Dies Dominicus Redivivus, OR, The Lords Day Enlivened.

OR A TREATISE, As to discover the practical part of the Evangelical Sabbath:

So to recover the spiritual part of that Pious Practice to its primitive life:
Lamentably lost, in these last Declining times.

By PHILIP GOODWIN M. A. Preacher of the Gospel, and Pastor of the public
Congregation at Watford in Hartford shire.

Mark 2 7. The Son of man is Lord also of the Sabbath. Luke 4.16. And Jesus
camt to Nazareth, and went into the Synagogue on the Sabbath day as his custom
was. Imprimatur,

Ed. Calamy.

LONDON, Printed by J. L. for Andrew Ke^be and are to be sold at his Shop over
against St. Margarets-hill in Southwark, 1654.

TO THE Worshipful the Justices of the Peace adjacent.
Gentlemen,
AS the most high God has set you up to be supreme persons in the places of
your aboade: so he has been pleased to put precious opportunities into your
hands for the honoring of him as Christian Magistrates. Now among the many
things requisite for Religious Magistrates that they may honor the most high
God, mention I shall only make Of Knowledge, and Courage.
Knowledge to examine and state things right;
Courage to determine and act right things.


Knowledge as the eye seeing what is just to be done; Courage as the hand doing
what is seen to be just. If courage be without knowledge, the eye of justice is
blind: If knowledge be without courage, the sword of justice is blunt. Though
your knowledge I do not question: yet your courage I would quicken. And
therefore I humbly beseech you to consider, In what cases, And for what causes,
courage is comely in every Christian Magistrate. The cases that require
courage, are either Civil or Religious. Civil cases that tend to the good of
the body Politic. Religious cases that tend to the good of the body
Ecclesiastic. These cases last are not the least. Yea, as the Church is more
excellent then the Commonwealth, so a Christian Magistrate is more to mind the
affairs of Gods Church, then the concernments of any civil State. Magis miror
Davidem sallantem quam pugn^^tem.
Hence Gregory professed, he did more commend David dancing before the Ark,
then fighting with the Philistines. All his courage in conquering enemies, was
not like his zeal for Religion, and the holy worship of God. Moses having
brought Israel out of Egypt, Romae qu^tie scunque Senatus cog^ba^ur, nulla de
re prius qu^^^ de relig^one ageba^^t^. Varro. lib. 14. cap. 17.
before he settled the Commonwealth, he prescribed the way of Gods worship.
Our dear Lord little looked after Civil Judicature, but much labored the
purging of the Temple. It Is Religion as Lactantius often teaches that maintains
humane Societies, civil Subordinations, Lact. de vera sepient lib 4. cap. 4.
which otherwise could not subsist, but savage cruelties and sensual impieties
would pull all in pieces. Yea, there is no State, City, or Town, but it
prospers in temporals, according as Religion and things that relate to God are
nourished, and do flourish. Dilexi virum, qui cum corpor^ solveretur, magis de
statu Ecclesiarum quam de propriis periculis ang^b^tur. Ambros. in vit.
Theodosii.
See Hag. 1. God bids some consider whether they did not thrive, according as
they promoted the building of the Temple. How well went it with the
Commonwealth of Israel when Josiah and Jehoshaphat bestirred them in a
Religious reformation? And how was Solomon's and Rehoboams Kingdom shaken when
they did not regard Religion, but corrupted the worship of God, leaving the
things of God to lie naked and open to enemies and evils. The Gold, blue silk,
and purple would never have been so safe, or shined so well within the
Tabernacle had not the outside been covered with red skins and Goats hair. Such
a shelter ought Magistracy to be to Gods Church and all the things of Religion
therein, whereby they may the better, and the brighter shine. And as the care
and courage of Magistrates ought to be most in the matters of God: So among
them their zeal ought to be most earnest in the matter of the Sabbath. The
Sabbath observed, is the Compendium and Epitome of the whole practice of Piety.
As the transgression of the Sabbath is the violation of the whole Law of God.
When the people of Israel went to gather Manna on the day of the Sabbath, God
makes his complaint to Moses their Magistrate, saying, Exodus 16.18. How long
will they refuse to keep my Commandments, and to obey my Laws? Laws and
Commandments, in the plural: In that they broke the Command of the Sabbath God
accounts it as a breach of all his Commandments, and a sin against all his
concernments: This Moses is to be affected with. And therefore all that are in
office under God, ought to be most burning in zeal against Sabbath-sins and
sinners, and for due observing the day of the Sabbath. Such was the zeal of the
first and best reformers, as we find in Scripture, Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 10.
Socrat. lib. 5. Russin. Ecc. by. lib. 2. Genesis 3.24. The Magistrates duty in
this point. See Page 132, 133, 134.
and in the Histories of all ages. In this case therefore of the Lords day in
the Lords Name, let me call upon you who about us bear the civil sword to be
toward this Gospel Sabbath (as the Cherubims with their flaming sword toward
that tree in Paradise) preserving the way thereof, and observing the work
therein, etc. SIRS, so far as possibly you can draw out your care, and lift up
your courage so as to be a wall of fire for this days defense, that on this
day the visible parts of Gods worship be performed, and therefore that the
places of Gods worship be diligently frequented. As I would beseech your zeal
against the principal places of Satan's service, I mean Rotten Alehouses the
Suburbs and Seminaries of Hell, the Nurceries of sin, and Synagogues of
sinners: so for the places (within your precincts) of Gods public worship. The
worship of God in public upon the Lords day by your personal presence, and by
your Magisteriall power express how much you prize. No marvel David had such a
desire to build a house to God, when he cries out, Psalm. 84. How amiable are
thy Tabernacles, O Lord! Blessed are they that dwell in thy house, etc. How you
highly esteem the public Ordinances of God declared by your close endeavors
to support both the DAY, and the place of their public use.

The causes that may encourage zeal in these cases, mount your minds and raise
your spirits for God and all that is Gods, His Sabbaths and service. I beseech
you observe, How hereto you are bound, and
How herein you are backed.


You are bound that about these things above all you burn in zeal. Has not God
bound you? And have not you bound your selves? God has bound you not only as
men, but as Magistrates by his holy commands to mind the matters of Religion
before all other things in the world, Deuteronomy. 16.17, 18. We see what Injunctions
are set upon the Supreme Magistrate in this regard, and therefore Magistrates
subordinate are chiefly to see to such things, above all to look that the days
and duties of Gods worship be carefully kept up, by all within the Gates, as of
their Domestic, so of their Civil Jurisdiction, Exodus 20.10. Yea, you kave
bound your selves by solemn oaths. Though civil things are principally
expressed, yet all is in order to a higher end and greater good. True, some
Magistrates, as Jehu, and Jeroboam, have made the matters of God subordinate to
their own interests and the outward peace of their kingdoms, but it has ever
proved the fatal miscarriage of such misplacing Governors. State-ends must all
be subordinate, the chief and uppermost end of all in power is to preserve the
things of God. The main end therefore of all your engagements, is to maintain
Gods worship, his holy Sabbaths, and whatever serves for his honor. As an oath
has a Divine Ground, so it is for ends Divine. And though many simple men that
be brought before you discern God no more in oaths, then Christ in Sacraments,
and therefore can take, yea, and break oaths (as Sampson his Withs) at their
wills; Yet what a solemn and sacred thing an oath is you well know. Hereby you
are bound, as to do just things betwixt man and man, so to do things just for
God much more. And as you are bound, so you are backed, and backed so, as may
well work up your warmest courage in the cause of God, for the WAYS and DAYS
of God. You are backed with good Laws against all open offenders, and
seen-Sabbath-sinners: Evil doers upon the Lords day. You are backed with the
prayers of all Gods precious people, who pour out their hearts to God to
preserve, bless, and prosper all pious Magistrates by whose means Godliness
may be promoted amongst men, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. You are backed with the promises of
God, the presence of God; God is with you, be valiant: Be valiant, for God is
with you. The Lord is with thee, thou mighty man of valor, says the Angel to
Gideon, Judge. 6.12. Be strong and of a good courage, ayes God to Joshua, I will
be with thee, I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee: Only be thou strong and
very courageous, Chap. 1. verse. 5, 6, 7.

And therefore, worthy SIRS, I beseech you against all encounters cloth your
selves with courage. You are to encourage others, (inferior Officers are by
your language, carriage, countenance, counsel, commands, to become courageous)
and therefore be you your selves full of fiery courage. The Audaciousnesse of
men to sin, even Sabbath-sins; And the dullness of men even to Gods
Sabbath-service, calls loud for courage in Christian Magistrates. Our Savior
had his scourge or whip, with which he drove men out of the Temple with their
sheep and oxen from their buying and selling: Magistrates had need have their
whips, penal Laws in force to drive men into public places of Gods pure
worship with their children and servants to hearing Gods holy Word and other
duties upon the Lords day. Good SIRS, so far as you can put on with enkindled
courage. Such must not be soft wood, but heart of Oak, that are in the place of
civil pillars; not men of easy, facil, flexible, timorous natures; but men of
unbended, unbiassed dispositions, resolutions, full of fortitude, valor,
magnanimity, and of Masculine spirits, etc. Theodoret has a good observation
upon that in Leviticus, Levit. 4.22.27. (...), etc.
where the Ruler for his sin is enjoined to offer an he-Goat, the private man a
she-Goat; for though the female may fit the ruled, yet the male most suites
such as rule. Some think that hence Constantine was termed, Revel. 12. the
Churches Male or man-child, because of his manly zeal for Gods Church, the
Lords day, and all the affairs of the Gospel.

Gentlemen, I hope you bear with me, I conceive I am not excentrick, but move
within my own sphere while I seek to incite you with courage to set to it for
God. Number. 10. Joshua 6.20.
When of old the Armies of Israel were to go out in Battle, the Priests were to
blow the trumpets. It Is meet for us that are Gospel Ministers to be as Gods
Trumpetters, or Drummers, to draw up the spirits, and raise the courage of all
that are to engage on Gods side for Sabbaths, and all his sacred concernments
against sinful men, among which Magistrates, and men in office must have a main
stroke. If I may by these expressions, and by this present Dedication more
hearten you up for God, and more heighten your zeal for the beating down of
sin, and well-being with us of Gods blessed Sabbath: I have my design,

Who am ready to serve you in all such affairs, Philip Goodwin.
Watford, July 20. 1654.
To the Reader.
Dear Christian,
A Quickening and a wakening providence that appeared in the place of my abode
about a year ago, put me then on publicly to preach and press the practical
observation of the Christian-Sabbath. And though upon that sad providential
passage, I thought it seasonable to say something upon that subject, yet at
first I only intended two Sermons as one days exercise, but I found the Bread
so abundantly to multiply even in the breaking, that I could not but acknowledge
the bounty of a Divine hand. Whereupon I proceeded, and upon the same further
insisted. That soul-provision which was therein made, though some hungrily
received, yet others hungrily refused, so that I could not but clearly see As
God with,
So the Devil against.


Which made me more to mind the matter. Hereupon having for diverse days
discoursed, I was soon after much moved to transcribe some Notes thereof by me
that were very unlegible in their first Draught. These after coming into the
hands of several friends, they much encouraged me further to communicate the
same. I considering they were both Gracious, and Judicious, thought it might be
the Lords voice, and that whereunto I ought to listen.

Likewise considering of the matter it self, I could not but confess it might
be of necessary use in the concernments of the Sabbath. For whereas there are
two sorts [Sabbath-ward] whose case is sinful and sad: So here are two parts
applying proper remedies for their recovery and cure. He is not only a
stranger, but a stone in our English Israel, who does not sensibly discern,
concerning Gods sacred Sabbath. As some putting off the practice of all good
thereon: so others not expressing any spirit of life therein. As some slighters
of the Sabbath-day-duties: so others slighty in the duties of the Sabbath day.
As some living in a fearful neglect: so others resting in a formal discharge of
a few feeble and faint performances. The former part is pertinent to put men on
to the practice of Sabbath-service. The latter part is pertinent to pull men
up, in the service of the Sabbath that they practice. And indeed as the leavers
of the Lords-day-duties: so the live^esse in the duties of the Lords day, who
would not condole their conditions, and endeavor to quicken their affections?
These latter we as Ministers should much lament, and if possible amend. The
wonted way and day of Gods worship how does it wax old in our Land? Like David,
when he was old and stricken in years they covered him with clothes, but he
gat no heat; wherefore his servants said to him, Let there be sought for my
Lord the King a young Virgin, and let her stand before the King, and let her
cherish him, and let her lie in thy bosom, that my Lord the King may get heat,
1 Kings 1.1, 2, 3.

It Is not ordinary clothes or bare outward Ordinances that will bring warmth
into this blessed day, that now seems with us to wax old and cold. We must seek
for the Spirit of God, the spirit of duty, which as the soul being brought into
its bosom will put new life, with warmth thereinto. And were but the Lords day
thus recovered to its heat and health, other duties of Religion would not long
lie sick: yea, though all religious duties with diverse lie dead in our days,
yet if this live, they would live likewise. Of the lively Lords day, we may say
as it is said of Eve, Genesis 3.20. She was the Mother of all living. As the Lord
of the Sabbath is the Father: so the Sabbath of the Lord is the Mother of all
spiritual life. In the womb of a wel-spent Sabbath are the most vigorous and
best spiritual conceptions. In the arms and by the breasts of such blessed
Sabbaths are born and brought up many newborn babes for God: yea, let the
Spirit of the Lord spring life in the Lords-day-duties and Ministerial
endeavors, how soon would sunk Christians, decaying and dying professors be
fetched back that are going apace to the grave of Apostasy, And other raised
that are ^ven dead and buried in sin? Indeed some have sunk so low, and
(Godward) been dead so long, that we may say of them, as Martha of her
brother, Lord, by this time he stinketh, Joh. 11. yet we might look to see even
such Lazarusses arise from their Sepulchers of sin upon the spiritual living of
Sabbaths and the sacred service of God; such things I also considering, my
encouragments have increased thus publicly to appear in this present Treatise.
Yet (as great cause requires) reflecting upon my many infirmities, cross
thoughts have sometimes beset me, not knowing what to do, but looking up to the
Lord, at length I resolved to let it go, considering likewise that the Lord
oftentimes does great matters by little and unlikely means. The Prophet was
pulled out of a dark deep Dungeon by cast clouts and rotten rags that only
seemed fit for the Dunghill, Jer. 38.11, 12, 13. If the Lord will, my poor weak
word may be some means to draw Sabbaths and sacred Ordinances out of those
Dungeons of contempt into which they seem now to be cast. And therefore (good
Reader) join with me in prayer, that a blessing from above may abide this book,
and that the great God of heaven would go with it from heart to heart, and make
it some help to this holy Sabbaths and servants.

Now the good Lord put life into every leaf* line and letter, and the Lord out
of his goodness more enliven my soul and thine,

Who am thine in the Lord glad to do thy soul any good, Philip Goodwin.
August 9. 1654.
To the Reader.
THe matters of Almighty God, and of man's immortal soul, are things of the
greatest concernment in all the world. This truth is in the general readily
acknowledged by all, and yet there is no one truth more contradicted by the
constant courses of the most of men. The business of the Sabbath is a
convincing instance: for although Gods honor, and men's welfare are very much
engaged herein; yet many in opinion, and more in their practice, do oppose the
right observation thereof, as holy to the Lord. First, Gods concernment herein
may many ways be made manifest. This is one of those ten Commandments charged
by the Creator of heaven and earth upon man: ^eut. 4.13.
^^o. 31.18.
Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy. And the engrossing of this charge,
God did not leave to any Amanuensis, but he writ it with his own finger. ^eut.
4.13. ^^sworth.
Also to intimate that his intentions were to perpetuate this (with the other
precepts of the Decalogue) in the morality thereof, the Lord himself imprinted
it, (not in paper) but upon Tables of stone: yea, when the first Tables of
stone were broken, ^xo. 34.1, ^. ^en. 2.2. ^hald. Pa^phr. ^a. 58.13. ^oc ad
^eum, non ^d homines ^ferri de^t. Calv. ^ark 2.28.
his Majesty gave express order unto Moses, to have other Tables like to the
former prepared, and he wrote thereon the same Law, the second time. As the
Lord delighted in the first institution of the Sabbath, so he accounts himself
honored, by its sanctification: yea, he takes this, as a title of glory, to
be called, The Lord of the Sabbath: whereas this is his complaint and charge
against them who are regardlesse of his Sabbath: I am profaned amongst them,
Ezekiel. 22.26.

Secondly, Man's obligations to keep the Sabbath, would neither be judged few,
nor weak, Ezekiel. 20.12. Ezekiel. 20.20. Ezekiel. 20.12. Heb 4.4, 5, 8, 9.
if principles of sacred self-love might prevail: For the Sabbath is givin, not
as a task, but as a privilege to Gods people to be a pledge of their interest
in God, and a confirmation unto their hope of their further sanctification; as
also of their everlasting Sabbatisme, or rest after their wearisome wanderings
in this World. ^sa. 58.13. Sabbathum deliciarum:
And for the sweetning of the Wildernesse-Way, unto the heavenly Canaan, the
Lord has provided a Sabbath for our spiritual feasting every Week, in which
respect, he commands us to call it, and to observe it, as a day of delight.
The Text, opened and improved in this ensuing Treatise, gives instance, of an
heavenly rapture, Isa. 58.13. Sabb thum delicatum quia delicate, et te nere est
observandu^. Lapid. locum. ^n
with which Saint John in his exile, was refreshed on the Lords Day; and the
servants of Christ have, in all ages, had abundant experience of spiritual
Cordials given in, upon their conscientious keeping of this Sabbath: therefore,
the rather should we observe it, with holy tenderness, as Solomon counsels
every one, to keep Gods Law, as the Apple of his eye, Prove. 7.2.

Upon the first consideration, we may condemn the profaners of the Sabbath, as
guilty of sacrilege; Exo. 20.10. Rev. 1.10.
for, it being the Sabbath of the Lord, and the Lords Day, that time is stolen
from God himself, which is spent otherwise then he allows. And how sad this
sacrilege and theft is, I find unfolded in the following Treatise. Only
observe, this sin against God in Sabbath-abuse is abominable, and inexcusable,
because we are charged only with one day weekly, to be kept as holy unto the
Lord. I remember, Deuteronomy. 5.
that Moses makes mention of this, as an Act of Gods great indulgence toward
man, and that having written the ten Commandments, he added no more: And should
not we with obediential submission, acknowledge the same concerning the
Sabbath? Upon the second consideration, men may without uncharitableness, be
censured also as inexcusably regardlesse of their own souls good, both in
regard of grace and comfort, here and hereafter, who disrespect the Sabbath
day, which is the Market Day of the soul, as worthy Mr. Rich. Rogers was wont
to call it. And that smart sentence (which was misapplyed unto Christ, (for he
strictly kept the Sabbath of the Lord his God,) may be applied to that person,
who is a wilful, ordinary profaner of that holy time: Joh 9.16.
This man is nor of God, because he keeps not the Sabbath day. According to a
man's regard, or disregard of the Sabbath, is his respect, or disrespect unto
all the rest of Gods Commandments.

Here I might take occasion to bewail bitterly Englands woeful declinings, both
in matters of doctrine and practice, concerning the Sabbath. In former times,
no Reformed Church was so famous, either for soundness in judgment, or
exactness in conversation, in relation to the Lords Day. But our Apostasy
began to be Notorious, when the Book for the allowing of sports, on that day,
was promoted, to gratify the profane and Popish party, then predominant in
England. And hereupon many, both Bishops and others (for alas, how apt are men,
even Ministers among others to swim down the tide with them who bear rule?)
appeared in the Pulpit, and in the Press, to decry the morality and exact
observation of the fourth Commandment. Many worthy servants of Christ looked
upon Germanies Wars as a fruit of this high provocation there, and they have
judged our late-yeares troubles an effect of the like profanation. At this day
(notwithstanding our Covenanted Reformation) how woefully is Gods Sabbath
neglected every where! and may we not say, that the looseness of them, who are
Atheistically wicked, is not so dangerous to poor England, as the carnal
liberty of such, who pretend unto the highest pitch of sanctity? How many even
amongst them, under pretense of Gospel immunities, and of observing every day
as a spiritual Sabbath, do both take, and plead for that liberty on the Lords
Day, which old Puritans (amongst whom the power of godliness shined
gloriously) did decry and abominate. Many years since I heard this speech
(uttered with much affection) from famous Mr. John Rogers, Take away the
Sabbath, and Religion will soon wither. And is not this too much verified
amongst our selves in England at this day? We have had, and we have Acts,
Ordinances, Orders, for the better keeping of the Lords Day; but who knows
not, that the life of the Law, lies in the execution? Proclamations and Papers
will not pluck down profaneness, except they be strengthened by the vigorous
actings of persons in power. The Lord threateningly complains of the Priests
in former times, because they hid their eyes from the Sabbath. Ezekiel. 22.26.
The meaning of the complaint is judged to be, either (more generally) their
regardlesnesse thereof, (...) (more particularly) their not taking notice when,
and how, and by whom profaned, that they might by roproof seek redress. This I
mention, that we Ministers may mind our Duties in this regard more. The
Reverend Author of this Useful Treatise has expressed vigorous affections,
with forcible arguments to awaken, quicken, and encourage people unto the
better keeping of the Christian Sabbath. And what considerations can be more
commanding and conquering unto an ingenuous experienced Christian, then those
two, hinted and handled from the Text, which this godly man undertaketh and
pursues to good purpose in this present Treatise, viz. 1. Christ, (whose Day,
the Sabbath is in a way of sanctified peculiarity;) 2. Spiritual joy, with
which the Lord is wont to crown the sanctifiers of this his holy Day. The
former useful Works of this my worthy good friend, have found so good
acceptance amongst Gods people, that I hope this piece (for its own sake,
rather then for my poor Testimony) will also be welcomed and improved. I
commend this savoury Treatise to thy serious perusal, and thy self therein, to
the blessing of God Almighty. I am

Thy friend and servant in, and for Jesus Christ, Simeon Ash.
August 7. 1654.
THE Contents of the first Part.
1. HOw God from the Beginning before the Law, ordained a set Day for Religious
Duties, page 6 2. How God after under the Law did more unfold and confirm the
same. page 7 3. Why Christ under the Gospel should have a set Day for his
Service, p. 10 4. Wherein the work of Redemption surpassed the work of
Creation. p. 11 5. Wherefore the first Day of the week is called The Lords Day.
p. 15 6. What warrant for the change of the Sabbath from tke last to the first
Day. p. 34 7. Their Objections answered who oppose the Doctrine of the Lords
Day. p. 36, etc. 8. Of the Lords-Day-Duties what they are, and where to be
performed. p. 58, 125 9. Their Objections answered who neglect the Duties of
the Lords Day, p. 65, etc. 10. The Multitudes of sinners against the Lords Day
discovered. p. 20, etc. 11. The Magnitude of their sin opened in several
respects. p. 83, etc. 12. The sad Judgments to which Sabbath Breakers are
subject. p. 96, etc. 13. Gods Delay of executing Judgment upon many that
mis-spend his Day, why. p. 110, etc. 14. What all are to do to help on due
Sabbath-observance. p. 120, etc. 15. What especially some are to do that the
Sabbath Day may be duly observed. p. 132, etc. 16. The Necessary Use of the
Sabbath. To whom, and for why. p. 138, etc. 17. The probable loss of the Lords
Day, when and wherefore. p. 148, etc. 18. How the Lords Day being removed, may
be long before its return. p. 160, etc. 19. How the Lords Day may remain
amongst some as a sore curse. p. 166. etc. 20. How equal it is to observe one
Day in seven holy to God. p. 169, etc. 21. The excellency of the Lords Day,
being well observed. p. 179, etc. 22. The commodity of well keeping this our
Christian Sabbath. p. 196, etc. 23. The comforts of the Christian Sabbath well
kept. p. 214 24. Their Objections answered, who cannot find the comfort and
profit. p. 225, etc. 25. How the Lords Day in the worst times may be certainly
and sweetly continued. p. 244.
THE CONTENTS of the second Part.
1. TO be in the Spirit on the Lords Day, as S. John was, what it is. p. 259 2.
Why some of Gods Servants are on the Lords Day in the Spirit. p. 281 3. How any
others of the servants of God may be in the Spirit on the Lords Day. p. 293 4.
The properties of Gods Spirit toward good men. p. 294 5. The properties of
good men's spirits toward the Lord. p. 300 6. Unsanctified men cannot be on the
Lords Day in the Spirit, why. p. 309 7. A false spirit moves mightily in them,
how that is discovered. p. 325 8. How far some such men may be moved by the
Spirit of God. p. 343 9. Objections by and about some in this regard answered.
p. 357 10. Some of Gods Saints on the Lords Day are not in the Spirit, why. p.
354 11. Spiritually to spend the Lords Day what it contains. p. 380 12. Motives
that incite spiritually to spend the Lords Day, of two sorts. p. 389 13. Duties
requisite to a spiritual spending the Lords Day, of three sorts. p. 433 14.
Preparation for the Lords Day, wherefore, and wherein it is. p. 437 15. How the
Lords Day is to be begun, carried on, and ended. p. 452 16. What is required
after the Lords Day is over. p. 468.
A short Epistle to the Reader, touching the Errata's.
Courteous Reader,
THough thou art no fault-finder, yet thou may find many faults in a few
sheets, both through the Defects of the Author, and through the Mistakes of
the Printer. These latter, are either lesser, or greater. Very many words
false-spelled, As center, for center. survile, for servile. and such like.
and mis-printed, yet the sense of the place preserved. These and such errors
being less, I let pass. But many words are printed so much amiss, as destroy
the very sense of the place. And among such errors more gross, Note these.

In the main Text.
Page 33. line 12. for sports, read spots. p. 34 l. 24. for use, r. cause. p.
37. l. 25. for breach, r. branch. p. 54. l. 3. for meal, r. wheale. p. 96. li.
15. for renounced, r. removed. p. 107. l 4. for note, r. find p. 108. l. 4 for
frogs, r. fogs. p. 121 l 21. for conjunction, r. conviction. p. 135. l. 14. for
Yea, r. So. p. 142. l. 27. for, in days past, r. in days future. p 145. l 6.
for but, r. yea, pa. 153. ^. 3. for cause, r. case. pa. 217. line 10. for
Goats, r. Groats. p. 250. l. 2. for pre. r. preserve. p. 2^2. line 12. for
whole man, r. whole of man. p. 353. l. 16. for, fixed, r. fired. p. 372 l. 18.
for fixed, r. fired. p 389 l. 16. for spirituality, read spiritual. page 412.
l. 23. for provoke, r. promote. p. 419. l. 16. for condile, r. condole, etc.

Errata in the Mergent.
Page 41. pro s^dendum. lege ludendum. page 24. pro ancle. leg. ante. pa. 253.
pro sancto, leg. sancta. ibid. pro quisc^ns, leg. quiescens. ib^d. pro Exem.
leg. Erem. page 322. pro pessima. lege pessimi. page 328. pro August, leg.
August.

These, (Good Reader) and some other such Bruises, the Body of this Book in the
Birth has suffered, which yet thou may much heal, by applying thereunto thy
charitable Interpretations, which he humbly entreats, who heartily desires Gods
honor herein, and thy Benefit hereby.

Philip Goodwin.

THE LORDS DAY Enlivened.
Revel. 1.10. I was in the Spirit, on the Lords Day.


SAint John among the Apostles, is compared to the Eagle among the birds: and
truly let him be observed, but only as the Text present reports, therein he is
found to fly exceeding high, soaring upward with heavenly wings, yea, he did as
it were pass out of the world into the Spirit, to converse with God in sublime
mysteries upon the day of the Lord.

I was in the Spirit upon the Lords Day.

Indeed if we reflect upon the foregoing verse, we may view him in a very low
place and case.

I John who also am your Brother, (written to some afflicted Churches of
Christ) and companion in tribulation, etc. Other Histories also tell into what
troublesome times he was turned, how Soldiers having apprehended him in Asia,
Non multum ante temporis Apocalypsin vidit Joannes. Sed pene nostro seculo ad
finem Domitiani Imperii. Irenaeus li. 5. cont. Valent.
and hurried him to Rome, where being brought before Domitian (under whom was
the second, if not the saddest of the ten persecutions) this cruel Emperor
caused him (for the cause of Christ) to be cast into a Cauldron of boiling oil,
out of which by a strange providence being escaped, he was after carried to
prison in the Isle Patmos, which (as Geographers write) was a barren beggarly
place, a little desert Island, lying in the Aegean Sea, where sure this good
man met with misery so much as might have sunk his Soul. But though he was
(world-ward) in a woe case all the week; yet he was in a high rapture, and
Heavenly posture when the Lords day came.

I was in the Spirit upon the Lords Day.

In the words of the Apostle are observable: Somewhat employed: And, Somewhat
expressed. Or his Concession. And his Assertion.


That which he silently grants, and secretly, yet certainly implies, is, That
there was then a Lords Day in use* and which he himself in his sufferings
observed.

That which he positively expresses, and plainly affirms, is, That upon this
Day of the Lord, he was in the Spirit, I was in the Spirit on the Lords Day.

As there were two brazen Pillars whereupon the burden of Solomon's Porch was
placed, 1. Kin. 7. So the burden of following discourse shall all be brought
and laid (through the Lords help) upon two Principal Points.

1. Point, That even in the times of the Gospel there has been, and is
continued a day, which is the Lord Christ's by a peculiar claim.

THE LORDS DAY.

2. Point, that some of the Servants of the Lord have been, and others may be,
in the Spirit on this day of the Lord. The Apostle is plain from his own
experience: I was in the Spirit on the Lords Day.

Upon these two bottomes I shall endeavor to raise the Religious observance of
the Christian Sabbath, and to lift up the Lords Day unto its highest and
holiest use. And now enter the first,

That the Lord Christ our dear Savior has a day that is peculiarly (His).

THE LORDS DAY.

All days indeed are the Lords. The Lord Christ in all days has an undoubted
interest, yea, and a double power for their dispose.

Natural, and Oeconomicall.
An original power and property pertaines to him as he is God coessentiall and
coeternall with his Faher.

A derivative property and power as he is Christ the Mediator. For as God the
Father has put all things, so all times into his Son Christ's hands. We find,
Genesis 1. the whole space of time divided into Days, and Nights.


Now there is not a night or day but is the Lords, Psalm 74.16. The day is
thine, the night also is thine.

Yet there is a day which is THE LORDS, by an excellency, and in a
super-eminent and immediate manner. As we see, Psalm 50. the Lord says, that
all creatures are his; Every beast of the Forest is mine, the cattle upon a
thousand hills, and all the Fowls of the Mountains are mine, Verse 10, 11.
But yet those Bullocks and sheep that were set apart for Sacrifice, were more
immediately the Lords.

And thus all time is the Lords, there is not a day in a thousand years, nor an
hour in ten thousand days, but to the least minute, all is the Lords.

Yet there is a day so set apart for holy service,

That it is THE LORDS DAY.

I shall reduce things to a threefold Thesis or Position.

1. Pos. That God has one day in seven set apart for his solemn service, is
sure even from the beginning.

2. Position, That Christ also should have one day in seven solemnly set apart
for his service, is sure.

3. Position, That this day, viz. the first day in the week, which Christians
have commonly kept, is that day assuredly.

THE LORDS DAY.

First, God from the beginning did ordain such a day for religious duties, a
holy Sabbath. This we shall consider, As first, sanctified. And after, ratified.


The consecration of it to Adam in Paradise, And

The promulgation of it to Moses on the Mount.

1. God did establish a seventh day for a sacred Sabbath, Genesis 2.2, 3. And God
blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it, etc. As God appointed Adam his
work, to wit, on the week-dayes to dress the ground: so God provided him a
Sabbath, a seventh day of holy rest. The ground indeed did not then as now need
tillage, but the first man must be an Exemplar or pattern to Posterity. Neither
did Adam need rest by reason of any bodily weariness in Innocence presupposed:
but God would have him full and whole to set himself one day in seven to serve
him, and in a holy communion then more immmediately to meet his Maker, which
might be unto him a Paradise in Paradise. This Sabbath for his souls solace was
as the sweetest flower in all his Garden. This Seventh day God had b^^ssed, and
man was bound to keep.

As there was a special Tree whereof Adam might not eat;

So there was a special time that Adam might not break.

Though he should live without sin:

Yet he must not live without a Sabbath.

Secondly, God did publish his Sabbath-pleasure more plain to his People upon
Mount Sinai, Exodus 20.8, 9. ver. Remember the Sabbath to keep it holy, etc.

Which words, as they concern a Set-seventh-day-sabbath, so they seem to look
toward it with a twofold aspect, Both backward, And forward.


Backward] As reflecting upon the Sabbath for mere entrance. Such a day already
instituted, the Seventh day, God in mercy had made it holy, and man must
remember to keep it holy.

Some (especially Popish Writers) say, there was no Sabbath set before the Lord
had proclaimed his Law upon Mount Sinai: but all the most Orthodox determine
otherwise.

Besides that in Genesis precited, we see, Exodus 16.23. To morrow (says Moses)
is the rest of the holy Sabbath to the Lord. It appears 'twas a preappointed
day.

Forward] As directing to the Sabbaths further continuance. A day that must be
remaining.

Some would make the fourth commandment to be a mere transient ceremony, to
live and die with the Jewish Church: But if they grant that the other nine are
moral and perpetual, Then this.

For it is comprised among them.
Yea, it is advanced above them.
This is set in the middle of all, as the very heart of the whole, as if the
Sabbath on the seventh day were the center in which all the lines of Gods Law
meet.

Yea, this is set beyond them, as we may see if we observe, with what a word
it is enforced in the preface, and with what words it is enlarged in the
progress. Remember, it stands at the door to invite, Calvin, Musculus,
Zanchius, etc.
it is a word of great weight, as our late VVriters observe. And in the precept,
as we pass the rooms, there we meet with many words to welcome. The Seventh
day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, in it thou shall not do any work, etc.
As saint Paul said of himself, considered with the other Apostles, 2. Cor. 11.
Are they Israelites? So am I. Are they the seed of Abraham? So am I. Are they
the Ministers of Christ? I am more. In labors more abundant. In prisons more
frequent: So may the Sabbath-precept say of it self in respect of the other
commandments: Were they written with the finger of God in stone? so was I.
Were they put into the Ark safe to be preserved? So was I. In reasons more
urgent. In circumstances more abundant; more particulars pressing practice,
then in any of the other precepts. The whole Decalogue or holy Law of God was
delivered in thunder, and the loudest and longest clap seemed to lie upon the
fourth commandment. As if at this the Trumpet gave the largest and shrillest
sound, to set it forth and to settle it fast. So we see God had for his service
(a Sabbath) the seventh day.

From the creation settled: and so to proceed.

Secondly, that our dear Savior should have such a set day of holy rest and
religious labor, as relating to him, suits with Scripture, and agrees with
grounds of reason. For

Christ he has wrought, as God the Father did; and

Christ is to be honored, as God the Father was.

First, the same works have been done by Christ the Son, as were done by God
the Father: John 5.19. Jesus answered. Verily, verily, I say unto you, The Son
does nothing of himself, but what he sees the Father do. For whatsoever things
he does, the same does the Son likewise. Did God the Father bless and
sanctify a seventh day for his sacred service? and shall not the Son do the
same? Is there not a set day which the Son has sanctified? As God the Father
rested from his works, so has Christ the Son ceased from his, Heb. 4.10.
Therefore Christ is to have his Sabbath of rest, as well as God the Father, in
the first age of the world. Yea, the work of Redemption done by the Son does it
not surpass the work of the whole Creation? Being In it self most precious.
Upon Christ more pressing, and Unto us more profitable.


First, most precious is this work in it self, viz. Christ's recovering souls
above Gods creating the World. As man's gaining the world cannot recompense the
loss of his soul: so Gods making the world does not equalize Christ's redeeming
the soul. To draw men out of an enthralled bondage, is more then to bring
matters out of a confused Chaos. In the former God was to deal with no enemy:
but in the latter Christ was put to combat with all the Devils in hell, yea,
and to overpower men opposing their own mercies.

2. Most pressing was this work to Christ, it made his very soul heavy unto the
death, Mat. 26.38. In this Christ did not only fight with the Devil, but God
herein fought with Christ, bruised him and put him to grief, Isay 53.10. The
worlds creation was done without difficulltie: But the redemption of souls was
difficult and painful. To effect the former, God did but speak the word;
Whereas to fulfill the latter, the Lord Christ did shed his dearest blood.

3. Most profitable unto us men, is this mighty work of Christ. Indeed to have
earth to tread on, air to breath in, meat to feed of, light to walk by, are
benefits: but the subduing the strength of the Devil, the removing the sting
of sin, with all the astonishing and sad sequels thereof:

The reconciliatian of Gods anger, and

The reparation of man's nature:

These and the like are benefits more abundantly benenficiall. It Is a mor
admirable and andvantagious work for Christ to pull brands out of the fire,
then for God to bring a world out of the water. After such works then may not
Christ well require a day of religious rest? A Sabbath to be sanctified for his
service one day in seven?

Secondly, The same honor is due to the Son that was done to God the Father,
John 5.23. All men should honor the Son of God even as they honor the Father.
In the times of the Old Testament, all men did honor the Father with a day of
holy worship, and was a special part of his honor: therefore all men must
honor Christ the Son, in the times of the New Testament, with a set day for
his solemn service.

To Christ, for his Honor is ascribed

The service of the day (and therefore,

The day for the service) is his due.

We find Christ honored by attributing to him the Word, Coloss. 3.16. The
Sacraments, of Baptism, Act. 8.16. of the Supper, 1. Cor. 11.24. So prayer,
John 16.23. Yea, the whole Gospel-Ministery; 1. Cor. 4.1. Sure then he ought
for his honours-sake to have a Sabbath Day for the exercise of all these. And
are there not as great endeavors in these last days to lay the honor of
Christ in the dust, as ever before was to trample down the glory of God the
Father? Yea, and far greater: For Christ and the things of Christ.

As they are much above nature created.

So they are most against nature corrupted.

Yea, and the corruption of nature was never so active and opposite against the
dignities of Christ, as in these last days, 1 John 2.18. Little Children, it
is the last time, and as ye have heard that Antichrists shall come, even now
are there many Antichrists, whereby we know that it is the last time, (or the
last hour, as in the Greek). And the devil knowing his time is short) as he is
the more malicious: Quanto potestas Diaboli decrescit in tempore, tanto crescit
in malignitate.
so he is the more expeditious, and industrious to dash down all the dignities
of Christ; and to hinder him the honor of his day, which for his honor is his
due.

Thirdly, that the first day in the week is the day due to Christ.

THE LORDS DAY.

And this is fitly called the Lords day for a double cause.

Because of what was done by the Lord on this day: and

Because of what upon this day was done unto the Lord, First, Such things the
Lord did upon this day as might well denominate it, The Lords Day; as, 1. His
resurrection from the dead upon this day, Luke 24.1, 2. John 20.1. Very early
in the morning did this Sun rise upon the first day in the week.

And well might he settle this day most observable for by his this day rising,
he made himself Most honorable, Most profitable, Most comfortable.


First, Hereby honorable, manifesting his mavelous Power, when after three
days dead, the Sepulcher sealed, the stone rolled, a strong watch placed, yet
he broke through all bars, beat down all opposition, as a Triumphing Conqueror
over death and devils. Lazarus, John 11. When he rose came up with his
grave-clothes bound, but Christ cast off his grave-clothes, leaving them in the
Sepulcher, Joh. 20. signifying he had victory over death, wereas Lazarus was
subject to die again. Plus erat de sepulchro surgere quam de cruce descendere,
and plus mortem resurgendo destruere quam vitam descendendo servare. Greg^.
The Jews cried, Let him come down from the Cross, and we will believe. It Was
more (says one) for Christ to ascend from his sepulcher, then to descend from
the Cross; more to vanquish death by rising, then to save his life by
escaping: O the honor of this!

2. Hereby profitable; The death of Christ was at the sowing of the Corn, Joh.
12.24. The raising of Christ is as the springing up of the Corn. The benefits
of Christ's death are reaped in his resurrection; the death of Christ was as the
casting of Joseph into the pit, selling him into Egypt, and putting him into
Prison; the raising of Christ is like the preferring of Joseph, by which he
comes into a capacity to enrich all his Relations.

3. Hereby comfortable; O the joy of a raised Christ! The Christians in the
Primitive Church were wont when they saw one another to have this joyful
salute; The Lord is risen: and the others ordinary answer was: True, (...).
Plus gaudere propter resurrectionem gloriosam quam dolere propter passionem
ignominiosam. Bern.
The Lord is risen indeed. We should not so much mourn (says a good Author) at
Christ's ignominious Passion, as we should rejoice at his glorious resurrection.
The day therefore of Christ's rising, may well set up this Christian Sabbath.

2. Christ's appearing to his Disciples was upon this day; he showed himself
five times upon the very day he rose: first, to Mary Magdalen in the morning,
Mark. 16.9. Secondly, to the women, Matthew. 28.9, 10. Thirdly, to the two
Disciples, Luke 24.18. Fourthly, to Peter, Luke 24.33. Fifthly, to the Eleven,
Mark, 16.14. Excepting Thomas, Joh. 20.24. When the Disciples were assembled
Christ came in, and he stood in the midst among them (as the tree of life in
the midst of Paradise) and unto them we may observe, He spoke peace, and He
gave power.


He said unto them, Peace be unto you; Peace, From outward foes, and From
inward fears.


And when fears were out, joys were in, Joh. 20.20. Then the Disciples
rejoiced when they saw the Lord: never did their spirits so spring within them.
Never before did such a day of comfort dawn: And upon this day he gave them a
threefold power; To Preach the Gospel, To administer the Sacraments, and To
exercise Church Discipline.


As is evident, Matthew. 28.16, 17, 18, 19, 20. Mark 16.15, 16, 17. Joh. 20.21,
22, 23, etc. Hereby

He did both sanctify the day for such Ordinances,

And he did signify such Ordinances were for the day.

And again, the very next first day of the week after he arose from the dead he
appeared to his Disciples, Thomas being with them. Then he did for his sake
more familiarly and fully unfold himself then before. This made (one say) He
was more beholding to Thomas doubting, then to Peter believing; for upon the
occasion of that Disciples doubts, our dear Lord upon this day drew forth most
infallible testimonies of the truth of his resurrection, and so left not only
to his present Disciples, but to his succeeding servants a more firm foundation
for their faith in himself, and a more strong Argument to enforce their
following observance of the same day, Joh. 20.26, 27, 28, 29. August,
detempore. Ser. 25. Bellarm. de cultu sanctorum. l. 3. cap. 11. Tertul. li. de
carne Christi.


3. The Mission, or Christ's sending down of the holy Ghost was upon this day.
It appears the Apostles met upon the day of Pentecost, Act. 2.1. this was a day
instituted in remembrance of the Law delivered to Moses in the Mount fifty
days after their departure out of Egypt. Answerably whereunto the holy Ghost
(and Gods love thereby, Romans 5.5.) is sent out, and shed abroad, the fiftieth
day after Christ our Passover was Sacrificed for us, which by computation of
the learned, both Orthodox and Popish, was the first day of the week. Christ
being gone up, the holy Spirit he comes down; A blessed bargain (says an
ancient Writer) hereby was made betwixt heaven and earth, to triumphing Saints
was given the presence of Christ's body, and to Militant Saints was sent the
comforts of Christ's Spirit. The Spirit of Christ the Comforter came down upon
this day. That cannot but be a holy day wherein the holy Ghost came down. There
be 3. works of excellency applied to the three Persons in Trinity: to wit,

The work of Creation to God the Father.

The work of Redemption to God the Son. And

The work of Sanctification to God the holy Ghost.

Times and things, Persons and seasons he sanctifies. The holy Spirit passing
through this day, has made it holy: This being the day of the Lord his thus
doing, it is

THE LORDS DAY.

2. To the Lord upon this day has been done Sabbath-service; In the Primitive
times, and In posteriour times.


The holy Apostles punctually set apart this first day of the week, for the
worship of God. And they were men eminently endowed with the Spirit of Christ.
Yea, men intimately acquainted with the secrets of Christ, men immediately
instructed by the person of Christ: Christ in his own person before his death
did discover things to them as to no other men, John 15.15. and after his
resurrection, they were the men whom he did commissionate to erect a
Gospel Church, and to order all things therein, and therefore he did continue
with them for the space of forty days before he ascended, that he might fully
furnish them for those great appointments wherein he found them faithful. And
how successeful they were, we see, Act. 2. when on this same day were gained
three thousand souls at one Sermon. O blessed day, blessed day!

And as for the Apostle Paul, I shall pray you to ponder both, His practice,
and His precept,
binding the day.

His practice in the day is plainly expressed, Act. 20.7. And upon the first
day of the week, when the Disciples came together, Paul preached unto them, and
continued his speech till midnight, being to depart on the morrow, etc. His
precept for the day is plainly employed, 1 Cor. 16.1, 2. the Apostle there
speaking of Collections for Saints upon the first day of the week, when they
should meet about the works of Gods worship, adds this, [ As I have ordained in
the Churches of Galatia, Piscator in Gene. 2.3. fol. 52, etc.
even so do ye.] In that, He Ordains such duties for the day,
He Ordains the day for such duties.


And above forty years after this (as Chronology says) Saint John tells us
in the text of such a continued day: The Lords day. And as for other good
Authors since the holy Apostles, they report concerning the Christian Sabbath
upon the first day of the week things of two sorts: Some more remote, as being
a Preparance for it, and Some more immediate, asserting the observance of it.


Some things they recite as referring to this first-dayes-Sabbath: August. de
tempo. Ser. 25.
Austin notes that this very day, was the first day of the Worlds Creation,
when Angels, Elements, and lights were made; and that of all the six
dayes-works, the work of the first day was greatest; because then the first
matter and Model, the principals and Platform of all was laid. Austin also
observes that this was the day of Noah's entering into the Ark, August. de civit.
Dei. l^b. 16. cap. 26.
of Infants receiving Circumcision, of Mannas first falling in the Wilderness:
Origin before him says* that if the Manna were gathered six days together as
the Scripture declares, Origin. Homil. 7. in Exodus
and it ceased upon the seventh day, which was the Sabbath, without doubt it
began on the first day which is the Lords day; and so he concludes the Lords
day to be more excellent then the Jewish Sabbath. This was the day (say others)
of Christ's Nativity and Baptism; of the Stars appearing at Bethlehem to the
Wise men, of Christ's feeding five thousand persons, and other particulars which
are in this case collected.

But I proceed to such as insist upon matters more immediate, affirming this
first day of the week to be celebrated for the Sabbath of Christians. In
Eusebius we read the witness of Dionysius the Corinthian, that they diligently
kept holy this Lords day in those times. Tertullian naming the Solemnities of
Christians, begins first with the Lords day, which they (he says) most
carefully kept, declaring their exercises thereon. Justin Martyr names the same
day, and shows their works: Ignatius against some that being Christians would
retain the Jewish Sabbath, says in plain terms, Plinius sub Trajano
scripsitsolitos hoc stato die convenire Christianos ancle lucem, carmenque
Christo quasi ^eo communi voce dicere; postea Sacramento se obstringere non in
scelus aliquod, ne furia, ne latrocinia, ne adulteria committerent, etc.
Magdeb. cent. 2. cap. 6.
We celebrate no longer the Sabbath of the Jews, but every one that loves
Christ keeps now holy the Lords day. An Historian writes of the Christians
custom in the Emperor Trajans time, how they met upon this same set day early
in the morning, sung a Psalm, received the Sacrament, and bound themselves in
Covenant to fly sin, etc. And it was a common question put to Christians when
they were brought before Pagan Governors: [Dost thou observe the Lords day?
and the ordinary answer then was, I am a Christian, and I dare not intermit
it.] I shall shut up my discourse about this settling the Christian Sabbath,
only by considering, Something that Christ himself said, concerning that; and
Something concerning that Christ said of himself.


That which our Savior says of the Sabbath, we find, Matthew. 24.20. Pray ye
that your flight be not in the winter, nor on the Sabbath Day: We may observe,
the Sabbath our Savior means, it was for such as were converted to the faith
of Christ; and 'twas for to remain long after the death of Christ.

1. The Persons that the Sabbath was for, appears to be the praying Saints of
God, though Jews by Nation, Christians by profession; and therefore the day
they ought to observe was suitable.

2. The season of this Sabbath Day was during that Sabbath which should be at
the time of the sacking, and sad desolating the City Jerusalem. About forty
years after Christ's death that dreadful and terrible time came, when according
to the voice heard in the Temple, Let us depart hence] Gods people departed
thence to Pella and other places; and for the Unconverted Jews, (as Eusebius
reports) whereas they had sold Christ for thirty pence, thirty of them were
sold for a penny, and so many hundreds of them who crucified Christ, were
crucified themselves in one day, that there were not places enough for Crosses,
not Crosses for bodies. Then, then were Gods faithful ones fain to fly for
their lives; yet then were they to be serious, and incessant in
Sabbath-day-duties, then all Ceremonies were abolished.

And that special day which the Jew had observed being Ceremonial, was before
abrogated; and a seventh day as a holy Sabbath upon an another account then
kept, and so to continue.

2. That which our Savior says of himself as concerning the Sabbath, we see,
Mark 2.28. The Son of man is Lord also of the Sabbath Day. Which notes in
Christ touching this day two things; His Authority for it, and His Propriety in
it.


The Sabbath is such a day, that the Lord Christ For it gives a special
command, and
In it keeps a special Interest.


Other time the Lord allots, and allows men for their ordinary affairs, but
this day he reserves as his proper and peculiar Portion. Truly may we say of
the Sabbath, as it is said of Jacob, Psalm. 135.4. The Lord has chosen it unto
himself for his peculiar treasure. Vox segulah significat rem quandam auctam
and charam, sive the saurus fuerit sive res aliae quae cunqu^.
(His Segullah.) Time the Lord gives out, but this he keeps as his store, and
as that which to him is most dear.

THE LORDS DAY.

Christ he is clearly the Lord of all, but especially

THE LORD OF THE SABBATH.

The Sabbath at first considered with other days, As Christ has separated it
from them;
So Christ has elevated it above them.


Above all days he does estimate this, it is emiminently his: And he the Lord
of this day.

It being from him, in respect of its Rise,

And it being for him, in respect of its Use. Christ was the raiser of it, and
Christ is the ruler in it.


This is that high day, he has set upon stable grounds.

This is that great day, he does guide unto noble ends.

The grounds on which this day is erected, are,

The Lords abundant care of: And,

His abiding Covenant with his Church and people throughout all ages. Such is
the care the Lord has for the spiritual profit of his People, and to
perpetuate the Practice of Religion, as thereupon he appoints this present day.
Yea, and that it might abide: he has bound it by covenant to continue through
all generations, Vid. Willets Hexapla in locum.
Exodus 13.16, 17. The ends to which this day is directed: are, The honor of
God, And, The happiness of man.


Hence is that, Isay 58.13. If thou call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the
Lord honorable, and shall honor him. And hence is that, Isay 56.2. Happy [or
blessed] is the man that does this, and the son of man that lays hold on it,
that keeps the Sabbath from polluting it To say now no more: this is that
sweet day upon which Saint John had such Soul-ravishing-Revelations in the
Spirit.

I was in the Spirit upon the Lords Day.

The Use twofold.

Of Information. Of Exhortation.
First, we are here informed of men's fearful evils relating to the Lords Day,
viz. Both

The sinful evil they are guilty of, and

The Penal evil they are subject to.

First, to set out the sinfulness of men against the Sabbath, I shall
consider, and clearly discover The Multitude of the sinners, And The Magnitude
of the sin.


Sinners against the Holy Sabbath are of several sorts:

Some sinning against the doctrine of the day: And,

Some sinning against the duties of the day.

1. Some that in point of judgment lie cross to the Lords Day.

Of such There be some gross in their opinion,
And others in their opinion more loose.


The former deny the day Positively, and in whole.

The latter deny the day respectively, and in part.

Those that do not at all believe the Lords Day, are of two sorts: Some that
more Sordidly declare it, and Some that more subtly conceal it.


1. There be some that publicly proclaim their denial of this Holy Day; and
of them we may observe two sorts; Some that did never better appear in time
past: And, Some that in time past did much better appear.


Some that have been so Sottishly and abominably bred up, that a conviction of
the Lords Day, they never let in; Sabbath-Principles they never laid up. And
some whose education and profession has formerly declared their belief of the
Lords Day: but now run in ranting and riotous ways, publishing their opinions
against all Sabbath-observance: yea, are come to scorn, and mock at the
Sabbaths of the Lord, like those, Lam. 1.7. Of such what shall I say? But
declare them utterly unclean: because the Leprosy is in their heads I allude
to that, Levit. 13.44. verse.

Secondly, there be others that carry Some Sabbath-day-shew, they abstain from
their ordinary works, and meet where some matters of Religion are managed: but
not from any tie upon conscience, or obedience to any divine Authority. The
Papists upon an Ecclesiastical, and others upon a Political account, and
because of the civil power; otherwise in their own opinions, they are set
Sabbath-free. They do not embrace the Sabbath, that is cross to their inward
principles: yet they do not disclaim the Sabbath, that may prove their outward
Prejudice. This is plain hypocrisy in the Lords Day, and woe to such
hypocrites in the Day of the Lord.

I proceed next to consider them that assent somewhat to a Sabbath Day: but
their assent thereunto is not right and through. Of such there be two sorts.
Some which deny that this is the Day: And, Some who deny that of the Day which
is.


Some grant the Lord has a Day for his service, but they plead against the
first, and for the last day in the week (the particular day which the Jews
kept) to be still the standing Sabbath Day. In this is a subtle design of
Satan, when he sees, as Sabbath-men will have, he seeks to set it where it may
be sure to fall; and though about this scruples may be in some conscientious:
yet the principal Patrons for the Jewish Sabbbath do it out of a secret design
to lay waste the Lords Day. Conatus eorum tanquam Pestilentissimus est
retundendus. Musc. Loc: Com. Part. 1. fol. 148.
This made Musculus to conclude their cunning endeavors were perilous and
pestilent, and by all means possible to be suppressed. Such men lift up Moses
to throw down Christ: advance God the Father to abase Christ the Son, and to
deface his glory due.

Zanchius de oper. redempt. li. 1. ca. 19: fol: 612.
And though they seem to be for God and his Law: yet it is an unlawful and
ungodly thing (says Zanchius) as to have no certain day for Gods public
service: so to undermine and to overturn that day which is certainly settled for
the Lords Day.

Secondly, some grant this to be the very Lords Day: but they do not believe
it is a day so precisely to be celebrated. As there are few so far Atheists as
absolutely to deny there is a God: (A God many grant there is, that yet deny
the true God, and many acknowledge the true God: that yet cannot be convinced
he is such a God, so just, holy, pure, and perfect.) Thus there are few so far
opposite to Sabbath as wholly to deny there is any day. A day they yield there
is; but then they do not confess the right day, or they do not confess the
day aright, a day to be kept, so holy and strict, this they withstand, whence
they are very loose and take large liberties upon the Lords Day. And of these
there are two sorts.

Some so minded for want of better Instructions. And some so minded from the
force of base Corruptions.

1. Some have strange latitudes in their judgments of the Lords Day: and
indeed the very Doctrine of some Churches, and Canons of Synods set the door
wide, allowing liberty for worldly labor, recreations and sports upon the
Sabbath Day. But these are black sports that blemish their beauty in the sight
of God.

2. Some who live where they might learn better, the light of the Lords Day in
the Doctrine of it, breaking out more bright, and shining forth clear and pure:
yet they cannot see the holiness of the Day, through the filthiness of their
flesh, and their dear indulgings of their delightful lusts. Neither are they
willing to see the Sabbaths Sanctity, lest it should disturb their sinful
security. If for the Lords Day they should be strict in their opinions, they
could not with conscience-quiet be loose in their practice: these persons, in
this point of corrupt principles, and erroneous judgments, object diverse
things, as,

1. Objection, The Sabbath is mutable and moveable from one day to another, and
therefore may be removed quite and made utterly to cease.

Answer, The Sabbath 'twas mutable, being altered from the last to the first
day of the week: but it is not possible there should be such another change, in
that there can never possibly be such another cause. To that change we may
consider a double cause concurring The material cause for it, and The actual
cause of it.


The cause upon which the day was altered.

viz. Christ's Resurrection.

The cause through which the day was altered,

viz. Christ's Institution.

So that the cause on which, and the cause by which this was done, all was
Christ. In this change of the Sabbath we may observe a double use: Original,
and Organicall.


The primary, Id sine dubio tenendum, quod Ecclesia ab Apostolis Apostoli a
Christo, Christus a Deo suscepit, etc. Tertul. Nostrae potestatis non est
sanctificare. Deus est qui sanctificat, etc. Muscul. Loc. Com. Praecept. 4.
principal efficient cause of that change, was Christ: The holy Apostles were
the Secundary and Isntrumental cause; for to such purposes all their power,
was from Christ, who did extraordinarily call, qualify, and commissionate them
upon such accounts as never can come the like. The Lord himself set up his own
Sabbath: and indeed, it is only for him to give a being to a Sabbath that can
give a blessing to a Sabbath: this is the work of the Lord alone, to bless and
sanctify a day.

Therefore not any person may assume power, nor by any power may persons
presume to alter and settle any other Sabbath. Men must not alter the ordinance
for the day, as they may not alter the ordinances in the day, to bring in other
Sacraments, another Gospel. Gal. 1.8. If an Angel from heaven should preach
another Gospel to you then that you have received, let him be accursed; and so
he that shall cry up amongst you any other Sabbath then what ye have observed,
let him be accursed.

2. Object. It Is contrary to Christian liberty to be limited to a day wherein
to worship God.

Answer, Christian liberty learned out, is taken Either more strictly, Or more
largely.


Strictly,] Christian liberty is a release from Mosaical Ceremonies and
Judaical circumstances; but this does not free from a fixed day for the Lords
service, which is not a ceremony, a circumstance, but the very Soul and
substance of Christian religion.

Largely,] Christian liberty or Gospel-freedome it does comprise these two
things; Freedom from the service of sin, and Freedom in the service of God.


First, to be free from sins servitude, this implies freedom from death and
devil, the curse of the Law, and the wrath of God, the sequels of sins slavery;
Sins service is the sorest bondage. Austins Position is proper: August. de
civit. Dei li. 3. cap. 4.
A good man though he serves, yet he is free; a wicked man though he reigns, he
is a servant. Rome, says he, is the great Mistress of the World, yet the
drudge of sin: Chrysos. Hom. 19. in priorem Epi. ad Corinth.
and hence Chrysostom concludes Joseph was the freeman, and his Mistesse who
obeyed her lusts, was the servant. 2 Pet. 2.19. While they promise themselves
liberty, they themselves are the servants of corruption; for of whom a man is
overcome, of the same he is brought into bondage.

Secondly, to be free in the service of the Lord is sweet liberty: this is the
case of Christians; whatever they do toward God as their duty, it is under a
freetenure, viz. the Covenant of Grace. It Is through a freee mover, viz. the
Spirit of Christ, yea, and their own spirits set free by Christ: The precepts
of the Lord are a good man's large walks, Psalm. 119.45. I shall walk at liberty,
for I seek thy precepts. BEDDACHAH, at large: that is the only free life,
that is spent in seeking, serving, obeying, and blessing God. So then into
Christian liberty let us look never so far, we shall not find that a discharge
from the Lords day is any breach thereof.

And therefore a strict observance of this Lords day is no breach thereof.

3. Objection, Under the Gospel there is no difference of days to be observed.

Answer, For satisfaction herein, we shall consider first, That there is a
difference between days, which it is sinful for to observe. And

Secondly, That yet there is a difference of the Sabbath from other days,
which not to observe is sinful. Sinful it is to observe such a difference of
days as is Heathenish, Jewish, Popish; the Apostle plainly prohibits this, Romans
14.6. Gal. 4.10. Colos. 2.16. Yet by these places the Apostle does not forbid a
distinct observance of the Christian Sabbath, for then should he contradict
himself, as Zanchius well observes; and others before him clear those
Scriptures, from any relation to the Lords day. Let him bless the Lord, says
Luther, that knows how to distinguish between the Law and the Gospel. Likewise
let him thank God who has learned to distinguish between several Sabbaths
under the Law, and this Lords day under the Gospel; they being abolished wear
not bound to observe them, or to make any difference between those days, and
others of equal concernment. But for the Christian Sabbath, it abides; and a
difference of that day from others we ought to observe.

This is that day set apart, By the holiest Person; and, For the holiest
purpose.

Psalm. 4.3. Know ye that the Lord has set apart the man that is godly for
himself. So know ye that the Lord has set apart the day that is holy for
himself. Here not to distinguish, is to abolish.

As God will have his Servants to be separated from other men: So he will have
his Sabbath to be differenced from other days. As men must not divide what God
has joined: so men must not mingle what God has separated, or debase what God
has elevated.

4. Object. Every day ought to be a Sabbath.

Answ. True, the whole term of our life should be a continued Sabbath, in two
respects, Viz. Cessation from the service of sin, and Disposition to the
service of God.


1. To serve sin we should be ever averse; and O how glad would God's Saints be
to keep such a perpetual Sabbath, as always to rest from sin! and O how sad
have some of Gods Saints been, because such a Sabbath comes so seldom! How
does the Apostle complain, Romans 7. That though with his mind he served the Law
of God, yet with his flesh he served the Law of sin? Thus Austin condoles his
own condition, Alas, sin follows I fly, and yet I fall; I fight, and yet I am
captive: I run from it, and yet I am drawn to it; I would rest, but I cannot be
quiet one day, one hour, etc. To have such an uninterrupted rest, as to be
every day at a distance from sin, is a very desirable Sabbath.

2. To serve God we should be ever prepared. Though we are not always in
Sabbath-day-time, yet our hearts should be always in a Sabbath-day-frame, in
such a blessed bent as is fit for all holy business. Some expound that precept
of the Apostle Paul, Pray continually,] Have a continual frame of heart sit for
holy prayer. And that of St. James, Be swift to hear,] Have always an open ear,
ready to hearken to the holy Word of God. We find, Ezekiel. 1. Angels described
under the form of Beasts;] Having four faces and four wings, verse. 6. Faces]
Ready to mind, Wings] Ready to move into any part of the World, about any
portion of work God pleases to appoint them: Thus Gods people should be in a
prepared posture at all seasons for Sabbath-service.

Yet if we respect the performance of the solemn works of Gods worship, or the
forbearance of the lawful works of men's callings; we are not required to keep
an every day Sabbath, Exodus 20.9. Six days shall thou labor, and do all thy
work, verse. 10. But the seventh day is the Sabbath of tht Lord thy God, in it
thou shall not do any work. God could in the Creation (as Austin observes) have
made an immediate dispatch of all with a word, but he took six days about the
works of the World, that he might allot men six days time for worldly works.
Yea, before the Law this was laid upon man: In the sweat of thy brows thou
shall eat thy Bread. Cumlegatur Adam in Paradiso positus, ut operaretur, quis
sanum sapiens filios ejus in hoc mundo positos ad sudendum arbitraretur Bern.
Sermon.
And after the Law, under the Gospel. We command, says the Apostle, men to
work with quietness, and to eat their own bread. So that if men should not be
in their worldy business upon the week-dayes, they would sin in a defect,
falling short of what is commanded. And if they should be every day in the set
service of a Sabbath, they would sin in an excess, going beyond what is
required, which would be but will worship, unwarranted by the Word, and
unpleasing to God. But with men this is but a mere pretense, to evade and avoid
all Sabbath-observance. As Polytheisme is the way to Atheism, an omni-Religion
to no-Religion; so a pretended every-day-Sabbath, and then really no Sabbath at
all.

Next we come to consider such as sin against the Lords day in point of
practice. Such are of two sorts.

Some doing upon this day what they should not; and Some upon this day not
doing what they should.
The works that men should not do on the Sabbath day are double.

Servile, and Sinful or Worldly, and Wicked works.
And accordingly those that do upon the Lords day, what they be bound to
forbear, are of two sorts; Those that then be about, Est triplex servitus, unde
opus dicitur servile, etc. Thom. Aqui. 22. qu. 122. art 4.
either The evil works of sin, or The servile works of the world.


In evil actings there are those that sin out the Sabbath day, passing away
this precious time; Some in sinful pleasures, and Some in the pleasures of sin.


Pleasures that are in themselves lawful, yet are sinful upon the Lords Day.
'Twere better (Says Austin) for a man to dig and plow, August. in tit. Psalm.
91.
then to dance and play upon the Sabbath day: that to the Commonwealth may be
a benefit: but of this there is no advantage: yet this is one of Satan's
stratagems, to make men mindlesse of Sabbath duties, he pleases them with
sinful delights. Justin. lib. 1.
As Cyrus dealt with the Lydians when he had conquered them in battle, he
allowed them liberty for all sports and pastimes, and so more fully subdued
them, that they became his servants for ever: Thus Satan in policy puts men
upon sinful pleasures even upon Sabbath days, that for ever he may make them
his assured and settled Servants. How contrary is this to what God in the
Prophet expresses, Isay. 8.13. Thou shall not find thine own pleasure upon my
holy day.

But there are some who do exceed these, passing Sabbath-daies in the down
right pleasures of sin: in lasciviousness, wantonness, surfeiting and
drunkenness, and such like sinful actions, that it is rather the Devils day,
then the Lords Day.

Plutarch thought that the Sabbath of the Jews was from [Sabbos] a name of
Bacchus, (...), Jovialiter vivere.
that signifies to live riotously, jocundly, merrily, and the like. And indeed
the Sabbath of Christians, as some keep it, may seem to have such a
derivation, for they make it the day of their mad merriments, when they are
most Jovial, vain and voluptuous. And were it not for Gods wonderful Patience,
while they are thus polluting the holy seasons of God, it should be to them as
to Belshazzar, when he was abusing the holy vessels of God: In the same hour
came forth fingers of a man's hand, and wrote upon the plaster of the wall;
MEAN, MEAN, TEKEL, etc. Then the Kings countenance was changed, and his
thoughts troubled him, so that the joints of his loins were loosed, and his
knees smote one against another, Danniel 5.3, 4, 5, 6.

To be sinful upon the Sabbath Day, Hieron. in Isaiam. cap. 5. August. Tract.
4. in Joan.
It Is an aggravation of sin; And, It Is an assimilation of Satan.


Thus a man greatens his sin, by sinning upon the Sabbath; a man not only
offends against the fourth Commandment, but other Commandments by such sins
are also violated, which makes the offense more deep and double. As to be good
in evil days, is that which heightens a man's praise, and declares the
eminency of his grace; so to be evil on good days, sinful upon the sacred
Sabbaths of the Lord, is that which makes a man's case more culpable, and his
sin the more abominable.

Thus a man likens himself to Satan, who is ever bad, but worst upon the best
days. The wickedest act that ever the Devil did, was when he met man in the
holy place of Paradise: and O what sinful designs has Satan upon the sons of
men, when he meets them upon the holy time of Sabbaths! Of all sins such Satan
is most prone to promote, that will most provoke God, and such are the sins of
the Sabbath. 1. Cor. 6.15. Shall I (says the Apostle) take the members of
Christ, and make them the members of an Harlot? God forbid; so should a man
say, Shall I take the days of Christ, and make them the days of sin and
vanity, of gluttony and drunkenness? God forbid. Unto God sin is ever
offensive, but to sin upon the Sabbath does most incense God. Ezra 9.13.
Seeing, O Lord, thou have given us such a deliverance as this, should we break
thy commandments, and join affinity with the people of these abominations,
would not thou be angry till thou had consumed us, and so as there should
be no escape? Thus ought men to argue, O Lord, seeing thou have given us such A
DAY as this, should we transgress thy commands, and practice abominations
thereupon, would not thou be very angry, etc.?

Chrysostom: de Lazar. con. c. 1.
Chrysostom well observes: that the Sabbath is the Day God appoints to purge
and cleanse men from sin; and therefore on that day for men to mix themselves
in sin, is exceeding sinful.

Secondly, in earthly actings there are those that spend out the Sabbath Day,
ravelling and running out this rich and precious time of the Lords Day.

Some upon their worldly business, and

Others about their business in the world.

In Sabbath-time are some set upon their ordinary affairs. As Seawater it
will not abide in its own banks, but beats and eats upon the Land, and drownes
the dry ground; so many men's worldly callings will not keep within their weeks
compass, but eat upon the Lords Day, and drown up Sabbath-time. God in the
creation went on through all the works of the World, till he had made man, and
then he took his Seventh Days rest, and sanctified it; how sad is it to see
man stay in worldly works, and never care to come at God in a
Sanctified-Seventh-Days-rest.

True, there are some who though they will not be in the open Sabbath upon
their ordinary week-day-work, yet they will be about such things as have
tendency thereunto. We find in the 14. of Luke, of some that when they were
sent to at Super-time, they made their excuse: One said, I have bought a piece
of ground, and I must needs go and see: and another said, I have bought five
yoke of Oxen, and I go to prove them. The one sort did not at that very time
purchase their Farm, but went then to see it; nor the other did not then buy
their Oxen, but went then to prove them. Thus some in Sabbath-time though they
are not upon the common work of their Trades, yet then they go to see, and are
busy about the disposing of their week-day-works. As God in the Creation
wrought out the works of the World in six several days, but the very first day
he fitted and ordered the matter for the whole frame. Thus men upon the first
day of the week, OUR LORDS DAY, are busy about the ordering of matters for
their earthly affairs in the following days. All this proceeds from Satan that
evil one, and from covetousness the root of all evil.

1. The Devil upon the Lords day, when he cannot draw to that which is wicked,
he will to what is worldly; Thereby To augment the sin of man, and To prevent
the service of God.


1. Hereby Satan increases the sin of man, he well knows those works which are
upon the week days lawful, are upon the Sabbath sinful, and so sets men
thereupon.

2. Hereby Satan opposes and suppresses the Service of God: God upon this
account requires (as Austin excellently notes) men upon the Sabbath to forbear
their worldly business, August. de civit. Dei lib. 6. cap. 11. Idem de tempore
Sermon. 25^.
that they may then be the more free and full, prompt and ready for religious
service; and fot this cause the Devil puts people then upon their earthly
business, that he may beat them off from Gods blessed service upon his holy
Sabbath day. The Devil does not like diligence in a lawful calling, but upon
sinful designs he unseasonably sets men thereupon. I could report of a poor
woman, often under strong temptations, whom I have heard sometimes sadly say, she
was not able all the week to go about the necessary works of her calling, but
when the Lords day was, she knew not how to keep from her worldly work, being
violently provoked thereunto. True, the more common case is for Satan upon the
Sabbath to hold men on in their earthly affairs, who are eagerly bent
thereabout all the week besides. As the subtle Serpent said to Eve, Genesis 3.
Yea, has God said, ye must not eat of every tree? so Satan subtly says to
men; Has God said, Ye shall not work upon every day? ye may work, 'twill be
for your benefit.

Yea, should Satan be silent, to survile work on the Sabbath.

2. A principle of covetousness puts men hereupon: What made Eve to eat of the
tree th^^ was forbidden of God? And what caused Achan to take the wedge of gold
that was otherwise disposed and set apart of God, but covetousness? And whence
is it, that men upon the Sabbath day which God has separated for himself, are
so carried about their own common business, but from covetousness?
Covetousness, Colos. 1.5. is called Idolatry; This Idol the world, it takes up
that time of service which does belong to God.

The Sun must bear the swey of the Day, though the Moon rules the Night; and
though the World* has the predominancy all the week, yet it is meet Christ
should have the command of his own day,

THE LORDS DAY.

I proceed to a second sort that sin against this Lords day, by not doing on
the day what they ought.

Concerning Sabbath-day-duties, we shall consider, The kind they are to be of,
and The place they are to be in.


For the kind,] the duties on the Lords day to be done, are Of Piety toward
God, and Of Charity toward men.


For the place,] the duties to be done on the Lords day, Are in our public
meetings, Or in our private dwellings.


Now persons who do not their Sabbath duties, and so sin against this day, are
of two sorts. Some that Idle out the day, and do nothing of the duty, and
others that trifle in the day, and of the duty do but something.

1. Too many are manifest, that spend this holy day in Idleness. By the Law
the Priests upon the Sabbath day, were to offer double sacrifice; whence
Chrysostom collects, Chrysostom. concion. de Lazaro.
that the Sabbath ought not to be a day of ease and Idleness, but of double
diligence in holy exercises. In the Gospel even the Lord of this day is
revealed, not as in an idle, but an active posture; During the days of his
flesh he went about doing good, Act. 10.38. And the Sabbath was the day of his
best and most abundant works, as is well observed; and therefore this Lords day
calls for diligence in the best duties, and does not indulge Idleness. The
Jews use to call the seventh year the Idle year, because then the ground lay
follow, no Plowing, or sowing, or bringing forth of Corn. Many Christians may
call the seventh day, the Idle day, for then is no praying, hearing, etc. or
bringing forth any fruit that is good, the whole day to the man, and the whole
man in the day lies like the desert, dry and barren, where no seed is sown;
through Idleness on the Lords day men they become, Most culpable in their sin,
and Most liable unto Satan.


1, To be Sabbath-idle increases a man's sin: Idleness is ever evil, but never
so bad, as upon this good day: No time is allowed for Idleness. As of every
idle word: Matthew. 12.36.
so of every idle hour, a man must give account at the day of judgment; and as
one upon the place further infers: S^ pro etioso verbo reddemus rationem,
videamus ne reddamus pro otioso silent^o. Ambros. de ossic. lib. 1. cap. 3. ut
nullo die intermittantur certa tempora orandi. Aug. Haeres. 57.
We shall not only give account for our idle saying^, but we must give account
for our idle silence, for our not speaking, when men do not take unto
themselves words in prayer, and the like: but he like the Prophets Idols,
having mouths, and speak not; ears, and hear not, etc. Some religious
exercises are every day duties: Austin upon that place of the Apostle, Pray
continually.] Expounds it, See that in no day there be any intermission of
certain times for prayer. But then from prayer and other holy duties to be
idle, vacant, and void on the Lords day, deepens the sin, because on such
days, Men have best work, And most work to do.


1. The Sabbath is a day of the best work. Most of the week-work is world-work,
poor in comparison of this. That Is like digging in a dark pit, this as reaping
in a pleasant field. As it is best being with God: so it is best working for God.
Weekly labor is but bodily labor, burdensome labor; Sabbath-work is chiefly
soul-work, and all sweet work. Men work on the week, that they and theirs may
live well in this world a while: But the Lords Day-work is our meal for ever.
Therefore for any to be idle on this day aggravates their sin of Idleness.

Secondly, the Sabbath is a day of the most work: men on that day should do
more in the service of God then all the week besides. The Jews did much on
their Sabbath; Christians are to do more on their Lords Day. If we compare
Numb. 28.9. with Ezekiel. 46.4. we shall find that the offerings in the time of
the Gospel prophesied of, were more then those in the time of the Law. In Number.
we find but two Lambs: but in Ezekiel we find six Lambs and a Ram for the
Sabbath. This signifies that in the settled times of the Gospel, Gods Worship
upon the Christian Sabbath should be solemnized more fully then in former times
under the Law. Now for men to be idle when they have most work to do, causes
idleness to become the more culpable, and the greater sin.

Secondly, to be Sabbath-idle, exposes souls to Satan's service: hence so many
do the devils drudgery, and draw the devils cart upon the Lords day. When
Satan, especially in Sabbath time, sees men idle and not about any thing that
is good, then he soon sets them about that which is naught: so that upon this
day men are most eager to go on the devils arrand, though to their own ruin.
Yea, men upon the Lords Day, that lie idle, they tempt the Tempter, and do
invite the Devil to their dwellings, and as it were ask if he has no work, or
what service he will command them. They are ready, each saying, Here am I, send
me. As in supper-time Satan entered into Judas: so in Sabbath-time Satan takes
possession of such idle ones. Some keep the Sabbath like their cattle, they go
not to plow in deed, but nothing good they go about. They are in their houses
as their horses in there stables: yea, perhaps in their beds as their hogs in
their styes. Or on the Lords Day, if they be not as beasts, they are as birds
that fly from place to place: so do they wander from town to-town, idly
passing away of Sabbath-time. Yea, it is with many in this, as with the Devils,
they believe a Sabbath, but they observe no Sabbath: as they can keep no
Sabbath in point of rest: so they will keep no Sabbath in point of work. Men
are on earth as the damned in hell, who never are in any religious duties: they
may be crying for water to cool theie tongues: but never praying for grace to
change their hearts, or for mercy to remit their sins. For thousands of idle
Sabbaths has God with some to reckon: and let them be fure, that as God will
not hold them guiltless that take his Name in vain; so God will never hold
them guiltless that spend his time in vain.

Secondly, I come to consider such as indeed do somewthat of duty in the day of
the Sabbath: but of these there are that take up their Sabbath-work, Either in
some one part of the day: Or in some one place for the day.


The part of the Lords day wherein the exercises of religion ought to lie,
being both The former, and The latter.


Some men they take the one, but then leave the other, and will not let the
Lord have his time entire. They say of the Lords day, as she in the Kings of
the living child; Divide it, Divide it. Yea, they make the time of the Sabbath
like the Veil of the Temple at Christ's death, to be rent in twain, viz.
between the Lord and the World, or which is worse, between the Lord and their
lusts; whereas not a bone of Christ's body was to be broke, so not an hour in
his day: As not a member of that, so not a minute of this. As our Savior said
concerning the loaves, and the fishes; Gather up the fragments, let nothing be
lost: so he seems to say concerning his holy Sabbath, Gather up the parcells
thereof, let not minutes be lost, which are precious like the least parings of
gold. It has been perilous to clip a Kings Coin, it is more dangerous to clip
the Lords day. O the dreadful death and doom of Ananias, who kept back part of
the price, and brought only a certain part, and laid at the Apostles feet,
whereas before 'twas all in his own power, Act. 5.3, 4. But this holy time was
never ours, nor ever was any part thereof in our power, therefore to keep back
any hour of this holy day is worthy of death. If no part be the Lords, why do
you give him any? if the whole be the Lords, why do you put him off with part?

2. The places wherein religious exercises are to lie upon the Lords day, being
Both public, And private.


Some rest in the public and neglect the private: And others are all for the
private, and contemn the public.

First, There are some, all whose religion upon the Lords day lies at Church,
no praying, reading of Scriptures, repeating of Sermons, instructing their
charge, or any such duty done in their houses all the day long. It Is said,
Exodus 12. that there was a great cry at midnight in all the dwellings of Egypt,
for there was not a house where there was not one dead: but not so much as upon
the Lords day from the dwellings of diverse does any holy cry go up to heaven.
('It Is doubtful in diverse houses there are not any alive by grace, to bewail
them that lie there dead in sin,) while yet it is easy to hear, and evident to
see what rudeness they suffer in their children and servants on the Sabbath
day. Have thou kept the commandment of the Lord (said Samuel to Saul) in
destroying all Amelek? What then means the bleating of the Sheep, and lowing of
the Oxen which I hear to day? So may we say to many a man: have thou kept the
commandment of the Lord, in observing his Sabbath? What mean^ then the
laughing and sporting and foolish talking of children and servants, which is
then heard in their houses? Such parents, and ungoverning governors sure the
Lord will one day charge with the breach of his blessed Sabbath. See what God
says to Eli, 1 Samuel 2.29. Wherefore kickest thou at my sacrifice, and
honor thy sons above me, etc? did Eli kick at the sacrifice of God? no, but
his sons did, and he restreined them not; and therefore Gad accounts it upon
him.

Will not God thus say to some Fathers and Masters, Wherefore profane ye my
Sabbath? and why have ye polluted my holy day? for they so do in their children
and servants, whom herein they do not restrain. They are careful to provide for
family necessities, but careless to perform family duties, though it be the
Lords day, when they should look to all within their gates, Exodus 20.10.

2. There are others, what they do in Gods service on the Sabdath, it is
private. for in the public Assemblies they are seldom or never seen. For the
Israelites to sit still in their houses when a thick darkness was abroad in
all parts of the land, was excusable. [I pray God there be not a near approach
of such a time upon England, when through worse then an Egyptian darkness,
people be constreined to stay at home in their houses.] But to lie at home on
the Lords day, while through the open light of the Gospel the land is like
Goshen, is an inexcusable evil. And sure, Chrysostom. in Act. 3. Hom. 9. and Hom.
2. in 1 Cor. 1.
it is no good presage, when people despise public Ordinances, even on the
Lords day: does not to such the Lord say, 1 Samuel 2.29. Wherefore do ye kick at
my sacrifice, and at mine offering which I have commanded in my habitation?
Read but those Gospel-Prophesies and Promises, Isay 2.2, 3. Isay 56.7. Mich.
4.1. which import the gatherings of Gods people for his public worship.

There are those who withdraw themselves from such duties, and while they think
to prejudice others, they do themselves the greatest wrong. It Is clear they do
not only fall from holy ordinances, but they fall into ugly errors, and
filthy evils many of them come to act. Chrysosto. Sermon. cont. Anomeos.
Chrysostom concludes that there is nothing more causes stablenesse in the
truth, and keeps up holiness of life, and corrects opposite vanities and
vices, then a constant frequenting of the public assemblies, and a careful and
cheerful there hearing the holy Word of God. And hence Augustine so earnestly
exhorts and persuades in some of his Sermons, Aug. de tempore. Ser. 251.
not to separate, but to congregate upon the Lords Day, and to the Gospel
publicly preached to apply themselves. Just. Mart; Apol. 2.
Justin Martyr reports of the Christians in the primitive times, how they would
call one another out of their houses, to meet together in the most solemn
manner they might upon the Lords Day And if we come out of the Ocean of the
Ancients, and go into the streams of our late Calv. in Deuteronomy. 5. etc. Pet.
Mart. in 1. Sam. 1.3. Bucer, in Math. 12.11. Zanch. in 4. Precep: Bullinger.
Gualterus in Act.
Writers, as they all urge the observance of the Lords Day: so they press the
practice of public duties in open assemblies, as most necessary unto the
right, and religious observation thereof. Give me leave (I hope I dote not on
any holiness of places, but prize the public gatherings of Gods people,
especially upon the Lords Day) to tell you that such servants the Lord has had
in preceding times, that would pitch upon places of public worship, not only
therein to serve the Lord; but to suffer for the Lord therein: thither they
would run to die, where they use to pray: and rather then they would be driven
from them, they would be destroyed in them, thinking it good going together
from thence to heaven. Eusebius reports that under the cruel persecution of
Dioclesian many thousand Christians were burned in the Temple of Nicomedia,
being assembled to celebrate the Day of Christ. And another mentions how at
Ments in Germany, Hieron. Epistol. ad Geront.
the City being taken, in the Church were many thousands murdered. But O how
exceeding sad is this when people may come to the public in peace, pray in
peace, hear in peace, depart in peace from Sabbath after Sabbath, yet loiter at
home on the Lords Day! I wish empty seats make not way for empty pulpits: and
that quite forgetting Sabbaths, be not the event of slighting Sermons.

(To say nothing of such as desert our assemblies, upon the groundless grounds
of Separation,) what Atheism begins to grow in the Land? whole Parishes live
as without God in the world, scarce knowing when a Sabbath comes: Help Lord.

Now amongst such as sin against the Lords Day in respect of works thereupon to
be done,

Diverse things are objected:

Some against the condition of the work in the day: And

Some against the continuance of the day in the work.

The condition of this days work considered, some object, Because any thing of
the day is required in public. Others, Because so many things in the day are
required.

Some say, They can read good books, and serve God at home, when the Sabbath
comes.

Answer, 1. They can, but it is a question whether they will or no. Such as in
their houses all the whole week do little or nothing in the worship of God, are
like to do no great matter at home when the Sabbath comes in the service of
God. As one well observes, that commonly, they who forget God in the time of
their life, do forget both God and themselves in the day of their death: So
they who neglect God in the week-time, do ordinarily little regard God or the
good of their souls upon the Sabbath Day.

Secondly, The public preaching of the Word is of more Soul-concernment on the
Sabbath then any private reading at home, if we consider, Either the precept of
God; Or the Profit of man.


Both express in that of the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2.2. As newborn babes desire the
sincere milk of the Word, that ye may grow thereby. Sincere milk of the Word,
(...), Sermon-milk, warm milk from the Mothers breast is best to battle the
babe. Sodden milk has not so much spirits therein, nor the child that
refreshing thereby.

Revera fratres nubes sunt praedicatores etc. August. in Psalm. 35.
Sermon-milk is the best food for spiritual growth. Agustin compares the
preaching of the Word to the raining of the clouds, which more refreshes the
corn then if pond-water should be poured out in pailes and buckets: My doctrine
shall drop as the rain, and my speech shall distill as the dew, Deuteronomy. 32.1, 2.
Slight not such Sabbath-showres, nor miss upon the Lords Day the former or the
latter rain.

Object. On the Sabbath in public I shall only hear another, at home I my self
can speak to God in prayer.

Answ. In public thou may not only hear, but also pray even then when not
one word thou speak. A man at home may speak many words, yet make never a
prayer: and a Christian in the congregation may pray earnestly, though he
speaks never a word.

It Is not the speaking of the tongue, but the working of the heart that makes
prayer. Non vocis magnitudine, sed cordis magnanimitate clamandum est, etc.
Clamabat populus et non audiebatur, tacebat Moses et audiebatur ille. Ambros.
in Psalm. 119.
One observes how the Israelites, when the Egyptian army was behind them, and
the Red Sea before them, they lift up their voices and cried out to the Lord:
yet God did not regard, this as a prayer. Exodus 14.10. Moses he was silent, not
one word of prayer appears: yet the Lord says to Moses. Wherefore cryest thou
unto me? ver. 15. Though his tongue was still, his heart was hot in holy prayer.

Secondly, he that will not upon the Lords Day hear Gods Word, his private
prayer is but unpleasing to God. It Is a saying of one of the Ancients, God often
rejects his prayer in trouble, who in the days of his peace does despise Gods
precepts: Deus saepe ejus precem in perturbatione deserit, qui precepta illius
in tranquillitate contemnit. Greg. Mor. li. 5. ca. 36.
and so God does but abominate his prayer in private, who will not hear upon
the Sabbath Day Gods holy precepts in public. He that turns away his ear from
hearing the Law, his prayer shall be an abomination, Prove. 28.9. He must first
hear God that will be heard of God.

Objection, On the Sabbath in public I may be put upon expense, in
contributing to some or other in want, which by being at home I escape.

Answ. 1. Charity to such as are in necessity is always an excellent duty. It
makes a man to resemble God, who has never need to receive, but is ever most
free to give, Jam. 1.5.

2. For the duty of charity the most seasonable day is the Sabbath Chryso. in
1. Cor. 11. Homil. 43.
Chrysostenme observes that the Sabbath is the day when God in his best bounty
does most appear unto us, and therefore for us to express our bounty to others
the Sabbath is the fittest day.

3. Though charitable duties are fit for every Sabbath, yet such occasions are
not constant. Christians indeed upon those Lords Days when they are not
communicating to, they should be commiserating of such as suffer in the World;
when they are not in their contributions liberal, they should be in their
compassions lively. In their thoughts they should go forth and look upon the
burdens of their brethren, remembering those that are in bonds as if bound with
them, Hebr. 13.3.

Object. Some Sabbath-work I am willing to do, but so many works on the Sabbat
be burdensome.

Answer, 1. The more work, the more wages. The more good Sabbath-seed men sow,
the more plentiful crops of comfort they shall r^ap both in earth and heaven.
God has more Sabbath-mercies to vouchsafe then we duties to perform.

2. As on this day men have much work: So they have much help; Scriptures,
Ministers, Ordinances, yea, Angels: yea, God himself, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost. Our Lord is not like Pharaoh who required brick, but withheld straw.

3. The work indeed on the Lords Day is large, but it is all excellent
business, that well becomes Kings: yea, and pions Princes have accounted it
not only their duty, but their dignity not only to see that others, but
themselves also in all holy duties do observe the Lords Day. Zozom. Eccl. hist.
si. 1. ca. 8.
History in the praise of Constantine reports much of this. And the Scripture
prophesies that Princes in Gospell-times should not abate, but abound in
Sabbath-day-duties. And the burnt-offering that the Prince shall offer to the
Lord in the Sabbath Day, Exek. 46.4.
shall be six Lambs without blemish, and a Ram without blemish. This by type
did signify that in succeeding times the Service of God should be plentifully
performed, even by the highest of the people upon the Lords holy Day.

4. Upon the Lords Day, though of duties there be a great variety, yet there is
no contrariety. In the soul of a Saint there be contrary principles, flesh and
spirit one opposing another: but there are not in the Sabbath contrary
practices each to other repugnant, one duty does not thwart another* but
Sabbath-services are to each other helpful. Prayer fits for hearing, and
hearing prepares for prayer.

5. The diversity and change of Sabbath-work, shows the Lords wisdom, yea,
and the love of the Lord; to make exercises the more easy, that holy labor
may not be heavy labor, nor men tired all Sabbath-time with one continued
work, the Lord lets them pass from one employment to another for refreshment.

6. On the Sabbath we have several works, yet in all we serve but one Master:
Indeed had we diverse Masters, it might discourage; but to us there is but one
Lord. Upon the Sabbath in religious services we change our place, and we change
our business, but we do not change our Master: All is to Christ; to Christ men
should say upon a Sabbath-morning, Though other Lords in the week-time have had
too much dominion over us, yet now we will make mention of thy Name only.

7. If multitude of services be tedious, what will multitude of sufferings be?
Jam. 1.2. says the Apostle, My brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into
diverse temptations. How will they rejoice in diverse daily distresses, that
shrink back because exercises are diverse upon the Lords day?

Object. The Sabbath ceases when public exercises end: no longer holy day,
then while holy duty.

Answ. If so, sure then with some Sabbaths are very short. But shall we think
that men can begin and end a Sabbath when they list? The Churches of Christ in
ages past have determined of an entire day due to the Lord. The Sabbaths, Iren.
cont. Valent. lib. 4. cap. 31. August. de temp. Sermon 251.
says Irenaeus, do require a complete day, and the perseverance of that whole
day in the Lords service. Austin declares his judgment touching the time of
the Sabbath from that text, Levit. 23.32. From even to even shall ye celebrate
your Sabbath. It Is evident from that place of the Apostle, Jam. 2.10. that
whosoever carelessely casts by any part of Gods precept, transgresses the whole
law of God; and thus, whosoever wilfully neglects any part of Gods Sabbath, is
guilty of breaking this whole holy day: men must not suite the day to their
duties, but their duties to the day; while the day endures their duty remains.

Object. But so to keep the whole day is terribly tyring: a hard service, who
can do it?

Answ. God because of our infirmities does afford what may refresh, the better
to bear up our bodies the Lord allows moderate sleep in the night, and
temperate food in the day. True, it was in Tertullians time a dispute, Tertul.
de coron. milit, cap. 3. Tom. 1. page 747.
whether it be not a duty on the Lords day to fast? but our Saviors Apology
for his Disciples, in plucking and eating the ears of Corn upon the Sabbath
day, may easily quiet that question, Mark. 2.25. And blessed be the Lord for
the allowances of his love.

2. Men do not complain of whole days for the world, They rise early, and go
to bed late, and eat the bread of carfulness, Psalm. 127.2. They do not say
all the week, when the morning is, Would God it were evening, but rather in the
evening they wish, would it were morning again, to go after the world afresh;
yet we find some even in sinful ways so unwearied, that when one day is past,
they pitch upon the very next day with enlarged resolutions: Come ye, say they,
I will fetch wine, and we will fill our selves with strong drink and to morrow
shall be as this d^y, and much more abundant, Isai. 56.12.

3. We may see what some of Gods servants have desired; instance David, that
dear servant of God, Psalm. 27.4. One thing have I desired of the Lord, (says
he) and that will I seek after, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all
the days of my life. As if he should wish it were always Sabbath day with him.
Psalm. 84.4, 10. O blessed are they that dwell in thy house, etc. For a day in
thy Courts is better then a thousand: I had rather be a doorkeeper in the
house of my God, then to dwell in the tents of wickedness. Were men of David's
mind, a day in seven for the service of the Lord would not be too long.

4. There have been them that have spent diverse days and nights also in the
service of God: see a considerable instance, Luke 2.37. A widow of about
fourscore and four years, which departed not from the Temple, but served God
with fastings and prayers night and day. For her sexe] A woman: For her case] A
widow, not having the company or comfort of a husband. For her age] About
fourscore and four years, yet night and day with fasting and prayer serving God
in the Temple.

5. For such as are tired out with the time of a Sabbath, would they go to
heaven? There it is ever Sabbath, always singing, serving, and setting up of God.
Bernard urges the observation of the Sabbath, and holding out in holy exercises
thereon upon this account, that by present rest men may learn to live in rest
eternal, Bern. super Saluz Regina Sermon. 4. Col. 1744.
and by persevering service men may be prompt to perpetuate the Lords
everlasting praise. But how would men do to endure heaven, and a never ending
Sabbath there, who know not here how to bear out the durance of a Sabbath day?

Object. I cannot so tend duties on the day, for I have other works of
necessity to do.

Ans. 1. There are works of necessity which we grant may be done upon the Lords
day, Vid. Lyra. in Exodus 20. and in Jonna. 5.8. Beda in Marc. 2.23. Zanch in 4.
praece.
as by food to refresh our bodies, to resist the invasion of enemies, to stop
the irruption of waters, to quench the rage of fire, to preserve the life of
our Cattle, and the like.

2. Those that say on the Sabbath such things they must necessarily do, ought
yet carefully to see, it be not A fained necessity, or A made necessity.


To pretend a things necessity, when yet indeed no necessity of such a thing to
be done, is to commit a double sin: To do what is not good, and To say what is
not true.


Men must also beware they bring not a necessity upon themselves, upon the
Sabbath to do such things as they might prevent through a prudent foresight,
this is to make a sin with a necessity. Isay 58.13. Thou shall call the Sabbath
a delight, not doing thine own ways, nor finding thine own necessities; so
some Paraphrasing expound the Hebrew word: men have many necessities which yet
are of their own causing, and not of Gods appointing.

3. There are things necessary in their season, that yet are not necessary upon
the Sabbath. It Is necessary for a man to follow his lawful calling, and to be
diligent in his worldly business. When we read (says Bernard) that Adam in
the pleasant place of Paradise was appointed to work, shall we think that the
sons of Adam in the troublesome Wilderness of this world are placed for play?
No, it is necessary for the sons of men to be industrious in their lawful
affairs: Moses putting his hand in his bosom, 'twas leprous; but putting it
out, 'twas made whole. God has given men hands, for a threefold work, says
one:

To lift them up in prayer to God,

To stretch them out in charity to the poor; and

To put them down by labor in a lawful calling. So that for a man in his
lawful calling to labor it is necessary, viz. in its season. But herein to
labor upon the Lords day is dangerous: The gain of this day may be as the gold
of Tholosse, as the cole brought to the nest setting the young and all on fire.
Luke 10. Reproof is given to Martha by our Savior, for her being about
ordinary affairs, assuring her that [One thing was needful.] Needful it was
for Martha to be about her household business. Yea, but not then when Christ
was present, and an opportunity served for soul-advantage, which her sister
Mary minded. Thus though it is needful for Christians to look after their
lawful occasions in the world, yet not upon the Lords day, the season for
soul-advantages.

4. Are such wordly walks and works necessary? and are the works of Gods
worship arbitrary? yea, upon the Sabbath is not the service of God much more
necessary?

As the Apostle said, Act. 4. Whether it be more needful to obey God or men,
judge ye: So say I, Whether it be on the Sabbath more needful to serve God or
your selves, judge ye; whether more needful to take care for your temporal or
your eternal being, judge ye. Among necessaries that which is most necessary,
is to be first minded.

Object. We see none so exact, our neighbors are not so nice, but take their
liberties on the Sabbath; and why not we the same?

Answ. 1. We must live by precept, not by example; it is the Law of God, and not
the lives of men that must be our rule. As he that will be for God must cross
the most of men; so he that would go to heaven must leave the greatest part of
the world behind him. He shall never write a good hand, that makes the world
his Copy; nor shall he ever well observe a Sabbath, who frames himself unto the
common platform.

2. If patterns are to bo followed, Be ye then followers of God as dear
children, Ephesians. 5.1. In six days God made heaven and earth, and rested the
seventh day; wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath Day, and hollowed it.
Likewise let us look unto the Lord Christ, Luke 4.16. He went into the
Synagogue on the Sabbath day, as his custom was, etc. Learn we ought of
Christ, though not (as Austin observes) to walk on the waters, yet to work in
Gods worship upon the Sabbath Day.

3. If we will take our Model herein after the manner of men, it is best to look
back to preceding Saints. Gods Church and people considered as past and present
may be compared to that cloud, Exodus 14. which was partly bright, and partly
dark. The bright part was before, to give light to the Israelites, and the dark
part behind, to blind the Egyptians. The Saints and people of God aforetime
were as the bright side of the cloud, shining clear in Chistianity, strict in
all the ways of God, and most exact in Sabbath-service; such as now profess
themselves the Saints of God, are as the following dark side of the cloud, more
dim and dull in holy duties, more loose upon the Lords Day, having less of the
life and luster of religion. O let us but think what was the care of Christians
not many years ago, to improve Sabbaths, and all the service of God, such
follow, with holy Apostles and Martyrs, and the spirits of just men made
perfect.

4. If herein we will take such as are present for our pattern, Blessed be the
Lord, some are left, that hold up religion to the life; and with great care
look to the Lords Day, and the duties thereof. Indeed there are diverse of whom
we may complain, Chrysostom. in Matthew. Hom. 3.
as Chrysostom of some in his time: Whereby (says he) shall I know you to be
Christians? Do you not delight in any place more then in the Courts of the
Lords house? and take pleasure in any time, more then in the hours of the Lords
day? Yet some few are found faithful to the Lord, and his Day, and such we
should duly observe.

5. When an age is in religion loose, 'twill be the more any man's credit and
comfort to be exact and strict. To be a precise Sabbath-keeper in a
Sabbath-breaking-age, that is a man's honor: For a man to remain sound in his
principles, and punctual in the practical observation of the Sabbath, when
opposite evils are high and huge, August. de Tempo. Sermon. 23 2^
in times and places that strange birds build their nests, when multitudes in
Towns and Parishes (as Austin resembles them) are like Toades and Frogs in
fens and puddles, Croaking against the Lords Day. When many as Musculus upon
the fourth commandment complains, Beza in Cant. Solo: Hom. 30. Bucer^ in
Psalm. 92.
(the like Beza Bucer and others laments) pitifully profane the Lords holy
Day; this is praise, then to be painful, pure and permanent in the practice of
all the Lords-Day-duties.

Object. We for our selves observe the Sabbath, but there are some with us,
that will have their liberties, and who can help it?

Answ. Superiors must help as much as is possible, that others under them as
well as themselves observe the Lords Day.

Therefore as many of us as have others within our gates, and under our
government, we ought as much as in us lies, upon the Lords Day to endeavor the
drawing them to holy duties, which may appear plain through a double proof: The
precept of God about them, and The property of God in them.


1. God gives his precept for them herein, as we find in the fourth
Commandment: The Seventh day is the Sabbath: in it thou shall do no manner of
work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy manservant, nor thy
maidservant, etc. If it be our duty to keep them from ordinary work for the
case of their bodies, then to bring them to holy ordinances for the good of
their Souls: and the bodily rest we are to allow them lies upon this account,
they are to rest from the common works of their vocation in order to the
exercises of religion in private and public upon the Lords Day. Luke 13.15.
Does not each one of you on the Sabbath loose his ox or his ass from the
stall, and lead him away to watering? and ought not each one of us on the Lords
Day to loose his children and Servants from our businesses and houses, and lead
them away with us to be instructed? should not every one of us publicly
present our selves on the Sabbath before the Lord, as it were, saying, Behold,
here am I, and the children and servaants that thou have given me? And if we go
before God alone leaving our families to their liberties, what will the Lord
say? As Eliah said to David when he came to the Camp of the Israelites, 1. Sam.
17.28. How come thou down hither? where is the flock? and with whom have thou
left those few sheep in the wilderness? And may not God thus question some,
when they come, and on the Sabbath day appear in public, How come thou
hither? where is thy family? with whom have thou left thy Children, and
servants? Eusebius. de vita Constable. li 4. Ca. 18. et 19*
Eusebius reports of Constantine what good laws he made for the bringing forth
of families, all sorts of servants, yea souldiets and men of war, to Gods
public worship upon the Sabbath day. And other pious Princes in times past,
have thought it no less a part of their duty.

2. God keeps his propriety in them; he is the great householder, and all our
families are his; as Laban said to Jacob, Genesis 31.43. These daughters are my
daughters, and these children are my children, and these cattle are my cattle,
and all that thou see is mine: Thus says God to a Governor, Thy sons are my
sons, and thy servants are my servants, and all that thou have is mine. Now as
by virtue of our interest in them, and authority over them, they work for us on
the week: So by virtue of Gods interest in them, and sovereignty above them,
they are bound to serve God upon his holy Sabbath; they have a Father in
heaven, and a Master in heaven, whose commands especially on this day they
ought to obey, which we must further, not hinder. As the Lord said by Moses to
Pharaoh, Let my people go, that they may serve me: so he says to us, Let my
children go, and my servants go, that they may worship me upon my holy Sabbath.
Pharaoh against this was froward, but think what befell him, and let us fear.
We should be in this case toward all under our charge, as the Master of the
Colt, as soon as he had heard the Lord had sent for him, he straight way
unloosed him, and let him go, Luke 19. Let them be loath herein, if we do not
put them on, the utmost we can, our selves fall under sin. Thus having seen the
several sorts of men sinning against the Lords day, and examined the arguments
which on each side they urge, answering among objections the principal they
press, that they may pass without blame; Multitudo peccantium auget peccatum,
I proceed from the multitude of the sinners to discover

The Magnitude of the sin.

Sin that lies against the Lords day is Great Both in judgment, And in
practice.


To err in opinion upon this point, as the error Is very senseless, So very
sinful. It Is a senseless error;


For such as own the Lord of the day, yet to deny the day of the Lord: for men
to acknowledge themselves under the command of Christ, and yet to be above the
Sabbath of Christians, etc.

It Is a sinful error.
It Is an error full of sin, in judgment to be against the Christian Sabbath:
for it is A Mother-error, A Master-error.


And therefore a monsterous error; men may easily imagine, many other errors
are under the beck, and bred in the belly of this. Hence people cry down
Sanctification, Mortification, Repentance, practical holiness, public
Ordinances, Prayer, Preaching, Scriptures, and all the means of grace, etc.
Yea, hence ready to plead for Popery, to embrace Images, and advance all
Idol-worship. At this one door this triple crown will easily come in, with all
Antichristian, yea Heathenish vanities: It Is a fundamental error, O what Babels
may be built upon this: yea, by this such batteries may be made, as may shake
and shatterdown the whole Fabric of Christian Religion. This makes many so
miserably misuse Scripture: some texts they muzzle their mouths, and will not
suffer them to speak; other texts they set upon the rack, making them speak
what God never meant, and all to make the Sabbath nothing: Satan having not a
greater design then to down this day.

And indeed the Devil well knows, there is not a readier way to rout and out
all the truths of God all the world over, and to introduce all errors into all
parts of the Christian world, then to corrupt the judgments of people, with an
Antisabbatarian principle. Therefore to err herein, is a very great sin.

2. To err in point of practice, and to transgress against the Lords day in
respect of the duties thereof, is a sin exceeding sinful: Both for its
gradation, And for its dilation.


If we observe, How high it rises, and How far it reaches,
The sin is great.

Great is the sin of Sabbath neglects: If we consider How it ascends in
height, and How it extends in breadth.



1. For height;] This sin goes up to God, and is a sin of such degrees against
him, as that therein are not only many sins enwrapped, but each sin rising
higher then the other, so that the latter is much worse then the former. As
Austin once aggravated Adams sin in eating the fruit God had forbidden: August.
Enchi. ad Laur. cap. 45.
so may I aggravate this sin, in not keeping the day God has commanded; For
therein is Ingratitude, Forgetfulness, Perfidiousness, Theft, Robbery, and
Sacrilege.


Ingratitude.] God at the beginning gave man a Sabbath; but man by sin soon
lost his Sabbath-right, yet God after gives men a new Charter for
Sabbath-priviledges, Christ confirms it; the day is sure, Consule Ambros.
Orat. de obitu Satyri.
the mercy is sweet. Lord, what is man? even a monster in nature (says one)
herein to be ungrateful. For him that is unworthy of a minute, to be unthankful
for a day, and such a DAY as this; a monstrous sin indeed.

Forgetfulness.] As for God to forsake man is among the sorest judgments: So
for man to forget God is among the greatest sins. When the Scripture would set
out the worst of wicked persons and Nations, it says they are such as forget
God. Now sure, he that does not remember the Sabbath of God, he does forget the
God of the Sabbath. Yea, it argues God forgotten all the week, when men do not
remember the Sabbath day and duty.

Perfidiousnesse.] This blessed day is one of those precious things God has
committed to man's trust to keep; now to be untrusty and treacherous herein, is a
most abominable sin. Constantine was wont to say, Such men I am sure will never
be faithful to me, that are unfaithful to their God. No marvel men betray so
many trusts in the world, when they deal falsely with God, in his holy times
and things. To be ungrateful to God is bad, to be forgetful of God is worse,
but to be perfidious with God worst of all.

Theft.] Though God has given man the Sabbath for his use, yet he still
continues therein his own interest, and lets it go upon no other account, then
to have it religiously kept; therefore they that take it from God upon other
terms, and turn it to other ends, shall be thrust among thieves in the great
day of the Lord. Perhaps a man may say with Samuel, Whom have I ever defrauded?
whose Ox or Ass have I taken, etc? Some though they have not theeved from
their neighbor, yet they have stolen from God the time of his holy day. Who
is not afraid to be found such a Felon?

August. lib. 4. in Exodus and habetur 14. q. 15. c.
Robbery.] Austin well observes, that Robbers are worse then thieves: Thieves
they take nothers goods secretly, by fraud, when the owners are not aware: But
Robbers they take openly, by force, the owners looking on. Thus men take away
the Sabbath day, under Gods all-seeing eye; that which God holds, they
profanely pluck away: among high-way-Robbers shall such be ranked not
repenting, Mal. 3.8. Will a man rob God? yet ye have robbed me: But ye say,
Wherein have we robbed thee? even in the days and times of the Sabbath. Yea,
and this greatens the sin of such men: they that theeve and rob, they possibly
may plead necessity, having nothing of their own whereon to live. But the Lord
has allowed men time of their own, for any needful and lawful work, and yet
to rob him of his Sabbath?

Sacrilege. August. super Joann. and habetur 13. q. 4.
] This is worse then all the rest. Austin does admirably aggravate this sin,
and he makes it so much the greater, because it is a sin which cannot be
committed but against God alone. Augu. cont: Cres. lib. 4. cap. 10.
And what way can it be worse committed against God, then by polluting the holy
time of his Sabbath? To abuse sanctified time, is such Sacrilege as the Lord
most abominates: Thou then that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege?
Romans 2.22. Why, is it not worse Sacrilege to take this blessed day from Gods
holy worship, then to take the silver Cup from the communion Table, or the
great Bible from the reading Desk? Be not deceived, here be heaps upon heaps,
many sins piled upon this sin, yea, more might be mentioned, as disobedience,
rebellion, unbelief, pride, self-conceit, a base and low esteem of the ways
of God, Word of God, worship of God, all concur to make this sin hateful and
horrible in the height thereof.

2. For the breadth;] This sin is of a large spread, Both against God the
Father of Christ,
And against Christ the Son of God.


1. This sin against the Sabbath day, considered in the duties thereof, does
reach so far against God, as it is found to be a sin Against all the Attributes
of God, and Against all the Ordinances of God.


1. The Attributes of God are herein all sinned against: He that takes not care
to keep the Sabbath of God, slights the wisdom of God, disobeys the will of
God, despises the mercy of God, provokes the Justice of God, contemns the power
of God, abuses the patience of God, defiles the holiness of God, defaces the
beauty of God; yea, as it were undermines the whole being of God blessed for
ever: No marvel if they that observe no Sabbath, should believe there is no God.

2. The Ordinances of God are herein all sinned against; to sin against
Ordinances, is to pollute those holy vessels wherein are laid up for us the
treasures of heaven, and to cut those precious pipes that convey to us the
water of life. To sin against Ordinances, is to break those Chariots wherein
the Lord rides toward us, and to sink those Boats which are to carry us over
to God. To sin against Ordinances is to cast by those clear Lanthornes wherein
the light of the Lord shines, and to fling dirt in those bright glasses wherein
the face of our God is seen. Word, Sacraments, and Prayer, all are as it were
pulled in pieces and put out of doors when the Lords day is laid by, and
Sabbaths set aside.

2 This sin against the Sabbath day in its duties reaches also so far against
Christ, as its found to be a sin Against the estates of Christ, and Against the
offices of Christ.


Christ considered in his estates, is by this sin injured Both as humbled in
his death, And as honored in his resurrection.


1. To sin against the Lords day, is to sin against the Lords death. This holy
day was one of those precious things Christ purchased, and with his blood
bought. As with his blood he bought a people to serve him, so with his blood he
bought this time for them to serve him in. To sin then against the day of
Christ, is to sin against the blood of Christ: What sin so abominably black, as
to sin against Christ's blessed blood? I was nothing (says Austin) and God made
me with his word; Aug. Sermon. 151. de tempore.
I was worse then nothing and Christ redeemed me with his blood; what shall I
say? shall I ever sin? we may well add,

2. To sin against this institution of Christ, is to sin against the
resurrection of Christ. August ad Janua. 119. cap. 13. and ad Casul. 86. Idem,
de civit. Dei. lib. 22. cap. 30. Idem, de verb is Apost. Sermon. 15. Chemni.
exam. cap. de diebus festis. Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 8.
Austin does often in his writings praise the practice of the Apostles, in that
they did observe this first day of the week to be the Lords day, upon the
account of Christ's resurrection. So Chemnitius commends it much, saying that
the celebration of the day of Christ's resurrection, was the best way for the
abrogation of Judaisme, and the exaltation of Christianisme in the world.
Sozomene sets this down for the honor of Constantine, that in the Law he made
for the keeping of this day, he laid the strength of his reason upon Christ's
resurrection. On the contrary, how cross is this to Christ who rose from the
dead this day? And what a sinful shame is this to them that profess
Christianity, to cast by that day whereon Christ rose from the dead? Oh the sin
of such as put this day to death, when Christ died that it might live! and how
abominable is it to bury this blessed day, which God raised together with
Christ! This is a wickedness worthy to be cried down.

2. Christ considered in his offices is herein injured, Both as a King, And as
a Prophet.


1. Christ as a King is herein cast off: It Is one of the Regalities of a King,
to appoint his own time when his servants shall attend. Berna. Sermon. 2. in
Epipha.
Christ (as one well notes) though his kingdom be not of this world, yet he
has his kingdom in this world; and in this world is to exercise Kingly power,
in respect of his dispose of persons and seasons, times and things: It Is the
message that every Sabbath-breaker sends to heaven, Christ shall not be our
King, we will not have him to reign over us.

2. Christ as a Prophet is herein put off: Tertul. li. contra judaeot.
An ancient writer affirms, that Christ by his coming into the world,
accomplished the prophecies of precedent Prophets, and as it were sealed up
them: but left a Prophetical office of his own to be fulfilling even unto the
end of the world, and the Sabbath day to be the especial day for his exercise*
in this office. Ramus de relig. lib. 2. cap. 6.
Another calls it the School-day, wherein Christ the great Doctor of his
Church, whose chair is in heaven, August. Sermon. 4. in fest. Jo. B.
keeps School on earth, and those persons proudly contemn Christ's teaching, who
neglect Sabbath-time. Is not this then a great sin? a sin against God and
Christ: a sin against Law and Gospel: a sin which Pagans and Devils are not
guilty of.

Object. This is the sin of such as profane and pollute the Lords day, but I
do not so, though I do not the duties thereof.

Polluitur Sabbathum, cum cujus gratia instituitur, a plerisque plane non
curatur. Muscul.
Answ. They pollute the Lords day who do not keep it holy; as they are said to
defile Gods Name, who do not sanctify the Name of God, Jer. 34.16.

To fanctifie the Sabbath is to spend it in holy exercises Lyra. in Exodus 26.
Bulling, in Romans 14.5.
and not to sanctify it, is to pollute it.

There are things men may be said to destroy them, when they do not take care
to preserve them: So such are said to defile the Sabbath, who do not use the
means to sanctify it. But for this, that saying of the Prophet may suffice,
Isay 56.2. Blessed is the man that does this, and the son of man that laith
hold on it, which keeps the Sabbath holy, and polluteth it not. By which
place it plainly appears, that as he does not pollute the Sabbath who keeps it
holy; Zanchi. de tribus Eloh. part. 2. lib. 3. cap 9. and de oper. creat par.
3. lib. 1. cap. 1. Idem in 4. praecep.
so he who keeps not the Sabbath holy, does pollute it. Now all accord, that to
keep the Sabbath holy, is to pass the whole day in pious duties. Indeed diverse
they think they very well keep the Sabbath day, if they forbear wicked and
worldly works, though that day little be done in the service of God: But as God
speaks in the Prophet, Isay 58.5. Is it such a fast as I have chosen? so is it
such a Sabbath as I have appointed? a day for men to do what they will? to take
up and lay down duties as they please? Is it such a Sabbath as I have
commanded? a day for men to take their carnal ease, to be idle, slothful, and
vain? Is not this the day that I have ordained? to be loose from earthly
delights, worldly cares, to be free from all entanglements for God? Is it not
for men to give themselves wholly to holy service? Is it not to pray fervently,
to hear diligently, etc? The neglect of these upon the Lords day, is a loud
sin.

2. The judgments that such sinners are subject to, come next to be noted.
These are, Both Privative And positive
Penalties.

Through this are Good things renounced, and Evil things inflicted.


Gods judgments of the Privative sort; are either In temporal matters, or In
Spiritual means.


1. God in judgment removes, or restreines matters necessary for men in this
world for the sinful neglect of his Sabbaths and service;

As things needful For their personal sustentation, For their political
preservation.


1. Things neeedful and good for the supporting of their bodies as they are men
God removes as a punishment for this sinful neglect of the Lords day. Hence God
does not hear the heavens, the heavens do not hear the earth, the earth does
not hear the Corn. Cypria. contra Demet.
Cyprian has an elegant saying: thou complaiest that now adays the fountains
are not so flowing, nor the air so wholesome, nor the rain so plentiful, nor
the earth so fruitful, etc. Do thou serve God by whose means all serves thee?
do thou wait on him by whose beck all waits on thee, etc? God withdraws his
bounty when men omit their duty. When the Lords day and religious duties, his
house and holy things are laid waste; what follows? let the Lord himself speak,
Levit. 26.2, 16.19. Hagg. 1, 9. with several such texts.

2. Things needful and good, as people are embodyed, for the preserving of
their civil State, God in punishment pulls them away for sinfulness against
his Sabbaths: as order, government, good laws, just administrations amongst
men. Let justice be removed (says an ancient Writer) and what are Kingdoms and
Commonwealths, but great robbing places, where might overcomes right? Let
government be gone, and multitudes of miseries break in, Nations of men are
made as the fishes of the Sea, and as the creeping things that have no Ruler
over them, ruins rush in upon them. Yet such are the sad sequels of Gods
slighted service, and neglected Sabbaths, as may be easily evidenced from that
of the Prophet, Jer, 17.24, 25. Jer. 22.8, 9.

2. Judgments privatively considered, which sinners against the Sabbath are
like to suffer, in removing of Spiritual good things; Both Instrumental, And
Principal.


1. Things Instrumental for much good, God removes from men not minding his
Sabbaths and service; I mean, the means of grace, the Ministry of the Gospel.
A miserable punishment. True; such as have an immediade hand in removing the
Word of God preached from a people, are guilty of a very great sin. And woe, woe,
woe, says Luther to them that leave the Church without a Preaching Ministry,
through which great Towns of people come to be like dark dens of wild beasts.
And a dreadful doom it is on such as suffer under a famine of the Word of God.
Yet such a famine God inflicts for sinning against his blessed Sabbath; See
Amos 8. 5. some saying, When will the Sabbath be gone, that we may set forth
wheat, etc. verse. 11. Behold, the days come, says the Lord, I will send a
famine in the land, not of bread, but of hearing the word of the Lord. 'Twas
ill with Israel when there was no Smith found in all the Land, but the
Israelites were forced to go to the Philistines every man to sharpen his Share
and his Coulter, his Axe and his Mattock, 1 Samuel 13.19, 20. And will it not be
ill with England, if no faithful dispensers of the Gospel should be found in
the Land, but poor people should be put to go to Papists, and other persons of
corrupt opinions; thinking thereby to quicken and comfort their dead and sad
hearts, etc. The God of heaven hold off the sight of such a dismal day. We read
Genesis 21.15, 16. of Hagar, when the bread and water in the bottle was spent, and
her son ready to famish, she went and sat her down at a distance, saying, O
let me not see the death of my child! And she looked toward him, and left up
her voice and wept. When Spiritual food shall fail, will not a faithful
Minister sit down sorrowfully, saying, O let me not see the death of my people?
Yea, when holy Ordinances are gone, how will other Christian Churches look over
to England, and lament saying, We have a sister, and she has no breasts? Can.
8.8. These are the deserved effects of our lamentable neglects of the Lords
day: when men cease from Sabbaths, then God makes Sabbaths to cease, Hosea 2,
11. Men sinfully forget Gods Sabbaths, and then God as a punishment causes
Sabbaths to be forgotten, Lam. 2.6. The Lord has violently taken away his
Tabernacle, destroyed the places of assembly, and caused the Sabbaths to be
forgotten in Zion.

2. The principal of all precious things is hereby brought to depart, even God
himself. When Gods Sabbaths, service, and servants leave a Land, the Lord goes
along with them. I read of Nazianzene, who being about to go from a place where
he had Preached for some time, a good man comes crying unto him. O Nazianzene,
will thou go away, and carry the holy Trinity with thee? Father, Son, and holy
Ghost, all forsake such as are Sabbath-forsaken: the Gospel of God, and the God
of the Gospel goes together. In the departure of the Lords day, the Lord of the
day departs.

2 The positive punishments for Sabbath-sins are considerable, Both in their
Diversity, And in their Severity.


1 God does execute diverse judgments upon the neglect of the Lords day; when
God himself with his Sabbaths and service forsake a Land, he lets in lamentable
calamities, and makes men suffer several ways. 2 Chronicles 15.5, 6, 7. For along
season Israel was without the true God, and without a teaching Priest, and
without Law: And in those times there was no peace to him that went out, nor to
him that came in, but great vexations were upon all the inhabitants of the
Countries. Nation was destroyed of Nation, and City of City, for God did vex
them with all adversity. Gaulter. in Act. 13. Homil. 88.
A learned Expositor thus speaks* In our days even among Christians, the
Sabbath is sinfully broken, that blessed day abused which should be wholly
consecrated to God, and do we yet marvel what is the cause of our calamities? I
have heard that in Germany, under their woeful Wars, there was at a time a very
great convention sitting to consult what should be the cause of their
calamities, and the Major part pressed the not trimming of their Churches and
adorning them with Images; not considering how careless they were of the Lords
day, and the due worship of God. The error with us is slighting of all public
places, painful Preachings, pure Administrations, Gods holy Institutions of
times and things; yet we are not aware that these things work our woe. Let Us
look into Levit. 26.2. Ye shall keep my, Sabbaths and reverence my Sanctuary:
What if not? I will make your Sabbaths to cease, and bring your sanctuaries
into desolation, and I will not smell the savor of your sweet odours: verse.
31. And is that all? I will set my face against you, they that hate you shall
reign over you, I will send wild beasts among you, and I will bring a sword
upon you: and several other sad miseries we meet in the Chapter. The like
Lamentations. 2. The Lord has violently taken away his Tabernacle, caused his
Sabbaths to be forgotten in Zion, and has despised (or suffered to be
despised) in the indignation of his anger the KING and the PRIEST: contempt to
be cast upon all that are appointed to rule and govern both in Church and
State, A great sin, a grievous punishment. and what further? The wall of the
Daughter of Zion is fallen, her gates are sunk her bars are broaken, the LAW is
no more, verse. 7, 8, 9. Alas! O the breaches God makes, and bloodsheds God
brings for breaking his Sabbaths! The Christian world is filled with wars when
the Lords day grows dim; When the Sun is darkened, the Moon is turned into
blood, Joel 2.13.

2. God does execute severe judgments for the Non-sanctifying of his Sabbaths,
In general upon people, And also on particular persons:


Jer. 17.27. If you will not hearken to me, to hallow the Sabbath day, then
will I kindle a fire in the gates of Jerusalem, and it shall devour the Palaces
thereof, and it shall not be quenched. Fire it holds forth the fierceness of
anger, evidenced in its most fearful effects: The Lord by the mouth of the
Prophet threatens fire, fire, Fire in the Palaces, and Fire in the Gates.


Palaces;] Places of honor, the beauty and ornaments of a City: upon these
shall be fire. Gates;] Places of power, where the strength of a City is laid,
and where justice is done, here also fire. Fire in the Palaces,] No keeping in:
and also Fire in the Gates,] No running out. A devouring fire round about, that
all must feel, and none can quench; and all this comes for not keeping the
Sabbath holy. See how Nehemiah contends with transgressors against this holy
time of the Sabbath, What evil is this that ye do, and profane the Sabbath day?
did not your fathers thus, and did not our God bring all this evil upon them,
and upon this City? yet ye bring more wrath upon Israel by profaning the
Sabbath. This sin heightens the wrath of God, and causes great fires, Nehem.
13.17, 18. Not only Nations, but Particular persons have also been severely
punished upon the same account, as there have been sad instances in several
ages; men made as monuments of Gods dreadful anger in diverse places. Tacit.
Histor. lib 5. Josephus Antiq. lib. 12 cap. 13. and lib. 16. cap. 11.
Pompey that great Soldier, is reported sorely to suffer for defiling of Gods
Sabbath and Sanctuary. It Is written of Herod the King, who appointing some to
pull up the Sepulchers of Gods Saints, and to search for supposed treasures
therein, God made fire to rise out of the earth, whereby such as searched were
devoured. Ecclesiast. Histor. 12. centur. Magdeb. cap. 6.
Histories are found full of examples of Gods fearful judgments upon such, who
upon supposals of earthly pleasure, and profit, have presumed to pull down the
Sahbath of his Son, in the solemn service thereof. Joh. Fincel, lib. 3. de
mirac.
Many make mention of that miserable Woman, who upon the Lords day dressing her
flax, fire flamed out thereof, and the third Sabbath it so burned in the house
that her children and self was consumed therewith. Discipul de de tempore Sermon.
117.


Another carrying in his Corn upon the Lords day, fire kindled in his Barn, and
burnt it to the ground: I have read of many such sad examples. Some within
doors their brains beat out, others abroad their bodies burnt with Lightning,
and beat down dead with claps of Thunder, as some recite.

Object. We see no such punishments in our present times, upon persons
profaning the Sabbath.

Answ. The Lord now leaves men unto that which is worse then punishment; to wit
sin, Both in the time of the Sabbath, And out of Sabbath-time.


O the sad sins of several, even upon the Sabbath day! Such sins set Musculus
upon the fourth Commandment to make a sad moan; and Bucer upon the 92.
Psalm, does bitterly bewail such sins. O that we had some so seriously
mourning! for we have now many miserably so sinning: yea, and also at other
times: Men are in sin* when they are out of the Sabbath: God leaves men to week
days transgressions as a punishment of Sabbath day omissions. The Lord lets
men on the week days do the evil they should not, because on the Sabbath day
they did not the good they should. Yea, let us sadly consider our abominable
sins, Both in judgment, And in practice.


The sinking of Sabbaths, is the rising of all errors. Hence we note Arminian,
Socinian, Pelagian opinions published almost in every place. With our sins
against the day of Christ we have sinful errors against the death of Christ,
against the whole Doctrine of Christ, Dignity of Christ, Deity of Christ. I
have found some affirming, that 'twas a piece of the Devils policy, to hinder
the Sabbath from being called (the Lords day,) that he might the more keep men
from knowing, and embracing the Lord of truth, and the truth of the Lord. I
dare say, it is Satan's design, that he might make men vent and advance Venomous
opinions against the pure and precious truths of Christ, he causes them to
become careless in keeping the Lords day. 'Twas observed among the Jews, that
when they grew remiss concerning the Sabbath, they became corrupt in their
Tenants touching the works of God in the Creation: And it may be observed among
Christians, that since men have fallen to soul neglects of the Lords day, they
have about the works of Christ redemption, waxed wild in their imaginations;
yea, errors of all sorts has God suffered, as filthy froggs to infect our
English air.

2. Sinful and prodigious practices are also plentiful in every place. As the
observation of the Sabbath is that which brings on all the duties of
godliness, cease that, and all sinks: so the violation of the Sabbath is the
inlet of al looseness, a door to all the works of darkness; what wickedness
will not rise up where the Lords day is down? As in the Decalogue the command
for the Sabbath is set in the middle, being the band of the whole, and that
which has an influence into all: thus in the Catalogue of Jerusalems sins,
Ezekiel. 22. the sin against the Sabbath is set in the midst amongst them, as
being the main, and that through which all the rest move. Read verse. 7, 8, 9,
10. In thee have they set light by father and mother, in thee have they dealt
by oppression, in thee have they vexed the father less and the widow. Thou
have despised my holy things, and have profaned my Sabbath; In thee are men
that carry tales to shed blood, in thee they commit lewdness, thou have
greedily gained by extortion, and have forgotten me, says the Lord God. Now
for the Lord in a Land to suffer such sins, is worse then if he should in an
ordinary way punish, punishment not being so great an evil as sin: Sin is the
common cause of punishment. In evil things the cause is more corrupt then the
effect; punishment is the work of God, sin is the proper work of the Devil,
punishment is opposite to the peace and quiet of the creature, sin it is
repugnant to the very being of man, yea, of God himself: It Is sin alone which
formally and causally separates a soul from God the chiefest good, and
therefore is the greatest evil: It Is sins that are Bars in Heaven-gates, that
there is no entering in; and Bonds in Hell flames, that there is no getting out.
If I (says Anselme) were in hell without sin, I should not be kept in, and
were I in heaven with sin, I should soon be turned out. This (says
Chrysostom) do I think, and this I will ever Preach, that it is worse by sin to
offend Christ, then to be tormented in hellfire for ever, May not we then well
think, that sin is a sorer evil then any punishment possible? And therefore,
though God does not punish persons for polluting his Sabbath: yet in that he
leaves them upon this unto other sins, their case is a thousand fold worse. Yet
of such too many are manifest, men who on the Sabbath do not regard Gods
assisting grace to help them in good: God on the week days withdraws his
restreining grace that might keep them from evil, even sin the worst of evils.

2. Though God does not in visible ways punish such men, yet he does in
various ways whereof they are not aware, viz. Negative, and Positive.


1. It Is a punishment that God does not punish them, Hosea 4.14. I will not
punish your Daughters when they commit whoredom, Infignis est poena, and
vindicta impietatis connivere Deum and indulgere peccantibus Philo. lib. de
confus. linguarum.
etc. When God does not punish persons for polluting and neglecting his
Sabbath, this is a sore punishment: Yea, it is a notable punishment (says a
learned Writer) and a dreadful revenge, when God seems to indulge, and as it
were oversee sinful men. As God shows love in correcting, so he shows wrath
when he does not correct. 'Twas mercy to me, may some man say, that I was
chastised. 'Twas good for me (says David) that I was afflicted. So every
wicked one shall one day say, 'twas ill for me I was not afflicted, 'twas a
judgment to me God did not correct me. The less smart on earth, the more pain
in hell: it is a terrible punishment upon some Sabbath Breakers, to break the
Sabbath, and yet to pass unpunished.

2. God sends in sad Judgments for this sin which men do not see; as a Judge
he smites them with blindness of mind, and hardness of heart; for this God
threatens, Levit. 26. to make the earth as brass, and heavens as Iron:
Iron-hearts are worse then Iron-heavens.

If sometimes on the Lords day to the Congregation men of hard hearts come, yet
that word which is a mercy to some, is a judgment to them: Quum sanctae
exhortationis verba aliamens suscipit, alia recipere recusat, super unam
civitatem pluit Dominus, and non super aliam. Grego. in Ezekiel. Hom. 10.
it is Gods expression in the Prophet, That he caused it to rain upon one City,
and not upon another, (that is, says an ancient Writer) the same words of
exhortation which God as a loving Father causes some to receive, as an angry
Judge he makes others to reject. Yea, God for sins against his Sabbath, gives
men up to follow their own fancies, and eagerly to pursue their own
seducements, Ezekiel. 20.24, 25. Because they despised my statutes, and polluted
my Sabbaths, I gave them statutes that were not good, and I polluted them in
their own gifts, etc. Under such punishments poor people perish, and perceive
it not. We see men's Sabbath-sins against God, and Gods judgments are upon men
for those sins, though we see them not.

3. Though God does not appear presently to punish such men, yet he will ere
long.

God is fitted himself to be sure, and

God has fixed his day which is near.

1. God himself is fitted to inflict punishment upon such as defile his holy
day: for as he is the Lord of the Sabbath, so he is the Lord of hosts. The same
that in the Hebrew term is the Lord of the hosts, in the Greek Septugint, is
the Lord of the Sabbath; and so does the New Testament express it. Except the
Lord of hosts (says the Prophet) had left us a remnant, we had been like
Sodom. Isay 1.9. Except the Lord of the Sabbath, says the Apostle, Romans 9.27.
repeating the words of the Prophet. It appears he that is the Lord of this day,
has many hosts at his command, wherewith he is ready to give Battle to all the
breakers of his blessed Sabbath. Josephus lib. 5. Ant. Juda^car: cap. 6.
Josephus speaking of the Battle, Judge. 5. wherein God fought against Sisera,
with an host of Men, an host of Stars, an host of Storms, an host of Rain,
Hail, and Winds; for, says he, there fell such a sudden and terrible tempest
beating full in the faces of the Canaanites, as took away their sight, and
benumbed their hands, that they could not hold their shields, not fling their
darts; but beat so on the backs of the Israelites, as emboldened them the more.
God indeed does not immediately make war with men that misuse his Sabbath, but
he has his forces ready to fight them, his Armies are mustered and ready to
march: all his weapons of war are prepared, Psalm. 7.12, 13.

2. God has such days drawing near when he will certainly proceed against
Sabbath-sinners, and pursue them to death; As a day of National Judgment, And a
day of general Judgment.


Indeed a dismal day of calamity may our Land look for, wherein the polluters
of the Lords day shall be drawn out to suffer Gods severe vengence. There be
some offenders and Malefactors, which the Magistrate does not immediately
punish, but they are bound over to the next Assizes. Though Sabbath Breakers by
Gods immediate blows be not beaten down, yet they be bound over to such an
Assizes as we never yet saw in England. God may not aforehand inflict exemplary
punishments upon particular transgressing persons, because he means to come
with common calamities upon the whole body of a Nation, when transgressors
shall be destroyed together. Psalm. 37.38. if a National repentance prevents
not. Such a day of National distress draws near, wherein Sabbath Breakers
with other sorts of sinners shall assuredly suffer: The Lord will either lay
the Land in blood, or in water. If waters of sorrows do not flow from men,
fires of fury will flame from God, and then woe to such as sinned down the day
of the Sabbath.

2. The great day of Gods general Judgment is now apace approaching, when such
as sin against Gods sacred Sabbath, The Lord will disown them, and The Lord
will condemn them.


Disown them,] so that they who regarded not the Lords day, shall not be
regarded in the day of the Lord, nor of the Lord in his day.

Condemn them,] down to endure pains perpetual, and torments eternal; O how
sweet would one Sabbath of rest be from Hell Torments in ten thousand years!
But they who would not keep the Lords day of rest, shall never have a day of
rest to keep. The day when Sabbath-slighters shall be certainly adjudged so to
suffer, now draws on. God in some former ages might more exemplarily punish
Sabbath-abusers, because then this Judgment-day was at a further distance, this
day now drawing nearer, the Lord may more let men alone, and they may escape
present penalties. But they that neglect the Lords day shall not escape the
dreadful day of the Lord. We may observe a double day that men for the most
part mind not: The present day of the Lords Sabbath, and The approaching day of
the last Judgment.


Men live as if there were no Sabbath day to be religiously employed in: and as
if there were no Judgement-day to be diligently prepared for. I eat, I drink, I
play, Bernard de interna Domo. cap. 33.
(says Bernard) as if I were gone beyond the day of Judgment. Thus may many a
man say, I eat, I sport, I sleep, I leap, and laugh, as if I had passed over,
and got above Gods blessed day. Men are as if they were now exempted from
attendance on the Lords day; and as if they should hereafter be excused from
appearance at the day of the Lord. But the day draws near, when all men must
appear before the Judgment Seat of Jesus Christ, and answer for non-attending
upon his holy day. Hieron. Epist. de scient. legis. Tom. 4.
Oh what shall we do, says Jerome, in that day, when the Lord shall come with
Trumphet sounding, fire flaming, sinners fainting, stars falling, mountains
melting, poor creatures crying to graves to hold them, and hills to hide them?
Let none that abuse the Lords day, suppose this day of the Lord to be far off;
for, Be^old, says the Apostle, The Lord comes with ten thousands of his holy
ones, to execute judgment, etc. Jude 14, 15. The coming of the Lord draws
nigh, Jam. 5 8. The Lord is at hand, Phil. 4.5. Hear this all ye who with the
Lords good day, put off the evil day of the Lord.

Lastly, though the Lord does not evidently punish all such men, yet he has
openly of late laid hold upon some. Yea, herein the Lord has spoken so loud
from heaven against Sabbath-sinners, that I cannot be silent. We hereabout have
had in a short time terrible tokens of Gods severe vengeance upon men not
minding the service of his day. Among our selves a sad example, a Townsman
going into the Parish, and gathering Cherries on the Lords day, fell from the
tree, and in the fall was so battered and bruised, that he never spoke more,
but lay groaning in his blood until the next day, and then he dyed. Another
man not far off, this Cherry-time fell from a Cherry-tree, and lay in dreadful
dolor all the week, and the very next Lords day dyed. A grown youth upon the
Lords day, not long ago, in a Neighbor-town scrambling with others for Pears,
thrown out of some pockets in the Churchyard, broke his main thigh bone, and
the bone of his leg on the same side, in such a miserable manner, as a precious
man who set those bones, assured me though he had seen very many; yet he never
saw the like. Thus much may evidence, that though now the Lord lets alone the
most Sabbath-slighting-men, yet he does evident execution on some: To inform
men of himself, and To reform men in themselves.


1. By this God brings out unto men more of the knowledge of himself, Psalm.
9.16. The Lord is known by the judgment he executes, etc. God executing
judgment upon such as pollute his holy day, is known to be a holy God. Some
such the Lord lets alone, that his patience may be seen, and some he proceeds
against, that his justice may be known. August. de civit Dei. cap. 8.
Austin is excellent in this: God now punishes some sinners, that the Attribute
of his present justice may be observed: but God he reserves others, that the
Doctrine of his future Judgment may be believed. If God should punish none, he
would not be known to be just: If God should for present punish all, the need
of a Judgment day to come might be questioned.

2. By this God brings on more men to amendment of life: at least it is the
Lords end in executing judgment upon some Law-breakers, to stop others in the
breaking of his Law: when God bodily beats any sinner down, his aim is, to
strike thereby upon the hearts Of all sorts of sinners, but Especially upon
sinners of that sort.


God in doing visible and terrible execution upon some Sabbath Breakers
hereabouts, expects that all who break his blessed Sabbath, Interim plectuntur
quidam, quo caeteri corrigantur, etc. Cypr. de lapsis, Sermon.
should hear and fear, repent and amend. Cyprian does sweetly press the
recovery of some relapsed Christians, from the dreadful examples of Gods
judgments upon some Apostates. And this use our Savior makes of those
eighteen, whose brains were beaten out by the fall of the Tower of Siloam, to
provoke others unto speedy repentance, Luke 13.4, 5. Except, etc. Alsted:
Chronol.
We read of one Waldus in France, who seeing a man suddenly to fall down dead,
it so struck upon his heart, that he went home, reformed his family, admonished
his friends to repent, and became famous, being the founder of the Waldenses. O
that the hand of the great God would now reach all your hearts, who have seen
and heard of what God has in justice done in the fearful falls of some, who
defiled his Sabbath! For except ye repent, Pereunt impii, non ut pereant, sed
ut pereundo alios proficiant. Seneca.
ye shall all likewise perish. O repent, repent!

That the Lord may have the praise of his justice,
And that you may have the profit of his judgments.
The exhortation follows.
And in prosecuting this present use, attend Both the Matters men are to be
exhorted to,
And the Motives men are to be exhorted by.


The most material things to which I would incite concerning the Christian
Sabbath be, To Assent in judgment, and To Assist in practice.


Let all assent that this Sabbath ought to be observed, and let each assist in
the observation of the Sabbath; and let us seriously see that our Sabbath-assent
be Full without doubting in it, and Firm without swerving from it.


With some little varying, let me press in the words of the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians.
2.1, 2, 3. Now we beseech you, brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and by our gathering together unto him, that ye be not soon shaken in
mind, neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter; as if the Lords day should
not be at hand, and ever in your hearts: Let no man deceive you by any means,
for that day is, and must be, and will be owned, except there come a sad and
fearful falling away, through the subtilties of that man of sin. O let us take
and keep such a conjunction upon our consciences concerning this day and duty,
as may be strong and stable. Indeed to be well settled in the point of the
Sabbath, we have exceeding good cause, considering we have Not only the help
of Nature, But also the help of Scripture.


There be some lessons the light of nature leads to, viz.

That there is a God, That this God must be worshipped,
That there must be a time set to worship him in, Than it is meet for God to
appoint his own way and time of worship.

It Is true, to determine the seventh part of time for the worship of God, is
above the dictate of Nature; hence the Heathen in derision were wont to call a
Jew [the seventh man] because he observed a seventh day wherein to worship God.
We have not only principles of nature, but expressions of Scripture: nor only
consequentiall deductions, but also positive assertions to settle our belief
concerning a holy Sabbath; yea, we have Not only the help of the Law, But also
the help of the Gospel.


The Gospel guides into most glorious truths, viz.

That there is a Christ, That this Christ is God:
That therefore he must have Divine worship: That for his worship he must have
a set seventh day, as God had.

That every first day in the week is the day set, for the solemn worship of
Christ: yea help, Not only of the Gospel of Christ, But also of all the
Churches of Christ, In ages past, And present.



They all with an harmonious consent subcribe this truth, and hand over to us
this testimony, That the Lords day, Is the Lords due.


Yea, Not only the Churches of Christ without us,

But also the Spirit of Christ within us helps.

The Spirit of Christ, though he savingly converts but few; yet he does
forcibly convince the most: most men amongst us are hereby convinced of this
fundamental in Religion, viz. That the Lords day ought to be observed.

Let us not then dim the light, nor drown the voice within us, that cries,
Sabbath, Sabbath.

Let us not suffer our minds to be corrupted with any poisonous opinions in
this point. But Brethren, stand fast, and hold the institutions of God,
according as you have been taught. Silence all doubts about, and disputes
against the Lords day; and stick close to that truth herein, which you have
professed and embraced. O let not any of you let in the least thought ever to
live Sabbath-free; indeed it is a day all men must always be free for, and free
in; but not any ever freed from. Bulling: in Rom 4 et 5.
'Twas a good observation of a learned Writer: The Sabbath as it came in with
the first man, so it most not go out but with the last man. As it was from the
beginning of the World, so it must continue till the worlds end. And therefore
for the Lords sake, and your own souls sake, suffer none to seduce you, as to
conceive a Sabbath-cease: but keep your Intellectuals sound in Sabbath-Tenents:
and while you live, labor to keep pure your Sabbathp-rinciples. And as for
practices,

2. Let all and every one assist unto the service of the Sabbath day: Suitable
to the parts of the service, and Suitable to their places for the service.


Concerning the service of the Lords day it self observe The spring of it, and
The spread of it. What it must proceed from, and What it must extend unto.


1. Sabbath-service must proceed from a spring of love: The service of our
Christian Sabbath-love, Amor meus pondus meum; eo feror, quocunque feror. Aug.
'Twill facilitate it, and 'Twill perpetuate it.


Love it will lead out and carry through the wole business of this blessed day
with ease to the end. Love is the best Lodestone through all the Lords
day-duties. This is one of the days of the Lords appearing, which every
Christian is bound to love, 2 Timothy 4.8. And who ever loves the day, will not
leave the duty,

2. The service of the Sabbath is of such extent, that there are diverse duties
duly to be performed,

Both secretly in our Habitations,

And openly in the Congregation.

In our private dwellings;] Religious duties upon the Lords day are required of
every one, as Prayer, Meditation, and holy Conference:

Prayer, whereby we speak to God.

Meditation, whereby we speak to our selves.

And good Conference, whereby we speak one unto another.

Prayer;] The Sabbath is indeed a day God has sanctified, yet it is not
sanctified as to us, nor we to it without prayer. Our Sabbath in heaven shall
all be employed in praysings of God, but prayer to God must have a prime part
of every Sabbath we observe on earth. Are there Sbbbath duties to be performed?
we must pray, [that God would make us able.] Are there Sabbath mercies to be
received? we must pray, [that God would count us worthy.]

Meditation;] The Sabbath is the day for the bodies rest from earthly affairs,
and therefore the mind is then most meet to be about the best business.
Theophil. in Marc. 1. et 21.
One well notes that the Lord commands rest upon the Sabbath, that men might
read the Word, and meditate upon the Word they read. The Word and the Works of
God are indeed every day to be meditated on, but most upon the Lords day.
Augustine gives this reason why God was six several days in the works of the
World, to wit, that upon the seventh day man might the more orderly think upon
those Works of God.

Conference;] The Sabbath is the day when all in a family have more liberty to
be together, then on any other day. On the week days persons in a house are as
Bees in a Hive, that go forth several ways to work; but on the Lords day their
common work abroad ceases: so that they may the better set themselyes to assist
each other in soul concernments. Exhorting one another while it is called to
day, Heb. 3.13.

In our public meetings;] The religious duties which upon the Lords day are
required, be Either more ordinary, Or less ordinary.


Ordinary and constant] duties for the exercise of all, As Prayer to God,
Hearing the Word, and Singing of Psalms.


Prayer;] Upon the Lords day, though one be made the Mouth, yet it is meet
there should be as many praying hearts, as present bodies. Prayer was a
principal thing; the practice of which, the Primitive Christians continued, in
their congregated assemblies, Act. 2.42. Austine sadly complains of some in his
time, August. de tempore Sermon. 251.
who when they should be entering in the Church doors, they are tarrying in the
Churchyard: playing without, when they should be praying within: idly talking
of the world, when they should be seriously seeking the Lord, etc. O that this
abuse had dyed in his days! but the Lord knows, it lives for us to lament.

Hearing;] Upon the Lords day a great duty is diligent attention to Gods word
read and preached. They (says a reverend Writer) who rightly use the Sabbath
day, Gualt. in Marc. 3. Hom. 23.
they go to the public assemblies to hear the holy word of God. And herein
what was the practice of Gods people in the time of the Apostles, is plain,
Act. 13.14, 15, 16, 42, 44. Act. 15.21. Act. 20.7. etc. And Justine Martyr who
dyed for the cause of Christ, in the year of our Lord 170. in his second
Apology for Christians, reports the people of God to gather into one place
perpetually on the Lords day, to hear the Scriptures read, and to attend
exhortations thereupon.

Singing;] Upon the Lords day it being the day of Saints sweetest delight, holy
Psalms are seasonable to be sung. And in ancient times there were some Psalms
penned and purposely appointed for the Sabbath day* as is expressed in the
Preface of Psalm. 92. Pliny in his letter to Trajan tells how in those times the
Christians upon their set days of solemn worship used early in the morning
sweetly to sing together unto the praise of God. August. lib. 9. confessio.
cap. 6.
Austin in this public exercise, says he had often wept for joy, joy, etc.
Some seek to cut off and cast this comfortable service quite out of doors:
contrary to the example of Christ, Matthew. 26.30. the practice of the Apostles,
Act. 16.25. and other express texts in the New Testament, August. in lib.
Psalm. Prolog. Basil. de virt. and laud. Psalm. Tom. 1.
as Colos. 3.16. Ephesians. 5.19. Jam. 5.13. Among other ancient Writers Basil
speaks large in the praise of praising God in this way, and abundantly blesses
God for the Book of the Psalms as a fit foundation for this duty.

Less ordinary, yet frequent] duties upon the Lords day to be done, they do
relate to Sacraments administering, Censures inflicting, and Necessities
supplying.


Sacraments;] The transacting of these suites best unto the Sabbath season. One
well observes that upon the day of the ancient Sabbath, the sacrifices were
doubled: Danaeus, Ethic. Chr. lib. 2. cap. 10.
And our Sacraments succeeding these, should not only come in their room, but
be at their time as services most seasonable for the day of our Sabbath.
Chrysostom reports how in the primitive times the Lords day had a double name,
'twas called Chrysostom. de Resurr. Sermon. 15.
The day of light, and The day of bread.


Of light,] Because on that day the Sacrament of Baptism was wont to be openly
administered.

Of bread,] Because the Sacrament of the Lords Supper used to be celebrated on
that day in the Assemblies of Christians. And this was the manner of the
Disciples in the time of the Apostles, Act. 20.7.

Censures,] The exercise of Discipline is fit for the Lords day, when the
servants of Christ are assembled, then to remove from among them scandalous
persons both in opinion, and practice; that is a plain place, 1 Cor. 5.4. In the
Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when ye are gathered together, [viz. on our
Lords day] and my spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, to deliver
such a one unto Satan, etc. And the first power for this purpose that our
Savior gave to his Disciples, was upon the day of our Christian Sabbath, the
first day of the week: see Joh. 20.19, 23. Therein directing them as on this
day to exercise that power: and that power (it does appear) was upon this
present day principally put in execution afterward; thus Origin, Cyprian, and
others relate. Orig. can. Cells. lib. 3. Cypr. ad Pomp. Epi. 62. Greg* Nys. orat.
And O how pure and clean would our waters boil, could we on this day so cast
off our scum! Help Lord, etc.

Necessities,] The duty of charitable relief is proper for the Lords day, 1
Cor. 16.1, 2. Tertullian tells in his Apology for Christians, how careful the
Christian Churches were to works of mercy on the Lords day, whereby their
Brethren in bonds were bountifully supplied, and the bellies of the afflicted
refreshed. Irenaeus contra Valenti. lib. 4, cap. 19^
Another of the Ancients does excellently note from the example of our Savior,
Luk 13.15. that the right sanctifying the Sabbath day does consist in acts of
pity, works of mercy; and how charitable deeds become this comfortable day,
Luke 14.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. is full. These Sabbath-duties some way concern the whole
body of a people more promiscuously.

2. There be some duties on the Sabbath that do concern some persons
principally, as Magistrates and Ministers, Parents and Masters.


All ought to concur in their care for the keeping of this day. Indeed the
Lords day is the Fort-royal of Religion, let all stand to it in their places,
we be not beaten out of that, especially now, when so many lay siege thereunto:
Some set their wits awork, and oppose the doctrinal part of it. Others set
their wills awork, and impugn the practical part of it; and as they will not
rest on the Lords day, so they will not let the Lords day to be at rest, but
mount their Cannons, and make what batteries they can, etc. O let all, and
especially such as may do more then others, now bestirre themselves to raise
the Sabbath siege, and to maintain our Sabbath Fort; if we dye, let us dye in a
courageous keeping of this, indeed if this be taken, all is lost; hold this,
and yet there is hope. Let us that are in public places play the men. As the
two milch-kine, 1 Samuel 6. being coupled together they bore up and carried on
the Ark of God; Thus let Magistrate and Minister be united to hold up the holy
day of God, and the holy worship of God upon his day. Let Sabbath Breakers for
multitude be like a numerous Army: if Magistrate and Minister would but join,
we should route them all: O how commendable were it if these two in this regard
would agree like Joab and Abishai his brother, 2 Samuel 10.11, 12. If the Syrians
be too strong for me, then thou shall help me: but if the children of Ammon be
too strong for thee, then I will come and help thee; only be of a good
courage, let us quit our selves like men, for our people, and for the Cities of
our God, and the Lord do that which seems him good. So let us do what we are
able to the utmost for the Sabbaths and the service of our God, and then the
Lord do with us what seems him good. O that those who bear the sword were fired
with some of that Sabbabth-zeal that once Nehemiah had, Chap. 13.17, 18, 19.
'Twas a high praise that Ambrose gave of Theodosius, that he was more
solicitous to preserve the things of God as a Magistrate, then to preserve
himself as a man. And it was a good caution that Austin gives upon Psalm. 2.
Magistrates are to be admonished, Vid. Pet. Martyr. in judge. cap, 1.
(says he) as not to grant men immunity to any false worship, so not to allow
men liberty to leave the true worship of God. The Magistrate upon the Lords
day, is not only to see men forbear the outward works of their callings, but
to see that they be about the visible works of Gods worship. August: Bonif.
comiti. Epi* 50. and praecip. Tom. 7. Cont. epist. Parmeniani lib. 1. cap. 7.
Tom. 7. lib. 2. contra Epist Gaudentii, cap. 16.17.
Austin more then once commends Imperial Laws against the Donatists for
separating from the public worship of God, and gathering into private houses
upon the Lords day, there to promote their Anti-magisterial opinions. Which
Laws were to punish the ordinary people with fines of Money, their leaders
with banishment, the places of their meeting to be forfeited to the Emperor:
and that none of them should have power to bestow their goods by will, or to
enjoy any Legacy to them by will bequeathed. And he gives Instances of the
execution of these Laws, and the good success thereof, encouraging the
Magistrate therein. And when people are brought to the public Pool, Joh. 5.2,
3.
the Minister is as the Angel that upon this Sabbath-season must move and work
in the waters, to wit, be active in all the Ordinances of God, that such as by
divine assistance step close in, may meet God for the cure of their souls. And
as the Minister is more immediately to manage the worship of God upon this holy
day; yea, his place is to press that men do not on this day of the Sabbath
satisfy themselves in a bare bodily way to worship God, but to see they on the
Sabbath serve God in Spirit and truth. Thus these two as the two Cherubims that
looked one toward another, and both upon the Mercy-seat, they should with
respect look one upon another, and both upon the service of the Sabbath, that
so the Lord may have his day and his due.

Lastly, Let governors of families, Parents and Masters contribute their best
assistance to see the Sabbath well observed; for which end toward their
children and servants there is required upon the Lords day a double duty, A
taking of them to the public means,
And a taking with them private pains.


1. You are to bring them with you unto the public Ordinances. In the time of
the Old Testament people that went to worship God, they carried their flocks
and their herds with them, Hose. 5.6. that in sacrifice they might offer them
up to God. In these times of the New Testament, men are to carry their children
and servants with them to the worship of God upon his holy day, offering them
up, with themselves as a sacrifice to God. When 'twas required that the whole
body of the Israelitish people should go out from their dwellings in Egypt to
serve the Lord together in the Wilderness, Pharaoh called Moses and said, Go
ye serve the Lord, but let your flocks and your herds be stayed: but what says
Moses? We will go with our flocks and our herds, with our sons and our
daughters, with our young and with our old will we go; there shall not a hoof
be left behind: for we must hold a feast unto the Lord, and serve the Lord our
God, Exodus 10.9, 24, 26. Such Religious resolutions become Christians in the
present case.

2. Such of you as are heads of families, must upon the Lords day be diligent
in houshold-duties: We find in the 4th. of Mark, yea, and likewise Luke 14. how
our Savior on the Sabbath day, when he had publicly preached to the people as
a Minister of the Gospel, he after privately examined his Disciples, and
further instructed them as a Master of a family. From which example of Christ
an excellent Expositor observes, Chemnit. examen cap. de dieb, fest.
how unto the sanctification of the Sabbath, besides public duties there is
work to be done in Families, as instructing servants, repetition of Sermons,
reading Scriptures, counselling and quickening such as are under our care, that
all may keep holy the Lords day.

So we see the matters men are exhorted unto, I come now to consider the
motives by which hereunto men are to be exhorted.

These are of two sorts: Some more driving, and Others more drawing.


Motives that more drive unto diligence in these Duties, may arise by observing
concerning the Christian Sabbath these four things: The necessity of it is
continued being, The Jeopardy of its future losing, The uncertainty of its
sudden regaining, and The possibility of its present cursing.


1. The being of the Lords day is necessary, note, Negatively, and
Affirmatively.


Not that God needs any Sabbath-service, or such holy duties as additionals to
his Dignity. Indeed as to us the honor of God seems to sink when Sabbaths
cease. And the supporting of Sabbaths seems the advancing of Gods glory; but
the intrinsecal glory of God can receive no increase. God would be infinitely
happy, though men keep no day holy: we need his service, not he our obedience.
When our Savior sent, Luke 19. to unloose the Colt, the Disciples were to give
the owner this reason thereof: The Lord has need of him. We call indeed to a
careful keeping of the Sabbath, but we do not say the Lord has need of it. The
gods of the Heathen need the supports of such as serve them; but so does not
the God of heaven. Hence says the holy Apostle, Act. 17.24, 25 God that made
the world, and all things therein, seeing that he is Lord of heaven and earth,
dwells not in temples made with hands, neither is worshipped with men's hands,
as though he needed any thing, seeing he gives to all life and breath and all
things.

One well observes of the Angels, Chrysostom* in Matthew. Hom. 9,
they are not poor, though they have no flocks of sheep; they are not in want,
though silver and gold they have none; they do not need these things, because
they have better things abide them. Thus God does not want our service in
Sabbaths, neither needs he any of our duties on holy days, because of those
most perfect felicities, and glorious excellencies that are in himself abiding.
As the Lord is omniscient, and needs not any man to assist his knowledge: So
the Lord is all-sufficient, and needs not any thing to help his happiness. And
therefore the necessity of Sabbath-observance does not refer to God: But to
observe Sabbaths, the necessity is in reference to us for a double cause, viz.

Necessitas duplex, Praecepti, and Medii.
Gods Injunction toward us, and Our condition toward God.
1. It Is necessary for us to observe the Sabbath day in all its duties, because
of Gods injunction. And here it is meet of two things to take good notice, to
wit,

Every command of God causes a necessity of our obodience: and here is a
necessity of our obedience, because of Gods express command.

1. Wherever God gives a word of command, there is a work of our obedience
necessary. I had rather (says Luther) obey the Lords commands, then to work
Miracles. If Miracles need be wrought, God will do his own work; but it is
needful we obey commands, for God will not do man's work. As God by his
promises binds himself to vouchsafe mercy: So God by his precepts binds us to
perform duty. As God promising mercy, requires our faith; so God commanding
duty, requires our obedience. Obedience it is a debt which as we certainly owe,
so we must necessarily pay. Some they owe to God the debt of passive obedience,
as they are his prisoners: all, they owe to God the debt of active obedience,
as they are his creatures.

2. Here God gives a word of manifest command, and therefore visibly to obey is
necessary: Remember thou keep holy the Sabbath day, Exodus 20.8. Touching this
commandment, That the Sabbath day be kept holy, we may observe, Who was the
Giver of it, Mediatorem hic appellat Christum, declarans quod ipse ante legem
fuerit, and legem tulerit. Chrysostom. In principio mundi Christus Mediator erat
hominum, etfi nondum erat homo, etc. Orig. Ambros. lib. 4. in Luc.
and To whom it was given.


1. He who gave this Sabbath Command, was Christ the Mediator; He who came
down upon Mount Sinai, and gave the whole Law, is called Jehovah, Exodus 20.2.
Deuteronomy. 4 11. This the Septuagint translate (Lord;) And the same the holy Apostle
applies to the Mediator, our Lord Christ, Gal. 3.19. And Origin, Chrysostom,
Ambrose, with almost all the Ancients, in expounding that place of the Apostle,
do affirm, that 'twas Christ the Mediator both of the Old and New Testament,
by whom the Law was given: So Calvin, Junius, Marlorat, and other able Writers
since assert upon the same text. We are therefore to look upon this sanctifying
the Sabbath, as that for which Christ has given a positive Command. 'Twas not
a Mosaical Ceremony pointing to Christ: but it is a Moral duty appointed by
Christ, and so to remain under the Gospel and government of Christ, until
Christ shall deliver up the Kingdom to God the Father, and set an end to all
times and things in this world.

2. He to whom this Sabbath-Command was given, is every one Individually,
[Thou] Remember thou keep holy the Sabbath day. Thou;] Not as a Jew, but as a
man, every man, both Jew and Christian. Herein whosoever exempts himself,
deceives himself. Yea, and of all the commands, not any have such a Memorandum
upon it, as that which concerns the sanctifying of the Sabbath. Remember,] As
it related to a duty to be performed in days past, so it related to a people
that in days past should still perform that duty. A Christian Church to come.
Remember,] If men forget all the rest, yet let them remember this; and if they
well remember this, not any of the rest will be forgoten. That which Luther
affirms of the first, may well be referred to the 4. Commandment, that in the
observance of that, obedience to all the rest is comprised.

2. The Sabbath day in all its duties is necessary for men to sanctify,
because of their condition, whether they be considered As unregenerate, Or as
regenerate.


1. For men in an unregenerate estate, they need to have a holy Sabbath
observed.

And of such there are two sorts;

Some in a sinful estate, and know it not: and others that know their estate to
be sinful.

And toward both, there is a necessity of Sabbaths.

1. For such men as are sinful, and do not know it, but are utterly in the
dark. Genesis 1. we find, that at the beginning there was darkness as a black
veil drawn over the face of the deep, but God upon the first day in the week
created light, which was exceeding good. God upon the first day of the week our
Christian Sabbath, creates that good light which scatters darkness, that
before covered the face of the soul, and causes such discoveries of things
never before seen, 1 Cor. 14.23 24, 25. If the whole Church be come together,
[viz. on the Lords day] there comes in one ignorant, and he hearing the Word,
is convinced, is judged, the secrets of his heart are made manifest, and so
falling down he worships God, etc. And indeed this is one great end of Sabbaths
and Sermons, Act. 26.18. 2 Cor. 4.4, 5, 6.

2. For such men as know themselves sinful, Sabbath-service is necessary, that
they may consider how sad it is to persist in known sins, Luke 12.47. Joh.
15.22, 24. Jam. 4.17. For some, our Savior says, Father, forgive them, they
know not what they do: but of several we may say, Father, affright them, they
know what they do. They transgress Gods Laws, abuse his mercies, they oppose
his Servants, and they know what they do. The former need Sabbaths to convince
them of the evil they know not: And these latter need Sabbaths to convert them
from the evil they know. Yea, to all sorts of sinners there is such a necessity
of these days and duties, as that there is little likelihood of any saving
good to the souls of such as lay aside the Lords day: but they who come not
within Sabbath-compasse, their case becomes incurable. Though a man be never so
diseased and sick, yet as long as he lies at Physic, keeps his purging days,
and uses good means for health, there is hope he may do well; but when he
neglects his healing time, lets his disease run, will not come under the
Physicians hands, then his case grows desperate, and dye he must. Even so
though a man be never so sinful, yet as long as he keeps within
Sabbath-compasse, and comes under the means of soul-cure, there is hope he may
amend; but if he neglects the Lords day, leaves off holy duties, damn he must.

2. For men in a regenerate estate, the Lords day is of necessary use; Of
whatsoever sort we consider them. Of such Some are in sins relapsed, and Others
are in sorrows distressed. All need these Sabbath-helps.


1. Relapsed Christians need Sabbath-relief. Whether their spiritual decay be,
In opinion, In affection, Or practice.


The service of the Lords day is of necessary concernment, to clear truth
clouded, to quicken love deaded, and to introduce the duties of a holy life
neglected.

2. Distressed Christians need Sabbath-succours. Sabbath-Cordials are required
for the recovery of fainting spirits, and the reviving of drooping dying hearts.

Again, Gods Saints are to be considered, either As more weak, Or more strong.


And unto them all the Lords day, is a day of deep concernment.

1. For weak ones, they need Sabbath-supplies, Days wherein they may draw near
and derive virtue from Christ, into all their feeble parts. Days wherein as
babes from the breasts of the Lord, they may suck in soul-nourishing milk of
grace and mercy to breed them up.

2. For strong ones, they need Sabbath-supports, that they may stand fast in
their good estate and plight. The highest and holiest of Gods Saints ought to
be under Sabbath-observance, it is a reserve for heavens privilege to be above
Ordinances, and present Administrations. It Is the City of the Heavenly
Jerusalem, that needs not the light of the Sun, neither of the Moon, Revel.
21.22. While we live, as we need the Moon, viz. the world with its creatures
and comforts for the bearing up of our bodies: So we need the Sun, viz. Christ
with his holy times, and things for the well-being of our souls. Some say of
the time that is spent upon the service of Christ, as they said of the ointment
poured out upon the body of Christ. What need this waste? Matthew. 26.8. But as
St. Paul said, A necessity is laid upon me, and woe to me if I preach not the
Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.16. So may every one say, A necessity is laid upon me, and woe
to me if I sanctify not the Sabbath. The sanctifying of the Sabbath is as the
[One thing needfull] to Christians in religion, and unto the religion of
Christians. It Is said of Jacob that his life was bound up in the life of his
son Benjamin: So the life of a Christian, and the life of his religion is bound
up in the life of Sabbaths. As Rachel said, Give me children, or else I dye: so
a Christian says, Give me Sabbaths, or else I dye. Religion says, Give me
Sabbaths, or else I die. The Sabbath is as the soul of Christian-Religion, if
that departs, all becomes as a Carcass, upon which the Vermin of corrupt
opinions prey: it is necessary then this continue.

2. Of losing the Lords day there is danger: And here we shall discover The
grounds of the loss, and The greatness of the loss.


The grounds on which we may see the Sabbath in hazard to be lost, and the
Lords day in our days likely to cease, are The sinfulness of men, and The
righteousness of God.


1. Men being monstrously sinful, put upon us this present peril of being
deprived of the Lords day, to wit, Wicked men against us more remote, and
Wicked men amongst us more immediate.


1. Men of the Romish Religion in remote Nations, are they not bigg with a
design to make our Sabbaths cease? As some of the Powder-Traitors 1605.
Confessed the cause why they sought to blow up the Parliament House was,
because that was a place wherein against the Romish Religion so many Laws were
made. And do not Popish parties in all places, plot against the Sabbath day,
because that is the time wherein against their Idolatrous worships so many
truths are taught? And are not now their hopes high, by our present Wars, to
deprive us of our precious times and things; to raise Rome in the ruins of
poor Protestant Nations? Does not Antichrist crow ovet these Christian
Kingdoms, as once Tyrus over Jerusalem, Aha, aha, she is broken, that was the
gates of the people, she is turned unto me, I shall be replenished, now she is
laid waste?

2. Among our selves how many seek to set us beside our Sabbath-mercies? As
Both Papists, And Atheists.


Papists,] Who secretly consult in our chief Cities to lay us Sabhath-waste.
Jesuits who can cunningly comr like Contrymen, and be seen like Soldiers,
Citizens, Lawyers, Preachers, in any posture to promote their projects.

Atheists,] These like Pharaoh's-frogs are found covering the land, and
croaking against the Lords day in every Pond, in every Parish.

Men that would have no God for a Sabbath, would have no Sabbath for God

Yea, what numbers of two sorts may we see, all setting against our
Sabbath-enjoyments.

Men of rotten principles, and Men of wretched practices.
As Herod and Pilate both agreed for the Lords death, so these both join
against the Lords Day.

As the blessed body of Christ was crucified between the Thieves, so the
blessed day of Christ is now crucifying between loose Sectaries, and profane
sinners. And Lord help, who labors to rescue it? Who sees not our
Sabbath-slightnesse, weariness, and willingness to be set Sabbath-free? The
barrenness of the best, and the ingratitude of the greatest part, what does it
foretell, but an approaching time of turning out, and overturning Sabbaths?

2. God being infinitely righteous, makes the danger of this more exceedingly
dangerous. God in his just way of Judgments makes mournful removes of such
sweet mercies, either When men to follow their sins, forsake his Sabbaths;
Or when men observe his Sabbaths, but in their sins.


Isay 1.13. Your Sabbaths, and your solemn Assemblies I cannot away with, your
hands are full of blood. Bloody hands cannot hold Gods blessed day. Those
things will away, that God cannot away with. It Is not all the powers, nor
policies of men and Devils can pull away Sabbaths from a Land if there the Lord
will hold them, neither is it all the Prayers and Powers of Saints and Angels
can keep Sabbaths in a Land if thence the Lord will take them. Let not us in
England think we have such a settled Fee-simple of the Sabbath, as that there
is no disinheritting, or such an entaile, as cannot be cut off. The Apostle,
Romans 11. speaking of Gods cutting off the Chuch of the Jews, a learned
Expositor puts the question, How did God cut them off? Olevian.
And then gives the answer, By taking from them his Word, Sacraments, and
Sabbaths, Lam. 2.6. The Lord has caused the solemn feasts and Sabbaths to be
forgotten in Zion. What in Zion? The Lord loves the gates of Zion, Psalm. 87.2.
The Lord has chosen Zion, Psalm. 132.13. The Lord dwells in Zion, Psalm. 76.2.
yet God causes Sabbaths to be forgotten in Zion? Yes, Zion and Sabbaths are
parted, with the loss of Sabbaths even Zion is punished. And O England, do
not thou fear such a day drawing near?

Art thou better then Zion?

2. How great, the loss of the Lords day will be, we may mournfully foresee in
four things, viz.

The Matter it will be of, This was Preached at a time when no less lay in
danger.
The Subject it will be to, The Season it will be in, and The Sequels that will
be thereupon.
1. The matter the loss will be of. In the ceasing of Sabbaths, a pawse is put
unto the precious things of God, as the Gospel with its glorions
administrations. Was it not a sad cause with the City Jerusalem, when the
sucklings swooned in the streets, and the children cried to their Mothers,
Where is Corn and Wine? And will it not be for poor people pitiful to cry to
their Ministers, Where is the Word and Sacraments? Where be those blessed
refreshments we were wont to find? That was a doleful day, Jer. 14.3. when
little ones were sent to the waters, but they returned with vessels empty,
because the pits were dry. And will it not be a woeful day for men, women and
children to go for the water of the Word whither they were wont, but to return
with vessels empty, for the pits are dry, or full of mud and dirt? [What the
present sinking of the springs and drying of the streams may mean, I much fear
to think.] Will not that loss be great, wherein the Word of life is lost? What
(says Luther) is the World without the Word but a dark hell? And what is a
Land without the Gospel, but a black Lantern without a candle? The keeping of
the Sabbath has been the honor of our Nation, and the Gospel the glory of our
Land; when the one is down, the other will be gone, and then may we write
Ichabod upon all our doors. I read of a Germane Minister, when he saw hopes of
the Gospels-passage, he cried out with joy, Let it come, let it come. O but to
let it go, what bitter cries will it cost?

2. The Subject, this loss will be to, It will be the souls of men will suffer
sorely herein. Sabbath-losse is a soul-losse. A soul in our Saviors account is
of more worth then all the World, Matthew. 16.26. Even the worst soul (says
Austin) is better then the best body. As the Apostle says of man, he was not
made for the woman, but the woman for the man. And so (says Chrysostom) the
soul was not made for the body, but the body for the soul which is the better
part. If we lose health, Wealth, and all the things of the world that relate to
the body, it is but a little loss. But if we lose the Word, Sacraments, and
Sabbaths, it being a loss that relates to the soul, it is exceeding great.

3. The Season this loss is likely to be in, makes it more lamentable. We find
it foretold, Math. 24, that toward the latter end of the World there should be
times of great tribulation. Nation should rise against Nation, etc. Ill in such
a time to be without Sabbat as: It was woeful for those Virgins, Matthew. 25.
when there was a cry at midnight, Behold, the Bridegroom comes, and then their
Lamps were out, and their oil to seek. And doleful will it be for those
Nations, when they shall be in their Nights of Trouble, and hear nothing but
cries, Behold, more misery comes, and then to have their Lamps out, their
burning and shining lights gone. Have not our hopes been high to see Sabbaths
more firmly settled, the Gospel more clearly preached, Ordinances more purely
administered, and if after all, all should be dashed down in the dirt, and we
left in the dark, how dreadful would this be? To lose Sabbaths at any time were
sad but at such a time as this.

4. The sequels of the loss make it most lamentable. Fearful effects will
follow the loss of the Lords Day, viz. the desolating the places of public
assemblies, Levit. 26.31. Lam. 2.6. Psalm. 74.4, 5, 6. The Prophet thus sadly
sighs it out to God: Thine enemies roar in the midst of the congregation, they
set up their ensigns for signs. A man was famous according as he had lifted up
axes upon the thick trees, viz. to build places for Gods public Worship. But
now they break down the carved work thereof at once with axes and hammers. They
cast fire into thy Sanctuary: yea, they say in their hearts, Let us take the
houses of God in possession, let us destroy them together, and burn up all the
Synagogues of God in the Land. Decet Sacerdotes cum Templis interire.
Titus with his Roman army when he ruined Jerusalem, burnt the Temple, he
commanded the Priests of the Lord to be slain. Time will come, says our Savior
to his Disciples, that they which kill you, will think they do God good
service, John 16.2. Romans 11.3. Or if such places be not plucked down, they
abuse them to abominable worships. When ye shall see the obomination of
desolation stand in the holy place, Math. 24.15. Instead of a preaching
Ministry, a wooden Idol. It Is said of the Egyptian Temples, they are
beautiful without but within ugly forms. To have the places of our public
meetings filled with deformed faces, and blaspheming voices. Owls to dwell
there, and Satyrs dance there, Isay 13.22, 23. Yea, upon this loss follows
not only the desolating the places of public worship that be in the Land, but
the desolating the Land it self wherein the places of public worship be,
Levit. 26.31, 33. I will bring your Sanctuaries into desolation, and I will not
smell the savor of your sweet odours, Yea, I will make this whole Land
desolate, that your enemies shall be astonished thereat. Then shall the Land
enjoy her Sabbaths, as long as it lies desolate. The Land shall have Sabbaths
of rest from plowing, when Sabbaths of praying cease. Now let us hence learn
how lamentable the loss of the Lords Day would be. I fear some are so profane,
that they think while Sabbaths are kept, the loss is great. August. de civit.
Dei, li. 6. ca. 11.
Austin reports of that heathen Philosopher Seneca, That he severely blamed the
Jews for resting on the Seventh Day, because thereby they lost the seventh part
of their time. Some I doubt that are called Christians, that yet are of such a
Paganish opinion, that they think that time lost which is spent in the Service
of God. But this, this is indeed that loss which the Lord help us to lay close
to heart, not to have the Service of God to spend Sabbath-time in, and not to
have Sabbath-time to spend in the Service of God. To lose the Sabbath is not
alone the loss of bare time, but of blessed time, time sanctified and set
apart by a Divine Ordinance, etc.

3. The Lords Day lost in a land may be long before it be regained. The way of
Sabbaths once ceased, may not soon (if ever) return, as may evidently appear
in a double respect. viz.

Of God inflicting this loss, and Of Men on whom this loss is inflicted.
1. Because God does not make Sabbaths to cease in a sinful Land, but when
there is great wrath in him stirred up, and great wrath of him to be poured
out. 1. When God takes away his holy Sabbath from a people, he is with great
wrath provoked. The Lord does not deprive a people of such precious
privileges, as his holy times and things, till he is very angry, and
exceedingly incensed, so as that himself forsakes them. Now great wrath in God
as it is not suddenly raised; so it is not presently appeased, but it may
remain long, Zech. 1.12.

2. When God takes away his holy Sabbath from a people, he has great wrath to
execute: The Lord has caused the Sabbaths to be forgotten in Zion, Lam. 2.6.
This was when God had great anger against Zion, and Zion was sadly covered with
the anger of God. How has the Lord covered the daughter of Zion with a cloud
in his anger Lam. 2.1. He has thrown down in his wrath the strong holds of the
daughter, of Zion, v. 2. He has cut off in his fierce anger all the horn of
Zion, v. 3. He has poured out upon Zion his fury like fire, v. 4. etc. Now
when God has much fury to bring forth, and in the way of his judgments much
work to do, he takes time. God in the ways of his mercy goes swift, because
therein he moves with delight, Micah 7.18. But as God is slow to execute wrath,
so he is slow in the wrath he executes, Dolet Deus quoties cogitur esse ferox.
for herein he moves with a kind of grief, Judge. 10.16. Lam. 3.33,

2. Such men as suffer this sad punishment, the cessation of Sabbaths. It Is
long As before they come to a true sense of it,
So before they may make a good use of it.


Men are many times long before they are sensible Either of their sin, which is
the cause of punishment,
Or of the punishment, that is the effect of their sin.


Commonly men that come under this Spiritual Judgment, the deprival of the
Lords holy day, Either they are pleased with it, Or they are stupid under it.


Some they please themselves in being Sabbath-free, as we may see at present in
some parts of the Nation. Can it be believed, that in England or Wales, there
should be Parishes wherein the people know not when the Sabbath comes, neither
do they enquire, but are contented, and account liberty from Gods Ordinance, a
great deliverance. People are pleased when well-spent Sabbath days are down,
Because then they are gone, who disturbed them, and
Because then they find others in place, that flatter them.


Such as caused them some soul-disquiet are gone, Revel. 11. See how merry the
world makes it when Gods witnesses are slain: They that dwell upon earth shall
make merry, rejoice and send gifts one to another, because the two Prophets
that tormented them are dead, verse. 10. Yea, and then such as keep them in a
carnal, quiet, and sinful secure peace are present. See the people of the
Jews, when Moses was gone from amongst them and they got Aaron to be of their
own minds, and made them a golden Calf; O what dancings and merry doings there
was! Exodus 32. It liked them well, but it wrought them woe. 'Twas that which
had a sad influence into all their after troubles. Hence it grew a Proverb: Non
est poena supra Israelem in qua non est uncia vitult.
That there was no punishment upon Israel in which there was not an ounce of
the goldden Calf. Thus people when they can get such Ministers among them,
Sabbatum aurei vituli. August.
as will help make them, a Sabbath of the golden Calf, as Austin calls it, that
they may huddle and slubber over a little service to God, and pass the
principal of the day in dancing, feasting, and Jovial meetings, this is to
their minds, but 'twill be misery in the end. 'Twill put a sting into every
trouble on earth, and torment in hell.

Others under this judgment of Sabbath-ceasing are sottish, and brutish.
Abundance such there be now abroad in England, where for want of a public
Ministry the Lords day it laid by, and since that liberty has been granted to
some upon the Sabbath, wholly to separate into private houses: others have
taken the advantage to live like Atheists and Epicures, as if there were no
Sabbath for God, nor any God for a Sabbath. Yea, people are in such a posture,
that if the Lord should punish the Land with the loss of Sabbaths, it is not
like soon to be laid to heart. With many, the Lords day is already lost in the
Land. As they that being asked, whether they had received the holy Ghost?
Answered, We know not whether there be any holy Ghost. So ask many now adays,
whether they have observed the Lords holy day? they are ready to answer, they
know not whether there be any such holy day to be observed. Time was, a Book
was set out to give liberties upon the Lords day, men now take their liberties
from the Lords day without any Book. And they that do not, are so listlesse and
livelesse in the Lords-day-duties, that I doubt if God should judicially
deprive us of Sabbath-Seasons, we should not thereof soon be sensible. And so
the time of Sabbath-returnes may likely be long.

Again, if the Lord should lay such a Judgment upon the whole Land, as the
loss of Sabbaths, it is not probable people will presently make such a
profitable use thereof, As to prize them highly, And to pray for them earnestly.


Highly God will have them prized. God will raise Sabbath-esteems before he
makes Sabbath-returns; before God brings back his blessed Day, as men shall
feel the want, so know the worth thereof, and be of David's mind: One day in
thy Courts is better then a thousand, Psalm 84.10. verse. Heartily God will
have them prayed for. [Sabbath-Liberties,] Men shall be humble Petitioners for
them before they be happy possessors of them. 'Twas one of the three things
Latimur did so ordinarily and earnestly pray for in Queen Marys days; That the
Gospel might be restored to England, once again, once again, etc. That
Sabbaths might be openly observed, and Gods worship publicly performed, [Once
again, once again.] Which words he used to repeat with great vehemency of
spirit. Others concurred in the same request, and had from God a most gracious
grant. What are David desires and prayers? Psalm 63.2. That I may see (Lord)
thy power and thy glory, so as I have seen thee in the Sanctuary. And, Psalm
42.4. When I remember these things, I pour out my soul within me: for I had
gone with the multitude, I went with them to the house of God, with the voice
of joy and praise, with the multitude that kept holyday. Should holy
Sabbath-dayes cease, some I doubt not but upon knees bended would beg their
bringing back, though the Major part would likely make little of it. O that men
would yet make much of Sabbath-Seasons, lest such a time come when they would
they cannot! Time will be, says our Savior to his Disciples, Luke 17.22. when
ye shall desire to see one of the days of the Son of man, and shall not see
it. O if you might but have one Sabbath as in former times! Luke. 19.42, 43.
When he came near, he beheld the City and wept over it, saying, If thou had
known, even thou, at least in this thy Day? the things that belong to thy
peace, but now they are hid from thine eyes. The things with the day, and the
day with the things thereof are now past and gone. Amos 8.11. Behold, the days
come, says the Lord, I will send a famine in the Land, not of bread, but of
hearing the Word. And men shall wander from Sea to Sea, and from the North to
the East, they shall run to and fro to seek the Word of the Lord, and shall not
find it. O now, now, while it is called to day, THE LORDS DAY, before Sabbaths,
and Sermons cease: though there should not come such a time over all the Land,
yet it may be upon particular places rain may fall on one City, and not upon
another, Amos 4.7. Brighr beams of the Sun may shine on one field, and the
very next field under a dark shadow, and over it a black cloud. There shine;
Here rain. O the clear light that has shined upon the Lords Day, and the sweet
Sabbaths that have been kept in some Towns of England not long since: but now
Ichabod, The glory is gone: God knows whose turn it may be next. O let me
beseech you of this place to look to the Lords Day, be diligent, hold fast. God
never takes away his Sabbaths till people are weary of them, and willing to
part with them,

4. To a people the Lords Day may not be lost, but last; yet all lie under a
curse.

They may be cursed to the Sabbath, and The Sabbath may be cursed to them.
The souls of men may be cursed toward Sabbaths. Never let fruit grow on this
tree: Never let Sabbath or Sermon do this people good. No sooner had our
Savior cursed the fig tree, but it withered at the roots. May there not be
found amongst us men and women that are most miserably withered, Both branch,
And root?


Not only the branch of their outward profession, but also the root of their
inward affection withered. What shall we say of such Galatians, who would now
pluck out Paul's eyes, that were once ready to pluck out their eyes for Paul?
Are not they withered? Are not they under Gods dreadful curse? For men to be
cursed in the trades they follow, and fields they possess, is sad: but to be
cursed in the Sabbaths they spend, and cursed in the Sermons they hear, is
worse. For God to say to a Minister every time a Sabbath comes, Go indeed to
the Pulpit, and preach to that people, Hearing they shall hear, but shall not
understand: seeing they shall see, but not perceive. For the heart of this
People is waxed gross, their ears are dull of hearing, their eyes have they
closed. Now make their hearts hard their ears deaf, their eyes blind, that
they may never be converted, never healed, but live and die under a
Gospell-curse, and their Souls sinking under a Sabbath-curse: yea, and so
Sabbaths themselves may be cursed to the souls of men. As men by their sins
may pollute that day, which otherwise is holy:

So God by his judgment may curse that day, which otherwise is blessed, and so
Sabbath-mercy may be turned into a judgment, as Moses Rod was turned into a
Serpent.

It would have been ill for Israel if the brazen Serpent should have become a
fiery Serpent; that mortally to sting them, that was made to heal them. And
will it not be ill for any if the Lords day which is a day of life, shall
become a day of death? This saving day, changed into a damning day? 1 Samuel
12.17. We see 'twas terrible when God turned a day of Harvest, into a day of
tempest; and that time wherein they should have gathered their Wheat with the
labor of their hands on earth; God scattered it with thunder and hail from
heaven. And who would not fear such an effect, for God to turn a day of Rest,
into a day of Wrath, and therein not to bless, but thereby to blast men's
hearts and hopes? It Is sweet for Saints, when to them the very curses of men
are blessed; but it is sad for sinners when to them the very blessings of God
are cursed, Mal. 2.2. I, says the Lord, will send a curse upon you, I will
curse your blessings, yea, I nave cursed them already, yet ye lay it not to
heart. Beware then I beseech you, how you spend the Lords day, lest the Lord
make this blessed day, to become a curse.

But I proceed from these Motives that are more driving, Generosus animus
facilior ducitur quam trahitur.
to insist upon such Motives as are more drawing; for upon Generous and
Ingenuous minds such Arguments work most. And here I beseech you consider: The
careful keeping of the Lords day, and the Lords day carefully kept, It is
Equitable, It is Honourble, It is Profitable, It is Delectable.


And O that God from heaven would set to the help of his own hand, that unto
diligence in the Lords-day-duties you might be drawn by this fourfold Cord.

1. For the equity,] That it is just and fit we all do the utmost of our
endeavors in the duties of this day, diverse reasons may be drawn.

Some from God, Some from other men, and From our selves some.
1. If we consider God in his gracious dealings, there is much may draw to a
diligent observance of his holy Sabbath, As his general dealing toward us with
others,
And above many others, his special dealing with us.


Let us mark how well God has herein dealt with mankind in common; as for
instance,

His mercy in appointing this day, out of other time, and

His bounty in affording so much time, beside this day.

First, if we consider, Both our souls, And Bodies, There Is much mercy.


The common rest of the day, is mercy to our bodies,

And the holy work of the day, is Gods mercy to our souls.

For the saving of our souls, God injoynes the work,

And for the casing of our Bodies, God Ordains the rest: That neither our souls
fall, into helltorments,
Nor our bodies faint, under earthy toylings.


God is pleased in pity to set apart a Sabbath. Hence it is said, Mark 2.27.
That the Sabbath was made for man] That is, for man's use, in order to man's
advantage. Gualter in Marc. 2. Homil. 22.
A learned Expositour upon the place does excellently open this; Even as had it
not been for man, a Savior had never been born: So had it not been for man, a
Sabbath had never been made. For their sakes (says Christ) do I sanctify my
self. And for their sakes (says God) do I sanctify my day. Now it cannot but
be manifest to as many as mark this mercy, how meet it is for each man to make
much of the day of God.

2. Let us see how liberal the Lord has been in allowing man so much other
time, viz. six days, with a reserve to himself, [This ONE.] As Joseph, Genesis
39. said to Potiphars Wife, My Master has not kept back any thing from me but
thee, because thou art his Wife: So may each man say to the Sabbath, God the
great Master has kept back no time from me but thee, because thou art his DAY.
We read how under a Parable Nathan the Prophet aggravated David's sin, 2 Samuel
12. A rich man that had many flocks of sheep, yet when a traveller came to his
house he spared to take of his own, but took and killed the one ewe-Lamb, that
this poor neighbor had nourished up for himself. This aggravates the sin of
many a man, when a temptation comes to his heart, and business he is to go
about, he spares to take of his own time, though he has several days, but
takes of this ONE DAY which God has set out for himself. Luke 13. There are
six days wherein men ought to work in them, therefore come and be bealed, but
not on the Sabbath day. So say I, There are six days for lawful labor; in
them men may go and trade and travel, but not on the Sabbath day. What says
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.21. Have ye not houses to eat and drink in? or despise
ye the Church of God? So I say: What have ye not nights to sleep in, and have
ye not days to buy and sell in? and have ye not time to recreate and take any
lawful delights in? but pollute ye the day of God? Seeing it is but one day in
seven, how unwearied in holy workings ought we to be? As Christ said to his
Disciples when he found them asleep, Could ye not not watch with me one hour?
So will the Lord say to some at the last and great account, Could ye not work
for me one day? Seeing the Lord has been so bountiful as to give us six days
for our necessary concernments in the World, he may well claim our close
attendance upon this one day. God might (as one well observes) have required
all days to be spent in the works of his worship, See Pet. Martyr. Genesis 2.3.
Read. Call. upon Deuteronomy. 5. Ser. 35.
and set us by night to get our necessary living. Had all time been ours, then
if God had taken out one whole day for himself and his service, and left us
six, we might have made some exception: But when all time was Gods, so that for
men to have a minute is a mercy: yet to have such a plentiful portion as
six-days-time of God every week, with so small a reserve to himself, is well
worthy of wonder.

But O how much more to be admired is God in his goodness toward us of this
Nation, and especially in these parts thereof, in settling amongst us for so
many years such Sabbath-Helpers, and Helps for Sabbaths! Should we go into many
parts of the Christian world, yea, into diverse parts of this Land we might see
poor people sitting of Sabbaths destitute. Matthew. 20.6, 7. it is said to some,
Is it not the eleventh hour? Why stand ye here all the day idle? they said,
Because no man has hired us. Thus might it be said to several, Is it not the
Sabbath? why walk you about, or sit you at home all the day idle? They may
answer, Because we have no Minister to preach to us. For want of the Ministry
of the Word, in many Churches of this Land, the Lords Day lies dead and buried,
the generality of people running into Atheism, ready for Popery, and all
Soul-poysoning opinions; yet God is good to us, and gives us Sabbath-supplies,
Sermons in season, and out of season: Week-day-lectures, as preparatives to
Sabbath-day-labour, and preservatives of Sabbath-Day-life, to keep up
quickenings in Christians, that what they gain on the Lords Day, they may not
lose in the week. Behold, what manner of love is this? And is it not meet, that
this Day should be duly observed?

2. Let us consider some men, and we shall see the observance of this day more
meet; viz.

Adam before Moses, The Jews before Christ.
1. For Adam, Peter Martyr upon Genesis the second observes, that man
immediately after his creation, was to enter upon this Holy-day-duties. God
having made him a woman for his wife: soon made them a Sabbath for their work.
And Chrysostom notes, Chrysostom. Gene. 2. Homil. 18.
how God in settling the very first week of the world sanctified a Sabbath;
thereby (says he) insinuating that in the compass of every week one whole day
was to be spent in spiritual working for God, and a Sabbath to be for holy
rest as long as a week of the world last Had Adam in innocence remained, he
was bound to God in Sabbath-obedience, and is it not more meet that we should
be Sabbath-bound in obedience to God? Must he keep a Sabbath to God his
Creator, and we keep no Sabbath to Christ our Redeemer? Must not he miss a
Sabbath in his complete condition? and may we omit Sabbaths who have manifold
imperfections? Might not the first Man and the common Father of us all be free?
and shall any of his posterity plead liberty?

2. The Jews generally were held under the tie of a holy Sabbath. Hereof we
have greater cause for a conscionable course. If we consider, Our Sabbaths are
fewer, and Our mercies are larger.


1. The Jews besides their great Sabbath, every seventh day, they had several
other Sabbaths which they were required to observe: [Sabbaths of months, and
Sabbaths of years;] Sabbaths of diverse sorts, Isay 1.13. Hosea 2.11. We for our
Christian Sabbath, have only one day in seven, and shall we cease the service
of that, or in the service thereof be slight?

2. The Jews had not so many mercies as we, for engagements unto
Sabbath-observance.

They lost many mercies that we might find them;
We find many mercies that they never lost.
1. Mercies were taken from them, for us to possess. They that were the
natural branches were broken off, that we of the wild Olive might be graffed
in. Behold therefore the goodness and the severity of God: on them severity,
but toward us goodness. See Romans the eleventh at large. They received their
Lo-ammi and Lo-ruhamah, that it might be Ruhamah and Ammi to us, Hosea 1.6, 8.
Hosea 2.1.

2. Mercies are given to us that they did never possess. The best of them
could but look through a lattice, and see Christ to come; look upon the
sacrifices slain, and see a Christ to die: We may see Christ come, crucified,
raised and set at the right hand of the Majesty on high.

They had the Gospel veiled in the Law,
We have the Law revealed in the Gospel.
They had the promises of things precious,
We have the precious things promised.
Shall God to us be more in mercy?

And shall we in duty be less to God?

We should be stricter then they in Sabbath-obedience, because God has been
larger to us in all sorts of kindness.

3. If we yet further consider our selves, the best care in keeping the
Sabbath Day is due.

Other days we observe, whilst we live,
We may live to observe but few Sabbath days.
As long as we live there are days we duly observe; some their Birthday,
others their Marriage-day; The day of some notable victory; The day of a great
deliverance, wherein we know our selves concerned: Our Fair-dayes, and
Market-dayes, that meet us every week; upon that day who lies in bed? or lazies
abroad? are not shops filled, and sacks crowded, every one in his calling
careful? And is it not more meet to mind the Lords day, in the serious
observing of which consists the saving good of souls, and men's necessary
commerce for heaven, and converse with God?

And long we may not live to celebrate Sabbath-seasons. The Wise man Eccl. 3.
says, There is a time to be borne, and a time to dye; he says nothing of any
time to live. For what is our life? says the Apostle, Jam. 4. It Is but a
vapor, that appears a little time, and then vanishes away. Man's time in this
world is certainly short, and how short uncertain; and are his Sabbaths sure?
The days of man's life are few, and are his Sabbaths many? Indeed he that has
not lived above twenty years, above a thousand Sabbaths have passed over his
head, but whether his life will last to the light of another Lords day, he
cannot say. Before the rest comes of another Sabbath on earth we may come to
our Sabbath-rest by death. Thus we see the Equity.

2. Let us see the Excellency of Sabbath-time. The honor and dignity of this
day is discoverable, Both as a holy Sabbath, And as a Christian Sabbath.


1. This day having holiness has honor: For what ever God sanctifies and
makes holy, he dignifies and makes honorable, 1 These. 4.4.

God has much honored this holy day,
And this holy day has much honored God.
1. God has highly honored this his holy Day, By precious Ordinances in it,
and By glorious Exercises on it.


1. The Ordinances God has put into the day, adds to its honor. A ring that
is it self gold, is of value; but put a precious Diamond into it, the weight
and worth thereof is greater. Take a plot or parcel of ground that is it self
good, yet if there be rich Woods, Springs, and Mines in it, costly houses, and
stately buildings on it; this raises the price. Thus is the Sabbath it self
holy, and highly to be prized. O but the rich treasures of Ordinances wherewith
God has adorned the day, draw up the dignity of it. Yea, upon the Sabbath day
there is not only some single Ordinance, but the Ordinances of God gathered;
as then there is a meeting of good Christians at the Ordinances: So then there
is a meeting of Ordinances for the good of Christians. Prayer says to
Preaching, Come and help me. The Sermon says to the Sacrament, Come and help
me. Upon this day they all join, which is indeed the honor of the day.
Ahashuerus commanded Mordecai to be dressed in all his brave attire, and to
have it proclaimed, Thus shall it be done to the man the King delights to
honor. The Sabbath, it is dressed up with all the rich attire, and stately
furniture of glorious Ordinances, that we well may say, Thus shall it be done
unto the day that God delights to honor.

2. Let us see what God for a further honor has done upon this day. Upon this
day God has commanded light to shine out of darkness, brought many a dead
Lazarus out of his grave: upon this day God has of stones raised up children
to Abraham, of Lions made Lambs to God, out of sinful men converted thousands
of souls to the faith of Christ. Upon this day God has made the blind to see,
the deaf to hear, the dumb to speak, and the lame to walk. Whereas the works
of the first Creation were all done upon the six days, and none upon the
seventh which was the Sabbath Day. All the works of the new Creation are
ordinarily done upon the Sabbath day, rather then upon any of the six days.
This, this has been the Birth day of many spiritual Kings and Princes, Psalm.
87.5. And of Zion it shall be said. This and that man was born in her. And of
the Sabbath it may be said, This and that man was born therein. O blessed day!
Millions of Saints in heaven they bless this day of God, and they bless God
for this day. I read of one that cursed the day of his Birth; but I never read
of any that cursed the day of his New Birth. This is the day of rescuing the
prey from the mighty, the day of opening the Prison-dores, and setting the
captive free. Exodus 12.42. It is a night much to be observed to the Lord for
bringing them out from the Land of Egypt. This is that night of the Lord to be
observed of all the children of Israel in their generations. So may we say of
the Sabbath, It Is a day much to be observed to the Lord for bringing souls from
the bondage of sin. This is the day much to be observed to the Lord of all the
children of God throughout all generations. This has been the day of many a
spiritual Marriage, or the day of Gods espousing many souls to Christ.

Thus has God honored this his holy day highly. And as for this holy day, it
does highly honor God, exalting all that appertains to God; It beautifies the
service of God, It dignifies the servants of God.


1. Hereby the service of God is beautified. Eccles. 3.11. Every work (says
the Wise man) is beautiful in its season. Holy duties are best in season upon
holy days. Preach the Word, says the Apostle, 2 Timothy 42. Be instant in season
and out of season, rebuke, exhort, etc.

In season;] That is, upon the Sabbath day.

Out of season;] That is, in the weektime.

So several sound Expositors upon the place. Prove. 25.11. Words spoken in
season, are like apples of gold in pictures of silver. Thus Prayers made, and
Sermons preached in season, are as golden apples in silver pictures, one
helping to honor the other. The golden apples grace the silver pictures, and
the silver pictures set out the golden apples. Thus the Sabbath-service
advances the Sabbath-season, and the Sabbath-season exalts the Sabbath-service;
and all lifts up the honor of God, who has prepared silver dishes for golden
apples, and put golden apples into silver dishes. Appointing blessed days for
sacred duties, and sacred duties for blessed days.

2. Hereby the servants of God are dignified. God in giving the whole Law, and
so in proclaiming the Command for the sanctifying of the Sabbath, made use of
the Ministry of Angels, not for necessity to him, but dignity to them. 'Twas
an honor to the Angels to be present and assistant when the Sabbath was set
forth, Gala. 3.19.. Thus God in the continued management of the Sabbath, and
carrying on the sanctification thereof in the world: makes use of the Ministry
of men as a dignity to them. Among other respects there are two most remarkable
things that do dignifie the office of Ministers above all other Functions: The
subject they are employed for, viz. The Souls of men,
And the Season they are employed in, viz. The Sabhaths of God.


Other callings their work lies upon the week-daies, but the Minister in his
business lies bound for the Sabbath. O let not any earthly discouragements
sink the souls of my dear brethren: but let us honor that God who has so
honored us, as to bend and bind our business to this blessed Day. Has God
magnified our office to labor on this day? Let us magnify our office by this
days-labour. Steadfast, immovable, abounding in the Lords work upon the Lords
day. That God who has blessed the day for our work, will bless our work in
the day.

2. The Sabbath considered as Christian, has honor. Christianity brings on
dignity. Theodosius accounted himself more noble as he was a Christian, then as
he was an Emperor. Hence Luther professed, He had rather be a Christian
beggar, then Heathen Alexander. Our Sabbath is Christian, and therefore
excellent. The excellency of our Christian Sabbath may be seen by two sorts of
things; Some more Principal. Some less Principal.


The principal things that put a price upon the Sabbath, lie, In the
appointing of it, and In the abiding of it.


This day may appear precious, if we ponder The person by whom, and The reason
for why 'twas appointed.


1. The person through whom this appointment came, was Christ, and his
Institution. August. de temp. Sermon. 36.
To this Austin applies that prediction of the Prophet, Psalm. 118.24. This is
the day which the Lord has made, we will rejoice and be glad therein. Jesus
Christ himself set out this Sabbath-time. Christ in person, Christ in the
Apostles.

THE LORD CHRIST,

Coelum e^ Christus non patiantur hyperbolen:
O how excellent is he? Christ and Heaven, (says Luther) in their praise can be
no excess. Too little we may speak, never too much. All the excellencies of
God and man meet in Christ. That then must needs be excellent whereof Christ is
the Author. That Child is nobly born which can call Christ Father.

The Sabbath derives its pedigree from Christ.

2. The reason upon which this Day was ordained, was Christ in his
Resurrection. The Resurrection of Christ was the first degree of his
exaltation. Had he not risen from the dead, he had never ascended into heaven,
never sat down at the right hand of God. And therefore his rising day, may well
be our resting day: that day on which Christ took the first step to all his
great honors, is an honorable day, and a day much to be honored. God has
highly honored this day;

As by converting on it the Souls of men,

So by raising on this day the Body of his Son.

2. We may see this days excellency in its permanency. As the Priesthood of
Melchizedeck was more excellent then the Priesthood of Aaron, because of its
order for ever, Hebr. 7.17. So the Sabbath of Christians is more excellent then
all the Sabbaths of the Jews, because it continues. To this Sabbath it might be
said in regard of all the Jewish Sabbaths, They shall perish, but thou
remainest, and they shall all wax old as does a garment. As a vesture shall
thou roll them up, and they shall be changed; but thou art the same, and thy
years shall not fail. Heb. 1.11, 12. To this day all the powers of earth and
hell shall never put a period.

Lastly, we may look into the large dignity of this Day, From the timing of it,
and From the naming of it.


1. This day is so timed, as is a help to its honor: It Is the first day in the
week. We have a rule, That the first in every kind is more excellent then all
the rest, August. de civit, De. ili. 11. Cypria. Sermon. de Spir. S,
Austin, Cyprian, and other of the Ancients much advance the excellency of the
Sabbath from the circumstance of time: That it is the seventh Day: The number
seven being most perfect and that which they say comprises many mysteries of
moment. But that which is more meet for us to consider, is the settling of our
Christian Sabbath upon the first day of the week. Luke. 2.23. we read how 'twas
written in the Law, that every Male that first opened the womb, was called holy
to the Lord: our Sabbath it is that day which first opened the womb of time,
that day which first opens the womb of every week: and therefore may well be
kept holy to the Lord, and be accounted honorable in the world. Whereas the
Jews Sabbath was upon the last, ours is upon the first day of the week. So
that the Jewish Sabbath might well say concerning the Christian, as John
Baptist of Christ, There comes one after me, that is to be preferred before me:
It Is more excellent as it is time.

2. Our Sabbath as it is named, transcends in excellency. Heb. 1.9. it is said
of Christ in respect of the Angels: He has obtained a more excellent name then
they; so may it be said of our Sabbath in respect of all the Judaicall
Sabbaths, It has obtained a more excellent name then they, it is called

THE LORDS DAY.

True, there is excellency in the name (Sabbath) as it signifies rest. Rest is
the Center to which all living creatures move. Rest is the perfection and
satisfaction of all creatures after their tyring and troublesome motions: But
in this name excellency more abounds,

THE LORDS DAY.

As it made much for the honor of Jacob when he had another name added,
Israel. Jacob signified, The supplanter of weak man: Israel signified, The
prevailer with a strong God. The latter the far more excellent name. This is
the honor of the Sabbath, it has another name, and the former was not like
this last.

THE LORDS DAY.

There is admirable excellency in all that is called the Lords.

The Lords Gospel. The Lords People. The Lords Prayer. The Lords supper.
1. The Lords Gospel;] There is excellency. The Law of God has beauty, but
the Gospel excells in glory. The Jewish Rabbis were wont to say, That upon
every letter of Gods Law hang Mountains of admirable matter. But Luther of the
Gospel goes further, saying, That the shortest line, and the least letter
thereof is more worth then all Earth and Heaven. The very Angels look out from
Heavens Glory, stooping down to see into the glory of the Gospel, 1 Pet. 1.12.

1. The Lords people:] There is excellency. They are the honor of the earth,
the glory of the world, the ornaments of Towns and Cities. As one pearl (says
Chrysostom) is more worth then a thousand pebbles: So one pious man is more
precious then ten thousand sinners. The whole wicked world may say to a Saint,
as the people of Israel to David, Thou art worth ten thousand of us, 2. Sam.
18.3. We may say of Saints in the world, as our Savior said of the Lilies of
the field, Solomon in all his glory was not clothed like one of these, Matthew.
6.29.

3. The Lords prayer;] There is excellency. Some have called it, The
Abridgement of the Bible; and others, Tertul. li. de orat. ca. 1. Cypr. ser. de
orat. Dom.
The Epitome of the Gospel. And several observe, that though it be little for
phrase of words, yet it is great for matter, and sweet for order, pithy and
precious in every part. A short prayer may be full of God, as there may be
little of God in a prayer that is long. The Lords prayer is, as it were, a
Breviary and Compendium of the great God.

Infolded.
Gods worth, and Man's wants
4. The Lords Supper;] There is excellency. It Is that Ordinance, wherein Saints
the most excellent of persons, and wherein faith the most excellent of graces
has the highest activities. Here the precious blood of Christ, and the
precious faith of Christians meet. Cypr. de coe Dom.
Here faith (says Cyprian) lays its mouth close to the wounds of Christ, and
sucks in sin-killing, and soul quickening blood. O blessed be God! Thus it is
evident what is the Lords is excellent: And is not the Lords day? Let us
observe, All time from the Beginning was precious. Gospel-time is more precious
then any before it.


The Lords day is the most precious part of Gospel-time. 'Twas a brave
expression of Galeacius Garacciolus that Italian Marquess* when a great sum
of money was offered him, to draw him to his own Popish Country and kindred:
Let all their money perish with them, who account all the wealth of the world
worth one days Communion with Jesus Christ. One Sabbath-dayes society with a
Savior ought to be of higher esteem then all the honors of the earth. O let
us not sink down the dignity of this day in our hearts, but every way let us
labor to lift up its Honor higher and higher: For As it is sad to debase it,
So to advance it is good.


1. To debase and despise the Lords day is common now in our Nation. Men for
the most part make no more of this then of any other day, Cant. 5.9. What is
thy beloved more then another beloved? say they to the Church extolling of
Christ. Upon this she fell to a more full discovery of the dignities and
excellencies of Christ. Some had need set up Gods Sabbath-honour the more,
there are so many that say in their hearts, What is the day of the Sabbath more
then another day? yea, and indeed it is no more, as many in their lives
sinfully make it. Dalilah prevailing upon Sampson, he lost his locks and his
strength, and became like another man. The Devil with diverse has prevailed so
far against the Sabbath, that it has lost its life and luster, glory and
honor, and is become like another day; which I am sure is no sign of good to
come. Some say, that if the Sun which is the chief of planets be Eclipsed, it
signifies great Commotions, Mutations, Destructions. I dare say, that when the
Sabbath which is the chief of days, is clouded and covered over with black
opinions and practices, it intimates heavy evils to come. O how do men pollute
that which God has sanctified! and debase that day which God has dignified!
Act. 10.15. What God has cleansed, call not thou common. And what God has
honored O man, account not thou base.

2. To advance this day is its due, and our duty; And indeed could we in
England but recover the Sabbaths honor, that this Sabbath-Sun might shine
again in its beauty and luster, and our Horizon be filled with the bright
beams thereof, it would remove the fogs of filthy errors, prevent the
inflicting of sad calamities, regain the credit of contemned Ordinances, Joh.
12.32. as there the Lord of the Sabbath said. If I be lifted up, I will draw
all men to me: So may the Sabbath of the Lord say, If I be lifted up, I will
draw all to me. Then all the things of God shall rise. As when Christ was
risen, Matthew. 27.52. Many bodies of Saints which were asleep in their graves,
arose and went into the holy City, etc. Thus were the Christian Sabbath raised,
the whole body of Christian Religion would be brought out of its grave, and
many of Gods Saints that are as it were now asleep upon the beds of sad
seducing errors, would arise and come forth to the holy service of God. Heb.
11.35. it is said of some Mothers, that they received their dead children raised
to life again. O what joy would it be to poor Ministers, that they might
receive again some of their spiritual children as alive from the dead! Such
things would be, were Sabbaths raised in their honor, that lie now under the
worlds contempt. Indeed as the Lord in the Prophet speaks, Ezekiel. 37.3. Son of
man, can these dry bones live? And I answered, O Lord God, thou know. Then
says the Lord, I will cause breath to enter, and the dead bones shall live.
May not the Lord say, Can my dead Sabbaths live? Can my dry Ordinances be
green, juicie, and sappy again? Lord, thou know. O would but God breath from
above, and bring his Sabbaths up from below, then would come on that FIRST
RESVRRECTION! O that I might live to see somewhat of this! As there has been a
certain day of the Lords Resurrection: Oh that there might be a speedy
resurrection of the Lords day! A day for the recovery of whose life, all ought
to labor. A day for the clearing of whose honor, all ought to be earnest. A
day that above all days ought to be had in very high esteem. This for the
Excellency.

3. Let us mark the Commodity that accompanies the well keeping of this
Christian Sabbath. That the profit may appear: Note, The Grounds for it, and
The Parts of it.


Viz. Out of what it proceeds, and Unto what it extends.


The grounds from which profit by the Sabbath proceeds, are Primary and
antecedential, Secondary and consequential.


The antecedent grounds through which proceeds Sabbath-profit for several
purposes, are The pleasure of God for it, and The blessing of God upon it.


1. The pleasure of God;] This brings out abundant benefit by the Sabbath. This
makes the Sabbath-Tree to bear plenty of precious fruit. As if we shall enquire
upon what account, and from what cause there comes such a confluence of all
good to be gathered in, and gained by Christ the Lord of the Sabbath? the
Apostle makes it plain, to proceed from the good pleasure of God, Colos. 1.19
It pleased the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell: So if any ask
after the reason, why multitudes of mercies meet in the Sabbath of the Lord?
it is because it seemed good in Gods sight: It pleased the Father to fill this
day with all fullness of good, fitting for glorious designs.

2. The blessing of God;] This brings benefit and good in abundance; from the
beginning of the World, God sanctified this day, and blessed it, Genesis 2.
Sanctified,] that is, separated the day from common things. Blessed,] that is,
God consecrated the day to special ends. Junius observes, Juni. in Genesis 2.
That the Sabbath besides the common blessing it had with other days by the
law of Nature, it had a special blessing above other days from the Love of
God. Gods blessing on his Sabbath, As it is abounding So it is abiding.


As the precious portion God has blessed his Sabbath with, Is double: So
stable.


Such a Sabbath-blessing as God will never reverse: But as Isaac said of his
son, I have blessed him, and he shall be blessed: So says God of his Sabbath,
I have blessed it, and it shall be blessed.

Whence was it that Joseph was as a fruitful bough, whose branches run over the
wall, etc. but that blessing that was upon him from his Father above all his
brethren? Genes. 49.22, 26. And hence is it that the Sabbath in the Tree of the
week is the most fruitful bough outrunning the rest of the days in doing
good; because beyond all the other days it has the blessing of God.

The subsequent grounds of Sabbath-Benefit are: The promise of God to it, and
The presence of God with it.


1. The promise of God,] This produces profit in the day. Precious promises God
has made to men minding his Sabbath, Teneamus fidelissimum debitorem, quia
tenemus miscricordissimum promissorem. Aug. in Psalm. 32.
Levit. 26.2, 3, 4, 5. Isay 56.4, 5, 6. Isay 58, 12, 13, 14. Jerem. 17.24, 25,
26. Let us but all here seriously consider, Gods bountifulness in making
promises, And Gods faithfulness in keeping promises made.


And none need marvel if mercies by multitudes meet in, and march out upon the
Sabbath Day.

The work of Gods promises, sets a promising God awork.

2. The presence of God,] This is productive of Sabbath-profit. As the Angel
said to Gideon, Judges 6.12. The Lord is with thee thou mighty man of valor;
and hence he did great things, ver. 14, 15. thus may it be said to the Sabbath,
Sicut Maria virgo inter omnes mulieres principatum tenet. ita inter caeteros
dies haec dies omnium dierum Matter est. Hieron. de resurrect. Domini.
The Lord is with thee thou mighty day of Honor; and no wonder if thereon
great things be done: or as the Angel saluted the virgin Mary, Luke 1.28. Hail,
thou art highly favored, the Lord is with thee. Blessed art thou among women.
O the wonder of mercy that her womb brought forth! And thus may we bespeak the
Lords Day with a Hail, holy Sabbath, thou art highly favored, the Lord is with
thee, and blessed art thou among days. And O the blessed births that are from
this womb! And O the abundant benefits that are in and by this Day upon these
grounds!

But I shall pass on to the parts of the profit, and discover where in the
Sabbath Day is so profitable; viz.

Against Evil, And for good.
First, great is the profit of Gods precious Sabbath, Against evil things, and
Against evil ones.


Evil things.] Gods holy Sabbath is good against The evil of sin, and The
evil of punishment.


First, the Sabbath it is good against the evil of sin: Iniquity now abounds,
but O how would sin superabound were this world set Sabbath-free! Sin that is
vigorous all the week, may be upon the Sabbath Day subdued. Exodus 14.13. Moses
said unto Israel, Stand still, and see the salvation the Lord will show to day:
for that very day God drowned the Egyptians in the water of the Red Sea, etc.
The Sabbath is the day wherein God saves souls from their sins, drowning their
corruptions this day in the Red Sea of Christ's blessed blood. Or if sin does
not immediately die; yet it may receive such a Sabbath-wound, as it shall never
recover, but as the house of Saul wax weaker and weaker, till all comes to an
utter end.

2. The Sabbath it is good against the evil of punishment, and all kinds of
calamities. When Judgments desolating are up and down, O it is safe being in a
Sabbath-sanctuary: when enemies are black and bloody, the Sabbath of God will
bring the God of the Sabbath to be on our side. Luther reports of a Bishop of
Magdenburg, who being told that a Duke of Saxony prepared war against him,
answered, My care shall be to reform the Church and amend what is amiss in the
Sabbaths and service of God, and God will fight for me: Which when the Duke
heard, he disbanded his forces, saying, he would not contend with that man,
that engaged God in his quarrel. Let who will resolve war against us, this
days reforming, would prevent the Lands ruining. Indeed while Religion is
languishing, Nations are perishing; while Sabbaths are sinking, Cities are
shaking: O what a controversy has God! O what a fire did God threaten within
the walls of Jerusalem, for the breach of his blessed day! Jer. 17.27.
Breakings of Sabbaths, brings burning of Cities. And the best way for the safe
keeping of Cities, is the well keeping of Sabbaths.

2. The sanctification of the Sabbath is of singular use against evil ones; As
the Devil, And Antichrist.


Much good against the Devil may this day be done, To the delivering from him,
and To the conquering of him.


O the rare rescues of souls from the power of Satan upon the Sabbath day! Luke
13.16. We see a poor woman eighteen years bound by the Devil, was upon the
Sabbath Day loosed from her bond. Some under the sore bondage of Satan twenty,
thirty, forty years, have been delivered upon the Lords day. God has made
heavy chains to fall off, and Iron gates to fly open, which has put the Jailer
the Devil in a rage to see upon the Sabbath souls pulled out of his prison, and
sinners set free from his fetters. And O the successeful Battles that have been
sought against Satan upon this day of the Sabbath! We read, Josh. 10. That when
five Kings came out in Battle against Israel, there was a day the Sun stood
still, and the Moon stayed at the command of Joshua. And says the text, There
was no day like that before it, nor after it, that the Lord so hearkened to the
voice of man; for the Lord fought for Israel, and they had that day a very
great victory, verse. 13, 14, etc. Thus upon the Lords day combinations of
Devils have been broken and beaten; no day like this, wherein God hearkens to
the voice of man, Heaven and Earth stand still, God fights, and the Devil
falls, Luke 10.18. 2 Cor. 10.4, 5.

Yea, and much good may be done this day against Antichrist, and all his
Adherents, both by The preachings of Christ's Gospel, And the prayings of Gods
people.


This days preaching of the Gospel brings on Babylons fall, Rev. 14.6. An
Angel flies in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting Gospel to preach to
men that dwell on the earth. And what follows? v. 7, 8. Another Angel, saying,
Babylon is fallen, is fallen. The words are doubled, to foretell a double fall
of Babylon, The one Spiritual, The other Literal.


Babylons spiritual fall, viz. in the hearts of Princes and people, this is
wrought by the Word.

Babylons literal fall, viz. in its visible pomp and power, this shall be done
by the sword. The former falling makes way for the latter. The more purely the
Word is preached, and the more clearly the Gospel shines, the more the
Mysterious workings of that man of sin is made manifest, and the more he loses
in the minds of men, 2 These. 2.8. Then shall that wicked one be revealed, whom
the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and destroy with the
brightness of his coming. It notes the coming of Christ in the clearness of
the Gospel, to cast down Antichrist, and call home the Jews. Amen, Lord Jesus,
come quickly.

2. Sabbath-dayes prayings of the people of God, this brings Babylon down.
Luther was wont to call his and the Churches Tears and Prayers their great
Guns and Cannons. Upon the Lords Day the Lords people play with their Cannons
aganst the walls of Babylon and make irrepairable batteries and breaches,
Joshua 6. Every day the army of Israel went round the city of Jericho, but on
the Seventh day they compassed the city seven times. And at the seventh time
the Priests blew the trumpets, and the people shouted; and then the walls fell,
and the City was taken. Every day the Saints of God in their sighs and suits
should besiege Babylon, but on the Sabbath day beset it seven times: Ministers
preach, and people pray. Upon this day all the soldiers of Jesus Christ must
march out of their quarters into the open fields to fight the battle of the
Lord against Satan and Babylon, Hell and Rome: and when they be in prayer
fervent, then they are in the heat of battle; then shout, shout, this would
make walls fall. O even upon this account let us keep up Sabbaths, and therein
cry mightily, Jerem. 50.14, 15. Put your selves in array against Babylon round
about, all that bend the bow, shoot at her, spare for no arrows: shout
against her round about, her foundations are fallen, her walls are thrown down.
Upon this day let all Gods people in all parts, put themselves in array against
Rome, Mystical Babylon; pour out tears, put up prayers, all
Artillery-Christians, bend the bow, shoot, spare for no arrows; cry again and
again. With the hands of the Prayer of faith lay hold, as Sampson upon the
pillars of the great Philistine-house, bowing himself with all his might, and
then down it fell, Judges 16.30. O let us every Lords day bow our selves with
all our might. 2. Samuel. 17.13. Counsel was given to Absalom that if David
were got into a City, all Israel should bring ropes to that City, and draw it
into the River, till not one small stone be found there. Is not Antichrist got
into a City? Every Sabbath let all Gods Israel bring their ropes, pull hard by
holy prayer, draw all into the River, till not a stone be left upon a stone. No
marvel Antichrist and the devil seeks to throw down Sabbaths; for Sabbaths
will throw down the devil and Antichrist.

Again, great is the profit of this precious Sabbath: For good things toward
men, and For men toward good things.


First, this brings on things that much concerns men's good, In Church, And in
State.


Let Sabbaths be well observed, and we shall see Good Governors to be obeyed,
and Good obedience to Governors.


To keep holy the Sabbath is a sure way to settle a succession of Governors
that are good, Jerem. 17.24, 25, 26. If ye diligently hearken to me, says the
Lord, and hollow the Sabbath Day, Then shall there enter into the gates of this
City KINGS and PRINCES sitting upon the throne of David, riding in Chariots and
on horses; they and their Princes, the men of Judah and inhabitants of
Jerusalem, and this City shall remain for ever. This speaks good things to the
State. And they shall come from the Cities of Judah, and the places about
Jerusalem, and from the Lana of Benjamin, etc. bringing burnt-offerings and
Sacrifices of praise unto the house of the Lord. This speaks good to the
Church, and all upon this account, The well keeping the Sabbath.

If then in Church and State we would have things go well, and do desire a
series of such settled as may govern for God, let us see to the Sanctification
of the Sabbath. God he makes breaches in men's Government, when men make
breaches in Gods Commandment. The way to keep good Government whole, is to
keep Gods Sabbath Holy.

Yea, this will bring on obediential respects to governors that are good.
People that profane and pollute Gods Sabbaths, will contemn and reject good
Rulers. That is a sad case, Lam. 2.6. The Lord has destroyed the places of the
public assemblys, he has caused the Sabbaths to be forgotten in Zion, and
has despised in the indignation of his anger, the KING and the PRIEST. [That
is, God, then as a testimony of his terrible displeasure, did suffer such to be
despised.

Where Sabbaths are not remembered,

There Superious are not regarded.

None so soon give to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, as they who first
give to God the things that are Gods. Remarkable is Gods Method in the ten
Commandments: Remember, the Sabbath:] and then the next, Honor thy Father,]
whether they be Natural, Civil, or, Spiritual.
Fathers.

The way to honor the Father, is first to remember the Sabbath. No marvel if
such as make little of the fourth Commandment, make nothing of the fifth.
Indeed none will make more of the fifth Commandment, then they that make most
of the fourth. We shall find it clear,

That such as most embrace Gods Commandments,

They will best obey Gods Vicegerents.

2. The men, this sanctifying the Sabbath is profitable for, are Sinners, and
Saints.


Men that remain in their finfull estate, the Sabbath is good, For their
conforming in some part, and For their transforming throughout.


Through Sabbath-day-impressions some men bad are brought to the outward
performance of religious actions. As Herod hearing John Baptist preach
(probably at such appointed times) was so far wrought upon, that her everenced
John, and did many good things, Mark 6.20. If Sabbaths were laid aside, men
would not have the face of visible profession, nor so much as keep the tongues
of Christians, but turn into absolute Atheism, yea, brutish Barbarism,
forgetting the Lord to be God, and themselves to be men. Christianity would
soon cease, and not long after humanity sink. The Name of God, the knowledge of
Christ^, civilities among men, are all kept up by a Sabbath-support.

Yea, besides such more common commodities, some by Sabbaths-meanes are brought
to a soul-saving change. In that glass of the Gospel which this day is held
up, some beholding the glory of the Lord, are changed from glory to glory, even
as by the Spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.18. This is the day wherein the net is
cast out, that draws many to shore. Yea, fishes that could never be caught,
are brought in by a Sabbath-tyde. Through the warm beams of a Sabbath-sun
some new creatures are engendered, that were before but as filthy dung. Such
ciences of saving graces are graffed into the souls of some upon the
Sabbath Day, as that after they prove trees bearing the best fruit, who were
before but as Crab-tree-stocks.

Men that are removed into a sanctified estate, the Sabbath does exceedingly
concern their good: That they which are fallen may stand, and That they which
stand, may not fall.


Such as are fallen through sin are set up through Sabbath-helps. The helps of
a Sabbath have recovered decayed Christians, impoverished places and persons
have been relieved by Sabbath-Collections, and so by Sabbath-petitions, have
some had sweet relief who were sunk low in their souls estate. Nothing better
by way of means, then holy Ordinances upon the Lords day to recover
soul-Consumptions. Some that have been as Aarons dry Rod, yet through this
days blessing, have blossomed and born abundance after of the best fruit. Mark
2. we see our Savior upon the Sabbath day healing of a man that had a withered
hand. O how many withered hearts bath Christ upon the Sabbath cured? How many
cast down by the Devil, has the Lord upon this day raised, Matthew. 12.11. And
Jesus said unto them, What man among you, having his sheep fallen into a pit,
will not pull it out on the Sabbath day? Out of deep pits of Apostasy the Lord
has pulled poor relapsed Saints upon the Sabbath day. 'Twas upon this Lords
day that Paul raised Eutichus fallen down from the third loft, Act. 20. O how
many in our days are fallen from the third loft, lamentably lapsed, In
judgment, Affection, and Practice!


Yet we hope that in some of them there is some life left, and that the Lord
will ere long raise and recover them through tht benefit of this blessed day.
Others that have not yet fallen, the Sabbath is of singular use to settle them
fast. It Is conceived by sound Authors from several grounds, that our first
Parents fell from their created Innocence, upon the sixth day of the week, the
very same day wherein God had made them: Should they have stood up, and
possessed out the service of the ensuing Sabbath, they would have been more
settled in their obedience, and better confirmed for their continuance; but
Satan subtly assaults them before the Sabbath, or the seventh day comes, and
so more easily were they conquered, and cast down. The Sabbath with the service
thereof is soul-quickning, Saint-strengthening. The Christian Sabbath is the
main sinew of Christian Religion; if this be stopped or obstructed, and vital
blood does not well pass, all the parts weaken, wither, waste and die: but if
all passes well in Sabbath-veines, then all grows and gathers strength, and is
more vigorous, lively, and lasting. Sabbaths serve to make the Saints of God
more pure, perfect, and permanent. That Is holy which the Sabbath sanctifies,
and that is strong which the Sabbath ratifies, and that is blessed upon which
passes the blessing of the Sabbath. Some Collect from Levit. 22. and 27. that
the Lamb appointed for the Paschal sacrifice, was not allowable before it was
eight days old: And some of the Rabbis render this reason, because nothing in
the world was to be reputed perfect, until a Sabbath had passed over it; but
then was a thing clean, complete, and blessed, when it had gone under the
blessing of a Sabbath. Yea, such is the benefit of this blessed day, that as it
brings all things to be blessed to us: so it brings us to be in all things
blessed, Isay 56.2. Yea, all things that concern our good, not only for time,
but eternity, are brought in at this Sabbath-door, Isay 56.5. As Caleb gave his
daughter the upper and the lower springs: so God has given his day the good
things both of Earth and Heaven. Thus the careful keeping of Christian Sabbath
is profitable.

Lastly, the Lords day duly kept, is delectable. For the delights and comforts
that do accompany the careful keeping of this holy day, consider Both the
persons they are to, And the properties they are of.


1. The persons to whom the Lords day well kept is a delight, are, Superior,
and Inferior.


Persons superior that herein take pleasure, are God, and his Holy Angels.


1. God himself [Father, Son, and holy Ghost] take herein great delight. A
Sabbath well spent, As it is formidable to the Devil, So it is acceptable to God.


We go from Sabbath-day-duties, Prayer well made, Sermons well heard, and
Sacraments well received (says Chrysostom) as Lions breathing fire, terrible
to the Devils themselves. But that which is bitterly displeasing to the Devil,
is most sweetly pleasing to God. So Calvin expounds that place of the Prophet
Isay 58.13. Thou shall call the Sabbath a delight. Or [Delights] in the plural,
as that worthy Interpreter renders it from the Hebrew, and refers it not to
men, but to God, saying, That the right observation of the Sabbath is [the
delights of the Lord,] nothing to God more grateful. And indeed no less from
the place appears; Thou shall call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord,
HONORABLE, and shall honor him. The Prophet seems to set down a double
reason, why the Sabbath should be the delights of the Lord, viz.

It Is the holy of the Lord, and It Is the honor of the Lord.
That sure is the delight of the Lord, which is the holy of the Lord. A holy
God cannot but delight in a holy day. That which is so suitable to him, must
needs be acceptable with him. And that which is the Lords honor, is certainly
the Lords delight. The Sabbath it is the honor of God displayed; it is the
great Engine God moves in this world, to make out his honor. As God has
honored this day by making it holy for us: so we much honor God by keeping it
holy to him. What is his honor, is his pleasure.

2. The Angels of God are greatly delighted to see Sabbaths observed; which may
arise from a double advantage, viz.

To themselves, and To others.
Through our Sabbath-day-exercises Angels do much advantage themselves, in that
their knowledge comes hereby constantly to increase. Austin well observes, that
the Angels of heaven have, Both their Morning, and Also their Evening-knowledge.


Their morning-knowledge;] This they have by Creation from the Worlds
beginning; as soon as they were made, they were able knowingly to contemplate
God, heavens glory, and their own felicities.

Their evening-knowledge;] This they have by inspection and diligent
observation of the affairs of the Church, and Mysteries of the Gospel made
manifest in the end of the World, Ephesians. 3.10. 1 Pet. 1.12. Those
Gospel-discoveries of Christ upon the Lords day the Angels delight fully to
look into, and enlarge their knowledge by.

2. Through Sabbath-day-exercises Angels see great advantage to others, and
this makes the day their delight. This being the day wherein lost Goats are
found, strayed sheep are brought home, and prodigal sons return to their
Fathers house. O the musik it makes in heaven, and joy among the Angels of God,
Luke 15. Luke 2. we see what rejoicing was among the Angels upon the day of
Christ's Birth, singing, Glory be to God, good will to men. Tidings of great
joy, To you is born this day, in the City of David, a Savior which is Christ
the Lord. If Angels rejoiced at the day when Christ is born to men; do they not
rejoice on the day wherein men are born to Christ? Ut hom^nes nascerentur ex
Deo; primo ex ipsis natus est Deus. August in Joan. c. 2.
The very end (as Austin observes) why God was first born of men, was that
after men might be born of God. Therefore Angels who rejoiced at the other, may
well rejoice at this. Yea, Angels who are present in the public Assemblies of
Gods Saints, 1 Cor. 11.10. not only to observe, but to assist them in Sabbath
day-duties; O how much is it Angels delight, to find us this day fervent in
praying, painful in preaching, diligent in hearing, etc?

Persons inferior that herein find pleasure, are Faithful Ministers, and
Faithful Christians.


1. To Ministers that are faithful, the Sabbath is a day of sweet delight. Upon
the Lords day laboring, Either they have herein their desired success: Or
they have not that success herein they do desire.

Sometimes God gives them good success in their Sabbath-Day-endeavous, that is
their delight. Austin having preached an excellent sermon, some of his hearers
thinking to please him with their applause, fell into his high praises; the
good man sighed, saying, Alas, these are but leaves, it is fruit we delight in.
The peoples fruit and profit is the Ministers delight and pleasure. Let a
faithful Minister meet with never so many molestations all the week, yet if
upon the Sabbath God prospers, and the peoples profit, lo this is his delight
and comfort, this his crown and joy. John 16. it is said of a Mother, she
forgets her pain and travels for joy that a man-child is born into the world:
Thus a good Minister forgets all his week-day-difficulties and discouragements
in the world, for joy that a soul on the Sabbath is born again to God. And if
they have not such success, yet the day of their labor is the day of their
delight, 2, Cor 12.15. I will very gladly spend and be spent for your souls,
though the more abundantly I love you, the less I be loved.

Here the Apostle in all his Ministerial pains seems to have poor success,
cold encouragement.

Little love for great labor.

Yet for the desired good of souls he gladly, yea very gladly spends himself,
and is spent. Faithful Ministers if they find good success of their
Sabbath-service, then they rejoice, because they have a sure reward from God.
If upon the service of the Sabbath they have no such success, yet they can
rejoice, because they have asure reward with God, Isay 49.4. I have labored in
vain, I have spent my strength for naught, yet SVRELY my Judgment is with the
Lord, and my REWARD with my GOD. Verse. 5. Though Israel be not gathered, yet
shall I be glorious in the eyes of the Lord. If Israel be gathered, then are we
glorious in the eyes of men. If Israel be not gathered, yet are we glorious in
the eyes of God, who looks more to our sincere intent in our work, Nos octava
die (quae ipsa prima est) perfecti Sabbeti festivitate laetamur. Hilar. Prolog.
in Psalm. page 335.
then at the successeful event of our work. We may well therefore make our
laboring day, our delighting day.

The day of our greatest pains, the Day of our sweetest Pleasure.

2. To Christians that are fruitful, the Lords Day is a day of large delight.
This is the day which the Lord has made, we will rejoice and be glad therein.
Psalm. 118.24. As there is not a day, which the Lord has not made: So there is
not a day, wherein Saints may not be glad; but as the Lord has made this DAY
to differ from all the rest; so saints may be otherwise glad on this day, then
at any other times. Which will be evident if we consider,

2. The properties of Sabbath-joyes as to Gods Saints, They are The safest, and
The sweetest.
They are The firmest, and The fullest joys.



1. These are the safest joys.] Take week-day-delights, as in worldly matters,
and ordinarily there is a deadly hook within a pleasant bait. Our Mother Eve,
Genesis 3. looked upon the fruit of the forbidden tree, and it was pleasant for
her eye.

Ai, Ai, but that which was pleasant for her sight, it was perilous for her
soul. It was but week-day-pleasure in a Garden-tree: had she continued
innocent, and tasted of Sabbath-day-delights in a glorious God, of that fruit
she might have eat, and at that Fountain she might have drunk safely.

2. These are the sweetest joys.] Weekday-sports in lawful delights, are but
as pills rolled up in Sugar, bitter-sweet, sweet without, and bitter within. As
the Prophets Book that was as honey in the mouth, and as gall in the belly.
These earthly pleasures are as garden-Roses, which as they have their pleasant
leaves; so they have their pricking stalks. Whereas true Sabbath-delights are
throughout sweet. Some bitter drops may possibly fall in them, but they are not
properly of them.

For as there is saltness in every drop of Seawater; So there is sweetness
in every dram of true Sabbath-comfort.

3. These are the firmest joys.] Unto sinful men their week-delights are weak
delights, that rise and soon fall, that spring up and soon wither away. One
blast of Gods displeasure it blows out those Candle-comforts: One drop of a
troubled conscience (says Luther) swallows up a Sea of worldly joy. Whereas
to Gods Saints Sabbath-delights are surer delights, stable and strong.

As the strength of the Lord is their joy,
So the joy of the Lord is their strength.
Their delights in the Sabbath of the Lord,
Is by delighting in the Lord of the Sabbath.
Isay 58.13. Thou shall not do thy pleasure on my holy day, but call the
Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord, honorable, and shall honor him, not
doing thine own ways, nor speaking thine own words. What then? Then shall thou
delight thy self in the Lord. I will cause thee to ride upon high places, and
feed thee with the heritage of Jacob thy Father. Here is a firm foundation for
Saints Sabbath-delightings, viz. God and his gracious dealings.

4. These are the fullest joys.] Sabbath-feasting-delights are
soul-filling-delights. Week-day-pleasures in worldly matters are ever swelling,
but never filling. They are windy, and empty, and so apt to swell men with
pride, and self-conceits: But they do not fill men so as to give them any good
satisfactions.

Soul-satisfying joys, are Sabbath-sanctifying joys.
Comforts in, and communions with God, give full content. Some of Gods Saints
who have had their souls filled with sorrows all the week, yet upon the
Sabbath God has turned their water into wine. August de tempore Sermon. 154.
Austin is of the judgment that that Marriage in Cana of Galilee, Joh. 2. was
upon the Sabbath Day, when the six water pots being filled with water to the
brim, Christ made all into wine.

When with some the six-week-dayes have been like those six water pots, all
filled brim full with the waters of sorrow, the Lord upon the day of our
Christian Sabbath has changed all into the best wine of soul-refreshing
comfort. Joseph. de bello Judaico. lib. 7. cap. 24.
Josephus writes of a River near Jerusalem, that upon the six days in the week
was dry through the failing of the water from the spring head; but upon the
Sabbath which was the seventh day, the springs sent out so fast, that the banks
were filled; whereupon it was commonly called, The Sabbath-River. I cannot
affirm the truth of this: But this is truth; There are that can by experience
speak it. When little has come from the spring head of comfort all the week,
yet upon the Sabbath day soul-eomforts have flowed in, and filled up amain.
About the tents of the Jews Manna fell from heaven only upon the week-dayes,
none was found upon the Sabbath. It Is otherwise with Christians, that Manna of
heavenly joy, that falls not all the week, is to be found upon their Sabbath
day; so as that therewith their souls are safely, sweetly, and firmly filled.

O how much might this promote among us the careful keeping of our Christian
Sabbath, viz. The profitable comfort, and the comfortable profit, that may in
the same be possessed!

Yet upon the souls of several of Gods Saints, some things may be supposed
sadly to sit. Some complain that though past, there has been a long
continuance of the Sabbath, yet they have found no such profit and comfort.
Others confess they have found much comfort and profit, but they fear a short
continuance of the Sabbath for the future.

The former are damped in the duty and service of the day, because they feel no
present profit and comfort coming.

The latter are damped in their comfort and profit for present, because they
fear the day will not publicly endure.

But that, neither the want of the comfort of the day, may dishearten the duty;

Nor the doubt of the continuance of the day, may diminish the comfort:

Some things suitable to both sorts, may be said to help in such cases of
sadness.

First, for such of Gods Saints as are under temptations, discouraging from the
service of the Sabbath, because they have not had such good success in
Sabbaths observed.

1. Be it so, yet such ought in the Sabbath-day-duties, to continue their
diligence. We are bound to perform duty, though we should not receive mercy:
it is the mark of mere Mercenaries, without some recompense, no obedience.
Indeed the recompense of reward may be in our eye, though it be not our end. In
our work we do, we may have a love to the reward; but for mere love of the
Reward, we are not to do our work. God is our great Lord and Master; though
it is not servile obedience, yet it is obedience of servants we owe to him daily,
and much more upon his holy day. If he should not be as a liberal Master to pay
us wages for it, yet we must be as loyal servants to perform his work in it. A
learned Author reports, Cassianus, lib 4 cap. 24.
that he knew a young man, who merely in obedience to a superiors command, for
a whole year together he went two miles every day, only to pour water on a
dry withered stick. We ought every Lords day to come under Gospel-waterings,
though our hearts should remain as withered, dry, and dead sticks, or hard
stones; though we should feel no softenings, quickenings, comfortings, it is
enough we have a command; the duty is ours, the day is Christ's, who is over
all, God above all, blessed for ever. It Is a favor God will employ us, though
he should not reward us. Angels are glad God will send them on his business,
though they have no new recompense. They are cheerful to increase their duty,
though they do not enlarge their glory. We be not to conceive of the Angels,
that some God has to stand up by him, and others are sent out of him; for,
says the Apostle, Are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister?
Heb. 1. Yet this is their property, they all think themselves happy, in that
God thinks them worthy to do his work in the world. And as there are special
persons they are employed for: So there are special seasons they are employed
in: Most for Gods servants, and Most on Gods Sabbaths.


Job. 1.6. Now there was a day when the sons of God came to present themselves
before the Lord, Job. 2.1. And again, There was a day when the sons of God came
to present themselves before the Lord. This day is by some applied to the
Sabbath, on which day the Angels more then ordinary tender themselves to God to
go out as Assistants in his Sabbath-service. Bernard was wont to say, The holy
Angels helped him to preach every Lords day. Though hereby there be no actual
addition to their essential holiness, or Celestial happiness; Their very
employment is their pleasure. Suppose hereby they may come to a greater
knowledge of Christ: yet hereby they do not gain a nearer access unto God, to
see any more of his face then they did, or to receive any more glory in heaven
then they had. What then? Notwithstanding they stand ready every Sabbath day,
if God will send them out, then to assist in his service

And shall not we be willing to perform Sabbath-works, though we receive no
Sabbath-Rewards? We that are Ministers must not in our places lay by the
business of the Lords Day, because we cannot have that comfortable success,
which the Searcher of all hearts knows, is our souls desire, in converting
sinners to God. Chrysostom. Hom. 15. in Matthew.
Chrysostom has a good expression, As fountains send out water, though no
pitcher be brought to fetch from them: So Pastors ought to preach, though none
receive fruit or profit by them. And thus other Christians must not cast off
the service of the Sabbath which concerns them, because they cannot come up to
those encouragements they carry in their eye.

2. Say, some serving of God upon the Sabbath Day should not be successeful in
that plenty of peace and profit they expect; yet what peace or profit could
such expect, should they lay aside the service of the Sabbath? upon the same
account, at all other times all the exercises of religion might be left off,
and what good could then be looked for? Jerome upon that place of the Apostle.
Romans 9.16. It is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs; Hieron. in
Psalm. 107.
but of God that shows merry: Sure then (says he) it is not of him that
sleeps, nor of him that idleh, nor of him that neglects duty: for on such the
Lord will have no mercy. And Chrysostom well observes upon that saying of our
Savior, Matthew. 16. If any will come after me, Chrysostom. in Matthew. Homil. 56.
etc. Christ says not, If any will stand still, or sit down: for (says he)
the Kingdom of God is not given to standers and idlers; but to walkers and
workers, etc. So say I, the comforts of God are not given to any person upon
any pretense whatsoever, that shall neglect his duty, especially upon the Lords
Day. For any to pretend they have performed duties, but see no good success;
what good success are any like to see upon the ceasing of their duty? Non est
gloriosa victoria nisi, ubi fuerint laboriosa certamina. Ambr.
If in the Day of battle he that fights may not win the field, sure he that is
loath to combat will lose the Conquest. If such as look well to their
seed-time, plow and sow, miss their crops; what harvest can they hope for,
who in due time do not sow their seed? If such as are provident and diligent
in their callings all the week, yet decay and sink in the world; are they like
to thrive if they throw by their business? As if some on the Sabbath
industrious in duty, yet perceive their souls sinking, and no comfort coming;
what comfort is like to come by casting off the duties of the Sabbath? If men
may use the means, and yet miss the end: sure such must miss the end, who do
not use the means. Let none think to better their souls condition, by ceasing
Sabbath-transactions.

2. When Christians have performed Sabbath-day-duties, and do not find such
desired success in comfortable communions with God, it should presently put
them, Upon self reflectings, and Not upon Sabbath-neglectings.


Instantly to enter their own hearts, enquiring the cause. The Word is a fire,
why am I cold? The Word is quickening, why am I dead? Ordinances are the means
of comfort, why have I no comfort by the means? Some are at Sermons and
Sacraments with their hearts leaping, and go away with their faces shining,
that such as see them may say, They have been with Jesus: why go I drooping all
the day? yea, when Christians find their Sabbath-performances yield them no
fruit, it should presently put them Upon the amending their duties, Not upon
the omitting their duties.


As Fishermen in the use of their Nets, having caught nothing, they fall to
turning and mending of their Nets with care: and not to casting away of their
Nets with discontent. An Archer in the use of his Bow, if his arrow flies wide,
or falls short, he shoots again, directs his arrow more straight, draws his
bow with more strength, that yet if possible he may not miss the mark; Thus
in the discharge of the Lords-day-duties, if we miss Gods desired mercies, we
must stir up our selves, and strive with the more strength, quickening up the
greater care in a Sabbath-course. We must not conclude through humane
frailties, we will do this days work no further; but we must resolve through
divine abilities to do the work of this day better.

4. The Sabbath-performances of soule-afflicted Saints, although they are not
Sensibly good and comfortable to them, yet
They are certainly good and acceptable to God.


God sees that in their aimings, which they cannot see in their actings. That
which they cannot see in their work, God sees in their will. God knows after
what all the day long the set desire of their souls reaches, not a bare being
in duty, but therein a clear beholding of God, a close coming in to Christ, to
keep up their intercourse with Father, Son and Holy Ghost. It Is not so much the
Ordinance of God, as God in the Ordinance they look for. I know whom you seek
(says the Angel, to the women, Luke 24.) Jesus of Nazareth, which was
crucified. There they saw the Sepulcher wherein Christ was laid, and there they
saw the linen clothes wherein Christ was wrapped, but all would not satisfy. It
was not the Sepulcher of Christ, but Christ in the Sepulcher they sought for.

So it is not so much the Sabbath of Christ, as Christ in the Sabbath, nor so
much the Gospel of Christ, as Christ in the Gospel they groan after. Something
like that of Bernards, is a true Christians cry, Lord, unless that I give thee
my self, it is not all my duties on the Sabbath will satisfy thee, nor is it
thy Sabbath with all its duties or mercies can satisfy me, except thou give me
thy SELF.

Now such as in the Sabbath seek God giving himself unto them, and in the
Sabbath seek to give themselves unto God; Oh how well pleasing is this? In
Cains sacrifice God took no content, but to Abel and his offering God had
respect, August. de civit. Dei lib. 1. cap. 7.
Genesis 4. Austin renders this reason, Cain gave some sacrifice, but not himself
unto God: Abel offered up himself to God with his sacrifice. O how sweetly does
God accept such in the service of Sabbaths, though in Sabbath-service such
cannot find sweet refreshings from God? Gods face toward them has smiles in
it, although a vail over it.

Though Gods mercy is not perspicuous to them,
Yet their duties are wel-pleasing to God.
Object. Ai but alas, I cannot believe it, and whosoever is not in the faith
cannot please God.

Answ. It is very requisite here to distinguish Between the state of faith, And
the acts of faith.


True, it is not possible a person should please God that is not set into a
state of faith; but God may possibly be pleased with a person that does not
move in some acts of faith. A true Christian, though all the Lords day long, he
has no fiducial acts as are comfortable to himself, yet he does such
obediential acts as are acceptable to God.

5. All those that are faithful in performing upon the Lords day their duty,
though comfortable success Is not sensible for present,
Yet it is certain for future.


It Is the fault of some Christians (as Luther upon Esaias 54. and verse. 7th.
observes) that they will close with nothing, learn nothing, meditate nothing,
hear nothing, see nothing, but what suites with present sense, and according to
what feeling affords. Feeling and sense set aside, faith in the Lord, as well
as obedience to the Lord, especially upon the Lords day, should be drawn out,
so as that what comfort we cannot by sense perceive, we should by faith
believe. Because we suddenly see not our selves successeful in our services,
shall we think God is unfaithful in his promises? In promises God has engaged
himself certainly to reward a good man for all that good seed, which he upon
the Sabbath sowes. Unto him that sows righteousness, shall be a sure reward,
Prove. 11.18. A Christian sincere every Sabbath day, he sowes the seed of joy,
and God will assuredly reward him with the sweetest fruits of joy. And though
he has not comfort in his way, yet he is in the way of comfort. For as God
has bound man to transact Sabbath-duties; so he has bound himself to
vouchsafe Sabbath-mercies. And though upon this day, man's discharged duties may
not leave in his soul the sense of sweet delight; yet Gods engaged mercies,
they lay the sure grounds of sweet delight in his soul. And as none shall
receive the mercies, but who performs the duties: So whoever faithfully
performs the duties, shall assuredly receive the mercies. And the less mercy
good men meet for present, the more is to come. Many men upon the Lords day do
the works of the Devil, yet for present they have no punishment of body, no
perplexity of soul. Ai but there is the more terror and torment to come. So
there are some of Gods Saints most serious in the service of the Sabbath, that
yet have no sensible peace, no soul-satisfying comforts. There is the more
plenty of peace and comforts to come. Christ in the great work of man's
Redemption by his death and sufferings, his soul was in sorrows, yet there was
joy set before him, Heb. 12.2. Looking to Jesus the Author and finisher of our
faith, who for the joy set before him endured the Cross, despised the shame,
and is set down at the right hand of the throne of God. Christians who seek to
sanctify the Sabbath, yet can see nothing but their own sadness and badnesse,
however there is joy set before them, which may support them against all
despondency, and encourage them in the course of their duty. Luke 5.5 6.
Master, (says Simon to our Savior) we have fished all night, and caught
nothing: nevertheless at thy Word we will let down the net. And when they had
this done, they enclosed a great multitude of fishes. Expositors observe, how
they fished in the fittest place to take, Aretious, and Hemingius, and
Maldo^at. in locum.
viz. the deep; the fittest time to take, viz. the night, yea, all night, but
nothing caught; however they go again to work, and afterward even with the same
net, and in the same waters where before they could find nothing, they have a
very great draught, insomuch as their ships were filled with fishes. It is the
sigh, and sad saying of some of Gods Saints, Lord, we have labored all the
day, many days, and yet got no good: in private, in public upon the Sabbath,
time and place probable for soul-peace and profit, yet no success: however let
them seek again the next Sabbath, in the same Ordinances, and by the same
Ministry they may find that which will fill their souls with refreshing
comforts. Abraham when he eyed God, and did not meditate his own oldnesse, nor
the deadness of Sarahs womb, then he had a son born, an Isaac, whose name
signified laughter, joy, joy. O let none of the sons or daughters of Abraham
sit thinking of the late deadness of the Sabbath-womb, how few births have
been brought forth for God upon this day! nor so sit thinking of the badnesse
and barrenesse of their own hearts as to break off, or not to bear up in the
business of this blessed day! Yet Sarah may be fruitful, and an Isaac may be
born; yet the Sabbath may be successful, and their souls joyful. O, brethren,
yet be steadfast, immovable, abiding, and abounding in the Lords work upon the
Lords day, your labor shall not be in vain, 1 Cor. 15.58.

Lastly, for them that have drunk deep of the sweetness of Sabbath-successe,
but now find some bitter drops to fall from thoughts of fear, lest the present
public use of Sabbaths should cease; Let such consider,

1. That if in the Land our public liberties on the Lords Day should be lost,
and the Sabbaths of God be as it were carried into captivity; yet it would not
be long before their return. Touching that great Question, about which are such
various apprehensions, Whether the witnesses or no be as yet slain? should we
determine the negative, yet after their death it is not long before their
resurrection will be, Revel. 11.11. And then dead Ordinances, dead Christians,
dead Sabbaths will be assuredly raised to their primitive life, and luster. O
let me not live to preach the Funeral Sermons of Englands Sabbaths! that would
be a dark day. When as the Lord of the Sabbath dyed, darkness was over all the
Land for some few hours: And should the Sabbath of the Lord die, darkness
might be over all the Land for some few years. Those strange astonishing
turnings which we have seen in our times, whether they tend to the overturning
of the holy times and things of God, God knows. Should we have our deserts, and
some their desires, there would soon be seen a sad sinking of Sabbaths. Should
some succeed in their designs, yet the Day of God might say, as the Church of
God, Mieh. 7.8. Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy: when I fall, I shall
arise, etc. Yea, and it is hopeful it would not be long after its falling,
before it is rising. We are in the last; times, wherein God, as he has great
works to do, so great works he may permit men to do, yet in all he will have
quick dispatches. Should the Gospel-Sabbath, and the Gospel with the Sabbath
be beaten down in England, yet mangre the might and malice of all their
enemies, we have some grounds to hope, it would not be long, before the Lord
lifts them up again. The time for the conversion of the Ancient Jews, and the
subversion of the Antichristian Rome, now draws nigh, for the batteries of
whose external part, God will make use of External Powers. And it appears by
consulting Revel. 17. that these Nations of Europe who have taken part with the
beast, and born her up, shall beat her down. The most Orthodox that I meet,
make England one of those ten horns, which shall hate the whore, and make her
desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire. Now sure
it will be England, beset with Sabbaths that shall send out, and be assistant
in this Service. When Joshuas shall be forth abroad with their armies in the
valleys, many Moses's shall be at home in the mount, especially on the Lords
Day, preaching and praying with hands lifted up unto the most High God: then
shall be the ruin of this Romish Amalek, this day draws near. I think indeed
it is impossible punctually to determine the time of Romes final fall, except
we could be exact in the time of Antichrists first originalls: but certain that
time does apace approach. Therefore should any party acted by the Spirit of
Antichrist, for a time interrupt the Lords Day, and oppress the precious
privileges thereof: yet they shall not long prevail, they shall prove but as
Athanasius said of Julians power, A cloud that will presently pass.

Indeed should Sabbaths fail and fall, in respect of sinful men (as I have
said before) there would be grounds of great fear, that it might be a long time
before God returns them: but in respect of good men, there is and will be good
grounds of hope, God will shorten that sad time: For the Elects sake those
days shall be shortened, Matthew. 24.22. Our Savior there speaks of such a sad
time, as even upon Sabbath Days, there might be such dangers, that men instead
of resting and serving God, they should then be running to preserve themselves,
verse 20. Ai but such a time should not be long. For the Elects sake God would
cut it short; Indeed as the least time of the Lord of the Sabbaths absence: So
the least time of the Sabbath of the Lords hinderance to gracious hearts will
be grievous long. Bernard upon that saying of our Savior. John. 16. Yet a
little while, and ye shall see me: and a little while, and ye shall not see me.
A little while, Lord? (says he) A little while? Thou can not be gone the
least while, but it will be a long time. So the Sabbath cannot cease the
smallest season, but the time to Gods Saints will seem exceeding long: and
therefore that time which in it self and to others would indeed be long, God
for their sake makes it short.

2. There is a possibility, notwithstanding the projects of men and perils we
are in, to preserve with us the present liberties of the Lords Day. But then
let us observe Some things toward the Sabbath of the Lord, And some things
toward the Lord of the Sabbath.


Toward the Sabbath of the Lord, let us labor To advance Sabbath-esteemes,
and To revive Sabbath-decays.


The Sabbath we ought all to consider, in respect Of its worth, And its work.


In its worth, let us rise to higher opinions, and

In its work, let us strive to quicker affections.

1. Let our opinions rise higher in the worth of the day. Indeed with the best,
Gods holy times are of too low esteems; but with the most, Gods glorious Day
is covered with great contempt, buried in the minds of men under the Tombestone
of deep forgetfulness, or under heaps of base and unbeseeming thoughts.
Lamentations 4.2. The precious stones of Zion comparable to fine gold, how
(says the Prophet) are they esteemed as earthen Pitchers, the work of the
hands of the Potter? So (may I say) the precious Sabbaths of God better then
the finest gold, how are they esteemed as ordinary week-dayes, fit only for
the common work of men's laboring hands? But let us estimate this above all
other times and things. Let God and his holy Sabbath have the highest room in
our hearts, and the chief place in the prime of our thoughts. The Jews were
wont to call the whole week by the name of the Sabbath, and to say, Chrysostom.
in 1. Cor. 16. Hom. 43. Hieron. ad Hedibi. Quaest. 4. Theophyl. in Luc. 18.
Lyra. in eundem. Beza in. 1. C. 16. 1. Tremel. in Syriac. Paraphras. Matthew.
28.1. etc.
the first, second, third, etc. Day of or after the Sabbath; and so the Greek
in some texts of the New Testament reads it, as Luke 18.12. Mark 16.2. etc.
This they did, as learned Writers observe,

1. For to discriminate themselves, in calling the days of the week otherwise
then the Gentiles, who called them by the names of their Idols.

2. For to demonstrate the dignity of the Sabbath Day, and that above all the
days of the week it was with them of the greatest account, they had that
reverend esteem thereof, as to denominate the whole week thereby. And ought not
Christians much rather to hold up an high and honorable esteem of the
Gospell-Sabbath, as a more glorious day?

2. Let our affections become quicker in the work of the day. O, how of late
has the Lords day layen a dying, through the dullness, yea, deadness of
Christians in the duties thereof! The way to revive the Sabbaths of God, is to
revive the service of God; and the way to revive the service of God, is to
revive Gods Saints in the service. And if that we would have such
Sabbath-revivings, Therein Let our visions of God be clearer, And our
approaches to God be closer.


1. The clearer upon the Sabbath we can see God, the better will our revivings
be. It is said, Genesis 45. that when Jacob saw the wagons that Joseph his Son
had sent, his spirit within him revived. Did his spirit revive when he saw the
wagons his Son had sent? O what were his revivings of spirit, when he saw his
son who sent the wagons? The Ordinances upon the Lords day, they are the
wagons that for us God has sent, it is some reviving to see them; O but to
see God whence these wagons are, and whose the Ordinances be, how reviving is
that? O, says David to God, that I may see thy power and thy glory, so as I
have seen thee in the Sanctuary, Psalm. 63.2.

2. The closer upon the Sabbath we can draw to God, the better will our
revivings be. We read, 2 King. 13.21. of a dead man, that being let down into
the Sepulcher of Elisha, as soon as he touched the bones of the dead Prophet,
he presently revived: Thus Christians whose hearts are dead, yet coming close
to God in the Sabbath, have sudden soul-revivings, and most comfortable
quicknings. And this is the way to recover the life of the Lords day, and so to
settle the liberties thereof, which at least to some seem to be shaking.
Toward the Lord yet further that his day may endure, let us Keep in the
presence of the Lord, and Keep up prayer to the Lord.


1. The presence of the Lord kept in with us, will hold holy Sabbaths amongst
us. Indeed let the Lord depart, and then the days of grace, and means of grace
will immediately remove. When Christ goes, he calls, Come with me, my Sabbaths,
Ordinances, and all my holy Institutions. Time was, Christ walked in the midst
of the seven golden Candlesticks, Rev. 1.13. That is, those seven once famous
Churches of Asia had the presence of Chirst with them, and the Ordinances of
Christ among them, the Lords day was a known day.

But now the Sabbath of the Gospel, and the Gospel with the Sabbath is gone,
because Christ there was not kept. O, says Martha, Lord, if thou had been
here, my brother had not died: If thou had been present my brother had not
departed. So may those Asian people now say to Christ, Lord if thou had abode
with us, thy holy Times and Things had never been stirred. Matthew. 28.20. Christ
there has promised his presence, even in the use of Ordinances, unto the end
of the world.

The way to retain Christ's presence,
Is to believe his promise.
No hands like faith to lay hold upon Christ. Faith (says Luther) is like the
beloved Disciple, it leans in Christ's bosom, it will not leave him, nor let him
go. Faith it produces A vigorous love, and A virtuous life.


Unto a people both will bind Christ.

2. Prayer to the Lord kept up by us, will hold holy Sabbaths amongst us. In
the land were the Spirit of prayer up, Sabbaths would never go down. Indeed it
will be a hard matter to make Sabbaths stand, if still praying hands fall. O
pray, pray, pray: And in prayer plead with God, To send out more
Sabbath-labourers, and
To bless Laborers more in the Sabbath.


1. Pray, that more may be sent out, who will be faithful in the labors of the
Sabbath, Matthew. 9.37, 38. The harvest is plenteous, but the laborers are few:
pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he will send forth lavourers
into his harvest. Many places in this Land are as fields of ripe Corn; and
alas, how do the Devils, [ those fouls of the air, Math. 13.4.] and wicked men
[ those swine of the earth, Matthew. 7.6.] wholly waste and spoil all, for want
of Sabbath-labouring men, to gather into Gods Barn. In diverse places upon the
Lords day, O what dark doings! people being as a black Lantern without any
Candle. And shall not we pray that God would set up lights, and send out
laborers, that his day may be duly observed; and that we may pre- his day?

2. Pray that those who are sent out may be fruitful in their Sabbath-labour;
that they may see the travels of their souls, and be satisfied: That Gods good
work may prosper in their hands, and their peoples hearts: That every Sabbath
they spend, and every Sermon they preach, may prove as the bow of Jonathan,
which from the Battle never returned empty. There is a precious promise fit in
prayer to be pressed, Esaias 54.10, 11. As the rain comes down, and the showers
from heaven, and returns not thither, but waters the earth, making it bud and
bring forth seed to the sower, and bread to the eater; So (says God) shall my
Word be that goes out of my mouth, it shall not return to me void. O pray we
that neither the Red or the Black horse be harnessed out to the Battle, But
that Christ on the white horse may conquer, Rev. 6. Many souls in the Sabbath
by the Gospel may be gained over to God. This would perpetuate Sabbaths, and
make the Lords day lasting.

Last of all, unto Gods Saints a Sabbath in some sense is sure never to cease.
Gods people Shall either have the Sabbath of the Lord,
Or to them the Lord will be a Sabbath.


Ezekiel. 11.16. Thus says the Lord, I will be to them as a little Sanctuary in
the Countries where they shall come. Gods people in Babylon, when they could
not go to worship God in the great and beautiful Temple at Jerusalem, yet then
God was as a little Temple to them, [And this little Temple was better then the
great.] Thus the Saints of God, when they cannot have the Sabbath that is
present, God will be to them a Sabbath more precious, [God is the best
Sabbath.] 1 Samuel 1.8. Elkanah says to Hannah his Wife, Am not I better to thee
then ten sons? One God better then ten Sabbaths, and twenty Sermons, to the
souls of his Saints. No Sabbath of God, is like [God, a Sabbath;] no
Sabbath-rest like to the rest that is in this Sabbath; no comfort in a Sabbath,
like this Sabbath of comfort. Yea, let Gods sincere Saints live or die, they
have a Sabbath will last, an everlasting Sabbath.

If they live, their Sabbath will be ever with them; and
If they die, they shall be ever with their Sabbath.
Ambros. in Psalm. 119. August. de cavit. Dei, lib. 22. cap. 30.
Some of the Ancients were wont to call that eternal life God gives in heaven
[The great Sabbath] And [That long Sabbath Day, that has no night:] O but then
God himself who in heaven gives life eternal, what a Sabbath is he? O the
height, and depth, breadth and length of this Sabbath!

[Christus] est magnum sempiter-numque Sabbatum, cujus parvum illud [Judaicum]
exemplar; in illo siquidem Sabbato requiescimus, cum in illo solo spem ponimus;
cum hunc toto cordis amore diligimus, etc. Epiphan. lib. 1. Haeres. 30 Greg.
Nyss. de Resurre. Orat. 1.
Yea, I find of the Ancients, who affirm, that to Gods dear Saints in the days
of the Gospel, there is a double enduring Sabbath, viz.

Christ, And a good conscience.
Christ is the great and eternal Sabbath which in the Gospel God has set up,
and in this Sabbath we rest, when we repose our hearts and hopes upon him. This
is an unchangeable Sabbath; Christ the same yesterday, to day, and for ever.

Christ who is The Lord our righteousness, he is the Lord our Sabbath;

So chat we shall have a Sabbath last, as long as Christ lives.

A good conscience, Sabbatum Dei illud quo exterius ^b opere cessasse dicitur,
Sacramentum est interioris Sabati ubimens sancto per bonam conscientiam a
peccato quisc^ns etc. Hugo. Chrysostom. Homil. 17. in Genes. August. Sermon. 10. ad
fratres in Exem.
as it is a continual feast, so a Sabbath of rest, Prove. 15.15. Esaias 57.20. The
wicked are like the troubled Sea., that have no Sabbath of rest. Tell me not,
(says Chrysostom) the man has a sumptuous Table, is clothed mith silks,
attended with servants; shows me his conscience, there is a hurry of lusts, a
tumult of sins. [A continual Sabbath-lesse man.] A good conscience, it is (says
Austin) the bed of God, the Palace of Christ, the Temple of the holy Ghost, the
Paradise of delights, the standing Sabbath of Saints, etc. Let us be faithful
in the Sabbath, that may possibly cease, and then may we be sure of a never
ceasing Sabbath.

In the saddest and most unsettled seasons, when customs are changing, and
Kingdoms are shaking, and all Gods Ordinances seem to be taking their leave in
a Land, yea, when all externals in the world are at worst, yet there is an
internal Sabbath in the heart, and an eternal Sabbath in the heavens, whereof
every Saint may be sure. Sabbatum duplex. Pectoris, et Temporis. Aquinas 12ae.
quest. 100. Art. 5.
Suppose there should be here no more Sabbaths remaining, yet there is a
remaining Sabbath, Heb 4.10. And though the Lords day will end: the Lord
himself will be a never ending day.

THE LORDS DAY Enlivened.
Revel. 1.10. I was in the Spirit on the Lords Day.


THe holy Apostle in the words present plainly reports, The Season upon which
he was set, and The condition into which he was put.


The Season which he was on,] It was the Lords Day.

The condition which he was in,] He was in the Spirit.

I was in the Spirit on the Lords Day.

The Point we are next to prosecute, is,

That it is sensible to some, and possible for all pious men, to be in the
Spirit on the Lords Day.

This Doctrine I shall endeavor To clear, To prove, and To press.


For the clearing of truth, it is fit to unfold,

What is the Spirit in which they may be on the Lords Day, and

What it is for them on the Lords Day to be in the Spirit.

Spirit;] This is to be considered both as it relates, To God, and To Man.


Omnes Nomenis Jehovae literae sunt spirituales, ut denotetur Deum esse
Spiritum. Alsted.
Spirit,] This as unto God, does import,

Either the whole divine Essence,

Or one personal subsistence.

The whole Essence of the Godhead is [Spirit;] As Christ, King, Priest, and
Prophet is one complete Savior: So God, Father, Son, and holy Ghost is one
spiritual being.

And as in the Spirit, they are but one being;

So in their being, they are but one spirit.

Thus God is a Spirit, John 4.24. Thus Spirit is attributed as unto God, 1 Timothy
3.16. 1. Pet. 3.18, etc.

2. The third Person subsisting in the Godhead is [Spirit.] As there is God a
Spirit, So there is the Spirit of God.


Through mighty signs and wonders, by the power of the Spirit of God, Romans
15.19. The things of God knows no man, but the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2.11,
etc. This is called, The Spirit of truth, John. 14.17. The Spirit of life, Romans
8.2. The Spirit of holiness, Romans 1.4. The Holy Ghost, Tit. 3.5.

Spirit,] This as appropriate to man, implies, Either the whole soul of man, Or
the superior faculty of the soul.


1. For the soul wholly in the substance thereof.

As every individual man has his soul,

So the soul of every single man it is his spirit.

Each man is a compound creature, made up of soul and body. Hence men are
compared to Gideons soldiers, Judge. 7.16. Ambros. de Spir. Sa. lib. 1. cap. 16.
Each having his, ^arthen pitcher and Lamp therein: when the earthen pitcher of
man's body is broken by death, the Lamp of his soul abides burning either in
heaven or hell. Thus, Matthew 10.28. Man's soul while in his body is called [his
Spirit.] Isay 26.9. Ex egests. vid. Augustine. in locum, et Ambros. Com. in loc.
With my soul have I desired thee in the night, and with my spirit within me
will I seek thee early. Luke 1.46, 47. Mary said, My soul does magnify the
Lord: and my spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior.

2. [Spirit,] That is the souls superior faculty.

As the soul it is spirit, So there is the spirit of the soul.
Or,

The spirit of the mind, as the Apostle calls it, Romans 12.2. This is the
intellectual, or the knowing power of the soul. Who knows the things of man,
save the spirit of man which is in him? 1. Cor 2.11. Thus, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. the
Apostle mentions body, soul, and spirit. Indeed this is most applicable to man
as born of God, considered

Not only in his proper constitution:

But also in his further restitution.

As the woman in the Gospel who hid her leaven in three measures of meal, till
the whole lump was leavened; Thus the Lord lays his Grace in these three
parts: body, soul, and spirit, till the whole man is sanctified. Now such a
man so spirited, is fit to be in the spirit on the Lords Day. On the Lords Day
in the spirit. [Spirit] it is taken as referring both to God and man. The
Spirit of God, and the spirit of man meeting.

2. What it is for a godly man, on the Lords Day to be in the Spirit. [In the
Spirit,] This notes, Both his souls habitual condition, as settled; And his
souls actual condition, as moved.


1. The soul of a sanctified man according to his settled condition considered,
is [in the spirit,] Being by grace habitually planted, and effectually put into
God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

John. 17.21. That they (says Christ to his Father) may be one in us. [In us]
That they are, not in thee only, nor in me alone, but [in us,] viz. Father,
Son, and holy Spirit. Every gracious soul Rests in God, Abides in Christ, and
Lives in the Spirit.


Bernard.
1. In God there is a resting, Psalm. 37.7. The soul of every true Believer
(says a learned Writer)

Has a double Mansion, One wherein it rules, viz. the body, and The other
wherein it rests, viz. God.


The soul of every Saint is settled in God, as in its center. The force of
some temptation may seem to unsettle his soul, and as it were to separate it
from God, but then as Noah's Dove out of the Ark it finds no rest, back again
it comes. God is its center; and out of God truly it can never be taken. maugre
all the malice of hell.

2. In Christ there is his abiding, John 15.7.

In the heart of Christ, and In the hand of Christ.
As by force none can pluck him from the strength of Christ's hand: So by fraud
none can take him out of the lov of Christ's heart.

In Christ Not only as a man, But as a member.


Not the least bone of Christ's mystical body can be broke off, nor the
smallest stone be struck out of this building. The weakest branch ever abides
in this vine.

3. In the Spirit, there the believing soul lives, Gala. 5.25. If ye live in
the spirit, walk in the spirit. That life by which the souls of Saints live,
Both for its entrance, And its progress,


It is in the Spirit; the Spirit being the Principle, From which their life was
first received, And by which their life is after preserved.


As man is kept alive by his souls being in the body;

So a Saint is kept alive by his souls being in the Spirit.

It is through the Spirit that converted Christians are set into God, and put
into Christ. Therefore sure the holy Spirit does not leave their souls out of
himself, but they are likewise in the Spirit, Romans 8.9. Ye are not in the
flesh, but in the Spirit. In the Spirit thus are not only some, but all the
Saints of God. And in the Spirit thus are Gods servants not only upon the
Sabbath Day, but at all other times; they are never out of the Spirit, nor ever
shall. Yea, in the Spirit thus is the whole man of every good man; The man
whole, if Not the whole man.


The man whole is so in the Spirit, as that he is a spiritual man, Gal. 6.1.
Take him with his bodily part, and about his weekly work, yet he is a spiritual
man, and a man that is in the Spirit.

Now to be in the Spirit on the Lords day, though it is to be in the Spirit
thus; yet it is more then thus, to be on the Lords day in the Spirit.

So in the Spirit signifies the spiritual transactions of man's sanctified soul,
as it is moved and acted by the Spirit of God, and as man's renewed spirit,
through the Spirit of God moves and acts, upon the Lords day exercised in the
Spirit; That is, In the graces of the Spirit, and In the comforts of the Spirit.


1. In the Spirit,] That is in the graces of the Spirit exercised all the Lords
day: then acting in graces Various, and Vigorous.


On the Sabbath the soul is set a work in several graces, and such as seem to
be of a differing nature, as faith, and fear, heavenlinesse of mind, and
humbleness of heart, repeatings for sin, yet relyings on God: Tremblings of
soul, yet restings on Christ. Dreading God in the justness of his Judgments,
yet loving God whose judgments are just: A real longing for promised mercies,
and yet a quiet staying for those mercies long: By hope expecting good things
to come, and yet by faith possessing the same things at present: Utterly
unsatisfied in Gods hiding his face, yet patiently waiting for God while his
face is hid. And though this be the continued posture of gracious souls, yet
into this they are put, and on in this they are kept through
Sabbath-day-quicknings. [In the Spirit.] On this day grace is enlivened in
them, and they lively in grace. In gracious actings their hearts were before as
the Chariots of Pharaoh, that drove heavily: now in the activities of grace
their hearts are as the Chariots of Amminadib that ran swiftly. Before the
members of the new-man were as the lame Cripple that lay at the gate: but then
they became as the cured Cripple, Whose ancle-bones receiving strength, he
stood up, and went on leaping and praising God, Act. 3.8.

Yea, upon the Lords day the soul of a sincere Saint may be in the lively
actings of grace, Both reflect, And direct.


1. Reflect actings;] That soul which in the week-season walks out in and with
the body about the business thereof, upon the Sabbath Day it turns in upon it
self, most seriously considering its own concernments. Gregor. moral. lib. 31.
cap. 17.
An ancient Writer spiritually expounding that place, Prove. 24.27. Prepare thy
work without in the field, and afterward go in, and build thine house.
Understands by the field man's body, and by the house the heart and soul of
man. In the week a man's work more lies in the field, viz. about the business
of his bodily being: but upon the Lords day his work more lies in the house,
viz. the work of the soul is more gathered then within it self. And as Christ's
Spouse-sayes, Cant. 1.7. They have made me to keep other Vineyards, but mine
own Vineyard have I not kept: So upon the Sabbath (says a good man's soul
within him) all the week I have been made to mind a multitude of worldly
affairs, but mine own concernments have been set aside. Now return into thy
self, O my soul: O my soul, now bethink thy self. And is not this to be in the
Spirit upon the Lords day? the soul of a Saint being then seriously set Upon
deep intuitions, and Diligent Inquisitions. Narrowly looking in it self, and
Thoroughly searching of it self.


One of the Ancients compares holy men on the earth, Gregor. moral. li. 19.
Sect. 30.
unto those holy Angels of heaven, Revel. 4.8. that are said to be full of eyes
within and without. In the week Gods Saints make use of their eyes without,
looking after their necessary callings and occasions in the world: but upon the
Sabbath they more solemnly set a work their eyes within, looking inward upon
the true estate of their souls. Upon the Sabbath are a Saints most serious
soul-searches, and heart-discourses: I communed with mine own heart, and my
spirit made diligent search, says David, Psalm. 77.6. Upon the Lords day with
great diligence is the soul of a Saint set, To find out things that are, and To
find up things that were.


Within he finds so much of sin, and so little of God, as makes his heart lie
low, and brings him to be in spirit poor, Matthew 5.3. Blessed are the poor in
spirit. August lib. 1. de Sermon. Do. in monte Ambros. lib. 5. in Luc. cap de
beatit. Basil. in regulis contract. quaest. 205.
Not poor of spirit, as if any without the Spirit of God were blessed; but
poor in spirit, that is, good men poor in the spirit of their own minds, out
of a sight of soul-sins, and sense of soul-wants: or poor in spirit,] That is,
says one, poor for the spirit. Of the spirit they may discern little, but
desire much.

That good they seek after which they never possess;

And that good they seek for which seems to be lost.

The woman in the Parable, Luke 15. having lost a piece of silver, She lights a
candle, and sweeps the house, and seeks diligently till she finds it. O this is
good seeking in the spirit; upon the least loss of God, to go into the house
of the Heart, and there using The candle of knowledge, and The Besome of
Repentance.


Diligently seeking till somewhat more of God may appear. When hearts and hopes
have been down and dead, yet then to look back, and call to mind mercies of
old, tracing the former footsteps of God in their souls, looking up, and
reading over the Lords love letters long since sent, and then comes quickening
life into their hopes and hearts, Psalm. 77.5, 6, 7, 8. Lam. 3.18, 19, 20, 21,
22. And though these gracious actings may be at other times, yet I appeal to
the most experienced Christians, whether they have not found themselves best
bent about such Soule-work upon the Sabbath Day.

2. Direct actings.] Upon the day of the Sabbath the souls of Gods Saints may
be set a work, Onwards toward the People of God, and Upwards toward the God
of his People.


In grace admirably acting toward their Brethren. Both in sufferings
scattered, And in service assembled.


1. Where ever a good man's body be found or fixed, yet in spirit he goes
visiting his fellow servants in prisons, and the foreign Churches of Christ in
all their afflictions. Beza reports of Calvin, That he was so tenderly affected
to Christian Churches remote, as if he had carried them on his shoulders, or
born them in his bosom, often sighing out, Vsque quo Domine, How long Lord?
more lamenting the Churches calamities, then his own adversities. Thus the holy
Apostle, 2 Cor 11.28, 29. Besides those things that are without, viz. several
sad afflictions upon his own body, that which comes upon me daily, (more then
all the rest) the care of all the Churches. Who is weak, and I am not weak? Who
is offended, and I burn not, etc. Yea, and in such Christian compassions to
others in affliction Gods dear Saints are most deep upon that day, wherein they
see their own sweet liberties, privileges, and Gods precious things peaceably
possessed.

2. Where ever a good man's body abides, yet in soul he will be sure at some
place in which Gods People publicly meet for Sabbath-service. David when in
body he was banished, and lay hid in the Land of Hermon, yet he was in spirit
at Jerusalem, and went with good people to the Temple for the service of the
Sabbath. My soul (says he) thirsts for God, for the living God: Oh when
shall I come and appear before God? [viz. In body also.] When I remember these
things I pour out my soul within me; for I had gone with the multitutde, I
went with them to the House of God with the voice of joy, and praise, with a
multitude that kept Holy Day, Psalm. 42.1, 2, 3, 4. The Jews that were bodily
at Babylon, yet in soul they kept their Sabbaths at Jerusalem, Psalm 137.5,
6. Jonah, though his body was in the bottom of the sea, and belly of the Whale,
yet in spirit he was in the Temple at Jerusalem: Then I said, I am cast out of
thy sight, yet I will look again toward thy holy Temple, Jonah 2.4. Though the
body of Saint John was a prisoner at Patmos, an Island as some write near
Africa, yet was he in spirit with the Churches of Christ at Asia, and with
them he kept the Lords Day. When Saint Paul was in body at Philippi, yet in
spirit he was with Gods Saints in their assemblies at Corinth: I verily as
absent in body, yet present in spirit, have judged concerning him that has
done this deed, in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, when (viz. on the Lords
Day) ye are gathered together, and my spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus
Christ, to deliver such a one to Satan, etc. So when he was in body at Rome,
yet in spirit he was with Gods assembled Saints at Colosse. Though (says he) I
am absent from you in the flesh, yet I am with you in the spirit rejoicing to
behold your order, (viz. in their Church Assemblies, etc. Colossians 2.5. But
above all are the souls Sabbath-actings in Grace Godward.

Though the body is then carried out by the soul,

Yet the soul to God is then carried beyond the body.

A man's soul is then so set, as that it incites the body, and the body is so
brought on, that it says to the soul, as Ruth to Naomi, Whither thou go
I Will go, where thou stayest I will stay, thy God shall be my God, and thy
people my people, nothing but death shall part thee and me. As Joseph and Mary
went together to seek Christ: So on the Sabbath soul and body in public and
private go together to serve God. Even upon week-dayes, when the body as Martha
is about worldly and household-businesse, the soul as Mary sits at the feet of
Christ. But upon the Sabbath, when they be both serving of God, yet the soul
does the most and the best work. Body and soul are upon the Sabbath, as those
two Disciples that went out to Christ's Sepulcher, but the soul is as that
Disciple which out-ran his fellow, John. 20.4. It comes quickest in, and
closest up to Christ.

Yea. suppose the heart and mind of a good man may all the week-time be as a
boat that bears upon the ground: yet upon the Sabbath the soul may be set as
a boat upon a strong stream, and goes as a Ship full sail for God; In
meditations of him, And applications to him.


O the admirable meditations this day on God! The mind that in the week has
been as the foot of Jacobs ladder standing upon the earth, upon the Sabbath the
soul has been as the top of that ladder reaching up to heaven in high
thoughts of God. One observes of the Virgin Mary, Hieron. Epist. 17.
when the holy Ghost had over-shadowed her, and that holy thing was conceived
in her womb, she arose and went up into the hill-countrey, Luke 1.39. When the
holy Spirit comes upon the soul of a Saint, and holy thoughts are conceived in
the heart, O how the mind mounts up hill to God in heaven! Such a soule-frame
is most frequent in Sabbath-time.

And O the close applications this day made to God, In prayer, and In praises!


A good Expositor gives this gloss upon what the Apostle does here express,
Vid. Aret. in Locum.
I was in the Spirit; That is, he was in prayer upon the Lords Day.

It is one thing to be at prayer, And another to be in prayer.
There is never a day comes over a good man's head, but he is at prayer;
Bernard. in F^st. Pen-Pentec. Sermon. 1.
but to be in prayer on the Lords Day, that is more. Not only praying by the
Spirit: but in the Spirit of prayer.

Prayer does not only ascend to God from the soul: but the soul it self
ascends to God in prayer.

In prayer wrestling with God, and With God reasoning in prayer.
So that such beams break out, Greg. Orat. de laudib. Basilii.
as make the man's heart burn, and his face shine. It is reported of Basil, that
the Emperor Valence coming in upon him while he was in prayer, he saw such
luster in his face, as struck him with terror that he fell back. Luke 9.29.
And Jesus went up into a Mountain to pray: and as he prayed, the fashion of his
countenance was altered, and his raiment was white and glistering. Thus for a
Saint to be set in Sabbath-Prayer, that his grace is vigorous, and his face is
glorious; This is then to be in the spirit: Yea, upon the Lords Day to be in
the praises of God on high, and in the high praysings of God, As adoring God
for his goodness received from him,
So admiring God for goodness perceived in him.


In such Sabbath-celebrations of God blessed for ever, and of Christ for ever
blessed of God, as to say, Psalm 45.1, 2. My heart is inditing of a good
matter, my tongue is the pen of a ready writer. Thou, O King, art fairer then
the Children of Men, God has blessed thee for ever, etc. Some birds how
sweetly do they sing, when they soar up into the air, and in a sun-shine-day,
sit in trees, upon the highest Twigs! Thus some of Gods Saints upon the
Sabbath Day with hearts meeting, and minds mounting, O the melody that they
make in heavenly Hallelujahs unto God. Of such it may be safely said, they are
in the spirit upon the Lords Day. This will be further unfolded

In that which follows.

In the Spirit;] That is, in the comforts of the Spirit, considered In their
heights, And breadths.


Heights of comfort.] Upon the Sabbath the soul sanctified may be carried in
comforts high, Both for matter, And measure.


The matter of the comforts wherein the soul of a Saint may upon the Sabbath
ascend, is exceeding high. Higher comforts had John in Patmos, then Adam in
Paradise. The Apostle upon the Lords day had comfortable converses with God in
Christ, which our first parents had not in the day of their Innocence; They
rejoiced in God a Creator, But not in Christ a Redeemer.


And they be far lower delights in which the most of men, do since solace
themselves upon the Sabbath Day. Upon Gods holy day men find only their own
pleasure, Esaias 58.13. But Gods Saints can find soul refreshing comforts in
Christ the Lord, upon the Lords day. With delights in the Lord their hearts
leap. Yea, and the measure of their comforts may mount their minds so high upon
this holy day, as to make them to be like Moses upon mount Pisgah, viewing
Canaan flowing with milk and honey. The soul of a sincere Christian upon the
Sabbath may be as it were swimming in a Sea of sweet delights unto the Land of
promise. He whose heart has been as a Boat that could not be got up because of
low water all the week, yet it has been brought up in a high spring-tyde of
spiritual comfort upon the Lords day. Comforts so high that he is ready to sing
with Simeon a Nunc dimittis: Now Lord, let thy servant depart in peace. Now the
man would gladly die, and be gone to God: content never to see his habitation
or relations on earth more, his soul being so fired and filled with joy, upon
Gods holy day, in his house of prayer, Esaias 56.7.

Breadths of comfort.] Upon the Sabbath the pious soul spreads it self in sweet
delights, God having given to a good man for his comfort, as Caleb did to his
Daughter, the upper and the lower springs. A Christian in his lower comforts
the further he goes, the narrower they grow, and the lesser they be: but in his
comforts upward, the higher he rises, the greater are their increases: when he
is most lively let in, they are most largely let and laid out. Sabbath comforts
may be exceeding broad: All things that meet being made into comforts, and.
All things for comforts being made to meet.


Into comforts are made all things that meet the soul of some Saint in the
service of the Sabbath: The crosses of the world are the increases of comfort.
Gods rod and his staff cause comfort, Psalm. 23.4. As sufferings abound,
consolations abound, 2 Cor. 1.3. The more outward troubles, the more inward
triumphs. The Apostle was never so in the Spirit of comforts, as when he was a
prisoner at Patmos. Under his greatest confinements he had his sweetest
enlargements. His every day-afflictions increased his Sabbath-comforts. To his
soul nothing was sad when the Sabbath came. Yea, upon the Lords day a believer
being in the Spirit, the worst evils greaten the best comforts. Sin remitted,
Hell removed, Death vanquished, Devil conquered, do all increase his comforts.
Out of every eater comes meat. He gathers grapes of thorns, and figs of
thistles. Upon Sodom (says Salvian) God rained hell out of heaven. Upon the
Sabbath God to his Saints raises Heaven out of Hell. Hell, Devil, Death, Sin,
Crosses, Curses, all increase their Sabbath-Cordials.

Yea, upon the Sabbath, a gathering of all comforts, considered according To
several sorts, And seasons.


Comforts of differing sorts receive a Sabbath-change: Earthly comforts are
made heavenly, those delights that lie in worldly relations, possessions,
promotions, creature-accomodations and contents, in the Spirit are made
spiritual. As a man in carnal comforts makes all comforts carnal: so a Saint in
spiritual delights makes all delights spiritual. The upper and lower springs
run all into one stream, and upon the Lords day become all as of one kind.
Comforts of differing seasons are brought within the Sabbath-compasse. A
Christians case becomes such, That in Spirit good past is then with him presenr,
And good future he is then present with in Spirit.


Things past come in for comfort at present. Luther reports, that sometimee,
and especially upon a Sacrament-day, the death of Christ was as full and fresh
upon his spirit, as if he were then at mount Calvary, and as if that were the
very day and hour wherein our dear Lord died: Thus a Christian may be so in the
Spirit of comfort upon the Sabbath Day, as if that were the very day when
Christ broke the bars of the grave, flung the stone off the Sepulcher, and rose
again from the dead. Or as if it were the very day when with the holy Apostles
he stood and saw the Lord Christ taken up into heaven, to sit down at the right
hand of God. Now to his comfort he can recall the comforts found in former days
and duties. That very Sabbath his soul comfortably possesses all the Ordinances
of Jesus Chhist. He sees as it were the Lord opening his bowels, his bosom, and
drawing out both breasts of his blessed Word and Sacraments, bidding his soul
suck, and be fully satisfied. And unto things future he comes for his present
comfort. Not only as at a distance a believer may look at heaven, and the
felicities thereof, but his soul in the Spirit of comforts may be so carried
out, as if heaven were already possessed. 'Twas a brave expression of the
Martyr to his cruel tormentors: Work your will upon my weak body, as for my
soul it is in heaven already, and over that Caesar has no power. And as such
may be a Christians case in the day of his sufferings: so may it be in THIS DAY
of his service. Jerome professes that he had sometimes found things so with
himself, Hieron. in lib. de virgin. Seru.
that it seemed to him, as if he had been triumphing among Troops of Angels,
and singing Hallelujahs with the Saints in heaven; Yea, walking arm in arm
with Christ in the Galleries of eternal glory. The Apostle is to this purpose,
2 Cor. 12.2, 3. I know a man in Christ above fourteen years ago, whether in the
body I cannot tell, or out of the body I cannot tell, God knows; such a one
caught up into the third heaven. And I knew such a man, whether in the body or
out of the body I cannot tell, God knows; how he was caught up into Paradise,
and heard unspeakable words, etc. This of the Apostle St. Paul does import the
highest pitch of a persons being in the Spirit. And of such a being in the
Spirit the Apostle St. John does here speak his experience, I was in the Spirit
on the Lords day.

This for Explication.

Now for Confirmation.

Upon the Lords day good men's thus being in the Spirit, See Why it is sensible
to some, and How it is possible to others.


1. Some of Gods Saints are sensibly in the Spirit upon the Sabbath Day.
Indeed, This day is fittest for the Spirits working; yea,
And they are fittest this day for the working of the Spirit.


The Sabbath it is a fit day for the Spirit thus to work: for It Is a day
blessed, Genesis 2.3. and It Is a day sacred, Exodus.. 20.11.


1. The Sabbath being a blessed day, it is fit for the blessed Spirit to be
about his work. [Day blessed;] Note, The blesser of it, and The blessing on it.


The blesser of this Sabbath Day is God; God above all blessed for ever, has
made this day blessed.

As that is cursed which God curses,
So that is blessed which is blessed of God.
The blessing of this Sabbath Day is great.

As God has blessed his Servants above other men,
So he has blessed his Sabbaths above other time.
As Isaac had a blessing for Esau, but no such blessing as had passed upon his
brother Jacob: So God has a blessing for every day, but no such blessing as he
has passed upon his Sabbath. The very blessing of blessings, is the blessing
on the Sabbath: so that well now may the blessed Spirit be about his most
blessed works, this being the most blessed day.

2. The Sabbath being a sacred day, a day sanctified, and made holy, it is meet
for the works of this holy Spirit. The holy Ghost, As he loves to live in holy
persons,
So he loves to move in holy seasons.


And so working, there is Holy, Holy, Holy, Viz. Gods holy Spirit, the work is
by; Gods holy servants, the work is in; Gods holy Sabbath, the work is on.


God has poured out the holy oil upon the head of the Sabbath (as the precious
ointment upon the head of Aaron,) some drops of which may indeed run down upon
the other days. Upon the head of this day God has set the holy Crown, whence
the Ancients well call it, The King of days. The Spirit of God, it is termed a
Kingly, or Princely Spirit, Psalm. 51.12. Uphold me with thy free Spirit. Or, as
the Septuagint reads it, Thy Princely Spirit. The works of Gods Princely
Spirit, are most proper for this Princely day: this high and holy day, it best
suites to the work of the most high and holy Spirit of God. Gods holy Spirit
may (its true) take A sinful subject to work in, And yet a holy Sabbath to work
on.


But his best works in souls sanctified, are most seasonable upon this
sanctified day. Yea, and the holy Spirit being now about his best business,
Both honors the Lord of the Sabbath,
And honors the Sabbath of the Lord.


The Lord is highly honored in the holy Spirits workings; for He brings in
Christ's presence, through his Ordinance;
And he draws up Christ's Ordinance, through his presence.


The presence of Christ is by the Spirit so brought in, and by the Spirit the
Ordinance of Christ is so wrought up, as lifts up the Lords honor high. The
Lord never has so high honor in a Sabbath-Ordinance, as when therein appears
his Sabbath-presence. The holy Spirit by Christ's presence supplies the want of
an Ordinance, and improves the worth of an Ordinance by the presence of Christ.
And by all this is Christ's honor held up, in being the Lord of the Sabbath.

Yea, the Sabbath it self is much honored thereby. Gods people whose hearts
have been made to sparkle and spring through the Spirit of God upon the
Sabbath Day, they esteem the day of the Sabbath, Not only as their resting day,
But rather as their rising day.


A day Not so much for the earthly easing of their bodies, As for the heavenly
actings of their souls.


This day in their hearts they so highly honor, that for it they long, and in
it they labor, and all with delight. O how honorable in the heart of this
Holy Apostle was the Christian Sabbath, having there on been ravished in the
Spirit! He writing to the Churches of Christ, first gives it this high Title,

THE LORDS DAY;

For the honor both of the Lord, and the day.

Upon such accounts, the Holy Ghost may well to choose take up this as a day
most fit for his great and wonderful works.

2 The Sabbath it is the day wherein Gods Saints are most fit for these
wonderful workings in the Spirit. This day they being From the world most
severed, And with themselves best gathered.


1. Upon the Sabbath Gods Saints are most remote from the world, Greg. Moral.
lib: 1.
and so meetest for the Lord, and fittest for intimate converse with God. One
observes, that our Savior being entered into a ship, Mark 4. He commanded his
Disciples to put a little from the shore, but not to lanch out into the deep;
Thus true Christians in the week-time may put the ship of their souls a little
off from the land, removing so far from their worldly affairs, as by and by to
step back into the business of their lawful callings: but on the Sabbath they
put the ship further off from the shore, and lanch out into the deep,
withdrawing themselves quite from their earthly occasions, and applying
themselves wholly to the solemn service of God. Another speaking to the Church
of Christ, does something thus expresse^ himself; O chaste and holy spouse,
Bernard,
Christ thy heavenly Husband that will not all the week crowd in to thee
through a throng of worldly cares, yet upon the Sabbath will give thy soul
most sweet visits. While Zaccheus was among the press of people, he could not
behold Christ; but climbing up into a sycomore-tree, then he saw him: a good
man in the press of his week-day-imployments can get no view of Christ; yet
then the Sabbath Day is as the sycomore-tree, on that he climbes and comes
close to Christ; Then his heart is in the best frame, freest for God, being
furthest from the world.

2. Upon the Sabbath Gods Saints are best brought together, both In Body, And
Mind.


Christians being thus gathered upon the Lords Day, lie in the readiest way for
these high workings of the Spirit. Act. 2.1, 2. And when the day of Pentecost
was fully come, they were all with one accord in one place. And suddenly, etc.

Day of Pentecost:] This fiftieth day (so the word imports) it was the first
day in the week, Vid. Cypri. de Spir. San; (...),
(as the best affirm (even our Lords Day.

They were all;] That is, Basil. de spi. Sancto. ca. 27. August. de temp. Ser.
251.
all the eleven Apostles of Christ, as is plainly expressed, Act. 1.26.

In one place:] In an upper Chamber at Jerusalem, they were all [Bodily]
gathered together.

With one accord;] Their minds were met as well as their bodies. They were all
in one house, with one Heart, waiting for the promises of the Lord.

And suddenly there came;] That is, with all speed the Spirit of God came down
upon them, so as never before, for Manner, and Measure.


The manner,] A sound from heaven as of a rushing mighty wind all about the
house where they were sitting. And there appeared unto them cloven tongues,
like as of fire and sat upon each of them.

The measure,] And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and they spoke
with other tongues, August. Ser. 2 ad fratr. in eremo.
as the Spirit gave them utterance. The Spirit spoke in them, and they spoke in
the Spirit the wonderful works of God; The Spirit was poured in upon them, and
they poured it out in the Spirit. Gods work was wonderful. and thus being upon
the Lords Day gathered, they found such spiritual fierings and fillings. That
evil spirit often assaults the souls of Gods Saints when they are solitary,
single, and severed, Matthew 4.1. But the good Spirit of God descends upon the
souls of his servants met in their solemn assemblies. One well observes, that
the dry bones which the Prophet saw, Ezekiel. 37. the Spirit of God did not
enliven them while they lay scattered in the field: but when the bones came
together, bone to his bone then the Spirit of life came into them, and they
stood up upon their feet, verse, 7, 8, 9. Thus Gods servants, when together they
are upon the Sabbath assembled, then these kindlings, and comfortable
quickenings come. Yea, though their hearts and thoughts were all the week more
scattered about in the world, yet they are better gathered in to the Lord upon
the Sabbath Day. And the souls of Gods people put into such a Sabbath-posture
are most prompt and best prepared for comfortable converse with God in the
Spirit. And in the Spirit on the Lords day some actually are, that so they may
the better, For present receive the mysteries of Faith, and
For future perform the duties of obedience.


Faith,] That the apprehensions of this may hereby be enlarged, and man unto
the Dimensions hereof may hereby be better enabled. By being in the Spirit a
Christian is made more able to reach out unto the lengths, breadths, heights,
and depths of faith, and by believing to find out, and fetch in the vast
Mysteries of God in the Gospel. Gospel Truths veiled, are hereby clearly
revealed, and closely received. Hence St. John came to receive such close and
clear revelations from God, which he could never have reached, had he not on
the Lords day been in the Spirit. His whole Book that is so mysterious to
others, Jerome. epist ad Paulin.
things therein were perspicuous to him. To him therefore several of the
Ancients so apply that, Ambros lib. 3. de Spir. Sancto, cap. 21. August. de
civit. Dei, lib. 20. cap. 17.
Revel. 22.1. And he showed me a pure river of water of life, clear as Crystal,
proceedinding out of the Throne of God, and of the Lamb. Things to him issued
from God, all pure and clear. This made John the Baptist a greater Prophet then
Esaias, or any other before him; things intricate to others, were explicate to
him. Now the Apostle could not have been capable of such clear discoveries, had
he not been first in the Spirit upon the Lords day. Upon the Lords day being in
the Spirit a Christian rides in the Chariot of faith triumphant from earth
[yea, possibly as out of Hell] into Heaven, where he sees those glorious
mysteries of mercy that concerns his souls comfort; yea, and what may be of
singular concernment for the souls of others.

Obedience,] That the several conditions of this may be the better fulfilled,
Both in service, And suffering.


Gods servants by being in the Spirit are abundantly fitted, Both for
Affliction, And Action.


Act. 20.22, 23, 24. And now (says the Apostle) behold, I go bound in the
Spirit to Jerusalem, not knowing the things that shall befall me there, save
that the holy Ghost witnesses in every City, saying, that bonds and
afflictions abide me. But none of these things move me, neither count I my life
dear to my self, so that I may finish my course with joy, and the Ministry
which I have received of the Lord, to testify the Gospel of the Grace of God.
O what a fixed frame of heart had the holy Apostle to honor God, both By
doing, And dying.


He was [bound in the Spirit.] The Spirit that is compared to wind, did now
upon the Apostle blow with such a full gale, that he went as a ship full sail
unto the Port God had appointed. The spirit of this good man did not hang
loose, but was girt up to go through with the work whatever came. The Spirit
hemmed it about, loosened him from all that might any way hinder; but so
gathered up his heart for God and the Gospel, as to further him in his way and
work. One telling a Martyr that it was hard to burn. It is indeed, said he, for
him that has his soul li^ked to his body, as a Theefs foot in his fetters; but
for him that has his soul set above his body it is easy to burn. Kindle fire,
I come, Savior.

Another having put one foot into the flame, steps back, saying, The flesh
shrinks, and says: On earth it is better to burn. The Spirit says, In heaven
it is sweet to shine: The flesh says, will thou shorten thy life? The Spirit
says, It is nothing, nothing to life eternal. The flesh says, Will thou leave
thy friends? The Spirit says, Christ and his Saints society is better, etc.
And so in the power of the Spirit he flings himself into the fiercest flames.
And the souls of Gods Saints may expect such Spiritual supports in the days of
their suffering, who serving God have been in the Spirit on the Lords day. The
truth of all which some have sensibly found.

2. That others of Gods Saints possibly may find their souls thus in the Spirit
on the Lords day. This proved, By the properties of the Lords Spirit toward
them, and
By the properties of their spirits toward the Lord.


As for the Spirit of the Lord toward them, It Is a Spirit enriching, and
ruling.
It Is a Spirit raising, and resting on them.



1. The Spirit enriches the people of God, by imparting to them, What is
precious and excellent, and What is Plenteous and abundant.


The riches of grace, Ephesians. 1.7. which is compared to enriching gold, Revel.
3.18. This in abundance is brought in by the Spirt, 2 Cor. 3.18. An evil spirit
is reported to have brought to some in league with him, Remigi. lib. de Daemo.
pieces in appearance of true gold, but they were never the richer; for when
they went to use them, all turned into whithered leaves; (And so with false
gold of seeming grace does Satan deceive the souls of some.) But the good
Spirit of God brings into the souls of Gods Saints such gold of grace as is of
real and rare use for their great enriching Godward. Men rich in earthly gold
and the ordinary wealth of the world, are able to compass and accomplish
those* things that others cannot. Such as the Spirit of the Lord has largely
enriched with Gospel-gold, O what great things are they enabled to do! O what
fellowships with the Father, converses with the Son, communion with the holy
Ghost are they prepared for! And may not they be in the Spirit on the Lords day?

2. The Spirit he rules the people of God by exercising over them, Both a
Negative, and A Positive power.


A power whereby he holds them off from what he dislikes. They cannot with
others wade into the ways of the world, the Spirit will not let them; they
cannot shift their sails as the wind, change in every turn of times. And though
(as Nazianzen said of Athanasius) they be as loadstones to draw others in to
God; yet they are as Adamants that will not warp wind, bend, or break, or
shrink from God. The Spirit of the Lord will not let them; they cannot, they
care not: yea, the Spirit may keep them from something which may seem good to
them, because of some greater good in the sight of God. When Saint Paul was
going to preach the Word at Asia, the Holy Ghost forbade him; and being about
to go to Bithynia, the Spirit suffered him not, Act. 16. And a power the Spirit
does daily exercise over the People of God, to lead them on to what the Lord
requires, Romans 8.14. Gala. 5.18. Ezechiel the Prophet saw four wheels which
were sometimes carried on upon the earth, and sometimes lifted up above the
earth, according as the spirit of the living creature moved that was in the
wheels; Thus the Souls of Gods Saints are set a going, sometimes they rise
higher, and sometimes they run swifter as the Spirit of the living God leads
that is in their hearts. Good men, The Spirit leads them, they may not be at a
loss: yea,
And when they are at a loss, yet the Spirit leads them.


August. de cor. et gra. Cap 2. Id. de Great. et lib. Arb. Cap. 1.
God led the people of Israel through the wilderness, not only by a pillar of
fire, but by a pillar of the cloud, Nehem. 9.19. The Spirit leads Gods people
through the world as a fire that gives them light, that so they may not lose
their way: sometimes there is such a cloud, they cannot see their way: yet then
the Spirit leads them, and when they are at a loss, it is that voice behind
them, saying, This is the way, walk in it, Esaias 30.21. Now they that are thus
under the daily conduct of the Spirit, may not they be in the Spirit on the
Lords Day?

3. The Spirit raises the people of God, lifts up a good man being down,
through amazing meditations

Either of God in the Heights of his Majesty.

Or of himself in the depths of his Misery,

When the Prophet was fallen upon his face through affrighting thoughts at the
glorious presence of God in a vision, Then the Spirit entered into him, and set
him upon his feet, Ezekiel. 2.2. Ezekiel. 3.24. The usual cause of a Christians
casting down is the sad apprehensions of his several sins: so that he seems
to himself as if his soul were sinking into the depths of hell, then the Spirit
helps him up, By recalling former mercies, and By revealing further Mysteries.


The Spirit recalls, or causes a Christian to remember

The promises of mercy the Lord has made, and

The experiences of mercy himself has found.

John 14.26. The Spirit shall bring all things to your remembrance, viz. The
gracious sayings and glorious doings of God in days past are drawn a fresh
into the thoughts of dejected Saints. The Spirit reveals, or makes such
mysteries of mercy manifest as were not before known, Ephesians. 1.17, 18. That God
the Father of glory may give you the Spirit of wisdom and revelation in the
knowledge of him: That the eyes of your understanding being enlightened, ye may
know what is the hope of his calling, etc Thus the Spirit pulls up poor Saints
pitifully plunged: Being down, Either in sins, Or in sorrows,
The Spirit raises.


Saints in their sad relapses have sweet illapses, the Spirit letting in such
light and heat as heaves up their hearts, dark, down and dead. They who in
ordinary days may have such experiences of Spirit-helps, may not they be in
the Spirit on the Lords Day?

4. The Spirit rests upon the People of God; so the Apostle expresses it, 1 Pet
4.14. This imports The Spirits Presence Both intimate, And pertuate
With the people of God


They have the friendly and familiar presence of the Spirit in close
acquaintance, Communions and Communications, as is not to any other men. They
have the presence of the Spirit in his continued workings, Without
Intermission, and Without Termination.


The Spirit within them does never intermit all his actings. Though he is in
the soul as the pulse in the arm, that does not always beat with the same
sensible strength, and evennesse (Motions may to a good man's feeling be more
weak and low;) yet even in such distempers he is still stirring.

As when the body of a man is asleep, yet there in the soul is acting:

So when the soul of a Saint is asleep, yet there in the Spirit is working.

Neither can any period possibly be put to such an operative presence of the
Spirit in the People of God. The gracious soul is on earth as the Spirits
center, the settled presence here of is not in any other soul. The Spirit of
Noah's Dove hovers over the hearts of earthly men: but a holy and humble heart
is to the Spirit as Noah's Ark to the Dove; there he rests. John. 14.16. I
(says Chrsst) will pray the Father, and he shall send you another Comforter,
even the Spirit of truth, and he shall abide with you for ever. Your bodies
have had my corporal presence for a time, but in your souls the presence of
my Spirit shall remain for ever. Now they that have in them such a perpetual
presence of the Spirit, may not they be in the Spirit upon the Lords Day?

2. We shall consider their spirits toward the Lord, For suitableness, And
capablenesse. For the pliablenesse, and Indefatigableness of them.


1. Suitable are the spirits of Saints to the Lord Christ. Christ and the
things of Christ, and the spirit of a Saint so suite,

That his Spirit has only a sympathy with them,

And they only can satisfy his Spirit.

The sympathy of a good man's spirit is with the things of Christ. His heart
has a kind of Antipathy to things of an other nature, Even the things of the
world his Spirit opposes, refuses, rises, if of them any tenders be to take him
off from Christ. When Valence the Emperor sent to Basil the offer of great
preferments, the good man's spirit was up in an anger, and made this answer, Let
him offer these ratles to children, and not to Christians. When some bade stop
Luthers mouth with preferments, one of his Adversaries answered, It is no boot,
that Germane Beast cares not for gold. God himself (says Luther) shall not put
me off with these things. Hooper when one offered him a pardon for life if he
would recant, he cried out, If you love my soul, away with it: For Gods sake
away, away with it: But to such men the things of Christ, truths of Christ,
ways of Christ, Words of Christ, Commands of Christ do accord.

And herein also are the Spirits of Gods Saints satisfied. How was it with that
holy man who replied to his friend, Speak to me while you will, no words can
satisfy me except you mention Christ. Write to me what you please, it will not
satisfy me, unless in your letters I may read Christ. Give me never so much I
cannot be satisfied, except you help me to somewhat of Christ. Christ and the
things of Christ were only things that satisfied the spirit of this precious
man. Suitable things are ready to run into one another, to mix, and hold fast
together. This made Nebuchadnezzars Image to fall asunder: because it was made
up of such unsuitable matter, things of such a differing nature. This makes
famous professors to fall, and diverse to desert Christ; because the things of
Christ do not suite to their spirits. The spirits of sincere Saints are
agreeable to gracious objects, the very frame of their hearts is fitted to the
ways of truth and holiness. Among good things, with that which is best their
spirits best agree. The more holy and pure any person or Ordinance is, the
better there with their spirits accord. The new nature and settled temper of
their spirits is most suitable to the Lord himself, and may not they be in the
Spirit upon the Lords Day?

2. Capable are the spirits of Gods servants to take in of the Lord largely.

Their hearts are compared to Vialls, Revel. 5.8. A Vial is a vessel narrow
beneath, and wide above. The hearts and spirits of good men are more closed
downward, and more open upward: Of enlarged capacities Christward. And though
of Christ's fullness they have already received grace for grace, yet there is
room to receive more. In these two we may comfortably conclude, there is room,
viz.

Gods glorious heaven, and Man's gracious heart.
As God in his heaven has more room for good men: So good men in their hearts
have more room for God.

Holy men's spirits are let out, and their hearts made wide, By Godly sorrows
for sin, and By earnest desires for God.


By Godly sorrows Christians cast out sin, Beata anima quae est instardomus
Jacobi in qua nulla simula^hra, nulla effigies vanitatis. Amb. de fuga secu^
cap. 5.
and so make more room for Christ in their hearts. Hence the heart of a holy
man is made as the house of Jacob, in which is no place allowed for the least
representation of vanity; the very images of evil thoughts are thrown out, and
the whole house is set apart for the precious things of God; and the more
plenty of these appearing, the more he labors heart-enlargement. As the rich
man, Luke 12. when he saw plenty of Corn upon the ground, he pulls down his
barns, and builds greater, that he may have more room to receive in such
fruits: Thus a Godly man by repentance pulls down his heart, he sees it is too
narrow for the vast things of God, and thereupon labors to make his heart as
capacious as possible. And by every penitential breaking, builds it better. By
earnest desires also after God he brings his heart into a better and bigger
capacity. O whom, Lord, have I in heaven but thee, and who on earth do I desire
besides thee? Psalm. 73. Yea, for Sabbath-enjoyments of God, the Spirit of a
pious man pants, Psalm. 42.1, 2. He even faints for more full fellowships and
fruitions of God. As against sin he thinks his heart can never be close enough
shut: So for God he thinks his heart can never be wide enough open. Of sin he
would fain have less, when he has least: and when he has most of God, he yet
desires more. And by such ways the soul of a Saint is set wider for God, and
thus the spirits of Christians become more capable to take in more largely the
things of the Lord; and may not they then be in the Spirit on the Lords day?

3. Pliable are the spirits of Gods people for the Lord to let out themselves
freely. Their hearts toward the Lord are waxy and willing in all ways of
well-pleasing, Judge. 5.9. Psalm. 110.3.

Being oyled with an holy Unction,
And wheeled with holy affections.
The oil of grace is poured upon the hidden man of the heart, which makes all
the spiritual members of the new man to be agil and nimble for God. As it is
said to Christ, Heb. 1.9. God, even thy God, has anointed thee with the oil of
gladness above thy fellows: So may we say to the soul of a Saint, God, even
thy God, has anointed thee with the oil of grace and goodness above thy
fellows. The heart it is first and most sanctified, and therefore may well be
most free and forward for God. In man no marvel the sensitive powers and
corporal parts are less pliable. As the ointment was first and most poured
upon the head of Aaron, and from thence drops went down to his beard and skirts
of his garments. Thus the oil of grace is primarily and principally upon the
heart of a Christian and from thence it descends into all the powers and parts
of the man, so that this has cause to come in first, and come off freest for
God, as indeed it daily does. When other parts rest, the heart runs. Yea, the
heart of a holy man is set upon such wheels, as make it move quick for Christ;
Judgment cleared, affections fired, 1 Chronicles. 29.3. I have (says David) set my
affection to the house of my God, and hence he was so lively and liberal,
laboring to lift up the honor of God in preparing for him a house. The
dispositions and affections in the soul of a Saint are such, as that his heart
is prompt and prepared for every precept, purpose and providence: O God, my
heart is prepared, my heart is prepared (says David.) One observes how he
doubles the expression, to imply he was willing to a differing condition.
Paratum cor meum ad prospera, paratum ad adversa, paratum ad sublimia, paratum
ad humilia, paratum ad universa quae preceperis, etc. Bern. Ser. 2. de
quadrages.
If God would have him high or low, rich or poor, a shepherd again, or a Prince
still: His heart was prepared, prepared. Thus is it with a pious man, his heart
is prepared to put on after God in any condition, his Spirit is upon such
wheels of love to the Lord, that he is often carried out beyond and before he is
aware. Cant. 6.12. Or ever I was aware my soul made me as the Chariots of
Amminadib. The spirit of the Spouse did unexpectedly rise and run out after
Christ, as a Chariot upon the wheels. And are the spirits of Gods Saints set
into such a frame for the Lord, and may not they be in the Spirit on the Lords
day?

4. Indefatigable are the spirits of Gods people in following the Lord. In Gods
worship their spirits are unwearied, when their bodies are weakened. Their
spirits may be weary in, but are never weary of any worship of God, or any work
for God in his worship; their hearts and minds Being pitched down, And girt up
for God.


The heart of a holy man is pitched down, and firmly resolved for God, his mind
does not fluctuate, hover, and waver in unsettled uncertainties, he is not upon
demurs and disputes, confers not with flesh and blood. Baron. An. 261. number. 30.
Cyprian that blessed Martyr, when the Governor bad him advise with himself:
answered, Sir do your office; in a righteous cause I am not now to resolve. A
man of a wavering spirit is soon wearied out, and wrought off from God. A good
man indeed his heart is fixed for God; though he be not fixed firmly in the
ways of God: yet for the ways of God he is firmly fixed. Though he has some
doubtings in his way, yet he has not doubtings of his way, and so walks on
unweariedly. His heart will not be tired, or turned out. Yea, the heart of a
holy man is girt up, and closely united to God, his mind is not divided between
the Lord and the world. Frederick the Elector of Saxony, who was a prisoner to
Charles the fifth, being offered liberty and dignity if he would come to Mass:
answered, I have but one Master, one soul, and one Savior: I dare not serve
two. A man of a double heart, that halts between God and Baal, God and Mammon,
never holds out. He may seem for a while to outrun many, but he will be weary.
A gracious man his spirit is not only for God gathered in one: but it is so
knit up as to be one with God, 1 Cor. 6.17. He that is joined to the Lord, is
one Spirit: and hence he holds out to the end: never weary. And they who in the
ways of the Lord are of such unwearied spirits, may not they be in the Spirit
on the Lords day? There is none of Gods Servants, but possibly now may be as
some of the servants of God cettainly have been, upon the Lords day in the
Spirit.

I was in the Spirit upon the Lords day.

The USE IS, Of Information. Of Exhortation.


1. This may clearly declare the ill case of two kinds of men, neither of which
are in the Spirit on the Lords day.

Some that are not, nor possibly can; Some that p^ssibly may, yet are not.
1. It Is the sad case of all unsanctified men, they neither are, nor possibly
can be upon the Lords day in the Spirit. This will plainly appear, considering
Both what they be, And what they do.


Men remaining in a sinful estate, we may observe what they be, Both
privatively, And positively.


Privatively,] They cannot be in the Spirit on the Lords day, because They be
without the Spirit of the Lord,
And toward the Lord they be without spirit.


1. As men in natures estate are without God, and without Christ, Ephesians. 2.12.
so they are without the holy Spirit, Romans 8.9. Jude 19. As when man was to be
created, the three Persons they all concur Let us make man, Genesis 1.26. And no
sooner is man corrupted, but they all conclude with a Let us leave man. So that
every sinful man is forsaken of God the Father, Son and holy Ghost. Such men be
without Gods holy and blessed Spirit, whether we consider Some more profane,
Others more refined.


Men that express nothing but vice and vanity, sons of Belial, chief servants
to the Devil, such as do that for the Devil as he cannot do for himself. Satan
himself, because of spiritual being, cannot commit many sins. But men that
herein they may fulfill his will, they run into drunkenness, and all kind of
corporal uncleanness; they swear and curse, steal and commit adultery, and
wallow in all worldly filthiness, and have they the Spirit of holiness? Men
whose mouths are as that Gate of Jerusalem, out at which was carried forth all
the filth of the City, Their throats are as open Sepulchers, their tongues are
set on fire of hell, and have they the holy Spirit of God in their hearts?

Other men there are who profess better. They speak high, but live low. Their
voice is Jacobs, but their hands are Esaus. Like Peter's fish that had silver in
the mouth, but none in the belly. Nothing of the spirit appears in their ways,
yet much of the Spirit may be heard in their words. As if the Dove were in
their Arks only, and none had the Spirit of God but they. Thus Muncer the
Anabaptist, while he called Luther a spiritlesse man, a silly soul, one
without the Spirit of God, he pretended himself to be all full of the Spirit,
etc. Men may think they have the Spirit; yet not have the Spirit which they
think. And indeed, whatever any unregenerate man think, they all are without
the good Spirit of God. They cannot have the Spirit, who are not born of the
Spirit; and they who never yet all their days were born of the spirit, they
cannot be in the Spirit on the Lords Day. On the Lords Day a man may not be in
the Spirit, that yet every day dwells the Spirit in him: And can they be on the
Lords Day in the Spirit of God, who to this day have not Gods in-dwelling
Spirit in them?

2. Such men Godward are without spirit. As Absalom stole away the peoples
hearts from David: So sin and Satan has enticed and taken away all these men's
hearts from God, Hose. 4.11. Or else the world has so won upon them, that
their hearts and spirits are gone Godward. The Queen of Sheba when she was at
King Solomon's Court, and saw the house he had built, and the meat of his table,
and the sitting of his servants, and the attendance of his Ministers, and their
apparel, and his cupbearers, and his ascent, etc. There was no more spirit in
her, 1. King. 10.4, 5. Thus the honors, pleasures and profits of the world do
so work upon the hearts of many, that they have no more spirit left in them.

Without Spirit,] That is, Without judgment to know, and Without courage to
do the will of God.


Without judgment to discern good, Hose 7.11. Ephraim is a silly Dove, without
heart. Gods Saints are as Innocent doves, without gall; and others are as silly
doves, without heart, without any wisdom of spirit. The spirit of man (says
Solomon) is the candle of the Lord. Many a man is a dark Lanthorn without a
candle, having in him no knowing spirit to give him light, he gropes after God
in the dark, Act. 17.23. So without courage to pursue any saving good, or
withstand any destructive evil, when they should stand up in Gods cause, and
souls defense, they have no spirit. Joshua. 5.1. When the Kings of the
Amorites, and all the Kings of the Canaanites heard that the Lord had dried up
the waters of Jordan from before the Children of Israel; so that they were
passed over, their hearts m^l^ed, neither was there spirit in them any more. We
se^ several men,

Who though set in a superior station,

And though of Christ they make a visible profession:

Yet if any difficulty appear, or danger approach, they have no spirit for God
is or good, only their care is to secure themselves. The King of Navarre, when
Beza blamed him for his spiritlessenesse in the cause of Christ, he replied,
That for Christian religion he would lanch no further to sea, then if a storm
did arise, he might be sure himself to return safe to shore. Men who thus
toward the Lord are without spirit, they cannot be in the Spirit on the Lords
Day.

Positively;] It is not possible such persons on the Lords Day should be in the
Spirit: Because [In the flesh.]
They be in the flesh which is evil. And they be in an Evil Spirit,


Flesh,] It is in several Texts taken for that which is lawful and good,
Psalm 79.2. Ephesians. 5.13. Romans 9.3. 1. Cor. 7.18. But [Flesh] ordinarily
intimates that which is evil and naught, as man's natural corruption and
sinful condition 1. Cor. 5.5. Coloss. 2.13. Gala. 5.24. 1 Pet. 4.6, etc. In
this flesh are all unregenerate men, Romans 7.5. Romans 8.8. Not only (flesh) in
them, that is the case of the best Christians, Romans 7.18. but in the flesh, as
a fish in the water. Not only sin in them, but they in sin, as the Leviathan
in the Sea; In sin they sport and take delight. They live in sin, and yet are
dead in sin. Sin is as the Sepulcher in which they lie dead and buried, they
lie in sin as a swine in the slow. They are in sin as a Malefactor in his
fetters, in the Gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity, Act. 8.23.
They are so in sin, as they are nothing but sin: so in the flesh, that they are
all, and only flesh. We may say of such men's persons, prayers, services, hopes
and hearts, as the Prophet of the Egyptian horses, they are flesh, and not
spirit, Isay. 31.3. These therefore cannot be in the Spirit on the Lords Day.

Their fixed condition is in the flesh.

Yea, on the Lords Day they cannot be in this good Spirit of God. For, They
have an evil spirit in them, And they are in an evil spirit.


An evil spirit is in them, Ephesians. 2 2. The spirit that now works in the
children of disobedience. The Greek has two [in's] The Spirit does inwork in
them: to signify how exceeding inward Satan that evil spirit is at work in
wicked men, Every sinful soul is such an Ark, wherein is the Raven, though
not the Dove; the Devil, though not the Spirit of God. Though in them is not
the Holy Spirit, yet the unclean spirit is in them, Matthew. 12.44. The unclean
spirit says, I will return into my house. [The Devils house is every evil
heart. We see there the house may be [swept and garnisht,] yet the Devils
swept.] A man may be free from some gross pollutions, horrid thoughts of
Atheism, Blasphemy, Butchery of the Lords Lambs may be thrown out of the heart.

Garnished,] A man may be furnished with gifts, parts, performances a fair
outward profession, some flashes of good affection; yet he may be the house
wherein the Devil dwells, Jam. 4.5. Do ye think the Scripture says in vain, The
spirit that dwells in us lusts to envy? He speaks of [us] as men, not of [us]
as Saints. In all men naturally the evil spirit dwells. A spirit that moves to
all lusts of envy, hypocrisy, pride, infidelity, sensuality. Can they who have
such an evil spirit in them, be in the Spirit on the Lords day?

Yea, but this is worse, they are in an evil spirit, Mark 1.23. And there was a
man with an unclean spirit. In an unclean spirit, the Greek reads it. So, Mark
5.2. When Jesus was come out of the ship, there met him a man in an unclean
spirit. Every sinful man is in Satan as in a Prison, in the Devil as in a
Dungeon. In the power of the Devil, Act. 26.18. In the snare of the Devil, 2 Timothy 2.26. In the mouth of the Devil, as Jonah in the belly of the Whale. Yea,
sinful men they are strongly acted, and they do strangely act in this evil
spirit, and therefore they cannot be in any spirit that is good, upon the LORDS
DAY.

2. Such cannot be on the Lords day in the Spirit, appears by what they daily
do, Both in respect of their own spirits Godward,
And in respect of the Spirit of God.


They cannot be in the Spirit on the Lords day, For They draw their spirits
from the Lord,
And against the Lord they turn their spirits.


1. From the Lord they withdraw their spirirs. Whereas Gods dear Saints, when
their bodies are brought into bonds, or are bound upon their beds; yet then
they in holy worships engage their hearts to approach near to God, Jer. 30.21.
But other men when in outward worships their bodies be brought in to God, yet
then they remove their hearts far off from God, Esaias 29.13. A good man watches
his heart, to hold it in to God; he does not slip away his heart from God,
though while he is with God his heart may give him the slip. This made a holy
man in the midst of prayer cry out, O Lord, August. in 2 Samuel 7.^7.
my heart has left both thee and me: But every sinful man, he takes his heart
off, and turns it away from God. As the Levite, Judge. 19 divided his Concubine,
and sent her several parts into all the coasts of Israel: thus many a man when
he should bring in his heart, and knit it up for God, he divides it, and sends
it into all the parts of the world, leaving none for God. True Christians,
though God makes them suffer, yet their hearts stick to God: All this is com
upon us, yet our heart is not turned back, though thou have sore broken us,
etc. Psalm. 44.17. yea, when Satan makes them sin, yet their hearts hold to God.
It Is said of Peter, his heart did not forsake Christ, when his tongue denied
him. Cord tenuit illum quem voce negavit. Greg.
But these men when they do not outwardly sin, yet in heart they go away from
God. They do not only in heart fall back, but they draw back their hearts from
God, Heb. 10.38. Now they that thus daily draw back their spirits from God,
they cannot be in the Spirit on the Lords day.

2. Against the Lord they turn their spirits. The spirits of all unconverted
are turned against God, Both by Original corruption, And by actual rebellion.


Romans 8.7. The carnal mind is enmity against God. It Is more then if he had
said: The carnal man is an enemy to God. The mind] the best part of corrupt
man; is enmity] which notes monstrous malevolence. The Greek word is in the
plural [Enmities,] To import multiplied perverseness. As there are many
excellencies in God for man: so there are many enmities in man against God.
Enmities against all the Attributes of God. Enmities against all the Ordinances
of God. Enmities against all the actings of God in the world. The spirit of man
from his birth is bitterly bent, and utterly turned against God. But further
every man does act up his spirit in rebellion against God blessed for ever.
Turns his spirit against God. This Eliphas does falsely charge upon that good
man Job, 15.13. But this charge may truly be drawn up against every evil man,
he turns his spirit, and makes his mind to swell against God. The least risings
of spirit against God, a good man groans under and grieves for. Hieron. epest.
32. ad Abiga.
There is nothing (once said a precious man) that I have all my life more
labored against, then a swelling mind, a stiff neck, and a stubborn heart. A
wicked man he hardens his heart, stiffens his neck, and turns his spirit
against God. He heightens his inward corruption, and becomes a hearty enemy
against God by thoughts, words, and deeds, Col 1.21. Or if there be outward
restraints from evil works; yet his spirit is turned against God. The
impenitent thief when his body was nailed to the Cross, yet his spirit was
turned against Christ. A man's body may be bound from sin, and yet his heart
bent against God. The bow of the bad heart may be bent up, though no arrows of
evil works or words be shot out. Peter Martyr in Genes.
A Learned Writer makes the Rainbow in the heavens an admirable Emblem of
peace, For though (says he) we see a bow, yet we see no string or arrow. An
unregenerate man's heart is a bow that has both strings and arrows. The strings
of the bow, are the corruptions and ill dispositions of the heart, and the
arrows are the evil cogitations and thoughts thereof. A multitude of these
arrows a man lets fly in the face of God, which argues the acted enmity of his
heart against God; he is at heartwarre with, his spirit is bent against the
Lord: such cannot be in the Spirit on the Lords day.

Lastly, on the Lords day these cannot be in the Spirit; For The gifts of the
Spirit they abuse, and The grace of the Spirit they oppose.


1. The Spirit of God in the gifts thereof they pervert. The Holy Ghost helps
them to knowledge, remembrance, utterance, etc. These they take and turn them
to a wrong use. As the Israleites, who took their earrings, jewels, and
bracelets of gold, and therewith made an Idol. As the Devil he has large
knowledge, and great abilities, but of all he makes an ill use: so it is his
design upon sinful men that whatever good things God gives them for his
praise, and their profit, may be employed to their harm, and Gods dishonor.
As Eve whom God gave to Adam for his meetest help, was made the Engine of his
greatest hurt: Of this rib (says one) the devil made a dart, and wounded man
to death with that should have sweetened his life. Basil:
Diverse act the Devils part: they take things given them for their chiefest
good, and turn them to the greatest evil. Co^rruptio optimi pessimi.
As the devils could never have been such vile and venomous spirits as they
are, had they not once had excellencies above other creatures; And so there are
several that could never have been so transcendently sinful in prodigious
opinions and practices as now they be, had they not had rare parts, and
admirable abilities above their Brethren. And can we think that they who thus
abuse the gifts of the Spirit, should be in the Spirit on the Lords Day?

2. The Spirit of God in the graces thereof they resist, Act. 7.51. Ye
stifnecked, and uncircumcised in heart and cares, ye do always resist the H^ly
Ghost; viz. in all his gracious workings. Men who make provision for the flesh
to fulfill the lusts thereof, they make opposition against the Spirit, and
withstand the works thereof. And though as with bellows they blow up the
Devils fire; yet as with buckets of filth they quench out the sparks of the
Spirit. As when the Angels were entered into Lots house, the men of Sodom from
every quarter compassed the house by force and fury to fetch them forth Genes.
19.3. Thus when any good motions enter into the hearts and minds of some men,
they are up in arms, and out of quiet, till they can crush them, and cast them
forth. How often do they (in effect) say to the Spirit, as Pharaoh to Moses. Get
thee from me, see my face no more, till at length the Spirit replies to them,
as Moses to Pharaoh, Be it as thou-hast said: Lo, I will see thy face no more
for ever, Exodus 10.28.29.

Some when they are in soul affrighted, they would have the peace of the
Spirit to calm them: but though they are in sin polluted, they will not have
the grace of the Spirit to cleanse them. And because they regard not the grace
of the Spirit, they resist the Spirit of grace. And can such be in the Spirit
upon the Lords Day? Indeed the Lords Day is the main time they thus gainsay the
Spirit of God, upon the Sabbath Day they most beat back Gods blessed Spirit,
and can they this day be in the Spirit?

Object. Upon the day of the Sabbath sure some sinful men meet with Spiritual
movings: and therefore they may this day be in the Spirit.

Answer, By way of concession, and By way of distinction.


Upon the Lords day, as at other times, men may by a false spirit be forcibly
moved, and have strong impulses, strange raptures and revelations from a lying
spirit. As the Devil can transform himself into an Angel of Light: so he can
conform himself to the Spirit of Light. And as Satan can in shape assume the
body of man; so he can in show assimulate the Spirit of God. 1 John 4.1.
Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits, whether they are of God
or no. Whence we note, 1. That there are spirits which pretend to be of God and
are not. 2. That such mere pretending spirits may much resemble the true
Spirit of God. 3. That their resemblance may proceed so far, that professing
Christians may be prone to believe they are the very Spirit of God. 4. That
such spirits may not be believed, a discovery of them is to be made by trial.
5. That the trial to discover spirits to be not of God, must be exact and
prudent. Try the spirits, viz. as skillful Lapidaries do their stones, or as
wise Goldsmiths do their mettalls, by touch and weight, as the word imports.
Now that men may so try, as to discern whether upon the Sabbath, as at other
seasons, they are moved by the Spirit of God; Be it known, that

The Spirit which is, Swelling, Smiting, Roving, It Is not ^he Spirit of God.
Renting, Ranting.
Driving,


1. A swelling spirit, that puff^ men up with pride is not the Spirit of God.
One of the chief lessons taught by Gods holy Spirit, is humility of heart.

And upon this account Gods Spirit suggests to a man, His Iniquity, and His
mortality.


When man's heart begins to swell, the Spirit of God puts in. Berna. August.
Sermon. 21.
Christ was humble, yet without sin, and shall a sinner be proud? What? thou
proud, dust and ashes? For pride God plunged Angels out of heaven, and will he
spare thee a rotten creature, a worm that must die tomorrow? Swelling in heaven
Angels sunk, and shall thou proud upon a dunghill pass unpunished?

Ambros. lib. de viduis.
As Christ (says a good Author) cured the blindness of the man by putting
clay upon his eyes, so the Spirit of Christ cures the swelling pride of man's
heart by putting thoughts into his mind of his mortal and dying condition.
That while he lives he is but a piece of warm clay. That is, the Spirit of God
which as it enlarges a man's abilities, it increases the man's humility. As
Nazianzene said of Athanasius. He was high in worth, and humble in heart. Of
such instances the Holy Scriptures are full: But some their souls are swelled
with pride, as Simon Magus, who gave out that himself was some great one Act.
8.9. Such a one was Muncer the Anabaptist in Germany as Sleiden reports his
proud pranks, and bragging boasts; such a one is that man of sin, who exalts
himself above all that is called God, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. The Spirit of God it is not
that moves these men.

2. A smiting spirit, that makes men clamorous and contentious is not the
Spirit of God; Chrysostom. homil. ad Pop. Ant. 36. et 51.
the Spirit of God it makes men peaceable, pitiful. To act pity and show
mercy (says a good man) is a more glorious work then to raise the dead, or to
build temples for God. Yet this lesson men learn through the help of Gods holy
Spirit. A meek and a quiet spirit. Such a spirit acted in Abraham, Genes. 13.8.
And Abraham said to Lot, let there be no strife, I pray thee, between me and
thee, or between my herdmen and thy herd-men, for we are Brethren. Is not the
whole land before thee? take either the right hand or the left, etc. Abraham
said [though he were the Elder and Superior, Let there be no strife.] His
spirit did so incline to peace, that he would not have the least breach: I pray
thee;] he begged agreement, so greatly did his soul desire it. I scorn, (says
Luther to the Pastors of Stratsburge) that any should be more earnest then I
for peace. Brotherly peace, and bowels of pity are the fruits of the Spirit,
Gala. 5.22 Likewise long-suffering, gentleness, meekness, temperance. It is
an evil spirit, that makes men tumultuous, mutinous, contentious, apt to smite
both with hand and tongue, 2. Chron. 18.23. And Zedekiah smote Micaiah on the
cheek, saying, Which way went the Spirit of the Lord from me to speak to thee?
It was not the Spirit of the Lord, but a lying spirit that moved Zedekiah
against Micaiah.

Such a spirit wrought in them against the Prophet Jer: 18.18. Come, let us
smite him with the tongue, and let us not give heed to any of his words. A
false spirit is so all for speaking, that it cares not to hear, 1 John 4.6.
Hereby we know the Spirit of truth, and the spirit of error. He that is not of
God, hears not us. Thus a Manichee furiously contesting with Augustine,
clamoured and cried out, Hear me, hear me. To whom the good man modestly
answered. Neither hear me, or I thee, but let us both hear the blessed Apostle.
Some they are all upon speaking, wording of it, with a full and fierce mouth
against others. As Samsons foxes that had fire on their tails, and set all the
fields on a flame: So some have such a fire on their tongues, that they set
Cities and Countries in a blaze.

Those movings such men have, are not from the Spirit of God.

3. A driving spirit, that hurries men to move about matters, wherein they do
not consider, or consult Times, or Means:
Grounds, Or ends.


But on they go, this is not the Spirit of God. Gods Spirit moving to any great
matter does not drive, but draw, and so leads men as to let them Both consider
with themselves, And consult with others.


Whether the time be seasonable, Viz. The means approvable, The grounds
warrantable, And the ends comfortable.


When Gods Spirit is the mover, a man so examines the matter about which he is
moved, that

1. He considers if the time be fit he is moved in; He knows that which is
untimely is uncomely, things being beautiful in their season, Eccl. 3.

2. He considers if the means be right he is moved by, and that which he is to
make use of. For, as the least false weight is not allowed for the getting of
the largest gain: No more is the least evil lawful for the attaining of the
greatest good.

3. He considers if the grounds be sure he is moved on: Not success in the
world, But an express from the Lord.


A warrant from Gods revealed will in his Word: for that only can bear him out
in his obedience.

4. He considers if the ends be safe and good he is moved to: not only in
respect of his purpose and intendment of good therein, but in respect of Gods
promise and engagement for good thereupon. Such a man is certainly moved by the
good Spirit of God.

Yea, and in respect of others; Counsel He both asks And takes That both from
God, And men.


In holy prayer he humbly asks counsel of God. When David had lost all by a
Troop of the Amalekites horse who had plundered Ziklag, his spirit sparkled to
be up, and after them. But David first calls for Abiathar the Priest to bring
the Ephod, and enquired of the Lord saying, Shall I pursue after this Troop?
and shall I overtake them? 1 Samuel 30. Thus Jehoshaphat before he would march
with Ahab to Ramoth-Gilead, he desires all the Prophets of God, and God by the
Prophet Micaiah might be consulted with. Ahab transported with a false spirit
presses only, Horse and away. Let Micaiah say what he will. To Ramoth-Gilead
he must, 2 Chronicles. 18. Whereas counsel given a good man takes, and turns his
designs. So David when he was with his men upon the march against the house of
Nabal, Abigail meets him, and he stops upon her advice, blessing God that he
shed no blood, 1 Samuel 25. Now an evil spirit having sprung a design, at least
seemingly good; yet violently provokes, and impetuously presses to prosecute
men, not considering or consulting, except with such as are on the same mind.
No seeking to God, except some prayer as a color. They first resolve their
business, and then go to prayer, then ask counsel; but if contrary come, they
cast off all. Yea, this spirit it drives and will rarely leave, or let them
have time to take advice. Satan that evil spirit in the Serpent, having upon
Eves sight of the pleasant fruit begun to move, gave her no time to seek God,
confer with her husband, or consider the sad events, only eat she must. So
Judas, the Devil suggesting a Booty to betray his Master, he immediately goes
out, Joh. 13. rises from Supper even when the best dish was to come, as the
Learned conceive, he never stays to speak a word, but away about his work. He
considers not what guilt of blood he should bring, Matthew. 27.3. Then Judas
which betrayed him, when he saw what was done, he repented himself, etc. It
seems he thought things would never have come to that. That spirit which thus
drives men in considerately, precipitately, etc. it is not the Spirit of God.

4. A roving spirit that wheels and whurries men obout is not the Spirit of
God. Men rove.]

Psalm. 78.8. Esaias 19.14. Jam. 1.6, 7, 8.
Observe, From what, and In what.


There is a spirit that in moving makes men to rove, viz.

Ordinarily from the rules of Scripture,
And often from the rules of Reason.
Scripture-rules men rove from. They will make Scripture go with them as far as
ever they can; and being they must go further, they leave it. They wrest and
rack Scripture, and stretch it as far as for their own advantage. Thus that
wicked spirit did with our dear Lord, Matthew. 4. Thus do such unstable spirits
in these last days, 2 Pet. 3.16. They make holy Scriptures, as their hired
servants, who when they will no further serve their design, they turn them off.
Every good man moved and managed by Gods good Spirit, says to Scripture as
Ruth to Naomi, Where thou go, I will go: where thou stayest, I will stay,
thy God shall be my God, and thy people my people; nothing but death shall part
thee and me. Sozomen reports of Constantine, that whatever was pressed, he
would say, Bring me the Book of God; when things were disputed, and various
ways urged, he used still to stand up and call for Gods Book commanding all
should there settle, and none from thence swerve. That spirit which in moving
men makes them swerve and rove from Gods good Word, is not the Spirit of God.

Yea, beyond the rules of reason, as well as Scripture men are made to rove
through an ill-moving spirit. Hence they roll and rove, Both from using reason,
And from reason used.


They do not use that reason which might stay themselves. From men of no reason
the Apostle prays he may be delivered. That we may be delivered from
unreasonable men, 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. Neither can that reason which others use, stay
them. As they have not reason to rule themselves, no more will they be ruled by
reason. Grounds of reason, and strength of arguments will no more bound nor
bind them then green withs could Samson. The things in which an evil spirit
moving makes men to rove, are Both inward, And outward. Viz.


In their opinions, And affections. In their discourses, And courses.

Men of rolling spirits who hold many things, yet hold to nothing. Like those
Arrians of whom Athanasius reports, now they held one thing, and anon another,
and never were at any certain stay: Socrat. Scho. lib. 1. cap. 25.
wandering Stars, fixed to no Orb, Meteors carried about with every gust, as
children tossed to and fro with every wind, Ephesians. 4.14. They like and dislike,
cry up, and cry down; hot and cold, ramble, and rest at no point, unstable in
all their ways: Constantly inconstant, men given to change, See Seneca. lib.
de tranq.
and that love to wander, as unsettled as the waves of the Sea. Such Christians
even Heathens condemn. Such motions are not from the Spirit of God.

5. A renting spirit, that moves men to make divisions and fractions, is not
the Spirit of God. The Spirit of God, it is All is uniting.
The Spirit of faith, The Spirit of love, and The Spirit of patience.


By faith the Spirit unites and knits us up to God, and by love the Spirit
unites and knits us one unto another, and by patience the Spirit unites and
knits each one within himself. And for want of the Spirit of God in these
graces, there are a multitude of sad severings. For want of faith a man breaks
and falls off from God. For want of love a man breaks and falls off from his
Brethren. And for want of patience a man breaks in pieces, and falls asunder
within himself.

All evidences an evil spirit present and prevalent. Mark. 9. There is a man
possessed with a spirit that did oft-times cast him into the water, and into
the fire, and wheresoever it did take him, it did tear him, that he gnashed his
teeth, and foamed at the mouth. O what a spirit does possess such men, as does
cast them into that water, whereby their love is quenched, and into that fire
whereby their wrath is kindled, and so takes them as it tears them with
impatiency, infidelity, and separation from Christian-society. Sure such have
not the Spirit of God, Jude 19. These be they who separate themselves, sensual,
having not the Spirit. It Is not the Spirit of God that has moved some to
separate themselves from our public Assemblies.

Vid. Cameron. de Eccles. tract. de Schism.
They having no good cause for it, and There being many bad effects upon it.
No cause good.] If we in our assemblies, are not separated from God, they have
no cause to separate from us. Are we separate from God? Is not the drift of our
daily endeavors to draw men to God? Is not this the bent of our business, to
bring men into obedience to God? communions with God? to set up God in hearts,
and houses? Is it not the enjoyments of God after which we seek? Is it not
worshippings of God in Spirit and truth after which we press? that people must
not be content, except in Ordinances they come up to God? And cannot the
experience of many Christians speak, that among us through mercy they meet with
much of God? And are we separated from God? And what cause have they to
separate from us? Yea, if with us there be sufficient means for salvation, then
they have no sufficient cause for their separation. For salvation have not we
with us means sufficient? Means apt, and able to bring home, and build up,
proper and prevalent through God for converting of sinners, and confirming of
Saints? If any shall seek a proof of Christ speaking in us, the Apostles answer
is proper, Prove your own selves, examine your selves whether you be in the
faith. Know ye not your own selves? etc. 2. Cor. 13.4, 5. If their souls were
ever sensible of any saving good, let them consider our Assemblies. Through our
way of worshipping God lies there no path to life everlasting? What will they
say to those Martyrs and precious men that are dead and gone? And what will
they say to those thousands of Gods dear Saints that yet live, and with us
worship God with love and delight? Must they be all shut out of heaven?

If not, why do these then separate themselves on earth? Many effects bad] both
to themselvet and others.

Some we feel, and More we fear.
Hence are our desired unions broke, and hoped reformations stopped, and
monstrous deformations and divisions come instead. Pharez is born when we
looked for Zarah, Genes. 38.27, etc. Tamar being in the time of her ^t raval,
behold, twins were in her womb; And it came to pass when she traveled, then
one put out his hand, and the Midwife bound thereon a scarlet thread, saying,
This came out first. And it came to pass as he drew back his hand, behold, his
brother came out, and she said. How have thou broken forth? This breach be upon
thee: therefore his name was called Pharez. And after his brother came out that
had the scarlet thread on his hand, and his name was called Zarah. Have not we
in this Land had our time of travel; and has not a sweet settlement, and good
government sometimes been brought so near the birth, that we have said, This
will come out first: But how has it been drawn back, and such a Monster born,
of which we may say, How have thou broken forth? This and that breach be upon
thee. Breaches at home, breaches abroad, wars continued, strifes increased,
civil States disturbed, Protestant Nations perplexed, brotherly Leagues and
Covenants laid violate, contrary to all civil, sacred, and religious bonds.
What bloody breaches have been made? but above all sad and bad is our breach
with God.

This breach be upon thee. etc.

Since some have forsaken our assemblies, O what abundance of others are broken
off from all the Ordinances, and holy worship of God, from the Sabbath and
service of God! O what a Spirit of Atheism fills men's heads, hearts, and
houses! How are the exercises of religion laid by, yea, left off both in
public and private! Yea, how do men break out in ways of profaneness, to the
shame not only of their persons, but of our religion and Nation!

This Breach be upon thee.

Men ceasing that which is good, soon pursue that which is evil.

Men who cast off the worship of God, will easily follow the works of the
Devil. This dividing and rending spirit, that moves men to make such
separations and schisms, of which there are sequells so sad, sure is not the
Sprit of God.

2. A ranting spirit that sets men upon sensual practices and pleasures, is
not the Spirit of God:

Jude. 19. Sensual, having not the Spirit. The Spirit of God and the sensual
delights of the flesh are utterly opposite, though the lusts of the flesh, and
spirit of the Devil do easily accord. A man led by a loose spirit loves that
which suits his sinful lusts, and carnal contents, Micah. 2.11. If a man
walking in the spirit and falsehood do lie, saying, I will prophecy unto thee
of wine and strong drink: he shall even be the Prophet of this people. Not any
will so forwardly and forcibly prophesy of wine and strong drink, as the man
who walks in a spirit of falsehood. With these things he thinks to content
others, they being the things wherewith himself is most pleased. As Saul
possessed with an evil spirit, nothing could quiet him, but instruments of
music; while one was by him curiously playing upon the Harp, his heart was
refreshed, 1 Samuel 16.23. Thus some, their sweetest refreshment and greatest
contentments are in the merriments of the world, in revelling and rioting,
luxury and sensual delicacies, indulging the delights of the flesh, such as
stretch out their wits for to rear up their lusts, setting off their abominable
vices with plausible pretenses, to cover their carnal nature; they run over
Scripture, and speak much of the Spirit, they may live the more in the flesh.
As Rachel that sits over her fathers Idols, and says, It is with her after the
manner of women. Thus they brood and hide their filthy designs, and say, it is
with them after the manner of men moved by the Spirit. But it is not the Spirit
of God that moves in these men. Men may be strangely acted only by a Spirit of
error.

And as at other times, so also upon the Lords day, lift up by a spirit of
delusion.

This lying and deluding spirit, As in some things he may seemingly take the
way,
So he may at sometimes subtly take the day, viz.


Of the usual workings of Gods holy Spirit, that he may the more undiscernably
deceive the souls of sinful men and women. As Satan crept into Paradise, and in
that place beguiled our first Parents: So he gets into the Sahbath, and upon
this day seduces diverse persons, J b 1.6. Now there was a day when the sons of
God came to present themselves before the Lord, add Satan came also among them.
He seemed as if on that day he had something to do as well as they. Though
undoubtedly whatever this evil spirit does, is not to bring men to a care of,
and love to the Sabbath as it is the Lords holy day: But his drift indeed is to
draw men to an idle neglect, and a low esteem of this day of the Sabbath.

2. Upon the Sabbath men may have many Spititual motions from the good Spirit
of God: Movings of the Spirit in them, and Yet they no movings in the Spirit.


As the Spirit of God upon the Sabbath moves in sanctified souls: So likewise
may he then move in sinful and unsanctified hearts. Here observe, Wherein it
may be evidenced, and Whereby it may be differenced.


Good evidence may be given that Gods Spirit may move in sinful men upon the
Sabbath Day, so as that in respect of spiritual good things they may be brought
To Observe, Discern, and Assent.
To Admire, Affect, and Resolve.



1. The Spirit may so move as that men may much observe what is said upon the
Sabbath concerning things Spiritual and Eternal, not barely to hear, but to
hearken; not only to employ the ear, but to apply the mind, to mark things
mentioned, to consider and ponder what is preached and pressed. When our
Savior upon the Sabbath preached the Gospel in the Synagogue of Galilee, the
people were so moved, that they pressed with eagerness to lesson and learn
what he delivered, Luke 5.1. Thus people may possibly under the preaching or
the Gospel, have their thoughts so helped, and their hearts so held, as to heed
what they hear.

2. Gods Spirit may upon the Sabbath so move, as that men may discern and see
much into the matters of God, and according to the Word of God become very
knowing. Divine things may not only be opened to their understanding, but
their understandings open to things Divine, Numb. 24.4. Heb. 6.4 Through the
Spirit their minds may so be enlightened, and their eyes so opened, that into
the good things of the Gospel they may have a great insight. Their heads may be
gold, though their feet be clay. Their understandings may have light, though
their affections no heat. Though the tree of life be not yet planted that may
bring forth fruit unto God, yet they may have a tree of knowledge so full of
leaves, that therewith they may flourish in the World.

3. Gods Spirit may move upon the Sabbath so as men may assent to the truth of
Gods revealed will, so as to believe the reports God has made in his Word to
be all infallibly true. A man may be brought to yield such an allowance, and to
give that credit to whatever God speaks in Scripture, that his soul may
secretly say, Truth Lord. Though that which most transcends reason, as the
mysteries of the Gospel, yet to each the soul inwardly says, Truth Lord.
Though that which condemns his own course, and discovers his own case to be
naught, yet conscience concludes, Truth Lord. That secret way is sinful, says
God, and must be broken from. Yea, says the man, Lord I believe it. That way
is holy, just, and good, and must be walked in. Lord, I believe it. That is
necessary to be sought, and that is worthy to be embraced. Lord, I believe it,
Luke 8.13. Act. 8.13. All which is brought on by the blessed Spirit of God.

4. Gods Spirit may so on the Sabbath incite, as to set men in admiring at the
greatness of Gods grace and mercy, wondering at Gods works and words, Luke
4.14. Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit into Galilee, and taught in
their Synagogues on the Sabbath day; there they admired him, and he was
glorified of them all, After he came to Nazareth, and went into the Synagogue
on the Sabbath Day, where preaching upon some part of the Prophet Esaias, the
people before him witnessed, and wondered at the gracious words that proceeded
out at his mouth, Luke 4.17, 18, 22.

5. Gods Spirit may be so inciting upon the Sabbath Day, as that men may be
much moved to affect the good things of God; hereby they may be brought To
desires of them, and To delights in them.


Spiritual good things men may be desirous of. When our Savior in a Sermon,
Joh. 6. preached about the Bread which comes down from heaven, and gives life
to the World; some of his hearers were so stirred, that they broke out saying,
Lord, ever give us this Bread. Thus when men hear of heavenly things, their
hearts may spring witn desires, and their souls secretly say, O Lord, ever give
us this good. Yea, with joy may their hearts dance and leap, Luke 8.13. Thus
some rejoiced in the Ministry of John the Baptist, Joh. 5.35. With gladness
of heart did Herod hear him, Mark 6.20.

6. Gods Spirit may on the Sabbath so move, as that men may resolve upon
obedience to God and his holy Commands, Deuteronomy. 5.27. Go thou near (say the
people to Moses) and hear all that the Lord our God shall say, and speak thou
to us all that the Lord our God shall speak unto thee, and we will hear it, and
do it. Jer. 42.4, 5, 6. I will pray (says the Prophet to the people) unto the
Lord your God, and whatever the Lord shall answer, I will declaer to you, and
keep nothing back. Then they said to Jeremiah, The Lord be a true and faithful
witness between us, if we do not according to all things for which the Lord
thy God shall send thee to us. Whether it be good or evil, we will obey the
voice of the Lord our God. Thus people under the Gospel, their hearts may be
wrought to a real resolving upon the right way, not only something persuaded,
but their present purposes pitched to practice and prosecute that which is
good. These and such like good movings may the Spirit of Grace have upon the
hearts of sinful men upon the day of the Sabbath, and yet are far from being
like Gods Saints in the Spirit upon the Lords day.

Now between these there is a discernable difference; Gods Saints upon the
Sabbath are so in the Spirit, as no other ever are. Those Spiritual motions
that are in other hearts, may be found defective in a four fold respect, Viz.
of Depth, Breadth, Height, and Length.


For depth,] Those Spiritual movings that are in carnal hearts, are but
superficial and shallow, they do not reach down into the inmost parts of the
heart, in deep humblings, and soul-afflictings, so as at first to lay the
foundation deep. A man admires the mercy of God in Christ: but does not abhor
himself for sin in the dust, as that dear Saint of God, who when he was
affected and wondered at the glory of God he saw, he also (reflecting upon his
own infirmities) abhorred himself in dust and ashes, Job 42.2. Gods Saints are
first moved to deep and bitter self-bemoaning sorrows, Jer. 31.18. and after
comes in sweet soul-quickning comforts, Matthew. 5.4. Others are like that stony
ground, Matthew. 13.20. who when they heard the Word, immediately they received
it with much joy, the seed sprung upward, but downward took no deep rooting, as
in the good ground, Luke 8.13, 14, 15. When the Spirit moves upon true
believers, it makes them to bottom well, to dig deep, and lay the foundation on
a rock, and then raise their building in holy resolutions, and sweet
affections, with suitable performances; but others, all the motions they feel,
puts them upon some fair buildings, without any deep bottomings, Matthew. 7. Luke
6.

For breadth,] Those Spiritual movings that are in carnal hearts, are but
straitened and narrow; they do not spread out, either in respect Of subject, Or
object.


They do not reach out into all the powers of the soul, so as to take up the
whole soul for God. Thus does the Spirit move in the Saints of God, having a
wonderful work in the whole soul, so as that they are set about God and good
with their whole heart, and whole desires, 2 Chronicles. 15.5. All their joys and
desires are in and after God. Whom have I in heaven but thee? and who on earth
do I desire besides thee? Psalm. 73.25. Others they desire God, but there is
somewhat besides their soul is set upon. In their affections or resolutions God
he has not the whole heart or whole soul and spirit. Neither do those good
motions they have, reach out to all the precious things of God. Something of
God they would have, but not whole God. O how are they delighted to hear of the
loving kindness, patience, pity, mercy of God. But the omniscience,
omnipresence, purity, holiness of God they are not so taken with, or stirred
at, pleased with.

The Death of Christ for their salvation,

Not the life of Christ for their imitation.

Fain have that of Christ which justifies:

But care not for that of Christ which sanctifies.

A Saint of God spiritually moved desires to know nothing but Christ and him
crucified. And, God forbid (says the Apostle) I should glory in any thing save
in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ Gala. 5.14. Moses can prize the
reproaches of Christ, Heb. 11.26. Others only regard somewhat of Christ, the
honors of Christ, the happiness of Christ. the comforts of Christ: but to
bear the Cross of Christ, and to possess the Grace of Christ, and to stoop to
the yoke of Christ, this is grievous.

For height] Those spiritual movings that are in carnal hearts, cause them
Heavenward to make some assayes: but up to heaven they do not in soul ascend,
as Gods Saints who mount up, and have communion with Christ, 1 John 1.3. and
have their conversation in heaven, Phil. 3.20. sitting down in heavenly places
with Christ, Ephesians. 2.6. Upon some movings of the Spirit others hearts and minds
like Grasshoppers leap up, but fly not far; Or as a vapor that ascends out of
the earth into the lower regions of the air, but never rises to get up into the
highest region; but when the heat or force is a little over, as a heavy body,
it falls back again, and that which was like to be fire, proves but water. When
the minds of carnal men are most mounted, and their hearts most heightened,
yet they do not come to that pitch of pious affections, and positive
resolutions, as whereunto Gods people are raised. They do not so highly admire,
nor so highly desire, nor so highly esteem the holy things of God, as do the
dear Saints of God in their heavenly converses with God, when God by his Spirit
carries them as upon Eagles wings.

For length,] Those Spiritual movings that are in carnal hearts, are for the
most part sudden and short; as sparks of fire that are soon quenched out, Esaias
50.11. Or as morning dewes that are soon dried up, Hose. 6.4. Through the
workings of the holy Spirit, O in what a hopeful way for heaven are the hearts
of men sometimes set, but things do not abide, all being by and by beat down.
This made Chrysostom observe a sad difference between the work of the Minister
in his calling, and the work of other men in their earthly trades and ordinary
employments. Men commonly as they leave their work, so they find it: But the
Ministers work (who is a Co-worker with God for peoples spiritual good) it is
one day set forward, and another backward. Upon some Sabbath O how mighty are
men moved! how sweetly are their souls disposed, how are their affections
fixed, and their resolutions raised, as if the new building would pass on
apace! but by that time a Minister comes again to his work all is dashed down,
so broken, as not a stone is left upon a stone. The work is new to begin, yea,
the case perhaps worse then it was before. As water once warmed being ward cold
(some say) is afterward the more hardly heated. Those holy heatings, warmings,
workings, movings, meltings, mountings, and meetings of God which good men have
through the help of Gods holy Spirit; are more remaining, and better abiding;
such good things are stablished and nourished in them, that are vanishing and
perishing in others, Luke 8.13. John 6.67, 60. Gala. 4.15, 16.

The Spirit does so act and stir in the hearts of holy men, and their souls
upon the Sabbath may so act and stir in the Spirit, as is not possible for any
other persons. The peculiar privilege of pious men to be in the Spirit on the
Lords Day.

2. We yet grant there be several of Gods Saints, who though they possibly
may, yet upon the Lords day in the Spirit they actually are not. Because Either
they go from Ordinances, Or they rest in Ordinances.


Some upon the Sabbath forsake Gods public Ordinances, and for that cause they
are not in the Spirit. The wise God will so honor his own holy appointments,
that such as sinfully desert them, shall not comfortably possess him: But they
shall comfortably enjoy him, who carefully attend them. O how much of Gods good
Spirit have good men met, when they have been on the Sabbath assembled in the
use of Ordinances! John. 20.19. upon the first day in the week, when the
Apostles were gathered together [The Greek word does signify such a gathering
as in Church-Assembly, it being a word of Ecclesiastical use, and so applied
in several texts, Act. 4.31.11.26.13.44.14.27.20.8. 1 Cor. 5.4. Then the Lord
breathed on them, and they received the Holy Ghost. When Peter was preaching
the Gospel, the holy Ghost fell upon all them that heard the Word, Act. 10.44.
It is in the use of Ordinances Christ has promised his Spiritual presence,
Matthew. 28.19, 20. As the presence of Christ in body is not enjoyed but in the
heavenly Jerusalem, Grego. Moral. lib. 18. et cap. 15.
the general Assembly, the Church of the firstborn, where are gathered an
innumerable company of Angels, and the spirits of just men made perfect, Hebr.
11.22, 23, 24. So the presence of Christ in Spirit is not to be expected, but
in the holy Assemblies of Gods Militant Saints, met to honor God, gathered to
glorify God in the way of his Ordinances, Word and Sacraments, etc.

It is true, diverse of Gods dear Saints can by experience speak that they have
met with much of Christ in Spirit, and much of the Spirit of Christ in private
duties, as Meditation, and Prayer, etc. But then this comfortable experience
has been to Christians, Either while public Ordinances also were attended,
Or when Ordinances in public could not be enjoyed.


1. Christians while they remain upon the Lords day diligent in public duties,
may in duties private meet with much of Gods Spirit. Christians may even in the
week-time, have sweet incomes of Spirit in their private Closets, the better to
prepare them for, encourage them to, and carry them through the public service
of the Sabbath, when the Lord with enlarged measures of refreshing mercies may
more fully flow in upon them.

2. The souls of sincere Christians may have in the private exercises of
religion, large enjoyments of God through the Spirit, being deprived of public
Ordinances, and debarred from the open liberties of the Lords day. Yea, when
they are held and hindered from ordinary works of Gods worship, God may more
immediately and abundantly in the best comforts break in upon them. As the
Israelites when they were in the wilderness, and could not have comfortable
crops from the earth, God gave them Manna immediate from heaven; but when they
were come into Canaan, if they would have a harvest, they must mind their
seed-time, and plow and sow in the season. When Gods servants are settled
where the means of Grace may be had, and the work of Gods worship may be
performed, they must not think to have Spiritual comforts, as Manna immediate
from heaven. Some upon the Sabbath they forsake the solemn worship of God, and
depart from the public Ordinances of God, and so are not in the Spirit on the
Lords day.

Object. In Spirit God himself is departed from the public Assemblies, and
therefore men's forsaking of them hinders not from rheir being on the Lords day
in the Spirit. What prejudice can it be to forsake God-forsaken Ordinances,
ways, and means, wherein God is not now to be found?

Answ. Thus some have suggested to justify their sinful separation; for how
can they make good their going from us, if they grant that God is with us? With
what face can they forsake those Ordinances with which God himself is present?
Present is God in Spirit with public Ordinances, though Not sensibly at all
seasons, Nor savingly to all persons, Nor effectually for all purposes.


1. God in Spirit and the Spirit of God is in Ordinances present, when not
apparent. He has secret and undiscerned ways of working. This holy Spirit
has his hidden accesses unto the souls of men. The dewes of divine grace they
fall in small and insensible drops. The seed of sanctifying grace is sown by
an invisible hand. Great works are done by a deep and intimate energie of the
Spirit of grace, whereof no present notice is taken. As Joseph by his servant
put his silver cup into Benjamins sack, when neither he nor any of his Brethren
knew it. Thus God by his Spirit puts sanctifying grace into the souls of men,
when not themselves, much less others are able to perceive the same. In the
conversion of Saint Paul it is said, Act. 97. that they who were with him in his
journey, they heard a voice, but saw no man: In the public preaching of the
Gospel the whole Congregation hear a voice, but do not see what secret works
the Spirit of God has in the hearts of men to promote their good. And though
the Lord is not ever appearingly present with public Ordinances, yet he has
not forsaken them. God does never forsake his precious servants, yet he is not
always with them sensibly present. As at the pool of Bethesda, people who
desired a cure, they waited for the moving of the water, there being certain
seasons when the Angel of God stirred in the same: So there be some special
seasons when the Spirit of God stirs in Ordinances, and therefore thereon
people must wait, that would have a cure.

2. Gods Spiritual presence it is with public Ordinances, though upon several
they have no saving work. Though diverse under Gospel-dispensations be blinded,
hardened, ruined, Act. 19.8, 9. Exodus 14. We find a cloud that cast darkness
upon the Egyptians, so that it blinded them, and brought them to run upon their
own ruin; yet with that very cloud God was present, thereby giving light to
the Israelites, and leading them in the way to Canaan, Nehem 9.12. 1 Samuel 4.
The Philistines having in a set battle worsted the Army of Isra^l, the Elders
of Israel cry^d out, Let us fetch the Ark of the covenant i^to the field, it
may save us from the hands of our enemies. And accordingly they caused the Ark
of the covenant to be brought into the Camp. But the Philistines fight, and
Israel was smitten with a very great slaughter, and the Ark it self was taken,
yet the Ark 'twas Gods ordinance, and wi h it was Gods immovable presence, as
may appear by the plagues God inflicted upon the Philistines who carried the
Ark captive. It was a curse to them, yet Gods own blessed appointment for his
peoples profit. The preaching of the Gospel, it is to several a savor of
death, yet with the Gospel preached God is graciously present, for the saving
good of the souls of some, 2 Cor. 2.16. Heb 4.12. The word of God it is a two
edged sword, it has a killing edge, and wounds some to death; yet through God
it has a curing edge, some being saved by the very Word which wounds them.
Christ himself who is a Cornerstone, upon whom many a blessed building is
raised: yet he is a Rock of offense, and a stone at which some stumble, and
fall, and rise no more, 1 Pet. 2.7, 8. Notwithstanding God is never separated
from his Son, but abides with him for ever, Joh. 16.32.

3. In public Ordinances God by his holy Spirit is present, even unto all
persons, for some or other good purpose. For the best and highest purpose is
God Spiritually present to some persons in the use of his Ordinances, so that
they are effectually wrought upon, and brought in to grace and glory. And
surely where ever the net is cast out, there are some fish to be caught; and
where the candle is lighted up, there are some lost groats to be found, though
but few. And as for other persons, for other good purposes, though of lower
concernment, is God in Spirit present: so that though they are not by grace
renewed, yet they are through grace restrained. Hence as Saint Paul complains
that he could not do the good he would: So sinners they cannot do the evil
they would. Might good men have their minds, they would be much better: And
might wicked men have their wills, they would be far worse. Hence men are not
only brought to forbear many things evil, but drawn to do diverse good things.
Thus Herod heard John Baptist gladly, reformed much that was evil, Josephus
lib. 15. cap. 8. et 12 etc.
and performed many things good, Mark. 6.20. Josephus reports of this Herod
many excellent things he did, as acts of Justice, acts of Fortitude, acts of
Liberality: In the time of a famine how he caused all his vessels of Gold and
Silver to be melted, and therewith corn to be bought for the relief of the
poor. People under the preaching of the Gospel that are not effectually
converted, yet are ordinarily convinced, have some Illuminations, Inclinations,
Qualifications, Commiserations, Operations, whereby others may have profit,
though themselves perish. All which are the actings of Gods good Spirit, and
the evidences of Gods sure presence in the use of his Ordinance. Let not any
then say that God has forsaken any of his administrations, but let men rather
reflect and fear lest themselves should be forsaken of God. This was
commendable in King Saul, 1. Sam. 28.15. O, says he, The Philistines make war
against me, and God is departed from me, and answers m^ no more, neither by
Prophets, nor by dreams, etc. He does not say, God is departed from his
Prophets, God is departed from his ordinary ways of answer; but, God is
departed from me, etc. Persons that do not find profit by the Word, should
misdoubt their own conditions, for Gods Word does good to them that walk
uprightly, Micah 2.7. Such as say, God is gone from public ordinances, it
argues their hearts are gone if their bodies be with us, and they do but learn
the Language of such as are gone from us both in body and Heart. But God is
with us.

Object. None have such comfortable discoveries of God by the the Spirit, as
some that are departed from public Assemblies.

Answ. Some that have been damnable seducers have given out, that they through
the Spirit have had glorious discoveries of God. The Spirit of God descending
upon our Savior like a Dove, when he had heaven opened, and God speaking, This
is my beloved Son, Matthew. 3.16, 17. in allusion thereto, and imitation thereof,
a grand Impostor having taught a white Pigeon to take pease out of his ear,
reported to the people that it was the holy Ghost, imparting the mind of God to
him in most comfortable Mysteries, for the which he was much admired of many.
And our Savior having promised the sending of the Spirit, the Comforter, that
should make known all things from the Father, Alsted. Chronolo. Haeresium 38.
page 382.
Joh. 14. One impudently affirmed, not only that he had extraordinary
Spiritual comforts from God: but that he was the very Spirit of God, the
Comforter; and that God had sent him to make known most comfortable messages to
the Churches of Christ; whereupon he had many favorers and followers. Luther
cites several sects in his time, who though they fled from the Word, as Owls
from the light, yet they pretended to high raptures and ravishments through the
Spirit, and t^us especially the prime leaders with lies as loadstones drew
parties after them, etc. And there are in our days diverse whose language it
loud of large discoveries they have from, and comforts they have in God through
the Spirit, never so as since they separated from our public Assemblies:
before they were full of fears and doubts, but now they are in the firmest
settlements and fullest assurance, free from all sad thoughts, filled with the
joys and comforts of the holy Ghost, having intimate acquaintance with the
mind of God, and understanding in the deep Mysteries of Christ.

This I shall only say, that if it be really so, let us see more of it,

Both in their lives and actions,

And in their deaths and afflictions.

In the actings of their lives how little of the power of this appears,

Either toward God above them,

Or toward men about them?

If they say, they now see and know so m^^h, taste and partake so much, trust
and confide so much in God; let them evidence it by their exact actings, and
strict livings, so as to out strip others in all goodness, kindness,
meekness, mercifulness, etc. As the Apostle speaks to the man who boasts of
his belief, Show me thy faith by thy works, Jam. 2. So may we say to such, Let
them show their comforts and confidence in God by their holy working, humble
walking, sin-subduing, self-denying, loving those that they count their
enemies, and praying for those they call their persecutors, Math. 5.46, 47.
That saying of our Savior to the Pharisees, may fitly be applied; If ye love
them which love you, what reward have you? Do not even the Publicans the same?
And if ye salute your brethren only, what do you more then others? Do not even
Publicans so, etc? Nay, instead of doing more then others] in their
conversations and actions they express less of the power of godliness, and
practice of holiness, keep less to the rules of righteousness, and in the
paths of peaceablenesse, then other Christians do, and yet they speak of higher
raptures, greater discoveries, sweeter comforts, stronger confidence then other
Christians have. I question whether these be any more then self-deceiving
conceits, arising from Satans-subtil designs.

2. In their deaths and days of deep distress, how little likewise do they
lay forth of that firm confidence and those full comforts they speak of in God?
It were easy to instance from among the Anabaptists and such other Sects, how
especially the prime leaders who have spoken of raptures and ravishing
revelations by the Spirit, yet some of them have died ragingly and in a
frenzy, others stupidly, their heart sinking within them like a stone. And
have not some been seen who have carried it boldly out, while the Sun has been
warm under which they have set, and while the Sea has been calm over which
they have sailed; but when the winds have been rough, and their hopes as ships
have been wrackt, their vapourings have vanished? History reports of a river
that at every Mid-Summer swells and runs over the bancks, but in
Mid-Winter is clean dried up; Thus some while they have had prosperous
success, their confidence and comforts have risen high; but when they have
been down in the depths of their distress, all have been damped and dashed to
the dust. As Pharaohs Chariots that carried him fast, and ran swift upon the
Land: but when they were in the Sea, then they went heavy, and their wheels
fell off.

The Jews said of our Savior, Let us see him come down from the Cross, and
we will believe in him: But of such we may say, Let us see them go up to the
Cross, let us see how they can look death, devil, and God in the face, keeping
up the heights of their comforts and confidence, and then we may the better
believe them. In the mean while, let not Christians believe they may have high
comforts and heavenly raptures through the Spirit; yet neglect holy Ordinances,
Christian Assemblies, the Lords Day, and the duties thereof. Though some men be
in Sabbath-day-duies that are out of the Spirit, yet let none think to be in
the Spirit, that lie out of duties upon the day of the Sabbath. As whoever
would sail over Sea to a friend in another Land, must have both a ship and a
wind; so whoever would in soul ascend from earth unto God in heaven, must have
the help Both of Gods holy Ordinances,
And of Gods holy Spirit.
The Ordinance as the Ship, and
The Spirit as the wind.


As the Ship of an Ordinance cannot move without the wind of the Spirit: so the
wind of the Spirit will not blow without the Ship of an Ordinance. And
therefore as a man must desire the wind: So he must take care that he be in the
Ship, else if he goes to Sea, his soul will sink, and not ascend. Some neglect
the Ordinances of God, and the duties of the Sabbath, and therefore are not in
the Spirit upon the Lords Day.

2. Some others they so rest in Ordinances, that therefore they are not upon
the Lords Day in the Spirit. This may be considered, Both in respect of the
Ordinances they use,
And in respect of their use of Ordinances.


1. The Ordinances that some upon the Sabbath use, are of a lower rank, viz.
Reading of Scriptures, Hearing of Sermons, and Prayer to God.


In these they rest, and do not rise to duties of a higher sort, viz.
Sequestered Meditation, Sacramental participation, and Solemn congratulation.


These three duties are as David's 3. Worthies, that outwent all their fellows,
2. Sam. 23.23. In reading and hearing Gods Word, truths are more transient, but
in meditation they are more stayed and established.

In the Word are rare things uttered and opened; But in the Sacrament they are
also sealed and settled. In prayer to God we seek the supplying our wants and
serving our present necessities, etc.

But in praises of God, we set up Gods worth, exalting his Bounty and Beauty.

In the Ministry of the Word God comes as it were down into the world to us:
In meditation we go as it were out of the world up to God. Of Isaac it is said,
he went into the field to meditate; but of a Christian it may be said, he goes
out of the field, viz. out of the world, to meditate, dilate, and delight his
thoughts upon God. Of God he cannot take in so much by the hearing of the ear,
as he does by the thoughts of his heart. In the Word we hear discovered the
Love of God by his voice: In the Sacrament we see uncovered the Love of Christ
in his Cross: herein the soul by a working faith walks into the wounds of
Christ, banquets upon his bruised body, and bathes it self in his blessed
blood. By prayer we receive mercy from God: By Praises we give glory to God.
Now it is more excellent to give then to receive. Prayer is the sole work of
Saints militant on earth; praises is also the work of Saints triumphant in
Heaven. As in an Orchard the ripest and sweetest fruit, and that which is most
pleasant to sight and taste, is to be gathered from off the upper boughs of
trees; So the sweetest comforts of the Spirit, that most refresh the heart, and
ravish the souls of Saints, are to be found in these upper duties upon the Day
of the Sabbath. Now because Christians do not rise unto these higher
performances, but rest in those lower services, therefore they are not in the
Spirit upon the Lords Day.

2. The use that some upon the Sabbath have of sacred Ordinances, is only in a
lower way, viz. so as that their hearts in holy duties Are heavy and sad,
Or lazy and dead,
And empty of God.


Thus they rest, and do not rise to that higher way of using Gods holy
Ordinances, viz. so as in religious exercises to have their hearts, Cheered,
Fixed, and Filled with God


First, they perform the Service of the Sabbath all with sadded hearts in a
lumpish way. Their spirits bowed down with a burden of black apprehensions, so
as that all the Lords day long they have no list to lift up themselves.
Fishermen when upon the waters of the Sea they cast out their nets, they not
only hang on lead, but they put on cork that they may the better bear them up,
and bring them out; whereas when Christians upon the duties of the Sabbath draw
out their hearts, having no cork of encouraging hope, but all lead of
desponding th^ughts, and distrusting fears, they cannot bear up, their souls
sink in the service of God, Matthew. 28.8. it is said of some good women that
they went from Christ's Sepulcher upon his Resurrection-day with fear and great
joy: but some Christians they come and go from Gods Ordinances upon the Lords
Day with great fear, but no joy: so that when they should be in the triumphs of
the Spirit, th^^r spirits are filled with troubles. T^^ Sabbath it is the day
whereon Christ came up from his Sepulcher, in which before he lay dead and
buried: bu^ the Sabbath it is the day whereon some Christians go down into the
Sepulcher of sorrows, and bury their souls under sad doubts, in which graves
of darkness they rest, when from them they ought to rise. Upon the day of the
Sabbath the souls of Gods Saints should send out sweet comforts, as the
conduits of a City that run with wine upon the day of some triumph. Upon this
day the minds of all good men should mount up into heaven, and comfortably
converse with God from morning to night, drinking deep of those rivers of
pleasure that are in Gods presence. Now this Christians do not, whose hearts
are upon this day down in deep fears and sorrows.

2. Gods Saints may sometimes transact the duties of the Sabbath with deadness
of heart, in a livelesse and lukewarm way. Dead Sacrifices, and Jewish Sabbaths
suited: but dead services, and Christian Sabbaths do not accord.
Gospell-Sabbaths require living Sacrifices, yea, a lively soul in every
service. As the true mother in the Kings could not be content with a dead child
in her bosom: no more should a true Christian be satisfied with a dead heart
in holy duty, especially upon the Lords Day: The day wherein deadness should
be turned into life, weakness into strength, and earthly coldness into
heavenly heatings. For want of this Sabbaths pass with small profit. The day
may be long, yet little work done. Soldiers, who meet and muster upon a
training day, and di^charge their Muskets without bullet or shot, they make a
noise but no execution is done: Christians meet and gather on the Sabbath day,
discharge their duties without fe^vour and heat: some noise is made, but little
work wrought: no rising of heart, no ascending of soul* no being in the Spirit
on the Lords Day.

As Christians should not rest in livelesse low or weak graces, but labor to
enliven and still more to strengthen those divine qualities: so they should not
rest in livelesse, low and flat performances, but endeavor to grow to greater
life, warmth, and strength in all holy duties. Not sloathful in business, but
fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord, Romans 12. For want of fervency of Spirit,
there is so much sloathfulnesse in the business of Gods blessed Day. Fervency
or zeal is to duty as the soul to the body, without which all is but a cold
carcass. Zeal is to the Soul as oil to the wheel, whence it goes quick and is
agil in all the ways of Gods worship. This is that Pillar of fire, which as it
must go along with us in the night of our suffering, so in the day of our
service.

Service and soul and all dies, as this decays. As upon the wasting of
radical heat the body grows into weakness, sickness and death: so in the
soul of man and Service of God all languishes and declines, as spiritual heat
abates. It is said of John the Baptist, he was a burning and a shining light.
When Christians are before men shining in actions, but are not toward God
burning in affections, they keep days, and carry on duties in a spiritlesse
way; And for lack of such sparklings and springings of soul, they are not in
the Spirit on the Lords day.

3. Pious men may possibly pass Sabbaths, resting in Gods Ordinance without
enjoying Gods presence. God having made those heavenly creatures, Sun, Moon,
and Stars, yet rested not till he had created man: so man having used holy
duties, Word, Sacraments, and Prayer, yet therein should not rest till he can
attain God. When the Jews were gone out of Egypt, and were in their way to
Canaan, God told them, they should have his Angel to go before them, but
himself would not go with them: which when they heard, they all mourned, and
none would put on his Ornaments, Exodus 33.2, 3.4. Gods servants in Sabbaths
should not be satisfied though they had the Ministry of Angels, except God
himself be present. When Rebecca was in her journey to Abraham's house with his
servants, she rode on the Camel, but she did not rest on the Camel, when she
saw Isaac who was to be her husband; she lighted down and modestly met him,
Genesis 24.63, 64. Jacob rejoiced to see the wagons his son Joseph had sent; yet
was not the seeing of them, nor being in them that satisfied Jacob, but thereby
to go into Egypt, and see and enjoy Joseph himself. It becomes Christians to
rejoice when God gives them Ordinances to use, yet is not the highest
Ordinances they can have upon this holy day, wherein they should rest
contented, except thereby they can come to some communion with God. It is
reported of Master Bradford the Martyr, that he would never leave off in holy
duties till he found therein somewhat of God; as in prayer he would not give
over till he had some intimation from God of his love; in meditation till he
had some manifestation of Gods presence, quickening and quieting his heart.
Gods servants even upon Sabbath days, when duties are most solemn and settled,
should not rest satisfied, except God shows upon them some token for good, and
seals upon their souls some impression of his presence, which they may carry
with them all the week. The Church, Cant. 3. being at a loss for her beloved,
she goes to the watchmen and enquires of them: And 'twas but a little (said
she) t^ at I passed from them; but I found him whom my soul loves. We are not
so far to pass Instruments and Ordinances, as not to make use of them or
attend in them: but we are to pass them a little, in respect of any relyance
on them, or resting in them. As evil things unrepented of carry us from God: so
good things rested in keep us from God. It is for Pharisees and Papists to rest
in good works done, Christians should rise higher, and reach at a GOD in every
good work, at Christ a Savior in every service of the Sabbath. When Samuel was
to anoint one of the family of Jesse to be King over Israel, Jesse made seven
of his sons to pass before the Prophet, and as they passed one after another,
the Prophets word was, This is not he, Neither this he, etc. Then says Samuel,
Is there not yet another? And Jesse said, There remains yet the youngest, and
behold, he keeps the sheep. And Samuel said, Send and fetch him, for we will
not sit down till he come hither. And Jesse sent, and brought in David. Then
says the Prophet, This is he, and he anointed him, 1 Samuel 16.

Thus upon a Sabbath, when Instruments, Ordinances, Ministers, Scriptures,
Prayers, Sermons, Sacraments and all pass one after another, the souls of Gods
Saints should secretly say, Is there not yet another? The Lord our
righteousness: we cannot sit down till he comes hither. And when the Lord
himself appears in an Ordinance, each soul should say, This, this is he. Some,
they sit down in Ordinances, though no Christ comes in, little or nothing of
the Lord himself is seen, and so their hearts rise not. The Virgin Mary coming
into the house where Elizabeth was, she being with child the babe leaped in her
womb, and she was filled with the holy Ghost, and said with a loud voice,
Whence is this that the mother of my Lord should come to me? Luk 1. Now it was
not so much the Mother of the Lord, as the Lord in his Mother that made the
child in Elizabeth leap. It Is not the Ministers of Christ, nor the Ordinances
of Christ, but Christ in his Ministers, and Christ in his Ordinances that makes
the hearts of holy men to leap upon the Lords day. Thus they are filled with
the holy Ghost, and fixed with the Spirit of God. Now because Christians do not
rise to a high minding the presence of Christ, but rest in a low using the
Ordinances of Christ, they are not in the Spirit on the Lords day.

Use: Exhortion.
Let this incite all Gods Saints to such a spiritual spending of the
Gospel-Sabbath, that upon this day they may be in the Spirit.

Two things it is here meet to mark, Viz.

The matter whereof this is comprised, and The motives whereby this is
enforced.
Spiritually to spend the Lords day does comprise principally these two things,
viz. The influence of Gods Spirit with us, and The concurrence of our spirits
with God.


1. The inflowings of Gods Spirit, so as to work in a double way, viz.

Of Resistance, And Assistance.
There being mighty oppositions against us, we need the Spirit of God for their
resisting, and

There being many imperfections about us, we need the same Spirit for our
assisting.

1. The blessed Spirit upon the Sabbath to resist Satan, and what he secretly
suggests to damp the duties of the day. Indeed the Devils design is not only
to dull us in, but if possibly to drive us from this day in all the duties
thereof. And when he cannot keep off our bodies to carry away our hearts, he
comes often like a flood, a flood of water to hinder a flame of zeal, Revel.
12.15. And the Serpent cast out of ^is mouth water as a flood after the woman,
that he might cause her to be carried away of the flood. When Satan sees that
upon the Sabbath we will go out to the Ordinances of God, to quench and carry
away our hearts he then causes temptations to come as a flood, viz.

Both in abundance, And with violence.
Against this, the best helper is Gods holy Spirit, Esaias 59.19. When the enemy
shall come in like a flood, the Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a standard
against him. Thus ate the billows beat back, and the floods dried up, and
Satan's designs dashed, and our souls upon the Sabbath set in a more hopeful way
for Spiritual work.

2. The Spirit of God upon the Sabbath to assist and help our infirmities, Romans
8.26 Our infirmities likewise the Spirit helps; for we know not what to pray
for as we ought, but the Spirit it self makes intercession for us with groans
that cannot be uttered. It Is not prayer, nor any other part of Gods service
upon the Sabbath that we can spiritualy perform except the Spirit assist. The
Spirit helpeth] Or claspeth in with us together, as the Greek word notes. As
when a business is too big, a work too weighty for one, others put to their
helping hands, lifting and laboring together. The work of the Sabbath
(especially to be spiritual therein) is above our abilities; except the Spirit
closes in, and sets to his assisting hand, service will be sleepy, and souls
will be dead. As it is said, that the whole soul is in the whole body, and the
whole soul in every part of the body, to animate and actuate all: Thus the holy
Spirit must be wholly in the whole body of Sabbath-businesse, and whole in
every particular duty, that all may be active, heavenly and lively. Upon the
Lords day Gods people need the help of Gods holy Spirit, Both to transport
them, And to support them.
1. The Spirit upon the Lords day to transport and carry them out in holy
duties, beyond ordinary formalities, and their own abilities: though in the
week their wings have been wetted in the world, yet upon the Sabbath they are
made fit to fly and soar up to God. Though upon this day Christ rose from the
dead, yet it was forty days after he ascended into heaven. But to a Christian
through the Spirit, as it is his resurrection day, so it is his Ascension day.
As on this day he comes up from the dead: So on this day he goes up unto God.

2. The Spirit upon the Lords day to support and keep them up in holy and
heavenly frames of heart; That in Gods service they sink not, Either through
sinful inclinations, Or through Satan's temptations.


Good men's hearts are as Moses hands, when they are lifted up, they must be
born up. Ever since Adams fall man's natural motion is downward. The soul that
ascends, will soon descend if Gods blessed Spirit does not bear it up. This
made David pray, when he saw the people for the service of the Temple with
their hands liberal, and their hearts lively: O Lord God, (says he) keep this
up for ever in the thoughts of the hearts of thy people, etc. And Satan he sets
in to sink the soul down when it is highest in holy movings, and heavenly
mountings. Matthew. 4. we find when our Savior was taken up into the holy City,
and s^t upon a pinnacle of the Temple, then Satan solicits him, that if he were
the Son of God, he might cast himself down; Such is Satan's design when he sees
Gods Saints taken up in holy service, and set upon the pinnacle in the practical
part of holy Sabbaths, then he privily puts in presently to pull them down, but
the Spirit helps, and holds them up.

2. There must be the close concurrings of our spirits with God, or the Lords
day cannot be spiritually spent. Not our bodies barely, but our very souls must
so set in with God in Sabbath-service, as Freely to stir, and Firmly to
stand.


1. To stir freely, with readiness and willingness of mind moving about the
business of Gods blessed day; Though there seems difficulty in work, and
Though there is diversity of work.


Although some of the service of the Sabbath may seem difficult, yet with a
prompt and ready mind to move thereto, and with all agility apt to act therein.
As some of the men that Mos^s sent to search Canaan, they came back and their
hearts sunk, O, say they, The Cities a^e walled, and the people are strong, and
we can never do the work. But Caleb who had another spirit, and was of a ready
and resolute mind, Come (says he) let us go up and take it at once, Number.
13.30. Some are as awke to enter upon holy Sabbaths, as upon walled Cities,
their hears shrink back, and they say, The service is too great, they cannot do
it, whereas Christians of another spirit whose minds are bent upon
Sabbath-businesse, they say, Come let us go up through God, we shall do great
things this day. Yea, to have a heart free and fit to move, although the duties
of the Lords day be diverse, viz. Works of piety, works of charity, Works
together, works asunder.


Sometimes lowly abasing our selves for sins committed: Sometimes highly
advancing God for good vouchsafed, etc. As a well-tuned instrument, the strings
are ready to stir upon a light touch to diverse lessons which the Musician may
play as he please one after another. Thus to have a well-framed heart, apt upon
the Lords day to its diverse duties, prompt to pray, swift to hear, ready to
distribute, prepared to every good work, 1 Timothy 2.21. Tit. 3.1. Yea, to have a
heart freely moving not only about diverse Ordinancts, but about the same
Ordinance.

To set in a way of work several graces, and
To set the same grace several ways a work.
As in prayer, in hearing the Word, in receiving the Sacrament, in any one such
service of the Sabbath, to act up in the soul several graces. Faith, Hope,
Love, Sincerity, Humility, Fervency, etc. To have the heart in a ready exercise
of all these, at the use of any Ordinance. Yea, such an Ordinance one of these
is, wherein the soul of a Christian is to exercise the same grace several
ways. As in receiving the Supper of the Lord there is a manifold use of faith:
Faith here it is as an eye to see, as a hand to take, as a tongue to taste, as
a mouth to feed, as the stomach to digest, retein, etc.

Thus when Gods Saints upon the Sabbath do not only use sacred Ordinances, but
therein also exercise several and suitable graces: yea, and are active in their
exercise, so that their spirits are quick in co-working with the good Spirit of
God, then indeed do they Spiritually spend this holy day.

2. To stand firmly, when the Saints of God upon the Lords day as they labor
to get their hearts up, so they are loath to let them down all the day long.
Whereupon they strongly strive, Rising to stand fast, they may not fall, and
Falling to rise, they may the faster stand.


1. That rising their hearts may stand fast, and not fall in holy duties while
the day lasts. As when General Joshua was in the heat of battle against the
enemies of Israel having his spirit fixed, he looks up to the firmiament,
saying, Sun stand thou still upon Gibeon, and the Sun stood still and hasted
not to go down about a whole day; So a Saint of God when he is in the heat of
Sabbath-service, his affections all on a flame, he looks in and says to his
soul, O my soul, now stand thou still. Hold here, and so the heart holds up,
and the soul stands still all the Lords day.

2. That falling their hearts may rise again to a more fixed affectionate
performance of all holy duties, Prove. 24.16. The righteous falls seven times
a ^^y, and ris^th again. Seven times even upon the seventh day, the Sabbath day
the hearts and souls of Gods Saints are subject to fall, from those heatings
and heightenings they then have in duties holy. But then they struggle in holy
heats of heart to rise higher, and to fix faster, Psalm. 108.1. O God, my heart
is fixed, my heart is fixed. Fixed, and loosened, and fixed again. Warmed and
cooled, and kindled again; so as that the fire is greater, and flame hotter.
More abounding and abiding through the business of Gods blessed day. Thus when
Gods Spirit flows in upon us, and our spirits fall in with God, so as with
agility to act, and with stability to be set in all sweet ways of
Sabbath-works; This is Spiritually to spend the Lords day.

2. The Motives that may incite all Gods Saints to such a Spiritual spending
the Gospel-Sabbath, may arise from things of two sorts observable, viz.

Some more antecedential, and Some more consequential.
Arguments from things antecedent which may set all the servants of God upon a
Spiritual passing this present day, may be to consider [Sabbath-ward] these
four things, all which we find to be spiritually, viz.

The Ordainer of it, The Ordinances in it, The ends for it, and The opposits
against it.
1. The Ordainer of this day, the Lord Christ, the things Spiritual concerning
him we may discern, by considering of him, Both as he once was, And as he now
is.


1. Christ the Lord of the Sabbath was Spiritual, In his Conception and Birth,
In his Conversation and life, In his Passion and death, In his Resurrection
from the dead, And in his Ascension to heaven.


1. Christ in his Conception and Birth was spiritual, he being conceived of the
holy Ghost in the womb of the Virgin: and the Angel said unto her, The holy
Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the most High shall overshadow
thee, therefore that holy thing which shall be born of thee, shall be called
the Son of God, Luke 1.35, 36.

2. Christ in his Conversation and life was Spiritual, Lo the heavens were
opened unto him, and the Spirit of God descending like a Dove lighted upon him,
Matthew. 3.16. Joh. 1.32. His joys were Spiritual, Luke 10 21. His words were
Spiritual, Joh. 6.63. All his ways in the world both toward God and men were
Spiritual, Heb. 7.26.

3. Christ in his Passion and death was Spiritual. He through the eternal
Spirit offered himself without spot to God, Heb. 9.14. Even when he was
condemned in the world, he was justified in the Spirit, 1 Timothy 3.16.

4. Christ in his Resurrection from the dead was Spiritual, Romans 1.4. He was
declared to be the Son of God by the Spirit of holiness in his resurrection
from the dead, Romans 8.11. If the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus dwell in
you, etc. Christ put to death in the flesh, but quickened in the Spirit, 1 Pet.
3.18.

5. Christ in his Ascension to heaven was Spiritual. As he went up to God by a
Spiritual assistance, so upon a Spiritual design, viz. to send down the holy
Spirit of promi^e, Joh. 16.7. It is expedient for you that I go away, for if I
go not away the Comforter [the Spirit of truth] will not come unto you; but if
I depa^t, I will send him unto you: which we find fulfilled, Act. 1. Act. 2.

2. Christ the Lord of the Sabbath, he is Spiritual, Both in his positive
condition, And in his Relative transactions.


Considered in himself according to his glorified estate he is all Spiritual.
His blessed body is now brought beyond all humane infirmities, filled with
beauty, clarity, agility, impassibility, immortality, through the eternal
Spirit. In his humbled estate he was endowed and adorned with the Spirit, what
then in his honored estate? God gave him then the Spirit not by measure, Joh.
3.34. O what immense and immeasurable fillings of the Spirit were in a
crucified, much more in a glorified Christ! Such an infinite fullness of the
Spirit is fixed in Christ, whereby he is compleately fitted to the perfect
performance of all his excellent offices. Yea, and Christ in his actings is now
every way Spiritual, Both in what he does with God for men,
And in what he does with men for God.


With God for men,] Christ has his Spiritual exercise. Christ's acting as an
Advocate with the Father, 1 Job 2. His appearing and pleading our cause in the
presence of God, Heb. 9.24. His making Intercession at the right hand of God,
Romans 8.33.

As this is founded in the sufficiency of his Merit,
So it is performed by the efficiency of his Spirit.
As a mere man Christ does not manage his Mediatorship with God, but Christ in
Spirit presents unto God the Father for his members, His deserts, and His
desires.


Both what for his people he has purchased, and what to his people God has
promised, that they may perfectly possess, Joh. 17.21, 23, 24.

And with men for God,] Christ acts all Spiritually.

As Christ executes his Priestly office in heaven, So he fulfils his
Prophetical and Regal office on earth, in a way of Spiritu^l working.

As with Ordinances by the Spirit, does Christ teach,
So by the Spirit with officers, does Christ govern.
As his Kingdom is Spiritual which he governs,
So his government is spiritual of his Kingdom.
It is through the Spirit that Christ does such great things in our days: as
it was through the Spirit that Christ did so many good things in the days of
his flesh. Being anointed with the holy Ghost, he went about d^ing good, Act.
10.38. He now sits on his throne in heaven, yet by the holy Ghost he transacts
manifold and mavelous things on earth. By the Spirit he writes his Law in the
hearts of his people, and rules his people by the Law in their hearts.

Leads his flock in the way they should walk, and
Feeds his flock as they walk in the way, etc.
Thus Christ the Lord of the Sabbath is Spiritual; And shall not we be
Spiritual in the Sabbath of the Lord?

2. The Ordinances in the Lords day are Spiritual likewise. Go through all the
appointments of God, that are for this days exercise; Are they not Spiritual?
If we seriously consider things that concern The Word, Prayer, Sacraments,
Singing of Psalms, Collections for the poor, etc.


Are they nor all duties to be spiritually done? Does not Both the precepts of
God, bind us hereto? And the practice of the bind us hereto?


Godly,

1. For the Word,

As it is of a Spiritual nature,

So it is in a Spiritual manner to be managed, Both on the Ministers, and On
the peoples part.


Every part of Gods precious Word is Spiritual. The Law is Spiritual, Romans
7.14. The Gospel that is Spiritual, Romans 1.11. Yea, because the Law in
Spirituality comes short of the Gospel: the Gospel in glory out-goes the Law;
As it is excellently opened, 2 Cor. 3.6, 7, 8. They that preach the glorious
Gospel, that is so surpassingly Spiritual, must endeavor to do it, in the
evidences, and efficacies of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.4. My preaching (says the
Apostle) was not with enticing words of man's wisdom, but in the demonstration
of the Spirit, and of power. When the poewr of the Spirit is so upon the
Preacher, as to put warmth into the heart, and words into the mouth, and is to
his soul, as wind to the sail, so that he is carried out in clear and close
discoveries of the Counsel of God, Act. 18.25. And Apollos being mighty in the
Scripture, and fervent in the Spirit, he spoke diligently the things of the
Lord. Beza when he was a Preacher to the Protestant forces in France, he was so
mighty in his Mi^istery, that to some his Sermons were more encouraging and
quickening, then the sound of Drums and Trumphts: though others Popishly
disposed were offended, and said his Doctrine was made up of nothing bur fire
and brimstone, all combustible and terrihle. To preach in the power of the
Spirit neither carnal men, nor Devils can endure, but is most pleasing to God,
and men spiritually good, being that which does mighty things, 2 Cor. 10 4. The
we^pons of our warrefare are not carnal but Spiritual mighty through God.
Spiritual weapons spiritually wileded, work wonders. The Word of God which is
the sword of the Spirit, it must be spiritually handled, And as they that
preach the Gospel, must spiritually preach it: so they that hear the Gospel
must hear it spiritually. This is more then barely with the bodily ear to hear
the voice of man, it is therein with the ear of the soul through the assistance
of the Spirit to hear the voice of Christ, Joh. 10.27. My sheep hear my voice,
I know them, and they follow me. Cant. 5.2. It is the voice of my beloved that
knocks, saying, Open to me my sister, my love, my Dove, my undefiled, etc. 1 Thessalonians. 1.5. Our Gospel came not unto you in word only, but also in power and
in the holy Ghost, 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. For this cause we thank God for when ye heard
the word, ye received it, not as the word of men, but (as it is in truth) the
Word of God which effectually works in you that believe. Christians are not
so to hear, as only to take in words at the ear, but so as to take in warmth
at the heart. Often (says Jerome) when I read the Apostle in his Epistles, I
seem not to hear words, but me thinks I hear the noise of Thunder, and as it
were feel the force of lightning that sets all on a fire so that I am made to
shake, to shine, to burn. Did not our hearts burn within us while he opened
unto us the Scriptures? Luk 24.32. Such Spiritual hearing God expects of his
people every Lords Day.

2. For Prayer,] This must be spiritually poured out in the presence of God.
Gods servants, As the Spirit is to be praying in them,
So they are to be praying in the Spirit.


Jude 20. But ye, beloved, building up your selves in your most holy says,
praying in the holy Spirit.

Both in the Spirit of love and unity.
And in the Spirit of life and fervency.
Not clashing, but with close agreements of soul, carrying out the same suit,
Symphonical in prayer: Matthew 18.19. If two of you shall agree on earth touching
any thing they should ask, it shall be done. It notes such a symphony and
agreement of the souls of Gods Saints in prayer, as Musicians who with several
Instruments play the same tune. Not cooling, but with kindled enlargements to
be affectionate in prayer, fired with the Spirit. It Is (says Luther) for want
of the fire of the Spirit in Preaching, that Sermons prevail so little with
men: and it is for want of the fire of the Spirit in praying, that petitions are
no more prevailing with God. As in confessions of sin our hearts must be
wounded with bitter sorrows; So in petitions for Grace our hearts must be
warmed with burning Desires. Gods people are to be together praying with their
Hearts as Bells raised, and to ring such a loud peal of prayer as may be heard
into heaven. Such spiritual praying is expected of God, as duly as the Lords
Day comes.

3. For the Sacraments,] Viz, Both Baptism, and The Lords Supper.


As they are spiritual for the Principal of them:
So the Practice of them, must be spiritual.
The Principal of each Sacrament is the spiritual part thereof. The outward
Element is but as the transient shadow. The spiritual and enduring substance is
Christ himself with his Cross, with his Grace, with his Merits, Mercies,
Excellencies, and Al-sufficiencies, 1 Cor. 10.3, 4. They (viz. our fathers of
old) did all eat the same spiritual Meat, and did all drink the same spiritual
Drink; (for they drank of the Rock that followed them, and that Rock was
Christ.) As when our Savior rode in Triumph to Jerusalem, Luke 19. the company
that went before, and they which followed after; All cried Hosanna: Thus the
Sacraments of the Old Testament that went before, and the Sacraments of the New
Testament that follow after, all say to Christ, Hosanna. All point at Christ,
saying, Behold the Lamb of God.

The Practice or transactions of the Sacraments must be spiritual, Both on Gods
part, And on our part.


In Baptism all depends upon the powerful presence of the Spirit. At the
Beginning, when the Spirit moved upon the waters, then were the creatures made:
And so when the Spirit moves upon the waters of Baptism, then is Gods work
done. And our work therein after is all to be done through the Spirit. In the
first receiving of Baptism we were totally passive: but for the further
improving of Baptism we ought to be spiritually active.

A spiritual Use we are bound to make of Baptism, Both to keep us off from
evil, And to keep us on in all good.


Luther reports of a pious Maid, who by her Baptism bore up against the
several assaults of Satan. If Satan sought to draw her to sin, Her reply was, I
dare not do it, I have been Baptized. If to draw her from Duties, her reply
was, I dare not but do it, I have been Baptized. We should observe, that to fly
sin, and follow God, we are Baptisme-bound: But for want of this, how does
Baptism lie like a Dead Ordinance? What multitudes are there, who making no
Spiritual Improvements of it, they make many Carnal Arguments against it?
Because they never knew how to work it up, they easily learn how to cry it
down. They say the Truth and life of Baptism lies in their deep Dippings, and
Water-Buryings.

But sure a little water and much fire, Baptismus flaminis et flaminis.
makes the best Baptism. I indeed (says John) baptize you with water, but he
that comes after me is mightier then I, he shall baptize you with the Holy
Ghost, and with fire, Matthew. 3.

[Against their Waterworks, we may see God angry in our want of water.]

In the Lords Supper;] All the great works which both God and we are to do, be
spiritual.

What God is to do, in Preparing, Declaring, Conferring, Confirming;
All are spiritual.

Christ, the hidden Manna for the heart, and the hidden Man it self of the
heart, which God makes ready, by causing hungring, humble, and holy Desires, by
quickening Graces, calling up all Divine qualities, abilities, etc.

That presenting and setting forth Christ as Shewbread on the Table,
evidencing and opening Christ, his Wounds, his Worth, etc.

That giving Christ his Body to be eat, and his Blood to be drunk, that is meat
indeed, and drink indeed: whole Christ given out, etc.

That settling souls in the assurance of his love, so as they may proceed in
the paths of Piety and Peace.

Are not all these spiritual Acts?

What we are to do, in Remembering, Discerning, Applying, Employing;
All are spiritual.

To remember Christ cruc fi^d by Meditation, to look back on the bitter
sufferings, and bloody death of our blessed Lord, till the heart be warmed, and
wound up.

To discern Christ, so as that the outward Elements are as bright Glasses, and
broad Lattices through which we see the Lord looking, and behold the Bounty of
his Goodness, and Beauties of his Holiness.

To apply Christ, so as to take and eat not barely the bread of the Lord, but
also the Bread which is the Lord. Potiphar's wife had the Garment, but Joseph
himself fled from her. The Elements are but the garments, it is Joseph himself,
and Jesus himself that we apprehend.

To employ and make use of Christ, so as to go from the Table of the Lord, in
the power of the Lord, and strength of his might, meet for all managements. In
these spiritual actings, lies the life of the Lords Supper.

4. For singing of Psalms;] This is a spiritual service, Ephesians. 5.18, 19. Be
filled with the Spirit, Speaking to your selves in Psalms, and hymns, and
spiritual songs, singing, and making melody in your hearts unto the Lord,
Coloss. 3.16. 1 Cor. 14.15. I will (says the Apostle) pray with the Spirit,
and pray with the understanding also: I will sing with the Spirit, and I will
sing with the understanding also. Luther was wont to make a large and lively
use of the Psalms of David. Johan. Manl. loc Com. Page 43.
According as he had his several sufferings, he had his suitable Psalms.
Having been under Satan's sad Assaults, Come, (says he to some company about
him) Let us go sing the 130 Psalm in despite of the Devil.

A precious Minister once in England, now with God, being upon the waters with
some friends in a Boat, Come, (says he) let us sing the 16 Psalm.

And when they had passed through those words, Of perfect joy are in thy face,
And pleasure for evermore:


His spirit so wrought, and heart so leaped, that he affectionately broke out,
What? pleasure for evermore? O let us sing that again.

Nicepho. Hi^. Eccles. lib. 3. ca. 37.
History speaks much of the zeal of the Primitive Christians, how by singing of
Psalms, they were wont to make hard work seem easy, and long journeys appear
short, and bitter cups taste sweet. In all their Travels and Troubles, Doubts
and dark conditions, they use to ease themselves, and cheer their souls by
this heavenly service, which they spiritually performed, however now sinfully
slighted.

6. Collections for the Poor.] This is also a Duty to be spiritually done, Both
Pondering, And Pitying,
Persons in Poverty.

Pondering and considering such as are in a poor condition, Psalm. 41.1. Blessed
is he that considers the poor and the needy: Not only relieves them with his
hand, but lays their case to heart. Considers the poor.] The ground of their
poverty, whether it be good, whether that it be from Gods hand upon them, or
men's hands against them for Gods sake. The degree of their poverty whether that
it be great. Considers the poor and needy.] That is, such as are miserably
poor, needinesse noting extreme poverty. Quanta nobis paupertas, imo egestas.
Seneca, Epist. ad Lucillum.
A good man so considers this, as according to the poores Necessity, he
proportions his Charity. To help he does not only reach out his hand, but
draws out his heart. If thou draw out thy soul to the Hungry, Esaias 38.10.

With Bowels of Pity compassionating persons in their impoverished condition.
There is little of this Duty done, except with the bounty and contributions of
the hand, there goes the Pity and compassions of the heart, 1 Cor. 13.4 If I
bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and have not chari^y, it is nothing.
Liberal al^es are nothing, without a fpirit of love; Love to Christ, and love
to men as the members of Christ: herein lies the life of liberality. This is
spiritual.

6. Inflicting of Censures.] This is also to be done Both with a spirit of zeal
against the offending person;
And with a spirit of love unto the person offending.


There ought to be anger and grief against the scandal of the man; and yet
compassion and love toward the man that is scandalous, 1 ^or 5.2, 3. Ye have
not mourned, that he which has done this deed be taken from among you. I
verily as absent in body, but present in spirit, have judged concerning him
that has done this deed. In the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when ye are
gathered together, and my spirit* with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ: To
deliver such to Satan for the destruction of the flesh; [yet with affections to
the soul] That the Spirit may be saved in the day of our Lord Jesus. This
casting out must have a spiritual carriage, and be upon spiritual accounts.
Thus all the business that belongs to the Lords day, is and ought to be
spiritual.

3. The ends for which the Lords day was appointed, are also spiritual. Whether
we consider The end primary, viz.
The glory of God, or
The end secondary, viz.
The good of man.


And these are to be our spiritual aims in Sabbath-times, that the Lords
gracious ends and ours may suite.

1. Sabbaths are seasons set apart for the exalting the glory of God, Both in
his spiritual being And in his spiritual working.


That the glorious being of God blessed for ever might the better be set out,
the Sabbath was set up. Although there is no day wherein we can add any glory
to God: yet on this day does God open much of his glory to us. Apud Persas
persona regis sub specie Majesta it is soc^u litur, etc. Justin. lib. 1.
Historians report, that it was a great part of the pomp of the Persian Kings,
that they were seldom seen: but upon some very high days they use to show
themselves to their people in their most Princely attire, when they were so
much the more admired and adored. The Sabbath is that high and holy day,
whereon God so shows himself to his servants in his garments of glory, that
they are made much to admire and adore him, who at other seasons is more
concealed. Our Savior after his resurrection and begun glorification, still
took this day to discover himself unto his Disciples, Joh. 20.19.20. Upon this
first day of the week, when they were assembled, he showed them His hands, and
His side.
Then were they glad.

Thus upon the Sabbath the Lord shows to his servants Both his hands And his
side.


His hands,] That is, the great things he has wrought in them and for them,
acts of his glorious Attributes.

His side,] That is, the good thoughts he has further toward them,
intendments of eternal good will. All which makes for the manifestation of Gods
great glory. And although we can never mention that glory which God did nor
before possess: yet we may manifest that glory of God which our souls did not
before perceive. We never see the Sun of Gods glory to shine so bright, as upon
this blessed day. It being the very end why this day was blessed, that thereon
the brightness of Gods glory might be the better seen.

2. The Sabbath is set up to promote man's good, In his spiritual part, and In
his spiritual estate.


To wit, his soul in the concerments of grace, thar he may be cast into a
spiritual mould, and become a spiritual man. The appointments of Sabbath-time
is to set and keep souls in a spiritual frame, Both by the first infusions of
grace,
And by the further additions of grace.


Man's heart is hardly put into a spiritual temper: and as hardly kept in a
spiritul order. It would never rise from corruption or soon fall into confusion
were it not for Sabbath-assistances. Should we have only week-time, and be all
for worldly things, and have no time of Sabbath for soul-concernments, into
what an ill case would our souls soon sink? As Abraham accounted all his
earthly comforts nothing while he went childlesse, sonlesse: so should we
esteem all our worldly enjoyments nothing, if we went Sabbathlesse. Indeed did
we go Sabbathlesse, we should be in danger to go Saviourlesse, Christlesse,
heavenlesse, to lose God and all that is spiritually good. But that we may not
lose, but gain God and all spiritual good, this day is drawn out from the
common lump of time, and set apart to advance, as Gods spiritual praise: so
man's spiritual profit. Thus the ends of the Lords day are spiritual.

4. The opposites are spiritual against the day, As Satan, and Seducing men.


1. Satan against the Sabbath Day, as he is a spiritual, he is a spiteful foe:
he knows if he can make this fall, other things will fly. As the Assyrian
General said to his forces, Fight neither against great, nor small, but against
the King of Israel: So says Satan to all his instruments, Contend neither with
great nor small, but with the day of the Sabbath, down with it, down with it.
Satan against the Sabbath seeks, Either to beat it out from men, Or to beat men
off from it.


Here may I make a mournful mention of a good woman, who by reason of her soul
safflicted condition, I have had with her the occasion of many a sad
conference; and though her usual estate was full of extreme strange assaults,
yet I have frequently observed, and the same her self has often freely
confessed, that still as the Lords day grew nearer* her temptation grew
stronger. Never such sad bouts, and sore buffets as upon some Saturday-nights.
Whereby she has been ordinarily unfitted for the following Sabbath, and often
times violently hindered, especially from the public Ordinances for diverse
Lords days together, unto her after great grief. Wherein I cannot but conclude
the wiles and subtle works of Satan, as the Sabbaths great enemy. Yea, Satan's
design is, Either that men may not at all mind it,
Or that they may not spiritually spend
Either to draw them from the day in its duties,
Or to dull them in the duties of the day.


A zealous sanctification of the Sabbath Satan to his utmost power opposes. He
cannot abide the spirit of burning should be upon us in the business of Gods
blessed day. As the holy Spirit puts us into the fire, the unclean spirit often
casts us into the water; so that our hearts heavenly kindled, are commonly
cooled. The Devils, Ephesians. 6.12. are called [spiritual wickednesses,] or the
spirituals of wickedness, as it is in the Greek.

As they are wicked Spirits,
So they are the spirits of wickedness.
And as they are so spiritually bad: so they cannot abide what is spiritually
good. As spiritual sinning against God they most seek to provoke: so spiritual
serving of God they most seek to prevent. The devil can be content men should
forbear bodily acts of filthiness, if they will but pursue spiritual
sinfulness: so can he be content men should perform outward acts of Religion,
if they will but cease from spiritual service; they may be at all the
Ordinances of God upon the Lords day, so they be not spiritual in any; not
miss a Sabbath, so they pass not any spiritually.

3. Seducing persons are Sabbath-opposers. These are called [spirits] 1 Timothy
4.1.

Because there be spirits that act them,
And beca^s^ they act like spirits.
They be men whom spirits act, viz. the spirit which i^ of the world, the
spirit of the Devil, the spirit of pride and falsehood, ^^e spirit of error and
Antichrist, etc.

They be men who act as spirits with subtilty, sedulity, agility, restless and
unwearied, creeping up and down, compassing places to and fro, abusing
Scripture to propagate error, etc. These oppose Gods precious Sabbath, seeking
Either directly to overturn it, Or remotely to undermine it.


Directly,] By Atheistical arguing against all Gods holy times and things,
professedly and profanely despising of, and disputing against, as the doctrine
of Sanctification, so the day which God has sanctified.

Remotely,] By setting against such as are Sabbath supports, viz. Against
Ordinances used in public,
And against instruments of public use.


Ordinances they clamor down, especially some, as singing of Psalms,
administering of Sacraments, etc. endeavoring (if possible) to pull away one
Ordinance after another, till they leave the day destitute of all. As Rachel
weepi^g for her children. Hence there is such a sad ceasing of several
Ordinances in some Congregations, that the Lords day may speak like Jacob
Joseph is not, and Simeon is not, and will ye take Benjamin away also? all t^is
is against me, Genesis 43. Instruments the^ thrust sore at, that are for
Sabbath-Use: Ministers by their law must be laid in the dust. Their endeavors
are to deal worse with the Servants of Christ, then Hanun with the servants of
David, 2 Samuel 10.4. He shaved off the one half of their Beards, and cut off
their Garments in the middle, etc. But these seek to shave, and cut off all,
both countenance, and maintenance, and to leave Ministers under poverty, and
perpetual reproach. And are not these Enemies to Sabbaths, and public
Assemblies? And are all these [Sabbath-ward] spiritual? The Ordainer of it
spiritual. The Ordinances in it spiritual. The ends for it spiritul. The
opposites against it spiritual. And shall not we be spiritual, so as that we
may be in the spirit on the Lords day? Thus are the antecedent arguments,
arguments from things subsequent: let us see, viz. what desirable effects will
follow upon spiritual spending of the Lords day. Hereby we shall raise Our
souls advantage, The Sabbaths excellency, The Lords acceptance, and The Lands
concernments.


1. To be spiritual in the Sabbath, will be exceedingly for our souls
advantage.

It will be operative for our present good on earth, and
It will be preparative for our future good in heaven.
This will work us much spiritual good on earth. For hereby Grace shall be
increased into Comforts, and
Comforts shall be increased through Grace.


1. Hereby comes a comfortable increase of Graces: for if we be spiritual upon
the Lords Day in duties, Then Grace is acting in Us, and We are then acting in
Grace.


The which actings, makes for the augmentings of it.

Grace it acts in Us.] When we are spiritual on the Sabbath, then grace is not
in the Spark, but in the Flame, and so rises and runs on. Grace is then not
barely in the root, but in the branch; so that it springs and spreads out.

We act in Grace.] This adds to its further degrees. The way to enjoy that
Grace we have not, is to employ that Grace we have. While we are spiritually
spending the Sabbath, we are in the Employments, and so in the Improvements of
grace. Grace is greatned in us, and we do great things through Grace. Elisha
when he had not only the Mantle, but the Spirit of his Lord Elijah, he went
and wrought wonderful works. When upon the Sabbath we have not barely the
Mantle, viz. the Ordinance of Christ, but also the Spirit of Christ; yea,
wrapped in the Spirit as a Mantle, then are we meet to leap Mountains, and look
Devils in the fac^: To Triumph in the Lord, and tread Death in the dust, 1 Cor.
15.54.

2. Hereby comes in a gracious increase of Comforts.

Comforts spiritual are springing,
While the Lords Day is spiritually spending.
Being in the Spirit which is the Comforter, we cannot but be in the Comforts
of the Spirit.

It Is a true Rule. That most cheeres the heart, which best clears the estate.
But spiritually to spend the Lords Day, it clears a Christians good estate
Godward. An external observing of the Sabba^h does distinguish us from Pagans;
But a spiritual spending the Sabbath does difference us from Hypocrites. An
Hypocrite in the Sabbaths outward observation may seem very precise, Luke
13.14, 15. But he never rises to be spiritual in the Sabbaths of God, and
service of God. A spiritual-spent Sabbath is a sure sign of a sincere heart,
and saving estate. This therefore may well be a cause of the Incomes of
Comfort. Would we have the profit, peace, and comfort of the Lords Day, let us
be spiritual then in our Duty. They who spend the Sabbath spiritlesse; they
pass the Sabbath profitlesse, comfortless. The more we have of the Spirit on
the Sabbath, the more we shall have of profit by the Sabbath, and comfort in
the Sabbath.

This will secure us from the worst of Judgments;
And the best of Mercies this will assure us of.
The worst of Judgments, to wit, such as are spiritual, hereby we escape; and
the best of Mercies, that is, such as are spiritual, through this we partake.
Diverse that come out on the Sabbath, and do the outward service, yet they fall
short of spiritual Mercies; and they fall under spiritual Miseries, because
they rise not to spiritual Duties. By being spiritual in the service of the
Sabbath, O the sweet Soul-advantage that is unto the Saints of God! Yea, this
it fits us for all spiritual good in Heaven, puts into us Heart-capacities for
Heaven-felicities. In Heaven all is spiritual, enjoyments spiritual,
employments spiritual, company, comforts spiritual. To be spiritual in the holy
Sabbath, As it best declares the Heavenly estate,
So it best prepares for the state of Heaven.


That Sabbath which Saints shall for ever have with God, will all be spiritual.
That this Sabbath may be as a resemblance of that, and an Introduction to that,
we ought to be spiritual.

2. To be spiritual, will much advance the Sabbaths excellency: O how much is
the Beauty and Glory of Gods-Day gone! the honor and luster of the Lord's Day
lost! Undoubtedly our Duty is, as together To condole the Dignity of it down:
So to endeavor to raise up the Dignity.


It Is matter of bitter sorrow to see the Sabbath so Eclipsed. One writes of the
Barbarians in the East Indies, that seeing the Sun Eclipsed in the year 1600.
they fasted, wept and cried all the day long, O we miserable people! the Dragon
has devoured the Sun; alas, alas, we have lost the Sun, etc. O how much may we
lament in England to see the Brightness of Gods blessed Day dimmed, the light
and life of the Lords Day lost. How has the Devil with his doctrines, and the
doctrines of Devils almost devoured the Sabbath! We have the Body of the Day,
but the soul of the Day, the Spirit of the Day is gone, with the greatest part
even of professing Christians, who though they retain the Truth, they have let
go the life of Religion, and may well weep over dead Days and Duties.

To recover amongst us true Sabbath-life, it is requisite, That God enliven the
Day to us, and
That we toward God be lively in the Day.


1. We must labor with the Lord, who quickens the Dead, to enliven this Day.
When the Ruler of the Synagogues Daughter was dead, no sooner did our Savior
say, Dams^l arise, but her spirit came into her again, and she arose
straightway, Luke 8.54, 55. Let but our Lord say over his Dead Sabbath, Day
arise, and the Spirit will come into it again, and straightway all will be
well. O what quickenings and kindlings, when the Spirit of life, and the Spirit
of burning from above shall abide upon Sabbaths, the service and servants of
God setting all on a fire! When Elijah and Elisha were going together, there
appeared a chariot of fire, and horses of fire, and a whi^lwind came which
caught up Elijah, and he was carried into heaven, 2 King. 2.11. Thus upon the
Sabbath, when Gods servants are together, and there appear Instruments and
Ordinances all on a fire, Ministers on fire, and Sermons on fire, and the
Spirit as a whirlewind comes, O what carryings then up of hearts into heaven!
This is the Honor of the Day.

2. We must labor with our selves in all the Lords Dayes-Duties to be lively,
and with the Spirit of the Lord to act high for God, and to be heart-warm at
work. All the Sacrifices of the Sabbath must be Burnt-offerings: Every service
fired with zeal. Indeed, for Christians while they are on the Week-dayes in
worldly company to be cooled, is common; [ Peter never gat such a cold as at
the High Priests fire among those servants, he warmed himself till he lost his
heat:] but for Christians when they are together on the Sabbath in holy
Assemblies, to have hearts cold, and affectiont flat, as it is a dishonor to
the Lord of the Sabbath; so it is a dishonor to the Sabbath of the Lord.
Christians should be like Angels who are called [Seraphims] for their fiery
zeal in the service of God. And so to be zealous in Sabbath-Duty, will raise
the Dignity of the Sabbath. This will admirably evidence, As Gods Interest in
the Day,
So the excellency of this Day of God.


The more we have herein of Heat and fervor, life and vigor, the better we
demonstrate the Day is Gods. As the true Mother in the Kings cried, The living
son is mine: so says God, The living Sabbath is mine. As when Christ was
raised from the Dead, then he was declared to be the Son of God, Romans 1.4. So
let the Sabbath rise from the dead to its due life and luster, and then 'twill
appear to be the Day of God. Yea, the more Vigorous and Spiritual we be in the
Day, the more glorious and excellent will the day be. O what advantage is to
the bodies of men, when after death they are raised again? Read 1 Cor. 15.42,
43, 44. It is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption; it is sown in
dishonor, it is raised in honor; it is sown in weakness, it is raised in
power; it is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body. Thus will it
be with the Lords Day, when it shall be raised from the dead, as it will be
more spiritual in its Nature; so it will be more transplendent in its Luster;
greater in power, higher in honor, all redounding to the dignity of it. This
will bring the Sabbath as the Sun to break forth from under those black clouds
with which it is now darkened.

3. The Lords acceptance will be certain if we spiritually sanctify the
Sabbath. This with the Lord will be acceptable, because it is suitable, As to
the precepts which God gives,
So to God which gives the precepts.


1. The precept or command given of God requires a spiritual care in
Sabbath-keeping. Remember the Sabbath Day to keep i^ holy;] This implies a
remembrance of the Sabbath day to keep it spiritually, let the spirituality of
the day be raised, and the sanctity of the day will not sink, but be better
seen. This will hold out the dayes-hidden holiness, and meet Gods command that
calls to keep it holy. And such Sabbath-keeoing, is to God well-pleasing, Esaias
56.4. It being that which complies with Gods prescribed Will, Esaias 58.13.

2. God himself from whom such precepts proceed, is hereby resembled. God is a
Spirit and a spiritual being, so that spiritual-spent Sabbaths, and
spiritual-performed duties, do best suite a Spiritual God, and so are accepted.
A good God being spiritual, spiritual good is most acceptable to God, 1 Pet.
2.5. To offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God Acceptable, because
spiritual: With such sacrifices God is well pleased, Heb. 13.16.

That best likes God,
Which is most like to God,
To be spiritual on the Sabbath, the Lord likes it, and loves it; it is so
pleasing to God, that he does highly prize it and praise it.

As it is a thing for the praise of God,
So it is a thing with God of praise.
To be in the spirit of the Sabbath, and to be on the Sabbath in the spirit, As
it will make for Gods praise from us,
So it will prove our praise with God.


The Apostle declaring who are now to be accounted Jews, and what is
circumcision under the Gospel, says, Romans 2.28, 29. He is not a Jew which is
one outwardly, neither is that circumcision that is outward in the flesh: but
he is a Jew which is one inwardly, and circumcision is that of the heart, in
the Spirit and not in the letter, whose praise is not of men, but of God: So
may we say, He is not a Sabbath-keeper, that keeps it only outwardly: but he
is a keeper of the Sabbath, that keeps it inwardly; and that is observation of
the Lords day, that is in the heart and in the spirit, whose praise though it
may be not of men, it will be of God. God at the great day will give him praise
in the presence of men and Angels. Yea, present praise will God by his Spicit
speak to such as spiritually spend his holy day. And O how sweet will it be for
God in a Sabbath to say to our souls, Well done, well prayed, well preached,
well heard to day my dear servants. Now that which the Lord thus praises, we
may be sure much pleases the Lord.

Yea, to sanctify the Sabbath in a spiritual way, the Lord is so pleased with
it, that he takes pleasure in it: then the Lords day is the Lords delight. The
Sabbath so kept on earth, causes joy in heaven. It is meet, says the Father in
the fifteenth of Luke, to his friends about him. It is meet we should rejoice,
for this my son was dead and is alive; was lost, and is found. So says God,
Blessed for ever, to all in bliss about him, It Is meet we should rejoice, for
this my Sabbath was dead, and is alive; the glory of it was lost and gone, but
is now returned again.

4. The Lands general concernments will through the Sabbaths spiritual
observance be much promoted, Both in the Ecclesiastic, And in the Civil State.


Let the spirit of the Lords day be well up in the Land, Then will Gods
Ordinances remain that are present,
And God will remain present with his Ordinances.


1. Gods Ordinances with us will abide. What makes God remove precious means
from among a people, but their dullness in his Sabbaths and service, their
falling from their fervent affections, their leaving their first love and life?
as we see in the case of that languishing Church, Revel. 2.4, 5. I have
somewhat, (says Christ) against thee, thou have left thy first love: Remember
from whence thou art fallen, and do thy first works, or I will come and remove
the Candlestick out of his place. Let Christians be carried out with a spirit
of love and life in the Sabbaths and service of the Lord, and though the Lord
may lay some sad afflictions upon them, yet he will continue the means of Grace
among them. And though the Lord give you the bread of adversity and the water
of affliction, yet shall not thy teachers be removed into a corner, but thine
eyes shall see thy teaches, And thine ears shall hear a word behind thee,
saying, This is the way walk in it, Esaias 30.20.

2. God himself will also abide with his Ordinances. Let the Sabbath be so
spiritually sanctified, Then as God will be with the Ordinances his people use,
So God will be with his people in use of Ordinances.


Then may Ordinances say to Gods Saints, and Saints may say to Ordinances,
[Emmanuel, God with us:] God with us in service and suffering makes all sweet.
That is a precious promise, Esaias 43.1. When thou art in the water I will be
with thee; and when thou art in the fire, I will be with thee. Water and fire
both may refer to afflictions, be they various and violent, God will be with:
Yea, in the waters of suffering, and in the fire of service God is with us. Or
though we cannot say, God is with us when we are in the water, to wit, when we
be cold or lukewarm in his work; Yet we may be sure God is with us, when we
are in the fire, to wit, fervent and zealous in the works of his worship.

Is God with us in the fire of heavy afflictions?
And is not God with us in the fire of holy devotions?
And let the Lord thus abroad in the Land, be with his service and servants,
and with his servants in service, O what great and good things will follow!

As the cleansing out of pollutions,
And the closing up of divisions.
Pollutions cleansed,] Were the holy Spirit thus up in the Nation, the unclean
spirit would be soon forced to pass out of the Land, Zach. 13.2. This would
not only keep informing Ordinances that are, but reforming Ordinances that are
not would be also brought in. In our English-house we might hope to have the
Besome as well as the Candle, Luke 15.8.

As the Candle of good Doctrine,
So the Besome of good Discipline.
The Besome of Discipline to sweep out dust,
As well as the Candle of Doctrine to drive out darkness.
It Is lamentable to see how the Leprosy has taken our house, Levit. 14. And O
what an infection has broke out even in the new building. Infliction of due
censures, would be a good means to remove the plague-stones out of the wall,
and so to heal the house, and help its standing.

Could we but increase our Sabbath-zeal, sure Church-Keyes would not lie so
rusty, yea, the civil sword would have a sharper edge.

When God came down upon Sinai in thunder and lightning, fire and much smoke,
God commanded Moses to set bounds about the Mount, that the people might not
presumptuously break in: Thus were there for the Sabbath that fire of zeal that
is fits, the Civil Power would set bounds that persons might not so profanely
break out. Those intolerable tolerations we now see, would soon cease. Those
Anti-Congregations that are now, Assembly against Assembly in the same place,
at the same time; It is the cause of many sad evils. Hence is it that if there
be any that will not afford their presence at the public preaching of the
Word: or if there be any that cannot abide the power of the Word publicly
preached, there be those by, that will invite them from us, and abet them
against us. Hence is it, that the common sort account Sabbath days, and duties
but as indifferent things, matters they may use, or omit if they please. Hence
is it, that the vilest of men have learned to vilify and blaspheme the ways
which God has blessed, to speak evil of the Instruments, and Ordinances God
has sanctified, and by which God is glorified, and which of God shall one day
be justified, etc. Did but the spirit of the Lords day rule in the Land, those
that are opposite we should either reduce or restrain. Those gross abuses and
great profaneness that is grown amongst us, would be either redressed or
suppressed.

Divisions closed,] If Christians on the Sabbath were higher raised by a spirit
of fervency, they would at other times be better ruled by a spirit of unity.
Were there in men more of the spirit of life upon the Lords day, there would be
more among men of the spirit of love all the week long. Men are not spiritual,
but carnal which is the cause divisions are common. There is among you envying
and strife and divisions, are ye not carnal and walk as men? For while one
says, I am of Paul, and another, I am of Apollo, are ye not carnal? 1 Cor.
3.3, 4. To heal the Land of divisions will be, Both the beauty, and The safety
of it.


Beauty,] Rents and divisions are to a Land as fits of convulsions to a child
which draws the mouth awry, and pulls parts out of their place, and causes all
to be uncomely; cure the Convulsions, and the beauty of the Babe returns.

Safety,] Rents and divisions are to a Nation as cracks and clifts in a
building, which yet Art may stop, and the house may be strong, and the
dwellings therein may be safe and sweet.

Now that which will most powerfully repair our breaches is the Spirit of the
Lord, which is a Spirit of love, and of a sound mind, 2 Timothy 1.7.

As it is a spirit of love it unites affections, and
As it is the spirit of a sound mind it unites opinions.
And so brings all into one: Nothing can so cause union of spirits, as the
spirit of union. Were we more carried out by a spirit of power, we should be
more carried on with a spirit of peace. This spirit would be in us out of
Sabbath-service, were we in the spirit upon the service of the Sabbath; yea, O
the abundant benefits that would abide our Nation upon this spiritual being,
and being in the Spirit! Then would the works of the Devil be dissolved, the
darkness of ignorance dispelled, Errors outed, blasphemies banished, the
Gospel cherished, truth established, iniquity would be less, and the love of
many would wax warm, formalities would fall, and the power of Godliness rise:
Ministers would be vigorous, and Magistrates valorous, and Christians in Gods
cause Courageous, Inferiors well governed, and Families well ordered, so that
Old England would become New, and we should find New England in Old: O happy
day, O let me beseech all that my weak words may reach, for our souls sakes,
for the Sabbaths sake, for the Lords sake, and the Lands sake let us be
spiritual; spiritual in Sabbath-service. O let us be like St. John in the text
upon the Lords day in the Spirit.

I was in the Spirit on the Lods day. Now that the Lords day may be thus
spiritually spent, there be duties of three sorts to be observed, Anteceden t
Concomitant, Consequent.


Antecedent duties.] Before the Sabbath comes Christians that would well keep
the day, are required to be, Both valiant in resisting temptations against it,
And diligent in making p^eparations for it.


Temptations that may turn soul^ aside from this observing the Sabbath, may
proceed From some more remote, or From some more immediate.


There be some remote that may suggest what may draw off from the Lords day,
and its spiritual duties. There be evil spirits now abroad whose bent is, to
beat down the day of God, and to beat off from the soul-benefitting duties
thereof.

As the spirit of Atheism, And the spirit of Sectarisme; The spirit of
profaneness, and The spirit of separation.
The former fight against the Sabbath day, and its due observers in open field,
by professed battles.

The latter labor to cut off the Lords day, and all its lovers, by secret and
subtle Stratagems. Men that separate from our settled Congregations, and run
wild in their opinions. Grant some of them meet on Sabbath-dayes in their
religious duties: yet themselves say, they do it not out of obedience to any
divine Command, or upon the acknowledgement of any Gospel-Canon, binding the
conscience more to this then to other days. As for many, they pretend to have
things so immediate from God, that they are utterly against the use of any holy
means or times. As Ehud told Eglon he had a message from God, and in the mean
while thrust him through the belly with a Dagger, Judge. 3. Some they say, they
have a message from God, and that they alone have the mind of Christ, and in
the mean time they strike through Gods holy day, and stab into the very heart
of Christian Religion. Dear Christians, do not hearken to any of these, but
stoutly withstand them, as being strongly resolved for the Lords day, and the
lively duties thereof.

2. Some immediate that may seek to hinder the holy observation of the Sabbath.
As sinful relations,] Deuteronomy. 13.6, 7. If thy brother, the son of thy Mother, or
thy son, or thy daughter, or the wife of thy bosom, etc. shall entice thee
secretly, saying, Let us seek another God [let us set our selves Sabbath-free]
thou shall not consent to him nor hearken to him, thou shall not conceal him,
etc. Yea, perhaps ancient intimate acquaintance, such of whom thou may say,
as David, Psalm. 55.14. We took sweet counsel together, and walked unto the
house of God in company, spent many a sweet Sabbath together, traveled
together many a mile to hear the good Word of God, went home with hearts warmed
full of comfortable conference by the way, etc. Now course and counsel is quite
contrary, all to carry off from Ordinances, and to discourage care about the
Lods day and duties. All such must be stiffly withstood, and you strongly
resolved, not to lose the Lord's Day privilege. When Ahab sought to persuade
Naboths vineyard from him, 1 King. 21. Naboth answers Ahab, saying, The Lord
forbid it me, that I should give away the inheritance of my fathers unto thee:
Thus if you meet any man that would bereave you of your Sabbath-right: say, The
Lord forbid it me, that I should give away the sacred time of God my Father. If
Devil or World, profit or pleasure seek to pull aside: say, The Lord forbid
that I should so give away the day of my dear Redeemer, etc. Thus must you with
courage crush temptations.

2. Care must be to make for the day due preparations: In order to the Sabbath
day a double preparation is due, More general and remote, More special and
immediate.


Matters must be so ordered every day as to prepare for this day. As our whole
life should be a preparing for death: so the whole week should be a preparing
for the Sabbath. But as this precious day does more approach: so preparative
work must more increase. For that more solemn preparation when the Sabbath day
draws nigh, observe, Wherefore it is required, and Wherein it is performed.


Things that do require, and that may encourage Christians to a right
preparation for the Sabbath day are, The necessities of it, The equities for
it, and The commodities by it.


1 Things necessary that for this day we do prepare are, Because This
preparation is a duty of the Lords commanding,
And the Sabbath is the day of the Lords coming.


1. Has not the Lord commanded every man to prepare for the Sabbath, before it
comes? Remember the Sabbath Day, to keep it holy. Remembering properly is of
things absent, not present. And words of Remembrance or knowledge do import
both affection and action.

To remember the Sabbath,] It Is aforehand to mind and manage matters that
concern the Sabbaths sanctification; or that when it comes, it may be holily
kept. Yea, for every Duty of the Lords day must be a due preparance. Yea, take
up any holy task at any other time, and for it we ought to prepare. Before we
pray we must prepare for prayer; and before we hear, prepare for hearing.
Prepare for a Sermon, and prepare for a Sacrament. Now if God would have us
prepare for single Duties, when they lie more asunder, sure we should prepare
for the Sabbath when such duties are laid more together, or as Jacob and Esau,
one hold the heel of the other. Yea this Day, when we are not only to be in
the Duty, but in the Spirit, in the prompt, and powerful, and precise
transaction of every service, we had need to prepare.

2. Does not the Lord upon this Day come in comfortable visits to the souls of
his Saints, and must not they prepare for his presence? When Christ was to come
in the flesh preparation was made: And must not we make preparation when Christ
is to come in the Spirit? 'Twas the Opinion of some of the Ancients, Lactant.
lib. 7. ca. 1. Augu t. De Temp. Sermon. 154.
that Christ's personal coming to Judgment will be on the Sabbath Day. Christ's
Spiritual coming in Mercy is to be sure on the Day of the Sabbath. We see when
the Bridegroom was to come, Matthew. 25. the Virgins (especially the wise)
trimmed their lamps, and prepared oil in their vessels. The Sabbath it is the
Day when our Bridegroom comes, how ought we to trim our Lamps, and get ready
oil in our vessels? When a Great Man is to come to our houses, how are all the
rooms dressed up? When a Great God is to come to our hearts, it is necessary we
be well prepared.

2. It Is Equal and Meet for us to prepare upon the Sabbaths approach, as may
appear, if we observe the practice of several: Some past, and Some present.
In time past the people of the Jews their practice was to prepare for their
Sabbath, Luke 23.54. And that day was the preparation, for the Sabbath drew on.
That day they called their [Sabbatulum] or their little Sabbath, on which they
made ready against the great Day of their Sabbath came. Yea, the Jews in honor
of their Sabbath, and that they might the more mind it, and be in the better
preparedness for it, they use [as some Learned observe] to call the whole week
a Sabbath; P. Mart. in Genesis 1. Tremel. in Syriac Paraphr. Mat. 28.1. Theophyl.
Matthew. 28.1.
The first day of the Sabbath, and the second day of the Sabbath, and so on.
And thus much is clear according to the Greek in several Texts in the New
Testament, Luke 18.12. and 24.1. And is it not meet then for Christians, whose
Sabbath exceeds that of the Jews, to prepare themselves thereunto? We are eased
of the business of Sacrifices, have no Sheep and Oxen to prepare; we have the
more time to make ready hearts and souls for spiritual service.

Secondly, The practice of several present makes such Sabbath-preparation
meet, as may appear, if we ponder Both the good actings of some,
And the evil of others.


For good actings in order to the Sabbath, Observe, Both the good that God does
in his People,
And the good that others do for the People of God.


1. God puts into his people for their good, gracious Habits, Principles of
holiness, disposing them to all parts of his worship: yea, the Spirit of
holiness to act up those principles, that so his people may be ready pressed
and prepared always to every good work, much more for the Sabbath in the service
thereof.

2. Others [as Ministers] they prepare for the Sabbath-good of Gods people.
It Is fit people should prepare to hear, as they prepare to preach. Gods
faithful Ministers before the Sabbath do not only prepare matter to speak, but
they prepare their hearts to speak the matter. As Cocks when they are about to
Crow, they lift up themselves, and clap their wings, they may be well awake:
Thus good Ministers when they are to teach, they rouse up themselves, and
strive to raise up their own hearts, and that Gods Word it may be as a fire in
their bones. Bernard in a Sermon breaks out thus to the people: Bern. in festo
omnium sanct. Sermon. 1.
To prepare you meat, my heart all this night has been seething within me, and
in my meditations I have been enflamed as with fire. Is it not meet that people
be prepared when prechers thus prepare for the people? And as for the evil
actings of some, they are sad. There are such who on the Sabbath prepare for
their worldly work in the week. Calvin complains of some Christians in his
time: Let us consider (says he) whether they which call themselves Christians
do any otherwise regard the Sabath then thereon to attend their worldly
affairs; Calvin. in Deuteronomy. 8. Sermon. 34.
they reserve to themselves this day as if they had no other to deliberate for
the whole week to come, etc. Upon the Lords day men cut out their work, and
cast their business, how to have this and that done upon this and that day.
Shall men on the Sabbath prepare for the week, and shall not we in the week
prepare for the Sabbath? Is Mammon more to be minded then God?

3. The profit that will be to our souls by such Sabbath preparance, is
precious. By such a serious preparation our hearts will be well fitted, Both
with abilities to perform Sabbath-duties,
And with capacities to receive Sabbath-mercies.


1. The duties of the Sabbath will the better and freer come off. We shall then
with more dexterity, agility, facility transact the several parts of Gods
service. A cause why we are so often upon the Lords day lame in duty, drive
heavy, because we did not aforehand oil our wheels, inure our selves. When
David had put on Saul's Armor, his helmet, sword, and coat of Male, he assayed
therein to go and fight with Goliath, but he is at a stand; saying, I cannot go
in these, for I have not proved them, 1 Samuel 17.39. Thus a Christian when he is
to go out in the service of the Sabbath, he is so straitened, stiff and bound
up, he knows not how to go on in such duties, because he has not proved them,
or prepared for them. We should aforehand put our selves into Sabbath-Armour,
and see how we can go, how we can pray, preach, hear, etc. this would much help.

2. The mercies of the Sabbath will the larger and fuller come in. According to
our preparations, are our after-participations. According to the number and
measure of sacks the sons of Jacob prepared and carried with them out of
Canaan, so were they filled with Corn when they came to Joseph in Egypt, Genesis
44.1. According as we prepare our hearts at home in the week-time, so our
comfortable fillings be when we come before the Lord on his own day. He that
would have from his field a large crop in harvest-time, must aforehand take
pains in plowing and well preparing the ground. We do not aforehand take
preparative pains, which is the reason we reap so little in Sabbath-time.

2. We are to consider wherein this preparation of our selves for the Sabbath
consists. Now this work does comprize acts of two sorts, viz. Reflect acts on
our selves from others, and
Direct acts towatds others beyond our selves.


1. Each man amongst us must act inward upon himself, In self-examination, And
self-humiliation.


We must diligently examine our selves, What sin has been before the Sabbath,
And what need we have of the Sabbath.


Sin before must be found out, lest we come to Sabbath-day-work, under
week-day-guilt. If for week day sins God be against us when in Sabbath day
service we seek to be with God, no wonder then if things work cross. The
Mariners in Jonah they rowed hard, but the Sea wrought and was tempestuous
against them, and they could not get the ship to shore till Jonah was found
and flung out. Thus in the service of the Sabbath we may row hard, yet not get
ship to shore, heart into heaven by reason of some sin before committed that
has set God against us. Yea, we must so set into our selves as to discern the
necessities that we have of Sabbath-helps, Because of the prevalencies of sin,
And the imbecillities of grace.


We must also deeply humble our selves, and be low in self-abasements. Those
herbs rise high in the summertime, that in the winter shrink low into the
ground: Those hearts that in the week-time are laid lowest, they rise highest
upon the Sabbath day. Yea, there must be such soul-humblings for sin, as there
may be sin-removings from the soul; else the day of Gods service comes, but we
cannot serve God in the day, Joshua 24.19. Thus before the Sabbath we must
bethink our selves, commune with our heart, and make diligent search, with
penitent sorrows.

2. We must act onward toward others, to wit, Godward, and World-ward.


1. Toward God, we must prepare for the day, By consideration of him, and By
supplication to him.


1. God must be seriously thought upon. Out of desires to the God of the Day,
we should long for the Day of God, Psalm. 42.1, 2. My soul thirsts for the
living God, O when shall I come and appear before God? As she said, Judge. 5.
Why is the chariot so long in coming? and why tarry the whe^les of the
chariot? So let each soul say, Why is the Sabbath so long in coming, etc? Amos
8. some say, When will the Sabbath be gone, that we may sell corn? Let us say,
O when will the Sabbath be come, that we may sell all, and buy that Pearl? When
will the Sabbath be come? Not that we may sell, but only that we may buy of
God wine and milk without money, Esaias 55.1. That we may buy of Christ
eye salve, white raiment, and tried gold, Rev. 3.18. O when will the Day come
that we may have communion with God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost! As that
Martyr with a leap said when he was going to the stake, There is but one style
more, and I am at my Fathers House. A good man on Saturday-evening going to
bed, leaps, saying, It Is but one Night more, and I shall be in the House of God
upon his Holy Day: Meet God himself in the use of Holy Things.

2. God must be seriously sought unto. Prayer in this preparative work has a
Principal Task. Our Prayer should precede the Sabbath, In Sunder,
If not Together.


It has been the manner of some, the day before the Sabbath, to meet and spend
some time in seeking God by Prayer; and quickening one another. This fervently
performed, would lay a great Ground of a GOOD DAY indeed to follow. Melancthon
who lived with Luther in lamentable times, though his heart was ordinarily
oppressed with fears, yet finding on a time a company of good Christians
together praying: Now (says he) there be some good days coming. Say days be
evil, yet how would this raise hopes in hearts that there be many good days
coming, if the Lords Day, this good Day were by a holy prayer duly prepared
for! Indeed for want of prayer-preparation Gods good Day may be as to us an
evil Day. But upon due preparing Prayer we may safely say of an approaching
Sabbath, Behold, even as to us there is a Good Day coming! O pray, pray, pray
beforehand, pray that Ordinances may be accompanied, Instruments encouraged;
pray that there may be dischargings of sins, enlarging of souls: Seek to set
our hearts well upon the wheels. Pray that we may be upon the wing in the
work. Pray (says our Savior) that your Flight be not on the Sabbath day,
Matthew. 24. But thus pray that your Flight may be on the Sabbath day, to wit,
from earth to Heaven, holding a holy converse with God.

2. Toward the world; what we are to do in this due preparing for the Lords
Day, is Sequestration from the Matters of the World,
And Reconciliation with Men, in the World.


1. We must make off from worldly Hindrances. As Mariners that intend a Voyage
to Sea, they put the Ship off from the Land; so if we mean to serve God on the
Sabbath, our hearts and minds must be put off from the world. Put off thy
shoes, (says God to Moses) for the place whereon thou stand is holy ground,
Exodus 3.5. We must put off earthly affections, for the Sabbath we are to
observe is a Holy Day. The affairs and cares of the world we must cast off,
for it is not fit with them to come before the Lord in the Day of the Sabbath.
Joh. 5.10. the Jews said unto the man whom Christ had cured, It is not lawful
for thee to carry thy bed, because it is the Sabbath day. Upon the day of the
Sabbath it is not lawful for to carry about us our worldly minds and matters.
Therefore from these we must get free before. A bird (says a learned Writer)
that she may fly, Musculus, loc. comm. praecept. 4.
she flutters with her wings, and frees her self all she can from what may
hinder her flight. And shall not we when we are to come to Gods service on the
Sabbath, labor aforehand to deliver our selves from all earthly lets, who are
in our spirits upon the Lords day to be lifted much higher (says he) then
birds can fly? It was Nehemiahs care when the Sabbath came on, to have the
Gates of the City shut up, that not any might enter in with their burdens. It
ought to be our course to shut up the Gates of our souls, when the Sabbath is
at hand, that no burdensome cares may come in. That Christ might make us a
Sabbath to keep, in body he first rose from the earth: In heart we must rise
from the earth before ever we can well keep the Sabbath Christ has made.

2. We must make up earthly differences before the Lords day comes. While we
are at a sinful distance with men, we shall hardly make any good Sabbath
approach to God. Some they come to Sabbath-day-service, in weekday-malice: So
that on the Sabbath thougb their bodies be together, their hearts are asunder.
When you come together in one place, (says the Apostle) I hear there be
divisions among you. This is not to eat the Lords Supper, 1 Go^. 11. Though on
the Sabbath we meet in one public place, yet if we have our private grudges
amongst us, and unreconciled dissensions betwixt us, this is not to keep the
Lords Sabbath. If thou bring thy gift* to the Altar, and remember thy brother
has ought against thee, leave thy gift, and go first, and be reconciled to thy
brother, and then come and offer thy sacrifice, Matthew. 5.23. If men
unreconciled were unmeet for a legal sacrifice, how unmeet then are
unreconciled Christians for a Gospel-Sabbath? It sets us off from God, and
gives way to the Devil to end a day in strife and wrath, but in an angry case
to end a week is worse; then to let the Sun go down upon our wrath, gives place
to the Devil against the next day, Ephesians 4.27. There is no Sabbath-duty, but
strife and wrath renders us unfit for; unfit to hear, unfit to pray. I will
(says the Apostle) that men pray, lifting up pure hands without wrath, 1 Timothy
2.8. They that will be swist to hear, must be slow to wrath, Jam. 1.19. O then
especially when the Lords day approaches, we should put away all bitterness,
wrath, and anger, and evil speaking, and kindly close one with another. Did we
thus at the end of every week make up breaches, distances would not grow so
great, and Lords days would be better spent.

Thus much for Antecedaneous duties to the day of the Sabbath. Let us now
consider the days Concomitant duties, These refer, To the entrance, The
progress, and To the end of the day.


1. For the right entering of the Lords day, our duty is, That our bodies be
early up, and That our hearts be largely open.


Bodies up early.] A great ground of our Christian Sabbath is Christ his
Resurrection upon this day. Now Christ he rose early in the morning. Before the
rising of the Sun our Savior was risen, Matthew. 28.1. Mark 16.1. It is the
judgment of Orthodox Authors that our Sabbath day begins in the morning, when
Christ rose Shall a Christ be quick to get out of his grave? and shall a
Christian be slow to get out of his bed? Shall the Lord make haste to begin the
day? [even soon after midnight say some] And shall we make no haste when the
day is begun? When our Savior saw Zaccheus in the Sycomore-tree, he said to
him, Make haste, and come down, fot this day I must abide at thy house; and O
the haste that he then made to get down, etc. Luke 19.5, 6. A Christian in the
morning as he lies in his bed, should think as if the Lord looked down from
heaven, saying, Make haste and get up; for this day I must abide in thine
heart, and this day thou must meet me in mine house. When Abraham was to offer
his son in sacrifice to God: He rose early in the morning, and sadled his Ass,
and took two of his servants, and Isaac his son, with wood cleaved for a
burnt-offering, and went to the place of which the Lord had told him, Genesis
22.5, 6. And shall not we on the Sabbath morning be early up our selves, and
our famlies, to go to the place the Lord has appointed, and to offer our
bodies and souls in service to God? The Israelites who lay in siege against
Jericho, upon the seventh day they being to compass the City seven times, the
text says, And it came to pass on the seventh day, that they rose up early,
about the dawning of the day, and they compassed the City after the same manner
seven times, Joshua 6.15. Upon the Sabbath day we are to compass the City of
God seven times, to encompasse heaven with multiplied prayers: and thetefore we
stould be early up.

To helps hereunto, let us take, to wit, A timely going to rest the night
before, and
An entire love to the work of the day that follows.


It Is too common a fault even with some professing Christians, they clog the
night before the Sabbath with a multitude of worldly businesses, which brings
them to sit up late. [A Sabbath let;] And a certain fault.] Hence in the
morning when they should be up with God, they lie sleep-bound in their bed.

And (alas!) we have too little love to the Lords-day-work, and so but little
list to be at the work of the day. Were there love to it, we should long to be
at it. Our minds would be upon it in the night, and we should catch the first
hour of the day. With my soul have I desired thee in the night, and with my
spirit within me will I seek thee early, says the Prophet to God, Esaias 26.9.

Hearts open largely.] The door of the heart upon the entrance of the Sabbath
must be set wide, shut to the world, but open to God. Ezekiel. 46.1. Thus says
the Lord God, The gate of the inner Court that looks toward the East, though
shut all the six working days, yet shall be opened as soon as the Sabbath
comes: Thus the gate of the heart, that is, the inward Court, however kept shut
all the week, yet as soon as the Lords day is come, it ought to be opened: to
wit, In delights at the day of the Lord, and
In desires to the Lord of the day.


Delights at the day should enlarge the heart: joy to see a Sabbath appear. A
learned Author reports, that near the Pole where the nights endure diverse
Months, the inhabitants in the end of such a night, when the Sun begins to be
seen, they deck themselves in their best apparel, and get up to the highest
mountains, with joy, saying. Behold, the Sun, the Sun appears: The day, the
day is come. Were we for several months kept without a Sabbath; how would our
spirits spring at such a days appearance! Why should the commonnesse of the
Suns shining, and the Sabbaths coming diminish the mercy? How should we every
Lords-day-morning have our minds mounting, and say, Behold, the Sabbath of the
Lord: It is come, it is come: Desires to the Lord our hearts should be enlarged
in. The day being begun, we should begin to pour out our hearts and breath out
our requests to God in prayer, that he would prosper us with his presence; O
how well will it be, if God shall say, Go and prosper pray and prosper, preach
and prosper, hear this day and prosper: Fear not, for I am with thee, I will
help thee, I will uphold thee, I will strehgthen thee. Thus in the morning we
shall have encouraging mercies, if we take care to perform our morning duties.
Moses, Exodus 34.4. rose up early in the morning, and presented himself before
God in the top of mount Sinai, with two tables of stone ready hewed in his
hand, for the finger of God to write what he would: Thus a Christian on the
Lords-day-morning should present himself before God upon the mount of
meditation and prayer with a heart ready for what God will that day write
thereupon; waxy and willing to take whatever impression God please to stamp
therein: Not any of us are then to be content to have a heart stiff and
straight, hard and dead. The true Mother, 1 King. 3. was filled with trouble,
when in the morning she found a dead child by her: It Is the trouble of a true
Christian, when on a Sabbath day-morning he finds a dead heart in him, a heart
that is hard, cold and closed up. His labor is to begin with a heart lowly and
lively, to feel those quickenings, and kindlings of heart, as may encourage to
the day, in all the duties thereof.

2. For the progress and principal part of the Lords day our duties are
considerable, In their varieties for matter, And in our properties for manner.


For matter, the varieties of duties on the Lords day required, have been
already declared.

For manner, in performing the Lords day-duties, we in our properties must be
Knowing, Willing, Unite, Fervent, Cheerful, Watchful.


Knowing.] Knowledge it must be the Guide, Usher, Pilote and promptor of
practice. In mysteries of faith we may as a blind man [sometimes] not see our
way: But in matters to obedience we must not go blindfold, but the eye of
understanding must see how we ought to go, and what we ought to do. So in
Sabbath-work we must know how to manage the matter of God, and actions of
Godliness. We must know how to order and time our duties, that each act may go
out in its place. Ignorant people in the public Congregation will be reading,
when they should be praying; and praying, when they should be hearing, etc.
Every work (says Solomon) is beautiful in its season. We must know how to
season and proportion our duties: not greaten one to straiten another. Like one
that Artificially draws out the picture of a man, as he sets every part in its
place, so he gives every part its due proportion which is the beauty of the
body: So it is the beauty of the whole body of Sabbath-day-duty, when every
member has its measure, every act is in order, and the whole business of
Religion has its due proportion. We must also know whereat to aim, and how to
eye God; whence to fetch strength, and how to go straight; wherein lies our
wants, and where our supplies, etc.

Willing.] Psalm. 100.3. Thy people shall be a willing people in the day of thy
power: [or a people of willingnesses in the plural;] To show how exceeding
willing-hearted the Lords people should be in the day of the Lords power. The
day wherein the Lord powerfully converts men, and that day wherein men by a
spirit of power are converted to the Lord: a day of Grace: a Gospel-day. Indeed
the day of the Sabbath is a day of the Lords power, wherein all the Lords
people should be most willing in the work of the Lord.

In what we can do we are willing, and
What we cannot do we are willing to.
On the Lords day we would do more good, and more for God if we could. It Is a
complaint that on the Sabbath a gracious soul sighs up into heaven: Lord, I
would better break out, but my sins beset me: I would faster run on, but my own
heart hampers me: Lord, I would otherwise serve thee, but my thoughs hinder me:
fears and cares encompasse me: help, Lord.

Unite.] Not only the will, but the whole soul; y^^, the whole man, and the
whole might is knit and bound up for God in every good work, body and soul must
not lie severed, nor any heart in it self scattered. 'Twas a sad sin in him,
who upon the Sabbath Day gathered up sticks that lay scattered on the ground,
Number. 15.32. But it is our duty on the day of the Sabbath to gather up together
our hearts and thoughts that are scattered upon the earth, and wandering about
in the world. We should say, as the Prophet, Bless the Lord O my soul, and all
that is within me. O my soul, and all that is within me, pray: O my soul and
all that is within me hearken, etc. Unite my heart, (says David) that I may
fear thy Name. So let each soul say, Lord, unite my heart, that I may hear thy
Word. Unite my heart, that I may hold fast thy truth, keep holy thy day.

Fervent.] The zeal of Gods house, and zeal of the Lords day should even eat us
up. Our hearts should burn within us like fire. See what God by Moses says to
the Jews, Exodus 35.3. Ye shall kindle no fire throughout your houses upon the
Sabbath Day. But upon the day of the Sabbath our duty is to kindle a fire
throughout all our hearts. The fire of zeal fits the service of God. On the
Sabbath we should go up to God in a Chariot of this fire. The force of this
fire would carry us into the highest heaven from the lowest earth. And from
earth to heaven is a good Sabbath-dayes-journey. Yea, such a burning fire of
zeal on the Sabbath would bring heaven (as it were) down to the earth, God into
our hearts. Exodus 3. we read how the presence of God appeared in a burning Bush
In burning hearts, in burning prayers appears much of the presence of God.
'Twas the praise of holy Hezekiah, he appointed burnt-offerings for the Sabbath
days, 2 Chronicles. 31.3. Burning sacrifices for blessed Sabbaths.

Cheerful.] Several of the Ancients much insist upon that care and course
which becomes Christians in carrying on the Sabbath more strictly then the
Jews were wont. August. Enar. in Psalm. 32. Tom. 8. part. Page 242. Aug. Tract.
3. in Joan. 1. Tom. 9. Ignat. Epist. ad Magnes. Page 57. Hilar. prolog. in
Psalm. oper. p. 335.
Whereas they kept the Sabbath carnally in feasting, dancing, and sensual
delights. We Christians must Sabbatize or keep the Sabbath spiritually, in holy
joys, heavenly contents, and religious delights; we must feast and dance too:
but our feasting must be conversing with God: our meat and drink to do the will
of God: Our dancing must be, the leaping of soul to see the face of the Lord in
the glass of the Gospel. And though on the Lords day we be not drunk with wine
wherein is excess, yet we must be filled with the Spirit. The comforts of the
Spirit are sweeter and better then all the wine in the world, and of this we
should take our Lords day draughts, Cant. 5.3. On this day we should drink wine
with our milk, eat our honeycomb with our honey, be in the Garden and gather
Myrrh with our Spice. This is the day that the Lord has made, we will
rejoice* and be glad therein, Psalm. 118.24. Psalm. 42. says David, Why art thou
cast down, O my soul, why art thou disquieted within me? Himself gives the
cause: His banishment, that he could not now go with the multitude to the house
of God, with the voice of joy and praise among them that keep holy day. Such as
can come to God's house upon his holy day, should not come with dejected souls,
but with the voice of joy and praise, triumphing in God,

Watchful.] For our Sabbath day watch, observe What we are to watch against,
and What we are to watch for.


1. Against the incursions of the Devil we are to watch all the Lords day long.

That God, who will, Revel. 20. bind up Satan for a thousand years, can easily
bind him for Sabbath-dayes. But yet even upon such days Satan is much let
loose, Job. 1.6. There was a day when the Sons of God came to present
themselves before the Lord, and Satan came also among them. The Sons of God on
that day came before God for good, but Satan had ill designs to hinder them
that would honor God. When Joshua the high Priest stood before the Angel of
the Lord, Satan stood at his right hand to resist him, Zech. 3.2. 'Twas the
policy of Pompey, Vespasian, Titus and other enemies of the Jews soreliest to
assault the City Jerusalem on the Sabbath days, when they refused to defend
themselves. Upon Sabbath days are the Devils most desperate designs. He is
ever bad, but worst upon the best days. O watch, watch: A harming Devil on a
helping day.

2. For the incommings of the Spirit of Christ, let us watch upon the Lords
day. As when the Dove sat upon the Ark, Noah put forth his hand and took her
in: When the Spirit of the Lord begins to light upon our hearts, we should
presently hand it in. Embrace his first motions, open and give him entrance:
otherwise Ordinances will do us little good. Genesis 1. We find a dark lump of
earth and water, but if the Spirit of the Lord had not moved upon the face of
the water the world had never been made, nor living creatures brought forth:
It Is the Spirit upon the Word that causes a new creation, living Christians. O
then when we are under the Word, and in the midst of the waters of Ordinances,
wait and watch for the good Spirit of God. Other birds drive away, but bid the
Dove welcome.

3. At the end of the Lords day let us see to our duty: lest we begin in the
Spitit, and end in the flesh. Nebuchadnezzars Image, the head and upper part
was gold, but the feet and lower part Iron and Clay: In the morning and
beginning of the Lords day our hearts have heavenly heat, and at evening, the
end of the Sabbath, all is Iron and Clay. Hearts hard and cold: it is ill when a
Christians affections are as the grass the Prophet speaks of, Psalm. 90.6. In
the morning it flourishes, and in the evening it is cut down, dried up and
withered. Plutarch reports of a River that runs sweet in the morning, but
bitter in the evening. It Is the property of some sinful men if they have done
somewhat on the Sabbath in the service of God, they are the more bold to sin
even before the day is gone; like the Harlot, Prove. 7.14, 18. I have
peace offerings with me, this day I have paid my vows, come let us take our
fill of love till the morning. That very day she had been at sactifice, she
presumes sordidly to sin. But it is the property of persons truly pious,
whatever good they have done upon the Lords day, they labout to complete the
service, will not neglect their evening-sacrifice, in private prayer,
meditation, conference, care of their families, keeping up their kindled
affections, least in the cool of the evening, they lose the heat of the day. Or
lest by neglect of the evening they lose any part of the day. Gods sincere
servants they keep the Sabbath as Soldiers keep a City, they look with care to
every Gate and part thereof. And such care becomes Christians Sabbath-ward, not
to watch one Gate, and leave another open: to work one part, and be the other
idle. To be quick and lively at first, and to stagger and grow sluggish at last.

Yea, some experienced Christians can say, that upon their continued care
throughout the Sabbath, though their hearts in the former part of the day have
been down, dull and dead, yet toward the latter end the Lord has come with
large enlivenings of soul. As the poor Israelites weary in travel, and fainting
for food, ready all day long to perish with hunger: At even there went forth a
wind from the Lord that br^ught so many Quails from the Sea, as came and
covered the Camp. O the quickening comforts that God in great abundance has
brought in upon the evening of a Sabbath to the souls of his Saints, who before
in the day were ready to sink with sadness and deadness. Of this day to some
we may say as the Prophet of another day, Zech. 14.6, 7. It shall come to pass
in that day, that the light shall not be clear nor dark, but it shall come to
pass that at evening-time it shall be light, and living waters shall go out.
Christians should never be satisfied to end the Sabbath Day in the dark, and in
a drought without some sweet ref^eshings from God.

Lastly, for subsequent duties when the day is done and gone; they come forth
upon a double case, In case it has not been well with us,
In case with us it has been well.


If we have been dull in our duty, and met with little of mercy, then our
endeavors should be To enquire the cause, and To lament the loss.


1. We should reflect to find out the cause of our heartlesse, and fruitless,
passing Gods precious day; What way laid our work, what kept God and our souls
asunder all the day long, When the Egyptians were pursuing the Israelites, God
set a cloud betwixt them, that darkened the camp of the Egyptians so that they
and the camp of Israel came not near one another all the night, Exodus 14.20.
What has caused a dark cloud betwixt us and God, so that we have not come near
one another all the day, Enquire this.

2. We must sadly bewail the loss of a Sabbath. 'Twas the rxpression once of
a great man, when a day was gone, and he had not done that good he was wont, he
brake out to some about him: O my friends, I have lost a day: The loss of any
day is matter of mourning; but to lose the Lords day, and the Lord in the day,
may cause a loud cry. When Elisha was going with Elijah, and a Chariot of fire
came and parted them asunder, carrying Eijah to heaven, and leaving Elisha on
the earth, he looked up and cried, My Father, my Father, 2 King. 2. Has God
and thee O Christian, been parted asunder upon the Sabbath, and has the Lord
left thy heart upon the earth, and gone himself up into heaven: O think so upon
this, as to cry, My Father, my Father. Repent for the loss of the Lords day,
and lament after the Lord that on his day thou have lost.

If on the Lords day we have been fired in duty, and filled with mercy, and
found much of God both in mercy, and duty; In that case the things of us
required are, To be thankful, To be careful, To be faithful, To be fruitful.


1. For to be thankful all have much cause: Yet some have more cause to be
thankful.

For the space of the Sabbath, and the use of Ordinances, all ought to be
thankful to God. Had not our good God prevented evil designs we had had no
Sabbaths. And had not God preserved us a Sabbath, we had been like the places
of Papists and Pagans. Except the Lord of Hosts had left us a Sahhath, we had
been as Sodom, and had been like unto Gomorrah, Romans 9.29. The Lord has
showed himself loath to leave us, yea, expressed his love to our Land in the
lengthened liberties of Sabbaths. The Sabbath in the first appointment was a
pledge of large love: but in the perpetual preserving the Sabbath, the pledge
of Gods love is larger. He is worthy (say the Jews of the Centurion to Christ)
for whom thou should do this; for he has loved our Nation, and built us a
Synagogue, Luke 7.5. The Lord is worthy of this praise for he has loved our
Nation, and kept us a Sabbath. The Prophet reproves the sin of some, who say
not in their hearts, Let us now fear the Lord our God that gives both the
former and the latter rain in his season, and reserveth the appointed weeks of
the harvest, Jer. 5.24. O the sin of such who say not in their hearts, Let us
fear, love, laud the Lord who reserveth to us the appointed days of the
Sabbath, which is a greater mercy then to reserve for us the appointed weeks of
the harvest.

But how much more thankful ought some of us to be to our good God, who gives
us not only the space, but the grace of the Sabbath; not only the use, but
the juice of Ordinances? when Sabbaths, Sermons, Sacraments, are to several,
but saplesse things. When the the Lord gives us with his holy Sabbath, his
holy Spirit. Nehem. 9.14, 20. Thou, O Lord, commandedst thy people precepts,
and statutes by the hand of Moses thy servant, and made known unto them thy
holy Sabbath: And thou gave them also thy good Spirit to instruct them, and
withheldest not Manna from their mouths, but gave them water for their
thirst. What cause had they? Such cause have we to be thankful, to whom the
Lord with a Sabbath of mercy, gives the mercies of the Sabbath. A comfortable
day, and the comforts of the day. O let the Lord have the high and heated
praises of our hearts in heavenly Hallelujahs.

2. Let us be very careful to keep off from sin and Satan. Satan after the best
spent Sabbaths has often the worst assaults. 'Twas the expression of an
experienced precious man: I look for the Devil every munday-morning; I am sure
then he will come to rob my soul of Sabbath-good, if possible. I read of a
great Captain, who being very sad the day after a mighty victory, one enquired
the cause, who answered, Yesterday my heart was too much lifted up, I had need
lie low to day. Have any of our hearts been raised and ravished, enlivened and
enlarged upon the Lords day; we had need look to it on the following day, and
keep our selves lowly, lest that mind which has been one day heavenly, be the
next day haughty. Pride is a worm apt to breed within the best wood. Beware,
beware.

3. Let us be faithful to keep up the good we have got: we are apt to catch
cold after the greatest heats: And after some close attendance in Gods service
to grow more loose and remiss in duty. Let us look to our selves we do not
lose the things we have wrought, we do not break the bounds we have set, or
slack the holy bonds wherewith we have been begirt. To be unloosened on the
Sabbath from weekday bonds is comfortable: but in the week-time to unloose the
Lord's Day bonds is abominable.

4. Let us be fruitful to bring forth more good for God, both in our general
and particular callings. That our week day carriage may be the springing up of
Sabbath Day seed: yea, our whole lives must be a walking in Sabbath Day
strength. Tertul. C. Jud. 4. Origin. in Numb. Hom. 23. cont. Cells. lib. 8. Page
522. etc. Chryso^t. in Matthew. tract. 29. Aug. de civit. Dei. lib. 22. cap. 30.
Idem. Epist. 119. cap. 12. Et de cons. Evang. lib. 2. cap. 77.
And thus ought we to keep a holy Sabbath throughout the whole course of our
days. Diverse of the Ancients dwell much upon this, persuading Christians so to
practice piety, and pursue sanctity, as to perpetuate a Sabbath. As upon the
Lords day we should be full of spirits, so after the Lords day we should be
spiritual still. As on that day we should live in the Spirit, so afterward we
should walk in the Spirit, Gal. 5.25. This I say then, Walk in the Spirit, and
ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh. If all the week we be carnal, how
can it appear we are spiritual on the Sabbath? A good Author speaks well in
this case, Have we well served the Lord upon his day? Bucer. in Matthew. 12.11.
let our manners show it, let our works prove it, let the holiness of our
lives decleare it. Who will believe that he has been present in public
Assemblies, and with a sincere heart has heard Gods holy Word, who passes the
following part of his life more loosely, vainly, carnally, coveteously, etc?
It Is this will evidence that on the Sabbath we have been with Jesus, when
afterward our faces and graces shine, our lips and lives hold out the praises
of Christ, and the power of his Gospel. When the Lords day comes we should be
as lively, fiery, and full, as if we were then to begin and end Gods work. We
should be found in such a fr^me every Lords day, as if that were the first
Sabbath that ever we spent, and as if it were the last day that we should live
on this earth; or as if the weight of all our work lay upon that single Sabbath
for which we were sent into the World: or as if our eternal being were to be
determined hereby. And yet after the day is over we must endeavor still to be
doing, as if no work were done. For as we must be all abundant and fervent on
the Sabbath day in the service of God, as if after were no holy duties: So we
must be as full and forward to all following duties, as if there had been no
Sabbath before. Before the Sabbath day, and after we must do all the good we
can even as if there were no Christ to be relied upon, and yet our relyance,
both in life and death, must be on our dear Lorld, as if there never had been
the least good done.

We must be precise for the Sabbath Day, and duty. And yet, yet, Duty shall not
be our Redeemer,
Nor the Sabbath our Savior.


Whether Sabbath Day or weekday we will do as much good as ever we are able:
but begin and end all in Christ.

The end with us, shall be the glory of the Lord;
And with the Lord in glory, shall be our end.
Amen, Amen.
FINIS.
AN Alphabetical Table directing to some Principal things in this Treatise.
A
ADam in Innocence to keep the Sabbath. page 7, 175 Advocate how Christ is, and
for whom. p. 402 Angels they have a twofold knowledge, p. 216 Angels all
Ministering spirits. page 227 Angels helpers in all holy Duties. p. 228 Angels
delight in Sabbath-service, p. 217. Atheists of two sorts. p. 32 Antichrists
ruin how wrought. p. 198 Augustine's answer to a Manichees p. 328 Assent to
Divine truths what. p. 121
B
BAbylons fall twofold. p. 203 Baptism of Infants why many against it. p. 401
Baptism of Infants its great use. page 340 Book of Psalms how excell^nt. p.
129 Blood of Christ what it purchased. p. 92 Blessing of God how desirable. p.
197 Breaches abundance how they come. p. 339
C
CHange of the Sabbath upon a double cause. p. 34 Christian liberty wherein it
consists. p. 36, 37 Charitable Duties how fit for the Sabbath. p. 66, 132
Church Discipline exercised on the Lords Day. p. 131 Censures in the Church how
to be inflicted. p. 407 Cheerfulness in Gods service required. p. 462
Collections for the poor how to be managed. p. 340 Conscience good what it is.
p. 253 Conscience troubled how sad. p. 222 Contentions of Brethren how bad. p.
328 Communion with Christ how sweet. page 102 Christ spiritual in all his
Estates. p. 390 Covetousness the root of evil. p. 50
D
Days all how they are the Lords. p. 4. Difference of Days how under the
Gospel. p. 38 Doctrine of the Lords Day strongly to be held. p. 122 Day of
Judgment draws near. p. 116 Delights in the Lords Day required. pa. 456
Desires after God discovered. p. 350 Discipline requisite in the Church. p. 429
Devil a bitter enemy to tht Sabbath. page 410 Devil large in knowledge. p. 321
Devils called spiritual wickednesses, why, p. 412 Divisions the evil of them.
p. 431 Divisions how closed. p 432
E
ENgland one of the ten horns. p. 241 England old how made new. p. 433 Enmities
in man against God. p. 319 Errors against the Sabbath how sad. p 83
F
FAthers of three sorts. p. 208 Faith beyond feeling. p. 335 Faith has its
Dimensions. p 289 Faith its various Use. p. 387 Faith in the state, and in the
Acts differenced. p 235 Faith the best belo^ed Grace. p. 248 Fervency in prayer
how fit. p. 398 Forgetfulness of God how sinful. page 87 Fourth Commandment
most excellent. pa. 9
G
GOd what he best likes. p 424 Gospel whereunto it guides. p. 122 Gospel
veiled in the Law. p. 177 Gospel it excels the Law. p. 190 Government of Christ
how ordered. p. 394 Grace in its actings most excellent. p. 416 Ground why to
be tilled by Adam. p. 7
H
HAnds given for a threefold work. p. 75 Hearts of Gods Saints like Vials. p
302 Heart is the best part in a Saint. p. 305 Heart of a wicked man as a bow.
p. 321 Hearing Gods Word a Duty. p. 128 Heretics not endure Scripture. p. 364
Honor to Christ due as to God. p. 305 Humble how necessary. p 325 Humility how
wrought. p. 326 Hypocrite how far observing the Sabbath. p. 417
I
Idleness on the Sabbath a great sin. page 52 Judgments of God upon
Sabbath Breakers. p. 103 Jewish Sabbath ceased. p. 31 Judgment Day now
approaching, p. 116 Jews had diverse Sabbaths, p. 176 Israel a more excellent
Name then Jacob. p. 189 Isle Patmos where it was. p. 2 John the Apostle
compared to the Eagle, p. 1. Intercession of Christ how performed. pa. 393
Judgments of God on Sabbath Breakers. p. 105
K
KNowledge of God by his Judgments. p. 118 Knowledge necessary to practice. p
458 Knowledge, to sin against it sad. p. 144
L
LAst days many Antichrists. p. 14 Law given by Christ, p. 141 Law and Gospel
differing. p. 38 Libe^ty under the Gospel what it is. p. 36 Light of Nature to
what it leads. p. 122 Love the spring of all Gods Mercies. p. 470 Love the
spring of all our obedience. p. 125 Lords Day how excellent a Name. p. 189
Lords Prayer how excellent. p. 190 Lords Supper how excellent. p. 191 Lord of
the Sabbath why Christ so called. p. 24 Lord of Hosts why God so styled. p. 112
M
MAgistrates who honor them most. p. 208 Magistrate his duty on the Lords day,
p. 134 Minister on the Lords Day his duty. p. 135 Masters of Families their
duties thereon. p. 136 Ministers Office most excellent wherein. p. 184 Mission
of the Holy Ghost when it was. p. 19 Meditation how excellent. p. 370 Man a
compound creature. p. 257 Ministers work differing from others. p. 353
Ministers must preach though none profit. p. 229 Motions spiritual how
discovered. p. 348
N
NAzienzen's saying of Athanasius. p. 326 Necessary what works are for the
Sabbath. p. 74 Necessary the Sabbath for all sorts of men. p. 144
O
OBedience to God is a debt upon all, p. 141 Obedience double due to God. p.
148 Ordinances their great Use. p. 369 Ordinances the best not above them. p.
147 Ordinances of God are all spiritual. pa. 395 Order in Gods service
requisite. p. 459
P
PAtience its necessary Use. p. 335 Pleasures of sin, and sinful pleasures
differ. p. 43 Places of public Worship to be frequented. p. 63 Public
preaching above private reading. p. 64 Punished here some sinners are and not
other so, why. p. 118 Psalms of David fit to be sung. page 129 People of God
more excellent then other men. p. 190 Power given to the Apostles threefold. p.
18 Prayer the admirable force thereof. p. 204 Praising of God more excellent
then prayer. p. 371 Preparation to the Sabbath opened. page 444 Presence of God
how with his Ordinances. p. 358
R
RAnting condemned. p. 341 Rainbow sign of peace. p. 321 Reading the Scriptures
in public necessary. p. 367 Reason cannot rule many men. p. 334 Redemption
surpasses the work of Creation. p. 11 Robbery worse then theft. p. 88
Resurrection of Christ how excellent. p. 16 Remembrance of Good what it
implies. p. 438 Reliance must be on Christ alone. p. 476 Relapsers of three
sorts. p. 146 Resting in Ordinances how bad. p. 369 Ruin of Rome draws nigh.
p. 241
S
SAbbath how it ought to be continual. p. 39 Sabbath the whole Day to be kept,
p. 56, 71 Sabbath-breaking how great a sin. p. 86 Sabbath not sanctified is
polluted. p. 95 Sacrifices dead suited Jewish Sabbaths. p. 374 Sacrilege how
great a sin. p. 89 Sin worse then punishment. p. 109 Sin against Ordinances how
great. p. 90 Singing of Psalms a sweet Duty. p. 128 Soul of man how excellent.
p. 154 Sacraments to be administered on the Sabbath day. p. 130 Segullah what it
signifies. p. 26 Sacrament of the Supper how excellent. p. 191 Separation, the
evils thereof. p. 337 Seducers why called spirits. p. 413 Seraphims, why Angels
so called. p. 422 Soul of man has a double Mansion. p 260 Spirie how variously
taken. p. 257 Spirit of God moves freely. p. 329
T
Thankfulness for Sabbath liberties. p. 470 Tree of life more excelllent then
the Tree of knowledge. p. 345 Trinity of persons their proper works. p. 20
U
UNity among Christians, the good fruits thereof. p. 433 Unity in Religion how
obtained. p. 432 Unthankfulness a great sin. p. 86
W
Waldensis whence their Rise. p. 120 Watchfulness in Gods servants needful.
p. 463 Withering branch and root how sad. p. 166 Weekday Lectures their good.
p. 174 We^k-day pl^asures their danger. p 221 Works not to be done on the
Sabbath, two sorts. p. 42 Works on the Sabbath to be done of two sorts. p. 51
Works Christ did, the same God did. p. 10 Willingness required in Gods
service, page 459 Word preached better then Word read. pa. 64 Wrath unfits men
for good Duties. p. 452.
Z
ZEal in Gods service good. p. 375 Zion deprived of Sabbaths, sad. pa. 152
Some Scriptures occasionally explained.
Genesis.
chapter ver. page 2. 3. 197 13. 8. 327

Exodus.
chapter v. page 32. 19. 161

Leviticus.
chapter ver. page 26. 33. 153

1 Samuel
chapter v. pa. 28. 15. 363

Job.
chapter ver. page 1. 6. 228

Proverbs.
chapter ver. page 24. 27. 183 25. 11. 183

Psalm.
41. 1. 306 51. 12. 283 108 1. 306

Esaias.
chapter ver. page 43. 1. 413

Jeremiah.
chapter ver. page 17. 27. 104

Lamenta.
chapter ver. page 2. 6. 103

Amos.
4. 7. 111

Matthew.
Chapter Ve. Page 5. 3. 266 12. 44 316 24. 20. 24

Mark.
chapter ver. page 1. 23. 316 2. 28. 26

Luke.
chapter v. page 2. 37. 73 5. 6. 237 15. 8. 267

John.
chapter ver. page 20. 24. 17

Romans.
chapter ver. page 8. 7. 319 8. 9. 262 8. 26. 382 9. 16. 230 12. 2. 258

Galatians.
chapter ver. page 3. 9. 141 5. 25. 261

2 Timothy.
chapter v. page 4. 2. 183

2 Thessalonians.
chapter v. page 2. 8. 204

Hebrews.
chapter ver. page 4. 12. 360

1 Peter.
chapter v. page 2. 2. 64

Jam.
chapter ver. page 4. 5. 316

1 John.
chapter v. page 4. 1. 325

Revelations.
chapter ver. page 4. 8. 265 5. 8. 302 12. 15. 381 14. 6. 203 21. 22. 147 22. 1.
290

FINIS.

