MERCY In Her EXALTATION. OR, A Sovereign Antidote against Fear of the Second
Death. In a Sermon preached at the Funeral of Daniel Tailor Esquire in Stephens
Colemanstreet London, on the twentieth day of April, An. 1655.

There is no Fear in Love: But perfect Love casts out Fear. 1 John 4. 18. His
heart is established: He shall not be afraid, until he see his desire upon his
enemies. Psalm 112. 8. Certissime indulgentiam expectare poterit, qui aliis
indulgere novit. Aug. De Tempor. Sermon. 203. Sine causa peccata accusant, quem
pauper excusat. -- Qui foenerat pauperi, ipsum sibi judicem praestitit
debitorem. Chrysologus. LONDON, Printed by J. Macock, for H. Eversden, and are
to be sold at his Shop at the Sign of the Greyhound, in Paul's Churchyard.
1655.

To Mris Margaret Tailor the late Wife of Mr Daniel Tailor deceased, Mr Edmond
Tailor, Mr Samuel Tailor his Brethren, together with the rest of his Kindred,
Allies, Friends and Acquaintance, Grace, Mercy, and Peace from God the Father,
and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Friends, Christian and Beloved;
IT was signified unto me by some of you, as the desire of many more, that what
should be preached at the Interment of your dear Friend and mine, Mr Daniel
Tailor, might be commended unto the Press, that so the memory of his exemplary
and Christian life, might live upon the better terms amongst you, and be the
readier at hand for your Christian service, upon all occasions* The Sermon, I
confess, rather intimates, and this very sparingly, then discourses, the
particulars of his worth: Upon my entrance hereinto, I declared my self under a
solemn resolution (not much short of a vow) not to offend the weakest of the
living, by commending, no not the strongest of the dead, especially not in the
Pulpit, not at such a time, when their highest concernments are in hand, and
they most sacredly engaged to attend them with all their might and strength.
Only the principal subject of the Sermon, Mercy, was indeed not the least of
his commendations. His example herein will bless you, if you follow it, but
will rise up in judgment against you, if you turn your backs upon it. His
other endowments, as well moral as intellectual, were very excellent, both for
kind, and degree. He was Religious, not of custom, or of course, but of
conscience, nobly disdaining to prostitute his judgment to any
circumforaneous, or vulgar opinion in matters appertaining unto God, simply
upon the credit, or recommendation, of other men's Faith; and withal studiously
scrupulous and tender of receiving any Notion or Tenent whatsoever, into his
Belief, until he had caused it to pass through the fire of a district
examination and enquiry, and found that it would not burn. Whilst the health
and strength of his body was able to bear the weight of exercises of Devotion,
he maintained a constant and close trade of communion with God: and in the time
of his last weakness, a few weeks before his change, amongst other savoury
Discourse, he bemoaned himself, that since the prevailing of his distemper upon
him, he was deprived of his heartbreaking opportunities with God. His heart
was up very high in desires after knowledge of the Truth, and this in the most
profound Questions controverted between men of greatest judgments in these
days. Books of Divinity that were any thing judiciously or accurately written,
his delight was, at his spare hours.

Nocturna versare manu, versare diurna;
By night to read; and not to spare by day.
He put no difference between persons, either for their concurrence with him,
or dissent from him, in matters of opinion, or form of worship. But that which
commended any person unto him, was his own opinion of his integrity, and
goodness of heart toward God. Some to whom his heart stood very close in
affection, whilst they were yet sound in the Faith touching Infant Baptism,
found no change in his respects toward them, after their judgments had warped
the contrary way, no not after they had disclaimed all Christian communion with
him in a Church way. His signal Integrity, Justness, and Clearness in dealings,
as well in the administration of the Trust committed unto him, as in his
private occasions, are freely testified by all that had to do with him in
either kind, with a nemine contradicen^e, (as far as I have heard.) The
Greatness (which some call Goodness) of his Estate, made no breach at all upon
the goodness of his disposition in his conversation: He observed no distance,
made between himself, and the meanest of his Brethren, by his abundance;
Persons even of lowest degree, by the mediation of his affableness and
humility, found access unto him upon all their occasions; and few, if any, came
from him discontented. His carriage was composed and grave, yet without
affectation: His Discourse, seasonable and savoury, without offense. His native
temper seemed to incline him to much reservedness: but by judgment and
conscience he reduced that which was less desirable, or less useful, in this
inclination. His Habit and Garb every ways comely, suitable rather to his
profession, then estate. Whatever savoured of ostentation or vanity, he left to
be taken up by persons of looser and lighter spirits. The full cup, which God
gave unto him, he carried with an even and steady hand, without spilling: yet
freely gave to every man that was a thirst, and came in his way, to drink.

His intellectual endowments were given him by the largest measure, which God
in these days is wont to mete unto men. What Ethan, or Heman, Chalcol, or
Darda, 1 King. 4. 31.
were in their generation, the like, or not much unlike, was he in his. His
understanding was large, and very comprehensive: His apprehension quick and
piercing: his judgment solid and mature, his memory, fast and faithful; his
elocution, or speech, distinct and clear, elegant, and fluent enough, yet not
luxuriant or pedantick. He was more then of ordinary abilities to argue the
most thorny and abstruse points in Divinity; ready of Discerning, where the
quick of any controversy, or matter in debate lay: very expert he was in the
word of Righteousness, able to draw waters of life out of such Wells of
salvation, from whence many men of good understanding, and parts of Learning,
had not wherewith to draw, because of the depth of them. He had a singular
dexterity to make the rough things of business, smooth, to turn the insides of
matters, outward, to untie knots, and dis-intangle intricacies, in all manner
of affairs that were brought to him. I scarce know any man amongst those he
has left behind him, of like felicity with him of giving counsel and advice,
in cases of difficulty, and doubtful consideration.

In sum, as well for parts of Nature, as of Grace, he was an highly accomplished
man, adorned and set forth by God, for a pattern, as for others, so for you
(more nearly related to him) more especially. I trust his life though he be
dead, shall speak unto you, whilst yours continues, and help to form and
fashion you into the same image of Christian worth and desireableness with him.
The best way to make your selves as little losers as may be by his death, is to
live by the pattern of his life, and to preserve the memory of all that was
exemplary in him, not so much for story, or discourse, as for a spur to a
conscientious imitation. Your day is coming, as his is lately past: yet a
little while, and you will all overtake him in the dust. If in the mean time
your hearts through the Grace of God, will serve you so to live, as that you
may be counted worthy to stand at the same hand of Jesus Christ with him in the
great day, you and he shall never part company more.

The God of all Grace shall mightily incline your hearts to desire part and
fellowship with him in this blessedness, or else deny (which I confidently hope
he will not) the fervent Prayer, of

From my Study in Swan Alley Colemanstreet, May 15. 1655. Your Friend in
Christ, cordial and faithful to serve you, JOHN GOODWIN.

To the Reader.
GOod Reader, I was bound with a threefold cord of engagement to publish the
Sermon in thy hand. First, the memory of my dear friend deceased, at whose
Funerals it was preached, pleaded the law of friendship, and by the Award
hereof demanded, either this, or somewhat more monumentous (if any such thing
had been within my reach) at my hand. Secondly the solicitations of some of his
relations and friends in the name of many more for the publication of it, were
too considerable to be neglected, especially by me, yea or by a person of
greater breadth in the world then I. Lastly, the misunderstanding (as I hear)
of some things by some persons, present at the delivery, requires a more steady
representation of what was spoken, to make their crooked things straight.

The vulgar vote and report of the outward estate of my worthy friend (now in
an incapacity himself to rectify men's apprehensions in any thing relating to
him) has been somewhat injurious unto the preciousnesse of his memory, and
this even amongst those, who know ground enough wherefore to honor him, and
only suppose a ground wherefore they should honor him less. The common
estimate and discourse of his estate, surmounting a third part, and not a
little more, the reality and truth of it can seth the proportion of his
bequests to appear less and so less honorable and lovely in the eyes of
some, the the truth of all things known and considered, reason represents
them. A twelfth, or there abouts sequestered by will out of an estate, where
there is a wife; and several children to be considered, is no proportion of
disparagement either to the wisdom, or piety, or bounty of any man; especially,
where a life full of works of mercy has gone before. When those that are rich
in this world, are charged by God to be rich in good works, 1 Timothy 6. 17, 18.
the charge (questionless) respects rather the time of the lives, then of
the deaths, of such men. And when as God himself has contented himself with
prescriptions in general, as that rich men do good, be ready to distribute,
willing to communicate, be rich in good works, etc. Ibid.
for men to undertake to prescribe particulars, is a kind of pretending to be
wise above that which is written. However, I wish, rather then expect, that
they who complain that Grantham steeple stands awry, would set up a streighter
by it, and fear that when themselves shall come to the trial, they will
justify the truth of the Greek Proverb, (...), i. e. that it is easier to carp
then to copy, or imitate. But whilst others censure, certain I am the poor
lament and mourn over the loss of their good Benefactor; and are like to have
cause of greater lamentation for the future, unless God shall vouch safe to
stir up unto them some other, one, or more, like unto him, anointed with the
like spirit of mercy in his stead.

Concerning the Sermon-mistakes of some (for I do not hear of more then a very
few that found, what, or how to mistake) it seems they were jealous that some
things delivered trench'd very near (if not too near) upon the Popish
Doctrine of justification by works. But certain I am that I speak nothing from
first to last of works, in reference to justification; nor did either the
subject I had in hand, nor the method of my discourse, lead me to treat little
or much of justification; especially not of that justification which consists
in remission of sins. I am not more clear, nor better resolved in my judgment,
touching the truth of any one Article, o^ Doctrine of Christian Religion, then
that all the good works in the world, were they, or could they be performed by
any one man that has sinned in the least, would not be able to procure the
pardon or forgiveness of his sins. Pardon of sin cannot be obtained by doing of
good, but by suffering evil, and this by a person who is sinlesse, according to
the typical representation under the Law, of which the Apostle speaks, Heb. 9.
22. And almost all things are by the Law purged with blood: (...), and without
shedding of blood there is no remission. That justification which consists in
the divine approbation of men, as, well done good and faithful Servant, Mat.
25. 21. 23. and so, Then shall every man have praise of God, 1 Cor. 4, 5. of
which kind of justification that is to be understood, not the hearers of the
Law are just before God, but the doers of the Law shall be JUSTIFIED, Romans 2.
13. So again, Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, come ye
blessed of my Father inherit, etc. Mat. 25. 34. etc. this kind of justification
(I say) without which no man shall be saved, more then without the other, is to
be obtained by good works, yet not properly, nor so much by the merit of these
works, as by virtue of the Law of God's most gracious and bountiful
acceptance. And yet to say or think on the other hand, that there is nothing
at all in these works, or nothing more then in others which are contrary to
them, to commend any man unto God for his approbation or acceptance, is to
reflect disparagement upon his wisdom and right^^^^^^esse in the establishment
of that Law, by which they come to be approved, and accepted upon such terms.
Some words (possibly) might fall from me in my Sermon relating to this
justification, I mean, to the notion, matter, or substance of it; for as for
the term or word it self, I purposely declined it to prevent mistakes in those
that might be weak, not having then either time or occasion, to open or handle
the difference between the two justifications. But I have had experience before
now of that strein of weakness in many professors, which makes them unable to
distinguish between things necessary to justification and to salvation; and
again, between the two kinds of justification now specified. By reason of this
weakness, some have taken deep impressions of discontent and offense at those
Ministers of the Gospel* who were men of the greatest faithfulness to their
souls, only because they were zealous and importunale in exhorting,
persuading, provoking, pressing, urging them to good works, in order to the
saving of their souls, which notwithstanding is the Apostles express Doctrine,
1 Timothy 6. 17, 18, 19. and the Holy Ghosts in I know not how many places more.

I have added, altered, or inserted very little, in so much of the Sermon
ensuing, as I had time to deliver, when it was preached. Only I give a brief
touch of one thing forgotten about the explication of the Doctrine, and
increase the number of the reasons by one or two. Otherwise, that which is here
added, is little, but some inlargements of my self in the application, which
being imprisoned in an hour glass, I had no liberty then to deliver.

God, who sometimes hangs great weights upon small wiers, give thee much out
of this little, and cause the Treasury of thy Grace and knowledge to rejoice by
the casting in of this mite in to it. In the prayer, there is the heart of

From my Study in Swan-Alley Coleman-street London, May 18. 1655. Thy Friend
and Brother, zealous to serve thee in Christ. JOHN GOODWIN.

ERRATA.
PAge 4. line 20. read, (...). p. 13, l. 9. r. occasions. l. 27. dele. arc. p.
17. l. 18. 19. r. grounds, reasons. p. 21. l. 15. d. the. l. 20. r. whit as. p.
22. l. 2. r. children. p. 26. l. 14. r. sympathy. p, 32. l. 27. r. their. l.
29. sees his, should be transferred hither, from the line following. p. 41. l.
22. r. heaps. p. 42. l. 30. r. her. p. 45. l. 5. r. irresistible. p. 48. l. 7.
r. men.

JAMES 2. 13. And Mercy rejoices against Judgment.
THe Dead (as David's meditation long since awarded the case) praise not the
Psalm. 115. 17
Lord; meaning, by any thing they now do in the state and condition of death:
only by those things which they did whilst they were yet living, if they were
proper for such a service, they may, though now dead, be said to praise him; as
the holy Ghost said concerning Abel some thousands of years after his death,
that by the Sacrifice, which he offered by Faith unto God, whilst he was
living, being Heb. 11. 4.
dead, he yet speaketha. And if the dead praise not God, neither shall I praise
them, but leave this to their works, by which they praise him (if they praise
him at all.) If what they did, whilst they were living, was judged by them
sufficient to praise God, we cannot well but judge the same sufficient to
praise them also, whether it was much they did upon that account, or whether
little. For if they did much for the praise of God, whilst they lived, such a
proportion of goodness will lift up their praises also on high, being dead. If
they did little, great praises would be uncomly for them, and could not be
answered for before God by those, that shall adorn their Names with them.

It is well known to a great part of you, who now hear me, that for several
years past, I have put from me the custom of Funeral Elogies and
Commendations, bequeathing this service unto the works of the deceased, which
have a Commission from God to perform it Prove. 31. 1.
(if there be cause) whereas I have none that I know of, especially not to do
it in consort with the work now in hand. But I have declined the practice,
partly because of the offensiveness of it unto many, who are weak; partly
because of the offensive practice, and mis-use of it by some, who seem
otherwise strong. I confess, that as it was the saying of one long since; If a
dishonest practice be in any case tolerable, it is for the purchase and
procurement of a Kingdom; in all other cases, justice and right must take place
(...). Euripides Phoenissis. Haec Cicero it a reddidit. Si jus violandum est,
regnandi gratia violandum est: aliis rebus pictatem c^las.
; so if a Minister or Messenger of God could be venially tempted to dispense
with so good a resolution, as that which he has taken up against blowing a
Trumpet in the Pulpit before the dead, my standing at present is upon the
ground of such an opportunity, being called to preach at the interment of a man
of a most exemplary and signal worth in every kind, and whose life can hardly
be remembered by those who have any steady knowledge of it, without falling into
an agony of sorrow and heaviness for his death. And as it was the saying of the
Poet in respect of the enormous vices of the times and place wherein he lived,
that it was an hard matter, Satyram non scribere, not to write Satyrically; so
may I well say on the other Difficile est Satyram non scribere. Juvenal.
hand, in respect of many things so highly commendable and Christian in him,
upon the occasion of whose death I am now speaking unto you, Difficile est
lauds non dicere, a man must resist a temptation to refrain from praising him.

However, partly for my resolutions sake (which is not far from a vow) but more
especially for your sakes, whom it much more concerns to be made praiseworthy
your selves, then to hear another praised before you, I shall leave the
Deceased to the good report of all men (which he purchased at an high rate of
well-doing, when time was) and of the Truth it self [the Word of God, which
gives large testimony unto him, and unto all like to him] and shall in the
Name of God, and of the Lord Jesus Christ, by the Opening and Applying of the
words read unto you, make an attempt upon you, to make you, if it may be, like
unto him in that which was his glory, whilst he lived, and his rejoicing at
his death; I mean, his Goodness and Mercy. Mercy enlarged his heart to rejoice
against judgment: and oh! How happy shall you be, if you will be persuaded to
cast in your lot with him, and suffer God to put into your heart, by his Word
and Spirit, which are now about to put you upon the Trial, to take part and
fellowship with him in that his rejoicing.

Let us then, with as much brevity as your interest in the opportunity before
you, will (to the best of my understanding) permit, endeavor 1. to open the
mind of God unto you in the words read; and then 2. to show you how this
treasure of the mind of God, may and ought to be improved by you to your
spiritual, yea and temporal advantage also; so leaving your consciences, and
the good Word of God together, to agree upon the things both of your present,
and eternal comfort and peace.

And Mercy (says the Apostle, if rightly englished) rejoices against
Judgment. In the former part of the verse, he had said. For he shall have
Judgment without Mercy [i. shall be very severely handled by God in the Great
day, the sentence that shall pass upon him, shall be most insupportable] who
has showed no mercy, [viz. whilst he lived, and had opportunity to show it]
and then subjoyneth (as you have heard) in the latter part of the verse; and
Mercy rejoices against Judgment. This latter clause manifestly relates unto
the former by way of Antithesis, or Opposition: in which respect the particle,
(...), is here rather to be construed adversatively, then copulatively, and
would better be translated, But, then And, as it is elsewhere. For 1 Cor. 16.
12. whereas it is in the Original, (...), the particle, (...), is rendered,
But, BUT his will was not at all to come at this time. So likewise, 1 These. 2.
18. where the Greek has it, (...), Our Translators give us, BUT Satan hindered
us. Thus our former Translators, (...), Mat. 13. 2^. translated, BUT the care
of this life, etc. And (to omit more instances in this kind) where the
Original, John 5. 40. has it, (...) etc. they left us in English, BUT ye will
not, etc. And thus I conceive the sense of the clause before us would be better
accomodated, if the words were read thus: BUT Mercy rejoices against
Judgment. For then the connection of it with the former will lie before us in
such a tenor of discourse as this: He shall have judgment without mercy, who
has showed no mercy: but he that shall show mercy, shall, not only have a
judgment full of mercy, yea and which shall upon the matter) be made of mercy,
be all mercy; but shall in the mean time, before the day of judgment comes, be
able to rejoice, or glory over it, and enjoy himself in a blessed security that
he shall not be hurt by it.

The word, (...), here translated mercy, is of somewhat a more comprehensive
signification; and signifies not only that Christian disposition or affection
in men (with the fruits or effects of it) which we commonly call mercy, but
several other dispositions also of affinity with this, as clemency, gentleness,
love, readiness to forgive and forget injuries, and the like; as these, or some
of these, sometimes likewise include mercy (properly so called) in their
signification. And not long since from Romans 9. 18. we observed, that words of a
cognate signification are in the Scriptures frequently used promiscuously, one
for another. In the place before us, the word, (...), may well be conceived, by
the opposition between the former and latter part of the verse (already hinted)
to import some such Christian affection (with the fruits of if) as that which
in Greek is called (...), which properly signifies usefulness, and is
frequently translated, goodness, as Romans 2. 4. Romans 11. 22. 2 Cor. 6. 6* etc. a
worthy principle found in all good men and women, enclining them upon all
occasions, according to that power and means, which are in their hand, to
relieve, help, and comfort those, who stand in need of help from them in one
kind or other.

When I mention this, or any other holy disposition of like nature with it, I
still insert these, or the like words, with the fruits thereof, partly because
it is the familiar dialect of the Scripture, under words properly signifying
some inward affection, or disposition only, to comprehend, together with the
affection, the actings or effects proper to it, as the word, Faith, frequently
imports, together with the inward Grace, or principle of Faith in the heart,
the proper fruits of it also, which we commonly call, good works, or an holy
conversation (Instances of this kind of Scripture Language, besides that
mentioned, there are without number, but we hasten) partly also, because that
which is here ascribed to this heavenly disposition of mercy, as viz. that it
rejoices against judgment (of which presently) enforces us so to interpret
and understand it [ viz. as signifying with the inward affection of mercy, the
outward fruits or works of mercy] according to that true and necessary rule in
Logic, Subject a talia sunt, qualia a praedicatis suis esse permittuntur; i.
Subjects in propositions must be so understood, as their predicates, or that
which is said of them in the said proposition, will permit and bear. Now we
shall (God assisting, and the time not preventing) in the process of our
Discourse, show, that it is not merely and barely the inward affection of
mercy, that is able to raise this glorious effect of rejoicing against
judgment, but the affection seconded, aided, and strengthened by her worthy
actings, and practical exertions of her self; according to what our Apostle
teaches us in the very next verse (with several verses following) concerning
Faith: Can Faith (says he) save a man? meaning, that it is contrary to all
principles, as well of Reason as Religion, to imagine that an empty and bare
Faith, not attended with such works, which are comely or meet for Faith to bear,
at least having time and opportunity to bring forth in this kind, should ever
advance or lift up the creature to such an estate of blessedness and glory, as
salvation imports. For to this purpose he explaineth himself, verse. 17. Even
so Faith, if it has not works, is dead (...), of it self [is dead, i. useless
and unprofitable, as dead things are, to those who have it, especially in
respect of such great and high productions, or seize, as Salvation] In
such a sense as this, mercy also, (...), and without works, may be said to be
dead, and consequently no ways able to yield such rich and pleasant fruit, as
rejoicing against judgment. So then, mercy rejoices against judgment, i.
Mercy, with her children, the tree of mercy well laden with fruit growing on
it, thus rejoices.

Only this is further to be considered, that when the Apostle attributes by way
of honor and privilege, unto mercy, this rejoicing against judgment, he is
not to be understood to speak of mercy simply, or of mercy in any faint or
inferior degree, though seconded with works proportionable, or of such a kind
of mercy, which is over-shadowed and (as it were) superintended, or overawed
by covetousness, nor of a pinching, or penurious kind of mercy, which is
sometimes found in worldly, covetous, yea and oppressing men (as the Pharisees
in our Saviors days, were wont to give alms as it were of course, and yet
were covetous, and ravening wolves, and some men will give a little to stop the
mouths of their consciences, hoping hereby to keep possession of all the rest
with the more peace) but of mercy in some degree of her exaltation, of mercy,
which has her great enemies, covetousness, and hard-heartedness,
penuriousness, and narrow-heartedness, etc. under her feet. It is the frequent
manner of the Scripture to use words of a general signification, and which
ordinarily signify the species or kinds of things (indefinitely) in an
emphatical sense, viz. for that which excels, and is eminently considerable
in its kind. In the last verse of the fourth chapter of this Epistle, it is
said; Therefore to him that knows to do good, and does it not, to him it is
[or, there is] sin [i sin of a great demerit, or of high provocation in the
sight of God] For otherwise it is sin to men [simply, or in some degree] not to
do good, whether they know to do it, or no; as is evident from our Saviors
decision of the case, Luke 12. 48. So when God discourses with Job about that
kind of creature, which we call, the Horse (Job 39. 19.) Have thou given the
HORSE strength? Have thou clothed his neck with thunder? The glory of his
nostrils is terrible, etc. (with much more of like import) by the word, Horse,
here, he does not mean any kind of Horse, or every thing that may properly or
truly enough in ordinary language be termed, an Horse: the greatest part of
Horses have neither part nor fellowship in this description: but he speaks of
an Horse that is high of mettle, strong of limbs, full of courage, etc. In like
manner, when the Apostle commends love, or charity. 1 Cor. 13. by that great
variety of the signal effects of it here mentioned, as that it behaveth not it
self unseemly, seeks not her own, bears all things, believes all things,
hops all things, etc. he does not by Love, or Charity, mean, this Grace in
any inferior, weak, or low degree, but in her strength, and some considerable
advance in the soul. Other instances of this kind the Sc^ipture affords many
See 2 Timothy 3. 16. Prove. 18. 22. Phil. 2. 22.
. So then when we hear the holy Ghost, speaking thus gloriously of mercy, as
that it rejoices against judgment, we must conceive him to speak of it, nor
simply, or absolutely, as it is such a Grace, or holy affection, in respect of
the kind of it, but (as has been already said) as it is such in degree also,
and in some considerable elevation in the soul. It follows,

Rejoices against judgment,] (...), rejoycingly gloryeth over, or against,
judgment. It is somewhat a like expression (for sense, and import) with that
Job 5. 22. At destruction and famine thou shall laugh, that is, thou shall be
confident, and herein take great contentment, that these shall not endanger or
hurt thee, as they are like to do the generality of men. Or like that, Mich. 7.
8. (spoken in the name of the Church of the Jews to her enemy) Rejoice not
against me, O mine enemy; i. Please not thy self, take no such contentment in
my present afflicted and low condition, as if I were never like to be again in
a capacity of quelling thy pride, or avenging my self on thee; as it follows,
when I fall, I shall arise; meaning, that she should get up again, and recover
strength to make her part good with her. So when it is said, mercy rejoices
against judgment, the meaning is, that mercy [so understood as was lately
opened] qualifieth, strengthens, enableth the Person in whom it is found, to
be confidently secure, that he shall receive no prejudice or hurt by the
judgment of God, by that judgment, which God shall pass upon the world in the
great day, and under which the greatest part of the world will fall, and never
rise more. There is scarce any thing more usual in the Scripture, then to
ascribe that to the quality or form, which properly belongs to the subject
qualified with it, or (which is much the same) to put the abstract for the
concrete. As in those passages lately mentioned, Charity bears all things,
believes all things, hops all things, etc. the meaning clearly is, that
charitable persons, or men and women richly endued with charity, do all these
things by virtue of that excellent endowment; Thus Romans 11. 7. The Election
has obtained it [i. all those, whether men or women, who believe, and
hereupon, by virtue of the eternal Decree of God in that behalf, are separated
from others, and made an Elect or choice generation of persons unto him, have
obtained it, meaning righteousness or justification.] Thus also some understand
(and happily not amiss) that, Romans 10. 6. But the righteousness which is of
Faith, speaks on this wise: Say not in thy heart, who shall ascend, etc. The
righteousness which is of Faith, i. Persons justified by Faith, by means of
this their Faith, are wont to encourage and speak unto men, thus: Say not in
thy heart, who etc.

So then, the true and entire sense and import of the words before us, rises
thus: Merciful men, men whose hearts and hands are much exercised in doing of
good, in showing mercy, by means of the Conscience, or consciousness of this
God-like disposition in themselves, and the regular actings of it, are, or
lightly cannot but be, full of a joyful and blessed security, that they shall
stand in the great judgment of the world, and find favor and acceptance in
the eyes of the Judge, when all unmerciful, covetous, and hard-hearted wretches
shall fall under it, and be ground to powder by it. If there be any thing
further requisite for the due understanding of the words, notice may be given
of it upon occasion, in the sequel.

The only point of Doctrine that we shall commend unto your Christian attention
from the words (as they have been opened) is this:

A rich and blessed assurance of salvation is the genuine Doctrine.
and proper result, or fruit, of much mercy. Or if you please, the Doctrine may
be conceived in this, or the like, tenor of words (agreeing, in substance,
with the former) A person rich in works of mercy, is, or readily may be,
joyfully secure, and this upon good ground, from perishing, or that he shall
not perish, in the condemnation of the world.

First, (to prevent mistakes, if it may b^^ we shall a little further explain
the Doctrine unto you, in some particulars. 2. We shall consult the Scriptures
for our better establishment in the Truth of it. 3. We shall endeavor to
demonstrate the truth of it, from its proper grounds and principles. 4. And
lastly, (the time permitting) we shall, as God shall enable, join the spirit of
the Doctrine, and your Consciences, somewhat closer together, in a way of Use
and Application.

For the first; there are 3. particulars, wherein the Doctrine requires some
explication.

1. It is not to be understood, as if it entitled rich men only to that
glorious security from condemnation, of which it speaks, or as if they alone
were in a condition to perform works of mercy, and men that are poor and low in
the world, excluded from all part and fellowship in that happy business. For
certainly, even the poorest of men and women are capable of showing mercy, as
well as the rich, though not in all the same respects. They may show mercy, and
this not only one to another, but even unto rich men themselves, as viz. by
commiserating and pitying them in respect of their slippery and most dangerous
standing by means of their riches (of which our Savior gives notice in the
Gospel Mat. 19. 23, 24. Mark 10. 23, 24.
) and so by praying unto God for them, that he will keep their foot from being
taken in the snare of this worlds abundance; and again, by suffering them to
enjoy their wealth, not only without any impeachment or impairing of it by
them, but without their having an evil eye upon it, without envying or
repining, that they ride upon horses, when as themselves go on foot; and yet
further by not suffering, as far as lies in them, any person whatsoever
unrighteously to touch any thing* that is theirs; by ^^stifying their good will
toward them, in endeavoring to stop all hard sayings, and sinister reports
concerning them, as of covetousness, pride, hardness, etc. So also by a ready,
free, diligent and faithful serving them in all such occasions, wherein at any
time they shall stand in need of their help, and desire it. For rich men are
not privileged by their riches against all kind of miseries, nor against all
wants, indigencies, or necessities: Yea they have their dependencies upon the
poorer sort of men, as well as these have theirs upon them; and these (perhaps)
if things were duly estimated, as many, and as Great: The King himself (says
Solomon) is served by the field Eccl. 5. 9.
; [or as the Hebrew has it, is servant to the field] viz. the care and labor
of the poor Husbandman intervening: and in such a sense as this, in which he
is, or may be said, to be a servant to the field, he may be also said to be a
servant to the Husbandman. The Philosopher likewise in his Fable of the Lion
and the Mouse, very emphatically taught the grand necessity which the Greatest
of men may sometimes have of the help of the meanest, where* he fancieth, the
Lion being taken, entangled, and held fast, in the toil or net of the Hunter;
that the Mouse upon the Lions roaring, came and with her little teeth gnawed
the Net insunder, until way was made for the Lions escape. So then the poorest
sort of men, that are but able to give a Cup of cold water, or to speak a good
word of a man, or to conceive a prayer for him, or to forgive injuries, or to
minister with the hand to any man's outward occaosins, when desired, or the
like, may be mreciful to what degree they please in their way, and consequently
are as capable of that high privilege, a glorious security from condemnation,
as rich men themselves. This in the first place.

2. When the Doctrine affirms, that a merciful frame of heart is a proper
means to secure it, against condemnation, and the fear of it, the meaning is
not (nor is it employed) that all persons who are commendably and Christianly
merciful, do actually, or at all times enjoy themselves in this blessed
security. Some may not so thoroughly understand, either the nature of Mercy, or
the nature of God so sympathizing with it, or may forget at present to compare
the one with the other, or neglect to consider how God has poured out himself
in promises of grace and mercy unto persons of this Heavenly character.
Therefore all the Doctrine intends (as to this point) is, That persons signally
merciful, or full of goodne^s, are by the advantage of this gracious
disposition worthily acted, either are in the actual possession of that
Heavenly security we speak of, or at least in a rich and regular capacity to be
argued, either by themselves, or others, into it, or, that they are not far
from it. This is another particular to be taken into consideration for a right
understanding of the Doctrine.

3. (And lastly) when it attributes unto mercy (in the sense declared) a
joyful exemption from fear of judgment or condemnation, it does not speak of a
loose, prodigal, or vain glorious disposition, which (happily) in some person may
affect the name of, merciful, because it effectually inclines them, as Mercy is
wont to incline her children, to part with their money, or other good things,
freely enough unto others, amongst whom some that are indigent and stand in
need, may sometimes (it is like) be found. Such a principle or disposition as
this; deserves not the name of Mercy, because a man or woman may be acted by
it without any compassionate sense at all of the miseries or necessities of
those, who are relieved by them. Nor does the Doctrine, by Mercy, understand
any affection of that name, wherewith some, both men and women, are (as it
were) prevented, not knowing how, or by what means, they became thus merciful,
or compassionate, as our Savior speaks of some that are Eunuchs from their
Mothers womb, (as of others, who make themselves such for the Kingdom of God.)
For though this kind of mercy be commendable, and proceeds from God, as the
Author of Nature, yet it is not able to create that Heaven of security in the
heart and soul of a man, unto which the Doctrine intituleth that mercy, of
which it speaks. What mercy it is, of which the Text and Doctrine speaks.
This Mercy then imports an affection raised in the soul of a man or woman by
Gospel consideration (the holy Ghost over-shaddowing or assisting those
endeavors, or that exercise of the mind and conscience, by which it is raised)
whereby they are effectually inclined and provoked to minister unto the
necessities of those that stand in need, when they have opportunity, according
to the means which God has touchvouchsafed unto them for their relief. This
(with what brevity we could) for the explication of the Doctrine.

For the truth of it, so understood, as has been declared, although that one
text of Scripture, upon which it has been built, be of sufficient evidence and
authority to secure it unto your judgments and consciences, yet let us give you
measure heaped up, by insisting upon some others for the strengthening and
enriching of this security.

He shall not be afraid (says David, speaking of the Scriptureproofs of the
Doctrine.
man that is gracious, and full of compassion and righteous, Psalm. 112. 4.)
such a man (says he) shall not be afraid of evil tidings (he means, any, or
all such tidings which import evil, i. e. which are of a sadding, or terrifying
nature unto the generality of men) His heart is fixed trusting in the Lord. His
heart is established: he shall not be afraid, till he see his desire upon his
enemies: The tidings of the day of judgment, when far the greatest part of the
world shall be sent quick to Hell, never to return thence to the days of
eternity, are tidings of the greatest evil to the generality of men and women,
that can be, yet he that is Gracious [i. e. apt to do good without any carnal
motive or inducement thereunto] and full of compassion, shall not be astonyed,
or struck with fear at these tidings, though so formidably evil (as has been
said) as appears by that which follows: His heart is fixed, his heart is
established, trusting in the Lord; meaning, that his trusting in God, is that
which fixes and establishes his heart, so that it is not, it cannot be
shaken, or tossed up and down within him with those storms and tempests and
whirlwinds of fear, which are the rending, and tearing, and tormenting of other
men's. A feather, though it be a very weak and light thing, and has nothing in
it self to balast it, or wherewith to resist the least puff or whiff of wind,
yet if it be close and fast knit or bound to a great Rock, it pertakes of the
stability and firmness of this Rock, and can no more be shaken, or removed,
then the Rock it self. In like manner, a man made of flesh and blood, a
creature very contemptible in his own strength, apt to be shaken and shattered
in pieces with sad expectations and fears of what it may suffer from time to
time, yet being close united unto God, and cleaving fast to him in trust and
dependence becomes interessed in the security and unmoveableness of God
himself. This happy posture or condition of soul, the Apostle calls a being
strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might Ephesians. 6. 10.
; meaning, that good Christians, and true believers, ought to be as secure, as
dreadless and fearless of evil, notwithstanding their own weakness, as if they
were themselves invested with the glorious omnipotency, or power of the might
of God, and had the same means for their preservation and safety in their own
hands, which now are in his. He shall not be afraid (says David, further
displaying the security or fearless posture of his gracious and compassionate
man) until he see his desire upon his enemies, i. e. until he shall see all
those, whether persons or things, from whence he may be conceived to be in
danger of suffering evil, so broken, scattered, and confounded, that he shall
fully know himself to be out of all danger offuffering from them; meaning, that
he should never be afraid: For he that is without fear until he see his enemies
utterly destroyed, certainly will not be afraid afterward. Now the great and
most formidable enemies of the Gracious and Compassionate man, as he is a man,
are Death, and Hell [or the Grave] with their sad and dismal retinue, both a
part ^^te, and a part post, before, and after. Therefore the man now before
us, Gracious, and full of Compassion shall not be afraid, [i. shall enjoy
himself in a blessed tranquillity and security of mind] until he shall see his
desire on them [i. until he shall see both Death and Hell, with all their
train, cast into the Lake of fire, Rev. 20. 14.] after which he shall
apparently be out of all danger of being hurt by them. Why David insisteth upon
this qualification, full of Compassion, in characterizing such a person, whose
heart should be fixed and established by trusting in the Lord, and
consequently, who should not be afraid, etc. and why a Person of this character
should trust in the Lord, and so be established, rather then any other man,
shall be showed unto you when we come to open the Ground and Reason of the
Doctrine.

In the mean time give me your patience to add a brief passage or two out of
the first Epistle of John, for your further satisfaction in the truth of the
Doctrine. We know (says this Apostle in this Epistle, c. 3. 14.) that we have
passed from Death to Life, because we love the Brethren. That he speaks here in
a more particular manner of love to the poor Brethren, which utters it self
after the manner of goodness, mercy, and compassion, appears from the sequel of
the context, and more especially from verse. 17. But who so has this worlds
goods, and sees his Brother have need, and shuts up his Bowels of
compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him? Now then the Apostle
(as ye heard) speaking thus; We know that we have passed from Death to Life,
because we love the Brethren; his meaning is, that all they who love the
Brethren (in the sense specified) i. express themselves in a way of kindness
and mercy to such of the Brethren who are poor, and stand in need of their
help, know hereby, i. may readily or easily know hereby, have a pregnant ground
on which to be built up in this blessed confidence or assurance, that they have
passed from Death to Life, that the bitterness of the wrath, and vengeance
which is to come, is already passed as to them, and that condemnation shall not
be their portion.

The 17, and 18. verses of the 4th chapter of the same Epistle, are confederate
in Notion and Import, with the now-opened passage, and give testimony to the
same Truth. In the former, Herein (says John) is our love [or, love with us,
(...)] made perfect, that we may have boldness in the day of judgment, because
as he is, so are we in this world. As if he should say, this is a sign, an
argument, that our love has attained some measure, or degree, of perfection,
and has acted its part well, when it has raised us to a boldness, or
fearlesness of spirit, in the day [i. against the day] of the judgment of the
world. Or thus, the consideration of this great privilege, or fruit of our
love, when it shall be grown to any strength or perfection, is a worthy motive
unto us to perfect it, or to hasten us to the perfecting of it, viz. that by it
we shall have boldness [or, liberty of face, (...)] in the day of judgment.
Now they, who at present know they shall have boldness in the day of judgment,
must needs have, even at present, a large first fruits of that Harvest. It
follows: because as he is, so are we in this world. This clause seems to
contain a reason or ground of the former assertion, and to import that our
being found in this world by means of our love perfected, like unto God, or
unto Christ, who fills the world with the fruits of his love, goodness and
mercy, is a pregnant reason, why we should even at present, promise unto our
selves boldness in the day of judgment, in as much as there is not the least
color for any jealousy or fear, that God should condemn those in the day of
judgment, who have been like unto himself in works of love, goodness and mercy
(works wherein himself most delights) and this in a place, where it is a
matter of greatest difficulty and disadvantage for men to resemble him in
these, viz. this present world, where there are so few examples leading, or
encouragements inducing, unto such things; yea and very many things greatly
discouraging from them.

The Tenor of the latter of the two verses pointed at, is, There is no fear in
love. He speaks of love made perfect (as appears both from the former verse, as
also from the clause immediately following:) In this love (he says) there is
no fear, i. e. with this love, or where this love is, there is no fear [viz. of
condemnation, or rejection by God:] The reason follows, by way of Antithesis;
but perfect love, i. e. because love when grown to any good degree of
perfection, casts out [such] fear out of the same heart with it. And the
reason (says he) why love carries this opposition in it unto fear (as viz. to
eject and cast it out of the soul) is because fear has punishment, or torment,
implying that the nature of love, goodness and mercy, is so rich, sweet and
God-like, that it will endure nothing that is afflicting, or tormenting,
neither in others as far as it is able to relieve them; but especially not, in
its own subject, in the same person, where it self resideth. This for proof of
the Doctrine from the Scriptures.

Proceed we to the further demonstration of it by principles and grounds in
Reason.

First, a spirit of mercy acting regularly, and bringing Reason 1.
forth fruit in due season, must needs breed that good blood in the soul which
the Doctrine speaks of, bless men with a glorious security, at least with a
rich capacity of being secured, against judgment, and fear of condemnation,
because it renders them like unto God, and this clearly to their own sense, and
in their own understandings, in such things or respects, upon which they are
declared and owned by him in the Scriptures, as his children. But I say unto
you (says our Savior to his Disciples) Love your enemies, bless them that
curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that despitefully
use you, and persecute you, that you may be the children of your Father which
is in Heaven. For he makes his Sun to rise on the evil and the good, and
sends rain on the just, and unjust Mat. 5. 44. 45.
. It is the manner of the Scripture to call persons, the children of those whom
they resemble in their Genius, or ways. Thus they who resemble Abraham in his
Faith, are termed Abraham's children, and so, Abraham's Seed, Luke 19. 9. Joh. 8.
39. Romans 9. 8. Gal. 3. 7. etc. And those who resemble the Devil in his wicked
disposition and practices, are termed his children, Ioh. 8. 44. Act. 13. 10. 1
Ioh. 3. 10. See more of this notion, Ezekiel. 16. 3. Isai. 57. 3. But those who
resemble God in his goodness and mercy unto men, are not termed his children
upon the bare account of such an imitation, but rather because they are
partakers of the Divine Nature (as Peter speaks) and have been spiritually
begotten of him. Beloved (says John) Let us love one another; for love is of
God, and every one that loves is BORN OF GOD; and knows God 1 John 4. 7.
. And whereas men are said to be the Children of God by Faith in Christ Jesus
Gal. 3. 26.
, the faith by which they become his children, is only such a Faith, which
has the works we speak of, works of goodness and mercy always in the womb and
heart of it, and upon occasion, in the hand of it, according to the Apostles
own explication of himself in such sayings as this: For in Christ Jesus, [i. e.
under the Gospel or under the profession of Christ come in the flesh] neither
circumcision avails any thing [viz. toward justification, or salvation] nor
uncircumcision, but faith which works (...).
[or rather which is operative, or working, i. e, which effectually disposes
and inclines thethe person in whom it resideth, to work by love Gal. 5. 6.
, clearly implying that such a Faith which is not (...), very operative (for
such is the import of the word (...)) by love, or through love, [both unto God,
and men] avails every whitis little, either to justification, or salvation,
as circumcision, or uncircumcision themselves. But this by the way.

Now then if works of goodness and mercy, declare and avouch men and women, and
this in their own consciences, to be not only followers of God in his ways of
greatest delight, but his children also, partakers of his nature, they cannot
lightly be in bondage under any servile jealousies or fears of being condemned,
or destroyed by him. Men that are evil (as our Savior remindeth us, ye^ know
[by the instinct and teachings of nature] to give good things unto their
children, etc. so far are they from destroying them. How then can it enter into
the heart or any man, that God, who is full of love and all goodness, yea
goodness it self, and so acknowledged by all men, should abandon his chitdren,
who are are really and truly, though spiritually, descended from him, and who
avouch their Heavenly parentage in the sight of the world, by doing the works
of their great Father, that he (I say) should abandon such children as these
unto perdition, unto the vengeance of eternal fire. Reason 2.


A second reason of the Doctrine is: when a man's heart is enlarged in mercy,
kindness and love to those that stand in need, so that doing of good unto such,
is a thing connatural and pleasing to him, comporting with his Genius and
disposition, he is in an advantageous posture hereby to take impressions of a
belief, that like gracious and merciful dispositions are to be found in others
also; according to that of the Apostle; charity or love, -- believes all
things, hops all things 1 Cor. 13. 7
[ i. e. effectually inclines, or disposes the persons qualified with it, to
believe and hope the best concerning others, upon any competent and tolerable
grounds for either, and where reasons are not pregnant or convincing of the
contrary] Especially a man by means of such a frame and temper of his own heart
and spirit, as that we speak of, is richly prepared to entertain the report of
the kindness and mercy, of the goodness and love of God, in the Gospel. For he
that is conscious to himself, that he himself is graciously and mercifully
inclined, can freely pardon those that have injured or offended him, can freely
minister unto the necessities of those that stand in need, must of necessity
believe that God is above him in all these excellencies, more gracious, more
merciful, etc. (which we know is the tenor and substance of the Gospel) or else
make himself, if not superior, yet equal unto God, in those things, which are
his greatest glory in the eyes of his creature. Now this the conscience of
every man and woman naturally trembles and abhors to do. Therefore he that is
largehearted and open handed, in mercy, kindness and goodness unto men, has
space and roomth (as it were) within him to receive and give entertainment unto
that great Salvation, which the Gospel brings and offers unto the world,
together with all the Heavenly retinue of the grace, love, goodness, mercy and
bounty of God, which accompany it: all which being received into the soul by
Faith, join hand in hand to secure him against condemnation. Whereas men and
women of narrow and scant hearts, wherein there is stowage and roomth only for
themselves and their own worldly concernments, lie under a most sad
disadvantage, next to an incapacity, to embrace the glad tidings of the Gospel,
in their due compass and extent, without which they will hardly reach to the
effectual allaying and quelling of their fears of wrath and condemnation for
their sins. It is a piece of the Prayer which Paul made for the Ephesians, that
being rooted and grounded in love [i. e. being upon pregnant, weighty, and
mature considerations and grounds, resolved against all disswasives and
temptations to the contrary, to persevere in love, and in the exercise of it,
they might by the opportunity and help of such a frame of heart, be able to
comprehend with all Saints, [i. e. to conceive and understand, with a
commensurableness of apprehension and faith, as near as may be, wherein I pray
that all the Saints may be partakers likewise with you] what is the breadth and
length, and a Ephesians. 3. 17. 18.
depth, and height, and to know the love of Christ, that passes knowledge,
etc. To know the love of Christ in all the dimensions of it here named, to know
it (I mean) as men may, and ought to know it (though otherwise in the full
compass of it, it is above the knowledge and belief of men) but I say to know
it, as men may know it, is sufficient to rescue their hearts and consciences
out of the hand of all fear of judgment or condemnation for sin. Now then the
Apostle in the passage yet before us, clearly supposes. 1. That persons rooted
and grounded in love (in the sense declared) are in a rich and immediate
capacity of attaining this knowledge; And 2. That no person without this
qualification or advantage, is in any likelihood, yea or possibility, to attain
it. Where love to God and men with the rest of the gracious retinue which still
bear it company, as mercy, goodness, etc. have not opened, widened, and
enlarged the heart to a very great extent and compass, the breadth and length,
depth and height of the love of Christ to men, cannot by reason of their vast
dimensions, enter, or receive entertainment there. This is a second Reason.

Thirdly, there is a principle found in the generality Reason 3
of men, to conceive and think that God is like unto themselves in inward
principles and dispositions, whatsoever these be. The truth is, that by
creation they did in these resemble him, and were like unto him, and this was
their glory, being (I conceive) that Image of God, in which they are said to
have been created. Again, true it is, that by Regeneration this resemblance is
regained: and this for the measure or degree of it, proportionable to the
greater or leser perfection of the work it self of Regeneration. Now though
wicked men by voluntary sinning, and continuing in sin upon such terms,
grievously obliterate, deface, and wast this Image or similitude of God in
themselves, and make themselves more like unto Satan, then God; yet partly out
of the pride, partly out of the ignorance of their hearts, partly out of a
desire to enjoy themselves in the pleasures and contentments of sin without
fear of being judged by God for it in the end, they are willing to hearken unto
Satan, when he suggesteth unto them, and tempts them to believe that God
symbolizeth in the same principles, Genius and disposition with them, according
to that of David, Thou thoughtest (speaking in the person of God to a wicked
man) that I am altogether such an one as thy self, and consequently, that I am
not offended with thee, will not punish thee, for thy wickedness: but thou art
dreadfully deceived in this: for (as it follows) I will reprove thee, and set
them [thy sins] in order before thine eyes Psa. 50. 21
; meaning, that he would judge and punish him severely for them, and this with
such a kind of judgment, which should be as glass unto him, wherein he should
(as it were) see his sins one after another as he had committed them, in their
native and proper shapes of deformity. Now as wicked men are apt to think,
though very foolishly and falsely, that God is of their mind and like unto them,
so are holy and good men apt to think also, and this according to their duty,
and the truth; only acknowledging their own infirmities and imperfections, and
consequently, their due distance from God. Good men cannot but think that God
is good, that he is holy, that he is gracious, merciful, etc. and consequently
that he is like unto them, or (which is the same as to the point in hand) they
unto him. And the more explicit and express these divine impressions or
qualities are found in them, the richer and fuller their knowledge and
assureance must needs be that God is like unto them, and they unto him.

As when men are eminently gracious, eminently good eminently merciful, etc.
there is scarce any place left for questioning or doubting, whether we be like
unto God, and so he to us, or no. Now then when a man shall be rich, and reign
in this confidence, that he is like unto God in righteousness, goodness, mercy,
etc. how, or upon what account can he be afraid that God should condemn or
destroy him? Though fear in many cases be a very irrational, senseless, and
unruly passion, yet to be afraid, lest God should send the Divine Nature, that
is, his own, into Hell, is a kind of fear so broadly irrational and
extravagant, that it is not incident to one of many thousands. Besides,
sympathize and communion in nature, disposition, and action, when apprehended
and believed, is security in abundance to the inferior, from receiving any
prejudice or harm by the power of him that is Superior. Upon this ground it
was, that the wicked person, concerning whom we lately heard from David that he
thought God to be such an one altogether as himself, was confidently secure
that God would not hurt, judge, or punish him; which conceit of his, as a
natural consequent of the said thought, David plainly intimates by making God
to say in opposition to it, (as we likewise heard) but I will reprove thee, and
set them in order before thine eyes Psalm. 50. 21.
; meaning, that he would punish, or destroy him; which implies, that this
wretched man promised unto himself peace and freedom from punishment, from the
hand of God. The Apostle John likewise builds upon the same foundation, in
reasoning (as we lately also heard) thus: Herein is our love made perfect, that
we may have boldness in the day of judgment: because as he is, so are we in
this world 1 John 4. 17
. But of these words formerly. This for a third Reason.

Fourthly, This impression is strong and clear upon Reason 4.
every man's heart, conscience, and soul, that God loves mercy, as he does all
kind of righteousness and goodness otherwise. We shall not need (I suppose) to
strengthen the hand of this impression from the Scriptures; which plentifully
assert the love which God bears unto all righteousness, of which mercy is
(and so the Scripture makes it) a principal part, or member. Yea and nature it
self teaches every man this further, that the more any creature excels in
any of those worthy dispositions which he loves, he loves this creature
proportionably the more. The righteous Lord (says David) loves righteousness,
and then subjoyneth; his countenance does behold the upright, or, those that
are righteous Psalm. 11. 7.
, meaning, that he looks after them* and bears respects of grace unto them.
So then that being a known property of love, which the Apostle mentions
amongst many others, viz. to think no evil, 1 Cor. 13. 7.
[i. e. to restrain its subject from intending hurt in one kind or other, to
any person, unto whom it is born] they who know that God loves mercy, and
merciful men (as all men generally do) and withal know, that themselves are
merciful, which all they that are eminently merciful, cannot lightly but do,
have no ground at all to fear that God intends evil toward, them, least of
all that greatest of evils, condemnation, or the vengeance of eternal fire.
This for a fourth Reason.

Fifthly, Hell is (as it were) the great draught, or Reason 5.
jakes of the world, into which there is nothing to be thrown, or cast, but
that which is filthy, noysom and unclean, and which would be offensive unto
God, and render the state and condition of holy and good men, the Sons and
Daughters of God, less desirable and delightsome unto them, if it were not
separated from them, and cast in there. Jewels or things, of value, pleasure
and delight, are not wont to be thrown upon dunghils, or into noisome Vaults,
the use whereof only is to receive and keep that apart, and at a distance from
men, which being nearer hand, and in view, would annoy them, and render their
lives uncomfortable. Least of all are men wont to dispose of such things into
any of these dishonorable receptacles, which are most necessary for the
comfort and well being of many. Now the Sons and Daughters of Mercy, are both
Gods Jewels, and men's: they render God himself full of beauty, pleasantness,
and desirableness unto the world. Let your light (says Christ) so shine before
men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in
Heaven Mat. 5. 16.
. As the Jews directed him that was born blind, after they had been informed
that Christ had opened his eyes, though upon a wrong and wicked pretense: Give
God the praise, we know that this man is a sinner Joh. 9. 24.
; So we knowing that men generally being left unto themselves, and led by the
spirit of the flesh, and of the world, are sinners, are covetous, unmerciful,
heard-hearted, etc. when we see the pleasant and lovely works of mercy and
goodness putting forth themselves plentifully in them, we cannot, quitting our
selves like men, but acknowledge God to be the Author and Father of these works
in them, and consequently to be most gracious, lovely, and desirable himself.
The holy Ghost takes notice that the multitude wondered when they saw the dumb
to speak, the maimed to be whole, the lame to walk, and the blind to see: and
that upon this, they glorified the God of Israel; c Mat. 15. 30.
as knowing and considering, that it must needs be he, who by his grace and
power, had made this happy change in the sad conditions of these miserable men.
But when men shall see of the stones of the Earth children raised up unto
Abraham, and Wildernesses turned into Rivers, and dry and barren grounds into
water-springs; I mean, when they shall see men and women, who sometimes were,
or atleast were in danger of being, as empty Vines bringing forth fruit only
to themselves; great self-lovers, self seekers, hard of bowels, eaten up with
the zeal of this present world, regardless of the sorrows, miseries,
necessities, extremities of others, etc. when men (I say) shall see such
persons as these to be transformed and renewed in the frame of their hearts,
and spirit of their minds, as that now they are full of mercy, tenderhearted,
of earning bowels, fruitful in good works, travailing in birth with the peace,
comfort, joy of their generation, and of all round about them, these being
matters of far greater dignation from God, then the other, and not resolveable
into any other Author or cause, but himself, cannot in reason, but turn to a
richer account in glory unto him from men, then those things, for which we
heard that the multitude glorified the God of Israel. Thus then we see how
merciful men are Gods Jewels, commending and setting him forth with beauty and
pleasantness of glory unto the world. In this respect there can be no ground of
fear that he should cast them amongst the retryment and filth of the world,
into the great sink, or common sewer of Hell.

Again, the persons we speak of, the generation of the merciful, are so far
from being any offense upon the holy Mountain of the Lord, or (indeed) upon any
mountain of the world, that they are desirable and pleasant in the eyes of all
flesh, they are the deliciae generis humani, the delight and darlings of
mankind. The Commonwealth of the Israel of God rejoiceth greatly over them,
and cannot flourish, or well stand without them. So that there is not the least
cause of the least jealousy or fear unto any of these, that their casting into
Hell would be any gratification or accommodation unto the Saints, but rather as
a sword passing through their soul, or a grievous dismembring of their body.
Thus security from the wrath which is to come, compasses the generation of the
merciful on every side.

Sixthly, To the Friends of God, and those who Reason 6.
stand close to him in those exigencies or cases of necessity (as they may be
called) unto which he has voluntarily, and according to the prescript of his
own wisdom, exposed himself in the world, there is no occasion of fear to be
condemned by him, but all grounds of the greatest security in this kind that
can be desired. Though men of degenerous and ignoble spirits, who are servile
to unworthy ends, may sometimes sacrifice their best friends, yea even those,
whom they know to be such, upon the service of some dishonorable project or
design; yet the common light of reason and conscience in men, abhors to
conceive or suspect any such thing in God, in whom all things are most
excellent and desirable, and no shadow of the least imperfection, or
unworthiness in him; who moreover, as the Scripture informs us concerning
him, is (...), cannot be tempted of evil Jam. 1. 13.
; all his ends are most honorable and just, nor do any of them require of him
the least unworthy action, much less the ruin and destruction of his friends,
for their accomplishment.

Now that persons mercifully disposed, and such who (in David's Language)
consider the poor and needy, are the friends of God, and stand by his Interest,
the Interest of his glory, in the world, the Scripture it self witnesses and
acknowledges, in saying, He that has mercy upon the poor, lends unto the
Lord, and that which he has given, will he pay him again Pro. 19. 17
. How, or in what respect, does he that gives unto the poor, lend unto God?
The reason of the assertion is (doubtless) this: God every where claims to
himself the great honor of being the Sovereign Administrator of humane
affairs, and Governor of the world: and he is generally by men, acknowledged
so to be. Now as he is the Supreme Ruler and Governor of the world, the care of
the poor and needy, being members of the world, and if they be godly and
virtuous, very considerable and worthy members hereof, lies upon his hand, as
well as, if not much more then, the care of other persons. Yea himself very
frequently engages himself by word and promise, to take special care of the
poor and helpless, and that he will be mindful of them, and provide for them.
In both respects when the poor are neglected, and exposed to extremities, the
honor and equitableness of his government of the world, together with the
truth of his word and promise, are in danger of being called into question, at
least by his enemies, and those that are less acquainted with his methods and
ways. So that they who charge themselves and their consciences with looking
after the poor, and shall minister unto their wants and necessities, as they
are able, and have opportunity to do, herein justify and vindicate the
Government of the world in the hand of God, together with the truth of his
Declarations made in the behalf of the poor, from, and against all imputations
and aspersions that are, or might be; cast upon them, upon the account of a
deficiencie in this kind, and in case the poor should be wholly unregarded.
Yea, whereas the great God has (as it were) pawned unto the world, those
inestimable Jewels, the honor of his righteousness, and of his truth, that the
poor of the Earth, shall not be forsaken or left desolate, but remembered in his
providential dispensations in the world, they who shall show them kindness, and
be as nursing Fathers unto them, what do they else but lend unto the Lord, for
the redeeming of his pawns, and to prevent the rejoicing of his Enemy, the
world, over the forfeiture of them? Whereas they who shut up the bowels of
their compassion against the indigent and needy, and suffer them to faint and
sink under the burden of their poverty, whilst they have in their hand the
good things of this world wherewith to relieve them, do what in them lies,
expose the righteousness and truth, and faithfulness of God in the government
of the world, unto reproach and shame. Hence it is, that the Holy Ghost
speaking by the Apostle John, imputes the heard-heartedness of men toward the
poor, not so much to a defect or want of love in them toward the poor
themselves, as toward God, who is more concerned (as he is capale of
concernments in one kind or other) in the relief and non-relief then
themselves. But whosoever has this worlds good, and Brother have need, and
shuts up his bowels of compassion sees his from him, how dwells THE LOVE
OF GOD in him 1 John 3. 17
? By the way it may be some comfort and relief of spirit unto the poor, when
they are neglected by men, that they are herein but fellow sufferers with God
himself. This for a sixth Reason.

Seventhly (and Lastly) Amongst Christians, and those that are trained up in
the knowledge of the Scriptures, there is this reason beyond all the rest, why
men and women signally gracious and merciful, cannot lightly be troubled with
any servile fears of judgment or condemnation, viz. that God has poured out
himself so abundantly above measure in his word, in high approbations of this
Grace and the exercise of it, and especially in promises of all sorts, great
and precious in every kind made unto it, as if he judged, both the world that
now is, with all that is desirable in it, and the world also that is to come
with all the glory and great things thereof, consideration or reward little
enough for those that shall honor him, and his Gospel, like themselves, with
the exercise of it.

We shall not need to instance in particulars. The Firmament of Heaven is not
fuller of Stars then the Scripture is of Divine promises and engagements unto
those that shall cast their bread upon the waters, and show themselves the
natural sons and daughters of mercy: Give (says our Savior) and it shall be
given unto you, good measure pressed down, and shaken together, and running
over, shall they [not men] give into your bosom Luke 6. 38.
. When actions are ascribed to un-named and (as it were) to invisible Agents
(which is sometimes done in the Scripture, as Luke 12. 20. 48. Luke 16. 9. and
elsewhere) it seems to imply some special hand of God, or somewhat more then
ordinary, in their performance. So when it is here said (...), they shall give
the measure here expressed into your bosom, the meaning may well be, that God
himself will interpose with extraordinary zeal to make the reward of men and
women, that shall be large hearted and open handed unto the poor, rich and full
above measure. I forbear to insist upon any more promises of like import,
because they are of such frequent occurrencie in the Scriptures. You may please
at your leisure to consider these places (with their fellows) Isai. 58. 6, 7,
8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Eccles. 11. 1, 2. Psalm. 41. 1, 2, 3. Psalm. 112. 4, 5, 6, 7,
8, 9. Prove. 11. 25. Mat. 5. 7. Luke 6. 35. Luke 12. 33. 2 Cor. 9. 6. This for
the seventh and last Reason of the Doctrine.

Proceed we now to the Use and Application of it. Here we shall find it
serviceable* unto us upon three several accounts. 1. It will yield us matter of
Instruction. 2. Of Reproof. 3. (And Lastly) of Exhortation.

First, for Instruction; If men full of goodness and mercy cannot (lightly) but
enjoy themselves in an Heavenly security from the wrath of God, which hangs
over the head of the world, learn we from hence, that then there is a course to
be taken, by which men and women may be built up in a stable, steady, and well
grounded assurance of salvation: there is a stone to be turned, and this not
very heavy neither, under which the inestimable jewel of an Heavenly security
lies hid, and may be found, a security* I mean, that a man shall be able to
stand before that great Judge in that his day, and not fall, or be condemned
with the world. By the coldness, indifferency, and dead-heartedness of the
generality of men and women, in looking after such a state and enjoyment as
this, a man would think that it were like the world, which some men fancy to
be in the Moon, yet find few or none that will trouble themselves to look after
it, partly because, they know not whether there be such a world, or no, partly
because in case there be, they know not how to come at it, or how to interess
themselves in any the good things of it. In like manner the far greater part of
men look upon a well grounded assurance of salvation. 1. As a thing of a
questionable and uncertain being. 2. As a thing out of their reach, in case the
being of it should be supposed: and what in one of these respects, and what in
the other, all thoughts of seeking after it are as far from them, as the East
is from the West, and the Heavens from the Earth. But the Doctrine delivered,
according to the Scriptures has assured us, both that there is a rejoicing
against judgment, and, that mercy in her Exaltation will invest men in the
possession.

Secondly, From the tenor and import of the same Instruct. 2.
Doctrine, take we further knowledge what the reason is, and how it comes to
pass that the generality of Professors amongst us, fall so frequently into the
company of Jim and Ojim, converse so much with dark and doleful thoughts and
fearful apprehensions of death, and of the judgment to come: why their
comforts in God and in Christ are so weak* and faint, that they do them little
service in an evil day, are not able to balance an ordinary trial. Alas, in all
this they bear the burden and shame of their own folly, of their great
unfaithfulness unto God and men, and their own souls. They are strait-hearted,
and closehanded: this is the root of all the bitterness. As Horses, and some
other creatures, never thrive, never are in good plight or likeing, whilst they
are hidebound, which is a disease incident to them: so when men or women are
heart-bound (a spiritual disease, or distemper very incident to Professors, and
especially to those that are rich amongst them) this keeps them from thriving
spiritually; this is a disease under which their souls cannot prosper. Their
covetousness will not suffer them to feast their consciences: they sell their
peace to purchase the ignoble office of being Jaylors, or Prison-keepers, to a
little Silver. They give by the penny, instead of giving by the pound, to make
any earnings, any considerable return of their Christian Profession. They who
in all their abundance can find nothing, or nothing considerable, to cast into
the Treasury of Gods glory, are not like to find any thing considerable cast by
God out of the unsearchable riches of his grace and bounty, into the treasury
of their peace. When the King of Israel, with his Bow and Arrows smote but
thrice upon the ground, then ceasing, the Story says, that the man of God was
wroth with him, and said, Thou should have smitten five or six times: thou
had then smitten Syria till thou had consumed it, whereas now thou shall
smite Syria but thrice 2 Kings 13. 19.
. In like manner, many Professors deprive themselves of that perfect victory
and conquest over their fears and doubtings, which is so desirable, and withal
might be obtained, by giving portions only to one, or two, when as the
Scriptures, and God speaking here, requires them to give portions unto seven,
and also unto eight Eccl. 11. 2.
. It is the liberal soul that shall be made fat Prove. 11. 25.
, that shall be enriched and made to shine, with comfort and peace; the sparing
and penurious soul consulteth leaness and languishing unto it self.

Thirdly, Observe we yet further from the Doctrine Instruct. 3.
(by way of Instruction) a worthy consideration, or mean^, for the cure of that
unseemly distemper (we may not unfitly call it a spiritual Megrum) so
epidemical and rife amongst Professors in these days, which disposes them to
turn round, or (in the Apostles phrase) (...), to be d Ephesians. 4. 14.
carried about with every putt of Doctrine; to run from one form, or way of
worshipping God, unto another; and from this again, to another* and from this
also, to another beyond it, and no^ ^ake any long stand or stay any where,
until they have compassed a round the whole encyclopedie or circuit of all
ways, and forms, and doctrines, and at last (happily) arrive at the same point
from whence they set out at first: for this properly, is (...), to be carried
round, or round about. Now the reason of this desultory humor and practice is
commonly pretended to be a dis-satisafction in conscience, about the
justifiableness or lawfulness of that way, or truth of those Doctrines, or
Opinions, which are deserted by men, together with a conviction of goodness and
truth in that new way, and Doctrine, unto which they remove. Whereas the true
reason (for the most part at least) of such removals, is the negligent,
un-Christian, and unworthy deportment of men and women, under those Forms and
Tenants, which they formerly professed, or a non-improvement of those
opportunities and means for their Edification, Comfort, and Peace, which these
Forms and Tenants afforded unto them. Many Professors in this case, do like
those, who not thriving in their callings through idleness, improvidence, or
ill-husbandry in one kind or other, charge all the blame upon their callings,
as if these were illconditioned, and devoured their followers; pretending that
had they been trained up unto, or followed, other callings, they might have
thriven, and lived of themselves as well as others. I do not speak this as if a
Christian profession might not both with more acceptance in the sight of God,
and with more advantage for the edification and comfort of Christians
themselves, be managed in one way, then in another; or consequently, as if
there might not be in many cases a v^^^ worthy and commendable ground (yea
possibly more then one) for men and women, to pass from under one form unto
another, and so to die in their judgment to one Opinion or Tenent, that they
may live unto another. But that which the present branch of Instruction holds
forth unto you, is, That the true reason why Professors vary and shift their
Forms, and Tenants, so frequently, and so dishonourably, both unto the Gospel
and themselves, as they do, is, their barren and unfruitful conversings under
them. For by reason hereof they gather little comfort or peace from, or under,
them (no Form, or Opinion whatsoever, how regular or true soever, being able,
without a conscientious and due improvement of them, to enrich or bless any
man's soul) and not finding their souls to prosper under them, they grow into a
discontent at them, and bethink themselves of some other, which they conceit
and hope, (though alas! very groundlesly) will upon the same terms, and
without any more care, better befriend them in their spiritual estates, and
commend them more highly unto God. Whereas the Truth is, that as on the one
hand, there is scarce any Form, so much beside the Rule, nor any Doctrine or
Tenent so forlorn and Truthless, but that the evil and disadvantage of them, as
to the sound peace of Conscience in the main, may be reprised by a worthy and
fruitful conversation; so on the other hand, there is no Form or Opinion, so
conform to the Scriptures, or rich in Truth, but that an empty and fruitless
conversation under them, will in time render them unto men as vessels wherein
there is no pleasure, yea, and make them the disdain and contempt of the soul.
Mercy, under any form of Christian Discipline or Worship, under any Tenants in
Religion, will rejo^ce against Judgment: and where the Conscience enjoys it
self upon these terms, is blessed with such a privilege as this, there will be
no disposition toward* a change, but only upon grounds and motives very
weighty and pregnant indeed.

Fourthly, Take we yet further knowledge from Instruct. 4.
the Doctrine (by way of Instruction) how and by what means, all, or the
greatest part of, the ataxies, disorders, and male-deportments of men in the
world, might be prevented, and so the condition of humane affairs reduced unto
terms of a thousand times more comfort and peace to the inhabitants of the
earth, then now it stands at, or is like for the future, to be reduced unto
in any other way; unless it be by an high hand of heaven, and by turning this
present world into that which is to come. Mercy exalted by the generality of
men, would bring this great, this so unspeakably desirable a thing to pass, and
this by filling their hearts and consciences with joy and peace. For the root
of all the bitterness that is tasted in the lives and conversations of men by
reason of the great unworthiness and wickedness, that rules in them, is, the
want of such company in their heart and soul, which would highly satisfy and
content them. Now there is no such company to take, please, and fill the hearts
and souls of men, as the native fruits, the genuine and clear results of such
Mercy, as the Doctrine commends. Which (as the Doctrine likewise imports)
are peace of Conscience toward God, and well-grounded exultations in the soul,
against judgment, and fears of condemnation. What is it that occasioneth, or
secretly tempts men to break out into any way of sin or wickedness
whatsoever? ^^an it be any thing else, but only want of satisfaction* and
desired contentment at home? The soul that is full (says Solomon) loatheth [or
as the Original has it, treads under foot, i. neglects, or despiseth] an
honey-combe Pro. 27. 7.
. And Job demands: Does the wild Ass bray when he has grass? or loweth the
Ox over his fodder Job 6. 5.
? When the heart of a man is full of the peace of God, and reigns in an
heavenly security, the honey-combe of sin, whether issuing the sweetness of
pleasure, or of profit, or of the greatness of this world, becomes but a
superfluity and loathsome impertinency to the soul. Nor would men complain of
God unto the Devil, as being hard and strait handed toward them (as all they,
who seek to ease, or better their condition by sinning, do) if he did answer
the joy of their hearts: which most assuredly he would do, were they merciful
as he is merciful, or delighted in mercy, as he delights. Saul did not
enquire after a familiar spirit, until God refused to answer him, either by
Dreams, or by Urim, or by Prophets 1 Samuel 28. 6, 7.
; and (questionless) he would still have answered him in one or other of these
ways, and so have kept him from the temptation of being beholding unto the
Devil, had not Saul by his disobedience and great un worthiness destroyed his
own capacity of such a Grace and Favor from him. Nor would God suffer the soul
of any person, man or woman, to be so barren and empty of spiritual provision
and accommodations, as to need the benevolence of Satan, or any contribution
whatsoever from Sin, were their hearts and their hands jointly exercised with
mercy, as he has commanded them. The pleasures and profits and all the
advantages of sin are only sweet to necessitous souls, drunkenness,
uncleanness, covetousness, oppression, deceit, pride, anger impatiency, with
the rest of the troublers of the world, and disturbers of the peace and
comforts of men, would all hide their faces in the dust, and not be once named
amongst men, did mercy exercise that sovereignty and command over the hearts
and Consciences of men, which of right appertain unto her.

Fifthly (and lastly for instruction) observe we by the light of the Doctrine
delivered, the strange and uncouth folly, yea madness, of a generation of men
in the world, who notwithstanding please themselves in their way, as if they
were the first born sons of wisdom and sound understanding. The persons of the
Character now mentioned and meant, are the great layers up of treasure for
themselveson earth, men that have silver and gold, heap upon heaps, and desire
to heap up still, that have joined house to house and field to field, and are
intent upon joining still, forgetting in the mean time to offer the sacrifices,
wherewith God (as the Apostle says) is so well pleased to distribute and
communicate unto those that stand in need, and SHUTTING up their Compassion
from their brethren, who are destitute of daily food, as if they were afraid,
that if these were at any time left open, their great Estates would presently
run out by them, and return unto them no more. Whereas the truth is, that did
rich men give a Christian vent and breathing that way to their great and
unweldy Estates it were the most prudential and promising way under heaven to
keep them from Consumptions, and to make them long-lived even to many
generations. There is a sore evil (says the wise man) which I have seen under
the Sun, viz. riches kept for [or by] the owners thereof to their hurt. Eccl.
5. 13.
Yea most certain it is, that there is no great Estate or wealth whatsoever,
but if it be kept too close and too entire, will in the end be found to have
been kept to the great hurt, and invaluable damage of the owner. And whereas it
is an excellent and high strein of wisdom for men, to make themselves such
friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, who, when they fail here, may, and
will, receive them into everlasting habitations; Luke 17. 9
so is it on the other hand the exaltation of folly, for men to make (as it
were) of the same material, such enemies, whose displeasure may cause them both
to fail the sooner here, and will most certainly exclude them out of those
everlasting habitations of rest, and joy, and peace, into which otherwise they
might, and should, have been received. For men shall be sent to Hell, as well
for the want of Charity, and of Mercy, as for the want of Justice; neither is
it much material whether a man or woman be sent thither upon the one account,
or the other. We have now done with the use of instruction.

The Doctrine is further profitable unto us for reproof. 2d Use Reproof.
For if mercy (in the sense and upon the terms declared) has this privilege
from God, to make all his true-born children, all her sons and daughters, free
from fear of wrath and condemnation, then are all such most worthy reproof, and
this with much severity, who do not lift up their hearts unto her service, and
stretch forth their hands to that work which she commends unto all men, for
their unspeakable benefit, and advancement unto an estate of such happiness
and peace. To the far greatest part of men and women in the world, mercy is
little less then a mystery; their soul never entered into the secret of it, and
they that are Christianly exercised in the ways thereof, may say unto them, We
have meat to eat which you know not of: We live like Kings and Princes upon the
sacrifices, which we have offered of our substance unto God, in ministering to
the necessities of the poor, in feeding the hungry, in clothing the naked,
etc. whereas you are in danger of being eaten up and consumed with cares and
fears, and sad expectations, under all that abundance which you possess. With
that which we give, we purchase a settled, constant and daily revenue of
heavenly comfort and peace, and so enjoy that which we have parted with, upon
far better terms then we could have possessed it. You on the contrary by
shutting up your Compassions from the importunate cries of the miseries and
extremities of the needy, cast in your whole estates into the Devils Treasury,
and consult to your selves both the present torment of the fear, and the future
torment it self, of suffering the vengeance of eternal fire. The truth is, that
men hard of bowels, and who have abundantly in their hand, but want in their
heart, wherewith to strengthen the hand of the poor, may well be compared to
Horse and Mule, which (as David says) have no understanding. For what can
argue a greater, a sadder defect in reason, judgment, and understanding, then
for men and women to purchase shame, and sorrow, and fear, and (in the end)
misery without end, with that price, which is put into their hand for their
high advancement in joy, and peace, and blessedness for evermore? What our
Savior demands concerning the gaining of the whole world, may upon the same
sad and serious account be demanded, concerning the possessing or keeping it.
For what is a man profited if he shall possess and keep to himself, whilst he
lives, the whole world, and lose his own soul. Mat. 16. 26.
And this is considerable, that a desire or endeavor to gain the whole world,
is not more threatening (nor indeed so much altogether) of the loss of the
soul, especially of the loss of it upon the hardest and most grievous terms of
losing it, as the hoarding and keeping of it to a man's self by unmercifulness,
when he has gained it. I no where read, that he that desires or attempteth to
gain the whole world shall lose his soul, much less that he shall lose it with
such a loss, which shall be more intolerable then the ordinary losing of souls
will be unto men. But I read as much concerning him, that shall keep the world,
or a part of it only, to himself, as both these amount unto, in the words
immediately before my text. But he shall have judgment without mercy, who has
showed no mercy. As he that withholds Corn, not he that has Corn, nor he
that takes the best, the most provident and industrious course he can, to fill
his Barns and Granaries with Corn, is the man whom the people will curse. Pro.
11. 26.
So neither are they that have Silver and Gold, and the good things of this
world in the greatest abundance, nor they whose hand is diligent to make them
rich, the persons to whom Christ will say at the great day, Depart from me, ye
cursed into everlasting fire; Mat. 25. 41
but they will be found the Children of this most heavy and insupportable
curse, who shall withold their riches, and neither give meat unto Christ,
when he is an hungry in his members, nor drink when he is thirsty, nor
clothing when he is naked; nor minister unto him according to the necessities
of his Saints and servants, in every kind. Cruel, hard-hearted and unmerciful
men will be hurled with greater indignation by the irresistible hand of God
into the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone for evermore, then any other
kind of sinner whatsoever. He who has showed no mercy, is nominated as the
only kind of sinner, that shall have judgment without mercy; unmerciful men
will be known from amongst all the children of wrath, that for all other kinds of
wickednesses and abominations, shall be cast together with them into Hell, by the
loudness of their roarings through the extremity of the torments, with they are
like to endure above them all, (...), I am grievously tormented (cries out the
unmerciful wretch, who had neglected poor Lazarus) in this flame. And the Lord
tells those unmerciful ones that shall appear at his left hand in the day of
judgment that they shall be beaten with those very rods, which the severe hand
of God prepared for the Devils back, and for the backs of his Angels. Depart
from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels,
Mat. 25. 41. This for Reproof.

The Doctrine (is in the third and last place) profitable likewise for
exhortation. For if mercy in the sense and upon the terms declared, be a
Shield of protection to the Souls and Consciences of men, greatly delighting in
her ways against the dread and terror of the great day, and the final
judgment and doom that shall then be passed and given upon all flesh, upon what
ground or motive more pregnant and provoking then this, can men or women be
exhorted unto that great Christian exercise, I mean, works of mercy? Who upon
such an account, will not be willing, yea and more then willing, rejoycingly,
triumphantly willing, to cast his bread upon the waters, to give portions unto
seven, and also unto eight, to feed the hungry, to cloth the naked, to visit
the sick and those that are in prison, to receive strangers, to comfort the
afflicted, to forgive injuries and wrongs; in a word, to fill the sphere of his
activity with the lovely fruits of goodness and mercy in every kind? The chief
Captain of the Garrison at Jerusalem, spoken of Acts 22. 27. made account that
he had done prudently enough in purchasing the Roman freedom, though (as
himself confessed) it cost him a great sum of money. Alas! the immunities of
a Citizen of Rome, were a dear bargain at the price of two farthings, in
comparison of that glorious immunity, that sacred privilege and freedom of
which the Doctrine speaks, a freedom from the fear of death, and of the day
of judgment (the very hearing whereof makes both the ears of the World to
tremble.) Yea though this heavenly Prerogative and freedom should be purchased
at the high rate of the poor Widows bounty, who cast in (...), her whole
livelihood or subsistence into the Treasury of God. To be so gloriously
strengthened in the inner man, that a man or woman may (in that high expression
of Job) go near unto God as a Prince, Job 31. 32.
not to be afraid when he shall hear the sound of the last Trump, summoning the
quick and the dead unto judgment, nor at the appearance of the Judge sitting
upon his white Throne, nor at the opening of the Books, by which all shall be
judged, to enjoy (I say) a man's self in peace, and with an untroubled, and
undanted spirit, under all these high astonishing transactions and doings, is a
privilege so transcendently great and sacred, that all the Silver and Gold
under Heaven, and all the precious things of the Earth with them, are but as
dross and dung, yea less then nothing in comparison thereof. Yet shall all the
trueborn sons and daughters of mercy, be sed with the heritage of all this
glory, all shall be light, and life, and joy, and peace, with them, when the
faces of all those, who have not strengthened the hand of the poor shall gather
blackness, and the souls of those who have hid themselves from their own
flesh, shall dwell among Lions, among devouring fears, and overwhelmings of
dismal dreads and terrors without end. Therefore now quit your selves like
men, and despise not the word of exhortation that has now been directed unto
you: you see that in harkening to it there is great reward. Be merciful, as
your heavenly Father is merciful; so shall no fear of judgment have Dominion
over you to torment you.

But besides this great motive held forth both in the Text and Doctrine, the
great duty of mercy, unto which you have been exhorted, might be further
recommended unto you by many others. Nor is there (I suppose) any one duty
within the whole compass of Christianity, wherein the Conscience of a man may
be invested with a greater retinue of arguments and motives, and these of rich
and high import, then this of Mercy. Be pleased only to taste a few of them.

1. If you shall (with God) delight in mercy, Mic. 17. 18. Motive 1.
you shall not be delivered and freed from the fear only, but from the stroke
it self, from the dreadful and all con^ounding stroke of judgment. Mercy will
not put you into a fools Paradise of security and fearlessnesse of judgment,
leaving you in the mean time in a condition obnoxious unto judgment, but that
security in this kind, which shall be given unto you, shall stand by you, and be
made good unto you in the evil day. There is no condemnation unto the Children
of mercy. With the merciful (says David unto God) thou will show thy self
merciful, Ps. 18. 25.
If ye forgive me their Trespasses, your Heavenly Father will also forgive you,
Mat. 6. 14
Mercy is divinely inspired to Prophecy good unto her Children; therefore
(doubtless) God will not suffer the words of her Prophecy to fall to the
ground.

2. Unto mercy is this Grace also given by God, Motive 2.
even to deliver her friends and Disciples from temporal judgments and evils,
as well as from eternal. Blessed is he that considers the poor, the Lord will
deliver him in the time of trouble. The Lord will PRESERVE him, and keep him
alive, etc. Ps. 41. 1, 2.
So again, Give a portion to seven, and also to eight, for thou know not
what evil shall be on the earth Eccl. 11. 2.
, meaning, that what evil or judgment soever shall come upon the place, or
people, amongst whom a man lives, they are likest to find favor and
protection from God, whose hand has been upon all occasions stretched forth in
works of mercy unto those that stood in need.

3. As if it were a small thing with God only to exempt Motive 3.
the children of mercy from perishing in the condemnation of this world; he
speaks unto them of the glory and great things of the world to come, and this
upon the account of their mercy. Then shall the King say unto them on his right
hand, come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from
the beginning of the world. FOR, I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat; I was
thirsty, and ye gave me drink; I was a stranger, and ye took me in naked and
ye clothed me; I was sick, and ye visited me, etc. Mat. 25. 34, 35, 6.
So the Apostle to Timothy, Charge them that are rich in this World, that they
be not high-minded nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God, who
gives us richly all things to enjoy, That they do good, that they be rich in
good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate, laying up in store for
themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they may l^y hold
on eternal life. 1 Timothy 6. 17, 18, 19.
If rich men will not simply do good, but be rich in good works, (i. e. abound
in doing good) and this out of a propenseness and readiness of heart and soul
unto these works, not grudgingly, or as of necessity (as the Apostle speaks in
a like case) hereby they shall take a most secure and safe course, though it be
secret, and makes little show in the eyes of men, [as treasures and
foundations, are both secret and safe, at least as safe as men can make them]
to possess themselves of eternal life.

4. Mercy has not only the promises of the great Motive 4.
things of the world to come, but of the good things of this life also (as well
as of deliverance from the evil) wherein as well the Children also and
Posterity of merciful men, as themselves, are comprehended. Is not this the
Fast that I have chosen to loose the Bands of* Wickedness, to undo the heavy
burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye break every Yoke? Is it
not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that are cast
out to thine house? when thou see the naked, that thou cover him, and that
thou hide not thy self from thine own flesh? Then shall thy light break forth
as the morning [i, e. as the cheerful brightness of the morning succeeds of
course, and uncomfortable darkness of the night, so shall the prosperity,
according to the standing Law of my righteous providence, forthwith succeed,
and come in place of thy present afflicted and calamitous condition, as it
followeth] and thine health shall spring forth SPEEDILY; Esa. 58. 6, 8.
as if he should say, whereas at present thy whole head is sick, and thy whole
heart faint, and from the sole of the foot, even unto the head, there is no
soundness in thee, but wounds and bruises, and putrefying sores, Esa. 1. 5, 6.
So that in respect of thy estate in this world, thou art like to a man most
dangerously sick, in the most vital parts, and withal most dangerously wounded,
yea and bruised, and besides all this, full of noisome Ulcers and sores, of whose
recovery and health under al these Maladies, there is very little, or no hope,
yet shall thou very suddenly, and above all expectation be restored unto thy
former honor, strength and dignity, and all the Nations round about thee,
shall say, The Lord has done great things for thee. Soon after to like
purpose, If thou take away from the midst of thee the yoke, the putting forth
of the finger, and speaking vanity; and if thou draw out thy soul to the
hungry, and satisfy the afflicted soul, then shall thy light arise in
obscurity, and thy darkness be as the noon day; and the Lord shall guide thee
continually, and satisfy thy Soul in drought, and make fat thy bones, and thou
shall be like a watered Garden, and like a Spring of water, whose waters fail
not. And they shall be of thee that shall build the old wast places, thou shall
raise up the foundations of many generations, etc. Esa. 58. 9, ^, 11, 12.
He that shall diligently consider these promises (with very many others of the
same gracious confederacy with them, which might readily be added) and is able
withal to bear himself with confidence upon the truth, and faithfulness, and
power of God, for the performance of them, cannot but conclude heart, and soul,
and all that is within him, that there is no counsel, project, or course, both
for making his own face, and the face also of his posterity, to shine in the
world, to be compared with a large heart, and open hand, with drawing out his
soul freely unto those that stand in need, upon all occasions. There are no
promises of this worlds felicities and enjoyments in every kind, to be found in
all the Scriptures, made unto any other vein, or part of obedience unto God,
which run so high, or engage the truth and power of God so deeply, as those
which are the heritage of the families of Mercy, and stand charged with all
earthly supplies, comforts, and accommodations, unto them and their
posterities, who shall minister with a liberal hand unto the necessities of the
poor, still taking off their sackcloth, and girding them with joy and gladness.
To be jealous that a frequent offering of those sacrifices, wherewith God is so
well pleased ( Heb. 13. 16.) will diminish any man's flocks, or make any breach
upon his worldly estate, or trench upon the prosperity of his house and
children after him, is but a bold affront put upon the truth and faithfulness
of God, by the ill-nurtur'd and base-bred hearts of covetous, ignorant, and
foolish men. Has not the Husbandman as much reason to fear, that his grass and
corn will parch and dry away, by the rain of heaven ever and anon falling on
them? Peruse (at your leisure) Ps. 112. throughout. Prove. 11. 24 25. Eccles.
11. 1, 2, etc. Psalm 41. 1, 2, 3. Luke 6. 38. 2 Cor. 9. 6. 8, 9, etc. (with many
like.)

5. Men and women that are rich in this world, Motive 5.
cannot convert, or dispose of their abundance in any other way, but to their
incomparable loss and disadvantage. They do but play at small game (as our
English proverb is) with great estates, who either hoard up the revenues of
them, or make sacrifices of them unto their lusts in one kind or other, as
either in building sumptuously, in faring deliciously, in apparelling
gorgeously, in gaming lavishly, in abusing themselves wantonly: or (or in a
word) by gratifying the flesh inordinately in what way soever. All the
considerable improvement that can be made of silver and gold, and great
possessions, is by spreading them upon the backs of the naked, and burying them
in the bowels of the hungry, by ransoming the captive, relieving the oppressed*
by making temporal provisions for the bodies, and spiritual for the souls of
men. By such a contrivement of wealth as this, men may become great in the
sight of God, Angels, and men: of uncertain riches, may make an enduring
substance; of that which is not, that which is and which ever will be to the
days of eternity. Whereas let men consult with the greatest spirit of the
wisdom of this world, and study, and streyn their reasons, wits, understandings
to devise it in any other way, it will turn to little or no account at all, but
of sorrow and shameand misery without end. For riches are given unto men much
upon the like terms with those, on which Christ himself is given unto them.
Behold (said Simeon) this child is set for the fall, and rising again of many
in Israel Luk 2. 4.
. So are the great things of this world dispensed and disposed of by God, that
in the issue and event they will be the shining of the face, and lifting up the
head unto some, viz. unto those that shall sanctify the lump, by offering a
first fruits, according to the Royal Law of the Gospel, unto God; and again,
the confusion of the face, and the hanging down of the head, and double measure
of the wrath of God in the vengeance of eternal fire, unto others, viz. unto
all those, that shall serve theirown humors and lusts with them, with the
neglect of that high and holy commandment, which God has given them to do
otherwise.

6. (And Lastly) Rich men are but God's Feoffees Motive 6.
in trust in behalf of the poor, of all that surplusage and redundance that is
found in their estates; nor have they any right or title unto it before him; or
(as it is usually expressed) in foro Conscientiae, but only unto the
disposition of it, and this unto the right owners, the poor, and according to
those instructions given by him in the Gospel on that behalf. Nor is it
reasonable, or consistent with that reverence and honor which we owe to the
wisdom* and goodness of God, to conceive or think, that he gives at any time,
or unto any person, a double, zrable, a sevenfold, tenfold, twenty-fold
proportion in wealth, above the line of competency, and what comfortably, and
with all Christian conveniences, supports other men charged with the same
proportion of expense with them, to bestow upon their lusts in one kind or
other (whether of sensuality, or of covetous, or ambitious hoarding, upon the
account of posterity) or for any other end or purpose whatsoever, save only for
the strengthening of the hand of the poor, and the buying (as it were) of
handkerchiefs to wipe away tears from their eyes. And were rich men as
considerate and tender in their ways, as would be their honor and safety to
be, it could not lightly but be a question of conscience unto them, whether God
would have cast the one half of the abundance upon them, which now they
possess, but for the poors sake. For it is within the compass of the light of
Nature to conceive, yea, and to conclude, that God abounds not in things
superfluous, perstuous* as he is not deficient in things necessary. So that the
superfluity we speak of in men's estates, in the best and truest construction of
the providence of God disposing it unto them, appertains of right unto those
that want, and stand in need, and only a right of a regular disposition of it
unto themselves. Which right of disposition (to mention this by the way is (I
confess) a far higher favor from God, and more valuable, then the right of
receiving it vested by him in the poor. The Scripture from place to place
speaks according to the tenor of these things, investing the poor and needy
with a right and title to the rich man's superfluities, and declaring the acts
of Mercy (usually so called) in these men, are in true consideration, but acts
of justice, or of righteousness. Withold not good (says Solomon from those
to whom it is due, or (according to the former Translation, better agreeing
here with the Hebrew (as the new Translators themselves acknowledge in the
margent) from the Owners thereof. Junius and Tremellius translate, ab iis qui
opus habent, i. e. from those that have need; and gloss the Original expression
thus; cujus [nimirum cohibiti boni] Dominum illum efficit necessitate, and te
dispensatorem, Deus* i. e. Of that good which thou with-holdest, or keep
back, God by his necessity makes him the master, or owner, and thee the
steward, or dispenser. And upon this account it is (as these Translators
likewise give notice, upon the place now touched) that men's alms or works of
mercy, are in Scripture called, their justice, or their righteousness Quam^brem
hac beneficia in Scripturis appellantur, justicia.
. Compare Psalm. 112. 9. with 2 Cor. 9. 9, 10. He has dispersed, he has given
unto the poor: (...) His RIGHTEOUSNESS remains for ever. And so verse. 10.
Multiply your seed, and increase the fruits of your RIGHTEOUSNESS. So Matthew.
6. 1. where we read, Take heed you do not your alm^ before men, etc. the best
Greek Copies, instead of (...) Alms, read, (...), Justice; and Beza renders it
accordingly; Attendite ne justitiam vestram excerceatis, etc. Yea and Calvin
acknowledges this reading. Thus also Deuteronomy. 24. 13. Moses from God promises or
declares, that the delivering back of the poor man's pledge before the Sun
goes down, shall be RIGHTEOUSNESS unto him that shall thus The Heathen man's
observations, De male quaesitis vix gaudet tertius haeres; an ill-gotten estate
seldom comes to the third heir. But Christians may observe, that De male
servatis vix, etc An Estate ill kept by him that got it, is commonly dispersed
and va^ished before the third heir os the race comes at it.
deliver it, before the Lord; meaning, that it should be accepted by God as an
act of mercy unto the poor. So then, rich men, and they who have this worlds
goods, and yet shall shut up their compassions against their Brother that
stands in need, are not only uncharitable and unmerciful, but unjust also,
companions of thieves, and these of the worst kind, sacrilegiously withholding
that which God himself has signally consecrated and set apart for the use and
comfort of the poor and indigent of the world. And since according to our
common saying, the Receiver is as bad as the Thief, it is no marvel, that the
children and posterity of so many great rich men, receiving estates so
desperately encumbered and entangled with that which of right belonged unto
other men, and these of that sort of men, whom of all others it is most
dangerous to injure or affront (I mean, the poor, whose Protector, and Avenger,
God has solemnly declared himself from Heaven) it is no marvel (I say) that
the inheritors of such ill-conditioned estates, should reap so little comfort
of them, whilst they keep them, and should so frequently be shaken out of them
before they die.

Let this consideration then be laid to heart with the former, to break that
iron sinew of unmercifulness, which is found in the hearts of any of us. Know
ye not (says the Apostle) that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom
of God? Be not deceived etc. 1 Cor. 5. 9.
And if God be the Avenger of all such, who go beyond, and defraud their
Brother in any thing 1 These. 4. 6.
, (as the holy Ghost pronounces him to be) and it be a most dreadful thing to
fall into the hands of this Avenger, let the consideration be as an alarm from
heaven to awaken us thoroughly unto that great and important duty, whereunto we
have been exhorted, to commiserate the indigencies of the poor, and to take
them into part and fellowship with us in our comforts.

The duty might be bound upon the consciences of men and women with many more
such spiritual bands, as these: but I trust that is, even by these, bound so
close and fast upon yours, that it will not break loose from them at any time.

FINIS.

