NEOPHYTOPPESYTEPOS, OR, The Yongling Elder, or, Novice-Presbyter.

Compiled more especially for the Christian Instruction and reducement of
William Jenkin, a young Presbyter, lately gone astray like a lost sheep from
the ways of Modesty, Conscience and Truth.

And may indifferently serve for the better Regulation of the ill governed
Society of SION COLLEGE.

Occasioned by a late importune Pamphlet, published in the name of the said
William Jenkin, entitled llotrioepskopo; the said Pamphlet containing very
little in it, but what is chiefly reducible to one, or both, of those two
unhappy Predicaments of Youth, Ignorance, and Arrogance.

Clearly demonstrated by I. G. a servant of God and Men in the glorious Gospel
of JESUS CHRIST.

Wherein also the two great Questions, the one, concerning the Foundation of
Christian Religion: the other, concerning the power of the Natural Man to good
supernatural, are succinctly, yet satisfactorily discussed.

With a brief Answer in the close, to the frivolous exceptions made by C B.
against Sion College visited, in a late trifling Pamphlet, called, Sion
College what it is, etc.

(...), Not a Novice, lest being lifted up with pride, he fall into the
condemnation of the Devil, 1 Timothy 3. 6.

Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses; so do these also resist the truth,
men of corrupt minds, etc. But they shall proceed no further: for their [ noia
] folly or madness shall be manifest unto all men, as theirs also was, 2 Timothy
3. 8, 9.

Homo peccatum defendendo, sibi praeponit: sed poenitendo, subjicit. Aug.

Exultatio praepropera, ruboris plerunque sementis est.

(...). Hom.

Quo (moriture) ruis, majoraque viribus audes?

Fallit te incautum pietas tua. Nec minus ille Exultat, demens. Virg. Aeneid.

Printed for Henry Overton in Popes-head-Alley. 1648.

To the unpartiall Reader.
REader, it was the complaint of a faithful friend and Counselor unto his
Country long since, that what he gave with the right hand, was still taken and
received with the left. That great servant and Prophet of God, David, who kept
a watch at the door of his lips (...)
and was abundantly cautious not to sin, or offend, with his tongue (...)
, yet met with occasion to take up this complaint against his adversaries, that
every day they wrested his words: or (as the original sounds) they made a
kind of labor and toil of it to figure his words: i. to put uncouth and
strange constructions upon them. When righteous Lot did but seek to turn his
neighbors, the men of Sodom, out of the way of their wickedness, though he
attempted it in a most sweet and loving way, I pray you, brethren, (says he to
them) do not so wickedly Genesis 19. 7.
, they through zeal to their lusts, being impatient of all admonition, fell
foul upon him with this answer; Stand back: This one fellow came in to
sojourne, and he will needs be a JUDGE. Now will we deal worse with thee than
with them. And they (says the Text) pressed sore upon the man, even Lot Verse
9.
, etc. It is not (I suppose) unknown to thee, how that some few months since,
the Lord Jesus Christ, the great Bishop of their souls, was pleased to
administer (by the hand of his unworthy and weak servant) a monitory visitation
unto some professing themselves his Ministers, who (it seems) stood in eminent
need thereof, commonly known by the name of the Society of Sion College. Which
Visitation, though administered with all faithfulness and singleness of heart
by him, whom the Lord Christ was pleased to use in that service, yet the face
of it being set to turn the said men out of those ways of unworthiness, which
they have no mind to relinquish, has so far provoked them (at least some of
them) that in stead of reforming themselves according to the tenor of that
visitation, they pour out the (...) vials of their wrath and discontent, in
most unmanly passion, in most unseemly revilings and reproaches, upon that
poor instrument of God, who unfeignedly sought their peace and wealth in that
administration. It seems they are a generation dreadlesse of that thunderbolt
from heaven, which certainly will strike all dead before it, where ever it
falls: He that despises you, despises me: and he that despises me, despises
him that sent me, Luke 10. 16. Not to mention the expressions that have fallen
from others of them in this kind, the unclean vomit of my Allotrioepiscopolian
Antagonist alone, is a super-sufficient testimony, how dep^^r^ble and sad an
effect that visitation has had upon them; not much differing from that, which
the Ministry of the Messengers and Prophets of old, by whose hand God sent to
his people, and the CHIEF PRIESTS amongst them, had upon them to whom they
were sent; who (as the Text says) mocked these Messengers of God, and despised
his words, and misused his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose against
his people, till there was no remedy 2 Chronicles. 36. 14, 15, 16.
When men are resolved to walk in the light of their own eyes, and shall not
only reject, but vilify and scorn the admonitions of the Almighty, by what
hand soever administered, it is a sign that destruction is coming upon them
like an armed man. 1 Samuel 2. 25.
It is said of Hophni and Phineas the Priests, that they hearkened not unto the
voice of their Father, because the Lord would slay them. And the sound of that
voice of the Lord himself by his Prophet Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 24. 13
is enough to make both the ears of Sion College to tingle: In thy
filthiness, is lewdness: because I have purged thee, and thou wast not
purged, thou shall not be purged from thy filthiness any more, til I have
caused my fury to rest upon thee. I fear the foundations of this College are
not long-lived: the iniquity of the Sons thereof has already so sorely shaken
them.

Notwithstanding ((...), not to press them beyond the line of their demerit)
it seems in their Provincial meeting not long after their visitation, it was
prudently, if not piously, and with remorce, resolved upon the Question, that
no answer should be given either to Doctor Hamonds Book, or mine But as Gehaz^
rose up against the spirit of his master Elisha, saying thus in himself, 2
Kine. 5. 20.
My master has spared Naaman this Syrian; but as the Lord lives, I will run
after him, and take somewhat of him (...)
: so has Mr. Jenkin in the vanity and pride of his heart, magnified himself
against that Spirit of wisdom and counsel, which spoke in his more advised
brethren, and whereunto (according to rule) he ought to have been subject; and
as the Jews would needs have Christ crucified, when Pilat had judged him to be
delivered Acts 3. 13.
: so has the heart of this young man importuned him to make long furrows of
most notorious and importune slanders and reproaches upon my back, when the
graver Judicatory had determined mine immunity in that kind, and this (I hope)
out of a conscientious sense of my innocence. But, poor man! little does he
know what he has done, not only to cause his own savor to stink in the eyes
of men, but to the further discovering of the nakedness of his brethren also,
by tearing that covering, which they had prudently cast over it.

Turno tempus erit magno cum optaverit emptum,
Intactum Pallanta, and cum spolia ista, diemque
Oderit. i.
The time will come when youthful Turnus shall
Wish dearly, Pallas never had been encountered;
And when these trophies and this day he will call
The hatred of his soul.
Nor can I charge all the 52. Ministers of the Diocese or Province of London,
whose names were sub-printed, but not sub^scribed, to the late Testimony
published in their names; nor do I know how many of them I may truly charge
with representing me as a man of Errors upon the Stage: Because it is very
possible that those of them, who were the Master-sticklers in the business,
and purveyors for subscriptions, (in which meritorious engagement my
Antagonist, as it seems by his unparalleld zeal for the vindication of the
said Testimony, had the principal hand) might serve many more of the printed
subscribers as slippery a trick as they did Mr. Downham one of the gravest and
best spirited men amongst them, The legerd^ main was this: The Architects of
the design, present Mr. Downham with their papers, wherein they had collected
and put down in writing only some of the wildest and most absurd opinions,
which are now extant in their Testimony, desiring his hand by way of
concurrence with them, as intending to testify against them publicly. In this
draught which they brought to him, and whereunto they desired and obtained his
hand and subscription, there was not the least mention or word of any error of
mine, or of Dr Hamonds. From whence (by the way) it is observable, how with as
little truth, as common sense, or good English (of which afterward) this young
piece of presumption writes thus, page 41. In which passage you bring in, AND
THAT TRULY, the whole number of 52. as testifying against you, etc. In which
words (though not many, as you see, in number) there are two contraries (at
least) unto truth. First, that in that passage, wherein I went about to make
Testardus my Patron (a passage no where to be found in my book) I speak to the
whole College or Covent of 52. There is not a word, syllable, or tittle, of
any such address, in that passage, wherein I speak of Testardus. Secondly,
that I bring in, and that truly, the number of 52. to testify against me. For
I confess, that if I did in this, or any other passage, bring in, or present
52. as testifying against me, I did it not TRULY, (though I presume, pardonably
not suspecting forgery in a testimony to the truth of Jesus Christ, especially
being a testimony also to our solemn League and Covenant, and this exhibited
by so many, calling themselves Ministers of Christ, and these all of them,
solemn pretenders to an inviolable observation of this Covenant) because Mr.
John Downham whose name they have printed amongst the subscribers, and who is
one of the 52, did NOT testify against me; and many more of the 52. might be
as innocent as he in this behalf, for ought I know, or have reason now to
judge. Are these false-fingred men, these forgers of testimonies, these
opprobria and propudia generis humani, the shames and blots of mankind, Mr.
Jenkin his reverend and beloved? Very probably they may so be, himself being
one, and (it is like) the first born of them. But are these the Pastors which
the Lord Jesus has provided after his own heart for his people? No great
marvel if the forlorn conscience of this man gives him full liberty of
speaking all manner of evil of me, when at the infinite holiness, the
dreadful power, the incomprehensible majesty of the Lord Jesus Christ himself
cannot secure him against the reproach of his pen, which not only makes the
vilest of men Pastors of his providing for his people, but also asserteth these
for Pastors according to his own heart? But to the story; These Setters having
obtained their desires of Mr. Downham in this kind, how honorably (think we)
did they reward him for his courtesy? First, they go and foyst into that
catalogue of errors, which he had subscribed, what sayings and sentences of
other men they pleased, without demanding his judgment about them, whether he
thought them errors or no Yea (that which was as base an affront as could have
lightly been put upon an ancient, reverend, and learned man) they insert in
this catalogue, under the name of errors, several passages out of a book of
Dr. Hamonds, which Mr. Downam himself had licensed but a little before; and so
represent him, not only as a man of a desultory and inconsistent judgment in
his sedate and best composed years, but also as a man of no more conscience or
cordialnes to his friend, than to blow hot and cold with the same breath, to
kiss and kill in the same hour. If this be the measure of Sion College to
their friends, what may their adversaries expect from them? If this be their
oil, what are their swords? Secondly, being conscious (it seems) that they bad
abused him, by way of reparation, they make him Captain of their black guard,
conferring upon him the ignoble honor of prenomination amongst all their
subscribers. Mr. Downham himself related, not without much regret, this
unnatural and most unworthy department of his Presbyterian brethren toward
him, to another ancient and grave Minister in the City, of his acquaintance.
Hem, vosteam fidem, Dii Sinoniam! Tales neanimis coelestibus arts! i. Have
heavenly minds such tricks, such frauds as these? Could but such a piece of
forgery as this be found in the tents of Independency, how soon should the
report of it fill -- Solis utramque domum, both houses of the Sun? Presbyterian
pens and pulpits would join hand in hand, to provide, that Solis ad occasus,
Solis caneretur ador^us. i.
That East and West should ring with the disgrace.


The story puts me in mind of an old Saw, which cuts well: Non audet Stygius
Pluto tentare, quod audet
Effraenis Flamen --
The Prince himself of the black Stygian lake,
Dares not attempt, what Priests will undertake.


But the best is, that our Collegrate sons of Sion do not build up but pull
down their College, and de number their Society, by such unhallowed policies
and practices, as that lately related. Mr. C. Mr. W. etc.
There are other Ministers (I hear) in the City, late of that Consistory, who
are resolved that their souls shall no more enter into the secrets thereof. The
cage is already so defiled, that the clean birds amongst them begin to loath
and forsake it. And indeed it stands all those of this nation in hand, whom
either the interest of conscience or of honor touches, speedily to quit all
communion in councels and engagements with them. But to return to my
Phaethontean Antagonist. I have heretofore had to do with some of the keenest
sons of high Presbytery, who (I am certain) bad divisim and conjunctim, more
strength of learning in their little finger, than Mr. Jenkin in his whole
loins: yet their attempts and writings in the defense of what was
indefensible, -- (...),
Lie in the dust, as well they did deserve.
Therefore (doubtless) this young man was of no deep reach, to involve
himself in the same guilt, and tamen eundem exitum non perhorrescere, and yet
not to fear the same issue. But when men have armed themselves with a brow of
brass, they make account they are bravely accoutred, sufficiently harnessed
for all incounters whatsoever. A breastplate of righteousness upon their
adversary, is a very feeble piece of armor in their eyes and the sword of the
Spirit glittering in their hand, is esteemed but as stubble and rotten wood.
The Apostle Paul served an hard service at Ephesus, when he did (...) fight
with beasts, i. with unmanlike, importune, and unreasonable men (as the best
exposition carries it.) For when men will say unto the Sun, Thou art a
sackcloath; and to the stars, ye are but so many clods of earth, and will
insult over others as very weak and feeble, who will not judge and say the same
things with them, with what discourse can such men be entertained either to
conviction, or satisfaction? or how shall they wh^ suffer disparagement upon
such terms, vindicate themselves in any other way, than by appealing from the
phrenetick imputations of these men, to the senses, and common-senses of
others, and by delivering up their adversaries to the neglect and scorn of all
such, whose reasons, judgments and understandings have not evaporated in pride
and vanity? I confess I do not well know how to prove, that the Sun is not a
sackcloth, or that the stars are not clods of earth, especially by any such
arguments which are like to convince, or to be regarded by him, who indeed
judges them to be such. And there are several things asserted by me in Sion
College visited, and in those passages of mine transcribed in the Testimony,
which Mr. Jenkin denies, or cavils at, which I acknowledge are very difficult
for me to prove; I mean, by any clearer light, than that wherewith they shine
of themselves. If a man will deny that Christus, in Latin, signifies in
English, Christ, or that person, God and man, who according to the Scriptures,
came to save the world; or that Gentes signifies the Gentiles, or the Nations
of the earth, as contra-distinguished to the Jews: or that suaculpa perire,
signifies in English, to perish by a man's own fault, (with many the like) I
must profess, that I know not well how to prove them. So again, if a man will
deny that twice two makes four, that the Sun is full of light, that sweet
things are sweet, that bitter things are bitter, etc. I shall be at a loss to
make any substantial demonstration of them, especially to the satisfaction of
Mr. Jenkin, or men of the same line of reason and understanding with him. In
which respect (Reader) I shall not weary either thee or my self with any
solemn or formal confutation of what Mr. Jenkin affirms in opposition to
things delivered by me; nor do much more, than only present thee with the
ridiculous insolency of his allegations when he argues, with the
unconscionablenes of his assertions when he reports; together with the
ignorance and unclerklinesse of his exceptions, when he vapors and insults.

The Lord deliver both thee and me in due time from unreasonable men, and
vouchsafe unto us more confortable employment, than to contend against those,
who both speak, and do, as if they had abjured all principles of reason,
conscience, and ingenuity.

From my Study in Colemanstreet, April 6. 1648. Thine to serve thee with all
faithfulness and simplicity of heart in the LORD, John Goodwin.

THE NOVICE-PRESBYTER INSTRUCTED.
FOR a great part of Mr. Jenkin his Pamphlet, Sect. 1.
the constitution and complexion of it, eases me of the labor of making any
Answer, or Reply unto it. For, consisting of such reproaches, vilifications,
and disparagements (the madness whereof is sufficiently known unto, and cried
out against by all men) I should but actum agere, do that which is abundantly
done already to my hand, if I should go about to possess men of sobriety and
judgment, with the unfavourinesse thereof. The task whereunto I shall confine
my self in this undertaking, is to show my youthful Confidentiary more of
himself, than yet he understands; and how far, even in those things, wherein
he most magnifies himself, Reason and Truth are above him. Or if by the
Institutes of High-Presbytery it be a thing unlawful for him ever to be wiser
than he is, or to see any thing more than what for the present he sees, then I
bequeath this his portion to those, whose Religion prohibiteth them not to GROW
in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord JESUS CHRIST.

For method, Sect. 2.
and memory's sake (with the brittlenesse whereof he upbraideth me, p. 41.) I
shall reduce what I judge necessary to animadvert upon his book, to the
demonstration of these four capital defects in him: 1. In point of
Conscience. 2. Of Learning, or Clerkship. 3. Of Judgment, or Apprehension. 4.
(and lastly) Of Civility, and common Ingenuity. I shall not furnish every of
these heads with matter so entirely appropriate unto them respectively, but
that some things more directly appertaining to one, will occasionally take
their place under another. But this (I conceive) will be no breach of method in
the eye of a Reader truly judicious. As for the two middle Deficiencies, the
one of Learning, the other of Judgment, were they not accompanied with the
other two, I confess I could very willingly gratify his youth with pardon for
them. But in what degree soever he is beholding to his years for their
mediation for him, in respect of his want of learning, judgment and
apprehension, in the same, or greater, he is burdened with them, and rendered
inexcusable, under his defect of conscience and ingenuity, For when the light
and vigor of conscience, and principles of modesty and ingenuity are so soon
extinguished, it is an undeniable sign that men have sinned at so much the
higher, and more desperate rate. And very unhappy must needs be the condition
of such men, who are charged not only with the inconveniences more appropriate
to their own age, or years, but with those also which are more commonly
incident to other men's: As when the children of youth shall not only suffer
themselves to be filled with vanity, ignorance, and presumption, (the evil
spirits which commonly haunt their years) but shall also take unto themselves
the worse spirits of malignity, hypocrisy, searednesse of conscience,
dissimulation of the truth, etc. which do not often find men out, until they
be somewhat stricken in year, and gray hairs upon them.

1. Mr. Jenkin argues himself defective in point of conscience, by these and
many such like passages in his Book.
In his Title page, he calls Sion College visited, A very feeble Pamphlet: and
a while after (in his Preface) His other writings are below the most: but this
last piece was below himself.

Though the man speaks these things in good concurrence with my conscience
(for I verily believe my writings to be of that sort of weak, Sect. 3.
feeble, and despised things, which God has chosen to confound the things that
are mighty,) yet I have cause to think that he speaks them with the loud
reclamation of his own, it being a thing incident to youth, (...). Arist. Eth.
(as Aristotle long since observed) to say many things, which they believe not.

For first, is it like that a man of such Seraphicall parts and learning, that
he is able to instruct the ignorant in the profound speculation of the Quiddity
of Manicheisme, whereof Mr. Goodwin, and such Abecedarians as he, is ignorant
Busic-Bishop, p. 45, 48, etc.
, would so far undervalue himself, and profane his excellency, as to set
himself and all the powers of his wit against that he judges VERY FEEBLE?

Subruere est arces, and stantia moenia virtus:
Quilibet ignavus praecipitata premit. i.
Valor, strong castles won, and walls, d'exalt;
It Is cowards guise things FEEBLE to assault.
Secondly, if he judged my Pamphlet so very feeble, why does he so studiously,
amolish, and deprecate of his Reverend Sirs, the suspicion of Ambition, in that
he should undertake to answer it Preface. p. 2.
? When an Eagle engages herself to catch a Fly, has she cause to fear the
imputation of Ambition, because of such an attempt? In this solemn deprecation
of his to his Reverend Brethren, not to account it ambition that puts him upon
the undertaking, supposing the Pamphlet he undertakes to be very feeble, he
either makes his brethren very feeble in their understanding, viz. as being
obnoxious to account it ambition in him, that should attempt to break a rotten
stick; or otherwise bewrayes the rottenness of his own conscience in calling
that VERY FEEBLE, which he inwardly thinks to be very strong. And whereas he
presently adds, that for the most of them to have performed his task, he
should have accounted it an act of (not to say too) great condescension:
Questionless the condescension in them had been as great, as it would be in
the Master-fidlers belonging to a country consort, to excuse the little Boy,
and carry the great Fiddle themselves.

Thirdly (and lastly) is it likely that Mr. Jenkin can have the consent of his
conscience, to say, my other writings are below the most, and this last to be
VERY FEEBLE, and below my self, when as the fifth rib of Mr. Jenkins Religion
(High Presbytery I mean: for which metaphor I shall give account hereafter)
lies bleeding at the foot of the other, being as good as broken in pieces by
them; and himself, with many others of his Collegiate fraternity, cast out of
the possession of their patience (that I say not, of their wits) by the last.
If my other writings were below the most; the cause of High-Presbytery being so
shaken, shattered, and dismantled by them, must needs be (in strength, and
capacity of being maintained) below the most of causes; unless for the staving
off of this consequence, Mr. Jenkin will say, that the cause I speak of, is
good, but the defenders of it are weak and insufficient. I give him leave to
choose his horn; but goared he must be either by the one horn, or the other, of
the Dilemma. And for Sion College visited, if this be below my self, it is a
sign that Mr. Jenkin, and his Reverend Sirs, grow downwards, or backwards, as
well in patience, as in learning and knowledge. For I appeal to all judicious
and disengaged men, that have found so much time as to lose in reading Mr.
Jenkins Busy Bishop, whether both the patience of the man be not overcome, and
his learning overcharged, with that writing. If Mr. Jenkin notwithstanding all
this, will say in his soul and conscience, he verily believes that the said
writing called Sion College visited, is a very feeble Pamphlet, let this
Animadversion be removed from under this head, and carried on to the third, to
prove him a Defective in judgment and understanding. But I suppose there is no
occasion for the remove.

Secondly, Sect. 4.
whereas (in the said Title page) he insinuates me guilty of cavills against
the Ministers of London for witnessing against my errors touching the holy
Scriptures, and the power of Man, etc. it argues (in his own metaphor) a crazy
conscience. For I never cavil'd against, nor had any thing to do with, either
on the right hand, or the left, the Ministers of London for witnessing against
any errors of mine whatsoever, nor did I ever charge them with any such crime.
That which I charged them with, (not cavil'd against them, for) was
unconscionable and indirect dealing with the words and writings of their
brethren, who never wronged them, a co^spiracy against several truths of God,
(bound up indeed in the same bundle with many errors, as Christ was numbered
amongst transgressors,) and incensing the Magistrates against thousands that
are godly and peaceable in the land, because not of their faction, etc. With
these things, and some other of like notorious delinquency with these, I
confess I charged them. But that they ever witnessed against any error of
mine, it never came within the verge of my thoughts. Does not then my young
adversary abase his conscience greatly in this point also?

Thirdly, Sect. 5.
when in the same Title page he affirms, that in his Busie-Bishop, the
impertinency of my quotations out of the Fathers, M. Bucer, and Mr. Ball, are
manifested, he plainy declares, that it is all one with him to say that snow is
black, as that it is white: yea more easy, to say that what is not done, is
done, than to say that it is not done. For alas! what has the young Glorioso
done to the value of the least hair of his head, toward a manifestation of
any impertinencie in any of my quotations he speaks of? Or if he understand
not what the impertinencie of a quotation means, or wherein it consists, let
this note serve under the third head, and prove him debile or crazie in his
intellectuals. For to cite other words, of a different, or contrary import, to
those quoted by me out of the same Author, is no manifestation at all of any
impertinency in my quotation. It is indeed a discovering of the nakedness of
an Author, to present him as contradictious to himself. Nor is there any
practice or course more ready and direct, to enervate, cancel, and dissolve
the interest of all humane Authority whatsoever, and to render all Authors, but
as so many ciphers in matters of religion, than to expose the unstablenesse of
their judgment to the eyes of men. For he that speaks contradictions, as to
matter of testimony, is as good as silent, and as speaking nothing at all. And
for my part, I neither am, nor shall be, at all offended with Mr. Jenkin, for
duly presenting any Authors whatsoever, Fathers or others, beneath the order of
Hagiographie, as divided from, and inconsistent with themselves, in any
difficult or disputable point in Christian Religion. To go on in this course I
shall rather give him the encouragement of Macte nova virtute, puer.
Brave youth, advance in this new valor thine.


For by this means he will help to tear and pluck off that covering of flesh,
wherewith the faces of many notable Truths of God have been so bumbled and
muffled up, that the generality of men could never come to a clear and orderly
sight, or view of them. Not that I would have the names or memories of men
deserving well of Religion and Christianity in their generations, unkindly or
unworthily handled in the least; but that their authority and greatness of
name might not (contrary to their desires) be abused to the prejudice or
disadvantage of any truth; nor, in any particular opinion which they assert or
hold, be exalted above the strength and worth of those grounds, whether of
Scripture, or Reason, by which they maintain it. I heartily wish, that in all
our disputes about matters of Religion, all names of men whatsoever might be
but standers by, and lookers on, and that only their arguments and reasons
might be actors. And whereas the young man, ( p. 41.) either very ignorantly,
or (which is worse) very contra-conscientiously, charge me with going about
to make Testardus my Patron; And p. 44. with bringing Mr. Bucer, and Mr. Ball
to bless me. And again, that I come to the Fathers for patronage (which is his
Coccysme, or Cuckow-note, that he sings ten times over.) I must tell him, for
his learning in these sayings, he (as the the English proverb phraseth it)
museth as he uses. For because himself, and others of his capacity, use to
make Patrons for their opinions, of their books and Authors, having commonly
no better pillars to support the Pile and Fabric of their judgments, than
flesh and blood; therefore he conceiteth that all other men, who make use of
Authors, do it upon the same terms, and ground. But when the Lord Christ
cited the testimony of John the Baptist, in the behalf of himself, and that
Doctrine of his, wherein he avouched himself the true Messiah and Son of God,
did he go about to make him a Patron, either to himself or his Doctrine? Nay,
does he not expressly disclaim any such thought or intention as this, in these
words, I receive not testimony from man John 5. 34.
, and as expressly declare what his intention was in producing this testimony
(in the words following) but these things I say that ye might be saved: plainly
signifying, that neither he nor his Doctrine, had any need of any foreign or
extrinficall aid from any Authority of men whatsoever, for the countenancing or
asserting of either, in the eyes or judgments of considering and unprejudiced
men, being both full of a native light of their own, abundantly sufficient for
the conviction and satisfaction of such; and therefore the reason which moved
him to insist upon the testimony of John, was, that such partial, froward, and
engaged men as they were (for he speaks unto the Jews,) might have the
advantage of a testimony more creditable with them, to be convinced of, and
believe that, which was so necessary to be believed by them, for their
salvation. In like manner, the reason why I quote either Testardus, or Hierome,
or Austin, or any other Author, as concurrent in judgment with me about my
Doctrine, or opinion, which I teach, is not by way of patronage, or countenance
unto them, or as if I conceived that intelligent, free, and disengaged men were
not sufficiently capable of truth in them only by the pregnancy of those
Scriptures, and grounds of Reason, upon which they are built, without being
relieved against their fears, by a conjunction of humane Authority; but that
M. Jenkin, and such as lie under the same disadvantage with him, for discerning
and believing Truth, being so servile, and so bowed down in their judgments
and understandings, that they dare not, (or howsoever will not) call any thing
Truth, which men, voted Orthodox by a reciprocal vote amongst themselves, do
not call such with them, might have a sustentory, or encouragement suitable to
their weakness in this kind, and not be afraid of Truth, as of an unclean
clean spirit, for want of flesh and bones. Therefore when he speaks of
manifesting the IMPERTINENCY of my quotations, I cannot readily imagine what he
should mean by his Impertinency: or how, or by what light given by him, he
should imagine that he has manifested any such thing in them, or against them.
If by the IMPERTINENCY of aquotation, he means, a contrariety of sense, or
import, to somewhat which the same Author affirms or denies elsewhere, all,
or the greatest part of his own quotations are every whit as IMPERTINENT as
mine. For he quotes nothing from any Author in opposition to me, but what has
been counter-quoted by me from the same. Nor do I, either in Sion College
visited, or in any other of my writings, quote any Author, for any such end or
purpose as this, viz. to prove that the Author which I quote, never expressed
himself otherwise, than according to the tenor of the words, which I quote
from him. If not to prove such a thing as this by a quotation, be to quote an
Author IMPERTNENTLY, I confess M. Jenkin has said somewhat (though not
sufficient neither) to manifest the IMPERTINENCY of my quotations: but
howsoever, the IMPERTINENCY of his own are equally manifest (as has been said)
by the same light. Or if by this his IMPERTINENCY, he means the Impertinency
of them in respect of the actual accomplishment of the end intended and
desired by them, which was the conviction and satisfaction of Mr. Jenkins, and
others, of the truth contained and asserted in them, I confess (as touching
himself) he has sufficiently manifested this Impertinency in them, by
declaring himself an enemy to such Truths, my quotations notwithstanding. But
in this sense of the word, IMPERTINENCY, his own quotations are altogether as
IMPERTINENT as mine; inasmuch as I, and many others (to my knowledge) are far
from being satisfied by them, touching the truth of what he conceived to be
comprehended in them. If young Thraso will undertake to manifest IMPERTINENCY
(in any regular or tolerable signification of the word) in my quotations, he
must clearly and lightsomly prove, either that vera justitia does not signify,
true, but hypocritical, righteousness; or that anterevelatum eis Christum,
does not signify, Before Christ [was] rev^^led unto them, but, that Peter
answered and said, or the like (...), quam ut ignorare eos Christum suum
pateretur, does at no hand (...) then that he would suffer them to be ignorant
of his Christ, but, (...) two Sparrowes sold for a farthing? or something as
extravagant, (...) noramus-like, as this, or other things of everyhwit as
difficult (...) as any of these: otherwise I make no question, but the next
time that he and his conscience meet, either he will come off with this fair
interpretation of his words, that the IMPERTINENCIE of my quotations (i. all
the IMPERTINENCIE that is in them, which indeed is none at all) is manifested
in his Busie-Bishop: for in this sense (I confess) the IMPERTINENCIE of them,
is here manifested: 1. there is no more IMPERTINENCIE in them, than what is by
him manifested, which (as was said) is none at all: or else, with this penitent
confession, that he dealt unkindly by his Conscience, when he talked of
IMPERTINENCIE in my quotations.

Whereas he pretends (in the same Title page) that in his Busie-Bishop my
Cavils against the Ministers of London, are answered: Sect. 6.
I answer, that in such a sense at the strong Arguments of his Book are
answered in the Title page of mine, so are my cavils against the Misters of
London answered by him in his. For as I answer all his strong Arguments,
without answering any at all: so does he answer all my cavils against the
Ministers, without so much as answering any; there being no jot or tittle of
such employment in my Book for his Busie-Bishop to meddle with.

Amongst many other causlesse and senseless revilings of me, Sect. 7.
wherein he comforts himself and his Reverend Sirs (his fellow
Testimonialists) against me, in his Preface he is not ashamed to charge me with
abundant rage in opposing Christ in his Scriptures, Grace, Ministers,
Government; his rage (says he) against the two last, reaching up to heaven.
Elijah was the man charged by Ahab to be the troubler of Israel: but Ahab
himself (with his Fathers house) was the man who indeed and in truth was the
troubler thereof, Elijah being the Chariot and Horsemen of Israel. I have not
troubled Israel (says Elijah to him) but thou and thy Fathers House 1 King.
18. 18.
. So I am the man charged with abundant rage in opposing Christ in his
Scriptures, Grace, Ministers, Government: but M. Jenkin with his Sinonian band,
is the man who really and according to the truth, thus opposes him. I oppose
Christ in his Scriptures in such a sense as Christ himself deceived the
people. Others said, nay: but he deceives the people Joh. 7. 2.
. These obstinate and blind Jews called that a deceiving of the people, which
was nothing else but an instructing of them in the truth, and a preserving of
them from being deceived. In like manner this son of shame, wilfulness and
folly, calls that an opposing Christ in his Scriptures, which is most evident
in the eyes of all men, who have not sold themselves (...) ^laves into the hand
of high-Presbytery, a justifying, a magnifying, an exalting of Christ in them.
It was the expression of a man, as eminent both for piety, parts, and place,
as either of our Universities afford, and not of the abhorred order of
Independency neither (as his preferment sufficiently testifies,) finding me
charged by the testimony-mongers of Sion College, with the foul crime of
denying the authority of the Scriptures, and having seen my tractate upon that
subject, that he wondered how ever it should come into the hearts of these men,
to lay such a thing to my charge, how they durst traduce me as a man denying
the authority of the Scriptures, when I had written so clearly, fully, and
effectually, in the defense and vindication hereof. These, or words to this
effect, he used to some of his friends; adding further this regretfull
Epiphonema: But I see we are fallen into times wherein men dare do and say
any thing. Words of like import have come from several other men of worth and
judgment. But as they, who charged the Lord Christ with deceiving the people,
were the deceivers of them themselves: so the truth is, that Mr. Jenkin, and
his Co^peers, who burden me with opposing Christ in his Scriptures, are
themselves the men of this abomination. For whilst in their teachings they turn
the glory of the abundant grace, love, sweetness and bounty of God, expressed
in the Scriptures toward men, into the similitude of the most unnatural,
unreasonable, unconscionable cruelty and blood-thirstinesse of a tyrant, and
withal represent Christ as the Image and Express Character of this God, do
they not oppose, and that with an high hand, Christ in his Scriptures? Or what
opposition is Christ capable of in his Scriptures, greater than this, that
these, diametrically contrary to their native tenor, tendency, and import,
should be made accessory to his disgrace, and to the misrepresentation of him
in the minds, judgments, and consciences of men; as if all the love, care,
bowels, and compassions which he bare toward far the greatest part of them
in his death, being interpreted, were nothing else but bloody purposes,
intentions, and desires, to make them twofold more the children of wrath, and
this to the days of eternity, than otherwise they had been? And that as for
those few, whose salvation he is supposed to have intended in his death, that
these were as much in the love and favor of God before, and without it, and
had eternal life and salvation settled upon them by the unchangeable decree and
purpose of God from eternity, without any relation to, or consideration of it?
The teachers and avouchers of such doctrines as these, are they who oppose
Christ in his Scriptures, not they who deny ink and paper, and whatsoever is
materiate or formed by man, to be precisely, and in propriety of speech, the
word of God. Of the two, in case the saying of Epiphanius be true, that
misbelief is worse than unbelief; (...).
it is better to deny the Scriptures in any sense, or in every sense, to be the
word of God, (which yet I never did, and am as far from doing as the best
resolved man in all Mr. Jenkins fraternity) than to render them an obloquie and
reproach unto God, and destructive to his glory. But with what authority, and
sovereignty of argument Mr. Jenkin proves the Sun to be a Sackcloth, I mean,
that I deny the Divine authority of the Scriptures, shall be taken into
consideration in due time.

That I oppose Christ in his grace, Sect. 8.
is a charge parallel to the other of opposing him in his Scriptures: and
therefore it is no great marvel if one conscience affords them both. But why,
or how, do I oppose Christ in his Grace? Surely, not by making it greater,
more extensive, more comprehensive, more redundant, than Mr. Jenkin and his
fellow-dogmatists do. Certainly the conscience of the man (if it be not
amongst Rachels children Matthew. 2. 18.
) will not give him leave to call this an opposition of Christ in his grace:
but will rather reverberate this crimination upon himself and his mates, who
tremble not to inform the creature against the Creator (blessed for ever) as
if from eternity he had shut up his grace, mercy, love, from and against the
whole generation of men (some few of them only excepted) with the iron bares
of an ireversible, indispensable decree, and this without any regard and
consideration had, either to, or of, their obduration, impenitence, or
unbelief: thus making him like a King, or other man, who should marry and
desire to beget children, with a full purpose and intention to make the far
greatest part of them slaves, yea and to put some as soon as they should be
borne; others not many years after, to a most cruel, shameful, and
tormenting death. If there be any opposers of Christ in his grace under heaven,
the teachers of such doctrines as these are the first born in the engagement.

But it may be this swelling piece of vanity, Sect. 9.
charging me, p. 29. with the swelling of nature, represents ^e as an opposer
of Christ in his grace upon this account, viz. as exalting nature against, or
above the grace of Christ. Indeed if the man could prove either of these, it
might somewhat mend his market. But as to matters of proof (truly so called)
the great Gingler otherwise, is as well in this, as in other his undertakings
against me, as mute as a fish. If God shall vouchsafe to grant me life and
health, and opportunity otherwise, to give a distinct and perfect account of my
judgment about the strength or interest of nature, and the efficacy of grace,
it will appear, that all things considered, I give as little to the former
(and much more to the latter) as M. Jenkin and his Assessors do I shall only add
this one thing (for the present) in the point in hand, that whatsoever is
ascribed unto Nature, by way of gift, power, or endowment, except Nature, with
her gifts and endowments, be given away from God, or from the grace of God in
Christ, and ascribed unto some other Author, Founder, or Benefactor, there is
no occasion given unto any man to look upon it, as any ways derogating from
the grace of God, or Christ. Sed de his alias

Whereas he expresses himself as somewhat more qualified about my opposing
Christ in his Scriptures, Sect. 10.
and Grace, but with great indignation charge me with rage reaching up to
heaven, in opposing him in the other two, his Ministers and Government, does
not his pen bewray him for a man, whose heart sits closer to his own interests
of honor and profit, than to his Masters greatest concernments? yea, I verily
believe, that had I not touched the apple of Mr. Jenkins eye, he would not have
said so much unto me, as black is my eye, for any opposition I have made
against Christ. I have made bold to visit Sion College, and to blaspheme (as
her worshippers interpret) the great Dieana of high Presbytery; therefore I
must suffer as an opposer of Christ in his Scriptures, Grace: yea, and as a man
whose rage reaches up to heaven, in opposing him, first and principally in his
Ministers, and then in his Government: my opposing him in his Ministers (that
should be) is the root of the matter: Scriptures, Grace, and Government too,
should have gone for naught, had not these Ministers of his been opposed. But
upon what simple and ridiculous pretenses, he raveth against me, as a man
opposing Christ either in Ministers, or Government, is argued under the second
head.

Not long after (in this Preface) he professes, Sect. 11.
that his hearty request to my misled followers (because led out of the broad
way of High-Presbytery) is like that of Moses to the people, that they would
depart from the tents of this man. Mr. Jenkin in this profession, has charged
himself with a very difficult task, against his next, viz. to prove, that
Moses made some such request as this unto the people, viz. that they would
depart from my tents. He tells me of three or four prophanations of Scripture
Page 59.
: But he that prophanes Scripture himself, as Mr. Jenkin does, more than three
or four times in his Busie-Bishop, is a very incompetent judge of this
misdemeanour in others. But to levy the Scriptures against any principle, or
practice in High-Presbytery, or Presbyterians, must by the decisive authority
of this young Dictator, needs be a profanation of them.

He further requests them, Sect. 12.
that they would not feed upon chalk and coals in corners. I make no question
but the persons he means will gratify him in this request, with an overplus:
and that they will take heed of feeding upon such stuff as he speaks off,
either in corners, or in more open places. It is well known that there is more
Chalk and Coals about Christ-church, than is to be found in, or about the
Warehouse in Colemanstreet.

But since he tells them, Sect. 13.
that the Lord Jesus Christ has provided them Pastors after his own heart, I
wonder how he dares attempt to seduce, or withdraw them from such Pastors? They
keep to the Pastor which the Lord Jesus Christ has provided for them. But for
those Pastors which Mr. Jenkin (I suppose) means, he or they, or both, shall
do well to prove them Pastors according to the heart of Jesus Christ: for
their spirit, ways, and works, strongly import another (much differing)
conformity.

If under Prelacy they hated those Doctrines as hell, which now they advance to
heaven, I trust they do but imitate St. Paul, who in time came to build up
that faith, which sometimes he destroyed Gal. 1. 23.
. It seems it is a law in High-Presbytery, that that which is crooked, must
never be made straight, nor that which is turned out of the way, ever be
healed: or else that this Government is built of Irish Oak, so that there is no
danger, or possibility, that any cobweb of error, or false doctrine should ever
be found about it.

And whereas (in the last place) he desires them not to be offended at his
acrimony (wherein he commends himself for being more bountiful to me, Sect.
14.
than to all the men in the world besides, put together) I trust that herein
also they will grant him his desire. For (as Hierome says) majores non
scandalizantur: well-grown Christians are never scandalized, or offended: the
reason whereof is, because they know that there are wolves in sheeps clothing,
as well as in their own skins: and that there is no unworthy, impious, or
abominable thing whatsoever, but there is vileness and wickedness enough in
some proffessing Christian Religion, to perpetrate and do it. Now the
knowledge of the reasons and causes of things, is an antidote or preservative
against admiration, and so against any distemper or disturbance in the mind or
affections, when such things come to pass, which to others, who are ignorant
of the causes producing them, are like to occasion disturbance and offense. I
make no question but my followers fully know, that Mr. Jenkin, before this,
might have, and that now, he (indeed) has pride, ignorance, and wickedness in
him every ways sufficient, to exhibit and afford, all that acrimony he
speaks of as bestowed on me, and in this respect I am full of hope, that they
will not be offended at it in the least, however they may be affected with
sorrow and grief of heart, to see a young man by the just judgment of God,
turned into a pillar of such unsavory salt. For what is that acrimony he
speaks of, or what are the ingredients of it, but affectate jeers, childish
ventosities and puffs of wit, charges made of most notorious, palpable, and
broad-fac'd untruths, senseless and importune vilifications, which his best
friends are ashamed of, exaltations of ignorance and folly in Criticisms, and
such like over-ingagements of his strength, unchristian revilings, diabolical
slanders, etc. This is the true composition of Mr. Jenkins his Acrimony; they
that have nothing else to do with their time, but to read his Pamphlet, may
without the help of any Commentary, so find it.

This considered, certainly either his sense, or conscience, or both, failed
him, to say concerning his Acrimony, that it is less than I deserved. For can
any man, whatsoever his demerit, or crimes be, deserve to make another man
sinful, or wicked? Does the Devil himself deserve to be belied, slandered,
reproached, reviled? At whose hand, or from whom, deserves he these things, or
who shall do the execution in case he deserves them? I know none but M.
Jenkin, and those that take the same liberty of conscience (or, from conscience
rather) with him, that are like to inflict such penalties as these upon him.
Such executions are no work for Archangels. But this Mancipium of absurdities,
and all manner of illiteratenesse, that in matters of Scholarship, regular and
manlike learning, scarce knows his right hand from his left, will yet ever and
anon be perking up into Aristarchus his chair, and as if he understood what he
censures, will tell men how often he takes them tardy.

For the further furnishing of this head, Sect. 15.
I shall only present the Reader with a catalogue of some of those many
broad-fac'd and shameless untruths (with a brief eviction annexed unto them
respectively) together with some other strains of a semblable impiety, which
lie thick scattered, like dung upon the face of his Pamphlet. First, there is a
nest of this serpentine brood I speak of, (base and putid slanders and
untruths) in the very first half page of his book. Here he affirms, 1. That
my work is to kill Religion. 2. that I advance her head in my Preface, to break
her neck in my book. 3. that in the performance of my book, I lay Religion
among the clodds. 4. that I deny the Scripture to be the Foundation of
Religion. 5. (within two lines after the end of this first page) that were my
wit but half so keen as my will, they should in a short time neither have
Religion nor Minister left among them. Might he not with as much truth, yea,
with as much likelihood of truth, have charged me to have uttered all those
scurrilous, foul-mouthed, unmanly, and most unchristian speeches against the
Parliament and Army, which (as the Pulpit-Incendiary informs the world) have
been the devout orisons, and pious ejaculations of the circumforaneous tribe of
our morning Lecturers? I confess, that if either my wit or will knew how to
effect it, we should neither have any such Religion, which stands in railing,
left amongst us; nor any Minister, who in stead of lifting up his voice like a
Trumpet, to cause the people to know their abominations, should lift it up like
a Trumpet, to prepare and cause the people to commit abominations. As for that
foundation of his, that I deny the Scripture to be the foundation of Relion,
upon which he builds this pile of lying vanities, we shall (under the next
head) so raze and demolish it, as not to leave one stone of it upon another,
which shall not be thrown down.

Page 2. he says, Sect. 16.
1. that my rage against the Ministers made me write nonsense, and so page 4.
and I know not how often besides, he tells me of my rage, rage, rage, against the
Ministers;) whereas the words, which through ignorance of his mother tongue he
calls nonsense, are as regular, proper, and significant, as the English tongue
will bear; and those which (novice-like) he would substitute in their place,
are merely barbarous, making (...), an absurd sollecisme, (as we shall, God
willing, show more at large in the second head). And secondly, there is not the
least occasion given by me, why he should imagine the least rage in me against
the Ministers he speaks of: He cannot but know, that in my Sion College
visited, I give them as friendly and faithful counsel as himself can do; not
is there any sentence or expression in all the book, savouring of any rage
against them. In the same page he is not ashamed to say, that he finds two
abominable falsities within the space of two lines; whereas the truth is, that
he contracts the guilt of two abominable falsities in relating my words. For
first, he affirms, that I say, That the Ministers of the Gospel, are ONLY so
reputed by men, for want of knowing and cosidering better; whereas my words are
clearly of another tenor, tendencie, and import: nor do I so much as speak of
the Ministers of the Gospel (truly so called) but only of such, who not being
such, notwithstanding assume the title and dignity of being such, unto
themselves, and receive it accordingly from inconsiderate men. And besides, the
word ONLY is here falsely foysted in; he finds no such word amongst those of
mine, which he pretends to cite. Secondly, he affirms that I say, that they
(the Ministers of the Gospel) have vested themselves with the privilege of
being the ground and pillar of Truth; whereas 1. I use no such barbarous or
illiterate expression, as vesting any man, or men, with any privilege: nor 2.
do I speak, what I speak in this point, concerning the Ministers of the Gospel
(truly such) but (as before is expressed) concerning those, who call
themselves, and are called by others, such Ministers, being really and in truth
nothing less. Therefore the two abominable falsities he speaks of, are his
own, not mine.

Page 3. Sect. 17.
Fearing (it should seem) that he might want variety of falsities to fill the
mouth of his Busie-Bishop, he again charge me with saying, The Ministers
have vested themselves with the privilege of the Church, etc. Let him show me
these words in my book, and I shall discharge him of the Whetstone. Page 4. he
says, that the design of my deluded followers, is to raze and level the
Church of Christ, and to preach as well as John Goodwin (as indeed they may
soon do.) Mr. Jenkin, the sooner my followers shall be able to preach, as
well as I, I judge it so much the better, and more honorable to me. If it were
the will and pleasure of him, who is able to effect it, I should greatly
rejoice if the thing might come to pass before the morrow next. It seems your
prayer is, that your followers may never be able to preach, as well as you: you
are a mountain, and therefore afraid of levelling. But why must it needs be
one and the same design, to raze, and to level the Church of Christ? When
Moses wished, Would God that all the Lords people were Prophets, and that the
Lord would put his Spirit upon them Numb 11. 29
, was his design, or wish, to raze the Church of Christ? When the Prophet Esaias
prophesied thus: Every valley shall be exalted, and every mountain and hill
shall be brought low Esaias 40. 4.
: did he prophecy of the destruction, or razing of the Church of Christ, or of
the exaltation and glory of it? Questionless the raising and lifting up of the
weaker members of the Church, in gifts and spiritual endowments, to the line
and level of those that are strong, would be so far from razing the Church
of Christ, that it would gird her with strength, and be a beautiful crown
upon her head. But it is plain, that by, the Church of Christ, Mr. Jenkin
(according to the old Pontificiall, and Pontifical notion) means the Clergy:
and makes account that if their interest, or honor be impaired, the Church
must needs fall. Notwithstanding whereas he says, that the design of my
deluded followers, is to raze, etc. if his meaning could be excused, his words
were innocent, (the crime of idleness only excepted) for they neither touch,
nor concern any man. Mr. Jenkin may send his learned ignorance, with his
unconscionable honesty, and my deluded followers, to dwell together in one of
the Castles which he has built in the air.

Page 4. Sect. 18.
He charge me with striking at the Pillar [meaning the Ministers of Sion
Colledge] because of the Proclamation, the Gospel that hangs upon it. If by the
Gospel, he means the Gospel of Christ, or Doctrine of Salvation (which
himself, I presume, will not deny to be his meaning) then is his meaning also
blasphemously base; his words otherwise being passable. For does the Gospel (in
such a sense) hang upon such a crazy pillar, as the Collegiate fraternity of
Sion College? Or does Mr. Jenkin think, that the Doctrine of salvation is
supported by Sion College, and must needs fall to the ground, if this should
sink, or fall? If this be the thought of his heart, I profess plainly, it is
none of mine, nor of any affinity with any of them: and therefore when he
charge me with striking at the pillar he speaks of, because of the Gospel
that hangs upon it, he charge me with that which never was in all my
thoughts, no nor ever came near unto any of them. I never looked upon the
Doctrine of Salvation, as depending or hanging on Sion College. But had he
charged me with striking at the pillar, only because of the Proclamation that
hangs upon it, and of such a Gospel, which really and in truth hangs upon it, I
should have acknowledged the charge, as true. For that Proclamation of impiety,
and opposition to the Truth, which hangs upon the pillar of Sion College, and
would (I believe) soon fall to the ground, if this pillar were removed, was the
very reason indeed why I struck at the pillar. Nor do I know any other Gospel
but this, or some like unto it, that in deed and in truth, hangs upon the
pillar of Sion College.

Page 5. Sect. 19.
He charge me with blasting the Ministers (he must mean the Ministers of the
Province of London) with the title of murderous Nebuchadnezzars. Shameless
young man! What? because the Ministers he speaks of, are indeed blasted, must
it needs be by the Title of murderous Nebuchadnezzars given unto them? and this
by me? This is another false and forged accusation against me: I no where call
them, murderous Nebuchadnezzars. Howsoever, it is not I, nor any man else, that
could blast them with any title, or titles whatsoever, did they not blast
themselves with the rough East Wind of their violent practices against
peaceable and pious men; and with other courses of little better influence upon
their names and reputations. When (in the same page) he represents these
words, as mine; The Ministers of the Gospel claim Nebuchadnezzars prerogative,
etc. he basely fallifies: I speak not this of the Ministers of the Gospel; I
verily believe, that no men of this interest and capacity, will claim any such
prerogative, as there I speak of; my charge is laid only against such men,
who call themselves Ministers of the Gospel, but are not.

Page 6. Sect. 20.
He charge me, that when I write, I am always in the clouds. But if so, how
then come I to strike at the pillar of Sion College? Is Sion College also in
the clouds? I fear rather among the Clods. But if I be always in the clouds
when I write, I am continually in my writings, where (as the Scripture says)
the strength of God dwells. His excellency (says David) is over Israel, and
his strength is in the clouds Psa. 68. 34.
. I confess that when I write, I find and feel the strength of God near
unto me, and with me. I am content to bear the reproach of my habitation, for
the accommodation of my company. But take Mr. Jenkin in his notion of my being
always in the clouds when I write, I wonder who shall mediate between that
assertion of his in his Preface, where he says of my last piece (Sion College
visited) that it was beneath my self, and this, of my being always, when I
write, in the clouds? Certainly there is nothing that can make peace between
these two, but only this supposition, that in all my former writings, I was in
the heavens; and that in the last, I fell no lower, nor nearer to the earth:
than the clouds. And in the clouds (I acknowledge) that sometimes I am, when I
write, viz. relatively, (I mean, with reference to Mr. Jenkin, and men of his
line of understanding) especially when I express any thing in significant and
proper English, which lies a little out of the road of A. B. C. At such
turnings as these, Mr. Jenkin is fain to pull me down out of the clouds of my
regular and good English, and put me into the light of his absurd and barbarous
language, before he can see or tell what to say to me.

When (as page 6.) he affirms, Sect. 21.
that many know, that I have more heresies and errors met me, than are
dispersed among some THOVSANDS in the world; he must seek his Substantive, for
his Adjective [thousands] inter oves and boves, and caetera pecora campi, or
such like creatures, or otherwise suffer the shame of a Pseudographer, in those
words. As for heresies, most certain I am that I have none in me, being always
ready and willing to submit my judgment, to such Arguments for my conviction,
of the weakness and insufficiency whereof I am not able to give a fair and
reasonable account (though I confess there is somewhat short of this, which
yet in true account is sufficient to exempt from the imputation of heresy.)
But as for errors, I confess there may be more in me, than are dispersed among
ten thousand [sheep and oxen] but that one Will. Jenkin has not double and
treble my proportion in this black coin, I know that there is neither man under
heaven nor Angel in heaven, that knows, or is able to demonstrate. And when
( page 7.) he charge it for a passage, as pernicious, as proud, that I should
say, that I will endeavor when I am gone, that my followers may have my spirit
among them; First, he falsifieth (almost) as fast as he transcribeth, Graecia
mendax.
as if his pen were made of a Greek-goose quill, and antipathized against the
truth. My words (in the Epistle he mentions) are these: I shall endeavor
whilst I yet remain with you, to prevent as much as may be, any supposed, or
feared inexpediencie in my departure from you. As for these words and phrases
which he interfoysts, followers, when I am gone, amongst them, etc. they are
no where to be found in the Epistle. And for those words which are in the
Epistle, some of them he takes out of one sentence, and others, out of another,
and jumbles them together into what saying he pleases. But secondly, suppose
such a saying as he reports, should have dropped from my Pen, why, or how, or
wherein, would it have been either pernicious, or proud? Does M. Jenkin judge
it pernicious either to his followers, or to the world, that he should
endeavor that his hearers might have his spirit among them when he is gone?
More shame for him to have a spirit so mischievous and vile, that it would be a
pernicious endeavor in him, to propagate it amongst his people. Certain I am,
that it becomes every Shepherd of every flock of Christ, to be of such a
spirit, which he may lawfully, yea and commendably desire and endeavor to
leave amongst his people, when he is gone.

Page 7. Sect. 22.
He sets this crown (shall I call it, of thorns, or of honor) upon my head; he
calls me a Seducer in chief; and yet a few lines before, he was so devout, as
to acknowledge it for a mercy, that I have no more of intellect, and in his
Preface he says, that my writings are below the most (to omit twenty
vilifications and ten, every whit as quisquilious and importune, as these) A
double minded man (says James) is unstable in all his ways. What? A Seducer
in chief, and no intellect? A Seducer in chief, and yet his chief writings
below the most? Happy sure is the condition of the world in Mr. Jenkins days,
when the chief seducer in it is a man of a despicable and depressed intellect.
Is not the most devouring beast also in it, a silly lamb, and the greatest
danger in it, that men will walk with their heels upwards? It had been time
enough for Mr. Jenkin to have called me a seducer in chief, when he had
proved, that I had seduced more, than any of the practitioners belonging to
Sion College.

Page 8. His face and conscience (it seems) like Simeon and Levi, Sect. 23.
took a shameless and sinful boldness together, to affirm, that it was my
aim (in a place in Hagiom) to prove him guiltless, who denies the Being of
the Scriptures; and yet in the words immediately preceding, he says, that it is
most like, that in the place he means, I deal cloudily. What a wretched man
is this, to charge a person, positively and peremptorily, with the vilest
intentions that lightly can be, when by his own confession he had but a cloudy
and obscure ground to do it? I am persuaded, that hardly can an instance ( ab
orb condito) be given, that so green a head, and so black a mouth, ever met so
near together before. Page 9. he charge me, with throwing off the Covenant
in my life. I confess I have not observed it with that exactness, which I
both might and ought to have done: but had not Mr. Jenkin, and his high
Presbyterian consorts, thrown it off in their lives, at another manner of rate
than I have done, the Rights and Privileges of Parliament had been better
preserved, Incendiaries and Malignants more discovered, the Reformation of
Religion in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government according to the word
of God, had been more advanced amongst us, less had been taught contrary to
sound Doctrine, and the power of Godliness, yea and a more effectual course
had been taken, that we and our posterity after us, might as brethren live in
faith and love, and the Lord delight to dwell in the midst of us. But not to
rave and rage against the servants of God in zeal to the fifth rib of Mr.
Jenkins Religion, is (in his interpretation) to throw off the Covenant in our
lives.

Page 10. Sect. 24.
He charge me with denying the Scriptures. Why does he not accuse the Sun for
wearing a Sackcloth, and the Moon that she never shines? Here also he says,
that I think my ears defiled, when with the Covenant the Ministers do but name
the world, Truth. Truly I think that M. Jenkin thinks he may both think and
talk what he lists, without being called to an account by him that judges
righteously. Where do I meddle with, or so much as mention the Ministers
naming the word, Truth, with their Covenant? Let them practice Truth and keep
their Covenant, and I shall not be offended at their naming either the one, or
the other. Indeed that men should talk aloud of giving Testimony to the Truth,
and so to their Covenant, and yet to walk contrary to the Truth, and to their
Covenant, is a matter of no pleasing resentment unto me, nor (I suppose) to any
truly fearing God, or loving the souls of men. Lest he should be so far
overseen, as to let a page pass sine calumnia, he remembers himself, p. 11.
and forgeth this slander, that I plead for the covenant only to get the
greater advantage against it God (I am certain) does not know of any such
intention as this, in me: but it is a small thing with Mr. Jenkin to make
himself equal in knowledge with God; he presumes to know, what God knows
not. In the same page he strikes the same false stroke again, and affirms,
that I dare not come near an expression of dislike to errors, by twelve score;
when as himself in the beginning of the same period, had acknowledged, that I
tell the world, that errors are a great grief to my heart, and that I oppose
them in my Ministry. Though these be none of my words (as most of his
transcriptions are basely falsified) nor so expressive of dislike to errors, as
mine; yet do they contain a manifest expression of dislike to errors. He
tell^^ me, page 41. that a crazy conscience, and a brittle memory, are very ill
companions. I am sorry Mr. Jenking has no better company than these: they must
needs draw him into much folly.

Whereas upon occasion of the Ministers branding Gods Truths, Sect. 25.
and Satan's errors, with the same brand of obloquy and reproach, I tender this
Christian and sober advice to them, that in their next impression, they would
not say, A Testimony against errors and heresies, but, as we account errors and
heresies. Mr. Jenkin, (p. 13.) in the heat of his youthful blood, not being
well capable of advice, in conjunction with his first love to the fifth rib of
his religion, rises up thus. His plain meaning is: Be doubtful whether those
damnable errors and heresies be such, or no: be Scepticks, Seekers, etc. Was
the man ever cut out for an Interprer, either of the word of God, or of Men,
who so frequently misuseth the mind and meaning both of the one, and the
other, by casting them out of their words, and substituting his own in their
stead? Does he that advises men, not to judge themselves infallible, or not to
deport themselves as if they were infallible, bidd them be doubtful whether
damnable errors, and heresies, be such or no? Is not this rather the Spirit,
and clear importance of such an advice, Take heed you call not such things,
such opinions, damnable errors or heresies, which you cannot sufficiently and
substantially prove to be so? and which, for ought that appears to men as
learned, as apprehensive, as judicious, as conscientious every whit as your
selves, to the contrary, may be the sacred truths of God? By Mr. Jenkins
logic, whosoever does not judge himself to be infallible, and this in the
most profound and disputable matters in Religion, ipso facto, (or non facto,
rather) turns Skeptic, Seeker, etc. and can never believe any thing. Men may
be so far resolved and established in matters of religion, as to be able and
willing to dye for them; and yet not necessarily judge themselves infallible:
will Mr. Jenkin call such Skeptics, or Seekers? If he will, what Sect shall
we find to give a denomination unto him, whose establishment in matters of
Religion, notwithstanding his importune claim of infallibility, will not (I
fear) amount to the value or worth of such a resolution. But (it seems) all
counsel and advice to mature consideration, though in matters of the greatest
consequence, and most dreadful importance under heaven, is to Mr. Jenkin as
the shadow of death, and the great abhorring of his soul. Youth, and the fifth
rib of Religion, when they meet, make (I see) a fiery conjunction.

REader, Sect. 26.
I make no question but thy conscience is before this satisfied about the
vileness and wretchedness of the conscience of Mr Vicars his Pastor, and my
Persecutor; yet have I present thee but with a first fruits only of his base
unworthiness. There is scarce any one page throughout the Pamphlet, but Jim
and Oijm, forgeries and falsifications dwell in it. His imputations and charges
are generally built upon the weakest, simplest, the most unreasonable and
senseless grounds, occasions, and pretenses, that lightly can be imagined. He
seldom transcribes any of my words, but he imbaseth them with some allay or
other of his own. Confident I am, that never did any Minister of Christ,
vastare conscientiam, make so much wast of conscience within so short a time,
and narrow compass of occasion, as Mr. Jenkin has done in this daring, and
heaven-affronting piece of portentuous insolency, and impiety, entitled, The
busy Bishop. However, I shall not weary the Reader, or my self, with tracing
him any further by the foot steps of an evil conscience: but shall proceed to
the second head propounded, where we shall take a like survey of his
intellectuals, as we have already done of his morals. We shall find him
hearted, and headed, much alike. Only because the discussion and vindication of
those two Doctrines or opinions, which Facultas Theologica, the faculty of
Divinity annexed to Sion-Colledge, has been pleased to make erroneous,
whether the Doctrines themselves will or no, and which were the principal (and
upon the matter) the only engagers of me to this Answer, fall under the second
head, I must crave the Readers patience and leave, to enlarge my self a little
more herein, than in the former; but withal shall make ample satisfaction, by
contracting my self in the other two.

2. Mr. Jenkin demonstrates himself defective in Clerk-ship, and matter of
learning, in these passages, with their fellows.
To prove that my rage ( in his rhetoric) against Christ's Ministers and
Government, Sect. 27.
reaches up to heaven, he appeals to these words of mine, which yet as he
has jumbled them, are more his than mine. The best success, which with any
color of truth we can entitle the Presbyterian government unto, is to snip and
keep under thriving branches. Upon these words out of his profound learning,
he distinguishes thus: I know he means not branches that thrive in heresies,
but clearly intends such branches, as thrive in holiness.

In this division or distinction of thriving branches, making some to thrive in
heresies, others in holiness, and concluding, that because I do not mean the
one, I must needs the other; does my young Springlius reason at any better rate
than this? that which Mr. Jenkin has upon his trencher is no apple: ergo, it
is an oyster. Or thus: By the Reverent Ministers in the City, Mr. Jenkin does
not mean the Independendent Ministers: therefore he means my Lord Major's
Officers, or the Ministers of civil Justice in the City. For is there no
thriving, but either in Heresy, or in Holiness? Does not Mr. Jenkin think
that it is POSSIBLE a man may thrive in learning, judgment and understanding of
the Truth? Or is such a supposition as this contrary to some Article in the
Creed of high Presbytery? Or does he necessarily thrive, either in Heresy, or
in Holiness, who thrives in any of these? But this is the line of reason,
which our young Metropolitan Visiter has stretched over his Busy Bishop, from
the one end to the other.

Before we leave this, Sect. 28.
I would gladly demand of the learning of the man, what rage it is against
Christ's, either Ministers, or Government, to say, that the best success of
Presbyterian government (or the government which the Subscribers approve of, as
himself more truly expresses my meaning, this government not being simply
Presbyterian, but high- Presbyterian, or Metropolitanicall) that the best
success of it is to snip and keep under thriving branches; suppose it should
be meant of branches thriving in Holiness? What communion (says the Apostle)
has light with darkness? or righteousness with unrighteousness? Cannot a
man call a spade, a spade, but he must needs rage against the mattock? Or
cannot a man charge darkness with misdemeanors and many evil works, without
raging against the light? or the Sons of Belial, without raging against the
Ministers of Christ? or say to a Cosmocraticall, imperious, bloody government,
thou art the cause of these and these mischiefs, but he must presently rage
against the Government of Christ? Would a man think that such a Consequentiary
as this, should offer to engage in the profound disputes about the efficacy of
Grace, and the liberty or power of the will? yes, why not as well as Phaethon
undertook to drive his Fathers Chariot.

Quem si non tenuit, magnis tamen excidit ausis.
Which how to manage though he could not tell,
Yet brave was the attempt from which he fell.
He speaks ( page 50.) of having me sent to the children. Sect. 29.
He had need be sent both to children, and to men: to the former, to learn
modesty: to the latter, to be taught the rudiments of learning and discourse.

Having so demonstratively proved my rage reaching up to heaven against Christ's
Ministers and Government (as you have heard) he conceives this cordial and
devout prayer for me: The Lord smite his conscience, and touch his heart, for
this expression, before it be wounded so as it will be without cure. Speaker
not my Lords Grace just as if he were in his Metropoliticall visitation? Or was
it not the manner of the Arch-Prelates and their Commissioners (to amuze the
poor ignorant people with the profoundnesse and solempnity of their devotion)
when conscientious and godly persons were brought before them, either for going
from their Parish Churches to partake of the Word where it was preached, or for
repeating Sermons in their houses, or the like, to lift up their eyes and hands
toward Heaven, and make devout prayers unto God for such heinous Delinquents
as these, that God would smite their conscience, and touch their hearts, and
give them repentance, for the great dishonor they had done unto God, and Jesus
Christ, by these refractory and schismatic practices, by their disobedience
unto those Rulers and Governors which he had set over them, etc.

Nec lacte lacti, nec ovum ovo similius.
'Twixt milk, and milk, the likeness is not greater,
Nor egg to egg more parallel in feature.
Then Mr. Jenkin's devotion in this, and other places of his book, is to that
of our late Prelacie, whereby they sought to commend both their Persons,
Office, and Government unto the poor simple people, as sacred, and such whose
honor could not be impeached or impaired, without great impiety, and dishonor
unto Christ: even as this Prelaticall piece of Presbytery, a little after,
would needs make the world believe, that the Lord Jesus Christ is the greatest
suffer of them all by my Pamphlet. The truth is, that none of them all need to
have been any sufferer at all by the Pamphet he speaks of, the face of it being
clearly set, not to curse them, but to bless them altogether. If they suffer
by it, they may thank the pride and stiffenesse of their own necks, which will
not stoop to the yoke of sound counsel, or a through Admonition. But for the
book, whatsoever now they suffer from it, they have only some such cause of
complaint against it, as they have against that cornerstone which God has laid
in Sion, who by stubbornness, impenitency, and unbelief, dash themselves in
pieces against it. As for his intituling Jesus Christ to the pre-eminence of
martyrdom amongst them, it is but a strain of Rabshekah his rhetoric of
old, who went about to persuade the people, that what Hezekiah had done with
special acceptance from God, in taking away the Idolatrous Altar and high
places, was matter of deep provocation in his sight Isa. 36. 7.
, and that God was a loser, or sufferer thereby.

His second proof of that sore rage of mine (which you heard of) against
Christ in his Ministry and Government, Sect. 30.
is, that I say, concerning the Reverent Ministers of Christ in the City, that
they foment dions, multiply distractions, obstruct the quiet composure and
settling of things in the Land, etc. I answer.

1o. That I speak no such words as these concerning any Reverent Ministers of
Christ, at least not concerning any, whom I had any more reason to know, or to
take notice of, for such, then Paul had to know, or acknowledge him for Gods
high Priest, who commanded him to be smitten on the mouth by the standers by
whilst he was soberly pleading his cause; and to whom he said, God shall smite
thee, thou painted wall Acts 23. 3.
. Concerning some Ministers in the City, I confess I spoke those words: but
that I spoke them concerning the Reverent Ministers of Christ in the City,
lies upon Mr. Jenkin (...) prove in his next, and in the meantime to be
suspected, not only for a (...) a simple accuser, but for a false accuser of
his brethren.

2o. For the truth of the words, applied to those, of whom they were spoken and
meant, I appeal to ten parts of twelve, throughout the Kingdom, viz. whether
the Ministers of Sion-Colledge, amongst them (for of all of them the words were
neither spoken, nor meant) do not foment divisions, multiply distractions,
obstruct the quiet composure of things amongst us. So that thus far here is
no rage reaching up to heaven proved in opposing Christ, either in his
Ministers or government. It is a certain rule: that Christ is never opposed
with truth.

Whereas he adds, that, the genuine paraphrase is, the Ministers are the
Troublers, and Traitors of the Kingdom; I wish, that if this be the
paraphrase, it be not too genuine to the original Text. I hear a bird
(called, the Pulpit-Incendiary) sing a note very near to the old doleful
tune, By Clergymen we are undone.

Whereas I add, Sect. 31.
and Mr. Jenkin repeats; and recompense no degree of all this unworthiness with
any considerable good; he gravely demands, would any Atheist in England have
said more? Truly (Mr. Jenkin) I think not, nor perhaps half so much. I would
be sorry to say no more for Christ, nor for his friends, nor in his cause, than
an Atheist would say? Atheists are not like to put their fingers into any such
fire, as I have done, for the honor and service of Jesus Christ my Lord, and
his Gospel. Whereas he adds (with much seeming regret) as if those words of
mine did imply, that all their labors, though never so successful in
converting, or building up of souls, amount not to any considerable good; I
clearly answer, that for all the success, either in converting of souls
(except it has been from God and godnnesse, unto the power of Satan) and so
for building up of souls (except it has been in wrath and disaffection,
against the Parliament, Army, and faithful servants of God, under the name of
Sectaries and Independents) which the Ministers I speak of have had for these
3. or 4. years last past (for I speak of the unprofitablenesse and uselesnesse
of their Ministry only since the zeal of high Presbytery eat them up, as my
words clearly enough import) I am very full of a rational confidence, that it
may be cast up in a cipher, and measured with a reed that never grew.

Page 1. Sect. 32.
He charge me with aiming at the fifth rib of Religion. It is the strangest
metaphor that a man shall likely meet with, to call High-Presbytery the fifth
rib of Religion. For certain I am, that (with truth) he can mean nothing else
that I should aim at. Let that writing of mine he speaks of, be examined and
sifted to the bran, let my scope, drift, aim, end, design therein be
calculated by the narrowest and most exact observations; and it will clearly
appear, that I aim at nothing, but the breaking of the neck of
high-Presbytery. Indeed, if this Presbytery be the fifth rib of Mr. Jenkin his
religion, I confess, I did aim at his fifth rib, and gave her a soar bang (I
believe) upon it. But did Mr. Jenkin gather this Rhetorical flower in Mr.
Vicars garden? Or what quaint Author furnished his pen with such an Elegancy as
this, to call the great interest of Sion College (domineering Presbytery I
mean) the fifth rib of Religion? But I am so taken with the pleasantness and
rarity of the resemblance, that I shall hereafter (in this discourse) forbear
the dull Grammar expression of High Presbytery, and use the Rhetorical of the
fifth rib of Religion, in stead of it.

Yea but he presses sore upon me with this accusation, Sect. 33.
that I take away the foundation of religion, because I deny the Scripture to
be that foundation. What else (says he, after his insulse and vain manner,
acting the part of a mere Braggadoch) is the English of these words, in
terminis, his own, viz. Questionless no writing whatsoever, whether
Translations or Originals, are the foundation of Christian Religion; And upon
the only repetition of these words, as if the battle were fought, the day
won, and nothing more to be said in the business, he be-zeales it thus Away
with your hypocryticall exclamations against the enemies of Religion, etc. But
is Caiaphas the High Priest risen again from the dead? Or was not this his
deportment right up and down? He has spoken Blasphemy (says the Priest,
concerning Christ) John Goodwin denies the Scripture (says Mr. Jenkin) to be
the foundation of Religion. What further need have we of witness (says the
Priest?) What else is the English of these words (says Mr. Jenkin?) The High
Priest in a devout detestation of our Saviors blasphemy (as he must award it)
rent his clothes: Mr. Jenkin in a zealous agony for my denying the Scripture,
cries ou^, Away with your hypocritical exclamations, etc.

Sio oculos, sic ille manus, sic or a ferebat. i.
Just so, and so, with eyes, hands, face, he acted.
But before my friend William and I part at this turning, I shall either make
him as heretical as my self in denying the Scriptures to be the foundation
of Religion, Sect. 34.
or else prove his wits to be as schismatic, as the senses of a Bethleemite
(whom he in course English calls a Bedlam) in departing from their master. But
first (to his most un-christian, yea unmanly deportment, in managing this base
calumny, and forged accusation against me.)

Whereas I clearly and plainly distinguish and lay down a double sense, and
acception of the word, Scriptures, and in the one sense a^ clearly acknowledge
them to be of Divine Authority, and so the foundation of Christian Religion,
only denying them to be such in the other, this unhallowed piece of Presbytery
wholly suppresseth and concealeth my distinction; and what I deny only in such
and such a sense, represents as simply, absolutely, and in every sense denied
by me. Whether I do not, in a due and regular sense, affirm and avouch the
Scriptures to be of Divine Authority, to be the Word of God, and consequently
the foundation of Christian Religion, I appeal to these words (in page 13.) of
my Treatise concerning the Scriptures. First, if by Scripture, be meant, the
matter and substance of things contained and held forth in the books of the Old
and New Testament, commonly knownamongst Protestants by the name of Canonical,
I fully, with all my heart, and all my soul, believe them to be of Divine
Authority, and none other than the word of God: and (God assisting) shall
rather expose my self to a thousand deaths, than deny them so to be. Can any
man, yea can Mr. Jenkin himself, in words more perspicuous and plain, assert
his acknowledgement and belief of the Divine Authority of the Scriptures, than
these? So that Mr. Jenkings charge against me of the denying the Scriptures to
be the foundation of Christian Religion, stands only upon the authority,
credit, or base, of such an argumentation as this. God has taken a course that
we might serve him without fear (as is evident, Luke 1. 74.) therefore he has
taken a course that we should not fear him at all, or in any signification of
the word, Fear: which conclusion is diametrally opposite to the whole course
and current of the Scripture, and no ways follows from the premises. In like
manner, he that should infer, because it is said (1 Samuel 15. 29.) that the
strength of Israel (meaning God) is not a man that he should repent, that
therefore GOD can in no sense repent, should belie the holy Ghost, who expressly
says ( Genes. 6. 6.) that it repented the Lord that he had made man on the
earth: yea and God himself, who said thus to Samuel, It repents me that I
have set up Saul to be King, 1 Samuel 15. 11. If I should reason thus, Mr. Jenkin
denies the wooden Horse made for unruly Soldiers to ride, to be a living
creature: therefore he denies an horse simply and in every signification of the
word, to be a living creatures; might not Mr. Jenkin conclude me to be a
Wooden Disputant? Yet this is the Logic by which he proves that I deny the
Scripture to be the foundation of Religion.

Secondly, Sect. 35.
when Austine, Mr. Bucer, Mr. Ball, etc. deliver themselves in one place (at
least seemingly, and so far as the letter of the words they use, will bear)
for such an opinion, which the general tenor to nor of their writings
elsewhere seem to oppose, how impatiently importune is Mr. Jenkin, to have the
sense of the particular place overruled and interpreted, by the Analogy of
what he conceives to be their judgment elsewhere? Why then, in as much as he
can produce but one place only, wherein I seem to deny the Scriptures to be of
Divine Authority, or the foundation of Religion, whereas in twenty and ten
places I clearly assert them for such, yea it is my entire, drift, scope, and
design in the whole Treatise, to prove them to be such; why (I say) does he
not regulate and measure the sense of that one place, by the constant and
express tenor of the rest of the Treatise? But Mr. Jenkin, I see, has a
weight and a weight, an Ephah and an Ephah, one to accommodate him in selling,
another in buying: but he shall do well to remember, that both these are an
abomination unto the Lord, Prove. 20. 10.

Thirdly, Sect. 36.
concerning that very particular sense, wherein I do indeed (and I think all
intelligent and considering men with me) deny the Scriptures to be the word of
God, and foundation of Religion, I express my self thus, p. 15. of the said
Discourse. Though I do not believe that any Original Exemplar, or Copy of the
Scriptures now extant amongst us, is so purely the word of God, but that it may
very possibly have a mixture of the word of men in it; yet I confidently
believe that the providence of God, and the love which he bears to his own
glory, as well in the condemnation of the wicked and unbeleevers, as in the
salvation of his chosen, have so far interposed and watched over the great
and gracious Discovery and Revelation which he has made of himself by Jesus
Christ unto the world, that those books, or writings, wherein it was in all the
branches and particularities of it at first imparted unto the world, neither as
yet have suffered, nor ever shall suffer, any such violation, mutilation or
falsification in any kind, either through the ignorance, negligence, or malice
of men, but that they will be able, sufficiently, yea abundantly to furnish the
world, men of all sorts and conditions, with the knowledge of all things
necessary to be known, either for their honorable and Christian deportment in
this present world, or for their everlasting salvation and exaltation in that
which is to come. By which words it clearly appears, that though in a sense
(limited and explained by me) I deny the Scriptures to be the foundation of
Religion, yet I hold and assert them to CONTAIN the Foundation of Religion, i.
those gracious counsels and intendments of God unto the world, by Jesus Christ,
upon which Christian Religion stands, and is built. Why then did Mr. Jenkin
Anania's it with my opinion, and keep back one part of it?

Fourthly, Sect. 37.
concerning my said opinion, for which I bear the calumniatory charge of Mr.
Jenkins pen, I write thus ( page 17. of the said Discourse) Seventhly and
lastly, the TRUE AND PROPER Foundation of Christian Religion, is not INK AND
PAPER, nor any book, or books, not any writing, or writings whatsoever,
whether Translations or Originals; but that substance of matter, those gracious
counsels of God, concerning the salvation of the world by Jesus Christ, which
indeed are represented, and declared, both in Translations and Originals; but
are essentially and really distinct from both, and no ways, for their Natures
and Beings, depending on either. Why then did not M. Ienkin, charging me with
denying the Scriptures to be the foundation of Religion, as with a dangerous
error, mention and relate this my opinion truly and fully, with such
explications of mine about it, without which it is unpossible for any man to
know what mine opinion was in this behalf? Particularly, why did he not charge
me with denying the Scriptures to be [THE TRUE AND PROPER] Foundation of
Religion? Why does he leave out those words [THE TRUE AND PROPER] which are
essential to the true stating of that opinion of mine, which he pretends to
represent? Again secondly, why does he not plainly acknowledge and declare,
that when I deny the Scriptures to be the foundation of Religion, I mean by
the Scriptures, the INK AND PAPER wherewith, and whereon, they are either
written, or printed, and what ever else is found in them, or appertaining to
them, besides the substance of matter, and those gracious counsels of God
concerning the salvation of the world by Jesus Christ, which are contained and
represented in them; this being an essential ingredient also in that opinion
of mine? but it may be the fifth rib of Mr. Ienkins Religion, has need of the
pious frauds of the Papists for her corroboration and support: and can you then
blame him for a little logerdemain now and then?

Fifthly, Sect. 38.
why does this young Academick, contrary to the principles of Logic, and all
regular Argumentation, yea, in full conformity with the weakness of illiterate
Disputers, deny the conclusion, without denying or answering any thing at all
to the premises? I lay down several Arguments, and Grounds of Reason, to prove
the Scripture not to be the foundation of Religion (in the sense wherein I deny
it so to be) and he, without any answer, or satisfaction given to so much as
any one of these Arguments, denies my conclusion, and votes it for an error
destructive to the foundation of Religion. It is like the bent and figure of
the fifth rib of his Religion, required the Anomalie of these proceedings at
his hand. But

Sixthly, Sect. 39.
does not himself distinguish (p. 7.) and affirm, that in a sense the
Scriptures are not the foundation of religion? Else what is the English of
these words, in terminis his own? May not Christ be the only foundation in
point of mediation: and the Scripture in point of manifestation and discovery?
Has the man a Fungus a Mushrome, in stead of caput humanum, upon his
shoulders, to quarrel with me for denying (in a sense) the Scriptures to be
the foundation of Religion, and yet to deny as much himself? Or did I ever, or
do I any where deny them to be such a foundation, in respect of representation
and discovery; i. to represent and discover him who is the foundation of
Religion, by way of mediation? Or does, or can this young Pragmatico produce
from any writings of mine, any jot, letter, syllable, word, sentence, of any
such import? I confess, that to call the Scriptures the foundation of Religion
in point of manifestation or discovery (taking the words manifestation and
discovery, properly, in their usual and known significations) is as ridiculous
and absurd a metaphor, as the stiling of Prerbytery the fifth rib of Religion.
For can he that only manifests, makes known and discovers unto me, where such,
or such an house, or town, stands, or what the situation or manner of building
of either is, be in any tolerable construction, or sense, called the foundation
of either? Mr. Jenkin thinks that he manifests and discovers the feebleness of
Sion College visited: is he therefore the foundation, either of the book, or
of the supposed (or rather, pretended) feebleness, which he discovers? But to
affirm (as he does) the Scripture to be the only foundation of Religion, in
point of manifestation and discovery, is not only absurdum absurdo absurdius,
but most Atheologicall also, and unsound in point of truth. For did not God
manifest, and discover Christ, or Christ, himself, whilst yet there were no
Scriptures, or books written concerning him? The Apostle Peter informs us,
that Christ by his Spirit went and preached unto the Spirits in prison, which
sometime were disobedient, when once the long-suffering of God waited in the
days of Noah, Pet. 3. 19, 20.
etc. Certainly the Scriptures were not extant in the days of Noah; Moses (who
was born diverse hundreds of years after) being the first Penman of them. Yet
Christ by his Spirit even then preached unto men. Did he preach without
manifesting or discovering himself, or the foundation of Religion unto them; I
mean, in such a sense as the Scriptures afterward manifested and discovered
him? If he did in the days of Noah manifest and discover himself to the world,
then are not the Scriptures the only, no nor yet the first foundation of
Religion, no not in point of manifestation, or discovery. Yea, if the
Scriptures be the only foundation in point of manifestation and discovery, how
came all the Hagiographers and penmen of the Scripture, by that knowledge they
had of God and of Christ, and of Religion? Did they ground their knowledge of
these upon the Scriptures, whilst as yet they were not? And whereas he demands
of me (not more imperiously, than simply, but both, sufficiently) why I allege
1 Cor. 3. 11. Other foundation, etc. to prove that Christ is the only
foundation, if I do not ground my knowledge and belief hereof upon this place,
I desire to require his kindness with this demand of him: why did our Savior
Christ cite the testimony of John to prove himself to be the Messiah John 5.
32. 33, 34.
, if he did not ground his knowledge and belief of his being the Messiah, upon
John's testimony? One good turn (the saying is) requires another: if Mr.
Jenkin will pipe unto me in answering my demand, I will dance unto him in
answering his. In the mean time what if I should prevent him with this answer,
that I do ground my knowledge and belief of Christ's being the only
foundation, upon 1 Cor. 3. 11? What follows from hence? That I acknowledge the
Scriptures to be (in a regular sense) the foundation of Christian Religion?
Poor man! when did I ever deny it. My discourse of the Scriptures is (as has
been lately proved) full of this assertion. If any thing follows besides
this, narra mi fili, fili mi Batte. Had not the man now (think we) a sore
temptation upon him to foame out his own shame in this most insufferably-
Thrasonicall demand: Is it possible that the known distinction of essendi, and
cognoscendi, principium, quod, et quo, or a foundation personal and
Scripturall, should be hid from this seducer in chief? I confess Mr. Jenkin
is in no danger of being a Seducer in chief (unless his wits and
intellectuals miraculously advance) except it be of, or amongst, such a
generation of men and women, as Peter resembles to natural bruit beasts, made
to be taken and destroyed 2 Pet. 2. 22.
, or Solomon's simple ones, whose character is, to believe every thing Prove. 14.
15
. Well might he ask, is it possible, that the distinction he speaks of, should
be hid from me? For that which is not hid from him, cannot lightly be hid from
any other. He talks of distinctions: but with the Apostles Desirers, to be
teachers of the law, he understands neither what he says, nor whereof he
affirms 1 Timothy 1. 7.
. Would he else charge me (as he does a little after) with doing wickedly and
weakly to oppose Christ and his word; when as himself (as we heard just now)
opposes foundations personal, to foundations Scripturall? What is this but to
oppose Christ and his word, as much as, and in the very same sense wherein, I
oppose them There is nothing more frequent in Protestant-writers than to
distinguish the person of Christ, whom (from the greek Fathers) they call
(...), the essential or substantial word, from the written word, which they
call (...) the word spoken, or pronounced: and what Novice knows not that in
every distinction, there is, or ought to be, an opposition? And for his known
distinction of essendi, and cognoscendi, which he so much wonders should be
hid from me, he is desired in his next to produce any classique Author that
ever used it, but himself. The complexion of it is, as if it were of the house
and lineage of Mr. Jenkins learning. I confess there is difference enough to
make a distinction, between esse, and cognoscere; witness Mr. Jenkin himself,
who has a tall man's portion in the one, but scarce a child's in the other. But

Seventhly, Sect. 40.
and lastly, that the Scriptures, whether written, or printed, are not truly
and properly the foundation of Religion, I demonstrate in the sight of the Sun,
to the shame and confution of all those faces, which have charged the Assertion
and Tenet upon me, as an Error, by these arguments.

First, If Religion was founded, built, stood firm and stable in the world,
before the Scriptures were, then cannot the Scriptures be truly and properly
the foundation of religion. This proposition needs no proof, beyond the
explication of the terms. By the Scriptures, I mean the Book, or books,
commonly known by this Name amongst us, wherein the gracious counsels of God
concerning the salvation of the world by Jesus Christ are declared and
expressed, either by writing or printing: as they were (for matter and
substance) revealed at first by God himself, unto the first writers, or
penmen of them.

By the foundation of Religion, we mean (I presume) on all hands, that which
mainly and primarily supports it, and without which it cannot stand, or have a
being among men. If Mr. Ienkin means any thing else either by Scriptures, or
by his foundation of Religion, I must excuse him from blaming, or meddling with
any opinion of mine concerning the Scriptures, or foundation of Religion.
Therefore I assume:

But Religion was founded, built, stood firm and stable in the world before the
Scriptures were. Ergo.

This latter proposition, besides the native pregnancy and evidence of Truth in
it, is fully proved by me page 10. of my discourse concerning the Divine
Authority of the Scriptures: where (for dispatch sake) I desire the Reader, if
unsatisfied in this point, to enquire after it.

Secondly, Sect. 41.
If the foundation of Religion (truly and properly so called) be unperishable,
and what cannot be thrown down, or deprived of Being, then can no book, or
books whatsoever under heaven, and consequently not the Scriptures themselves,
be this foundation.

But the foundation of Religion (truly and properly so called) is unperishable,
etc. Ergo.

The Consequence in the Major Proposition, is evident: because any book, all
books whatsoever, are perishable, may be burnt or consumed by fire, or
miscary by many other casualties, that may possibly befall them.

The Minor Proposition stands firm upon this bottom: viz. that no building or
superstruction whatsoever, can exceed the Foundation in strength, or
continuance. Therefore if the Church of God, which is built upon the foundation
of Religion, be unperishable, and which cannot be prevailed against, to ruin
or destruction, (which the Scripture every where asserteth) most certain it is,
that the foundation on which it is built, is unperishable also. If the
foundation of Mr. Jenkins Religion, be his Bible, then is his Religion no such
treasure, but that thieves may break through, and steal it from him. For how
should it continue or stand, the foundation of it being gone? Or in case his
Bible should be casually burnt with fire, the foundation of his Religion, and
consequently his Religion it self, should be consumed. Diogenes hearing that
Plato had given this definition or description of a man, Animal bipes implume.
that he was a living creature, with two feet, without feathers, gets a Cock,
and pulls off all his feathers whilst he was alive, and throws him in amongst
some of Platoes Scholars, Ecce hominem Platonicum.
wishing them to behold their Master Plato his Man. If some such odd-conceited
fellow as Diogenes, should use means to get Mr. Jenkin his Bible, and having
defaced, rent and torn it, should come and cast it into the midst of his
Auditors, with this Elogie, Ecce fundamentum religionis Jenkinianae, Behold the
goodly foundation of the religion of your Master Jenkin, it might prove a more
effectual conviction unto him of his folly, than seven demonstrative reasons
administered by a more sober man.

Thirdly, If any book, or books whatsoever, either that which is called the
Scripture, or any other, be the true and proper foundation of religion, then
may religion be truly and properly said to have been founded by men.

But Religion cannot truly and properly be said to have been founded by men,
but by God. Ergo.

If Mr. Jenkin will deny the Assumption, at the peril, both of his conscience,
and reputation, be it. The consequence in the Proposition is evident. For as
the Apostle says concerning houses, that every house (...), is built by some
man (as our Translators render it:) So is it as true concerning books, that
every book now extant in the world, every Bible, in what language soever,
whether printed, or transcribed, whether consisting of paper, parchment, or
other like material, was built and formed, and made into a book by men. There
is no point, letter, syllable, or word, in any of them, but is the workmanship
of some man's hand, or other. If Mr. Jenkin has a (...), a Bible that fell out
of heaven, written, or printed without hands, he is defired to produce it for
the accommodation of the world. Yet he must know, that though he could produce
such a Bible, or copy of the Scriptures, as this; it would not follow that
this book must needs be the foundation of Religion, inasmuch as Religion might
take place, be professed and practiced in truth and power by men, where this
book never came, nor was heard of.

Fourthly, Sect. 43.
If those Tables of stone, wherein the Law was written by the Finger of God
himself, Exo. 24. 12. 32, 16.
were not the foundation of this law, nor of the obedience exhibited unto it,
then neither is any Bible or Book whatsoever, the foundation of Religion.

But the Tables of stone written immediately by God himself, were not the
foundation of the Law written therein, nor of the obedience exhibited unto it.
Ergo.

This latter proposition is evident, because these Tables of stone were broken
in pieces by Moses soon after Exodus 32. 19
, and yet the law stood firm, and obedience has been given unto it until
this day.

The Consequence in the Major cannot reasonably be doubted or denied. For
doubtless there is as much, (if not much more) reason, to judge those two
Tables, which are said to have bin the work of God, and the writing in them, the
writing of God graven upon the Tables Exodus 32. 16
, to have been the foundation of the Law written in them, and of the obedience
either due, or exhibited unto it; as there is to judge any book whatsoever,
either written, or printed, by the hands of men, to be the foundation of that
Religion, the grounds and principles whereof are declared in it, and no more
but declared: especially confidering that this Declaration has (as has been
said) been formerly made by God without any such book, and might be made again
by him, if he pleased: yea and (doubtless) would be made, if there were any
just occasion, or necessity for it.

Fifthly, Sect. 44
If any book, or books whatsoever, Bible or other, be the true and proper
foundation of Religion, then is not the true and proper foundation of religion
necessarily uniform, and consistent in all things with it self. The reason of
this Proposition is, because it is very possible that either through
negligence, ignorance, want of memory, or the like, in Scribes, and Correctors
of the Press, some such error may be found in every copy of the Scriptures
now extant in the world, which will render this copy contradictious to it
self; yea it is possible, that many such errors as this may be found in the
best and truest copies that are. I now assume:

But the true and proper foundation of religion, is necessarily uniform and
consistent in all things with it self. Ergo. If this Proposition be obnoxious,
the true and proper foundation of Religion must be divided in, and against it
self: and how then (according to our Saviors own Maxim and Rule, Matthew. 12.
25.) can either it, or the Religion built upon it, stand?

Sixthly, Sect. 45.
If any book or books, Bible, or other, be the true and proper foundation of
Religion, Then is the foundation of Religion somewhat that is visible, and
exposed to the outward senses of man. This needs no proof, unless Mr. Jenkin
will deny, that Bibles, or the Scriptures, are legible, and may be seen.

But certain it is, That the true and proper foundation of Religion, is not any
thing that is visible, or exposed to the outward senses of men; but somewhat
that is spiritual, and apprehensible only by the mind and understanding of
men. Ergo.

The reason of this proposition is, if the proper foundation of Religion, be
the object of the outward sense, then is there nothing necessary to be believed
by any man to make him truly religious, but what either he sees with his eyes,
handles with his hand, or the like. For he that believes or builds upon, the
true and proper foundation of Religion, (questionless) is truly religious. But
men are not made truly religious by believing only what they see with their
outward sense of seeing: otherwise, every man or woman, that did but look into
a Bible, and see such and such words and sentences written, or printed there,
and believed accordingly, that these words and sentences were here written or
printed, must needs hereby become truly religious. Certainly, if men may be
made truly religious, only by looking into a Bible, seeing what is there
written, or printed, and by believing that what he sees there written, or
printed, is indeed there written or printed accordingly, Mr. Jenkin has small
reason to deny, but that a Natural man has power to supernatural good; at
least if he judges true religion to be such.

Seventhly, Sect. 46.
the true and proper foundation of Religion is intrinsecally, essentially, and
in the nature of it, unchangeable, unalterable in the least, by the wills,
pleasures, or attempts of men.

But there is no book or books whatsoever, Bible or other, but in the contents
of them may be altered or changed by men. Ergo.

For the Major, If the proper foundation of Religion, were intrinsecally, and
in the nature of it, changeable and alterable by men, then can it not be any
matter of truth; because the nature of truth is like the nature of God
himself, unchangeable, unalterable by Men, Angels, Devils, or any creature
whatsoever: yea God himself cannot alter it, any whit more than deny himself,
or change his own Nature or Being.

For the Minor, that also is no less evident: Experience teaches us, that
books, or Bibles themselves, are de facto changed and altered by men from time
to time; every new Edition, or Impression (almost) commending it self for
somewhat corrected or amended in it, which was delinquent or defective in the
former: And if Mr. Jenkin be not dissensed altogether, he cannot but know, that
a facto ad possibile, efficax est illatio.

Eighthly (and lastly) If the Bible, Sect. 47.
or Scripture (in the sense formerly explained) be the true and proper
foundation of Religion, it must be understood and meant, either of the Bible
and Scriptures, as in the Original languages only, or only as translated
into other languages, or as both.

But it is neither true, that the Bible or Scriptures in the Original
languages only, nor only as translated into others, nor as both, are this
foundation of Religion. Ergo.

First, if Mr. Jenkin will say, that they are the foundation of Religion only
as they are in the original languages, then they that understand not these
languages, cannot build, (at least with understanding) upon this foundation:
and consequently can never be truly Religious. If so, what will become of Mr.
Jenkins own Religion?

Secondly, if the Bible, or Scripture, be the foundation we speak of, only as
translated into other languages; then it is alike unpossible, that any Jew, or
Grecian, who understands only the language wherein he was born, should become
truly religious.

Thirdly (and lastly) if they he this foundation, in both the said
confiderations and respects, or as well in the one, as the other,
indifferently; then two things, or more, in completenesse of being, really and
specifically differing one from another, and between themselves, may
notwithstanding be one and the same identicall and numericall thing. This
consequence is evident upon these two suppositions: 1o. That the foundation of
Religion is but one and the same numerically. 2o. That Bibles, or the
Scriptures, in several languages differ specifically amongst themselves. Both
these suppositions are pregnant enough in Truth. For 1o. If the foundation of
Religion were not numerically and identically the same, then men by becoming,
or by being made Religious, should multiply foundations of religion: yea, and
foundations in this kind should both increase, and decrease, in their number,
as the number of persons Religious, either increases or decreaseth. Which
though it looks like an (...) of Master Ienkin's learning and wit, yet is
sufficiently ridiculous to an understanding man.

2o. That Bibles, or the Scriptures, in several languages, differ
specifically, amongst themselves, is evident likewise. For two things, or more,
which differ more then numerically, must needs differ specifically (at least)
there being no middle or third kind of difference between that which is
numericall, and that which is specifical. Now certain it is, that an Hebrew
Bible (for example) and a Spanish Bible (and so an English Bible, and a Latin)
differ more then numerically the one from the other; because they differ more
than either two Hebrew Bibles, or two Spanish Bibles, differ from one another;
and yet these differ numerically the one from the other.

If Mr. Ienkin by the advice of the learned (by which Mr. Vicars, Sect. 48.
if he and his speak Truth, composed his learned picture, and Windmill) shall
here answer, that two things, which differ only numerically, may yet differ
more between themselves, then either of them differs from some third, which
differs from neither of them more than numerically: so that every difference
which is more then numericall; is not necessarily specificall: as a man that is
learned, differs more from a natural Idiot, than either of them differs from a
sober man without learning; yet it follows not from hence, that any of these
three men differ from other specifically, they being all men properly and
univocally; I answer,

That every difference which is more then numerical, must needs be specificall,
in one kind or other; i. must needs argue a difference in some things (at
least) which specifically differ one from the other, though not necessarily in
any thing which is essential to the things, or persons, which are said thus to
differ. As for example: a learned man differs not from an idiot, or ignorant
man, in any thing which is essentially requisite to the nature, and simple
being of a man: these have a humane body, and an humane soul (which is all
that is essentially requisite to the simple being of a man) as well as he. But
yet he differs from them both in the endowment of learning: which learning
differs specifically both from the ignorance, which is in the one; and the
incapacity of knowledge, which is in the other. Such differences as these, the
Logicians call specifical, but not simply specifical, but specifical
accidental, or, in specie accidentali. This confidered, the exception mentioned
is of no value against the argument, which it pretends to oppose. For though
the difference between an Hebrew Bible, and a Spanish, be but specifical
accidental, i. in respect of the two specifically different languages, wherein
they are written, neither of these being essential to the book, which we call
the Bible, or the Scriptures; yet such a difference as this is sufficient to
prove, that they cannot be one and the same thing numerically, either Bible or
Scriptures: and consequently, neither divisim, nor conjunctim, the proper
foundation of Religion, which (as was lately proved) is numerically one and the
same. As though the difference which is in point of learning, and ignorance,
between two men, the one of them being learned, the other ignorant, be not
sufficient to prove that they differ specifically essentially the one from the
other; yet being sufficient to prove that they differ specifically
accidentally, it is abundantly sufficient to prove that they differ
numerically, and cannot possibly be, or make, one and the same person.

Mr. Jenkin (I trust) before he baul, Sect. 49.
or brays against me any more, as a man erroneous for denying the Scriptures to
be the foundation of Religion, will vouchsafe to answer these 8. arguments, and
that workman-like, not after that smal-sense rate, at which he has written in
his busy Bishop. Or if he had rather clamor, then clerk it, or shall do only
the one, because he has no good faculty at the other, I shall apply that soft
and gentle remedy (good both for him, and my self) neglect.

Before I leave the particular in hand, I must needs (for the credit of my
Antagonist, being but a young beginner) acquaint the Reader with that Hercule
in and signal argument of his ( page 22.) being the quintessence, and
spiritfull extraction of many pages; yea of all he argues against me about
the Scriptures. How can any (says he) believe the matter and substance of the
Scripture, to be the word of God, when as he must be uncertain, whether the
written Word, or Scriptures, wherein the matter is contained, are the word of
God, or no? But is not this a question of the same profound calculation, with
this: How can a man believe that the Sun is a greater light, and the Moon a
lesser, if he be uncertain, whether every jot and tittle of what is read in
our Bible, Genesis 1. 16. be the word of God, or no; because here it is said, and
God made two great lights, the greater, etc? Or with this: How can a man
believe, that there are any such seasons in the year, as Summer and Winter, if
he must be uncertain, whether that be the word of God, or no, Psalm. 74. 17.
Thou have made summer and winter? If there be no means possible, to believe
the matter and substance of the Scriptures, if a man be uncertain whether the
written word or Scriptures, (i. whether every thing, sentence, phrase, word,
syllable, letter, point that is found in our printed Bibles: for this must be
his meaning, if he means to argue against me) be the word of God, or no,
miserable is the faith of Master Jenkin, yea miserable is the faith of the
whole world. For what assurance can any man have, that the Transcribers of the
Bible heretofore, and the Printers of them of later times, have in nothing
mistaken, or miscarried about them? Are Scribes and Printers, Mr. Jenkins his
Prophets, and Apostles? or does he not vest in them the infallibility of the
immediate penmen of the holy Ghost? If the knowledge and faithfulness, or
unerringnesse of Printers and Transcribers, be the foundation of Master
Jenkin's Faith, I confess that he and I build upon two very different
foundations.

Besides, Sect. 50.
if it be unpossible for me to believe that the matter and substance of
Scriptures is the word of God, if I be uncertain whether the written word be
the word of God, or no; how came the Patriarchs, and holy men and women, who
lived in the first two thousand years of the world, to believe it, since it was
not only uncertain unto them, whether our Bibles, or Scriptures, or word now
written, were the word of God, or no, but whether such a word should ever be
written, or no? Doubtless the same way to bring me to believe, what they
believed, is as open before the glorious God at this day, as it was then;
seeing he has not hedged it up, either against himself, or me, with the
thrones of any threatening, or decree.

Again: though I willingly acknowledge (and prove it at large, in my Treatise
concerning the Divine Authority of the Scriptures) that the manner of the
phrase and style of the Scriptures, is a rich character of their Divinity, and
a very considerable ground to prove that they are the word of God; yet is not
this character of equal weight or power for such a conviction, with the matter
and substance of the Scriptures. Therefore the nature, beauty, worth, weight,
and excellency of these (I mean, of the matter and substance of the
Scriptures) is sufficient to persuade, and bring men to believe, that they are
the word of God, or things which came from God, though they had not the
gracious and super-added advantage of any thing in the Scriptures, whereby to
believe, that they, in respect of their language, style, and all
particularities of expression, were the word of God. Insomuch that were the
matter and substance of the Scriptures understandingly and faithfully declared
and held forth, in any other Book or writing, besides the Scriptures, and which
Mr. Jenkin himself would not call the written word of God, there were no
impossibility at all, nor much improbability, but that considering men might
come to believe them to be the word of God.

Yet again: Sect. 57.
Does not the Scripture it self plainly affirm and teach, that (...) the
goodness, or kindness, of God leads [even natural, yea and wicked men] to
repentance Romans 2. 4.
If so, then certain it is, that this kindness or goodness of God toward
them, leads them to the knowledge and consideration of this Truth, that upon
their Repentance God will be gracious unto them, and forgive them their sins:
in as much as without the knowledge or belief hereof, it is unpossible that
any man should be led to a true and sound Repentance (of which the Apostle here
speaks) by any motive, means, or engagement whatsoever. Now I desire to
understand from Mr. Jenkin in his next, whether forgiveness of sins, and
acceptance into favor with God, upon true repentance, be nothing of the
matter or substance of the Scriptures: yea or whether it does not comprehend in
it, as explicitly and entirely, as so much can lightly be comprehended in so
little, the whole and entire matter and substance of the Scripture. If this be
so, then may men who are uncertain whether the written word, or Scriptures, be
the word of God, or no, come to believe the matter and substance of them to be
the word of God notwithstanding; in as much as the long suffering, kindness,
or goodness of God, are extended and vouchsafed unto many, who are altogether
uncertain whether the written word be the word of God, or no.

Lastly, Sect. 52.
does not the Scripture also as plainly affirm, that the Heavens declare the
glory (i. the glorious power, as the word often signifies) of God Psalm 19. 1.
, and his righteousness Psalm 50. 6.
and again, that (...) i. that which may be known of God, his invisible
things, his eternal power and Godhead, are clearly seen from the Creation of
the world, and are to be understood by the things that are made Romans 1. 19, 20.
: and yet further, that the Gentiles (without the written word) both have, and
show the works of the Law written in their hearts Romans 2. 15.
(by the work of the Law, meaning, the effect, matter, or substance of the law
written; or else such convictions of the equity, and meetness for them to
practice, of the things contained in this Law, which this Law is wont to work,
and produce, in those who live under it) besides many other things of like
consideration. Now I would gladly know of Mr. Jenkin by his next, whether
neither the power of God, nor the righteousness of God, nor the invisible
things of God, nor the eternal power of the Godhead of God, nor the things
contained in the law, be not the matter and substance, at least somewhat as
much of the matter and substance of the Scriptures. If they be, then simple is
his demand: How can any man believe the matter and substance of the Scriptures
to be the word of God, when as he must be uncertain whether the written word,
or Scriptures, wherein the matter is contained, be the word of God, or no?

One thing more (as to the point in hand) I would gladly be informed of by Mr.
Jenkin in his next, viz. what the groundwork and foundation of that Faith of
his is, whereby he believes that every passage, sentence, phrase, word,
syllable, letter, point, extant and to be found in every Bible, or copy of the
Scriptures, printed, or written, Original or Translated, throughout the world,
is the word of God, or any part of it; considering 1. the manifold, yea and
material disagreements that are generally known to be between many of them:
and 2. that the word of God is but one, always uniforme, and consistent with
it self, without the least variation or change. It is more than to be feared,
that whilst he pretends the establishment of men in the Faith of the
Scriptures, he spreads a snare in their way, and steers a direct course to
cast them upon the quicksands of insuperable difficulties and uncertainties.

Whereas I take my Testimonialists tardy, Sect. 54.
in making it an infamous and pernicious error against the Divine Authority of
Scriptures, to say that a superstruction, is not a foundation, or that the act
of believing, being built upon the foundation of Religion, cannot be this
foundation it self; with what acumen (think ye) does this novice-undertaker
bring off himself, and his fellow adventures, from the shelfe of this
malicious absurdity? For your argument (says he, page 8. 9.) Christ is the
foundation, and therefore not any act of man, as the believing of the
Scriptures, it is very false and feeble. What man! is it a very false and feeble
Argument, to infer, that because Abraham begat Isaac, therefore Isaac was
Abraham's Son? Or thus: Isaac was the Son of Abraham: therefore he was not the
Son of Moses; is this a false and feeble argument too? Or is not this an
argument of the same calculation, pregnancy and frame; The timber of an house,
is part of the superstruction, and is built upon the foundation; therefore it
is not the foundation it self? Faith is an act of man built upon the
foundation of Religion: therefore it is not this foundation it self. If Mr.
Ienkin's forehead will serve him to call these false and feeble arguments,
gape against ovens hereafter who will: and let those undertake to prove, that a
man's eyes are not his ears, who have a mind to trifle away their time, or
know not how to do God or men better service with it. Mr. Ienkin by such
courageous expressions and sayings, as these, superstructions are foundations,
it is very false and feeble to say otherwise, that the Covenant has done good
to the Kingdom Busy Bishop, p. 9.
, that I by denying the Scriptures fear not to destroy the word of Truth Page
10.
, that men that are dead assume to themselves titles in print Page 11.
, that I dare not come near an expression of dislike to error Page 11.
, that Master Edwards is a man of blessed memory Page 12.
, that to advise men, not to make error and herefie of what they please, and
cannot prove them to be such, is to advise them to believe nothing or to put
them to believe nothing Page 13. 14.
, that because there is nothing in the world so certain as matters of Faith
Ibid.
, therefore there is nothing more certain then that I deny the Authority of
the Scriptures, and that natural men have no power at all to good
supernatural, etc. that Doctrina salutaris signifies the Law Page 42.
[of nature] that, Gentes ante revelatum eis Christum verae justiciae fuisse
compotes, does not signify, that the Gentiles before Christ was revealed unto
them, were partakers, or obtainers of true righteousness, but of the duties of
righteousness commanded in the law Page 43.
; Mr. Jenkin (I say) by the frequency of such valorous and courageous sayings
and reasonings as these (for I omit twenty more, and ten of as high a
resolution, as these) has inspired me also, with courage, and resolution, to
count it strength eough for me to sit still, the next time he rises up against
me.

By a like line of learning, Sect. 55.
reason, and truth, with which he measured my former error (so voted in the
Testimony concerning the Scriptures, and at last could make nothing of it, but
a Truth, (in process of discourse) he attempts the measuring of my second
error also (for so it pleases the College of Dictators to adjudge it)
concerning the natural man's free will, and power to good supernatural: (for
thus that Facultas Theologica thought good to head it.) The difference between
his deportment, and acquitment of himself, in the one, and in the other,
consists only, or chiefly in this; that as Jerusalem justified her two sisters,
Samaria, and Sodom, by multiplying her abominations more than they Ezekiel. 16.
51. 52.
; so has he qualified the hard aspect of his un-christian and un-clerk like
behavior, in traversing the former point, with that super-abundant
extravagancy in both, wherein he utters himself in managing the latter.

As for his un-christian dealings (in affirming contrary to the certificate of
his own conscience, so many most notorious, and broad-fac'd falsehoods, and
untruths) knowledge has been taken of them, and given (in part) under the first
head. Concerning his ridiculous, empty, and absurd reasonments, and other
puerllities of this nature; we shall (for the present) only give a transient
and brief account of them; intending a more full and through discussion of the
controversy in due time (the great disposer of all things not gainsaying.)

First, one of his firstborn arguments, to prove it an error in me, to hold,
that a natural man has any power to good supernatural, as to repent,
believe, etc. is, that herein I lovingly join hands with the Arminians the
Remonstrants Busy Bishop, p. 28.
: that the Arminions were my Schoolmasters Page 30.
: and again, that I and my masters the Remonstrants will not part Page 31.
. This cabbage he boyles, and re-boyles, and boyles again over and over, I know
not how often, and sets it before his Readers as one of his choicest dishes.
But did the young man (think we) calculate his Pamphlet for the Meridian of
Mr. Vicars his Academie? or did he expect it would be read only by children,
women, or men superstitiously addicted in their minds and understandings, or
blinded by the God of this world? Or did he conceive, that men of worth, parts,
learning, who keep their judgments, consciences, understandings free for the
entertainment of truth, and judge it beneath a man (...) to be servile to the
epidemical suppositions of men, would reject the opinion as an error, because it
is found in the writings of the Arminians and Remonstrants? Might not I upon
the same ground, tell Mr. Jenkin, that if he holds Jesus Christ to be the Holy
one of God, he lovinly joins hands with the Devil, on which he charge me,
to join hands with the Arminians, and Remonstrants? Or did not the Devil
assert the one, as well as the Remonstrants do the other? Or that if he
teaches the Resurrection from the dead, he lovingly joins hands with the
Pharisees? Are these two great Truths ever the worse, or the more to be
declined, because (in Mr. Jenkin's notion, and phrase) they who embrace them
lovingly join hands with the Devil, and men erroneous in many things
otherwise? Might he not by as good logic as this have proved Daniel to be a
beast, because he was amongst Lions? or David to have been a Philistine,
because he dwelt amongst Philistines? The Arminians affirm, that there is a
supernatural power conferred upon the will, and that God by this means does
work immediately upon the will, etc. They attribute all the praise of
conversion to God, and place the cause of men's disobedience and unbelief in
themselves, etc. They acknowledge a necessity of special grace unto
perseverance, etc. I presume Mr. Jenkin concurs in all these, and in twenty
things more, which they teach: and why is not he an Arminian for joining with
them in many things, if I must needs be an Arminian for joining with them in
some few? especially considering that upon a legitimate debate and examination,
some of those things wherein he agrees with them, will be found every whit as
much, yea or more, erroneous than those, wherein my judgment falls in with
theirs.

But this stratagem of Master Jenkin in attempting to defame such Truths, as
he has no mind should be received, and to cause the judgments and
consciences of weak men to loath them, by telling them, that such and such
opinions dwell in the tents of such and such erroneous and dangerous men, is
but an old Papisticall device, whereby they also endeavored to render such
Truths of God, as were incomportant with their Interests, hateful unto the
weak and superstitious people amongst them. Thus Prateolus (a great Popish
Hereseologer) to render this christian and sound opinion as erroneous and
heretical amongst his party, viz. that it is lawful for any person to eat
what meats he pleases on any day, though the Church should forbid it,
solemnly tells them, that it was the opinion of Jovinian the Heretic. So to
make them out of love with receiving the Sacrament in both kinds, he tells them
that it was the practice of Nestorius the Heretic. To defame the judgment
and opinion of those, who deny Purgatory, he informs them that it was one of
the heresies of Armeni to deny it. And it is an argument much insisted upon by
Popish writers, to bear off Protestants from that Doctrine of Justification by
Faith alone, that this was a Doctrine taught by Simon Magus. Mr. Jenkin, the
question, with wise and considering men, in matters of Faith is not, with whom
we lovingly join hands, but from whom we unkindly withdraw hands. So that I
separate not in an opinion from Peter, Paul, or Christ, it concerns me not at
all with whom I join.

Secondly, Sect. 57.
whereas I charge the young man and his compeeres, with confuting Pelagianisme
by pure Manichisme, Busy Bishop, page 48.
he makes account that he washes his hands in pure innocence from this
charge, by telling his Reader, that this charge was as old as Pelagius: it was
by him cast upon Austin, and Hierom: by the Jesuits, upon the Protestants: by
the Arminians, upon the assertors of grace, etc. I confess the man needs not
care how heavy his charge be, if his Judges be so simple as to accept such a
purgation as this. For does he in this vindication reason at any better rate,
than if a Seducer and Deceiver of souls, being charged with such a crime,
should plead thus for himself: the charge or accusation of Deceiving people,
is as old as the Scribes and Pharisees: they, or the people by their
suggestion, charged Christ himself with it. Or if a blasphemer, being justly
accused of blasphemy, should vindicate himself thus: the accusation of
blasphemy, is as old as Caiaphas the High Priest: he cast it upon the Son of
God himself: the Synagogue of Libertines suborned men to cast it upon Stephen,
etc Acts 6. 9. 11.
. Mr. Ienkin, the question is not, how old the accusation of confuting
Pelagianisme by Manichisme, is, nor yet by whom, nor upon whom, it has been
cast: but by whom any of your judgment in the point of Reprobation, have been
sufficiently vindicated from it, or against it. Till you can produce a man who
has done this feate for you, and for your opinion, and can demonstrate unto us
that he has done it sufficiently indeed, you must (for ought I can do to
relieve you) be under the accusation.

Thirdly, Sect. 48.
In going about to wrest the passages cited by me from Mr. Bucer, Mr. Ball, and
some of the Fathers, out of my hand, how miserably does he flunder in quagmires
of nonsense and absurdity! Let us view him in this posture once for all, page
37, 38. where we shall find him up to the ears in mud, struggling and working
with his brain might and maine, to fetch off Mr. Balls words from my opinion.
Mr. Ball's words are these: No man is hindered from believing through the
difficulty or unreasonablenesse of the command, or through his own simple
infirmity, as being willing and desirous to believe, but not able, which
inability deserves piety: but his inability is of corruption and wilfulness;
he does not believe, because he will not: he is unable, because he does not
covet, or desire, which is inexcusable. Well: how does Mr. Jenkin wash these
words from all stain and tincture of confederacy with my opinion, which
affirms, that men are not wholly destitute of all power to do what God
requires of them as simply necessary to salvation, and particularly to repent,
and believe? In the might of his weakness he rises up thus, p. 37. What is
here that gives you the least countenance in your errors? Why (Mr. Jenkin) who
either said, or thought, that here was any thing of such an import? I profess
ingenuously, I know nothing written by any man whatsoever, that gives me the
least countenance in any error. I cite the words, not so much by way of
countenance, either in any Error or Truth, as of concurrence, and this only
with Truth. But what childling, but Mr. Jenking, would have raised the dust of
such a ridiculous demand up such an occasion? But it may be he redeemes his
reputation by that which follows: if he does, it is with a, nihil minus. Mr.
Ball (says he) says, and that truly, that unwillingnesse to believe hinders a
man from believing: but he does not say, that any man of himself can be
willing. But (Mr. Jenkin) when I tell you that Mr. Ball speaks of Apples, why
do you (by way of answer) tell me, that he does not speak of Oysters? Who
ever said, that any man of HIMSELF could be willing to believe? Or that Mr.
Ball should affirm any such thing? The ridiculousnesse of the expression, a
man cannot be willing, is enough to acquit any judicious man from the guilt of
such an assertion. But what if Mr. Ball does not say, that any man of HIMSELF
can be willing to believe? Does this hinder, but that he may say every whit as
much as I say, or as my opinion imports? Moses does not say, Genesis 1. 1. that
Babylon is fallen: but yet he says, that in the beginning God made Heaven and
Earth. Therefore if the doctrine that lies upon me, to prove, be either this;
There is a God: or this, God is the great Architect of the world, or the like,
I may very properly, for the confirmation of either, cite Genesis 1. 1. where
Moses says, In the beginning God made Heaven and Earth; though he does not
here say, that, Babylon is fallen. Where did Mr. Jenkin ever meet with any such
assertion or opinion of mine, as this; that Man of HIMSELF can be willing to
believe? As Christ sometimes said to the Jews, If I should say, I know him
not, I should be a liar like unto you John 8. 55.
: So say I to Mr. Jenkin; If I should say or hold, that Man of himself could be
willing to believe, I should be as absurdly erroneous as He and his partners
are in many of their Doctrines. My sense and opinion (as to the point in
question) is this: that natural men have such endowments from God, and such a
gracious assistance, or concurrence of God with them for the acting of these
endowments in order to repentance, and believing, that did they act according
to their power, and means vouchsafed unto them, they might repent and believe.
As for any will, or willingness in such men, to do either (I mean, either to
repent, or to believe) I never asserted it: much less, that they had any such
will, or willingness, as this, of themselves. My opinion (as to this
particular) scltarly this: That upon the first motion and rising up of the
will, in a true and real willingness to repent and believe, men cease to be
any longer Natural men, and become regenerate, God in this case accepting the
will for the deed. Now whether Mr. Ball (in the words cited by me) does not in
clear and pregnant importance, say every whit as much as this, let men without
brass on their forehead, and blindness in their eyes, judge. No man (says
he) is hindered from believing, through the difficulty, or unreasonablenesse of
the command. Certainly, a man has power to do that, from the doing whereof he
is not hindered by any difficulty relating to the performance of it. If the
command of God, wherein he commands men to believe, has no such difficulty in
it, whereby they are hindered from obeying it, have not men power to obey it,
and consequently to believe? Besides, though Mr. Ball does not say, that
Natural men of themselves cannot be willing to believe (no more than I say it)
yet he says that, which clearly supposes, that such men want no power, no not
of being willing, or of making themselves willing, to believe. For if there be
no such difficulty in the Command he speaks of, by which natural men, are, or
need be hindered from obeying it, it must needs follow, that there is no such
difficulty in it neither, but that such men may be willing to obey it; inasmuch
as there is an absolute impossibility for men to act or do that which is
unpossible for them to will. Men indeed may suffer, what it is impossible they
should be willing, or make themselves willing, to suffer: but they cannot be
said to act or do, or to be able to act or do, but only what is possible for
them to will, or to make themselves willing, to do. And this is the apex and
utmost point of what I hold touching the natural man's free will, or power to
good supernatural: wherein it is most evident either that Mr. Balls judgment
was fully commensurable with mine; or else incommensurable with his own words.
Besides, when Mr. Ball says; That a man does not believe, because he will not,
he does not resolve his non-beleeving, or unbelief, into any weakness, or
deficiency of power in him, to will, or to make himself willing, (as Mr.
Jenkin would imply:) but into his will it self, into the actual and present
frowardness and indisposition of his will, by reason whereof it voluntarily
chooses to continue in unbelief, whereas the nature of it is such, yea and the
grace of God in conjunction with it is such, yea and a thousand engagements
upon it, and motives round about it, are such, that it both ought, and might,
as voluntarily choose the contrary, viz. a purpose and resolution to believe, or
(which is the same) to steer an effectual course of means for believing.

But just such work as he makes in interpreting Mr. Balls words, Sect. 59.
to demonstrate their non-concurrence with me in my opinion, (or rather much
worse) he makes also in a like attempt upon the passages cited by me from M.
Bucer, and such work as he makes in this attempt, through the steadiness and
Uniformity of his hand, he makes the like in construing my citations from the
Fathers. As it is said of Joshua, that as he had done to Hebron, and Libnah,
and to her King, so he did to Debir and her King Josh. 10. 39.
: so does Mr. Jenkin strike the same unpartial stroke in dealing with all my
quotations: as he deals by M. Ball, and his words, so he deals by M. Bucer and
his words; and so again, with Austin, and his words, and with Hierome and his
words: he leaves nothing of their native sense, or savor remaining. To insist
upon the particularities of every story, were to require more in patience of
the Reader, than I could recompense him in weight or worth of matter.

-- Manifesta rotae vestigia cernas.
The prints made by his wheels, do plainly tell,
That gone he is a way, which does not well.
Fourthly, Sect. 60.
whereas he troubles himself with quoting several sentences out of Mr. Ball,
Bucer, Austin, etc. of a contrary import (as he after his weak manner
imagines) to that opinion, which I affirm to be asserted by them in the
passages cited (respectively) by me, I would gladly know of him, what is the
distinct sound that this trumpet makes: or to what part he intends to sail
with this wind. Certain I am, that what he does in this kind, has no manner
of tendency in it to disable the pertinency of the words or passage cited by
me, in regard of my purpose or intendment in these citations. My intent and
drift in citing these Authors, was not to prove, or so much as to insinuate,
that they no where else in their writings delivered themselves with any seeming
contrariety, to the substance or import of the respective places cited by me;
but only to show and prove, that the opinion asserted by me in opposition to
Mr. Jenkin, and his Testimonying Consistory, was neither so irrational, nor so
far distant from truth, but that men of worth, of sound judgment, and much
learning, formerly had embraced it; yea, and had left it upon record in their
writings, that they judged it to be a truth; at least that they thus judged,
when they made the record. So that unless Mr. Jenkin can prove, out of the
writings of Mr. Ball, M. Bucer, etc. that they were at that time, when they
wrote those respective passages, cited by me, of a contrary judgment to the
tenor, purport, and contents of them, he shall but beat the air in any
attempt what soever to separate between me, and my end, in these citations.
What the genuine and proper tendency of these his counter quotations is, is
elsewhere declared, and proved to be nothing else, but only the breaking (as it
were) the bones, and strength of the authority of these Authors, and
consequently, the easing of the Truth (in many points) of the burden and
weight of their Authority, which lies heavy upon her, and keeps her from
lifting up her head in the world, with so much freedom and dispatch, as
otherwise (in all likelihood) she might do.

Fifthly, Sect. 61.
if the information were worth a Readers time to peruse, it were easy to show,
how irrelative to his purpose, the greatest part (if not the whole number) of
all his quotations are; there being very few of them (if any) but that, Reason,
and good Grammar, and Lexicons, being the Interpreters, I can willingly
subscribe unto. And yet how considerable a part of his inconsiderable Pamphlet,
labors under this vanity. Busy Bishop page 44.
So that he will very pertiently serve for an example to his own Rule: A child
can blurre paper.

Sixthly, Sect. 62.
how like himself is he, and acts he, in telling me, that my quotations out of
the Fathers are thread bare quotations, commonly made use of by the Jesuits
and Arminianes Page 46.
. Are not quotations from the Scriptures made use of by them both, and that
much more frequently, than any of those sayings cited by me from the Fathers?
Will he say that the Scriptures become thread bare by being so frequently
quoted, as they are, by pretenders to Truth on every side? If any of the
illustrious sayings of his book, were quoted a thousand times over by a
thousand men, I believe he would not complain of their being made threed-bare
hereby. Howsoever the question is not (among wise men, whatsoever it may be
among Novices and shuttleheads) whether quotations have been often used, or no,
nor yet by whom they have been used; but whether they carry the sense and
importance of that opinion or conclusion in them, for the credit and
confirmation whereof they are used. He is ever and anon up with Jesuits,
Arminians, Remonstrants: but I can hardly believe that this great talker of
Robin Hood, ever shot in his Bow. Jesuits and Remonstrants are half as bad as
Modall Propositions in Logic: de quibus (as the saying is) non gustabit Asinus.

Seventhly, Sect. 63.
whereas he vapors in pity toward me, telling me that my mistake was
pitiful, Busy Bishop, p. 48
in saying, that the question between Pelagius and the Fathers, was not whether
man bad freedom of will in respect of good or evil, but whether men,
notwithstanding their freedom of will, did not still stand in need of the
adjutory of grace, etc. and undertakes to inform me better, viz. that the
question between the said parties was not, whether the will did stand in need
of the adjutory of Grace, for the performance of good, but what kind of
adjutory it was, etc. First, the words of Austin are expressly contrary to this
his information. Dicat Pelagius (says he) per gratiam nos posse praestare
legem Dei, and pax est. Construe (Mr. Jenkin) or let Mr. Vicars help you: it
may be he is better at construing, than at making, Latin. Ask Mr. Vicars
whether this be not the English of Austins Latin: Let Pelagius say, that by
grace we may perform the Law of God, and we are friends; or, it is peace. If
Austin offered the right hand of fellowship to Pelagius upon this condition,
that he would grant, that by Grace (i. by the Adjutory of Grace) men might, or
had power to perform the Law of God, certainly that which occasioned the
distance between them, was, that Pelagius denied the necessity of grace, or of
the Adjutory of grace for performance of the Law of God, which Austin contended
for. But

2o What if in process of dispute, and after a long ventilation of the
controversy between them, the difference came to settle in that point, wherein
he places it, and that Austin would not be satisfied, unless Pelagius would
grant the Adjutory of Grace, by way of an invincible and undeclinable working
of good in us; does it follow therefore it stuck here between them at the first,
or in the beginning of the controversy? Who knows not but that skirmishers,
especially if the velitation or encounter continues long, often shift and
change their ground. But by Mr. Jenkins Logic (it seems) he is pitifully, if
not palpably mistaken, who says that ever Mr. Vicars was a child, because now
he is a man: or that the Sun was but two hours high at six in the morning,
because it is eight hours high at noone.

3o. If the question between them, was that, which Mr. Jenkin seems to assert,
viz. whether God does not invincibly and indeclinably draw or work upon the
will, that is (as I understand it) so that the will must of necessity follow,
will it, or nill it, be it never so obstinate, or resolved to the contrary;
then it could not be, (I mean the question between them could not be,) what
kind of Adjutory the will did stand in need of; but whether it stood in need
only of an Adjutory, or compulsory. For can that be called an Adjutory, or
help to another, for the performance of what he is not able to do alone, which
necessitates or compell's him to do it, whether he will or no? If my will be
unwilling to consent, and God shall come in with such an unresistible force or
power upon me, which shall ravish my will, and force it to consent, contrary to
the present bent and posture of it, this would not be adjuvare, to aid or help
forward my will to a consenting, but cogere, to compel or force it to consent,
whether it would, or no; nor could my consent upon such terms be called the act
of my will, but of the power, which extorted, or enforced it. Suppose Mr.
Jenkin having taken some just offense at the proceedings of the Class he
speaks of Preface, page 3.
, should grow into an utter averseness of meeting them in their Sessions any
more. If in this case some stout Porter should surprise him, hoyse him up upon
his shoulder, and so carry him by main strength, and against his will, to the
Classical Consistory, would he look upon this Porter, or his act in carrying
him, as an Adjutory, or help to convey him to his Class? But

4o. If by his invincible and indeclinable work of grace upon the will, he
means only such a work, which the will has no power to decline, or to hinder
God from working or exercising in it, or upon it, pax est (as to this point)
Mr. Jenkin and I, shall be no more two. Grace (questionless) does work upon
the will invincibly and undeclinably (in such a sense) no creature has any
power to prohibit or impede God from working upon his will, either in what
kind, or to what degree he pleases.

5o. Whereas Austin (as he says) makes a twofold adjutory to good, the one,
without which a good work is not done; the other, by which, and through which a
thing is done; adding, that the Pelagians in granting the former, never
satisfied Austin, because denying the latter: by this addition he makes Austin
ignorant of his own satisfaction. For Austin requires but this, as a true
confession of the grace of God, viz. for a man so to confess it, as not to
question but that nothing at all appertaining to godliness and true
righteousness, CAN BE DONE WITHOUT IT Ac per hoc, gratiam Dei, qua charitas
Dei diffunditur in cordibus nostris per Spiritum sanctum qui datus est nobis,
fic confiteatur, qui vult veraciter confiteri, ut omnino nihil boni fine illa,
quod ad pietatem pertinet, veramque justitiam, fieri posse non dubitet. Aug. de
gratia Christi, cap. 26
. Yea most evident it is, if there be any tolerable consistencie in the
writings of this Father concerning the Pelagian controversy, that the main
difference between him and Pelagius (at least during the heat of the
contention) was, Whether the Aajutory of grace was simply and absolutely
necessary (which was his opinion) for the inabling of the will to do that,
which is good and pleasing unto God, or necessary only by way of accommodation
and facilitation for such a performance, which was the sense of Pelagius Non
quomodo iste [Pelagius] qui cum dicit, propre^^a dari gratia^, ut quod a Deo
praecipitur, faciliu impleatur, quid de (...), satis ostendit, scilicet. quod
etiam, sine illa, etsi minus facile fieri tamen quod divinitus praecipitur.
potest. In libre quippe ad virginem sacram, cum dicit, Divinam mereamur
gratiam, ut facilius nequam Spiritui sancti Spiritus auxilio resistan^,
significat protecto quid sapiat: ut quid enim hoc verbum interposuit, id est
facilius? -- Volens utique credi tantas esse naturae vires, quas extollendo
praecipitat, ut etiam fine auxilio Spiritus sancti, etsi minus facile, tamen
aliquo modo nequam Spiritui resistatur. Aug. de grati^ Christi. Cap. 27.
. Yea the very truth is, that all things duly considered and compared, both
what Austin has left in writing concerning his own judgment and demands, in
the controversy, and what he reports as given in and granted, first or last,
by Pelagius, the difference between them in conclusion, was very little, if any
at all. But

6o. (And lastly) whereas he fears (as he says) that I deny such an a^jutory
of grace, by, and through which a thing is done Sed etiam hic vult intelligi
[Pelagius] ad hoc esse auxilium, ut facilius fiat per gratiam, quod etsi minus
facile, tamen putat fieri praeter gratiam. Item in eodem libro alio loco: ut
quod per liberum (inquit) homines facere jubentur arbitrium, facilius possint
implere per gratiam. Toll facilius, and non solum plenus, verumetiam sanus est
sensus, si ita dicatur, ut quod per liberum facere jubentur homines arbitrium,
possint implere per gratiam. Cum aure^ facilius addit, etc. ibid cap. 29.
; I must tell him, that (...) fear is as vain here, as his confidence is
elsewhere. Unhappy man, that neither feare's, nor faith's, but without ground,
or cause. I freely acknowledge, yea, have always taught and publicly
asserted such an Adjutory of Grace, not only without which a good work is not
done, but, by and through which a thing, yea every good work which is done, is
done. Only let Mr. Jenkin take this mite from me, and cast it into the
treasury of his understanding; that such an Adjutory of Grace, by and through
which a thing is done, does not imply an absolute necessity of the effecting of
that, which yet is effected and done, by, and through it. Nor was Austin
himself (doubtless) of any other mind, when he preached this doctrine, that
it was in the power of man, through the adjutory of God, whether he would
consent to the Devil, or no Et ideo, cum per Dei adjutorium in potestate tua
sit, utrum consentias Diabolo quare non magis Deo, quam ipse obtemperare
deliberas? Aug. Hom. 12.
Nor did he ever, that either I read, or heard of, nor (I believe) Mr. Jenkin
himself, retract this doctrine, but stood by it to the last. Certain I am,
that if he preached what he wrote, and wrote what is printed in his name, he
preached the same Doctrine (for substance) over and over. He indeed (says he
speaking of the Devil) gives counsel: but God assisting, or helping, it is
our part [or it belongs unto us] either to choose, or refuse what he
suggesteth Dat quidem ille [Diabolus] confilium: sed Deo auxiliante nostrum
est, vel eligere, vel repudiare, quod suggerit ibid.
. And again: So then, both sin and well-doing are in the power or liberty of
the will Est igitur, and peccatum, and recte factum, in libero voluntatis
arbitrio. Aug. de 83. Quaest. Quaest. 24.
.

Eighthly, Sect. 64.
whereas in one place he does (very freely and friendly) all me, that I know
not what Manicheisme is, and p. 48. that it proceeds either from unparalled
impudency, or inexcuseable ignorance, that I charge the Merchants of Sion
College with confuting Pelagianisme with pure Manicheismee: 1. For
imparallel'd impudency; I marvel a Cripple should have so little skill in
halting, as not to know when a man goes upright. 2. For inexcuseablenesse of
ignorance, it being his own deep demerit, it is no great marvel if he seeks
to interesse others in the same guilt with himself. That great Traveller he
speaks of ( page 57.) whom he calls the greatest liar in the world (as a
Father says) Selatium suae perditionis, perdendis hominibus quaerit,
solalaceth himself under his own destruction, in seeking to destroy others
with him. But 3. to let him and his Sym-marterists know, that there was neither
Impudence, nor Ignorance in the charge (unless it were (...), and such indeed
as he cannot parallel) I shall now give both him and them an account of my
knowledge what Manicheisme is, and leave them to account with their own
preachings, writings, and consciences, and particularly with their Testimony it
self, whether there was any Impudence at all, but that which is called Truth,
in the charge. We (says Austin) so confess the freedom of the will, that we
say, it always stands in need of the help and aid of God: and that they err
on the one hand, who with Manicheus affirm, THAT A MAN CANNOT AVOID SIN; and
they on the other, who say with Jovinian, that a man cannot sin. Both these
take away the liberty, or freedom of the will. But we say, both that man
always sins, and yet withal, that he has power not to sin, that so we may
acknowledge a liberty, or fredome in the will Liberum sic confitemur arbitrium,
ut dicamus nos Dei semper indigere auxilio: and tam illos errare, qui cum
Manichaeo dicu^t, hominem peccatum vitare non posse, quam illos, qui cum
Joviniano asseru^t, hominem non posse peccare. Uterque enim tollit arbitrii
libertatem. Nos vero dicamus, hominem semper and peccare, and non peccare
posse, ut nos liberi co^fiteamur esse arbitrii. Aug de Temp. Sermon. 192. circa
finem.
. From this passage it clearly appears, that one notorious strain of the
Manichean error, or heresy, was this, that there is no possibility for a man
to avoid sin, that men by the eternal, unchangeable, irresistible decree of
God, are either put ininto, or left in such a condition, wherein it is
impossible but that they should sin, and do wickedly. And elsewhere the Father
both in his Tract de Haeresibus, and in other places of his writings, couples
the Manichean heretics with the Stoique Pholosophers, who are famously know to
have asserted an invincicible necessity of Destiny and Fate.

Now whether Master Jenkin, and his (...), fellow-artificers (the
Testimony-makers) in denying it themselves, and making it an error in others,
to hold, that men have power given unto them by God to repent, believe, work
righteousness, etc. do not make sin, yea sinning to destruction, things
unavoidable unto men, let Jews and Gentiles judge. Fatemur, ac docemus impios
omnes ita a Divina provide^tia regi, ut nihil aliud efficere queant, quam quod
Deus aeterno suo et immutabili consiliodecrevit. Trigland in Declar. (...)
Nobis ex vebo dei consta re potest, hominem non plus boniposse facere, quam
facit, nec plus mali omittere, quam omittit imo Deum decrevisse apud se;
quantu^ boni et mali ab unoquoque praestari vellet.
Yea their common Doctrines and opinions concerning the Decrees of God,
especially concerning Predestination and Reprobation, are extremely tainted and
sowred with that levenof Manichisme, whereof we now speak. It were easy to
cite many passages from the writings of such men, whom they count Orthodoxe,
and with whom they profess a concurrence in judgment, as full of that Spirit
of Manichisme, lately mentioned, as words (lightly) can be. Crimine ab uno^
disce omnes. Take one or two for a taste of many. We confess and teach (says
one of these) that all wicked men are so ordered, or ruled by the providence of
God, that they CAN DO NOTHING BUT WHAT GOD HAS DECREED in his eternal
unchangeable counsel. Another of them says, that a man can neither do any
more good, then he does, nor avoid any more evil then he avoideth: yea and
that God has decreed in himself, how much good, and how much evil he would
have to be done by every man. If such Tenets as these are not pure Manicheisme,
I must (I confess) sign Mr. Ienkin's estimate of my weakness, and say as he
says, that I know not what Manicheisme is. Sect. 65.


Ninthly, for his arguings, whether by Scripture, or by reason, to prove my
opinion, about Natural man's free will, or power, etc. (as the Ministers of the
Testimony are pleased to baptize it) erroneous, they plainly argue, that the
man neither understands the mind of God in the Scriptures, nor yet savours the
principles of reason with men. Take an instance or two in either for a
demonstration hereof, page 27. To prove that conversion is the restoring of
sight, not of light only? Et alibi; verum quoque est quicunque hodievel
pecca^t, vel been agu^t, respectu decreti divini non posse non peccare, au been
agere: quia quicquid Deus decrevit ut fiat, id non potest non fieri: decrevit
autem ut fiat, quicquid fit. Piscat. Adam. Dup. Vorstij. p. 231.
the opening of the eyes, not the bringing of light to them, who have eyes
already, he cites, Acts 26. 18. where Paul declares that he was sent by
Christ to the Gentiles to open their eyes, etc. Where 1o. It is observable, how
ridiculous he is in making an opposition, between the opening of men's eyes, and
the bringing of light to them, who have eyes already; as if men, who had eyes
to be opened, had not yet eyes already. It seems that either Master Jenkin,
sleeps with his eyes open, or else has no eyes at all, when he sleeps with
them shut. 2o. How ignorant he is of the Scripture dialect, and phrase, when he
makes an opposition between, the restoring of sight, and of light only; the
Scripture, by the opening of the eyes of men in conversion, meaning only such
an opening, which is proper for the light to effect. In such a sense as
darkness, or the night, may be said to shut men's eyes (for a disabling of them
from present action, or service, is a kind of shutting of them) in the same,
the light of the morning, or of the Sun, may be said to open them. i. to
restore them to a capacity of present service. Now that it is in this sense
only, that the eyes of men's understandings, are in Scripture said to be opened
in their conversion, is evident, 1. by all those places (which are very many)
where conversion active is expressed by the giving of light, and conversion
passive by the receiving of it: see and consider to this purpose (amongst
others) Luke 1. 79. Ephesians. 5. 14. 2 Cor. 4. 46. Mat. 4. 16, etc. 2. Upon this
ground because if men should have the eyes of their minds or understandings
opened in any other sense, then that, wherein the light may be said to open
them, God might and must be said to work as many miracles, as conversions: and
how then can that great pillar of Presbytery, that miracles are ceased, stand?

Take only one instance more (for the present) Page 31. to prove that the
Scriptures deny a power, in those who perish, to believe, and repent, he cites;
dead in sins and trespasses, from Ephesians. 2. whereas it is evident, both from
the context it self, where this expression stands, and also from the frequent
tenor of Scripture-expression elsewhere, that by being dead in sins and
trespasses, the Apostle only means, that they were guilty of death, or liable
to condemnation, for those sins and trespasses, wherein in times past they had
walked. For 1. this their death in sins and trespasses, is explained, by their
being children of wrath, verse. 3. 2. That quickening together with Christ,
opposed to this death, as a remedy to a disease, is interpreted, Col. 2. 13.
to be the forgiveness of their sins and trespasses. Both which plainly show,
that the death spoken of by the Apostle in the place which Mr. Jenkin cites,
is not a death, which either stands in, or which necessarily implies, an
utter impotency in men to believe, but which consists in guilt, and
obnoxiousnesse unto death. 3. The Scripture often expresses the estate and
condition of guilt, by the term, death. See Genesis 20. 3. 2 Samuel 9. 8. 16. 9. 19.
28. Romans 8. 10. 2 Cor. 5. 14. 1 Timothy 5. 6, etc. And for those other Scriptures,
Joh. 14. 17. Romans 5. 6. Phil. 2. 13. We shall in due time (God willing) give a
satisfactory account, with how little pertinency to his purpose, they are here
brought upon the stage by him.

4. (And lastly) that death in sins and trespasses here spoken of,
whatsoever, is meant by it, is not asserted or represented by the Apostle as
the condition of a mere natural man, or of men considered as natural: but of
men who have actually, and for a long time lived in disobedience against God,
contrary to the effect of the Law, written in their hearts by the finger of
God, is evident from the express letter of the context. And you has he
quickened, who were dead in trespasses and sins, wherein in times past ye
walked, etc. verse. 1. 2. and 6. 3. Among whom also we all had our conversation
in time past, etc. So that from this place (however) nothing can be inferred
concerning any defect, or want of power to believe, in mere natural men;
though such an inference should be yielded against such men, who have corrupted
themselves by a long continuance in wilful and known sins.

Again 2. How like unto himself (i. simply, Sect. 66.
and novice-like) he reasons otherwise, to prove my opinion a delinquent
against the Truth, appears by the constant tenor of his arguing, wherein he
opposes (indeed) my opinion; (for, more generally, he makes weak and simple
opinions of his own, and then confutes them strongly, instead of mine) Page
29. Upon this saying of mine, that by the improvement of nature a man may
attain to such a conviction, as upon which saving conversion follows, he
profoundly demands, what place is here left for grace? what agreement with the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 4. 7. Who makes thee to differ from another? But is there any
whit more sap or savor of reason, in these arguings, and demands, then if I
should gree^ Master Jenkin thus: Sir, If you be able to travail upon your ten
toes within 3. or 4. days to a place an hundred miles off, where you must
appear by that time, or else you are a dead man, though you be lazy, and
perhaps as willing to dye, as to take the pains of such a journey: what place
is there left for the kindness of any of your friends to accommodate you with a
wel-going horse, or Coach for your journey? A man may have power of doing, yea
and of willing, that, which yet, left unto himself, he neither will ever
actually will, nor do. So that notwithstanding such a power as Mr. Jenkin
strikes at in the dark, yet there is place enough for all that Grace of God,
which the Apostle attributes unto him, Phil. 2. 13. In working both to will,
and to do in men, of his good pleasure. Yea if Mr. Ienkin would quit himself
like a man, and reason home, in stead of hal^e way (like a child) he would
manifestly perceive, that there is a far larger place left for grace, by that
opinion, which he calls error, then by that, which he seeks to enthrone in
stead of it: and this in more respects then one. For 1. as he is a far
greater sinner, who knows how to do well, and has all things necessary
thereunto, and yet does evil, than he that does evil, having no power at all
to do well: so is it a far greater act of Grace to forgive the sin of the
former, than of the latter. Now the latter is Master Jenkin his Sinner, and the
former, mine. 2. For God to give a man strength and power to believe, twice
over, or after a forfeiture made by sin and wickedness, of the first
donation, is an act of more grace, than to confer them only once, and that
without any such provocation. Now Mr. Jenkin his opinion leaves place only for
this latter act of grace, which is far the lesser; whereas my opinion, makes
roomth for the former, which is the greater. 3. (And lastly) to save greater
sinners, is an act of more grace, or of Greater Grace, than to save lesser. Now
whether that opinion which presents men impenitent and unbeleeving before God
under a sufficiency of grace, and means otherwise, both to repent, and
believe, does not present them as far greater sinners, than Mr. Jenkins
opinion does, which denies them so much as a possibility to do either, I
refer to Mr. Jenkins himself with the fagge end of reason and understanding,
which is left him, to consider, and (if he please) determine. In the mean
time, had not the man (think ye) a prodigy of provocation upon him, to cry
out, What place is here left for grace? What agreement with the Apostle? It
seems there is no agreement between Wood and Trees, in Mr. Jenkin his Logic;
nor any place left for so much as one man to stand, where there is space enough
for an hundred. Surely Mr. Jenkins Theology is like his Philosophy, who would
undertake to argue and make good this Position; Nil intra est oleam; nihil
extra est in nuce, duri. i.
Within the Olive ('it is without all doubt)
There Is nothing hard, nor in the Nut, without.


And if his interrogatory exclamations had such simple hey and stubble (as you
have heard) for their foundation, his subjoyned parenthesis has nothing but
mire and dirt. Mr. Goodwins answer (says he) my self by my improvement of
nature made me to differ, would have fallen little shorter than blasphemy. What
putid incongruity, and perfect nonsense is there in this parenthesis? Mr.
Goodwins answer: to what? or to whose question? Such an answer as he personates
in me, has no more relation unto, nor congruity or coherence with, either of
his questions propounded, than his answers (so called) in his book, have to, or
with, the importance of my arguments, unto which they pretend this relation.
Mr. Jenkin demands. What place is here left for grace? Mr. Goodwin is made to
answer; My self by improvement of nature made me to differ. Or else, M. Jenkin
demands thus: What agreement with the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4. 7? Mr. Goodwin answers
(by plowing with Mr. Jenkins heifer) thus: My self by my improvement of nature
made me to differ. Qu. How far is it to London? Ans. A poke full of Plummes.
Does not this Harp and Harrow agree as well, as those that Mr. Jenkin has here
tuned? If his meaning be, that according to the tenor of that opinion of mine,
which he speaks of, I must make such an answer as that, to the Apostles
demand, Who makes thee to differ? he should have done well, and unlike to
himself, to have said so. As for those words [from another] who makes thee to
diffe^ [from another] I confess he finds them in our last English Translation:
but this is never the more the word of God, but the less, for having them in
it. For the original bears only thus: (...); i. For who makes thee to differ;
or, who separates thee (as the former translation had it) But first, how does
my opinion, which only says, that by the improvement of Nature a man may
attain to such a conviction, upon which saving conversion follows, necessarily
lead me to such an answer to the Apostles question, as this young Simplicius
will needs thrust into my mouth? Must Mr. Jenkin, because he has a pair of
long legs, needs walk as far in a day as they are able to carry him? or is it
not far from blasphemy to say, that it is possible for him to ride on an horse,
because he is able enough to go on foot? Or does he in every kind, whatsoever
he is able to do? If so, certain I am, that his ability in arguing, or drawing
consequences, is very scant.

Secondly, Sect. 67.
in case it were true, that a man by the improvement of nature, has [actually,
and defacto] attained such a conviction, upon which saving conversion follows;
does it follow from hence, that therefore this attainment must needs be
resolved into himself, or his endeavors, as the sole or primary cause hereof?
For (supposing that the Apostle here speaks of such differing which is made by
believing) that his question does not intend to exclude the creature it self
from ing the cause [in a sense, viz. in a way of inferior, subordinate, and
dependent efficiencie, or causality] of its differing, or separation here
spoken of, is evident from hence; viz. because this differing, or separation of
his from others, either consists in, or is caused by, his believing. So then,
if it be the creature it self, and not God, who believes, then is it the
creature it self, and not God, which [thus far, and in this respect] makes it
self to differ. But it seems by Mr. Jenkin his Logico-divinity, that if Mr.
Jenkin should say, that he believes, it would not be far from blasphemy;
Possibly it might not be far from untruth: but as for any affinity or
neernesse unto blasphemy, it may (I suppose) be measured by the neighborhood
of the East to the West. Therefore it is as clear as the light, that the
Apostle in this demand, Who makes thee to differ? (supposing, as before, that
he here speaks of any saving difference between man and man) intended only to
put the creature upon this consideration and acknowledgment, viz. that God, and
God only, was the original, prime, and sovereign cause of that happy estate
and condition, by the attainment and enjoyment whereof, he differed from all
others, who had not attained it; not to occasion him to confess or
acknowledge, that himself could in no sense, or consideration at all, be
looked upon as the cause thereof. But

Thirdly (and lastly) evident it is, Sect. 68.
to him that will but view the context, that the Apostle does not speak here of
any difference between man and man, which is made by Faith, or by any saving
work in either; but of such a difference only which stands in more and fewer,
or in greater and lesser gifts: which kind of difference in the primitive
times, was very frequent, between persons, who were paratakers in all things
saving, one with another. And that God indeed, is not only the principal, but
the sole cause of such differings as these between men and men, is more
evident, than to be matter of doubt or question unto any man. But how, or
wherein, does the Apostles question, thus understood, relate unto my opinion,
concerning the power of natural man to good supernatural? If M. Jenkin
understand Scripture no better than thus, (which it seems, by many other
misinterpreted places in his pamphlet, he does not) certainly the Chalk and
Coals in Corners, are more wholesome nourishment, than the Partridges and
Quails that are cooked and fed upon in the pompous Basilique near Newgate,
not so properly, as commonly, termed Christs-church: unless (happily) the
Episcopal consecration of the place, be a standing antidote against all
infection and unwholsomnesse of Doctrine, that shall be delivered there. I have
good ground to believe, that the persons which he pities, as feeding upon Chalk
and Coals in corners, will by the goodness of their food, and blessing of God
upon it, be nourished up to eternal life, when as the wrath of God (I fear)
would come upon the quail-eaters in Mr. Jenkin his vast and roaring Seraglin,
even whilst the meat which they feed upon, is in their mouths, as sometimes it
did upon those, that ate Q^ails in the W^ldernesse, had they not some better
provisions from other hands. You have seen the young man's nakedness in point
of arguing: he neither levies Reasons, nor Scriptures, with any pertinency to
his cause; there is not the least hair of the head of my opinion, concerning
the natural man's power to good supernatural, fallen to the ground, by any
thing, by all things, that he has attempted against it. His Scriptures are
good and serviceable otherwise, but too hard for him: his Reasons are like
unsavory salt, good for nothing but to be thrown upon the dunghill. But

Tenthly, Sect. 69.
though he be weak in arguing, yet he may be strong in questioning: Some can
beg stoutly, that can do little work. Possibly his faculty may lie this way:
for I remember it was a common saying in the University, that plura potest
interrogare Asinus, quam respondere Aristoteles: An Ass may ask more
questions, than Aristotle can answer: As a man not worth a groat, may ask and
beg more, than the richest Prince under heaven is able to give. But let us
taste a little his genius and strength in quereeing. Page 54. he propounds
four querees, yet the three latter so relating unto, and depending upon the
first, that unless such an answer be given to the first, as he expects
should be given, the three last are nonsuited. His first queree is, Whether I
mean, that grace is an adjutory by way of influence into the will, or by way of
concourse unto the work only? I confess he has as good as apposed me with his
first question: For whether it be the profoundnesse of the question, or the
shallowness of my apprehension, I know not; but by reason either of the one,
or of the other, I must profess, that I understand it not; unless I should
put such a sense upon it, which would (I confess) make it a question too too
ridiculous and weak even for M. Jenkin himself to propound. For other
construction of this queree I can make none, but only this; viz. whether,
supposing the work of Faith, Conversion, or Regeneration, to have two ends, God
be at the one end of it, and man at the other, each heaving at his respective
end, and lifting up the work like a piece of timber, until it be laid upon the
soul? And does his simile, subjoyned by way of explication of his question,
import any other sense than this? As two men (says he) that between them both
carry a burden, yield assistance to each other, neither of them contributing
strength unto other. If this be the sense of the question, I must answer,
tollendo subjectum questionis, by denying that, which the question supposes,
viz. that Faith has two ends. Besides, how grace should be any Adjutory at all
unto the will in believing, only by concourse unto the work, without some
influence upon the will it self, considering that it is the will only, and
not grace, that must consent, or believe, I understand not. So that Mr. Jenkins
comparison is (...). But

2o, Sect. 70.
In case I do acknowledge that grace is an Adjutory unto the will by way of
influence into it, his next queree is, Whether I mean, that this influence is
moralis, suasorie by way of entreaty, that the will would move; or, Physica,
that is properly, really, and efficaciously operative upon it. This queree
contains more absurdities in it than the former. For first, it supposes, that
there can be no moral influence, but that which is suasorie, or by way of
entreaty. When Mr. Jenkin commands his Clerk to set the second part of the 119
Psalm, and threatens him that he will turn him out of his place, if he will not
do as he is commanded; has such an address as this, any Physical influence
upon the will of this Clerk? or any other, than what is moral? But will Mr.
Jenkin call it suasorie by way of entreaty? He indeed often finds appositum in
opposito, and so may make commands and entreaties, all one: but the Apostle
Paul, who could distinguish as well as he, finds a great difference between
them, writing thus to Phil^mon; Though I might be much bold in Christ to enjoin
[or, command] thee that which is convenient: yet for loves sake I rather
BESEECH [or, intreat] thee, etc. v. 8, 9.

2o. Sect. 71.
The said quere, makes an opposition, supposes an inconsistencie, between a
moral influence upon the will, and that which is properly, really, and
efficaciously operative upon it; as if the influence of such a command and
threatening of his, as were mentioned, could not be properly, really, and
efficaciously operative upon the will of his Clerk; and that it were simply
impossible that his Clerk, having his will no otherwise influenced, should be
willing to do the service enjoined him. But to the intent (as I suppose) of
the queree, as also of the other two yet behind, I answer briefly (for the
present, expecting an opportunity for a larger explication of my self, upon the
subject) that if by a Physical influence upon the will, Mr. Jenkin means any
other kind of working or acting upon it by God, than by the mediation of the
Word, or then that which is proper to be wrought by such an instrument as
this; as if God did work any thing saving in men, either apart from the word,
or in any other way, or after any other manner than those, wherein the word may
be said properly, and according to the nature and frame of it, to communicate
and to have part in the action, I deny any Physical influence of grace upon
the will, in the act of conversion. It passes my understanding to conceive,
how the will should be wrought or acted into a consent in any kind, otherwise
than by argument, motive, or persuasion; unless it be by force, violence, or
compulsion; which Mr. Jenkin himself will not hear of: yea, the truth is, I
do not well understand, how any other force, violence, or compulsion it self
can do it, but only that, which consists either in the weight, or proportion of
an argument or motive, one, or more: or else in the effectual explication,
urging, and pressing of such arguments. As the natural frame and structure of
a man, renders him incapable of speaking by any force, or course of violence
whatsoever, otherwise than by opening his mouth; yea, and of speaking, though
his mouth be opened, without the consent of his will: so does the essential
constitution and fabric of the will, exempt it from a capacity of being drawn
or brought into a consent by any other means, method, or way whatsoever, but
only that of argument, motive and persuasion. Again, it no whit less passes
my understanding, to conceive, how or in what sense, Faith can be said to come
by hearing, or men to be begotten by the word, in case either of these works be
wrought in men, by any such kind of action, or work, which immediately reaches
the will, and wherein it is unpossible that the word should communicate: as
also how it is possible that the word should communicate, or bear a part, in
any action that is properly Physical; more than it is possible for Iron and
Clay to mix and work together, or for the understanding and will of a man to
communicate (by way of assistance) in the motion or influence of the Sun. If
Mr. Jenkin his youthful head be more vigorous, pregnant and quick in these
difficulties, than mine, who am stricken in years, and he please to open such
veins of truth unto me, whereof I am ignorant, I shall willingly sit at his
feet to reap the benefit and blessing of his head. But if by a Physical
influence of the will, he means nothing else, but either an inward excitation
of the soul, or opening of the heart by the Spirit of God, whereby a man is
made to mind, or to attend unto the things of his peace, (as it is said, Acts
16. 14. that the Lord opened the heart of Lydia, that she attended unto the
things spoken by Paul) or else, a gracious and immediate supporting of the will
in the act of consenting, and in all other acts requisite hereunto, so that a
sufficient light of conviction shining in the judgment or understanding, God
suffers nothing to intervene to the disturbance of the will, so as to prevent
or hinder the regular motion thereof, which, in such a case, is to consent: or
3o (and lastly) if he means by his Physical influence, any such
representation of things to the mind or understanding of a man, whereby the
will is brought over after an effectual and potent manner, to give up her
self in consent unto them; I acknowledge a Physical influence of Grace upon
the will. But the truth is, I do not well understand what the man means by
his Physical influence (and am fully persuaded that himself understands
himself as little in it, as I) so that I cannot give that particular and
distinct answer which upon a distinct explication of the queree, I am ready to
do. But they that propound blind questions, must expect answers accordingly.
Only let me add this further (in the point in hand) that for any other
Physical influence upon the will, than that which I have expressed and
acknowledged, (which I confess to be very untowardly and unproperly so called)
himself acknowledges none, at least if he means as he says, page 51. For
here (more like a reasonable man, than himself) he writes thus: To whatsoever
object it [the will] is carried, it is not without the preceding counsel of
the practical judgment. The will being a rational appetite, never moves but
per modum judicij, upon apprehension of some goodness, to which it moves. Nor
is it in any motions compulsorily overswayed, but works according to its own
proper motion, and to the condition of its own nature. Surely he that says
these things, if he be of a consistent brain, does not suppose the will capable
of any other influence in order to the moving of it, but only that which is
suasory and moral.

The profundum, Sect. 72.
or bottom of his querees, is this: If I grant that Grace is certain,
infallible, and determinative in its operation upon the will; he desires to
know, whether I mean that this invincibility and infallibility of the working
of grace, be only to be looked upon as such respectu eventus, in regard of
what does fall out, and de facto does come to pass, or whether the certain
determination of the will by grace, proceeds from the powerful nature of
that grace of God, which (as Austin says) no hard heart is able to refuse.
They that clearly understand this question, may give a clear answer to it. All
that I clearly understand of it, is a parcel of absurdities; what I conjecture
of sense in it, I shall give answer unto.

First, he makes the invincibility and infallibility of the working of grace,
and the certain determination of the will by grace, to be one and the same;
whereas it is evident, 1o. that invincibility and infallibility, are but
modifications of the act, or working of grace; whereas a determination of the
will, is either the act it self, or else (if it be understood passively) the
product, or effect of such an act.

Secondly, he supposes, that if there be an invincibility and infallibility in
grace, there must needs follow a certain determination of the will by grace.
Wherein Supponit quod non est supponendum (a misbehaviour very incident to
novice Disputants) For grace may be invincible and infallible in the working of
it, i may invincibly and infallibly produce such an effect in the soul, which
answers the nature, measure, and degree of it, and yet not necessarily produce
a certain determination of the will to a saving consent, or a through act of
believing.

Thirdly, Sect. 73.
is it not a very ridiculous queree, to demand, Whether the certain
determination of the will by grace, proceeds from the powerful nature of
grace; considering first, that effects do not proceed from the natures of
their causes, but from the actual engagements of their causes in a way of
efficiencie, to produce them? 2o. That Grace is not a natural, but a voluntary
or free working cause, and so does not necessarily act, or work, when it does
work, ad extremum potentiae, to the uttermost extent of its power, but
according to such measures and degrees of efficiencie, as it self pleases. So
that how powerful soever the nature of grace be, it no way follows, that a
certain determination of the will must necessarily follow upon the motion,
acting, or working of it. It was the grace of God, which is so powerful in the
nature of it (for God has but one Spirit of grace, which is always in respect
of his nature uniformly and equally powerful) which wrought upon the stiff
necked and hard-hearted Jews for many succeeding generations; yet we know that
they resisted this grace and Spirit of God, neither were their wills penitently
or savingly determined by it. -- Ye have always (says Stephen to the latter
brood of them) resisted the holy Ghost: as your Fathers did, so do ye.

Fourthly, Sect. 74.
nor is there any overplus of acumen in that distinction exhibited in this
queree, between an invincibility and infallibility of a cause, respectu
eventus, in respect of the event, or effects, and the powerfulness of the
nature of a cause. I do not understand how a cause may be termed invincible
and infallible in respect of the event, or effect, which is not very powerful
in the nature of it. But

Fifthly (and lastly) that which the young man would demand in this Queree, as
far as my soul is able to enter into his secret, is briefly this, whether
the act, or work of God, in, and about the conversion of a man, be so strong,
powerful, and over-hearing, as to carry, or produce the effect of his actual
conversion, against all the possibility that is in him to hinder it? If this be
the intent of his queree, I answer: My sense clearly is, that according to the
ordinary course of the grace of God acting, and working, in, and about the
conversion of men, there is no man actually converted, but might possibly have
acted, or demeaned himself so, as never to have been thus converted. The
account of my judgment herein (for the present) is briefly this: I conceive,
that though the grace of God, acting in, and toward the conversion of a man,
subdues and takes away all the actual rebelliousnesse, or gainsayingnesse of
the will, yea and possibly all inclination toward any rebellion in this kind,
(which is abundantly sufficient as to his actual conversion) yet it does not
remove or take away all possibility from the will of rebelling, or of doing
wickedly. Nor do I apprehend how it is possible for the will, either of men,
or Angels, being a creature, ever to be made equal unto God, in so transcendent
and glorious a privilege and perfection, as a non-possibility of sinning, or
doing wickedly. It is the (...) and highest pitch of perfection competible to a
created being, to be like unto God in actual holiness, in actual hatred and
detestation of sin, in firm and stable resolutions to continue holy for ever:
but for a simple and absolute impossibibility to sin, I conceive it to be
one of the incommunicable properties of God, as being simply and absolutely
unchangeable. From hence then it undeniably (and ex abundanti) follows, that
even then, when God is ready (as it were) with the hand of his grace lifted up
to strike that blessed stroke, whereby a man is actually converted, there is a
possibility in him to hinder the work, or effect it self, of this conversion;
inasmuch as it is impossible for any man to receive actual conversion from
God, in any act of sin whatsoever. By the way, if I had as much a mind to
cry out against M. Jenkin for a Blasphemer, as he has to clamor out this
Impiety against me; I have another manner of ground or occasion now before me
to call him a son of this guilt, than ever he had to asperse me with such an
imputation. For is not he a blasphemer, who claims part and fellowship in any
of the incommunicable properties of God? Or does not Mr. Jenkin made this
Blasphemous claim when he asserteth himself under the same impossibility of
sinning, with God? Or does he not assert such an impossibility as this to
himself, when he supposes it impossible for him to sin, when God is about
to convert him?

Besides, if there be a possibility in man to sin after the work of grace
and conversion wrought in him; certainly, and much more, is there a possibility
in him to sin at any time before such a work. If it be possible for a man to
stumble in the day, much more possible is it, that he may stumble in the night:
And if a wise man may be overseen, much more a weak and foolish. Now if there
be a possibility for a man to sin at any time before his conversion, then is
there a possibility in him also to hinder his coversion; because (as has been
said) it is unpossible for any man to be converted in, or under, an act of
sin: conversion it self standing in such an act, which includes (at least)
an aversion from all sin (at least in purpose, affection, and desire) which
must needs be a act of righteousness. I^ Mr. Jenkins sense in the point only
be, that a man being now converted, has no power to hinder his conversion, i.
to prevent the doing of that, which is done already, I know no man like to
oppose him, unless it be in a dream. And whether himself do not clearly
acknowledge a power or possibility in the will, to withstand the work of
conversion attempted by God, so as to prevent and hinder the actual effecting
of it, I appeal to these words of his, page 52. Nay this efficacious
determination of the will by grace, is a most happy adjurory to it, TAKING
NOTHING AWAY BUT THE PRAVITY and rebellion of it, but preserving and RESTORING
ITS TRVE LIBERTY. First, if grace in the act of conversion, takes nothing away
from the will, but the pravity and rebellion of it, then it leaves it a liberty
or power of rebelling or depraving it self. For there is nothing more evident,
than that there may remain a liberty or power of rebelling in the will, when
the rebellion it self is taken away from it. There was no rebellion in the
will of Adam during his innocence: but yet there was a liberty or power in it
to rebel: otherwise it could not have rebelled afterward. Again 2o. if the
adjutory of grace preserves and RESTORES the true liberty of the will unto it,
then it invests it with no other liberty, than that which was natural to, and
sometimes inherent in it, i. to that liberty, wherein, and wherewith it was
created. Nothing can be said to be restored, but what was formerly possessed
and enjoyed. And besides, doubtless that liberty wherein the will was first
created, is the true liberty thereof. Now then, if grace, in, or about the act
of conversion, vesteth no other liberty in the will, but the true, native,
original liberty of it, wherein it was created, most certain it is, that it
leaves a liberty or power in it to rebel, and consequently to oppose the work
of conversion, even to the frustration and defeature of it: inasmuch as the
true liberty, wherein it was created, was none other liberty (as has been
said) than what left the will under a power or possibility of rebelling. This
may serve for a morsel to stay Mr. Jenkin his stomach, till a fuller table can
be prepared for him. I^ in the mean time, out of the abundance of his
Seraphicall Revelations, he shall please clearly to demonstrate unto me, an
utter and absolute impossibility in men to hinder their conversion, at any
time, before they be converted, I seriously profess, I shall look upon it, and
accept of it, as simply the greatest and richest accommodation for the
satisfaction of my mind and spirit, which I have received for these many
years. And this briefly for answer to his captious and yet ill-digested, and
worse expressed Querees.

Eleventhly (and lastly, Sect. 75.
as to the non- error of natural man's free will) whereas he demandes, p. 44.
(though his demand be somewhat imperious and authoritative, for a stripling)
Let me have one page half filled [out of Orthodox Authors] agreeing with th^se
your opinions, which are transcribed by the Subscribers, etc. I shall
nevertheless gratify him in his demand; or rather (I fear) trouble him with
this gratification. For herein I cannot but suspect that he acts the part of a
jealous man, who many times inquires after that which much troubles him when he
finds it. But first, I must re-minde him, that my former passages from M.
Bucer, P. Testardus, and I. Ball (together with those cited from the Fathers)
are still in full force, strength, and virtue for my purpose, notwithstanding
any thing attempted by him, for the cancelling or defacing of them. I have
formerly asserted their clear and through concurrence with those opinions of
mine, of which he speaks, and have sufficiently showed, that the man was
necessitated to a Sion College trick, I mean to forge an opinion, which he
might call, Mine, to set so much as a face, or color upon them, of a
non-concurrence with me. All these citations (I presume) being put together,
will amount to the full of his desire, and fill the half of one page (at
least.)

But to g^ve him measure heaped up, Sect. 76.
I shall here cast in unto him a further parcel of the same commodity. And
first ( hororis causa) I will begin with the judgment of the Subscribers
themselves: I make no question but they are (in Mr. Jenkins account) the first
borne amongst all that are called Orthodox. Let it then be unpartially
considered, whether there be not the substance of that opinion of mine, about
the power of natural man to supernatural good, which they have transcribed,
and voted for an error, in there words of their own (page 3^) Thousands and ten
thousands of poor souls which CHRIST HAS RANSOMED with his own blood, shall
hereby be betrayed, seduced, and ENDANGERED TO BE UNDONE to all eternity,
First, here is the Doctrine of universal Redemption, fully, and with open
face, asserted; inasmuch, as they who are ransomed by the blood of Christ, are
said to be endangered to be undone to all eternity. He that is in danger of an
evil, or misery, may very possibly fall into it. Danger does not only imply a
possibility, but even a probility, or likelihood of suffering. So then, if
thousands ransomed by the blood of Christ, may be brought into danger of being
undone for all eternity; they very possibly may suffer such an undoing, and so
perish for all eternity. If the ransomed by Christ may perish for all eternity,
then Christ ransomed not the elect only, of whose perishing there is not the
least possibility, but the reprobate also, or those who perish; and
consequently, all men.

2o. Sect. 77.
If Christ's love unto all men was such, as prevailed with him to ransom them
by his blood; doubtless he is not wanting unto them in such inferior
accommodations, whereby they are, or may be, sufficiently provided, actually to
partake of this ransom, and to enjoy the blessedness of it. And what is this,
being interpreted, but a conferring upon them a sufficiency of strength and
power to repent, and to believe? Nor was there ever any considering man, whose
judgment stood for the Redemption of All men by Christ, but by being true to
his opinion herein, and in clear consonancy unto it, held a sufficiency of
power or means also of believing to be vouchsafed unto All men. Nor is it
(indeed) any ways consisting with the wisdom of Christ, to purchase for men
such a blessed inheritance as redemption and salvation is, especially at so
dear a rate, as with his own blood; and not withal to procure them a way,
wherey they may be able to come at it, and enjoy it. So that if Mr. Jenkin, and
his fellow Con-subscribers, will but stand their ground, and be content to own
their own principles and sayings, they must of necessity own those opinions
of mine about the power of natural man to supernatural good, which they have
transcribed, yea and proscribed as erroneous, in their Testimony. Did not Mr.
Calamy himself, no mean man in the retinew of the Subscribers, within these
very few years, ( viz. Jan. 12. 1644. preaching upon 2 Chronicles. 25. 2.)
publicly assert the power of natural man to supernatural good upon terms
every whit as obnoxious, and liable to exception, as ever it was asserted by
me? Yea was not the Spirit of my Doctrine in the point, in this of his; An
unconverted man may do that, which is right in the sight of the Lord? Or did
he not in the prosecution of this doctrine, speak as great things of Nature,
and the power thereof, as ever were spoken by me? Let such sayings as these
give in their evidence: An unconverted man may believe that God made the world:
He may believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. Afterward; A wicked man
may d^e that, which i^ right in the sight of the Lord, by the light of Nature,
and by the help of common grace. And although God be not bound to reward him
for it, yet I doubt not but God, out of the abyss of his mercies, if he make
use of common grace; I do not doubt (I say) but God out of his abundant mercy,
though he be not bound unto it, yet will give him spiritual: [or speciall]
grace: if he make use of common Nature well, God will find some way or other
to do good to that man's soul, Luke 17. 11. If therefore you have not been
faithful in the unrighteous Mammon, who shall commit to your trust the true
riches? This place seems to hold out thus much: That if a man improve the
outward mercies of God, or the work of common grace, God will entrust that man
with better riches; God will find out a way to do that man good Yet again, in
the use of the former Doctrine: Beloved, this I do affirm^, that a man that is
not converted, may by the general assistance of Gods spirit, do that which is
naturally good, and which is morally good: yea and may do something which may
make toward his conversion, by the help of common grace. Again afterward:
Thou ought to do according to the gift and power, which God has given thee
in a natural way: and that God which has given thee power to do it in a
natural way, will no doubt assist thee with power to do things in a spiritual
way. For that man which improves his natural talent, God will one time or
other entrust him with a spiritual talent. For there was never any man went to
hell for, CAN NOT, but for, WILL NOT. If the author of these sayings (whosoever
he was) flies not every whit as high a pitch as I, in maintaining the natural
man's free will, or power to good supernatural, I confess I had need to be
sent, whither Mr. Jenkin would have me, (I mean, to the children) to learn to
read, and understand English with them. If Mr. Calamy, by reason of the present
occasion, has forgotten these passages, I know how to relieve his memory, and
to find him out an authentic Remembrancer.

I do not find Mr. Henry Scudder amongst the Subscribers: but I question not
his repute of Orthod^x^sme with Mr. Jenkin. Thus then Mr. Scudder: And it was
intended by Christ that the plaster should be as large, as the sore, and that
there should be no defect in the remedy, i. in the price or sacrifice of
himself, offered upon the Cross, by which man should be saved; but that ALL
MEN, and each PARTICVLAR MAN, might in that respect, become saveable in Christ
Mr. H S^^dder, Christians daily wa^k. p. 342. of the 8. Edition.
I know no Arminian or Remonstrant ( at Mr. Jenkin calls them) that maintains
universal Redemption upon other terms than these. Not long after the forme^
word^, Which condition ( says he, speaking of Faith, by which the actual
fruit of the all-sufficient ransom of Christ redoundeth unto th^se that are
saved) many, to whom the Gospel (...), MAKE IMPOSSIBLE TO THEMSELVES, through a
wilful refusing of the Gospel, and salvation it self by Christ, upon those
terms, which God does offer it. Doubtless that which a man makes unpossible
to himself, through a wilful refusing of the Gospel, is not so or such, by
nature unto him. That which is naturally, or by nature, unpossible to a man, he
cannot be said to make unpossible to himself by any act whatsoever. Whatsoever
Mr. Jenkin has made unpossible to himself otherwise, he has not made it
unpossible to him to fly, nor yet to build castles in the air, nor to remove
mountains. If he has made any of these things unpossible to him, I desire to
know (in his next) how, by what act, or acts, he has done it. Therefore Master
Scudder clearly supposes, that till a man wilfully refuses the Gospel, it is
in his power, or very possible for him, to believe.

Dr. William Gouge Pastor of Black friars, Sect. 79.
I find a Prince amongst the Subscribers: therefore his Doctrine ( Judice
Jenkin) must needs be Orthodox and true. Hear then how affectionately his pen
sympathizeth with mine, in the substance of those opinions, which himself
(unless he has been made to drink of Master Downham's cup) with Mr. Jenkin,
and the rest of the Sinonian Class, has voted erroneous in me. In something
or other (says this Grave Author) all they which believe not, come short of
that which they might have done, for attaining unto this precious gift of
Faith. And that is it for which another day they shall be condemned. Unbelief
is in a man's power Dr. Gouge whole armor of God, p. 233.
-- If men's coming short of that which they might have done, be the reason and
ground of their condemnation, it undeniably follows, that they have power to
do that, whereby their condemnation might be prevented; and consequently, to
believe, in as much as there is no possibility of preventing condemnation, but
by believing. Again, in saying, Unbelief is in a man's power; does he not
imply, that a man has power oover it, and may dissolve, subdue, and destroy
it, if he will? When God said to the Devil, Behold, all that he [Job] has, is
in thy power, did he not mean, that the Devil now might, if he would, destroy,
or dispoile Job of all he had? Besides, nothing that does accompany a man ex
necessitate naturae, out of the necessity of nature, can be said to be in his
power; as for example, original sin is not in a man's power, nor is his being
born, either blind, or seeing, in his power; nor is the frailty of his life,
nor the mortality, or corruptiblenesse of his flesh or body, nor any thing
whatsoever, that is merely and simply natural unto him, in his power.
Therefore if unbelief be in a man's power, it is certain that nothing in
nature does necessitate him to it: and consequently, that he may free and quit
himself of it, if he please. It were easy out of the same Treatise of this
great Subscriber, to transcribe many other passages, of like importance. Let
every one (says he, in another place) of what rank or condition soever he be,
be encouraged to apply to himself these glad tidings of pardon: and seeing God
excludes none, let not any of us exclude our selves. Questionless so grave a
Teacher, would not encourage men, or persuade men to encourage themselves to
do that, which he judges unpossible for them to do: would he say, let men be
encouraged to fly, to number the stars, to touch the moon, etc. Therefore
(doubtless) he does not judge believing a matter of like consideration with
these in point of difficulty, or unpossibility of performance. And if God
excludes none [from believing] then has he not inflicted any such punishment
upon men for their sin in Adam, by which thy are disabled from believing; or at
least he has dealt so graciously and bountifully by men in the second Adam, as
to furnish them with power sufficient to believe, that punishment
notwithstanding. For certainly he that thrusts out a man's eyes, and does not
restore them again to him, does exclude a man from seeing. Nor can a man be
said to exclude himself, unless it be supposed, that that act, by which this
exclusion is made, be in his power, as well to forbear, as to execute or
perform. I^ were ridiculous to say, that a poor man, who is not worth a groat,
excludes himself from eating Partritriges and Quails by his not buying them
at a dear rate in the Market.

I shall only sub-joyne two or three places more out of the same discourse,
Sect. 80.
and leave it to the Reader to consider, whether the spirit of those opinions,
which both William J. and William G with William B. and William T. and many
other Sinonian names of men, have stigmatized for error in me, does not breath
and live in them. In the order of Redemption God has made man's sin pardonable:
but man by his impenitency makes it not to be pardoned Page 275.
. Elsewhere thus: Did not the very lifting up of the Serpent show, that it was
Gods will they should look on it, and looking be cured? So God causing Christ
to be lift up by the preaching of the Gospel before thee, shows that HE
WOULD THOU SHOVLDST BELIEVE, and believing have everlasting life Page 230.
. God never failed any that continued to wait on him: at length he satisfied
their longing Page 232.
. Though it be hard to the carnal careless man, yet (as Solomon says of
knowledge, Pro. 14. 6.) Faith is easy to him that will believe: not that it is
simply in man's power, but that GODS SPIRIT SO OPENS HIS UNDERSTANDING, etc
Page 289.
. Again, if we repair to the Author who gives Faith, and to the spring whence
it flows; if we rightly use the right means of attaining it, and wait at
the door of wisdom till she open unto us, VNDOVBTEDLY WE SHALL FIND FAITH,
and not miss of it. Page 290.
. I appeal to any man, that will please to take the pains to compare my
erroneous passages (so rated by the Subscribers) with these cited from their
learned Doctor, whether the one can any more be orthodox, if the other be
erroneous, then the Parish Pastor of Christ-Church near Newgate, be an honest
and modest man, if William Jenkin the Author of the Busy Bishop, be
disconscienced and lofty.

I shall add two passage which I have met with in the writings of Dr. Sibs:
whose memory and Name is Sion-Colledg proof, and needs not fear the poisoned
arrow of their obloquie or reproach. If the will (says he) would use that
sovereignty, which it should, and could at the first, we should be altogether
freed from this necessity [he speaks, of sin, and unbeliefe] men are not
damned, because they cannot do better, but because they will do no better Dr.
Sib's souls conflict, page 162.
. This clearly implies, that neither the necessity of sinning, nor the
impotency of believing, under which the generality or greatest part of
unbelievers lie, are merely natural, but voluntarily contracted: and withal,
that naturally they have power to do that, which, had they wills to do, would
prevent their Condemnation. Again not long after: Our consciences tell us to
our faces, that we might do more than we do to hinder sin; and that when we
sin, it is not through weakness, but out of the wickedness of our natures. If
our sinning be (clearly, and with sufficient ground for the avouchment) not
through weakness, then certainly we have power sufficient not to sin; and if
so, then to believe.

And because the young man talks of the Synod of Dort, Sect. 82.
as if that were, Ex (...) beneficii oblati, and verbo Dei apertissimo
judicandum est de illis Gratiae auxiliis, quae hominibus suppeditantur: non
autem ex eve^^u, aut abusn. Et paulo post:

Talentum gratia a (...) semel concessum nemini eripitur, nisi qui prius suo
vitio illud sepelivit, Matthew. 26 28. (...) divinae derelictionis ea apertissime
designatur ratio, quod Deus ab hominibus prius deseratur. Et paulo post:
Nusquam in Scripturis vel levissime innuitur, Deum solere, aut velle unquam
absque praevia hominis culpa eripere cuiquam gratiae exercitantis auxilium, aut
ullum (...) quod semel contulit ad conversionem hominis ordinatum. Sic docuere
Patres Orthodox, quibus cum Pelagianis negotium fuit.


head, and tail, rush and branch, wholly, absolutely, and entirely his, and no
part of it, mine, in the cause depending, I desire the Reader seriously to
consider the tendency and import of these words (being the words of our English
Divines, members of this Synod) we are to judge of those adjutories or helps of
grace, which are vouchsafed, and adminstred unto men, by the nature of the
benefit that is offered, and by the manifest word of God, not BY THE ABUSE OF
THEM, OR THE EVENT. If there can no judgment or estimace be made of the aids
of grace (viz. in point of sufficiency, or insufficiency, for the enabling of
men to believe) either by the abu^e of them, or by the event, then men's
non-believing, or perishing, is no argument or proof at all, that they had not
sufficient means given unto them, whereby to have prevented both the one and
the other. Again, if they be to be measured or judged of (in the consideration
mentioned) by the benefit offered in the Gospel, which is forgiveness of sins,
salvation, etc. then are they to be judged as sufficiently efficacious for the
enabling men both to repent, and believe; in as much as without these the said
benefits cannot be obtained. A little after they affirm; that there is not the
least intimation in the Scripture, that God ever takes away the talent of
Grace, or the aid of exciting Grace from any man once given unto him in order
to salvation, but for their preceding sin, and burying of it through their
own default. Yea and affirm this to have been the opinion of the Orthodox
Fathers, who had to do with Pelagius: and accordingly cite Austin for it. In
which passage they clearly suppose, 1. that men who never come to believe, or
to be saved, have a talent of grace vouchsafed unto them by God in order to
their salvation, (and consequen^^, sufficient, upon, and by improvement, to
save them; and if so, sufficient also to make them believe) and 2o. that the
reason why men do not believe, and in fine come to be saved, is not any defect
or withholding of Grace sufficient hereunto, on Gods part, but their own
voluntary abuse, or burying of it, being given unto them. So that if these men
be friends to their own principles, words, and sayings, they cannot be enemies
to my opinion about the the power of the natural man to supernatural good. If
men will stagger, and not stand their own ground, say, and unsay, affirm in
premises, deny in conclusions, I cannot help it. In the mean time, though many
things they say may be of worthy concernment for the clearing and confirming of
many truths in Religion, yet is their simple vote or Authority in matters of
Religion, of small value.

I presume by this time I have satisfied Master Jenkin's desire to the full,
and have given him out of the Orthodox, a sufficient proportion of citations
and sayings for the filling of half a page (unless it be a page in
super-folio, which he means) wherein those opinions of mine are clearly
avouched, which the Grand Committee of Sion College, out of a desire to enrich
themselves with the spoils of my name and reputation, have sentenced for
erroneous. I make no question but leisure and opportunity for a further search
into the writings, both of these, and other learned men amongst us, of
reputation enough to be counted Orthodox, might fill many pages with quotations
of a manifest consistency with my proscribed opinions.

I now expect, that Mr. Jenkin, and his fellows, should either put me out of
their black bill, or else write down their own names, and their Friends
names, with mine: unless they shall clearly and Clerklike, not shiftingly, or
shufflingly, or by showing me the nakedness of the Authors (I mean, their
interfeerings, and selfe-contradictions) disable the testimonies produced by
me. Which I am certain they never will, nor can do, but by turning rules of
Grammar, significations of words, regularities of constructions, and principles
of reason, upside-downe.

Under this head I shall only take knowledge further of some few simple
passages more in the Busy Bishop, Sect. 83.
of the same seasoning (with unsavory salt) with the former, and so pass on to
the third and fourth heads; in the furnishing whereof, we shall be much briefer
then in either of the former, and so conclude. Having ( page 3.) committed a
sin, in telling me, it is my sin to say, they are no more then Ministers reputed
[he means, himself and his fellow Testimonialists, of whom I speak not at all
in that place] he demands of me; If they be not Ministers, why disprove I not
their callings? But might not I more per^inently demand of him; If they be
Ministers of Christ, why do they disprove their callings themselves, by
transforming themselves into the Ministers of Satan, by forging Testimonies,
by blaspheming clear and manifest Truths with the odious names of errors and
heresies, by cursing those, and that in their very pulpits, who have blessed
them (I mean, both Parliament, and Army; so far they are from the practice
of that which becomes, not only all Ministers, but all Disciples, of Christ,
Bless them that curse you Mat. 5. 44.
; and again, Bless them, which persecute you, bless, and curse not Romans 12.
14.
) by throwing firebrarnds of discord and dissension amongst the people, by
declaiming against, and virulently decrying that (...) or moderation, which the
holy Ghost commends unto all Christians Phil. 4. 5.
, by continual complainings of oppression, and hard measure, from, and in the
state, where they live, when as they have the Sun of Authority shining in its
might upon them, and all expressions of respects from them, which they can with
a good conscience, or with any tolerable convenience or satisfaction to the
Kingdom, and with their own safety, exhibit and show unto them, as in settling
the Government which they so inordinately desire, in discountenancing and
discouraging those that are contrary-minded to them, in investing only them,
and their party in the Ministry, with a capacity of all the sat Benefices, yea
with all the Church Livings (judged meet to continue in such a relation) in
England, etc. Men that call themselves Ministers of Christ, and make such
crooked and unworthy steps to themselves as these, need not call upon any man
to disprove their callings: they do it (with Authority and conviction in
abundance) themselves. Nevertheless that Mr. Jenkin may not remain
u^-gratified in any so reasonable desire, or demand; I do here promise him,
that when either he, or any of his party, shall have sufficiently vindicated
their callings against all those who have already impleaded them, no material
engagement lying upon me otherwise, I shall be willing, upon his second
summons, to attempt somewhat (according to my feeble and weak manner) for his
satisfaction in that behalf.

Page 2 Upon an ^^staticall pang of desire (it seems) to have his learning and
clerk-ship seen (like Solomon) in all their glory, Sect. 84.
and mine, prostrate in the dust at their feet, he resolves to make the
representation upon a theater built by himself on purpose to act the
triumphant part of a Critique upon. Thus then he builds, and thus he acts,
in order to that noble design. First, for the LECTIO. Your meaning I suppose
was, and had not your rage against the Ministers, made you write nonsense, you
would have said thus: The Ministry cunningly vested themselves with the
privilege of the Church, and not as you do; The Ministers vested the
privilege of the Church, in themselves. A man may be vested in, or with a
privilege: but it is very improper to say a Privilege is vested in, or with a
man, as improper as to say, a garment is vested in the man that wears it,
'twere better to say the man is vested in the garment. Your pen is drunk with
madness, it does stagger and stammer, These faults of pure weakness I should
not regard, etc. Poor young man! the old proverb has caught you; Corrigis
Magnificat, et nescis quid significat. This it is for the Cobbler to adventure
beyond his Last. Even a fool (says Solomon) when he holds his peace, is
counted wise Prove. 17. 28.
: but Mr. Ienkin (I see) had rather make an adventure for the reward of a
fools silence (I mean, repute of wisdom) by talking, then to accept of it
upon such terms, on which only he is capable of it. For my self, I am
willing, and shall not be ashamed, to receive relief against my weakness or
ignorance in any kind, from the meanest hand, that can reach it unto me: if M.
Vicars his blew regiment can add any thing to my knowledge in my mother
tongue, I shall most readily hearken unto them; and upon benefit received,
shall acknowledge them my benefactors. Yea there are not many years gone over
my head, since (I must confess) I learned that, which I knew not before, of
such teachers, who are known by no greater name then, Grammar Scholars. But Mr.
Ienkin (I perceive) went lame to the University, and halts upon his English leg
to this day. For what ailes the Lectio he speaks of? Doubtless much the same
kind of ailement, which was in the house complained of by Harpasie (in Seneca)
for being dark, when as she her self was blind. And as her blindness was
all the darkness of the house; so is Mr. Ienkin his ignorance, all the
unpropernesse in the Lectio. Questionless if he had tendered the Lectio to his
Teaching Elder Mr. Vicars, and desired his advicement upon it, before he had
taken the Censorian rod into his hand to smite it; Mr. Vicars would have taken
pity on him, and dissuaded him from proclaiming the shame of his folly so
loud, as to say, that he finds that which is crooked, in that which is
straight; and that which is rough, in what is perfectly smooth. For though M.
Vicars his learning does not lie so deep in the old Italian tongue, called
Latin, (there being, happily an unhappy antipathy between his Genius, and it)
yet I make no question but that he is a Master of some competency in his
Mother Tongue, and can understand a piece of plain English. Speak then, Mr.
Vicars, speak out: know neither Father nor Mother, Friend nor foe, in the
judgment: is it very improper to say A PRIVILEGE IS VESTED IN A MAN? or is it
more proper to say, A MAN IS VESTED IN A PRIVILEGE? Say, did you ever meet
with this latter construction of the word, VESTED, in any good English Author?
or have you not met with the former, in very many? Say, is it very improper to
say, that the river runs in the channel? and more proper to say, that the
channel runs in the river? Is it very improper to say, that the fruit grows
upon the tree? or more proper, that the Tree grows upon the fruit? But
concerning the regular and proper construction of the word, VEST, VESTED, etc.
let Mr. William Prynne umpire between Mr. William Ienkin and me. Well known it
is, that he is no friend, or flatterer of mine, nor enemy to Master Ienkin:
and withal, that for understanding in the propriety of the English tongue, he
is above, and Mr. Ienkin beneath. I have not had leisure or opportunity of
late, to search much into his writings; but two places, wherein he uses the
word, have occurred unto me. In his first book, concerning the Sovereign power
of Parliaments and Kingdoms, p. 50. he writes thus: Now it is clear on the
contrary side, that the King has not the power of the whole Realm VESTED in
his Person, etc. In his Full reply to certain brief Observations and
Antiqueries, toward the close whereof, he was pleased to make some brief
Animadversions (as he calls them) upon my Theomachia, he writes thus (page
24.) Why may they not (the common people) likewise delegate a lawful
Ecclesiastical legislative Authority in Church affairs, to their elected
Parliamentary, and Synodicall members, which was never actually in themselves,
as well as M. Goodwin delegates the power of determining who should be fit
persons to receive the Sacrament, and to become members of his Independent
Congregation, to eight select substitutes, which was never actually VESTED in
himself, nor transferrible thus to others, etc. How does Mr. Jenkin his pulse
beat upon this potion? will he say, that rage against the Ministers made Mr.
Pryn to write non sense? or that his pen was drunk with madness? Let him
either charge him, or discharge me. For (as the saying is) -- Facinus, quos
inquinat, aequat.
A crime makes equal, where it does pollute.
Well might he conclude, as he does (toward the beginning of his Preface)
Never was an Over seer so over-seen. I easily believe, that never since the
mountains or hills were brought forth, was there such a Novice, that took upon
him the office of an Over-seer, and performed it with that height of insolency,
and depth of ignorance, which Mr. Jenkin has done. Many Bishops have been
busy in reforming that which was right, by attempting to b^ing in that which
was crooked, in the place of it: But Mr. Jenkin's busy Bishop surpasses them
all. Mr. Jenkin the preaching Elder, understands not plain English; Mr. Vicars,
the Teaching Elder, cannot make true Latin: Is not the Church of Christ in
Christ-Church in a fair and hopeful way to a learned Presbytery? He tells me
(page 55.) that his soul pitties my cheated chapmen, and elsewhere he talks of
my misled followers. But as Christ spoke to the women, who bewailed and
lamented him; Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for your
selves, and for your children Luke 23. 28,
: So may I desire Mr. Jenkin to turn the pity of his soul from my chapmen and
followers, upon his own; whose condition must needs be most deplorable and
sad, having no better Guide in the important affairs of their souls, then
such a one, who on the one hand is so defective in knowledge, as not to
understand plain English (the tongue wherein he was borne) yet so abounding in
pride and presumption on the other, as to make himself a Judge over others,
not in such things only, but even in those also which are of a far greater and
more difficult import.

By the way, I cannot reasonably judge, but that he dissembles, when he says,
that his soul pitieth my cheated chapmen and followers; else why did he refuse
to rectify the judgments of such of them, who not long since upon the alarm
of a magnificent challenge sounded by him in his pulpit, came unto him, to
propound their scruples and doubts, about the Doctrine which he had taught,
concerning the nature of a true Church? He could not but know, that, in his
sense, and according to the tenor of his doctrine, they were in an error. If
then his soul pitied them, why did he refuse conference with them, they so
earnestly and frequently desiring and pressing him, that according to his
pulpit-promise and engagement, he would answer those objections (very
material and strong, as they supposed) which they had against his doctrine?
Why did he after several delays and put-offs, at last take sanctuary, and
shift for himself, under this poor and creeping refuge; viz. that it was the
advice of his brethren, that he should not dispute with them, unless it were
by writing.

Another like pageant of illiterate arrogance he plays, Sect. 85.
p. 50. where he meets with another Lectio, as much too hard for him, as the
former: yet he is resolved to have a saying to it, though that which he says
be never so ridiculous and absurd. My expression was this: These men have
exchanged the Fathers Adjutorium, into their own Compulsorium. Upon the head of
this expression he pours out this flood of folly. For your accusation brought
against the Subscribers of exchanging (as you word it) the Fathers Adjutorium
into their own Compulsorium; first, for the Lectio: In what garden of authority
did you gather that flower of elegance, to exchange one thing into another? Had
you said, they have exchanged the Adjutory for the Compulsory; or thus, they
have exchanged the Adjutory into the Compulsory, though the matter had been
base, yet the sense had been current: but now this expression of (exchanging
into) makes the whole sentence not so much worth as brass silvered over: 'twas
a mistake of Permutare, for Mutare: and I should advise you to study that easy
work, where you shall find Nil permurabis, emesve, before you adventure again
upon the Fathers. Had another taken you in this gross nonsense, he would have
sent you to the children: but I spare you.

What a mirror or glass have we here presented, wherein to behold Mr.
Jenkins profound learning and humility together in their own native colors and
shapes! First, for his learning, does not this ride on horseback, in these
words: It Was a mistake of Permutare for Mutare? Illiterate soul! Is the man so
ignorant, as not to know, that Prepositions in composition, many times, make no
alteration or difference at all in the signification of Verbs? If his pride had
not been a debtor unto him of shame, it is probable he might have consulted
with his Dictionary about the signification of these two verbs, mutare and
permutare, before he had uttered his ignorance in asserting such an emphaticall
and signal difference as always found between theem: and so have saved his
face from the covering of this shame. If he had looked into his Thomas
Dictionary, he should have found, that as permuto signifies, to change one
thing for another, and to barter, so does the simple verb muto, signify to
change, to barter or exchange one thing for another. So in the judgment of
those who understand the propriety of the Latin tongue at another manner of
rate than M. Jenkin; there is no more difference between permutare and mutare,
in Latin, than there is in English, between, to barter, and to barter; to
change one thing for another, and, to exchange one thing for another. Yea the
Dictionary I speak of would have informed him, that permutare in contrarium, i,
(according to his own translation) to exchange one thing into another, is an
expression used by Pliny (no ignoble Author in the Latin tongue.) And I would
know of him, whether in that easy work, which his humility advises me to
study, where he finds (to the rendering of himself a very ridiculous Critique,
Nil permutabis, emesve, the word permutabis, has any other touch, notion, or
streine of sense or signification in it, than what might have been as well
expressed, by the simple, mutabis. It is no ways like, that the Author of the
verse preferred the compound, permutabis, before the simple, mutabis, for the
sense of the word, but for the verse, which stood in need of the Preposition to
complete it. And if we consider the proper force and import of the
preposition, ex, in the English word, exchange, why may not one thing be
properly enough said to be exchanged into another? nay, can one thing be said
to be changed into another, without being exchanged, i. changed out of it self
first, and so changed into another? But this it is to have to do with Novices,
who understand not quid distant era lupinis. And whereas he in the simplicity
of his pride, asks me, In what garden of authority I gathered that flower of
elegancie, which he ignorantly seeks to blast; I might upon terms of sobriety
and good reason, ask him, where, or from what Author he learned to call a
mistake of a compound verb for a simple, gross nonsense. But unless he
should be ever and anon in his sayings, as low in learning, as lofty in
conceit, he should not beget in his own likeness.

For his Humility, does not this also triumph in these expressions, I advise
you to study that easy work, where you shall find, Nil permutabis, emesve,
etc. And again: Had another taken you in this gross nonsense, he would have
sent you to the children, etc. In what garden of authority did you gather, etc.
Are not these the ejaculations and streines of a most profound humility in a
young man? Must not he that speaks such demure, modest, and submissive words
as these, needs be as light as the dust in the balance, upon his own weights?
a man as little in his own eyes, as a mote in the Sun? Is it not an unheard of,
an unparallable condescension in a child, not to send his Father to his fellow-
children, to be taught wisdom of them? I^ ever the unclean spirit of pride and
insolency had his throne in the heart of a young man, I fear Mr. Jenkin
affords him the accommodation. In one place of his book, he tells his reader
the story of his famous exploits in taking me tripping Page 89.
, (I know not how often) he means in impropriety of expression, and nonsense.
If a man were so blind, as not to be able to discern trees from men, in case he
came to a Forest, or Wood, he might very possibly imagine, that he saw as many
men as trees. Nor is it any great marvel, that M. Jenkin, understanding so
little as he does, the propriety of the English tongue, or regularnes of
construction, should take me tr^pping, as often as he pretends. It is much
the greater marvel of the two, that he does not take me tripping in every
sentence, and in every line. A stumbling Horse is as apt to stumble in a smooth
way, as in a rugged. But upon such terms as he takes me tripping, he may take
what Author he pleases tripping also, when, and where, and as often as he
pleases. If what I have said and argued under this head, be not thought
sufficient to evince my conclusion, viz. that M. Jenkin is but a very Novice in
Clerk-ship, and understands little in any regular and sound learning; the
Reader is desired (if he shall judge it worth his pains) to peruse the other
passages in his book, which I have not rembled, and then he needs not fear,
but that his measure will be full. In the mean time I shall proceed to the
demonstration of the two points yet remaining; and shall prove, though very
briefly, 1o. That the said M. Jenkin, proves himself defective also in
judgment and (...). 2o. That he demonstrates himself void likewise of
civility, and common principles of ingenuity.

Mr. Jenkin proves himself defective in judgment and apprehension, by such
passages as these.
FIrst, Sect. 86.
all the three Titles, wherewith he has fronted his Piece, and affronted the
Truth, present him extremely defective in this kind. For first, he flourishes
with his Greek Colors, and intitles, (...), which signifies, A busy body in
other men's matters; and is to (...) both by our later, and former Translators,
1 Pet. 4. 15. Is the young man so weak, as to reflect upon me the imputation of
a busy body in other men's matters, only for washing my self clean from those
foul aspersions of Erro and Heresy, wherewith he and his defaming generation
had bespattered me? Or did I in my Sion College visited, lift up my hand to
any thing, but in necessary and due order hereunto? If a pick-purse, or thief
upon the highway, should take Mr. Jenkins money from him, and he knew who had
it, and withal, how to recover it, should Mr. Jenkin be a busy body in other
men's matters, to attempt the recovery? What a vast difference is there between
the judgment of old Hierome, In suspicione (...) quenquam esse patientem.
and young Jenkin, in this point? Hierome judges it not meet, that any man
should be patient, or sit still, under a suspicion of heresy: Judge Jenkin
judges him a busy body in other men's matters, that shall stir little or
much, in vindication of himself, in such a case. Or suppose the defamatory
Testimony of the Ministers, had spared my name and reputation; yet falling
foul upon so many precious Truths, as it does: does he deserve the reproach of
a busie-body, who shall rise up in the strength of the zeal of God, to defend
them? It seems the things of Jesus Christ, and of the eternal salvation of the
souls of men, are none of M. Jenkins matters: nor will he busy himself with
them, further than they relate unto himself, and are his proper concernments,
either in point of reputation, or of purse. Therefore (doubtless) they young
man did not understand the first word of his book: and if he understands not
his own words, I have the less reason to marvel, or be offended with him,
that he understands not mine.

His second Title is, Sect. 87.
the Busie-Bishop: to which he joins (to show, as it seems, the manifold
exubera^cie of his wit) by the dis-junctive, Or, this (in the third place) The
Visitor visited. And soon after (in his Preface) by way of indulgence to this
his Titular wit, and rare invention for his Frontispiece, having repeated some
words of mine, which were not for his tooth, he demands thus: Speak^s not my
Lord j^st as if he were in his visitation? But speaks not my young Ignaro in
all this, just as if he were in a delirium, or deliquium of understanding? O^
was it done out of a politic reach, to make himself a Metropolitan, that I
must need^ be made a Bishop, and in this capacity be visited by him?
Doubtless, if I be a Bishop, and Mr. Jenking my visitor, he must needs be an
Archbishop (at least) if not a Patriarch, or a Pope. But the poor man (I see)
is troubled with that infirmity in the eyes of his understanding, which the
Grecians call, (...); we English Moon sightednesse: and in this respect was not
able to discern a consequence, that lay fair and clear, and near enough to a
man of ordinary apprehension. So that (by the way) I have no great reason but
to believe him, when he says: I FIND not (to my remembrance) throughout his
papers, one quotation taken out either of Scriptures, Fathers, or modern
Writers, pertinently applied. It is no great marvel if a lusk, or pur-blinde
man FINDS not that which is plain enough before him, and easy to be seen and
found by others.

Speaking of my misled followers (a generation of Paracelsus his non-Adami) he
says first, Sect. 88.
that whether be escape their reproaches, Pref. p. 3.
or sustain them, he shall labor to bless God and love them. Though I much
suspect the reality of his heart in this promissory engagement, yet I accept
the intimation, which is clearly this: that if ever he blesses God, or loves
men, he must make a labor of it: the present frame and temper of his spirit it
seems) are in no more capacity to yield such fruits as these, than Thorns
are, to bring forth Grapes, or Thistles, Figs.

Secondly, he adds, that assured he is, that should be have their stroke, it
would be in the dark. This confidence of his, may very well be allowed him. For
he that is never out of the dark, may be fully assured, that if he be struck,
he shall receive the blow, or stroke, in the dark. A fish, if he can but escape
danger in the water, needs not fear trouble in any other element.

Whereas he adds, I desire them to know that I desire to say, I can die, etc.
Was the man afraid, that saying, I can die, my followers should not know, that
he desired to say it? or was he jealous, that in case such a saying should come
from him, they would suspect that he did but dissemble therein, and that it
came not from any truth of desire within him? Either of these jealousies are
extremely simple and empty. For though a man may very reasonably doubt, whether
Mr. Jenkin can do as he says, when he says, I can die: yea, and whether,
when he says, he can die, his heart does not reprove him, for so saying, as
being conscious to his tenderness in that kind: yet why saying it, he should
be thought not to desire to say it, himself (I think) cannot well imagine the
least reason. But whatsoever his intent or meaning was, the words are so
un^avoury, that no salt of any construction whatsoever will give any relish or
taste of reason unto them. And yet this Neophyte, with all his own
non-sensicall sayings in that end of the wallet, which hangs at his back,
presumes from the Tribunal of his understanding, to give judgment in cases of
sense and nonsense.

Having said, Pref. p. 3.
I can die, he adds, I cannot be silent. It seems, he is troubled with the
unhappy infirmity of that talkative man in Athens long since, of whom a wiser
man gave this character, saying of him, that he was, (...), i. unable to be
silent: but most unable to speak.

That which yet follows, Sect. 89.
is liker Mr. Jenkin than what went be-before: Pref. p. 3.
When the truths are struck at (says he) which I^^ish not to outlive. How
piously rational^ is the man in his wishes? He wishes, not to outlive him,
that lives for evermore. A very modest and mortified wish. Is he afraid, that
the truths of God, however struck at, should die? Indeed according to his
absurd sense, and notion of the word and truth of God, making them nothing but
paper and Ink, and the workmanship of men's hands, either in printing or
transcribing, they are mortal, and may die. All the Bibles in the world may be
burnt with fire, or perish otherwise: but the word and truth of God cannot be
burnt, or perish. As Jesus Christ (the substantial Word, and Truth, of God) is
the same yesterday, to day, and for ever Heb. 13. 8.
, however he be opposed, or struck at in the world: so are all his words,
whether uttered immediately by himself in the days of his flesh, or suggested
to his Penmen before, or after, by his Spirit: let m^n misscribe them,
mis-print them, mis-understand them, mis-interpret them, handle them how they
will, turn them upside down, yet will they be the same, full of the same truth,
yesterday, to day, and for ever. Is not the man (think you) a profound
Theologue, to be afraid of outliving the truths of God?

Or if his meaning be, that he wishes, not to outlive, the free, open, and
State-countenanced profession of these Truths, i. that the profession of Truth,
may be free, without danger, countenanced by the State, whilst he lives in the
world; I cannot but commend him, for not being so unnatural unto himself, as
to hate his own flesh. What carnal, formal, or lukewarm Professor is there,
that will not give the right hand of fellowship to Mr. Jenkin in this wish?

Or if his meaning be, that upon supposition, that the Truths he speaks of,
shall be publicly opposed, discountenanced, persecuted, he had rather die
before, than live to partake with the Truth in these her afflictions; this
argues, that he is no good Soldier of Jesus Christ. Thou therefore (says
Paul to Timothy) (...), endure hardness, as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ 2 Timothy 2. 3.
. And a little before: Be not thou therefore ashamed of the testimony of our
Lord, but be thou partaker of the afflictions of the Gospel 2 Timothy 1. 8.
. He does not say to him; In case the Gospel shall come to be opposed,
disgraced, hated, persecuted in the world, desire rather to die, or, wish thy
self out of the world, than to stand up in defense of it, or to partake of the
afflictions which attend upon it. If a soldier, when the enemy comes on, and
the battle is now ready to be joined, should come to his Captain, and say,
Sir, I wish rather to die than to fight: I wish I may not outlive my ease and
peace; were this gallant, or martiall-like? I perceive Mr. Jenkin has no
mind, nor courage, to follow the Truth, longer than she has Fields and
Vineyards to bestow upon him, or opportunity to make him a Captain.

When he says ( page 6.) that I cannot say that I have been opposed by them
[he speaks of himself and his Colleagues the Subscriptioners] in God way,
Sect. 90.
did he apprehend the most obvious and plain sense and importance of his words?
Or was it his intent to confess ingenuously, that the men he speaks of, never
opposed me in Gods way, i. with meekness, sobriety, strength of argument, etc.
but in their own way, viz. with passion, precipitation, peremptorinesse, or at
the best, with empty, childish, and loose arguments, which stand off from the
opinions which they pretend to prove by them, as if they were afraid to come
near them, or to own them? Of which kind of argument, Mr. Jenkin has
mustered up a small body, in his pamphlet. I might without much labor instance
in many: but by seeing only two or three play before you, you may judge of the
dexterity and valor of the whole troop. Page 28. he affirms, that by my
opinion, wherein I affirm, That if God should not make men capable of
believing, they who are condemned, would have their mouths opened against Gods
proceedings, I must needs make Gods sovereignty to be impaired with man's
ability, and to be limited to man's sinfully and voluntarily contracted
impotencie. Might he not (wel-neer) with as much semblance of reason, and
strength argue thus: If I hold that Abraham begat Isaac, I must needs make Abel
the murderer of his brother? For what greater affinity is there between my
premises and his deduction, or conclusion, drawn from them? If it be not
consistent with the wisdom of God, or with the goodness of God, to require
faith and repentance of men, unless enabled by him to exhibit and perform
them; does it any ways follow, that God must needs lose his sovereignty, by
not requiring them? Does he lose his sovereignty by not acting contrary to his
wisdom, or contrary to his goodness? Is his sovereignty or dominion over the
creatures impaired, because he does not judge it meet to command throns to bring
forth grapes, or Thistles, Figs? Confident I am, that there never was a
generation of Christians (scarce of any kind or sort of men) so positive,
peremptory and bloody in asserting their opinions, and withal so weak,
contemptible, and shallow in arguing them, as the greater part of the London
Sub-scripturients are.

Page 27. Sect. 91.
to prove the words, which I deny to be an error, viz. It Is a needless thing
for Satan to blind, if they have not eyes to see, to be very false, he
advances this apodicticall proof: For (says he) notwithstanding Satan's
making us blind, we are blind of our selves: Dicite I^ Paean: is not this a
triumphant demonstration? we are blind of our selves, therefore there is a
necessity that Satan should blind us. I fear, and partly know, that such
arguments as these, or those that are very little better, are the foundations
of a great part of Mr. Jenkins Religion, how importunely soever he ob^rudes
his reverend opinion of the Scriptures. The very truth is, that he, and many
more, speak highly of the Scriptures, not because they loves Truth, or the
mind of God, and of Christ, contained in the Scriptures, or care much for the
propagation or knowledge of these in the world, but to procure the greater
reverence and authority to their own minds and opinions, how unworthy and
godless soever, by persuading the people, that they dwell in sacred sh^ines,
and therefore can be none other but the Truths of God. See a clear instance
hereof, in the progress of the late mentioned argument: as simple as it is, it
must be fathered on the Scriptures, yea Scripture upon Scripture must be cited
(or rather abused) in the justification of it: according to Scripture, (says
he) which says, That nature all men cannot know the things of the Spirit of
God, 1 Cor. 2. 14. and yet that the God of this world has blinded them, 2 Cor.
4. 4 When the Scripture says, that a nature all man is carried captive by Satan
(it is only Mr. Jenkin that says this, the Scripture says it not: he has
practiced the art of falsification so long, in citing my words, that his right
hand cannot forget her cunning in citing the words of the holy Ghost himself,
when he has a lame opinion to gratify) 2 Timothy 2. 26. Does it therefore follow,
he is not a slave to since, because to Satan? In this piece of discourse, the
intentions of these men in lifting up the Scriptures, and so in using of them,
may be clearly seen, unless the veil of their ignorance may be conceived to
hide them. He charge me ( page 34.) according to the known tenderness of his
conscience, that still I would have fain the Scriptures counted heretical with
me; In which saying alone, there is more arogant and desperate blasphemy, than
can well be supposed incident to any other man, than him that spoke it. For
does it not clearly suppose, that the Scriptures themselves must be heretical,
if they should teach or hold forth any other doctrine than what M. Jenkin
teaches? And if so, then not the Scriptures, or their authority; but M. Jenkin
his judgment and authority, must be the touchstone of Truth and Error: and the
Scriptures must be looked upon as Heretical, if they shall presume to teach or
assert any thing contrary to him; and consequently, must submit themselves to
the regulation of his judgment, in their sense and meaning, and in whatsoever
they affirm. But whether I would fain have the Scriptures counted heretical,
with me, or no; evident it is, that M. Jenkin would fain draw them into
communion and fellowship with himself, in a most absurd, insulse, and unsavory
opinion; in going about to prove from them, that he that is as blind, as a man
that is dead, had need yet to be blinded by Satan, or may further, or to a
greater degree of blindness, be blinded by him. As for that Scrip. 1 Cor. 2.
14. by which he seeks to prove it, it appears by his producing it for such a
purpose, that he understands little of it. For first, evident it is from the
series of the context, that by (...), translated, the natural man, is not
meant, the man that is simply or merely natural, or unregenerate, or that has
nothing at all of Christ in him, but such a kind of men, whom two or three
verses after (viz. cap. 3. 1. 3.) he twice expresses by the name of, Carnal;
whom notwithstanding he calls Babes in Christ. So that evident it is, that by
natural there, and carnal here, he means only weak Christians, such as for
the present had made little progress in the knowledge of Christ, and of the
Gospel. This interpretation is further confirmed, 1o. from hence, viz that one
and the same kind of person, whom he calls spiritual, is opposed both to the
natural man there (as cap. 2. v. 15.) and likewise to the carnal man, here (
cap. 3 1.) 2o. From hence, that as the Gospel speaks frequently, of two kinds
(or degrees rather) of Christians, weak, and strong, expressing them by
several appellations; so the one sort of them, viz the strong, is (amongst
other denominations) frequently expressed by the term, spiritual. If any man
think himself to be a Prophet, or Spiritual [i. excellent, and of a greater
growth in knowledge than ordinary] let him acknowledge that the things I write
unto you, are the commandments of the Lord, 1 Cor. 14. 37. So again: Brethren,
if any man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual, [i. more able than
your fellows,] restore such an one, etc. Gal. 6. 1. To pass by other
instances of like import; And I (Brethren) could not speak unto you, as unto
spiritual [i. as unto strong, or understanding Christians] but as unto
carnal, even as unto babes in Christ, 1. Cor. 3. 1. So then the word
Spiritual, when spoken of persons, or spiritual man, being never found in the
writings of this Apostle opposed, to the mere natural, or carnal man, but
very frequently to the weak, and less understanding Christian, it is no ways
reasonable to imagine such an opposition here: the scope and carriage of the
context, no ways requiring it, but rising up in opposition to it.

The reason (by the way) why the weak Christian is, Sect. 92.
and well may be, termed natural, or carnal, is, because he retains much of
the mere natural, or carnal man in him: he is still under the guidance of
many false principles and notions of things, which are more genenerally found
in mere natural, and carnal men; and consequently his dispositions and
practices are in a great measure like unto theirs also. A denomination may
truly, and with sufficient propriety of speech, be given, upon a graduall
participation only of a form, though it be not inherent in the highest, or
most perfect degree of it. As for example, Silver is called white, though it be
not as white as snow: and a man or woman, may be called black, though they be
not as black as a Negro. So a man may be termed an ignorant man, not only when
he knows nothing at all, but when he knows little in comparison of what he
might, and ought to know, and what others do know. In like manner, men may be
termed natural, or carnal, not because they are wholly, or altogether either
the one, or the other; but because there is much of that genius and temper,
many of the properties and principles of those, who are altogether such, found
remaining in them. The Apostle himself gives this account unto his Corinthians,
why he called them carnal. For having charged them with being carnal, that it
might appear to them, that' he had done them no wrong in this charge, verse 3.
he demands of them, and reasons with them thus: For where is there is among
you, envying, and strife, and divisions, are ye not carnal, and walk as men?
Implying, that since they had so much of mere natural and carnal men in
them, or amongst them, as they clearly discovered by such ways and doings as
these; since they so far communicated with them in their natures and
dispositions, they might well be content to partake with them in their names
also.

If it be here objected, Sect. 93.
a minori ad majus, thus; If weak Christians, who have the Spirit of God in
some measure, are not yet able to know ordiscern the things of the Spirit of
God, how can we imagine, that the mere natural man should do it? I answer
briefly (for the present, expecting an opportunity of further enlargement)
evident it is, from the tenor and carriage of the context, that the Apostle
does not (in this passage of Scripture) speak simply, or in general, of the
things of God, nor particularly of things simply necessary to be known or
believed, unto salvation, but only of the deep things of God (as they are
called verse. 10) and such which the Corinthians by reason of their infancy, or
b^b^ship in Christ, were not (for the present) able to bear. Such things of
God, as before (viz. verse 6. and 7. of this chapter) he had called, wisdom,
and the wisdom of God; and afterward, (viz. c. 3. v. 2.) he calls meat
(opposed to milk) i. strong meat; by milk, understanding the obvious and plain
truths of the Gospel, such as are easy of apprehension even to those that are
carnal, and babes in Christ. Now men merely natural, may be incapable of
these, as a great part of the believing Corinthians themselves were: and yet be
some ways capable and apprehensive of such of the things of God, the knowledge
whereof is of absolute necessity unto salvation. And that they are very capable
(I mean in respect of knowing and discerning) of many of the things of God, as
generally of the duties commanded in the moral law, of his eternal power and
Godhead manifested in the creation, of such rational grounds, arguments and
demonstrations, by which the original and descent of the Scripture, and
particularly of the Gospel, from God, are usually argued and proved by learned
Divines, and others; is a thing so manifest, that me thinks Mr. Jenkin
himself, though he have a rare gift of denying any thing that makes not for
his turn, should not deny it. But

2o. Sect. 94.
That power, or ability, which the Apostle here denies to his Animal, or
natural man (who ever he means by him) of knowing the things of God, or of the
Spirit of God, may well, nay (of necessity) must be understood only of an
immediate, actual, or present capacity, or power. So that his meaning may be
only this: The Animal, or Natural man, whilst he continues merely such
[animall, or naturall] or in sensu composito, has no principle, or power,
directly, actually, and de praesenti, to know savingly, the things of the
Spirit of God. But this proves not, but that such a man, animal, or natural,
may have such principles even for the present, which by a due and regular
improvement, and such whereof, by the never-denied assistance of God at first,
he is very capable, may advance and rise through the ordinary blessing of God
in such cases, into such a capacity, or power, as is contended for. A child,
or youth of ten or twelve years of age, cannot (happily) construe, or understand
a chapter in the Hebrew Bible, or lift a great weight, which requires the
strength of a man to heave it, whilst he remains yet a child: he has no
immediate or actual power to do either of these; yet such a power, or
principle he has in reference unto both, by a regular employment and
improvement whereof, he will, or may in time, according to the ordinary course
of Gods providence, be able to do either. A man that stands upon the floor of
a low room, has no power of stepping into the upper room, immediately; but he
has a power of conveying himself, if he pleases, by the opportunity of
stairs made for such a purpose. The Apostle himself, in this very context of
Scripture (viz. cap. 3. 2.) supposes that these Corinthians, who being
carnal, and babes in Christ, were NOT for the present) ABLE to bear meat, had
yet such a principle, or capacity in them, by the growth and strengthening
whereof, they might in time come to such an ability. I have fed you (says he)
with milk, and not with meat: For HITHERTO ye were not able to bear it,
neither YET NOW are ye able. In that he says to them, that they were not YET
able to bear it, as being Babes, he plainly implies, that by using means to
grow in grace, and in the knowledge of Christ, they might in time through the
ordinary blessing of God (ordinary I mean in such cases) come to be able.

3o. Sect. 95.
(And lastly) whether the place be understood, either of weak Christians, or
of mere natural men (though the former be less questionable) as well the
one, as the other, may (according to the frequent Dialect, and phrase of
Scripture) be said to be unable, or, to have no power to know, or to discern
the things of God, either because of that great difficulty, which lies in the
way of such men to attain the knowledhe or discerning of these things; or else
because of that great averseness or indisposition, which is incident to both
these sorts of men, to steer a course of means proper or likely, to render
them capable of such knowledge, or discerning.

For first, as the Scripture is wont to express a number, next to none, (I
mean, a very few, a number inconsiderable) by the word, none, simply; There is
NONE that does good, etc. Psalm. 14. 3. and elsewhere; and so likewise in
greater sums or accounts, to omit the fractions, or odd unites, expressing
only the round number (whereof there are many examples in Scripture ready
enough to be found) so likewise when a thing is very unlikely to come to pass,
and (as it were) near to an impossibility, it oft-times takes no notice of
those few degrees of probability, or possibility, under which it lies, but
calls it (simply) a thing unpossible, or which cannot be done. Thus Christ
having first said to his Disciples ( Matthew. 19. 23.) Verily I say unto you,
that a rich man shall hardly enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, in the next
verse, to carry up their apprehensions to the due height and pitch of the
difficulty, hardness, or unlikelihood of the thing, he expresses it by a
similitude importing an unpossibility. And again I say unto you, it is easier
for a Camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter
into the Kingdom of God. Yet that he does not here speak of a Logical, i. a
simple and absolute impossibility, but of a moral only, is evident from verse.
26. where he restraines the impossibility of it unto men, and supposes it
possible enough with God: With men this is impossible, but with God all things
are possible. Now that which is Logically, or simply impossible, is impossible
with God himself, as well as with men. And that which in this verse he affirms
to be impossible with men, v. 23. he had represented only as very difficult,
and what was very seldom likely to come to pass. Verily I say unto you,
(...), etc. i. that very hardly, or with great difficulty, will, or shall a
rich man enter into the Kingdom of heaven. Many times the rareness only, or
the great unlikelihood of an effect, is expressed, sometimes by the difficulty,
otherwise by the impossibility of it. The like passage is to be seen, Mark 10.
23, 24. Thus when the Lord expostulated with his people after this manner, Jer.
13. 23. CAN the Ethiopian change his skin? or the Leopard his spots? Then may
ye also do good, who are accustomed to do evil; he seems to imply (as to the
manner of the expression) a kind of impossibility in them to repent, or turn
unto God. Which impossibility notwithstanding is not to be measured, or
computed by the strict definition of what is simply and precisely impossible
(for in that sense it was not impossible for them to repent, notwithstanding
their long habituated custom in sinning, as appears by the examples of those,
who have repented upon such terms as these) but only by the nature and
definition of what is marvellously unlikely, and what lies (as it were) in the
borders or confines of an impossibility. This interpretation fully agrees with
Austines notion in the case. How hardly (says he) or with what difficultly
does such a man rise, (or get up, meaning, to repentance, or a course of
well-doing) who is pressed (or kept down) with the heavy weight of an evil
custom (lying on him.) And yet he rises upon a great voice Quam difficulti^e
surg^, quem malae consuetud^^s moles premit? sed tamen surgit post vocem magnam.
, i. after some (...) consideration, or motive to repentance has taken an
effectual hold upon his judgment and conscience, by the gracious
interposition and cooperation of the Spirit of God. To instance only once
more (for the present) the multitude of the Saints spoken of, Revel. 79 is said
to be so great, that NO man COVLD number them: i. it was very difficult and
hard, not simply unpossible for men to number them. For it is not simply
unpossible for men to number any number that is finit: and that the number of
these Saints was not simply infinite, appears from hence, viz. that elsewhere
in Scripture they are called, few, a little flock, See also 1 Kings 3. 8.
etc. viz. comparatively, in respect of the far surpassing number of those
which perish; which number, the great surplussage of it notwithstanding above
the other, is not simply infinite. The line of this interpretation is to be
stretched over very many other places of Scripture of like expression and
phrase with those, in which instance has been given. According to the tenor of
this exposition (which is, as we have heard, fully consisting with the familiar
Dialect, and frequent manner of speech in the Scripture) those expressions in
the passage in hand, Cannot receive, Cannot know, Cannot discern, etc. do not
import a simple, or utter impossibility in the men spoken of, to receive, know
or discern the things of God; but a difficulty only which no man I know of,
denies. Again

Secondly (as to the other particular mentioned) it is very considerable both
to the clearing of the place in hand, Sect. 96.
and very many other place^ also of like notion and phrase in the Scriptures,
that the word POWER, whether formally, and in the letter, expressed, or implied
only, is in very many places to be taken in a kind of metaphorical and
unproper sense, viz. for a moral POWER, that is, for such a principle or
disposition in the will, which renders a man actually inclimble and propense to
do such, or such a thing, and not for a POWER of efficiencie, or execution,
which (in strictness and propriety of phrase) is POWER only. And again the
present or actual want of such a principle, or disposition, is frequently
expressed by the want of POWER to do the thing. When it i^ said of the Lord
Christ himself, that being in his own country, He COVLD there DO NO mighty
work Mark 6 5
, etc. It cannot be imagined that the arm of his Divine omnipotency, by which
he wrought all his great works and miracles elsewhere, was at all shortened in
his own country, more than it was in other places, or that it was Logically
unpossible for him to work as mighty works here, as elsewhere. Therefore the
meaning of the expression is only this, that by reason of the exceeding
disrespective and unworthy carriage of his contrymen toward him, he had no
mind, will, or disposition, to show unto them the glory of his power by doing
any mighty work amongst them, but by reason hereof, during his abode with them,
was as if he had had no such power, nor been able to any mighty work at all.
Thus when Christ says to the Church of Ephesus, I know thy works, and thy
labor, and thy patience, and how thou CAN NOT bear with them that are evil
Rev. ^ 2.
, etc. his meaning is not, that it was logically, or simply impossible for
these persons to bear with those that were evil; but clearly this, viz. to
acknowledge that they were zealousl^ and vehemently inclined and bent, to
censure and restrain those that were evil amongst them; by reason of which
inclination, they constantly dealt as effectually, as severely with those that
were evil amongst them, either in reclaiming them, or disclaiming them (by
casting them out from amongst them) as if it had been simply impossible for
them to tolerate or bear with them, being evil. In the like construction and
phrase the Apostle Paul expresses himself to the Thessalonians thus:
Wherefore when we could no longer forbear, we thought good, etc. And a
little after: For this cause, when I COVLD no longer forbear, I sent to know
your faith 1 Thessalonians 3. 1, 5.
, etc. His intent was not to inform them of any thing that was simply and
absolutely impossible for him either to do or to forbear: but only to
express the greatness of his affection toward them, and the vehement longing
of his desire after their establishment and comfort in their faith. To open
only one instance more, and to content our selves with a brief pointing at
many others; when the Apostle John writes thus; Whosoever is born of God,
sins not, for his seed remains in him: NEITHER CAN HE sin 1 John 3 ^.
, etc. his meaning is not, that such a man wants faculties, or Powers, either
of body, or of soul, wherewith to perpetrate, execute, or practice sin, in
case he had a desire or mind thereunto: but that that inclination or
propensnesse of will, which formerly abounded in him toward the commission and
practice of sin, is by the influence or working of the seed of grace, by which
he is born again, so broken and disabled in him, that notwithstanding he has
all the same power, or powers (properly so called) which other men have, to
perpetrate and commit sin, yet ordinarily, and willingly he sins no more, than
if he had no power at all to sin: there is an abhorrencie or great alienation
of heart and soul in him, from sin.

Very many places there are of like construction and phrase, Sect. 97.
besides these, which can admit of none other interpretation. How then ( says
Joseph) CAN I do this great wickedness, and sin against God Gen 39. 9.
Ye CANNOT ( says Joshua to the people) serve the Lord your God: for he is an
holy God Jer. 24. 19.
The people CANNOT come up to mount Sinai ( says Moses speaking unto God) for
thou have charged us, saying, set bounds Exo. 19. 23.
, etc. The evil ( says Jeremy concerning his Figs) very evil, that CANNOT
he eaten, they are so evil Jer. 24. 3.
And I CANNOT ( says Lot to the Angel) escape to the mountain, lest some evil
take me Genesis 19. 19.
, etc. We CANNOT (say Laban and Bethuel to Abraham's servants) speak unto thee,
bad or good Genesis 24. 50.
, And they said ( the Shepherds of Haran unto Jacob) we CANNOT [meaning,
water the sheep] until all the flocks be gathered together Genesis 29 8.
We CANNOT (say the sons of Jacob to Shechem and Hamor) do this thing to
give our sister to one that is uncircumcised Genesis 34. 14.
, etc. It is said of Joseph's brethren, that they hated him, and could not speak
peaceably unto him Genesis 37. 4.
. We cannot go down ( said the same persons to their Father) if our youngest
brother go with us, then will we go down Genesis 44. 26.
. Of Joseph himself it is said (a little after) that he COULD NOT refrain
himself before all them that stood before him Genesis 45. 1.
, etc. The Magicians COVLD NOT stand before Moses, because of the boyles Exodus
9. 11.
. It B^l^k would give me this house full of silver and gold, ( says Balaam) I
CANNOT go beyond the word of the Lord Numb. 22. 18. and 24 13.
. He is such a son of BELIAL ( say Nabals servants of their master) that a
man CANNOT speak to him 1 Samuel 25.
. I am doing a great work. ( says Nehemiah) so that I CANNOT come down Neh.
6. 3.
. CAN that which is unsavory ( says Job) be eaten without salt Job. 6. 6.
? Parallel to to these instances in the old Testament, are these following, in
the New: CAN the children of the bride-chamber mourn, so long as the
Bridegroom is with them Mat. 9. 15.
? How CAN ye, being evil, speak good things? Mat. 12. 34.
? Are ye ABLE to drink of the cup that I shall drink often? etc. Mat. 20. 22.
Either how CAN thou say to thy Brother, Brother, let me pull out the more
that is in thine eye Luke 6. 42.
? etc. How CAN ye believe, which receive honor one of another Joh. 5. 44.
? No man CAN come unto me, except the Father which has sent me, draw him Joh.
6. 44. 45.
. Therefore they COVLD NOT believe Joh. 12. 39.
. Even the Spirit of Truth, whom the world CANNOT receive Joh. 14. 17.
etc. And I, Brethren, COULD NOT speak unto you as unto spiritual 1 Cor. 3. 1.
, etc. So then, they that are in the flesh, CANNOT please God Romans 8. 8.
. Who CAN have compossion on the ignorant Heb. 9. 2.
, etc. How can he love God whom he has not seen 1 John 4. 20.
? In all these places (and many more of like character with them) by an ability
or power of doing things, whether expressed, or implied, whether affirmed or
denied unto men, is only meant such a moral power as I spoke of; an actual
propension or inclination in the will toward the doing them. Which kind of
Power men may be without, and want, and yet have a sufficiency of power
otherwise to furnish themselves (by a diligent and regular course of meane^)
with such a power. As they (John 5. 44.) who by receiving honor one of
another, were disabled (for the present) from believing, had notwithstanding
such a power, I mean, such principles of knowledge and conscience, by a due
excitement and improvement whereof, they were able to have removed the
impediment of ambition and vainglory out of the way, and consequently to have
believed. For (doubtless) it was both Reason and Experience, that taught the
Heathen Poet this Truth: Nemo adeo forus est, Horat.
ut non mitescere possit,
Si modo culturae patientem accommodet aurem. i.
No man so fierce or furious is,
But he attain to meekness may;
If that a patient ear he please
To wholesome discipline to lay.


Nor ought that Idiome, Sect. 98.
or phrase of Scripture, wherein the present inclination, or bent of the will
in reference to an action or course, is signified by a power, or ability to do
or practice accordingly, seem strange, or any ways hand; since it is but the
familiar Dialect of our own language. When we have a great unwillingnesse, or
averseness of mind to the doing of a thing, we ordinarily express our selves
thus, We CANNOT do it: and it may with good propriety of speech be said, that
a covetous man CANNOT do liberally or bountifully: an angry or proud man,
being proked, cannot express himself meekly, or humbly, etc. In such
expressions as these, we do not imply, or deny, but that the men, whose wills
for the present, stand strongly bent a contrary way, have yet a power (properly
so called) to do the actions: yea and have (as has been said) such power,
such ability of reason, judgment, and understanding, by a regular engagement
whereof accordingly, they may dissolve and alter the present frame of their
hearts, and bend their wills quite another way.

By this time, Sect. 99.
the Reader (I trust) fully understands, how little Mr. Jenkin understands of
that Scripture, 1 Corinthians. 2. 14. The natural man knows not the things of
the Spirit of God, by which he seeks to confute that assertion of mine, viz
that it were needless for Satan to blind the eyes of men, if men were
naturally blind, and totally incapable of the things of God. Poor man! It is
evident by his Scriblings, and frivolous quotations of Scripture, that he is
but a raw Student in the Scriptures, does not weigh or ponder contexts, or
carriages of Arguments, nor mind the propriety or import of
Scripture-expressions. He tells me (page 30.) that I have a longwinded style,
and a foggie conceptus, that I cannot write a slight notion, which may be
couched in four lines, under thirty-foure; and hereupon lays his command
upon me, to Be quicker hereafter. Because. Mr. Jenkin himself still makes more
haste than good speed, he thinks others should do very virtuously to follow
his example herein. It is a true saying, De facili pronunciar, qui ad pauca
respicit: he that considers little, may soon be ready with his answer; and they
that speak English proverbs are wont to say, that a short horse is soon curried.

I remember a story in Plutarch to this purpose: A Painter, who though a
Bungler in his Art, yet being vainglorious, and sufficiently conceited of his
skill, brings several Tables, or pieces of work, to show to a master-workman
of the same profession (of his acquaintance) and (desirous to ^ast of the sweet
mor^^ll of applause from such an hand) declares to him with what celecity and
quickness of hand, he had performed them, and tells him, that within such a
space of time, he had dispatched them all. But (replies his friend to him) are
these all thou did in that time? wittily reproving his vanity, and
affectation of applause and intimating withal, the slightness and
inconsiderablenesse of his work. Mr. Jenkin, Mr. Jenkin, it is very easy to
be quick, but exceeding hard to be substantial and through. You young men
can feast vitreum vas lambendo, only with licking the cut-side of the glass:
but wiser men must pultem attingere, come at the meat that is within; or else
they cannot be satisfied. Nor is it any great marvel, that you complain of
long-windednesse in my style: a broken-winded horse thinks a short journey
long, and informs his Rider accordingly, in a harsh complaining gutturall
Dialect every step (almost) that he takes. And for the Fogginesse of my
Conceptus, had a wiser man made the observation, the consideration of it might
have taken some hold upon me: but colors need not regard the censures and
disparagements of blind men. I confess Mr. Jenkin his conceptus, or conceit of
himself, is more elevated and clear than mine: but his conceptive faculty, of
the nature, truth, cause, reasons, grounds, and connexions of things, is so
foggy dark, and gross, that four hundred lines will not serve him to bring
forth a very slight and sl^nder notion indeed with any clearness or evidence
of truth. But I had rather he should discover his weakness himself, than I:
only I desire to give him some further assistance toward so laudable a work.
And upon this account

I desire him seriously to consider, Sect. 100.
whether this demand, or (command rather, page 32.) sounds weakness, or
strength: In your next tell me in what places Peter and Paul assert, that a
natural man's impotencie excuses him from doing his duty, whether in Romans 9.
19, 20. where we are forbidden to dispute against God; Or in Romans 3. 19. --
Every mouth shall be stopped. How ridiculously irrelative are these demands to
his purpose, or to any occasion administered by me? Do I any where hold it
fort^ (or any thing of affinity with it) that either Peter or Paul should
assert, that a natural man's impotencie excuses him from doing his duty? Or is
it not the express and clear tenor of my opinion (in this point) that there
is no such impote^cy in a natural man, which does excuse him from doing his
duty: and and that men are therefore inexcusable before God, who do not their
duty, because he has sufficiently in abled them to do it? Might not I then as
reasonably say to Mr. Jenkin, Tell me in your next, in what place Peter and
Paul assert, that Iannes and Iambres were excellent Prophets of the Lord, and
that Balaam was a holy and righteous man? whether in 2 Timothy 38. where Paul says
thus: Now as Iannes and Iambres withstood Moses, etc. or in 2 Pet. 2. 15. where
this Apostle writes thus: Which have forsaken the right way, and have gone
astray, following the way of Balaam the son of Bosor, who loved the wages of
unrighteousness, etc. As absurdly ridiculous is that also which follows in
Mr. Ienkins Bishop: In the mean time your old friend, Mr. Bucer sends you word
by me, that our impotencie and want of strength to do any good at all, will
prove a vain excuse. Well may Mr. Bucer employ Mr. Ienkin to carry such
frivolous and impertinent messages as these: I know not where he could have
found a man that might better be spared, either to pill st^awes, or to throw
stones against the wind, or to carry such messages, which nothing concern
those to whom they are sent. For do not I very well know without information
either from Mr. Bucer, or his filly pragmaticall agent (Mr. Ienkin) that
impotency and want of strength to do any good at all, will prove a vain
excuse? Or do I not clearly and positively affirm, even in those passages
transcribed by the London Scribes, things every ways consonant hereunto? When
Christ said to Thomas, Reach hither thy finger: and again, Reach hither thine
hand, and put it into my side John 20.
; if Thomas should have excused himself from doing either the one, or the
other, upon this ground, that he had neither fingers, nor hands, doubtless
this had been a vain excuse. Why? certain it is, that Thomas had both fingers
and hands. In like manner, in case we should plead impotency or want of
strength to do good, it must needs prove a vain plea, or excuse. Why? because
every untruth pleaded by way of excuse before God, must needs prove a vain
excuse, yea and more, or worse than vain; the righteousness of God not only
not admitting any untruth to mediate with him in any man's behalf, but also
deeply abhorring those, who shall presume to come before him in the name of
such a mediation.

Whereas I complain, Sect. 101.
that one while, and in one place, the London Heresy (...) deface and mangle
those passages of mine, which they pretend to transcribe, by suppressing and
leaving out what they please, yea very emphaticall, and material words and
clauses; in a other place, that to render me as a man prodigiously erroneous,
and to make me heretical in folio, they swell and bulk their transcriptions by
citing similitudes, parables, and resemblances also; Mr. Ienkin (page 30.)
profoundly censures this deportment of mine, as a deep misdemeanour in these
words: The Subscribers have not (as yet) the Art of pleasing you: even now they
cited the words too sparingly: now, too copiously: you are ever complaining,
etc. Might not the tyrant Procrustes, having first cut off the feet of a man to
make him shorter than he was, and afterward stretched him upon a rack to make
him longer than he was, in case this man should have complained of his cruelty
toward him thus differently acted, as reasonably and as Christianly have
replied unto him; even now you complained of me, that I made you too short, now
you complain that I make you too long: you are ever complaining: I have not the
art of pleasing you, etc

I conclude my present demonstration with another brief touch upon his
deplorable weakness, Sect. 102.
and insufficiency in managing the Scriptures. Page 31. to prove, that the
Scriptures deny, that they who perish, have power to believe, and repent, he
cites (among other Scriptures every whit as impertinent) without strength, Rom
5. 6. God works in us to will and to do. Certainly the man understands
nothing of the sense and meaning either of the one place, or the other. In the
former, we are said to be without strength, or rather to have been without
strength, not in respect of our condition as repaired, relieved, and stated by
Christ, but in respect of that condition, whereinto we were exposed by the
sin of Adam, and whereinto we should certainly have perished, had not Christ
interposed by his death for our deliverance. The tenor of the Apostles words is
express: For when we were yet without strength, in due time Christ died for
the ungodly. So that this Scripture, affirming men to have been weak, or
without strength, i. unable to help or save themselves from death, without the
death of Christ for them; rather supposes them endued with, or as having
strength in this kind, by means of the death of Christ than otherwise Therefore
he that should thus reason; the sun now shines: therefore it is midnight;
should draw the true portraicture of Mr. Jenkin his reasoning from the
Scripture in hand. For to prove, that the Scriptures deny strength in those who
perish, to believe, and repent, he brings a Scripture, which (as has been
showed) supposes it.

Nor does his latter Scripture any otherwise relate to his purpose, than the
East unto the West. For Gods working in us, both to will and to do, clearly
supposes, that men have power both to will and to do; so far is it from
denying it, or supposing the contrary. Yea it is Gods working in us both to
will and to do, that enableth us both to the one, and the other. The Apostle
himself earnestly presses and persuades the Philippians, to will and to do
(in effect) upon this ground, viz. that it is God (...), that is working in
them to will, and to do, of his good pleasure. Wherefore (my beloved) as ye
have always obeyed not as in my presence only, but now much more in my
absence, work out your salvation with fear and trembling. For it is God that
works, and. Phil. 2. 12, 13. From the connection between the exhortation, or
duty laid down (in the former verse) and the motive, in the latter, evident it
is, that Gods working in us both to will and to do, does not necessarily
suppose, that either to will or to do, are actually, and without any more to
do wrought in us: no more, than his purging Jerusalem of old, necessarily
supposed, that herefore Jerusalem was actually purged. Because I HAVE PVRGED
thee (says he to Jerusalem) and THOU WAST NOT PVRGED, thou shall not be
purged from thy filthiness etc. Ezekiel. 24. 13. As God purged Jerusalem of old,
and yet Jerusalem was not purged: in the like sense, and after the same manner,
God works, or is working both to will, and to do in many, who yet neither
will, nor do. For the understanding whereof, Mr. Jenkin shall do well to take
knowledge of the Scripture Dialect and phrase in such expressions; as viz. that
when an effect depends upon the joint concurrence of two, or more causes for
the actual production of it, it is very usual and frequent in the Scriptures,
when any one of these causes have contributed that efficiencie, which is proper
for it to exhibit toward the production hereof, to mention the effect as
produced by this cause, though it be not actually produced, the other cause, or
causes, not having given in their influence or concurrence hereunto. As for
example, The purging of Jerusalem (lately mentioned) was an effect, which
depended, partly upon God, or his interposall by his Word, Spirit, Mercies,
Judgment, etc. partly upon Jerusalem her self, in comporting with God in
those administrations, wherein he applied himself unto her, for her purging,
and so in suffering her self to be purged by him. Now because God had done
that, which was necessary or proper for him to do toward this effect of
purging her, he had for a long time stroven with her, by his Word, by his
Spirit, by his long suffering, by his judgments, to bring her to repentance,
in this respect the effect it self, (I mean, the purging of Jerusalem) is
attributed unto him, though it was not effected or brought to pass, Jerusalem
her self denying, or withholding that, which was necessary on her part, for
the actual producing of it, viz. her consenting unto the motions and
applications of God unto her, for her purging. Because I here purged thee,
(says God unto her) i. have done all that which was proper or meet for me to
do toward the purging of thee; and thou wast not purged, i. deniedst to join
or comply with me in thy purgation, therefore thou shall not be purged etc.
Upon the same consideration and ground, our savior expresse^^ himself thus,
Matthew. 5. 32. Whosoever shall put away his wife, except it be for fornication,
causes her to commit adultery, i. does that which is proper, apt, and likely
to cause her to commit adultery, whether de facto she commits adultery, or
no. For he does not suppose, that every woman put away upon such terms, must
of necessity therefore commit adultery: yet he that puts her away so, is
said to cause her to commit adultery. Thus (in Paul's language) he is said to
destroy his brother Romans 4. 15, 30.
, who does that, which is apt or likely to destroy him, whether he be actually
destroyed, or no. In like manner and phrase of speech, God may be, and is said
to work in men, (...), to will, and to do [viz that which is good, holy, and of
a saving import] though men actually neither will, or do such things, viz.
because he acts or works that, in, and upon men, which is very proper, and
full of efficacy and power, to prevail with men, both to will and do such
things. For men actually to will and do things accompanying salvation, depends
partly upon God, in respect of the necessity of the motion, and assistance of
his Spirit, thereunto; partly upon men, in respect of a like necessity of their
concurrence, and consenting unto the motions of the Spirit God, in that
behalf. Now when God does his part, I mean, that which is proper and meet for
him to do toward these great and blessed effects in men, whether men act
their parts or no, he is neververthelesse said, to work in them both the will
and the deed. I^ Mr. Jenkin desires more instances of that propriety of
Scripture Phrase, by the analogy and consideration whereof his inference from
Philip. 2. 13. is quite overthrown, he may please at his leisure to have
recourse, to John 10. 32. Matthew. 5. 24. Romans 2. 5. 1 John 2. 16. 1 Timothy 4 16.
In all these, and many more places like unto them, he shall flude several
effects attributed unto their partial causes respectively, not because
actually produced by them, but only because these causes contribute their
respective virtues or efficacies toward the production or raising of them. So
that Mr. Jenkin in citing Scriptures to prove, that men who perish, have no
power to repent, or believe, shows himself to be a man of the same line of
understanding with those, who should either bring water to drown an Eele, or
fire to imbase Gold.

Though the particulars which have been insisted upon, and argued, be but as a
first fruits, in respect of the full harvest of absurdities, which might be
gathered from Mr. Jenkin his Busie-Bishop; yet I suppose them demonstrative in
abundance of their conclusion, viz. that the man is extremely shallow, empty,
and depressed in his intellectuals, and no ways meet for his engagement. So
that if Sion College mean to have their work done to any purpose, alius
quaerendus est artifex, they must seek some better workman. Mr. Jenkin has
done his good will: but what is this to their relief?

4 Mr. Jenkin evinceth himself defective even in matters of Civility, Modesty,
and common Ingeunity, by such deportments and passages, as those taken notice
of in the sequel of this present Discourse.
WHen a young man renounceth principles of Civility,, Sect. 103.
Modesty, and common Ingenuity, he gives hostages unto Satan, and secureth
him, that he will never atchieve (nor indeed cordially attempt) any great
matters against him, or his kingdom. Those strains in the Busie-Bishop, which
represent the Author, as a man, in whom, though a young man, Nature herself
takes no pleasure, but leaves him in the hand of the degenerous and ignoble
impressions of incivility, male-pertnesse, and shameless scurrility, are of a
sadder consideration to a spirit truly Christian and considering, than all the
rest. Humanum est errare: to err, mistake, and mis-understand, is nothing but
what is incident to men, as men, and so to the best of men: but to outface,
forge, falsify against knowledge, to vilify our Superiors, to trample upon
our betters with the foot of insolency and disdain, to boast of the key of
knowledge when we are grossly ignorant, to assume the seat of Judicature, and
pass confident awards in matters which we understand not, no nor care to
enquire into; doubtless such misdemeanors as these, are not the waves or
practices but but of men (...) (as Chrysostom speaks) i. who are declined
and bowed down toward the nature and disposition of unreasonable creatures.
Now whether several of these ill-portending symptoms be not found upon Mr.
Jenkin, I appeal to these, and many such like unclean touches and
breakings-out as these, in his Busie-Bishop.

Page 41. Sect. 104.
he calls Testardus, a French Minister, and Pastor of the Reformed Church of
Orleance, a man that discovers more soliditie and worth, more soundness of
judgment and understanding in the Scriptures, and matters of Divinity, in one
page of his writings, than Mr. Jenkin has done in all that ever he has
written, yea and a far more Christian temper and Genius, than he; yet this man
he avileth with the scurrilous character of a Dough-bak'd Testardus. They that
are not burnt as black as a coal in the fiery furnace of High-Presbytery, are
(it seems) in M. Jenkins account Dough baked. Page 35. as if all his own
ind^tings were of an Angelical refinement and allay, he calls my writings,
Heretical Scriblings. Modestlessime! Is not he, who understands not a piece of
plain English, a competent judge of Scriblings? and he who is as ignorant of
the mind of God in the Scriptures, as M. Jenkin, Secun^u^ allegata and probata,
has been evinced to be, a like judge of Heresy? Page 23. He flings himself
into this hypocritical and basely-calumniating passion: How does my soul
pity your poor deluded followers, who have such a soul starving, and soul
poisoning Shepherd set over them: The Lord knows, I hardly write these things
with dry eyes. What M. Jenkin says, in saying that he hardly writes with day
eyes, I find no great obstruction in the way of my believing; considering that
children oftener cry out of anger and mere vexation, when they cannot have
their wills, than out of pity. I believe (and not without ground) that if the
inside of M. Jenkins heart were turned outward, there would be seen in it,
wrath, envy, and indignation in abundance at the prosperity and flourishing
estate of the souls of those persons, whom he (notwithstanding the earnest
solicitations of his conscience to forbear) pretends to pity, as if they had
as^ul starving and soul poisoning Shepherd over them. But the spirit, which
pitied the followers of Christ, and his Apostles, as deceived, 1 John 7. 12.
47. 2 Cor. 6. 8.
deluded, and drawn aside, by them, I see is not quenched to this day. It M.
Jenkins courage had not failed him, when he should have entered the lists with
some of those my deluded followers he speaks of, he would (I believe) have
found no great symptoms upon them of their being fed by a soul starving, or
soul-poysoning Shepherd. Yea those very fears which ceized on him, and
dissuaded him from the attempts when his great words and public challenges
called him to the conflict, give sufficient evidence against him, that he had
not the consent of his conscience, when he reviled me with the stigmaticall and
opprobrious terms of a soul-starving and soul-poysoning Shepherd. But I have
been a long time used to the hissings of the old Serpent: and now they do not
trouble me.

Because I advise the Subscribers, Sect. 105.
in respect of that un- Christian temeritie, and self-assumingnesse of spirit,
which they discover, in branding with the odious names of Errors and Heresies,
such Tenets, not only which are controverted between learned, sober, and
religious men, but for the truth whereof also more (in weight, and worth) has
been said, and argued both from the Scriptures, and clear principles of Reason,
than has yet been produced against them by all their opposers, yea or (I
believe) ever will be produced, that they would (for the time to come) deal
more Christianly and tenderly in such cases, and not stigmatize their brethren
as Erroneous, or Heretics, because they are not of their judgments in such
points, wherein themselves can give no account of their judgments tolerably
satisfactory; M. Jenkin demands, page 12. Had ever Ministers or Christians such
advice given them before? It seems he never heard of that exhortation of
Paul, given as well to Ministers as Christians, even to every man, not to think
of himself more highly than he ought to think, but to think soberly, as God
has dealt to every man the measure of faith Romans 12. 3.
: and in another place, that men be not wise above that which is written^? For
what is the substance or import of these and other like injunctions in this
Apostle, but the same, with that advice of mine given to the Subscribers, at
which he so causlesly and importunely maunders? notwithstanding, because of the
same Christian counsel, he presently after gravely teaches me, that the
Heretical Devil must not be used gently. M. Jenkin had best take heed how he
provovokes his own Familiar. But for my part, let the proud Devil, and the
Bloody Devil be first handled in their kind, and as they deserve, and I shall
freely consent, that the Heretical Devil drink of the same cup with them.
Upon the same account he says afterward, ( Page 13.) that I am more wicked in
prescribing the manner of doing, than the thing to be done. I marvel what that
manner of doing is, or means, for which this upstart Censor concludes me so
abundantly wicked. If he were asked what he means by it, confident I am, that
an Ignoramus would be his best account. Yet he goes on (all this page, and the
greatest part of the next) like himself, railing and taking on without fear or
wit, as if I would have them believe nothing at all in Religion for certain,
only because I advise them not to be unchristianly poremptory, and self
willed, in stigmatizing such opinions for Errors and Heresies, which men every
way as wise, as learned, as judicious, as religious as themselves (no dispraise
to them) judge to be truths: yea, and have asserted them for such, with a
stronger hand of Scripture, and rational demonstration, than all those of
contrary judgment have been able to resist. Suppose M. Jenkin his opinion
were, that there is another World in the Moon, or that the Sun is the center
of the Universe, or that the earth moves, the heavens standing still, or that
there are nine Hierarchies, or distinct ranks of Angels, that the name of the
Soldier, who thrust his spear into our Saviors side, was Longinus, the name
of the penitent Thief crucified with him, Dysmas, with the like; and the man
should be so importunely confident of his judgment in these particulars, that
without all question or debate, he judged all men Erroneous and Heretical,
that were not partakers of the same foolish faith with him; in case I, or any
other man, considering the weak grounds of these opinions, should soberly
advise him, that he would consider better of such opinions, and especially
forbear to declaime against those that were otherwise minded, as men Erroneous
or Heretical, had he the least color or tolerable pretense to complain of us,
as if we advised him to turn Sceptique, or to believe nothing positively and
for certain? But in M. Jenkins Logic, there is no difference (it seems)
between believing that the Moon is made of green Cheese, and, that twice two
make four; but that he that disswades men from believing the former, does by
consequence, dissuade them also from believing the latter. This is ingenuous
Mr. Jenkin.

Page 42. Sect. 106.
He tells me, that if any thing could be wrested from the words cited by me,
from Bucer, yet I show nothing but extreme ignorance, or impudency (M. Jenkin
is offended with me for showing his commodity) to allege an Author for me, the
whole strain of whose writings are so directly opposite unto me. But (M.
Jenkin) suppose that which is not to be supposed, and which lies out of the
reach of the outstretched arm of your learning to prove, I mean, that the
whole strain of M. Bucers writings were so opposite unto me, as you pretend;
yet upon what account, or by the verdict of what principle of reason, or common
sense, do you give sentence, that I show nothing but extreme ignorance and
impudence, in citing him [i. passages from him] for me? Will you blaspheam, and
say, the Holy Ghost showed nothing but extreme ignorance, or impudency, to
record or cite the words of Caiphas the High Priest for him, or as consonant to
the Scriptures, because the general strain of the words and sayings of this
Priest were opposite unto him? Or did the Apostle Paul show nothing but extreme
ignorance or impudency, in citing some passages for him, and for the
confirmation of his Doctrine, out of Heathen Poets, because the whole strain
(in a manner) of their writings are opposite unto him, and to that great
Doctrine or mystery of Christianity, which he taught? In other cases (more
generally) the more rare, and less frequent or usual things are, the mention,
discovery, or presentment of them, finds proportionably the greater
acceptance with men. But Mr. Jenkin renders me either ignorant or impudent,
only for citing such sayings from M. Bucer, which (as he says) have no
fellows in his writings. But for ignorance, impudence, and such aspersive
terms as these, M. Jenkin has them at the first hand, and so affoords them
cheap.

He tells me, Sect. 107.
p. 43. that I still LABOUR to make my own face clean, by throwing dirt in
Bucers. Wretched man! I know of no soil or uncleanness in that face of mine he
speaks of: why, or how then should I still LABOUR to make it clean? especially
how should I LABOUR to do it, by throwing dirt in Bucers face? or what does the
silly brain mean by throwing dirt in his face? Does M. Jenkin labor to throw
dirt in the faces of his Authors, when he cites them for him? Or does not every
man suppose, 1o. That what he holds in point of judgment, is the truth? and
2o. that it is an honor and matter of good repute unto him, to assert and hold
the truth? How then is it possible that any man should LABOR, or intend, to
cast dirt in the face of another, only by affirming him to be of the same
judgment with him in the Truth? I thought Mr. Jenkin had not LABOVRED to cast
dirt in the faces of Jerome, Austin, Luther, Calvin, etc. by citing them for
his opinion, but rather to have cast honor upon them, as being Orthodox with
himself. Upon the like account he presently after charge me, that my AIM is
here to make Bucer seem a Giant, that I standing by him, may seem but a Dwarf
in heresy. Was there ever man spoke at this rate of malicious nonsense? Or
was ever man charged with such a crime as this, that his AIM was to make
himself seem a Dwarf in heresy? Is any man's AIM to be counted Heretical, in
what degree soever? or to bring the reproach of Heresy upon others, only by
presenting them as men of the same judgment with themselves? But any thing,
sense, or nonsense, will serve M. Jenkins turn, to vent his unmanly distemper
in. He can build with Slime as well as Mortar. But would you know, why, or how
I would make Bucer seem a Gynnt in Heresy? The root of the matter is only
this: Whereas M. Jenkin by vera justitia (in the passage cited by me from
Bucer) will needs understand, the duties of righteousness commanded in the
Law, and so make him speak perfect nonsense; I on the contrary, affirm the
words to signify, True righteousness. Presently after, in the same heat of
blood, he civilly tells me, that I do wickedly to seem willing, that the
Reader should believe, that Bucer did ever imagine, any could be justified out
of Christ. Reader, would thou know the ground of this charge also? I only
translate Bucers Latin words into English, where he says, Magis id ex
instituto Pauli fuit, ut objiceret Judaeis, Gentes etiam ante revelatum eis
Christum, verae justitiae fuisse compotes. i. It was rather Paul's mind and
intent, to object [or suggest] unto the Jews, that the Gentiles, even before
Christ was revealed unto them, were obtainers [not of the duties commanded in
the Law, as M. Jenkin would absurdly interpret, hereby making Bucer to affirm
that, which is notoriously false, and that in a very uncouth and harsh phrase:
For the Gentiles never obtained the duties commanded in the Law, or the true
righteousness of the Law, neither before Christ was revealed unto them, nor
since, but] of true righteousness. Nor does it any ways follow, that in case
Bucer should imagine, that the Gentiles were justified before Christ was
revealed unto them, [viz. in the ministry of the Gospel, of which kind of
Revelation it is evident he speaketh] that therefore he must needs imagine that
men may be justified out of Christ. God has several ways to reveal Christ
unto men, besides the external ministry of the Gospel: nor is Faith said to
come by hearing, as if there were no other way by which it is possible to come:
but only because it is the ordinary way by which God has appointed that it
should come. Many things are simply and indefinitly affirmed in the Scriptures,
which do not import an absolute universality, but only a commonnesse or
frequency of truth. When our Savior says, that if any man walk in the day, he
stumbleth not Ioh. 11. 9.
; his meaning is not to affirm, that no man whatsoever, walking in the day,
ever stumbled (this being notoriously untrue) but only, that men walking in
the day, do not ordinarily stumble, or, are not likely, or apt to stumble. So
when he says (a little after) If a man walk in the night, he stumbleth; his
meaning is not, that always, and without exception, they who walk in the
night, stumble; but only, that it frequently comes to pass, that such do
stumble. Do I not then very wickedly, to seem willing that the Reader should
believe, that M. Bucer should imagine, that which he clearly does imagine, yea
and which he may imagine, without any disparagement to him; nay which he cannot
but imagine, unless (with M. Jenkin) he should imagine that which is palpably
false?

Page 33. Sect. 108.
He ingenuously demands of me, whether I be a Bedlam, that I tear my own
flesh? I may very reasonably demand of him, whether he did not consult with a
Bedlam, and take his advice, about the proposal of such a question? For what
sober man can imagine he should mean, by my tearing my own flesh? All the
ground and occasion he pretends for this his question, is, that I say, that
the Subscribers represent it for an error in me to say, Doubtless men are
natural men, before they are spiritual, and yet these are the words of the
Apostle. What act, what strain is there in this question, which a man in
possession of his wits, can call the tearing of a man's own flesh? When I cite
one saying of M. Jenkin, without citing another, or without citing all the
rest, do I tear his flesh? If so, M. Jenkin tears the flesh of his friends of
Sion College, and of several other Authors less deserving such measure, than
they. A little after he commenceth another demand, of a like stamp: Friend
(says he to me,) Fear you not God? Did not your hand shake, and your heart
tremble, when you wrote, that the Ministers set down these words for THE Error?
Doubtless, men are natural before they they are spiritual. It seems Mr.
Ienkins hand shakes, and his heart trembles, when he speaks, or writes the
truth; else why should he ask me, whether these Symptoms were not upon me, when
I wrote nothing but the truth? For I do not write, as he falsely ( pro more
suo) repeateth my words; viz. that the Ministers set down the words he speaks
of, for THE error, but, for AN error in me. And if Christ were not looked upon
by the Jews, as a malefactor, why was he crucified by them amongst
malefactors? If the Ministers did not intend to represent the assertion
mentioned, as an error in me, why do they inventory it under their head and
title of Errors and Heresies? Yea, why do they number it amongst my
transgressions in matter of opinion? Nay, the truth is, that this assertion we
speak of, is the very basis and foundation of what is asserted afterward in
that passage, which they transcribe, as erroneous: so that granting the said
assertion to be true, they cannot reasonably deny any thing that follows
therein.

Pa. 30. Sect. 109.
He turns himself unto me with this grave address: The Arminians were your
Schoolmasters, when you learned this lesson: The Remonstrants and you meet
again. Did M. Ienkin never meet with any man the second time, but who presently
became his Schoolmaster upon the greeting? But why should he think the
Arminians were my Schoolmasters, when I learned the lesson he speaks of? This
lesson being interpreted, is nothing else, but that God is not unjust, nor
unequal, nor any ways pretending contrary to his intentions, in his dealings
with men. I trust M. Ienkin has learned such lessons as these: and if he
learned them without having the Arminians for his Schoolmasters, why was it not
possible for me also to learn them upon the same terms? Has not M. Ienkin so
much mother-wit, as to say, that thrice five make fifteen, without having some
choice Schoolmaster to teach him?

He tells me ( page 30.) that I have such a long-winded style, Sect. 110.
and such a foggy conceptus, that I cannot write a slight notion, which may be
couched in four lines, under thirty four lines: and yet page 10. he tells me
on the other hand, that I have a compendious way of confutation: and that I
blow away whole books with the Dictates of three or four lines. M. Ienkin (I
perceive) can beat his dog, both with a long staff, and a short. And as the
Scribes and Pharisees, one while, to create enviein, and amongst, themselves,
against the Lord Christ, pretended that the whole world was gone after him Ioh.
12. 19.
; Another while, to disparage him among the people, pleaded on the contrary,
that none of the Rulers, or Pharisees believed on him, but only a few ignorant
people, who know not the Law Ioh. 7 48, 49.
: in like manner M. Ienkins ingenuity serves him to make vilifications and
reproaches, of any thing; yea aspersives, though never so contradictory unto,
or inconsistent with, themselves, will yet warrantably, and congruously enough
to his principles, serve him in his warfare. I have (to my discredit) a
compendious way of confutation, and can blow away whole books with the
Dictates of three or four lines: and yet (to my disparagement also) have such
a long winded style, that I cannot write a slight notion, which might be
couched in four lines, under thirty four lines.

Page 14. Sect. 111.
Only upon occasion of my saying, that God made the world of nothing, he
interjects it thus; Profanely enough! Is it profaneness in M. Ienkins
Divinity, to say, or hold, that God made the world of nothing? Or is it pious
only in High Presbyterians to say it, but profane in all others? Or does the
man deny creation, and dogmatize with those, who affirm the world to have been
from eternity? Why else should he call it profaneness in me to affirm the
contrary? (...)
But what is it (almost) that I can speak, or do, but the debauched conscience
of this man pretends to find, either blasphemy or profaneness in it? If I
cite, or any ways make use of the Scriptures, he charge me with profanation
of Scripture. What remains (says he page 50.) of this weak Pamphlet,
consists of nothing but three or four prophanations of Scripture. And a few
lines after: It Is a miracle that the stones and tiles of houses do not speak
about the ears of one so profane and erroneus. But let me tell you (M.
Ienkin) whether I be profane, and erroneous, or no (both which imputations you
are as far from proving, as free in charging upon me) that it is profaneness
and erroneousnesse in you (and that in a high degree) to think it a miracle
that God should be God, and not man: or (which is the same) that he should not
be of your mind, and condemn him for profane and erroneous, whom you out of
a blind zeal to the fifth rib of your Religion, condemn for such. Is it a
miracle with you, that the righteousness of God should not accomplish the
wrath of man?

Because I express my self only thus; Sect. 112.
Do I not plainly, clearly, and distinctly enough declare unto the world, in
m^ Treatise concerning the Divine authority of the Scriptures, in what sense I
hold the Scriptures, whether Translations or Originals, to be the word of God,
his ingenuous and candid animadversion is this (page 20.) YOUR SELF IS the
first man that ever I heard to commend you for clearness, plainness, and
distinctnesse. For a man to say, especially by way of Apology, that he has
clearly, and plainly expressed his sense and meaning, or stated his opinion,
was it ever so fairly and heartily interpreted, as to be the commending of
himself, until Mr. Jenkin and his transcendent ingenuity came to undertake
the construction? But howsoever, the great Corrector (or Corruptor rather) of
L^ctio's, should do well to pull the Beam of false concord ou^ of his own
eye, and not join Nominative cases of the second person, with verbs of the
third, before he goes about to pull the MOAT (or rather somewhat as much less
than a moat, as nothing is than something) of unproper English out of his
brothers eye. If any of Mr. Vicars Boys, who have learned that easy thing,
where Mr. Jenkin finds Nil permutabis, emesve, should bring any such English
as this to him, YOUR SELF IS, or any such Latin as this, Tuipse est primus,
etc. I cannot but think he would administer correction to him; and but
deservedly. As much reason as M. Jenkin has to charge me with commending my
self, for the words lately mentioned, so much also (and no whit more) he has
to slander the close of my Sion College visited, with some four or five (it
seems he cannot speak clearly, or distinctly) nauseous commendations of the
Author and Book. But Nabal (as his own servant described him) was such a son
of Belial, that a man could not speak to him 1 Samuel 25. 17.
. If a man washes off the base dirt and filth, which M. Jenkin (and his
Truth-defaming generation) has cast in his face, it amounts to no less in the
balance of his rare ingenuity, than to the nauseous commendations of himself.

Page 16. Sect. 113.
He sadly bewailes his own condition, and the condition of his fellows, under
the name of Orthodox (thrice mentioned in the complaint for failing; this is a
nauseous commendation of himself to purpose) as if it were far better with
the Sect of the Independents, than with theirs. These (says he) are exceeding
days for Sectaries: the Orthodox have but short commons: they are rich in
employments, and poor in payments. It Is true, you preach a great deal more
than you pay of the debt of Evangelicall Truth, which you owe unto the people:
your payments in this kind are very poor) you are quite contrary, you are
paid for being an hearer of your people: but it were well with the Orthodox, if
they were paid for preaching to their people. You are the Preachers under
worldly glory: the Orthodox are under the cross, etc. In this passage of M.
Jenkin it is clearly seen, both how strangely Envy multiplieth, and
unthankefulnesse substracteth.

Fertilior seges est alienis semper in arvis,
Vicinumque pecus grandius uber habet. i.
In other men's fields the best corn always grows,
And still the greatest Dugges have neighbor Cowes. But
1o. With what forehead, or face, can he say, that the Orthodox have but short
commons, if by Orthodox he means the Ministers of the adored Order of
Presbytery? May not Newcastle as well complain for want of Coals, or the Sea
for lack of water, as the Presbyterian Ministers for shortness of commons? Is
not the whole English element of Church Livings offered up by the State upon
the service of their conformity? Marcus Crassus negabat quenquam esse d^vit^,
qui suis fructibus exercitum aler^ non posset. Cic.
Are not all the fat Benefices in the Kingdom appropriated unto them, and
their Order? Are not all other men thrust out of doors with disgrace, to make
room for them with honor? Must they feast with Hecat^^bs every day, o^ else
complain of shortness of commons? Or is Mr. Jenkin of M. Crassus his mind,
who would have no man accounted rich, unless he could maintain an Army of men
upon his revenues? I wonder what length he judges competent for Presbyterian
commons, that two hundred, three hundred, four hundred, five hundred pounds
per annum, will not serve to protend them to their due longitude and
proportion. And yet I believe that the line of many of the Orthodox he speaks
of, has fallen upon a fruitfuller ground than any of these. The Author of Sion
College vindicated [that is, of the Black-a-more washed] if I mistake not the
man, having but C. B. and A simple book, to direct me to him, would (I presume)
count it sacrilege in him, that should compel him to exchange his
Presbyterian demesnes for five hundred pounds per Annum.

I would willingly know in what crypticall, mystical, or retired sense he
affirms the Orthodox aforesaid to be under the cross? For unless some
underhand, or unknown sense here relieve him, his assertion must be his shame.
What? Presbyterian Ministers under the Cross, and scarce under the Crown? Are
they under the cross, who are carried by Authority upon Eagles wings? over
whom the Parliament it self rejoices to do them good from time to time,
heaping up Ordinance upon Ordinance, Ordinance upon Ordinance, to advance both
them, their government, and their livings together, suffering no man to do
them wrong reproving all sorts of men for their sakes, and charging all men
concerning them, as God charge the world concerning his indeared ones: Touch
not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm Psalm. 105 14, 15.
. Are these the Symptoms of men under the cross? What? Sun, Moon and
Stars making obeisance unto them, and yet they under the cross? High and
low, Magistrate and people courting them, and yet under the cross? Alas for
their tenderness! When they lie upon beds of Roses, if a leaf happen to double
under them, it is as a sword passing through their souls: they are not able to
endure the torment of it. Unhappy men, to whom wealth, ease, honor, peace,
liberty, are turned into a cross! For alas! who, or what shall deliver them
out of their great distress? But certainly there is some pad in the straw;
something there is, that Mr. Jenkin calls a cross, which few men know by that
name, but only they, who are deeply baptized into the Spirit of High
Presbytery. Questionless the cross he speaks of, is such a cross as Saul
complained of, when he sough^ the life of innocent David, and could not have
his will on him: Blessed are ye of the Lord (says Saul to the Ziphims, who
sided with him against David) for ye have had compassion on me 1 Samuel 23. 21.
. Was not Saul in a very sad condition, under a grievous cross, and much to be
pitied, that he could not have his will upon David, an holy, innocent, and
peaceable man, to destroy him? Doubtless the Orthodox Mr. Jenkin speaks of,
are under no other cross but this: they cannot do all the evil that is in
their hearts to do, to a quiet, peaceable, holy and harmless generation of
men amongst them; against whom they are vainly and senslesly jealous, as if the
thought of their heart were to take away their kingdom from them. But

3o. With what color or pretense of truth can M. Jenkin say, that these are
exceeding days only for Sectaries (meaning Independents) especially in
comparison of Presbyterians? Are not the gleanings of the grapes of Presbytery,
better th^n the vintage of Independency? Or have Independent Ministers any
other commons, or means of subsistence, than what is the abomination of the
Presbyterian souls to think of, I mean the benevolence, the free and voluntary
allowance of their people? Or might not Presbyterian Ministers have such
commons, such exceedings as these, if they pleased, with thanks in abundance
for the change? But as Hophni and Phineas the Priests, gave the people to
understand, that if they would not give them what they desired, they would take
it by force 1 Samuel 2.
; so do M. Jenkin and his Orthodox men teach their people by the thorns and
briers of the laws of the land, to pay their tithes: so far are they from
contenting themselves with the exceedings of the Sectaries, which are nothing
else but the revenues of the love, and good will of their people. Mr. Jenkin
himself very lately preached a Law Lecture to his people concerning the
payment of Tithes, wherein he potently convinced them of the necessity, though
not of the duty, yet of the action: and so fulfilled the law of Christ (the
clean contrary way) If any man will sue thee at law, and take away thy Coat,
let him have thy Cloak also Mat. 5. 40.
. C. B. likewise has been a terrible man at this weapon in his days, and by
the mediation of the law has often reconciled himself unto his covetousness,
which (it seems) would give him no rest, until he had by that Rod of Iron,
brought his Parishioners under contribution for the enlargement of his commons.
But with what Truth, or semblance of Truth, Mr. Jenkin affirms these to be
exceeding days only for Sectaries, it may be clearly judged by this: viz.
that one of his Orthodox men, even C. B. himself (lately touched) has in
yearly Ecclesiastic means and incomes, more than any three (I believe, I
might safely say, than any four) Independent Ministers in all the Kingdom.
And yet I do not look upon him neither as a man anointed with the oil of that
joy and gladness I speak of, above all his fellows: I believe there are more
than a few of them, whose anointing is richer than his.

4o. What Sanctuary does M. Jenkin think will protect him against the shame of
that assertion of his, that the Independent Ministers are the Preachers under
worldly glory? Does he count it matter of worldly glory unto Ministers to be
discountenanced by the State where they live; to be made, and publicly
declared, incapable of those favors and privileges, which are granted
generally to other Ministers, or Preachers in the Land; to be sequestered from
their means and livelihoods; to be disgracefully thrown out of places more
creditable (at least, in vulgar repute) for the exercise of their Ministry,
and thrust into holes and corners (as himself calls them) yea and to be
upbraided herewith from time to time; to be represented both unto Magistrates
and people, by those that are like to be believed by both, as Sectaries,
Schismatiques, Erroneous, Heretical, Factious, Troublesome, Dangerous to the
State, and what not? If these, and such like things as these, be matters of
worldly glory, then may the Preachers of whom M. Jenkin speaks, be truly
said, to be the Preachers under worldly glory: but if not, has not he avouched
it to the shame and confusion of his face?

5o. (And lastly) the most staring, and daring untruth in all the story, is
this, that I am paid for hearing my people. If this be written in any of M.
Jenkins Bibles, whether Translation, or Original, most certainly it is not the
word of God. If in stead of saying, I am PAID for hearing my people, he had
said, I am well apaid in hearing them, his pen had been no great transgressor:
but saying I am PAID FOR hearing them, can he be judged any other than an
(...), a man condemned of himself in the saying? Or if he had said, that I am
paid for teaching them, or for inabling them [instrumentally under God] to
speak those things which sometimes I hear from them, the saying had been
tolerable enough, for matter of truth, though little enough, for matter of
consequence, or import. But M. Jenkin has little cause to be offended with me,
for being paid for teaching my people so, that I may hear them speak the
things of God with comfort; when as himself is paid for teaching his people (I
fear) to far less purpose; yea and compels some to pay him, whom (I
believe) he teaches not at all, unless it be to know what it is to dwell in a
Parish so proudly, covetously, and quarrelsomly Clergified.

Though I assert the Divine authority of the Scriptures, Sect. 114.
or their being the word of God, and the foundation of Religion, in the very
same sense wherein himself asserteth either the one, or the other (as has
been formerly proved) and that by many Arguments and Demonstrations, himself
only dictating his opinion, but demonstrating nothing; yet how importune and
restless is he in his barking against me, as if I denied both the one, and the
other? And does not (says he, page 1.) John Goodwin deny the Scripture to be
the foundation of Religion? Page 3. he tells me, that I subvert the whole
Scripture. Page 6. My Treatise, wherein I assert the Divine Authority of the
Scriptures, he calls, My late book AGAINST the Authority of the Scriptures.
Page 10. He charge me, that by denying the Scriptures, I fear not to destroy
the word of truth. I fear that he by his diabolizing and calumniating, fears
not to destroy his soul. Page 19. he says, My work is to preach and write
against all Prophetical and Apostolical writings. What shall be given unto
thee? or what shall be done unto thee, thou false tongue Psa. 120. 3.
When did I ever preach or write the least word or syllable, against any
Prophetical or Apostolical writing? Page 24. he charge me with casting
contempt upon the written Word. Page 20. he demands thus. Ought you not to be
the more blamed for your cloaked impiety, and for your real enmity to the
Scriptures? etc. Page 22. he complains, that J. Goodwin tells him, that this
written word is not the word of God. Page 24. he charge me, that in terminis,
I deny the written word to be the word of God. Page 14. he visits me with this
Interrogatory: Did not you blasphemously deny the Scripture to be the
foundation of Faith? Page 55. he says, He is sure, that, according to my
principles, the written word cannot be the standing measure of Truth and Error.
I think he is as sure of this, as of most things, wherein he is, or pretends to
be, most confident. The man (it seems) knows not sands from rocks Page 56. he
charge me with having thrown off the written Word. What a generation of
spurious accusations has Mr. Jenkin here begotten upon the body of a shadow of
demerit? Was there ever a foolish and groundless pretense thus nauseously
improved to the defamation of a man (if yet M. Jenkin has so much credit in
the world, as to render him capable of that mischievous act, of defaming?)

P. 19 He demands of me thus: Sect. 115.
Was it from the lowliness of your heart that you prefer your self before the
most learned and pious of the Subscribers? Reader, if there be any word,
syllable, letter, or tittle, in that passage of mine, as himself has
transcribed it, upon occasion whereof he levieth this demand, which savoureth
in the least of any prelation of my self before any, even the meanest of the
Subscribers, let this crown of honor be set upon Mr. Jenkins head, that once
in his days he spoke truth. In the next words he interroga^es me further,
thus: Or was it from the Logic of your head, that you form such a childish
argument, viz. you may not be taxed with errors about the Authority of the
Scriptures, because you have written in vindication of them. Reader, if thou
can find any such Argument as this formed by me, let me be the child, and Mr.
Jenkin the man: but if it be otherwise, contrariorum contraria sint
consequentia. The Argument formed by me (as to that point he speaks of) is to
this effect: that having written and published a large Treatise in vindication
of the Divine Authority of the Scriptures, and having withal labored with the
uttermost of my endeavors in the engagement, to quit my self faithfully
herein; I conceive it no effect or fruit of the integrity of the hearts of the
Subscribers, to perform their duty, taking no knowledge at all of the main
drift, scope, and end, or of the general carriage of the Discourse, to clamor
and traduce me for a man denying the Authority of the Scriptures, only because
in one place I do not ^autologize, and use those restrictrive or explicative
expressions the second time, which I had used a little before for the clear
stating of my opinion. Yet had I formed such an Argument as he speaks of, it
had been more manly by far, and less childish than that whereby himself
would prove, that I cite M. Bucer for me impertinently; inasmuch as M. Bucer
never wrote an entire book or discourse, against that opinion, for which he is
cited by me, as I have done against that opinion, which the Subscribers take
liberty (or licentiousness rather) of Conscience, to ascribe unto me.

A while after (in the same 19. page) to vilify me, Sect. 116.
and make ortes of my discourse in vindication of the Divine Authority of the
Scriptures, he magnifies Bellarmine, and makes singular good hey of what he
has written upon the same subject: and particularly commends one saying of
his, as a non-such in all my writings; in which saying notwithstanding, there
is very little weight, or worth, (indeed) scarce Truth. Bellarmine (says he)
has labored in justifying the Divine Authority of the Scriptures against the
Swenkfeldians, with INCOMPARABLE more sinews and strength, than ever you have
done in your way. When did your pen ever^ (...) his did, drop such a passage as
this, that the very Question, Whether the Prophetical and Apostolical writing
is to be received as the word of God, is unworthy to be handled by any
Christian Divine, had it not been necessary by the deliration of Swenkfeldius,
and the Anabaptists denying it? I confess, Mr. Jenkin, my pen never dropped such
a passage as this, nor (I hope) ever shall. D^mmemor ipse mei, God keeping me
in my Christian wits, I shall never say or affirm, that such a Question is
unworthy to be handled by any Christian Divine, which of all Questions in
Christian Religion, is of the highest and most fundamental concernment, both
for the propagation of this Religion in the world, and likewise for the
radication and confirmation of it in the souls and consciences of those, who
profess it. The young man could hardly have picked out a more inconsiderate
and unsavory saying out of all the writings of this his admired Author, than
that mentioned, whereon he bestows such admiration. Nor is, nor was, the
deliration of Swenkfeldius, or of the Anabaptists, who in words denied the
divine authority of the Scriptures, the only, no nor yet the principal or
most considerable cause, of that necessity, which lies upon Christian Divines,
to labor in the Question whereof Bellarmine speaks, or to assert the said
Authority of the Scriptures. The sinful and profane lives and conversations
of the generality of Professors of Christianity, whether in the way of
Bellarmines, or of M. Jenkins persuasion, (I mean, whether Papists or
Protestants) who deny the Divine Authority of the Scriptures, (as they do God
himself, as the Apostle speaks) in their works Tit. 1. 16.
, amount (upon true accuunt) to a far more considerable i^gagement upon
Christian Divines, to assert the true Original and Authority of the
Scriptures, than the deliration of Swenkfeldius, or of the Anabaptists; on
which only Mr. Jenkin his adored Author insists. Yea the conviction of the
Jews (in respect of the Divine Authority of the new Testament) together with
the conversion of the Turks, and all Pagan and Idolatrous Nations throughout
the world, unto Christian Religion, impose a greater necessity upon Christian
Divines, to labor in that Question, which first to Bellarmine, and then (by
virtue of his authority) to Mr. Jenkin, seems so inconsiderable, than either,
or both, of those considerations which the one of them suggests, and the other
digests so readily. Yea, I believe Mr. Jenkins own Faith, and conversation,
stand in much need of a through and substantial ventilation of the Question we
speak of (concerning the Divine authority of the Scriptures) and would receive
improvement thereby, if he were capable of understanding, and condescending
unto, the things of his peace.

I shall conclude (for the present) with Mr. Jenkin, Sect. 117.
when I have only (to perfect the demonstration in hand) presented the Reader
with a first fruits of those palpable and broad-fac'd untruths, together with
those industrious and consulted falsifications (for Charity her self can think
no better of them) of my words and opinions; which, together with his workings
and arguings upon the advantage taken by them, take up little less than the
one half of his Pamphlet. Page 16. He affirms (as we heard before) that I am
paid for being an hearer of my people: which is as true, as that Mr. Jenkin is
paid for hearing his bells ring. In the same page, speaking of me, and other
preaching Sectaries (as his clemency indulgently terms us) You (says he) are
Preachers under worldly glory. Speak, holes and corners: speak, hatred and
threatenings of all sorts of people: Speak, Books and Pulpits of Presbyterian
Ministers: Speak, votes and ordinances of Parliament, and stop the mouth of a
leasing-speaking man. In the same page (a little before) he tells me this
untroth; that now I see many of the names of those Ministers of Christ in the
Province of London, subscribed in the last edition of the Testimony, concerning
whom I had said (in my Sion College visited) that God had provided a better
thing for them, than to suffer them to fall into the snare of so unworthy a
Subscription; whereas the truth is, that I neither see, nor ever saw, (and
confident I am) never shall see, any one of the Names I speak of, or intended
in the said passage, subscribed to that Testimony, in what Edition soever. Page
19. He obliquely taxes me, with preferring my self before the most learned
and pious of the Subscribers. Mendacissim^e (as was said before, and as is
visible enough in the words, upon which the tax is raised.) In the same Page,
be bids me Remember in what confident heat I rose up for the most horrid
Heretics, Anti-scripturians, Anti-trinitarians, etc. in my Hagiomastix.
Reader, assure thy self, that I never rose up for any Heretic whatsoever,
either Horrid, or smooth, much less in any heat, least of all, in any
confident heat; (as this mouth of vanity suggesteth) but have evermore pleaded
and declared AGAINST them upon these terms; That first, their opinions being
substantially and clearly proved to be Heretical; Secondly, all due and
Christian means being used for their conviction and reclaiming, if yet they
remain obstinate, they ought to be censured and punished with such punishments,
which the word of God appoints for such offenders. It seems by the principles
of M. Jenkins Divinity, that to be delivered up unto Satan, is a courtesy, and
to be cast into bell fire, a friendly dealing by men. Why else does he charge
me with rising up for Heretics, who never thought, nor said, that they
deserve any more courtesy or friendship (upon the terms mentioned) than to be
thus severely and dreadfully punished? Pa. 26, 27. He says, that a Sectarian
Anti-scripturist has found that favor in my Hagiomas^ix, as that in this
Calender he was highly Sainted. The vain young man is not able to produce any
one line, saying, word or syllable in that book, of any such import. Page 28.
He tells me, that my mouth is widely opened against God for the English of this
assertion; If God should not make men able to believe, they MIGHT accuse God.
Reader, (I assure thee) these words are none of mine, but Mr. Jenkin's: and
consequently, it his mouth, not mine, that is widely opened against God.
Whereas 1o. he makes me to say, If God should not make men able to believe; my
words are, If God should not make men capable of believing. An intelligent
Reader cannot but apprehend a very material difference between the one
expression and the other; especially, as I explain my capability of believing.
Secondly, whereas be makes me to say, that men MIGHT accuse God (as if I
implied the lawfulness of such an accusation) my words are, that they WOULD
have their mouths opened against Gods proceedings, and be furnished with an
excuse. In which words I only imply an aptness in men to take hold of such an
opportunity, or advantage, in case it were given them, to speak against Gods
proceedings in their condemnation, and by way of excuse for themselves: which,
how far short it comes of any justification of such an act (which young M.
Jenkin by his false transcribing of my words, would put upon me) lies clear
enough within the reach of an ordinary apprehension. Thirdly and lastly, ^or do
I any way intimate, or imply (in the least) that the opportunity or advantage I
speak of, would be given unto men, or taken hold of by men (for the end
mentioned) simply upon Gods not making men able to believe, or not capable of
believing (which this degenerate son of Levi by his maladministration of my
words, would fasten on me) but upon his proceedings against men to condemnation
for not believing, in case of an utter incapacity in them to believe. So that
for the young man to make me say, that If God should not make men able to
believe, men might accuse God: is not only to make me say what I never said,
but what is diametrally contrary to what I do say. Yet this is his constant
manner, and measure to me, and to my words, whenever he either finds
blasphemy in them (which is very ordinary with him to do) or when he levieth
an Argument or Dispute against any thing asserted by me. He must pervert, not
my sense and meaning only, but my words themselves also (in one kind or
other) or else he knows not how to gain any commodious ground or standing, to
quarrel or cavil against me. Page 29. His right hand practices her cunning
with this falsification: If God will not suffer his Sovereignty to be impaired
with man's ability, and to be limited to man's sinfully and voluntarily
contracted impotency; the holy commands of God are by J. G. openly charged to
be worthy of having our mouths wide opened against them. Os impudens! when do
I charge the holy commands of God (so much as in color or show) upon any such
terms? But the madness of this imputation is made manifest elsewhere. Is this
assertition of his (p. 34.) Orthodox, viz. that Rivet p. 155. of his
Disputations, calls me, amongst the rest, pargetted Pelagian? I cannot believe
any thing so unworthy of so worthy and learned a man, as to reproach me
altogether unknown to him. Page 43. He pours out himself in falsehoods: 1. He
says, that I still labor to make my own face clean, by throwing dirt in
Bucers. 2. that my aim is to make Bucer seem a Giant, that I, standing by him,
may but seem a dwarf in Heresy. 3. that I desire, that the Reader should
believe, that it was Bucers judgment, that the Gentiles could be justified
without Christ. These three (the last whereof, with a small difference in the
words, he presently again repeateth) have been dealt with like themselves, and
put to open shame, as they well deserve. Yet he adds a fourth (in the same
page) with the same image and superscription, viz. that the Papists were not so
cruel by a THOUSAND parts, in digging up of Bucers body, when dead, and
buried, as you, in laboring to bury his name, while it is yet living: and
rather than his name shall want a burying place, to make your own throat an
open Sepulcher. Unworthy young man, and most unworthy the name of a Minister of
Christ! How, or wherein, or whereby, do I labor to bury the name of the man
thou speak of? Is this to bury his name, to say, that he was never counted
an Arminian, nor branded for an Heretic, or a man of rotten judgment,
unless it were by the Ministers of Babylon? Or is it to honor his name, and
keep it alive? Or is the showing of those monuments of Truth, which he reared
up, yet living, and dying, left behind him, unto the world, (I mean, the
quotation of his writings) a burying of his name? Or is a proper translation,
or a like interpretation of his words, a burial of his name? Or have I said,
or done any thing in relation to him, more than these? But that he charge me,
with making my throat an open sepulcher to bury his name in, I impute not so
much to his malice, as to the inconsiderateness of it (though this may well be
a symptom of the strength and heat thereof) For does the man think, that I
wrote with my mouth, or could he imagine, I should write with my throat, Or can
he chargeme (so much as in pretense) with any unkindnesse, or cruelty to Bucers
Name, otherwise than in, or by my writings?

Reader, I am loath to weary thee with any more proofs or demonstrations of
the conclusion in hand. Those that have been already taken up, and insisted
upon, do abundantly evince, that Mr. Jenkin evinceth himself in his
Busie-Bishop, extremely defective, and (in a manner) totally eclipsed even in
matters of civility, modesty, and common ingenuity: quod erat probandum. If I
should make a collection of all other the untruths, falsifications,
mis-transcriptions, sophistications of my words and sayings, which have not
been yet mentioned, and which are obvious enough to my view, in the said
Pamphlet, and withal argue and detect the wilfulness and unworthiness of
them, I should (I verily believe) make another book every whit as bulky and big
as this, the materials would be so many. But I have done (for the present, and
happily for a full do) with my Youngling-Elder Mr. Jenkin.

As for my Antique Elder, Sect. 118.
Rabshakeb Vicars, that (...), that bad Egg of ill Bird, (a rod gathered by
himself for his own back) with his Pictures, Poetry, and Wind-mills, I
conceive that he has received already an answer or recompense meet for him,
both from God and men; 1. In the contempt of learned men. 2. In the neglect of
wise men. 3. in the sorrow of good men. 4. In the shame of his friends: and
lastly, in the laughter of Boys and children.

(...) i.
Such wages always let such workmen have.
I shall be no further troublesome to Mr. Vicars, except it be with the
recommendation of a few words unto him from the mouth of God, for his Christian
and serious meditation; If any man among you seem to be religious, ^am. 1. 26.
and bridleth not his tongue (much more his pen) but deceives his own heart,
this man's Religion is vain. Farewell Mr. Vicars.

There is yet a third man, Sect. 119.
whom I cannot call, but only conjecturally, by his name: the man has been
already touched in (the precedure of the discourse) with whom I desire to
debate a few particulars, though very briefly, before I close. The man I mean,
is the Author of a late scurrilous Pamphlet, which fronteth, Sion College what
it is, etc. but pageth, Sion College vindicated, i. what it is not (a natural
intimation, I conceive of the lubricity, or versipelliousnesse of the Author,
whom no man can well tell, either what he is, or what he is not.) Touching his
name; he is not willing (it seems) to express it by any letters further off
from GREATA, than those that are next to it, viz. C. B. Yet I half believe
this C. B. to be that same D. D. who lived not long since in Colemanstreet; and
who being demanded (as I am credibly informed) by the Collectors of the
Assessments for the Army, a small sum which he was assessed upon that
account, taking up a Bible in his hand, wished the Devil take him if ever he
paid it; and yet very honestly paid it a while after. I will not
over-confidently assevere this D. D. I speak of, to be that C. B. whom I am to
speak with: because C. B. may dissemble; and whereas they pretend to be the
proemiall or initiall letters of a man's Christian name, and Surname, they may
prove the Epilogicall or final letters of them, yea or letters of some middle
place. Nay who knows, but that possibly they may be letters borrowed to serve a
turn, and to deceive, by enticing a man to challenge such or such a person by
name, for the Author of the book, because they agree to his name, when as he in
the mean time lies upon the catch in ambush, to fall foul upon him that shall
so challenge him without sufficient proof. Therefore be this C. B. who he
will, I shall neither nominate him, nor any other man, upon so slight a
foundation as two letters afford.

Notwithstanding I cannot easily disengage my thoughts from running upon the
same D. D. Sect. 120.
I spoke of: they will, do what I can, secretly challenge him for the Author of
the piece, the consideration of many circumstances animating them hereunto.
First, that fell and fiery Spirit that beats up and down in the veins of it,
resembles the man. 2. The authors symbolizing with their principles, who (as
the Apostle says) glory in their shame, in his accounting it his honor to be
a member of Sion College Title page.
, strengthens the conjecture. 3. (...), the style and dialect of the piece
bewrays him. 4 To plow with clandestine heifers, together with underhand
practices to know what he should not know, are known practices of his. 5. That
encyclopaedicall knowledge of the state of Sion College, and of all things
relating to it, from the Cedar in the Lebanon thereof, even to the byssop that
springs out of the walls thereof, which magnifies it self in the piece, is (I
conceive) the appropriate character of the man. 6. The notion of Bishop and
Chancellor working in his fancy who is the Author of the piece, strongly
tempts me to a belief, that the said D. D. is the man who in his book of
zeal, and when he wrought at the fire, spoke many an hot and affectionate word
for Episcopacy. But yet this constellation is made only of such stars, quae
tantum inclinant, non necessitant, which only incline, but do not
necessitate. Therefore since the humor of the man is to speak his name in a
parable, but his mind plainly, let us leave his parable (to his own
explication) and weigh what it is which he speaks more plainly.

In his Title page he talks of two fell and fiery Satyrs, Sect. 121.
the one, called Sion College visited; the other, the Pulpit Incendiary; from
the slanderous defamations whereof, he promises a Vindication of the Society
of Sion College. To vindicate the Society he speaks of, from the slanderous
defamations of the two Treatises he names, is no service at all to this
Society; no more than it would be in a Chirurgian to heal a man of such
wounds, which he never received. As for one of the Treatises, Sion College
visited, certain I am, there is no slanderous defamation in it of that Society:
nor do I remember any such miscarriage in the other. If C. B. desired to
deserve honorably of his Society, he should have undertaken (and quitted
himself accordingly) a Vindication of the members thereof, from those crimes
and unworthy deportments, which with evidence, and manifestnesse of truth the
said two writings lay to their charge. But in this case, that of the Poet
excuses him (in part.)

Non est in Medico semper relevetur ut aeger:
Interd^m d^cta a plus valet art malum. i.
The Doctor cannot always help the ill:
The sickness sometimes is beyond his skill.
All the slanderous defamations which C. B. finds in the two Pamphlets he
speaks of, are nothing else but either his own clear mistakes, or else the
capcious constructions, which he makes of some of their expressions. When they
charge Sion College with such and such unchristian misdemeanors, and crimes,
C. B. avoucheth with importune confidence, the innocence of the walls and
edifices of Sion College, and tells us a long story of the conversion of a
large and ancient house in Alphage Parish, into a College, and of the
commendable intentions of the Founder of this College, with many such good
morrowes, which are altogether irrelative to the matters objected by the
Authors of his two Satyrs. Goodman, he learnedly pleads the cause of the b^na
terra of Sion College: but it is the malagens of this college that is
accused. We charge the children: and he tells us, that upon his knowledge he
can acquit the mother. His carriage in this kind, Fortasse cupressum scis
simulare: quid hoc, si fractis enatet exspe^ navibus, aere dato qui pingitur?
Horat. Art.
remembers me of a story in Horace, concerning a simple Painter; who, when one
that had hardly escaped drowning in a wreck at Sea, came to him, and offered
him money to make him a Table, wherein his person, danger, and escape, might be
artificially drawn, made him this answer; Sir, if you please, I will draw you a
very fair Cypress tree. C. B. is excellent at one thing: but it was another
thing that lay upon him to do. He has painted us a goodly Cypress tree: but
what is this to a shipwreck?

So again when we challenge and charge Sion College, as aforesaid, C. B.
charge us with slanderous defamations, and thinks that he vindicates this
College and Society with an high hand, by protesting or proving, that the
matters of fact charged by us, were not transacted, concluded, or done by this
College, or Society, in their Collegiate capacity, or in the formalities of
their Corporation. Truly (C. B.) we confess that very possibly our senses may
not be so much exercised as yours, in discerning the puntillo's of Law; and
probable it is we may fail in some formality of expression: but when we charge
Sion College, or the Society hereof, with misdemeanour, our intent is to
charge the members hereof, as well divisim as conjunctim: and when the greater
part, or any considerable number of the members of this Society, are found
guilty of the crimes which we lay to their charge, the rest no ways declaring
against them, we make account that we speak properly enough, and nothing but
the truth, when we charge the Society (simply and indefinitly) with such
things. But that is the thinnest Fig-leafe of all the rest, wherewith C. B.
goes about to cover his own, and his Colleagues nakedness; to pretend,that
when they do meet to agitate and consult of their affairs (which many times
prove the Kingdoms miseries) they do not meet in Sion College. As for the
place of their meeting, whatsoever it is, wheresoever it is, it is but Asini
umbra, or lana ^aprina to contend about: so the ends of their meetings, and
their transactions at their meetings, be the same, it is all one to me, and I
suppose to all others, where their Rendez-vouz be, whether they meet at the
quondam Dean of Paul's College, or at the present Dean of Paul's House, or at
Mr. Jenkins House, or at the Pope's Head Tavern, or wheresoever.

But why does he style the two books he speaks of, Sect. 1. 22
two fell and fiery Satyrs? A Satyr (according to our best Lexicography) is a
nipping kind of Poetry, rebuking vice sharply, and not regarding persons. The
man (as himself confesses) read the books with much astonishment, and so
being besides himself, might very possible mistake Prose for Verse. However,
after the manner of men astonished, he speaks halfe-sense. The books he
speaks of, though they be no Poetry, or Satyrs, yet do they rebuke vice
somewhat sharply, nor do they regard persons. The truth it, that Truth is
Satyricall, and biting.

Sed quid opus teneras mordaci radere vero Auriculas? i.
What need we grate the tender ears of men
With BITING TRVTH?
Yea the Galatians themselves (it seems) looked upon Paul, as an enemy, as one
that dealt Satyrically, and over-sharply with them, only for telling them the
Truth. Am I therefore become your enemy, because I tell you the truth Gal. 4.
16.
And questionless the admonitions and reproves of the two Prophets, Elijah
and Micajah, unto Ahab, might (in the same dialect and propriety of speech)
have been by him called Satyrs, which C. B. uses, when he terms the
admonitions and reproves administered to Sion College in the two writings
which he quarrels, by the name of Satyrs. Howsoever, if the writings he speaks
against, should be found Satyrs (in the common notion and acception of the
word) yet he should out of his charity consider, that they who wish well to the
cause of Religion, to the peace and quiet of the City and Kingdom, lie under
a great temptation of writing Satyrs, considering the most unnatural dealings
of Sion College men in opposition unto both. Good men have at this day cause
to profess and say with the Poet of old: Difficile est Satyram non scribere.
To write a Satyr who can well forbear? Especially
-- cum tot ubique
Vatibus occurras --


When we meet with so many Prophets every where, who write and speak things so
provokingly obnoxious to the lash. I believe the man is haunted and troubled
with Satyrs, and these fell and fiery enough (as his complaint is.) But, like a
man affrighted, intus habet, quod extra causatur. He has that within him,
which he complains of, as if it were without him. The fell and fiery Satyrs,
which (as it seem^ by his complaint) handle him so severely (doubtless) are
not the Pamphlets he speaks of, which have nothing f^ll or fiery in them,
(except it be the fell and fiery actings, and speakings of Sion College men
here mentioned) nor yet Satyricall, unless it be Truth; but rather, the sharp
accusations, the severe workings and smitings of a guilty conscience within
him. Which conscience (I confess) might very possibly be awakned, and set on
work by the two books he speaks of, to do that severe execution upon the
man: but the Law, which only teaches and admonishes a Judge of his duty in
punishing a malefactor, is rather to be justified and commended, than any ways
censured for so doing.

Moreover, Sect. 123.
out of the Amalthean horn of his Title Page, we have a promise, of, a little
taste, by the way, of another young thing of Mr. J. Goodwins, running about with
the shell on the head, before it be all hatched, etc. What? must C. B. needs
taste of a young thing before it he all hatched? Behold the unmaturalnesse and
unrulinesse of the man's appetite! The Law forbids again and again, the seething
of a Kid in his mothers milk Exodus 23. 19. 34. 26, etc.
. But Gallio cares for none of these things. I look upon this unrulinesse of
appetite, as a further character (besides those mentioned) of that D. D. I
spoke of; for so common fame reports him a man of an irregular appetite, as
well in respect of reals, as personals. Yet if C. B. be this D. D. me thinks so
grave and mighty a man of war, should not think the engagement worthy his
grandeur, to enter the lists against a young thing with the shell on the head.
Is there no mercy neither for young, nor old, with the members of Sion
College? But how came C. B. to meet with that young thing he speaks of, in
that posture which he describes? For confident I am, that that would willingly
have kept the nest, and not been running about before it had been all hatched,
had not some unnatural thing befallen it. But alas! Does not our English
proverb inform us, that he must needs RVN whom the Devil drives? No marvel
then to see a young thing running about before the time, which by some black
Art or other has been conjured out of the nest, and compelled to run. I
believe C. B. himself has had a finger in the prank, and employed some of his
Familiars to act it. Howsoever, if the Society of Sion College be vindicated
by C. B. in his late Pamphlet, I believe they are beholding to this young thing
of Mr. J. Goodwins, as well as to the old thing [C. B.] for the accommodation.
For I have very good reason to think, that C. B. would not have made any such
breach upon his golden occasions, as the compiling of this vindication (such as
it is) has put him upon, had he not had the opportunity of commending himself
for a man of rare activity, as viz. in procuring the sight of some part of a
book before the whole was finished; and so by giving notice accordingly unto
his friends and party, to arm themselves with patience against the coming forth
of it; that when it does come, they may be able to bear the brunt with less
regret and sorrow.

Expectata minus laedunt --
Looked for sorrows prove less sorrowful.
The said Title page yet blesses us with this one blessing more, Sect. 124.
which consists in such a discovery or notification of the Author; whereby a
little door of hope to obtain the great happiness of finding him out in due
time, is opened. The tenor of the words and letters together, is this: By C. B.
who accounts it his honor to be a member of Sion College. In good time. Who
accounts it HIS honor. Has the man no more honor that he counts upon, or can
call HIS, but only his simple being a member of Sion College? Judas had the
honor of being a member of the College of Christ's Apostles (a better
foundation I wisse, than that of C. B. his Sion College) yet the spark of this
honor was soon quenched in the deluge of wickedness, which burst out of him.
But why, or upon what account does C. B. account it his honor to be a member
of Sion College? Himself tells us (page 3.) that the whole company of the
Ministers of London, and the suburbs (being Incumbents of Churches) together
with their Assistants and Lecturers, for the time being, are all incorporated
by Charter, as fellows of this College: So that by his own account it is no
more honor to be a member of Sion College, than it is to procure a
Church-living (whether by hook, or by crook) or a Readers place, or a Lecture
in London. And if this be an honor to any man, certainly it is minimum quod
sic, the least atome or dust that ever was filed off from the mass or wedge of
Honor. Besides, if C. B. be the D. D. my thoughts run so much upon, I know not
well how, according to the tenor of his own informations, to allow him that
honor which he so highly accounts of, I mean; of being a member of Sion
College. For since his Incumbency, or leaning upon Magnus Parish (which
complained grievously of his leaning hardupon it) he neither was, nor yet is
(to my knowledge) either an Incumbent upon, or of any Church in London or
suburbs, or any Assistant, or Lecturer unto any such Incumbent. Therefore there
is no door that I know of for him to enter by into Sion College, as a member
thereof: but when the door is shut, he can climb, and get in by the window. If
he has any color or pretext of claim to the honor (as himself reputeth it)
of the membership which he challenges, it is in the lowest and last capacity
of all the rest (according to his own Table of Herauldry) I mean, that of a
Lecturer (for the time being.) But whether he be a natural, or putative member
only of the College he speaks of; or whether it be an honor to him to
account it his honor to be such a member of it, as he is, or no; certain I am,
that it would be a greater honor to him by far, if this College could think
it an honor to it to have such a member, as he. But though I cannot much
commend this College either for principles of ingenuity, or for any great
wisdom in providing for their own honor; yet I conceive they are not upon any
such terms of defiance with their reputation, as to say, that they account it
their honor to have such a member, as C. B.

In the very entrance of his Piece, Sect. 125.
he confesses himself to have been in a great distemper, when he read the 2
books, which (the distemper, as it seems, yet remaining on him) in his Title
page (as we heard) he calls, two fell and fiery Satyrs; yea, here also he
mingles words, which plainly declare him to have been under the regiment of the
Distemper, as well when he wrote his own piece, as when he read those other. So
that I cannot believe that common saying to be universally true, viz. that to
tell a dream is the part of a man waking. Narrare sommum vigilantis est.
The words of his confession (together with the said mixture) are these: I have
with MVCH ASTONISHMENT read two scurrilous Pasquils, one entitled, Sion
College visited, written by an Apostate member thereof: the other, calls it
self, the Pulpit Incendiary, compiled (some say; the more shame for them) by
the same visiting Bishop, though published by his dear Chancellor, the
Exchange-man. In these words (...) gives his reader a rational account, how
it might very well come to pass, that he should so far mistake the natures and
respective purports of the two discourses he names, as to call them one while,
two fell and fiery Satyrs, another while, two scurrilous pasquils. He read them
(he says) with MUCH ASTONISHMENT: if he had not said it, his (...) of them,
and (...) upon them, would have said it for him. For both these speak him a man
suffering much in his intellectuals, when he perused them. A man of a serene
and undisturbed fancy, could not lightly have pitched upon such uncouth, wild,
and extravagant appellations as those, by which he calls them. That the
distemper was not off him, any whit more when he wrote, than when he read it,
is beyond all peradventure confirmed by this saying of his, that Sion College
visited, was written by an Apostate member thereof. For I would fain know of C.
B. (if he be yet come to himself, or to a more considering man) upon what
account he voteth me an Apostate member of Sion College; or wherein stands
this my Apostasy? Was that blind man, to whom Christ restored his sight, John
9. an Apostate from the Jewish worship and religion, because the Pharisees cast
him out Ioh. 9. 34.
by a strong hand? Or was David an Apostate from his religion, because his
enemies drove him out from abiding in the inheritance of the Lord, saying unto
him, Go serve other Gods 1 Samuel 26. 19.
? Or what act have I ever done, by which I have either made or declared my
self an Apostate from Sion College? The sin of Apostasy is never committed
by suffering. Was not C. B. himself far more properly an Apostate member of
this College, when he voluntarily abandoned his people and Incumbe^cy, in
Magnus Parish; and thereby dismembered himself from the College he speaks of?
Yea is it not likely that he would have continued in this his Apostasy all his
days, had he not been reduced and reconciled by the friendly mediation of many
hundreds per annum? But if a Lecturers place in the City, be the cure of his
Apostasy in this kind, why is not mine apostasy healed also, who have
accepted such a relation as well as he? For though the hundreds I spoke of were
his reconciliation, motive, yet is his place of a Lecturer, simply considered,
and without the adjunct of an Episcopal demesne annexed, which reconciles him
formaliter, and terminative. So that my Lecture in the City, how poorly soever
endowed, is as potent to invest me with the honor of being a member of Sion
College, as his is.

Again, considering that it is so generally known what an Exchangeman himself
has been, exchanging first Magnus for Major, and then Major for Maximus, and
withal, how studious and diligent he was (when time was) in furnishing
himself with that kind of learning, which teaches the Art of Chancellory, and
how he fau'nd upon Episcopacie, (the common road to a Chancellorship in those
days) me thinks it argues the relics (at least) of a distemper upon him, to
remind the world of these his disparagements, by using the metaphors of Bishop
and Chancellor, and by describing a man by the emphaticall periphrasis of THE
Exchange-man.

Passing by all his frivolous and (indeed) ridiculous exceptions against me,
Sect. 126.
about my mis-notioning of Sion College (which together with his essays to
jeere and flout, make up the greatest part of what he pamphlets against me) I
shall only touch two or three particulars of somewhat another nature, in the
charge whereof he magnifies himself at an extreme rate of height and grandeur
against me. His firstborn charge against me (upon which he runs a long
division in a multiplicity of words, p. 14. and again, p. 19, 20.) is this,
that I say in my Epistle (which yet does not begin with it neither, as C. B.
stumbleth) that the Lord Jesus Christ, the great Bishop of their souls, some
few months since, was pleased to administer (by the hand of his weak and
unworthy servant) a monitory visitation unto some, professing themselves his
Ministers, etc. upon occasion of these words, he charge me first, with inward
rancor of heart against the College; and then, with a presumptuous fathering
of all, little short of blasphemy, upon Christ, and the Almighty himself. And
(soon after) at a man fallen into a new trance of astonishment, or as not
recovered out of the former, he epiphonema's it thus: O horrid presumption,
thus to entitle his railings, and slanders to the Almighty! But first, (good C.
B.) where are the railings and slanders you speak of? Certainly the place of
them is no where to be found, but in your distempered fancy; distempered (I
fear) with a more malignant and dangerous distemper, than that of astonishment.
You neither do, nor can, show any one instance, either of the one misdemeanour,
or the other, in that piece against which your transportation so rages: In
that Epistle, or Preface you speak of, you only find a monitory visitation,
entitled (as you call it) unto Christ; no railings, or slanders. Nor does it
follow, that because I entitle the body or substance of that visitation unto
Christ, I must therefore entitle unto him also all, or any, the infirmities
found in the administration. A man may, and ought, entitle God to the act of
his believing; and yet not entitle him to any deficiency, or weakness therein.

2o. Whereas you are so zealously displeased, that I should entitle Christ to
the visitation you speak of, and cry out of little less than blasphemy in it,
it no ways troubles me (nor need to trouble any other) considering there is
nothing more incident to men, that have too much will on ways that are sinful,
than to rise up with deep indignation against those, that shall censure or
reprove these ways, as speaking of themselves, ^ut of the pride or malice of
their own hearts, and as having no commission or authority from God, so to
speak, or do. When Jeremy had faithfully made known unto the people, the mind
of God against their going into Egypt, upon which accommodation (for so it
seemed unto them) their hearts and minds were inordinatly, impotently, and
importunely set, how peremptorily and confidently did they charge this Prophet,
with speaking unto them those things in the name of God, which yet he had no
commission from God to speak, but spoke them out of ill will to them, and with
an intent to destroy them. Now when Jeremiah (says the Text) had made an end
of speaking unto the people, all the words of the Lord their God, for which the
Lord their God had sent him to them, even all these words, then spoke Azariah
the son of H^sh^iah, and Johanan the son of Kareah, and ALL THE PROUD MEN,
saying unto Jeremiah, Thou speak falsely: the Lord our God has not sent thee
to say, G^ not into Egypt to sojourn there; But Baruch the son of N^riah
sets thee on against us, for to deliver us into the hand of the Chaldeans,
that they might put us to death, and carry us away captive into Babylon Ier.
43. 1, 2, 3.
The self sam^ Spirit which uttered it self in these men against Jeremy,
works at this day after the same manner, and utters it self upon very like
terms in C. B. W. I. and some other high-spirited men of Sion College, against
me, and others, for reproving such sinful ways and practices of theirs, unto
which they have lift up their hearts very high, and are resolved (it seems) not
to let them fall again, come life, come death, whether temporal, or eternal.
It were easy to trace the same spirit by several other footsteps in the
Scriptures. See Jer. 5. 12, 13. 18. 18. Am. 9. 10, etc. But

3o. (and lastly.) It being the manner of the Scriptures, to ascribe those
things unto God, which are done by virtue of, and in obedience to, his command;
I had ground and foundation large enough to inintitle or ascribe unto him, that
my visitation of Sion College (except as before is excepted.) For is not the
command of God express, Them that sin, rebuke before all men, that others also
may fear? 1 Timothy 5. 20. And again, This witness is true: wherefore rebuke them
sharply, that they may be sound in the faith, Tit. 1. 13. It seems C B. has no
mind himself to become sound in the faith, nor yet to have his Collegiate
brethren divided from him upon that point. For, as to his demand, p. 7. How
dare these men, so boldly and deeply to traduce, calumniate, condemn, and post
up a whole Society of Elders, without any show of truth, ^or offering to
produce so much as one witness to make good their charge; he does prudently
to shelter himself from the charge of a right-down and most notorious untruth,
under the wing of an interrogation; which yet he conceives will serve his
turn, as well as an assertive affirmation, which had been more obnoxious, would
have done. The truth is, that the men he speaks of, dare not, upon any terms
whatsoever, traduce or calumniate any man, or men, of what condition soever,
much less a whole Society of Elders: they know as well as C. B. himself, that
in so doing they should d^e the office of the grand accuser of the brethren, as
Atturneys or Sollicitors (the Lawyer still metaphors it in his Act) to the
Devil. But I will tell you what they dare do: they dare with the hand of Truth,
take Lions by the beard: they dare in the vindication of the cause of God, and
of his servants, withstand his and their enemies, though never so formidable
for number, rank, or other consideration soever, to their faces; they dare
expose their names, estates, liberties, lives, to the wrath of men, for
fulfilling the righteousness of God. These, and such things as these, they
dare do. But whereas he would fain intimate, that the men he speaks of, do not
reprove for, or charge upon his Society of Elders, matters of truth, but only
traduce and calumniate them, and this without any show of truth; 1o. evident it
is, that all, or far the greatest part of all, the particulars charged upon
them in Sion College visited are extant in their own d^are Testimony, not
only acknowledg^d, but rejoiced and gloried in by themselves: 2o. concerning
the particulars wherewith they are burdened in the Pulpit Incendiary, I have
several times heard the Author say, that he can produce very competent and
^uostantiall witnesses for the proof of them all; yea and of many things more
of every whit as unchristian a character and import, as the vilest and worst of
these.

Page 17. Whilst laboring in the fire to find a knot in a rush, Sect. 127.
a contradiction ( I mean) in a fair consistency (as the Reader may soon
perceive, if it be worth his time to view the passage) he deals so kindly with
the truth, as to spare it twice together. For first he says, that I style the
Subscribers learned and pious men, as if generally, and without exception of
any, I so styled them all; whereas my expression, wherein I use those words, is
clearly partitive, and only imports a supposall of some to be such. 2o. He
says, that I instance in Dr. Gouge, Mr. Calamy, Mr Case, Mr. Cranford, is men
of great names; whereas I speak only of great names of man, not any thing at
all of men of great names, there being no such expression or juncture of words
in all that book. Nor 3o. do I so directly instance in the four persons he
speaks of, for great names of men, as he implies But 4o. (and lastly) whereas
he seems very desirous to imply (for here his sentence scarce senseth well)
that I Instance in the said four men, as learned and pious, he draws the face
of my words quite awry, and seeks to represent me to these men (at least to
some of them) as if I had anintent to abu^e them.

Page 19 He makes me a trans^r^ssor in chief, Sect. 128.
only for mentioning a report or information that was brought to me, concerning
another name, by which Sion College, or the house now called Sion College,
was anciently known, For I affirm nothing positively concerning either the
credit or truth of the information; only once alluding to ^he information, I
confess I call it Sinon College. Was this so treasonable a practice against
the majesty of Sion College, (be it supposed that this, and not the other, was
the ancient name of it; though I have no ground at all from any thing that C.
B. has yet said to suspect the credit of my information The house that has
for these 24 or 25 years last past, been known only by the name of Sion
College, might very possibly notwithstanding, be anciently called, Sinon
House. And if so, to say that the ancient Records mention it by the name not of
Sion, but of Sinon College, is not the breadth of a lana caprina out of the way
of Truth. For that House, and the present ^olledge being ^aterially the same,
there wants only a fair explication to make the saying stand right and
straight in point of truth
) as to deserve a tree of fifty cubits high? or to have such a Vial of wrath,
or such a flood of fiery indignation poured out upon it, as this great
Rhadamanth has prepared and decreed in these words: Therefore (viz. because
the Records will speak for themselves, i. because the Crow is black, and not
white) Therefore (says he) I know none but himself, who does boldly take
authority, and delights in it, to make errors, that has THVS IMPVDENTLY
changed the name at pleasure, etc. It seems C. B. knows not himself:
otherwise he might know another besides me, who far more IMPVDENTLY than I,
changes names at pleasure. For 1o, when a person, or thing, has two, or more
names, or appellations, he that calls them by one of these names, and not by
the other, does not hereby change the name of it: When Paul called Peter by the
name of Cephas (as he does 1 Cor. 1. 12) did he change his name at pleasure;
especially calling him Peter elsewhere, as I usually call C. B. his beloved
palace, where he thinks his HONOR dwells, by the Name of Sion College?
Therefore it is a most frivolous and false charge upon me, to say, that I
change the name of his College, because I once, or sometimes, call it by a
name, by which it is not so vulgarly known, or called. How much more
shamelesly false is it, to say, that I either IMPVDENTLY, or at pleasure change
this Name, when as first, I use it but once, and 2o, have the ground and
inducement of such an information asserting the legitimacie of that Name, by
which I call it, the authority whereof I know no man able ^o disable?

Secondly, though he says here, that he knows none but me, that has so
IMPVDENTLY changed the name of that pleasure of his eyes, Sion College; yet a
few lines before, he had said, that he thinks he knows another. As for the
information (says he) which you intimate out of the ancient Records, I THINK
it came originally from a famous Atheist. Surely this person whom he calls an
Atheist, (by a worse change of a name, I wisse, than that of Sinon, for, Sion
College) yea a famous Atheist, whom he susspects for the Author of my
information, must needs be known unto him. But

3o (And lastly, to this) is not C. B. himself a far more Impudent changer of
names, and this at pleasure, then I? He pretends not to lay any other changing
of names to my charge, but only of a dead edifice. Nor is the Name pretended to
be given by me by way of exchange, any ways reproachful, or disgraceful unto
it: but how often does he change the Names of living men, and that of his
brethren in the most holy profession of Jesus Christ, and this for Names
disparaging and stigmaticall? Page 1. He calls me by the Name of an Apostate
member, etc. In the same page he calls the Author of the Pulpit Incendiary, and
me together, by the name of, Gracchi, [those audacious Gracchi.] Page 13. he
calls me by the name of, Bishop John: page 15. Presbyter John. Page 2. the
Mock-visitor of Sion College (to omit many other such changes of names as
these, which at his mere pleasure he gives me for mine own.) But this is he
that complains of so much of the Dragon, and so little of the Saint, in other
m^ns writings.

But the man contains not himself within the narrow compass of the
indignation uttered against me for my loud-crying sin of changing the name of
Sion College (as you have heard) in the words transcribed; but advances the
motion of his passion and pen together, thus: And now, Mr. Goodwin, be serious,
speak the truth, and shame the -- [D. D.] Did the Lord Jesus Christ, the great
Bishop of our souls, administer this Piece of your Monitory Visitation? [No,
C. B. nor did any man I know of, ever say that he did] Or was not your hand
guided by another spirit, which you well know without my naming? (You mean, I
presume, that Spirit, by which your own hand was guided in drawing up this your
vindicative vindication,) Consider and repent seriously of this great
wickedness [in calling a spade, a spade] least that great Bishop of souls
deprive you of your Bishopric and call you to such an account at his
tribunal, as an Atheistical scoffer, ^luctus in simpul^ excitare. Prove.
as will make your ears to tingle, and your heart to tremble, but to hear the
report. What mighty waves are here raised in a cup dish of water? Once in a
man's life, o call Sion College, by by the name of Sinon College (though he
has more grounds and reasons than one, and these very tolerable and competent
so to do) in C. B. his learned charity, amounts to no less than the rendering
of a man an Atheistical scoffer; deserves no less than the deprivation of his
Bishopric, and shall be punished with no less or lighter punishment, that
the vengeance of eternal fire. Is it the inward thought of this man's heart,
that the righteousness and wrath of God are calculated for the fulfilling of
his unrighteousness? and that the Tribunal of Christ, is, or shall be erected
for the trial and condemning of his opposers? The truth is, all things
considered, that it is no easy thing to believe, that C. B. durst have so much
as once mentioned the Tribunal of Christ, in case it be supposed that he
rea^ally believes the being of it.

How stigmatical and shameless an untruth looks out of these words, Sect. 129.
page 20. There is not so much as one word of admonition to Sion College in all
your Book? let the 18. and 19. pages of the book he speaks of ( Sion College
visited) speak. In which pages, I do first (upon leave desired, and presumed)
seriously admonish the men of Sion College (for I suppose C. B. does not
challenge me for not admonishing the walls) of those true and real grounds and
causes, of those sad inconveniences which have befallen them, and whereof they
themselves complain (as I there say, instancing in sundry particulars) And 2o.
I here also admonish them with all faithfulness and sincerity, how, and by
what ways and means they may repair all their breaches that are made upon
them, and recover with advantage whatsoever they have lost in the hearts of the
people. Among some other addresses unto them upon this account, I use these
words, Following showers of uprightness and sincerity from your hearts and
hands together, will make your crowns of honor to flourish upon your heads;
which otherwise will certainly anguish, fade, and die away.

In the same page (within a line or two after the words last transcribed) he
complements with me in this whirlewinde. Sect. 130.
For you have taken upon you, Sir, the boldness in that bold visit of Sion
College, to blaspheme, not the great Diana of High Presbytery (as in high
scorn you flout it: I wonder what his ^^ecedent is to his relative it) but the
High God, whose Ordinance Presbytery will approve her self to be, when your
Name is like to rot in the dust, amongst those Giants, that would wage war
with heaven. Here we have profound and learned doings indeed.

1o. He here prophesies of the time, when Presbytery will approve her self to
be an Ordinance of God, upon such terms, and in such a kind of expression as
God by Ezekiel prophesied long since of the return of Juda and Jerusalem out of
captivity: When I shall bring agoin their captivity, the captivity of Sodom
and her daughters, and the captivity of Samaria and her daughters, then will I
being again the captivity of the captives in the midst of them. Ezekiel 16. ^3.
Gods intent in this prophecy was (as Calvin rightly interprets it) to ^ut
off all hope of deliverance from the Jews M^nime ergo dubium est, quin
Propheta hic spem omn^m salutis erip^at Iudaeis, dum ratiocinatur ab
impossibil, etc. Calv. in locum.
In like manner C. B. prophesying, that Presbytery will approve her self to be
the Ordinance of God, when my Name is likely to rot in the dust amongst those
Giants that waged war with heaven, does emphatically prophecy and affirm,
that Presbytery will never approve her self to be the Ordinance of God. For
most certain and assured I am, that my Name will never be likely to rot in the
dust with the company he speak^ of, i as much as all the war that I have ever
waged, has been, not with heaven, but with earth, and with earthly ways, and
earthly minded m^n.

2o. Why, or upon what tolerable account does he say, that I blaspheme the high
God, because Presbytery (as he supposes) will prove her self to be his
Ordinance? If the man thinks, that because I speak against High Presbytery, I
speak against Presbytery simply, or the Presbytery spoken of in the Scriptures,
I perceive he knows not the Lamb of God which takes away ^he sins of the
world, from the roaring Lion the Devil, who goes about seeking whom ^e may
devour. For the Scripture Presbytery, (...) the sweet and m^ek Genius and
disposition of the former: and High Presbytery, the bloody pride, and devouring
rage of the latter. And if C. B. and his associates, did not stand in their own
light, it were unpossible that ever it should enter into their hearts to
imagine, that such a Government should be the Government of Christ, or the
Ordinance of God, the Scepter whereof is nothing else but a senseless and
importune claim of a power from Christ, to umpire the sense and meaning of the
Scriptures, according to their own notions, and exig^ncies of interests and
affairs: and consequently, of making Errors and Heresies of what opinions, or
doctrines they please, without giving, in many cases, any sufficient (or indeed
any tolerable) account (save only what themselves and their prosely^es, and
party, are pleased to d^em and call such) of such their determinations and
decisions. By the exercise of which power, the persons interested in this
Government, stigmatize and brand whom they please, though otherwise pious and
peaceable, and friends unto Christ, with the reproach of men Erroneous and
Heretical, so exposing them to the hatred of men, and all miseries attending
thereon, only because they cannot acknowledge knowledge them as Commissioners
from God, to arbitrate the affairs of their judgments and consciences, and
subscribe to their sense in matter, of Religion, as the infallible Test and
Rule of Truth. If this Government (which I call High Presbytery, and) which is
laniena and macellum ovium Christi, the shambles, or slaughterhouse of the
Sheep of Christ, be the government of Christ, or the Ordinance of God, then
had C. B. some color (however) to charge me with Blaspheming the High God;
though (by the way) it savours of anignorant and bloody interpreter, to make
every arguing against truth (whether known, or unknown for such, unto the
arguer) to be a Blaspheming of God. But C. B. (it is like) is of their mind and
judgment, who hold, that in Schismaticis and Hereticis puniendis non po^est
peccari; there is no possibility of sining in punishing, or proceeding against
Schismatiques and Her^tiques. There is scarce any thing can be spoken, which
touches High-Presbytery any thing near the quick, but that Mr. Jenkin and C.
B. with others of that learning and candor, make either Profaneness, or
Blasphemy of it. But there is nothing more common than for men zealously
affected in a cause that is not good, to make themselves and their cause, the
apple of Gods eye: and then neither the one, nor the other must be touched [for
fear of pleasing of God, and easing men.]

Whereas (in the same 20. page) he flees to common report for a little
assistance against me, Sect. 131.
which (it seems) takes compassion on him (as the Z^phims did on Saul when he
persecuted David) and voteth me for a man that have long labored under two
great infirmities; Ambition, to be a contradictor in chief to all my brethren
in points of greatest weight: and Revenge, upon all those that tell me my own
freely. I answer, 1o. That when C. B. tells me either of Ambition, or Revenge,
he tells me his own, not, my own. I will not say that common Report, or Fame
(which long since was known to be Tam ficti, pravique tenax, quam nuneia very,
i.

Of truth and untruth much a like assertresses) but the tenor of his own
Actions and Departments for a long time (which, in matters of the left hand
especially, seldom misreporteth) speaks him a man, not so much laboring
under the two infirmities he speaks of, as rejoicing. As for my self, I
confess I have more infirmities upon me, than becomes either me, or any other
man to have; but my laboring under them, is an effectual door of hope opened
unto me, that they are on the declining hand, and that a perfect freedom and
deliverance from them, is as near unto me, as Death, or the Grave. In the mean
time, neither was Paul's paroxysine with Barnabas Acts 15. 39
, nor his withstanding of Peter to his face Gal. 2. 11.
, nor his disputing against the Grecians Acts 9. 29.
, nor his disputing with, or against the Jews in their Synagogues, or with
whomsoever be met daily in the Marketplace Acts 17. 17.
, nor his fighting with beasts at Ephesus, after the manner of men 1 Cor. 15. 32
, either divisim, or e^njunctim, any argument, or proof, that he labored
under Ambition to be a contradictor in chief to all his brethren, in points of
greatest weight (though the points which he disputed against his Brethren, the
Jews, were, for the most part, points of the greatest weight) but his
frequent, and almost continual engagements in this kind notwithstanding, he
was a man that sought to please all men for their good 1 Cor. 10. 32
; yea and was made all things to all men, out of a desire by all means to save
some 1 Cor. 9. 22.
. Therefore it was no ambition in Paul to be a Contradictor in chief to the
world: nor did the frequency of his contradictings and contests with men in his
way, any ways evince him to be any other, than a most meek, humble, quiet, and
peaceable man. The great Knower of Hearts, and searcher of the veins, in whose
presence I write, knows, that if himself would be pleased to discharge me of
the service of contradicting and opposing men, and dispose of me in a way of
retirement, were it never so private and obscure, where I might only contest
with mine own weakness and errors, he should give me one of the firstborn
desires of my soul in the things of this life, into my bosom. As for Revenge,
I have always (since I understood any thing in the things of God) judged it
not only an un-christian, but a most effeminate, base, and ignoble passion or
distemper: yea at this very hour, my thoughts hardly suffer me to conceive of
it, as consisting with those things which accompany salvation. But to practice
Revenge, when no injury has been done, but rather a kindness, and office of
love, as the telling of a man his own freely is, is a far more unmanly,
unnatural, and horrid distemper, than Revenge it self (properly so called.) I
wish that it were but as easy for others to forbear injuring of me, as it is
for me to neglect and pass it by, when they have done it. But whether it be
either C. B. himself, or his common Report, or whosoever, that burden me with
the crimes of Ambition and Revenge, certain I am, that they are strangers to my
spirit, and converse in the world. The Apostle Paul, speaking of himself
chiefly, yet (as it seems) in conjunction with some others, says they were, as
deceivers, yet true 2 Cor. 6. 8.
. They were as deceivers to them that looked upon them at a distance, and had
not familiar acqua^ntance with their principles, ways and spirits: but unto
such, who with Timothy, fully knew their doctrine, manner of life purpose,
faith, long-suffering, charity, patience 2 Timothy 3. 10
, etc. they were true: i. they judged them to be the men which they were indeed
and in truth. It is no hard matter to bear the imputation and reproach from
strangers, of such crimes, from the demerit and guilt whereof, all that are
intimate, and thoroughly acquainted with us, as God, our consciences, our bosom
friends and acquaintance, do with a joint and free consent absolve us. As for
Ambition, unless to shape a course for the dust and dunghill, for poverty,
disgrace, contempt, loss of estate, loss of friends, great and small, and of
whatsoever is called great in the world, be Ambition, the tenor of the course I
have steered, will be my compurgator in the consciences of all those to whom it
has been known. I have now dispatched with my Triumviri, for the present, yea,
if themselves please, for the future also.

NOTE.
The passage cited from the Synod of Dort, which stands in the margent at the
bottom of page 72. should have been placed in the margent of the page
following, right over against their respective English. The said passages are
to be seen, in Sentent. Theolog. magn. Britan. super 3m and 4m Artic. Thesi 32
and 42.

Postscript to the Reader.
REader, though there be nothing in the preceding Discourse, that can justly
offend any man; yet considering, partly the exigency of the season, which
calls a loud unto all parties, of what judgment soever, to join heart in
heart, and hand in hand, in order to their common safety: partly also, the
extreme weakness of many who know not how to love, where all their thoughts,
as well as their persons, are not first loved, and adored for truth; I could
easily have been so far overruled, as to have quietly born (a while longer)
that burden of shame which Mr. Jenkin has most unworthily laid upon me, and
accordingly have forborne (at least for a time) the publishing of the said.
Treatise, had not an importune stickler in that cause (who calls himself C.
B.) having by sinister practices procured the sight of some of the sheets,
unseasonably published some part of it (in a Pamphlet very lately set forth,
entitled, Sion College what it is etc.) Wherein he labors with both his
hands, to prepossesse the world with prejudice against it, whilst it was yet
unborn, clamouring in a most effeminate and calumniating manner, as if nothing
but unworthines, and this in the highest degree, were to be found it. In
consideration hereof I was necessitated to a present publication of it, hoping
that neither a Christian Apology for innocence and truth on the one hand, nor
yet a necessary reproof of error and undue practices on the other (out of which
two spears the Treatise moves not) shall prove any obstruction in the way of
love, concord, or peace, in the hearts of Christian and considering men, but
rather make way for their advancement, and exaltation. There is no man shall go
further with his adversary to make peace, than I The most peaceable man under
heaven, may draw his sword in his own defense; yea, and possibly, in managing
the resistance, wound his adversary; and both, without the least reflection
upon that lovely disposition in him. Farewell.

Thine in the God, and Prince, of peace, J. Goodwin.
Junii 0 1648.
ERRATA.
Epist. page 2. line 15. for, light, r. sight. Book. p. 3. l. 2. for, is, r.
are. p. 9. l. 26. for, dia^^errically, r. diametrally. p. 11. l. 20. for
Dieana, r. Diana. p. 24. l. 37. for (...). p. 26. l. 8. after, forbear, r. (as
much as well may be) p. 28. l. 1. for, to nor, r. tenor. p. 29. l. 26. after,
them, r. (together with the peculiarity of phrase and style, wherein they are
written.) p. 37. l. 37. for univocallay, r. univocally. p. 41. l. 14. de e,
not. Ibid for as, r. if not. p. 44. l. 33. after, of, r. the. p. 45. l. 34.
for, piety, r. pity. p. 47. l. 2. for, ^ clear, r. is clear. p. 48. l. 27. for
part, r. port. Ibid. l. 29. for, passage, r. passages. p. 53. l. 3. for
Marterists, r. Martyrists. p 66. l. 5. for, coversion, r. conversion. p. 79, l.
16. after, so, r. that. p. 92. l. 19. after, to, r. do. p. 94. l. 30. for,
for-us, r. ferus. p. 95. l. 7. for, proked, r. provoked p. 98. l. 21. for
whereinto, r. wherein. p. 100. l 24. after spirit, r. of. p. 101. l. 32. dele,
but. p. 127. l. 35. dele it. p. 128. l. 16. after is, r. it. p. 133. p. 133. l.
26. after did, r. immmediatly and by himself. Ibid. l. 34. for, o. r. top. 134.
l. 25. for anguish,, r. languish. p. 136. l. 33. forassertresses, r.
assertresse.

Some other oversights there are, as in pointing, capital letters,
parencheses, and some few in marginall notes; which the Corrector presumes
will be but a gentle exercise for the Readers patience.

FINIS.

