THE SHIPWRECK OF ALL False Churches: AND The Immutable Safety and Stability of
the true Church of CHRIST.

Occasioned: By DOCTOR CHAMBERLEN His mistake of her, and of the Holy
Scriptures also, by Syllogising words, to find out Spiritual Meanings, when in
such cases it is the Definition, not the Name, by which things are truly known.

Jer. 9. Trust not in lying words, saying the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of
the Lord, etc. Psalm. 87. 2. The Lord loves the Gates of Sion more then all the
dwellings of Jacob. Matthew. 12. 36, 37. But I say unto you, That every idle word
that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof in the day of Judgment.
For by thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou shall be
condemned. LONDON: Printed, and are to be sold by G. Calvert, at the West End
of Paul's, and J. Hancock in Pope's Head. Alley. 1652.

To the Church of Christ at London, Beloved of God, called by the Spirit, to be
Saints in Christ Jesus. All grace be multiplied.
FAITHFUL FRIENDS;
IN love to you and the Truth, I have undertaken in your Cause, and in the
right of you all, to discover a counterfeit Friend, whom I lately met with,
that did aver to my self, and to others of your society* That, to be your
state and condition, your devotion, fruit, and manifestation, which upon trial
proved no better then carnal and sensual. And having received perfect
knowledge of you by the same spirit that does make and constitute you, I could
not keep silence, but instantly reproved him openly: yet notwithstanding that
public disclaim I made of what he said, he has since printed that which he
then verbally avouched, which is so unsavory, and to your holy and pure nature
so contrary. From which aspersion to free you, I have made bold to declare and
make known your holy and spiritual birth, life, constitution, fellowship,
communion, hope, and worship, in the purity and spiritual part of Gods
Ordinances: your divine communion with the Father, and with the Son, in the
Spirit, your righteous Garments without you, and Gods habitation, with his
comfortable refreshments within you, your peculiar treasures and privileges in
knowing the Truth, and the Administration of it also, the heavenly power you
have with Christ, and what it is indeed to be gathered together in his name,
and how clear and entire you stand distinct from all other Churches that boldly
call themselves by your Titles and Appellations, and lay claim to your own
immunities, and privileges also, with such particular Letters that have passed
interchangeably between us, touching the vindication of you in the premises,
who am the Lords and yours,

In all humble Service, In the Truth. J. G.

Bucklersbury, the 25th of June, 1652. SIR;
I Have twice borne your contemptuous slightings, although what I moved was
seasonable, both for Gods glory, and the present occasion. And had not earnest
business caused my long absence from London, you should have heard of me
before this time, to have required an account concerning your great seemings to
no purpose. Sir, As there was in times past an outward appearance, that was not
righteous, so there is still in this present time, which was as much manifested
by your self in those Arguings, where I was with you at Mr Webbs, as ever
heretofore by any of your Generation. Now since my return to London, I have
seen you have printed a Monument of your own weakness, which except you
repent of, will unavoydably redound to your great prejudice, and if you will
give me satisfaction in the two particulars I reproved you in, well; if not, I
shall publish not only my reproof of those two Arguments, but of every thing
else you then spoke of, and since have printed; this is the mind of him that
answered your uncivil questions, what he was that spoke, and how in
profession, where for habitation, and his distinction for nomination, who then
told you he was always ready to meet you at any time to discover the fallacy
of your Baptism and Church also.

Subscribing my Name as it is, John Grant, Dwelling as abovesaid, at the sign
of the half Moon.

London, the 9th of July, 1652. Sir;
THe last Month I gave you to understand of your incivility toward me,
intimating the time and place also; and because your regardlesnesse is still
continued, I thought good the second time to write, although you denied me to
speak, once and again, and to let you to know that there is not a more
certain time of sinning against God, his truth, and children, then of
suffering for wronging them. For he that affirms, that to be the Church of
Christ that is not, wrongs the Lord the Husband, and his holy Spouse also. And
he that gives any other meaning of the Scripture, then what the holy Ghost
intends, hurts and wounds the truth of Gods testimonies, and his Children
also. Now the truth is, thou art the man that have blasphemed the Tabernacle of
God, and them that dwell therein, affirming her to be untempered mortar, and
fading* that is true, dureable, and everlasting. And that to be the meaning of
Christ, Mat* 16. 17. and the Apostle, Romans 10. 9; 10. which was never meant nor
intended by them. Sir, you did not consider the Scriptures when you read them,
if you had, you might have discerned the meaning otherwise then that you have
there declared: and if it be possible, look on the Text with a single eye, and
then you may perceive more then yet you have, for this is a spiritual
Scripture, and none but spiritual eyes can discern it. In the letter it runs
thus, upon Peter's confession. Thou art Christ; the Son of the living God. Jesus
answered and said unto him, Blessed art thou Simon, etc. For flesh and blood
has not revealed this unto thee, but my Father which is in Heaven. You see the
Lord pronounces him blessed, because he was one that the Lord had inspired,
taught, and instructed; that it was not Peter's confession as he was a natural,
but as he was a spiritual man, and so uttered from the Spirit of adoption, as
in another place the same Apostle speaking to the same purpose, We believe and
are sure that thou art that Christ, the Son of the living God. And as in the
foregoing words he calls him Lord, saying, Whether shall we go, thou have the
words of Eternal life. Again, consider the terms he uses* We believe and are
sure; this sure and steadfast Faith is that Faith which ^^y had that received
him, that is, that loved, understood, and obeyed him, To whom he gave the
privilege of Sonship, even them that believe on his name, And then he shows
what manner of men they are in these words, Which were borne (says he) not of
blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God: so
then this blessed confession is from a blessed man, a regenerated man, the
Confession of a Child of the Covenant, as the Apostle Paul in the other place
says, speaking in the meaning of the Lord, The word is nigh thee (says he)
even in thy mouth, and in thy heart: That is (or this is) the word of faith
which we preach, the word or Covenant of Promise: That is, whoever by virtue of
the New Covenant, the Word or Statute of life, the Covenant of Grace, shall be
born again, and shall Believe in his heart, and confess with his mouth, the
Lord Jesus, as before is showed, he shall be saved, for such a one is the Child
of salvation. Now Doctor, see how you have wronged these Scriptures by making
the first a ground of a long discourse of Philosophy, in declaring to the
people how in the improvement of natural Faculties, first the Judgment is
informed, then the Will consents, and accordingly the Affections are
exercised.

I tell you the truth Doctor, I was ashamed of your Doctrine, and that made me
speak, though you returned me a scoff. And when your wisdom led you to show us
the meaning of the Apostles terms ( Believing and Confessing) by a Sillogisme
without distinguishing the meanings that were of diverse significations in the
Word of God, I was so bold as to tell you before all the people your Argument
was fallacious, and tended to deceive, because the terms were dubious: and
then you scorned and despised me again. And according to these corrupt
Expositions, are all the rest of your Arguings, whereof, except you prevent me
by your speedy repentance, I shall make a public Anatomy to the view of the
World, and Subscribe my Name

Your Friend, John Grant.

SIR,
I Received a thing subscribed with your Name, full of Basket-hilted words and
quarrelsome phrases, to provoke me to a challenge (as I suppose) about Mr
Cranfords Dispute at Mr Webbs; and in Justification of your uncivil behavior
there, which not I, but your own party rebuked. The business concerns Mr
Cranford, and how you should come to interest your self in it, I know not. If
Mr Cranford be pleased to resign it to you under his hand, I shall accept it.
If any thing else lie upon your stomach, you may signify what it is, and you
need not doubt of a reasonable Answer from

June 30. 1652. Peter Chamberlen.

London, the ^^ of July, 1652. SIR,
YEsterday I received a Letter from you, dated June 30. 1652. which Antedated
the last from me of the 3d Instant, which had you seen before you had written
this, I suppose your mind would not have been as here is expressed, for therein
you might have understood no carnal quarrelling, nor provocation to fleshly
challenges, nor vain and uncivil expressions of basket hilted words, nor any
private natural man's suppositions, but a clear, plain, and earnest contention
for the doctrine of faith once delivered to the Saints, clearly discovered, and
not dissembled, nor counterfeited; minding more the spirit of faith, by which
Gods Servants are enabled to speak then this or that man's business. And a Child
of truth that has his right or interest therein, they hear, they receive, they
understand, they believe the voice of their shepherd, but a strangers voice
they will not, they cannot, they may not hear and receive: and of the same
nature was yours, as I have signified twice before. At this time, I shall deal
only with you, I speak not of others, and mind no such resignation as you speak
of, but a vindication of the truth of God, from you withholding it in
unrighteousness, and pray for your repentance, to become truths Friend; truly
and plainly to distinguish between Divinity and Philosophy; and of terms also,
to preserve differing proprieties, and the contrary lies on my stomach
undigested.

Yours, John Grant.

SIR,
THe last night late, I met with a more civil Letter of yours, and surely
therein you shall not outdoe me. Wherefore now, taking all your Gods Servants
in speaking the truth to the blame of such as mistake, do not reproach them,
for they are commanded to reprove them, and must not call bitter sweet, nor
sweet bitter. They are commanded also to call that darkness that is so, and
that light that is light, and to justify the just, and condemn the wicked.
Reproaches of me, as done out of Zeal and Conscience, I can willingly pass
them by, and endeavor to satisfy you in whatsoever you may make a scruple*
(as far as the Lord shall enable me.) In your Letter July 2d you say he that
affirms that to be the Church of Christ which is not, wrongs the Lord, etc.
And he that gives any other meaning of the Scripture then what the holy Ghost
intends, hurts and wounds the truth of Gods Testimony, etc. To both these I
And to assent to the truth is tolerable, with a right understanding, but that
you are the man that have blasted God etc. is plainly proved in my second
Letter, and throughout the Trial following.
assent. Let us therefore see whether I be the man that have blasphemed (as ye
say) and I shall not dare to maintain it; I shall also desire you in the like
candor to lay these Rules to heart, and examine your self.

You say I affirm her that is True, Durable, and everlasting, to be fading, and
framed with untempered mortar; and that to be the meaning of Christ* Matthew
16. 17. and of the Apostle, Romans 10. 9, 10. which was never meant, nor intended
by them, which if I were guilty of, I confess your accusation Just. Let us
therefore speak of them both apart. First of the first, wherein we must first
endeavor to bring your words to your meaning, or your meaning to your words.
For if it My words and meaning if you take a true view of them, do not
contradict, as you shall see in my discovering of your own daubing, which you
say is the Church of Christ, and Gods perfect work in building his own
habitation.
relate unto the first Rules set down, it is a kind of contradiction. The Rule
intimating the making of a false Church to appear as a true: the other, the
making of a true Church to be as a false. But if you mean two several things,
then I suppose your rule would infer an imputation on me of having maintained
our Church to be the Church of Christ, which you say is not so, and your Church
not to be the Church of Christ, which nevertheless is so. For (surely) you
mean not that ever I affirmed the Church of Christ to be fading, and framed
with untempered mortar, but rather that such Churches which were so fading, and
framed with untempered mortar, are not the Churches of Christ.

Now that whereby we aver our selves to be the true Church of Christ, is by
keeping the Do you dare to boast of pure Ordinances, when all you do in the
outward, without the spiritual part, and meaning thereof, is abominable
iniquity: and, for bodily exercises that rotten Strumpet the Church of Rome
will outdoe you, although you should add your own vanity in your lacivious
washing your Damsels feet and legs also, for shame bring not in your former
carnality unrepented of, under the Vizzard of the Churches innocence. But
consider what is written, for in Christ Jesus neither Circumcision, or
Baptism, or Uncircumcision avails any thing, but a new creature. And again,
faith that works by love. And again, but keeping the Commandments of God.
Are any of these heavenly effects brought forth by your Plants? Nay, a bad tree
cannot bring forth good fruits: For all that has proceeded from you, are but
sower Grapes, and yet you will compare your bramble Berries with the Grapes of
the Vines of Canaan.
pure Ordinances of Christ, according to his word; and if you think otherwise,
you should instance in any particular. On the other side, we say that yours is
not the true Church of Christ, because you keep not the true Ordinances of
Christ according to his word. And we instance in Baptism, and the Lords
Supper, and could instance in more. Now this we do not for any Spleen or
Malice, (for I say the same things to my best Friends) but that I might provoke
you and them to examine your selves exactly by the Word of God, and forsake the
Traditions of men.

As to the Scriptures mentioned, Mat. 16. 17. The word it seems says it was
the Father that revealed it to Peter, and not It Is true, you mentioned the words
of Peter, but your carnal discourse thereof, showed plainly you understood not
his meaning, neither can you til you repent and be a new man.
flesh and blood, which thing I brought to prove that the knowledge of Truth
comes not by Flesh and Blood, but by Revelation from God. And Romans 10. 9. and
10. was no whit clouded or disparaged by the Philosophical Discourse of And if
your spiritual Experiences be of no higher nature then natural Philosophy is,
then your experience is vain; for all things under the Sun are vanity, since
their deprivation through sin and the curse. And as you your self have made
use of Philosophy, our Lords and Paul's use and yours is at a broad distance.
And that all your sill^gisms were fallacious, is sufficiently proved hereafter.
Experience (as you suppose) since David (Psalm. 19. and 104. etc.) and Christ
himself is full of excellent Philosophy, both moral and natural ( Mat. 5. 6.
7. Chap. 5.) and all throughout the Gospel. So Paul (Acts 14. 17.) etc.

Be not offended at Philosophy (which is the work and providence of God)
unless it be vain Philosophy, which is against God. If any of my Syllogisms
were fallacious, surely you were more quick then Mr Cranford, and all the
Scholars there to discern it, and truly know it better then my self: for I
know of none, nor meant none, show it, and I shall amend it.

Your last Letter from John 10. 5. I confess in all senses true; and whosoever
is but taught of man is but man's sheep. Whether any pretend to be mine or Mr
Cranfords, they have nothing to boast of. But if I speak the words of Christ,
in the power of Christ, it is no more I, but Jesus Christ that dwells in me.
And Here take notice what frieght of pride the Gentleman is laden with, in
these words, Them that hear not me, hear not him that sent me; for every thing
he has said or written, proves him not to be sent of Christ, although he
affirm of himself, that he is, for if I had sent him, says the Lord, he
should have spoken my words unto the people, which he has not, as hereafter is
more cleared.
then they that hear not me, hear not him that sent me.

Thus you see how large a Letter I have written to you, in love unto the truth,
and compassion to your soul, that you may know me to be

Your true Friend in the Lord, Peter Chamberlen.

NOw the reason why I do not answer this last Letter of the Doctors in a
private way as he sent it me, is, because he has so boldly and publicly
wronged the truth, that she has no way to be righted and relieved, but by
public reparation. And if I should reprove all I know of the Gentleman, both
old and new, some other things would fall in with my pens reprehension also.
But we will lay aside all these and many more, till another opportunity, and
now proceed to the trial of his Syllogismes.

THE Shipwreck of all False Churches. AND The Immutable Safety and Stability of
the true Church of CHRIST.
THE Disputes and Arguings of Dr Chamberlen, March 1. 1651. which are since
published, and as he says, for the satisfaction of all that love the truth,
but tends wholly contrary thereunto; and it is so far from being justified,
that it is condemned by all the Children of Wisdom, as I shall show plainly,
and that from his own printed Papers, gathering these three Conclusions out
from amongst abundance of unsound positions, vain repetitions, and absurd
inferences; and although he has scattered them up and down, yet we will
orderly reduce them, and Quaerie.

1. What he says of the Church of Christ. 2. Of the Ordinances. And, 3. Of the
Ministry thereof. And this shall be my method with Gods help.
1. I will show how the Doctor in all these particulars misseth the truth, and
then I will manifest and confirm the truth it self, as the Scriptures do
determine of all and each respectively.

In the 20^h page of his Book of Vain Syllogismes, he has these words, Dr
Chamberlen here took liberty to make a short Discourse concerning the Church,
which indeed is very much and large, but to little purpose; and therein
declares himself not to be acquainted with true Divinity; for what are all
Heathenish or carnal Christian Assemblies, to the Congregation of Christ's
Members, which are his Church, or the multitudes of carnal Christians, in
their devotion and worship, in the litterall, external Ordinances, and yet
notwithstanding be a sinful Nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of
evil doers, children that are corrupters, such as in heart have forsaken the
Lord, and have provoked the Holy One of Israel to anger, and are gone astray
backward, that is, have estranged, alienated, or separated themselves from God,
through their impenitency and hardness of heart, notwithstanding all their
pretense of outward sanctity in External Ordinances and Church Discipline,
where there is no such thing at all in truth and in sincerity, although drawn
out from others into separated Congregations, according to the traditions of
men's devices, filling themselves with the old wine of harisaicall
righteousness. And although among other Churches, the Doctor is pleased to
affirm, that the Church of Christ comprehends all the Saints, but in that he
shows not his* meaning what a Saint is, he thereby clears not himself from
being ignorant thereof, forasmuch as Antichrist himself gives the Title of
Saints to his ungodly Church also.

But if the Doctor would have edified the Congregation, he should in the first
place have distinguished between the true Church, and all such as are false, by
a right definition, and description of the Saints and true Church of Christ,
from all others that assume to take upon them her Name, and yet are ignorant of
her Nature, which he wholly omitting, has lost his labor, and rendered
himself unwise to the Children of wisdom. And for wanting better principles,
in his Premises, he makes his conclusion as equally corrupt in these words,
page 21. The Church of Christ, says he, is then, and so long the Church of
Christ, as she says and does what Christ gave her to say and do, even as
Christ himself. By which saying he makes the being and continuance of the
Church to depend on her own obedience; and for proof thereof, quo^es John 7.
17. and 8. 26 28. and 14. 10. 24. and 5. 19, 20. and concludes thus, and when
she says or does otherwise, she speaks, or plays the Harlot in that
particular. Which is not the doctrine of the spirit of Christ, but of the
spirit of Antichrist: For the Doctor makes the Church to be her own Keeper,
but the spirit of God says, the Lord is the shepherd and keeper of her. The
Spirit of Christ says, she is chaste and undefiled, the Doctor on the contrary
affirms she may play the whore, and be a Harlot. The Spirit says, she is led
into all truth, that she is the ground* pillar, and upholder of it, and so
impregnable that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against her, that every
member is living, every stone precious. But on the contrary, the Doctor says,
she is mutable, and so changeable, as that she may say and do contrary to it,
that leads her, that guides her, that speaks in her. Oh miserable doctrine, and
no less miserable are those that receive it; for if the blind lead the blind,
they will both fall into the ditch, yet the Doctor would have the people
believe he is not blind, but sees; and therefore quotes many Scriptures to
prove it, as are before mentioned, which being the letter of the Text, without
any exposition, we will examine the meaning thereof. Our Lord being at
Jerusalem, at the Feast of Tabernacles, the Jews, says the Text, marvelled
concerning him and his Doctrine; some said he was a good man, others, that he
deceived the people; but Jesus answered. My doctrine is not mine, but his that
sent me, and so advises them how they might have benefit by it. If any man
will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine whether it be of God, or
whether I speak of my self, where there is not one word of the Church of
Christ; for they that do not obey his will, are not his Church, nor any other
title to the Doctors purpose. In the second place, he continues his speech to
his persecuting enemies, which I hope upon second thoughts he does not
understand to be his Church. In the third place, he graciously informs and
confirms his faithful servant Phillip, in the Mystery of his Divinity, as of
his Humanity, and that his words are the works of God; but not a word in the
Doctors meaning. And in the 24. verse, as he speaks of them that love him, so
he speaks of them that hate him, whom to affirm to be his Church, is to
blaspheme her. And in the last place, John 5. 19, 30. the Lord speaks of
himself as distinguishable from the Father, and also declares the
hypostaticall union of both Natures, Humane and Divine. The true meaning of
these Scriptures being thus considered, shows plainly that his doctrine and
their intention, were at a vast distance; for it is far from their meaning,
that the Church of Christ may play the Harlot, and of pure, become base and
unclean, because they testify that she is so long to last, and continue holy,
even every member of her his body, as Jesus Christ her head is to be Christ,
who was yesterday, and to day, and for ever. And s^ving your learning, Sir*
this doctrine shows that you are still tainted with the old leaven of corrupt
Popery, and Arminianisme, which will be more manifested when I come to show
what the true Church of Christ is indeed, discovering thereby your fancy more
particulerly and exactly.

Another conclusion that he would teach the people was, That his Church was a
Baptized Church, and had the true marks of a true Church, which is the true
Preaching the Word, and the true administration of the Sacraments, as he calls
them. Here the Gentleman is at a loss also, and beats the air as before, and
that which he says is to as little purpose, his terms not being cleared to
what sense he means, from their various ac^eptations. But the truth is, his
own meaning by Baptism is but that which is outward, that any man may bear
witness to, that is present, as he affirms in page 23. So then, his Baptism
is of the same nature as his Church is, both carnal, the inside foul, as
Simon Magus his heart was, not right in the sight of God, his estate natural
and miserable, in the Gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity, yet
washed and cleansed without. Where do you read in the Scriptures that the
Churches of God, true spiritual Christians, did ever brag and boast of the
fleshly and carnal parts of the Ordinances of the Gospel, as you have done?
No, they see those are shaddows, elementary representations, and say, that it
is not Baptism in the flesh, that saves not; but the Baptism of the heart, the
heart sprinkled from an evil conscience, and the body washed with pure water,
by this spiritual Baptism men are saved. So also they affirm, that is not
Circumcision that is in the flesh, but that is Circumcision that is of the
heart in the spirit, and not in the Letter, inward, spiritual, and heavenly
Baptism. And this Circumcision is that which Gods Church glories in, and not
the outward, that Devils may participate of as well as Saints. But the Doctor
fears not to avouch, that the washing with the Old Ford, or Thames water, and
the like places is that Baptism, which the Scripture in a special sense
speaks of, by which men are regenerated, because he makes it the true mark of
the rue Church. Indeed this is the opinion of the stupid, obdurat, hard-hearted
Jews and Papists, and of most carnal Protestants, in which they are all alike.
But as the true Church of Christ is spiritual, so is her Baptism, and so are
her fruits and manifestations, her marks and seals, by which she is
distinguished from all other Churches that are false, as when I come to
establish the truth shall be cleared.

But the Doctor further affirms, that their Baptized Churches have the true
Preaching of the Word; and he thinks himself to be none of the meanest amongst
the rest: and therefore in the first place, and in the behalf of all the
Baptized Churches, as he calls them, we will examine his own true Preaching of
the word as he affirms in page 24. That his Church, and all other Baptized
Churches baptize such as shall be saved, according to Mark 16. 16. because, as
he says, they are beleivers and repenters. Again, says he, they that Baptize
such as confess with their mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe in their hearts
that God has raised him from the dead, Romans 10. baptizeth such as shall be
saved.

But baptized Churches baptize such as confess with their mouth the Lord
Jesus, and believe with their hearts that God raised him from the dead;
therefore baptized Churches baptize such as shall be saved. This professed
workman for want of true understanding to divide the word aright, has from his
own mouth eternalized his own shame, for want of a clear and true distinction
in the same terms that have diverse meanings. And that his folly may the more be
manifested, we will ingeniously consider the Scriptures; the first we read
thus, He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved. Now to find out the
true meaning hereof, two terms of necessity must be opened; for one and the
same term admitting of diverse meanings in Scripture, that sense must be
distinguished from all others of like nature, that is properly and only
intended in that place. Now for the term [ Faith] it has diverse significations
in the Scripture; sometimes it is referred unto God, sometimes unto men; when
unto God, then it implies or intends nothing else but the sure and certain
unalterablenesse of his promise, and decree. If unto men, then it signifies
and intends either the doctrine of the Gospel it self, or their faithfulness
that declare it, or else some special gifts which the Spirit of God indueth
his servants with; now of such gifts there are but three sorts that bear the
name of faith. Sometimes the knowledge and certain understanding of the truth of
Gods word, is called Faith, which for distinction sake may be called, and that
truly, The Faith of knowledge, or Historical Faith; which Faith, although all
the Saints under the Scriptures administration of the Gospel have, yet it is
not peculiar to them alone, but common to all perishing Christians, such as the
Doctors Church consists of, and may abundantly exceed in yea, even Satan
himself. The second gift of the holy Ghost, is that by which any one
miraculously does such things as canseth admiration in the beholders, exceeding
natural effects, and is often in holy Writ called by the name of Faith, and so
may be denominated Miraculous Faith. But with this gift the unholy may more
excel, then the holy men of God; for John the Baptist did no Miracle, but
Judas the Traitor did many; in which gift of Faith the Priests and Juglers of
Rome were famous; as the Spirit of the Lord foretold. And they shall do great
wonders, and works of great power, so that they would deceive if it were
possible, the very elect. Which kind of Faith may properly be defined thus,
That it is a certain undoubted confidence whereby a man believes that God
Almighty will by him do this or that Miracle, as the Scripture says, Through
Faith in his name. The third sort of the gifts of the Spirit, which any man
receives to Eternal life, is called by the name of Faith; and that more often
then those before named, which the Scripture calls The Faith of God, The
Faith of the Son of God, the Faith of Jesus Christ, the Faith of Abraham, the
Faith that works by love, the Faith of Gods Elect, which is often and
properly called by godly men, justifying Faith; and of this sort and kind of
Faith, all the Saints, and they only have, which may be truly defined in this
manner, that it is a full, sure, and firm confidence engraven by the power of
the Spirit of God, in a penitent, broken heart, whereby he assuredly believes
that all his sins are remitted, and that he is reconciled and made one with
God, in everlasting love and favor through the Lord Jesus Christ. Now the
Doctor ought to have considered which of all these three sorts of Faith is
meant by our Savior in the place he alleges; the last sort of Faith cannot be
understood, for that is included in the next term [ Baptized] as I shall show
when I give you the meaning. Nor the second sort, for that is not peculiar to
them that shall be saved. And therefore without all contradiction it must be
the first sort of Faith, which all the Elect of God must have in some measure
or other, wrought by Gods Spirit, before he works, either Repentance, or
Remission of sins; which kind of Faith may well be expressed in saying that it
is, and it is nothing else but a sure knowledge and settled assent* of the mind
and heart, by which a man most undoubtedly believes such things as are
revealed for the Salvation of mankind.

Now the second Term in the Text is [ Baptized] which word is likewise of
diverse significations in the Scripture; and he ought here to have dealt like a
skillful spiritual workman, as before is expressed; that is, in the first place
to have showed the manifold acceptations the same word also has in the Holy
Ghosts expression, and then which of all the meanings by the same term is here
to be understood, which the Doctor having omitted, of necessity I must do this
work for him, to find out the true meaning of this Scripture also. Wherefore I
say of the term [ Baptisme] as of the term Faith, that it has diverse,
disfinct, and several meanings in the Scriptures; sometimes is meant by it
external elementary Baptism, that which is from below, but more often that
which is spiritual and heavenly, from above, as repentance is called Baptism,
and so is Remission of Sins; and these two heavenly operations together,
being Regeneration, and the making parts of the New man, are called Baptism,
and so are the gifts of the Holy Ghost given to this New creature, called
Baptism: as also, the enabling Grace in the holy conversation of this Child of
God. His mortification and vivification are called Baptism; as also are his
blessed sufferings for righteousness sake. Can you be Baptized with the
Baptism that I am Baptized with? etc.

Now Mr. Doctor; may it please you to learn which of all these distinct
meanings is that which is intended by our Lord and Savior: the last it cannot
be, for in that our Lord speaks of the work and exercise of a New man, born,
and not of the Birth it self: the first it cannot be, for that is from below;
and it is impossible for the water of the great Ocean Springs, or Fountains to
unharden the heart, to convert a natural man, to renew the sinner, to
sanctify the polluted; then without all question it must be the Baptism of
Repentance, and Remission of Sins* the washing of Regeneration, and Renewing
of the Holy Ghost, for whosoever is so Baptized, does so repent, and believe,
shall be saved.

Now these things considered, I pray see what a corrupt manner of Preaching is
this of yours, and how these Scriptures prove what you have affirmed, let the
people of the Lord judge. For as you have by your false Expositions killed and
taken away the life and meaning of Gods holy Word, in these past instances of
Divine Writ; even so in like manner has your dealing been with all other
Scriptures you have made use of; for which in due time and place you shall
receive just reproof. In the next place, I should have discovered your
ignorance of the Ordinance of the Lords Supper, which is your confirmation of
your Disciples, under the power of your Ordinances, as you use to say, by which
you do not only interest your selves into their Estates, but have the
disposing of their bodies also. But I will defer that till I shall determine it
rightly by the Scriptures of truth, and will now take in hand the point you
have spent most of your Syllogismes about, concerning the Ministry of the
Church of Christ; and you ground your large Disputes on a Question, page 2.
which you frame thus. Whether private men, I mean Tradesmen, say you may Preach
the Word of God without Ordination. By which it appears his meaning is, they
may; and so goes on in all fury, and in a conceit of an uncontrollable ability
to make good his three fold Cord of Major, Minor, and Conclusion, with cunning,
sophistical words of Juglers, as the Apostle speaks of some in his time, 2
Pet. 1. 16. And the man is so confident, that he thinks neither word nor spirit
may countermand him, but when the account of his Question is audited, I think
he will wish he had been better employed, for the Doctor is fallen into a
mist, as he was before, and does all his work in darkness; and he shall find
them to prove no less then works of darkness themselves, by not clearing
three terms in his Question; that is, Private men, Ordination, and Preaching:
and that I may the more fully discover the Doctors weakness, his question's
examination shall be by the Scriptures, and then it will appear how the
Scriptures meaning, and the Doctors does disagree. Now we find the first
term, Private man, made use of by the Apostle, 2 Pet. 1. 20, 21. Knowing this
first (says he) that no Prophecy of the Scripture is of any private
interpretation (or motion* as some translate) for the Prophecy came not at any
time by the will of man, etc. The Apostle teaches us here that the private man
he speaks of, is a natural man; and he explains his own meaning to be so, in
these words, By the will of man: that is, by no natural man's abilities
whatsoever. And as he denies that the Prophecy of truth and holy Writ came by
the power, parts, and gifts of any man in nature, so also he affirms, By whom
God makes known his word, will, and Prophesies, that is, by spiritual men, in
these plain words, But holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy
Ghost Now Doctor, see that which yet you never saw; the Church of Christ, her
Preachers and Prophets of the Lord are not carnal, but spiritual men, and
their motion and enablement thereunto, is not by any humane spirit, but through
the movings and ability of the holy Ghost. Where is now therefore the multitude
of your Arguments, and Syllogismes, of men and Trades men, and gifted men, not
taking into consideration, there are men and men, and gifts and gifts, which
for want of Scripture distinction, all the pains you have taken to spin so many
curious threads to make a carnal webb of, no sooner is it touched by the Divine
finger of the spiritual meaning of the word of God, but your glorious show of
humane, and of carnal, or private men falls all into filthy dust: for although
carnal men may literally preach, as Judas and others have done, yet none but
holy men can Preach spiritually. And in this distinction the other terms are
to be understood also, of Ordination and Tradesmen, both Divine, the one in
person, the other in approbation, and mission for holy men of God. The
Messengers and Ministers of Christ, are sent, appointed, and Ordained by the
Lord himself, and justified and approved of by the Saints And their Preachings
and Declarations are not their own visions and though^s, as the Doctors are,
but the truth, word, and mind of the Lord; the same spirit in them enables them
to open the Scriptures now, which wrote them by the hands of his holy Prophets
and servants, which shall be more fully cleared when I come to the truths
confirmation.

Now this brief discovery of the Doctors large mistakes, shall suffice for
this time; some other things there are, which we shall have occasion to
reprove, as we find them to hinder us in the way of truth And therefore,
according to my promise in the first place I shall make a clear and plain
description of the true Church of Christ, and so follow the Doctor the same
way he goes. But who is sufficient for these things, as the Apostle speaks; But
we are not as many which corrupt or deceitfully deal with the Word of God, but
as of sincerily, but as of God; in the sight or in the powerful presence of
God, speak we in Christ, although the Doctor despise us. Be it known unto him
therefore, and all the world, that the true Church of Jesus Christ is of a holy
and pure nature, every part and member of her: for he that sanctifies her, and
they that are sanctified, are all of one; that is, of the one Holy Spirit; so
then, as in her new nature she is Holy and Divine, so she is heavenly and
spiritual; spiritual Children which make a spiritual Family, or Household;
spiritual Trees which make a spiritual, fruitful, fragrant Garden;
spiritual Stones built up a spiritual House, Temple, Tabernacle, a repose, an
habitation for the heavenly God, the Father of Spirits, to abide, to delight,
to dwell and reside in. Yea more yet, she is a spiritual body, consisting of
none but of spiritual members, knit and joined together with spiritual
sinews, supplied with spiritual grace from the Fountain, the Head, the
spiritual Head Jesus Christ, from which all the joints and bands, having
nourishment, ministered and knit together, grows or increases with the
increase of God; from the Head* I say, conveyeth all over the body, to the
least Member, with spiritual veins, through which, an everlasting supplying
grace is continued. For as she is the building and workmanship of God, the
Children and Household of God, the Plantation and Garden of the Lord, so she is
kept by the power of God unto salvation. And he that keeps this his Israel,
his chosen, called and sanctified ones, does neither slumber nor sleep, but
ever watches: And he their Holy Shepherd is mighty, and stronger then all, so
that no opposite power and strength is able to take them out of his hand.

Now forasmuch as the faithful servant and Apostle of Christ writing unto the
holy and blessed Church at Ephesus, affirms them to be Saints, and faithful,
and that they are in Christ Jesus. Now all that are in Christ Jesus are holy
and faithful, for they are justified by faith, and sanctified by the Holy
Ghost, and as the Root is holy* so are the branches also; yet the Apostle says
to these holy ones, You were the Children of wrath as well as others. And to
another Church he says, And such were some of you, speaking before of wicked
and unholy men; But ye (says he, meaning now) are washed, but ye are
sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
Spirit of our God. That is, through the power of Christ, by the operation of
the Spirit.

Therefore to know the way and method which God takes in the conversion of his
servants that are his Church, the discovery and opening thereof, will make not
only the Description of the Church of Christ more clear, and manifest, but
give us a definition also of her supernatural making, parts: For as since the
creation, propagation or birth gives being to all men naturally; so heavenly
and spiritual birth since the fall of man, is ordained and appointed of God to
give spiritual being to all his Saints, and Children, which are the Church of
God, as it is written, That which is borne of the flesh is flesh, and that
which is borne of the spirit, is spirit: so it is spiritual birth that gives
being to spiritual men* But forasmuch as this one Scripture does fully prove
the assertion in both parts thereof, that is that birth taken in a two fold
meaning, is the production both of natural men, and spiritual men. And the
due consideration of the wisdom of the Holy Ghost by declaring that which is
heavenly, by that which is natural, teaches us that there is much resemblance
of the births in the manner, although not in the nature. In the natural birth
there is a conception in the beginning, and a reception in the continuance,
till bringing forth, or accomplishment. And all these distinctions with their
concomitants may be comprehended in the term birth, now that which does
accompany conception, is compunction in nature, in sorrow, shall thou conceive,
and in the reception, all the while till the deliverance, and in the
deliverance, pain, sorrow, labor, pangs, throws intolerable dollorous till
the Child is born, and then comes ease, comfort, and rejoicing; even so it is
in the spiritual birth, in a likeness and resemblance, for the manner of it,
but in the nature, no similitude at all, for the the one is from below, the
other from above, as it is written; Except a man be born again from above, of
water and the Spirit, he cannot see the Kingdom of God: In which words there
are four parts, and the terms therein to be distinctly considered of. The
first is, Of whom our Lord speaks by the name man, and by it he means a
natural man. And secondly, That this man is to be born again; his meaning is
not as Nicodemus at that time understood him, to enter into that place of
nature from whence he came forth, but to be born from above by a supernatural
force, power, virtue, and operation of the Spirit of God. In the third place,
He speaks of the matter of the Birth, and that has two parts: The first is
heavenly and spiritual water, meaning thereby the grace and gift of God, which
the holy Ghost often in the Scriptures, calls by the name of water, which is
the Baptism of Repentance, a true turning to God. The second part consists
of another more excellent work of the Spirit, which is here called the Holy
Ghost, but in other places by metaphorical terms, blood, and fire, by which
is meant the Baptism of the Holy Ghost, or Remission of sins. The first part
is full of spiritual grief, and disconsolation, the last full of heavenly
comfort and consolation. And lastly, By seeing the Kingdom of God, he means
the knowing and being a member of his Church in the state of Regeneration,
receiving the Spirit of Adoption, through which he is made the Child of God,
and if Children, then Heirs of the everlasting Kingdom, the World to come, the
inheritance of the Saints: so then; from this Scripture thus opened we are
taught, that Gods method and way to convert men from nature to grace, to make
them members of his Church, is to Turn them from darkness to light, from the
power of Satan. to be reconciled unto God: To deliver us from the power of
darkness, and translate us into the Kingdom of the Son of his love. And by
this way and means the Lord made and constituted the true Church of Christ at
Collosse, as he does all other Churches of his, which were Saints, and
faithful brethren in Christ, And so did he likewise that famous Church at
Ephesus, Ye were sometimes darkness (says the Apostle) but now are ye light
in the Lord, walk as Children of light, Mark I pray you, he calls this Church,
these Saints, these Faithful in Christ Jesus, Children of light, and how came
they to be so, but by being Borne of God, of his own will begat he them, being
born again of incorruptible seed, the Word of God, which is the Word of his
Grace, the New Covenant, the Word of Promise, the Covenant of Life, the making
us partakers thereof, is the taking away the stony heart, and in the place
thereof to give his Elect a heart of flesh, that is, a soft, tender, and humble
heart, and in it to write his everlasting love, mercy, and kindness, never to
be obliterated, or revoked, as before is showed. For those whom he thus loves
once, he loves unto the end. And these Children of God, are those little ones
the Scripture speaks of, those humble ones the Lord teaches, those contrite
and penitent ones, that the Lord comfort, refreshes, and reviveth; this is
his Sion, his little City, his desired Habitation, his delightful dwelling,
his Holy Mountain. And where two or three of these are gathered together in
his Name; where by Name we are to understand Spirit, there is he in the midst
of them; that is it that is it that makes them his Church, even his holy
presence; that is it that makes them his House, his Tabernacle, to do his
great pleasure in Earth, by his Spirit, as the everlasting Father, and the Son
does in Heaven, whose voice not to regard, is as much as not to regard the
voice of God himself. Oh Doctor, for you, to compare your hay, wood, and
stubble, with the purity and excellency of this Churches mettle, which is Gods
building, it will even so eclipse your rush light, and split your hulk, and
shipwreck your bark for ever, as never to recover, and your sandy foundation
will shortly cause such a fall of your foolish Church* building, as never to be
built again. And that you may repent of your ignorance of the true Church of
Christ, I will give you another discovery of her excellency, by her pure
estate, and glorious condition, which the Prophetical Apostle John saw in a
Vision, and writ it for posterity, in these words, And a great sign appeared
in Heaven, a Woman clothed with the Sun, and the Moon under her feet, and on
her head a Crown of twelve stars. And being great with Child, she cried
traveling and laboring to be delivered. In which Scripture there are many
things considerable. 1. A matter of wonderment and admiration, for the great
excellency of it. 2. The place where it appeared, and that was in Heaven. 3.
What it was that appeared, and that was a woman* 4. Then her clothing and
apparel all over her body. 5. As also what she was crowned with on her head.
6. What she trod under her feet; and not only denominating all things without
her, but 7. what was within her also. And being great with Child, she cried
traveling, and laboring to be delivered. This precious Virgin Spouse, the
Lords Bride, being in her condition spiritual, did shine forth in her
primitive estate, not in any outward pomp and humane carnal glory; as now in
any external form, or soft Raiment, after the fashion of the multitude of
gathered Churches in these days; but in her heavenly gifts, and holy virtues,
her chaste and prudent conversation, the shining of her faith, love, patience,
and moderation; in all things she was such as she was the light of the world,
to the wonderment and admiration of all the Children that had eyes to behold
her. And whereas it is said, She appeared in Heaven, the meaning is, the places
where the Gospel was believed, the truth of God, and way to salvation
professed, as in Judea, Italy, Macedonia, Asia, and diverse other places,
Cities, and Countries; in which sense the Apostle speaks to the Church of
Thessalonica, For from you sounded out the word of the Lord not only in
Macedonia, and Achaia, but also in every place your faith to Godward is spread
abroad, etc.

And that the Church of Christ is signified by the appellation and title of a
Woman; that is usual and often the expression of the Holy Ghost in the
Scriptures; as The Kings Daughter, The Daughter of Sion, The Spouse of Christ,
The Lambs Wife, The Mother of all the Saints, etc. And there is great reason
for the Female Sex resembles the Church of Christ in many respects; as for
their fruitfulness, for their beauty, for their subjection and passivenesse,
and tender bowels of compassion. And that she may want nothing that may tend to
her full description in her whole attire, to make her all glorious without as
the Prophet says, The Kings Daughter is all glorious within. The son of
Righteousness, even his own Righteousness is her Mantle, her clothing, It is
a metaphorical speech, often used in the Scripture, thereby declaring the
Righteousness of Christ by being clothed in sine linen, by a wedding
Garment, and a white stone, and very apt is the resemblance, for as a stole or
Garment, covers and adornes the natural body; so the righteousness of Christ
covers and clothes, adorns and beautifies the poverty and brokenness of the
peninent souls of his Elect. And this Garment is of that nature, and quality,
as that it warms and sustains the feeble and thirsty soul, with the assurance
of the mercy and favor of God in Christ Jesus for ever. And the Holy Ghost
gives testimony also of the fruits of her lively justifying faith, in
declaring her newness of life in her detestation of sin, and true love to her
Lord in this figurative expression, And the Moon under her feet, declaring
thereby her mortification and death too, and of her sinful corruption, and
worldly natural affection; and also her vivification and daily renewed mind,
to a heavenly conversation, delighting and meditating day and night in the Holy
Law and Word of God, being no more carnally, but spiritually minded. The next
external, yet spiritual description is the Ornament of her head, wherein she
took most pleasure, saying, She wore on her head a Crown, not with gold and
silver beset with precious stones, for the excellent matter thereof it exceeded
all these, for it was made of the holy and pure Doctrine of the Twelve
Apostles, which testimonies and verities of theirs are the Lords lights and
torches to guide and direct sinners when they are benighted and darkened with
their sins, and for this cause are called by the name of stars. And lastly, the
Holy Ghost declares the effects, and operation of Gods spirit and word in her,
for by the heavenly truth which was by her ears received, her heart spiritually
conceived, and she was greatly filled with a deep sense of her own vileness
and unworthiness; with bemoaning and mournfully lamenting her sad forlorn
condition, traveling and laboring under great oppression, by reason of sin,
in restless desire of reconciliation to God; which pains and anguish of her
mourning heart and contrite spirit, the Apostle most truly compares to the
throws and pains of a woman in travel of Childbirth, of which spiritual
pains and labor she could not possible by any means be eased or releived,
until her Lord were formed in her, even until her tender heart were
sanctified by faith; for nothing could cure the wound but the assurance of
mercy, nor nothing satisfy her restless desire, but the love of God insured
her in Christ her Lord, and written in the fleshy Tables of her heart,
according to his everlasting Covenant. Thus you see both the definition and
description of the true Church of Christ, that she is holy and spiritual,
within and without also, distinguished and disevered from all other Churches,
by Regeneration; as the outward Court and the Temple were parted by a veil,
and described by such perfect fruits of righteousness, as no Pharisaicall
Congregations can bring forth. And herein I have made good my promise to you in
this first particular: The second thing I promised, was to make known unto you
the divine Ordinances of this holy Church, and they are many, but we will
briefly and that truly discover such as are most material to our purpose. Now
as she her self is spiritual, and their communions one with another, so also
is every part of her worship spiritual likewise; and yet we must ever
remember, that most Ordinances consist of two parts; the one carnal and
outward, the other spiritual and inward: Now the common and carnal Christians
are most busied about the carnal part, as fleshly washings, corporal eatings,
litterall Expositions, and verbal supplications, like the Pharisees, that were
strict to tyth mint, and the meanest external things, but wholly omitted the
weightiest and greatest, that which was internal, as true Repentance, etc.
diligently washed the outside, but minded not at all to cleanse inwardly the
heart, in all which Mr Doctor, you spent most of your labor, and very few
words or none, about the spiritual part. And one Reason was, because all your
Disputes tended but to a carnal Church, for a Congregation of carnal
Christians make no better then a carnal Church; and carnal Arguments and
actions do manifest the hearts of such to be carnal.

But I desire your Repentance of these things, and hasten to the discovery of
the truth, that may make you a Child thereof indeed; and therefore we will
return to a further discovery of the true Churches spiritual Worship in the
Heavenly part of Gods Ordinances, in which she and her Children are most
conversant, for they are always mindful of the Holy Covenant of their Lord,
in the heavenly parts of it; they mourn, and weep, and suffer together, in
their patience possess their souls, and pass through the Valley of Tears,
participating each with other, knowing they are thereunto called of God, not
only to believe, but to suffer for his sake: the assured hope they have of the
great portion, inheritance, and salvation they are born unto by the spirit,
does so support them, that they rejoice in tribulation, the Holy Ghost bearing
them witness, That if they suffer with him, they shall also reign with him.
Know you not (says the Apostle, as if he had said in other words, you know
assuredly) that as many of us as are Baptized into Jesus Christ, were Baptized
into his death; therefore we are buried with him by Baptism into death. Mark
the terms, Baptized, or Buried with him into death, which shows, if men be
Members of his body, then if our head suffer, the Members must suffer also: and
as sure as the Head is raised from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so
we also his Members are raised in our mind and affections, to newness of life.
And in the same sense he says again, For if we have been planted together in
the likeness and similitude of his death, we shall be also in the likeness of
his Resurrection. And these broken melting hearted Saints, that at first in
their Regeneration were thus humbled, and made low, and poor in Spirit,
yielding, inclining, and bowing to the will and pleasure of Almighty God. This
heavenly grace which the Lord calls water in a spiritual meaning, abides in
and with them always throughout their whole life; and by it they are enabled
to be Baptized with sufferings, as they were born or begotten of water, which
is Repentance: So likewise at the Lords Supper, they sometimes, and that with
much comfort, eat and drink corporally the Elements of Bread and Wine, and
therein declare the Lords death till his coming; but they always by faith
communicate of his body and blood, the Spirit of Adoption that dwells in them,
still bearing witness of the Lords everlasting kindness, with the refreshings
of the light of his countenance, affording them more comfort, then all the
abundance of earthly things, or shaddows of that which is spiritual, the
witness and evidence of the Spirit of God, exceeds all testimonies and
assurances, and fills the soul with satisfaction. Now in this condition they
know the truth of their Lords words by blessed experience. My flesh is meat
indeed, and my blood is drink indeed, living bread that came down from heaven,
and they that eat thereof, eat everlasting life. It is immortal food, this
body and blood is the resurrection and the life, for they that eat this flesh,
and drink this blood, dwell in Christ, and Christ in them. This food causes
union, co-habitation, one-nesse of mind, and likeness of affection between
Christ and his Members. This is the fatted Calfe that fed the prodigal, this
is the Childrens bread provided of God himself for his servant Jacob, those
excellent dainties, sweet and fat things, full of marrow, the wine and milk,
the honeycomb with the honey, with which the Lord feeds his friends, his
beloved and chosen ones, which food does not only cheer, delight, and comfort,
but it confirms, and seals with assurance, even that gold Ring that sealed the
Fathers favor to his lost Son, the best Robe of all the Wardrobe, for there is
none like it in Heaven nor in Earth, for it is the Righteousness of the
Saints, it covers all nakedness, it defends from all dangers, and it ever
finds acceptance with their heavenly Father, in all services and sacrifices,
for these worshippers have their hearts purged from an evil conscience, and
their Garments dipped in blood for the Lamb is in them, and they in him. And thus
spiritual are their prayers also, this sacrifice likewise is a broken heart,
and as it is the spirits habitation and dwelling, so it is his place of acting
and working; and although the Saints themselves cannot tell how to pray as they
ought, yet the Spirit their continual comforter, guider, and directer helps
them, and secretly prompteth them with sighs and groans that cannot be uttered,
with the Organ of the Tongue, so inward, faithful, and fervent, are the
spirits requests to God that only knows the meaning thereof: and for their
matter they are faithful supplications, they ask in faith, in the name of
their Lord, that is, in the powerful assistance of Christ's Spirit; And this is
the confidence we have in him (say the Saints) if we ask any thing according to
his will, he hears us, and if we know that he hears us, that is, if the
Spirit do so witness to us, we know then, that we have the Petitions that we
desired of him; for number they are but few; for place, private; for practice
and performance, often and frequent; Pray continually, says the Apostle. And
shall the Elect cry day and night unto God their Father, against their Enemies
oppressions, and shall not he avenge them? yea he will avenge them, and that
speedily. In all their spiritual warfare, this is the last and principal
piece of Armor, Praying always with all prayer and supplication in the
spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseverance. This Servant of our Lords
had very well learned his Masters Lesson, Watch and pray, least ye enter into
temptation; and this part of their worship is spiritual, as the worshippers
themselves are spiritual. Again, their understanding the Scripture, is not
only litterall, but spiritual; and that it may the more clearly appear, we
must remember to make use of this distinction, that the Scriptures may be
spoken of as of a Body, and a Spirit, in the letter and the meaning thereof.
Now all carnal Gospellers, and false Expositors, as they understand no further
then the letter, or common gifts declared therein, by the sense which such give
of the Scriptures, they kill Gods Witnesses, the two holy Testaments. Priests
whose Visions are darkness, do violate, wrong, and injure all the holy
Writings of Gods faithful servants, and witnesses; of which company a^e the
Learned Clerks of Rome, and all other fleshly Preachers; for that Church
consisting of the fat Beasts of the field, did kill, havoc, and slay them in
such a barbarous manner, in that great City of Rome, which in a spiritual
wicked meaning, is called Sodom and Egypt, for their uncleanness and malice,
against the true intent of the Scriptures, that notwithstanding they had the
letter and Corpse amongst them, yet they did deny the life and soul, the mind
and will of God therein revealed, to be buried, or interred in their proper
Monuments, the hearts of men; and as they then, so the same things do all
carnal Churches now that are of her old nature, although of a new frame, by
their like lying, and false Expositions, and interpretations, even take the
life from the body, and separate the soul from the corpse, of these two
Witnesses, two Prophets, two Candlesticks, two Testimonies, two Olive Trees,
and two Covenants; which two in all and each appellation, are but one thing in
the true meaning; and so they shall continue to do the remainder of the 42
months, till 14 years of the whole number to come, be expired.

In the mean while the voice of the Church of Christ is heard from out of the
Wilderness, and wholly tends to the vindication, resurrection, and restoration
of the true meaning of the Word of God, as it is written. And after three days
and a half* the Spirit of life from God, entered into them, and they stood upon
their feet. And Gods Church fears not to speak, although she cares not to be
known, she being indewed with the spirit of life from God; and in her reading
the Scriptures you shall find her full of consideration, and understanding, as
our Lord directs her, Let him that reads consider: For they that read and
hear the words of this Prophecy, and keep those things that are written
therein, and are blessed in so doing, must needs truly understand them; and
indeed it is Sion, Gods Church only, that understands and declares the
Gospel truly by the Scriptures administration; For by the Church (says the
Apostle) is made known the manifold wisdom of God; which shall be more
manifested in the next particular, in declaring what the Ministers of the
Church of Christ are.

And it is an undeniable truth that they are Regenerated, spiritual men, for
if every Member of their Church be so, and all their Ordinances and Sacr^fices,
their Communions, and administrations, then of necessity their Ministry must be
so also, and therefore in Scripture they are called, Holy men of God, and Holy
Apostles and Prophets; and are thereby distinguished from all others that are
vain and ungodly.

1. They are holy personally. 2. They are holy giftedly.
And as God has joined them together, so I shall not separate them in their
description. A Scribe instructed unto the Kingdom of Heaven, is like unto a
good Householder that brings forth of his Treasury things new and old. Now in
that our Lord says, He is taught unto the Kingdom of Heaven, it is all one as
if he had said, he had been taught of God, and that shows he is a Child of
God, a holy man, as I have instanced before in the Apostle Peter's description
to this purpose; and by bringing forth of his treasure, he means the
administration of his spiritual gifts, from the supernatural store house
within him. Again, our Lord says, Whosoever believes in me, as the Scripture
has said, out of his belly shall flow Rivers of water of Life. This he spoke
(says the Text) of the gifts they should receive that believed on him. This
effectual faith, which is twice repeated, and that to which the Word of God
witnesses to be satisfying drink to the thirsty soul, shows such a one to
be Regenerate; and the flowing fountain proceeding from him* those heavenly
gifts of the Holy Ghost. And agreeable to this is that which is spoke of
Stephen that Holy Martyr, when those choice and learned Students of the
Synagogues of the Libertines men of four several Nations, Cyrenians,
Allexandrians, Cyreans, and As^ans; these, even such were not able to resist
the wisdom and the spirit by which he spoke.

So the Prophet Micha speaking to the shame of such Prophets that speak without
an answer from God, that have no Vision but their own, to whom the day, the
light of Gods truth is dark over them, and the Sun is gone down from them,
and yet will Prophecy though they confound themselves; But truly (says he) I
am full of power by the Spirit of the Lord, and of judgment, and of might, to
declare unto Jacob, and c. That is, to Preach to Jacob. And so the Apostle Paul
(speaking of the Gospel of Christ, Whereof (says he) I am made a Minister,
according to (or by) the gift of grace given to me, by, or through the
effectual working of his power. And so he testifies to another Church, Whereof
I am made a Minister, according to the dispensation of God, which is given to
me for you fully: That is, perfectly, truly, and spiritually to preach the Word
of God. And so Peter and John testified to the face of such at Jerusalem as had
Crucified our Lord with wicked hands, and proceeded also to forbid them to
speak any more to anyman in his name, notwithstanding their threatenings we
cannot (said they) but speak the things we have seen and heard. What Gods
Messengers see, hear, and learn of the Father, that they declare, that they
preach. Christ gives the gifts God has set them in his Church, his body, but
every member has not the same Office, therefore the differing gifts give being
to different Offices and Officers, and all spiritual, as the whole body is and
are approved of, and allowed by the rest of the Members, all the Saints.

Now I should have spoken of the keys, power, and rich treasures of this
Church, but Doctor you are not able to bear it at this time, that is, neither
to understand it, nor receive it.

But you will say, I will answer all that he has said in one word, for all
that he has spoken is to be understood of the invisible Church, but all my
Disputes are of visible Congregations, and Sir, what you mean by them, your
own words declare, page 23. as is touch before, such as any man may know
(says he) and if that be so, then I am sure they consist of natural and
carnal men; and of the same nature are their administrations, for the Apostle
says, The natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they
are foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned.

Again, to say the true Church of Christ is invisible, is the old cunning cheat
of the Devil, to keep men from Repentance, and from attaining that eye salve,
through which they might discern the things that belong unto their peace, and
depart from Babylon, and make haste to Sion.

But says the Doctor, The Baptized Churches have forsaken Babylon, and admit
of none but Baptized Members, nothing but pure Ordinances; we are knit together
in Church fellowship. But by your leave, if ye be carnal, and cannot discern
the Church of God, and therefore deny her visibility, which her Lord affirms
of her, to be a City set upon a Hill, a candle on a Table, the Light of the
World, the Salt of the Earth. If you cannot discern the true Church, and yet
you profess your selves Churches, then you are no other then the carnal Jews
Church, Jerusalem from below, which is in bondage with her Children; and the
Righteousness thereof, but the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees,
who used to wash the outside, and flesh, as you do, but inwardly and in
heart, very foul and adulterous, notwithstanding all their seeming holiness
of separation, stand further off, I am holier then thee; their boasting of
their Prayers, and of their Ordinances, and their compassing Sea and Land to
make a Proselyte, to convert men to their Church, and yet in so doing make them
more the Child of the devil, then they were before, and thereby make them the
rather a stink in the Lords nostrills. I tell you plainly, Doctor, there are
but two Churches in the whole World; one carnal, the other spiritual; two
seeds, the seed of the Woman, and the seed of the Serpent; two sorts of
Children, them of light, and them of darkness; two herds of Cattle, the fat
and the lean; two kinds of people, the cursed and the blessed; and I advise you
therefore to trust no longer in lying words, saying, The Temple of the Lord,
the Temple of the Lord; for no outward conceivings, or humane traditions, or
inventions, can be Gods House, Church and Temple, but those before described;
and as the Holy Prophet says, The Temple of the Lord are these, such as
thoroughly repent of their sins, and amend their ways and their doings, etc.
And therefore Doctor, I advise you again now heedfully and speedily, to mind
the Apostles counsel, To day if you will hear his voice, harden not your
heart, least you enter not into his rest: where he teaches you, and me, and
all, that to enter into Gods rest through Faith, is by Repentance.

And because I will omit no means to take you off from minding so much your
false Church, I will show you in what condition you and all men else stand in
this C^mmon-wealth of England.

Consider this I pray you, that this Commonwealth being a University of
Believers, the whole multitude consists of two sorts.

The one sort Regenerate Believers, such as are borne of God, whose spiritual
estate is before described; and this sort only are the Church of Christ, as
before also is affirmed.

The second sort of Believers are outward Christians, and are indewed with the
common Faith only, from which faith and grace they may fall, and perish, and
yet before their apostasy have equal right with spiritual Christians, in
outward external Ordinances, as the letter of the word and prayer, the washing
away the filth of the body, and the corporal signs of the Lords Supper, and
all which, for the more clear condemnation in disobeying the Gospel. Now
forasmuch as the Congregation and Commonwealth of England in these respects is
like the Congregation or Commonwealth of Israel, and that in Gods great House,
as the Apostle says, There are both honorable, and dishonorable Vessels,
servants evil, slow* and negligent, as good and diligent Virgins, foolish as
well as wise, some spiritual, but most carnal, and all to be provided for by
the Stewards of this great House, such as are in supreme authority, not only
in matters between man and man, but also in duties between God and man; not
only for meum and tuum, but also for the public worship and service of God.
And as Moses, Solomon, and Jehosaphat provided not only corporally, but
spiritually for Israel, so and in like manner the supreme authority of England
ought to provide for every one his portion, that no lack or want may befall any
capacity, neither of carnal, or spiritual Christians, and as wholesome and
good laws for men, so pious and decent Rules for Gods public worship, so far
as it concerns their power and direction. And consider also, the Jews before
Christ's Incarnation had a Rule for most of their external Ordinances by the
Word; as the express day for Gods Worship, and the Tribe who to wait on the
service also, the time when, the member what, and the parties themselves both
active and passive for Circumcision And for the Passover, what for the matter,
the kind, the age, the preparation, the parties who to provide it, and the
manner for participation. Now there is no such express Provision, for the
carnal Ordinances of God, since Christ's Incarnation and ascension; it is true,
there is example for Baptism, but no command who shall Baptize, neither when
for time, nor how for manner, whether all parts of the body in general, or
which member in particular. And so for the Supper of the Lord, Bread and Wine
are the Elements in the institution thereof, and in the future practice
enjoined, but who shall provide it? and what kind of wine, or what sort of
Bread, or who in particular shall bless or administer it, or how the
Communicants shall take it, is not in the word determined; and without these
and the like circumstances, the Ordinances cannot be celebrated. Now if the
present Authority should give Rules for the whole Commonwealth, or
Congregation, for all perticulars; as formerly they have done in a Parochial
way, for time, place, persons, and administrations, thereby the spiritual and
heavenly Christian is bound to yield obedience as the carnal and outward
Christian; for as the Saints are free as they relate to the person of a true
Christian, for so their communion is above the reach and rule of any outward
direction, for their Baptisms they are spiritual, as I have showed before;
their Teacher exceeds all Teachers from men, for they havean Unction from the
holy one, that teaches them all things. And they stand not in need of any
private or carnal men's teaching; yet as they stand, or sustain the persons or
Members of a State or Commonwealth, and under Authority; so Gods Law binds them
to be obedient to every Ordinance of man; and their communion externally with
carnal Christians, does no more prevent or preinic^ their communion
spiritually, then Cain's external communion corrupted Abel's, Ishmaels defiled
Isaacks or the proud Pharisees polluted the penitent Publicans. And although
inwardly and spiritually, yet not externally nor corporally severed one from
another, till the harvest, least with extirpating the bad, the good may suffer
prejudice. And therefore it appears plainly, that in a Commonwealth that
professes the Faith, the carnal with the spiritual may commuicate in the
external Ordinances of Gods worship, except the injunctions are evil and
unlawful, as were the abominations of Antichrist, from which the Saints are
commanded to separate, least by pertaking with her sins they shall be punished
with the participation of her plagues. And also that it is in the power of the
Magistrate to order all externalls for the public worship of God, that are not
already so done by the S^iptures: Now if this be so, then what ground or
warrant have you or any man whatsoever, to select form, and order Congregations
of your selves, when the whole Commonwealth is congregated already by Christian
Authority. And how can those that are under this Authority cast off their
obedience, to which in conscience they are bound; and gather Churches out of
Churches, without any warrant from God or man; for they were in the profession
and communion of Gods Ordinances before, and emboddyed and congregated* before
by Acts of the National Congregation, the high Court of Parliament. And what
other things they do ordain and constitute, that was not done before by the
said Authority, the wisest and learned of them all cannot show rightly, nor
prove plainly, but it will appear to be their own imagination, tradition, and
fancy, by duly considering the Scriptures, with what is abovesaid, in the
distinction between the spirtuall and carnal Christians; as also, the
distinction between the external part of Gods Ordinances, and the Divine and
Heavenly part. I am sure these Rules are according to the practice of our Lord
and his Apostles, they never neglected the public, nor disobeyed the
Magistrate therein, nor contemned participation with them, yet let us always
bear in mind, that the faithful and regenerate Christians are the Church of
God; and although the carnal Christians are amongst them in external
participation, yet they are not of them, nor do spiritually participate with
them. The consequence of selected Church-gatherings, admits of many
absurdities, as I have showed in former discoveries.

Thus much Doctor for the public good has your private mistaken conference
occasioned; and we have more yet to make known upon the next opportunity.

And my conclusion shall be a word or two to the State and Authority of this
Nation, against an ancient, continued, superstitious distinction of the people
of this whole Commonwealth, even of all degrees, from the highest to the
lowest, that distinguish the whole into two parts, Church and Commonwealth,
Clergy, and Layetie. Now in common reason, if in this Nation the public
Ministry, for those are they they mean by Clergy, although no m^n can prove it
by Scripture, be the Church, then the State Magistracy, and the rest of the
people are not the Church or Congregation of England, which seems to cross the
Scriptures denomination, for the whole Nation of the Jews, Priests and People,
are often called the Congregation, or Church, and the Reason is beyond
exception, because they were a people professing and communicating in the
external Ordinances of God, and but a small remnant of the multitude faithful
to communicate spiritually* Now as spiritual and heavenly Christians are Gods
peculiar, little house, vineyard, or Church, so outward Christians, may bear
the name of his Vineyard, Church, or great House also, as an outward Jew or
Christian bears the name, although not the nature of a Jew or Christian
inwardly. And if the Supreme Authority do not annihillate this distinction
aforesaid, and cause it to be forgotten, in time it will pull up and advance
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy again, as the Oak the creeping Ivy, and a general
provision made for the many, as before is expressed, would supply all men in
all things, both Divine and humane.

Beloved Christian;
THou that have read what is here declared for public good; see the Doctor
and his doings in the glass of one Scripture, 2 Pet. 3. 15, 16. the Apostle
Peter speaking of his brother Paul, and of his writings according to the
wisdom of God given unto him, he speaks of some that notwithstanding had
received the common faith, yet were unlearned and unstable, who did wrest not
only what they said, but also the other Scriptures to their own destruction.
Now the terms in the Text do show us plainly what these Believers were, even
such as should perish, first because they were unlearned, that is, not
spiritually taught of God: secondly, they were such as were unstable, that is,
were not built upon the foundation, neither were deep rooted, as the good
ground, but such Christians as were liable to wither, as the stony ground, to
be choked as the thorns, and to loose what they had, as the Highway side.
And such Christians as these do not understand only, but they pervert or give
false Expositions of the Scriptures, those Heavenly things intended by the
Text, are not understood by their earthly minds; therefore it is said, That
there are some things hard to be understood, that is, the Heavenly estate of
the Children of God, their spiritual sufferings here, and their glorious hope
they have of the everlasting inheritance in the World to come, which
supernatural excellencies as they are in themselves are hard, that is, not to
be understood by carnal Christians, such as the Doctor has declared himself
to be in all his Arguments.

Now if any please to see the other poor endeavors of thy Faithful Friend,
thou may have them thus nominated.
1. A True Reformation, and perfect Restitution. 2. Truths Victory against
Heresy. 3. Christian Liberty to the Lords Table. 4. A Defense of Christian
Liberty. 5. A Cure of deadly Doctrine. 6. A Lamp of Light. 7. A Right Use made
by a stander by, at J. G. and I. S. Disputes at Great Allhallows. 8. A brief
Discovery of Feigned Presbytery; and Capt: Norwood's Declaration proved an
Abnegation of Christ.
There were some other things, but they are out of Print.

FINIS.

