THE Grand Catastrophe, OR THE Change of Government: BEING A Word about the
last turn of these Times WRITTEN In a Letter to a Friend, as an Essay, either
to give, or to receive Satisfaction in the Dispute of the last CHANGE. By one
who takes leave to style himself Johannes Cornubiensis..

PSALM. 75.7. God is Judge, He puts down one and sets up another.

PROVE. 29.2. When the Righteous are in authority the people rejoice; but when
the wicked bears rule, the people mourn.

LONDON Printed by R. I. and are to be sold at the Crown in Popes-head-Alley.
1654.

The Grand Catastrophe, or the change of Government, being a word about the
last turn of these times.
THat saying of the Psalmist has of late times often been in my thoughts, even
that; Thy way is in the sea, and thy path in the mighty waters, and thy
footsteps are not known, Psalm. 77.19. For if ever there were an Age since
Isreal's advance out of Aepypt, when God once and again made his path in the
waters (literally at Jordan) and had his way through the Sea (even the red
Sea) and through the whole of that miraculous providence was, as a ship in the
sea, whose way and footsteps are unknown; If ever (I say since that age) God
has so acted again the second time, to bring up his people from an Egypt,
sure it has been in this, which we have seen. And indeed the works of God in
the midst of us have been so parallel unto those past providence, as that I
have often said, they have been but another edition of them with some
inlargements. Our way out of Bondage, and through the Wilderness has been so
like, that scarce can there be mentioned any particular act then, which (as
Isaiahs phrase is) has not its mate now. What God has done for the bypast
time, there is scarce any so great a stranger in Israel but can tell, but what
God is doing, or will do, is that which poseth the greatest Teachers in
Israel; and I had almost said, we see not our signs, there is no more any
Prophet, neither is there among us any that knows how long. That great sign
of the concurring desires, and prayers, and counsels of the godly (which was
wont never to fail us) is now eclipsed by those sad divided aims, and
sub-divided thoughts, which cause breaking, and bleeding of heart every where;
and how long it will be ere the envy of Ephraim (the major, or ten parts of
Professors) and the envy of Judah (the minor, or two parts of them) shall
depart, and each shall not vex, or vary one from another, who can tell? yet
certain the time shall come, when it shall be; but in the interim, to see
through these clouds, to be able to hear the voice of the Father in the midst
of the confused noise of his Children, is the great desire, and endeavor of my
soul. And that I might pump up the deeper, and fuller discoveries of longer
heads and hearts then my own, I will adventure humbly to cast in a dish of
water out of my little cisterne-thus: I have for some years eyed that place of
Isa. 1. 23, 24, 25, 26. as a Prophecy, which is yet to receive its
accomplishment. And much has been (as I humbly judge) done in the midst of us,
as to the minatory or threatening part of it; whether God be not about to enter
(at least) upon the more positive mercy of it, I would a little inquire; and
let that ver. 26. be the basis of the inquiry, the words are thus; I will
restore thy Judges as at the first, and thy Counselors as at the beginning,
afterward thou shall be called the city of righteousness, the faithful city.
From this Prophecy I would speak the words of truth with soberness; and oh,
that the sons of truth and soberness others I desire not to deal withal)
would give me an answer, that if I err I might see it, for verily I am
unwilling my error should abide with me; teach me, and I will hold my tongue,
and cause me to understand wherein I have erred.

But yet hear me of your goodness (ye Judges and Princes of reason) while in
a few words I acquaint ye with my thoughts, about this Scripture in reference
to these times.

First, I have thought that God clearly intimates a resolve (as it were upon
the debate) to change the form of Government from what it was now, (corrupted
by Kings and Princes) unto what it was better, when administered in the days of
the Judges and Elders (or as it is here phrased) Counselors, Kings and
Princes of a Monarchical principle, and power, were not ab initio, i. e. not
from the beginning amongst his people, they were indeed at last, but not at
first. Now tell me (for I desire to learn) if the context of these words, joined
with the words themselves speak not, as if God would raise up an expectation
of such a change, as in which he would remove Kings and Princes (whom he calls
rebellious, and companions of Thieves) as his enemies, and adversaries, as
those which had made the faithful City ( Isreal's Commonwealth) an Harlot; and
which that it might become again the city of righteousness, should be blessed
with its first Government of Judges and Counselors. After all Dispute and
Comment (which yet I have had the advantage to hear and read) upon that, 1 Samuel 8. it appears clearly, that at the first, and in the beginning, God did
dis-approve of the change of Government from Judges to Kings, and the (...)
there spoke of, was to terrify his people from their desire, it being directly
opposite to (...) The manner of Kingly Government was, and has been
experienced, to be no more like Gods, then the violent, tyranical advice of
Reboboams young Counselors, unto the grave and moderate Counsel which the
ancient men gave, who were indeed the wiser, and advised better then young Lads
did; yet still it has been the manner of Monarchy to act after the young men's
Council, and not according to the council of the aged. As thereby showing it
self to be not the government of the beginning, nor that which was at first.
But God speaking here of reducing the state of things to that prime pattern,
does (to me at least) clearly intimate this change of Government, which we have
had some experience of, and which others shall in time find; for we are but as
the first ripe fruit to that Harvest, wherein the sickle of Providence shall be
put into the Kingdoms of men, to accomplish this Prophecy, of Gods cutting
down Monarchs, his Adversaries, and making way for restoring of his Judges as
at first, and his Counselors as at the beginning.

Secondly, may it not then be thought to be (not to say impious, but) very
impolitique, and imprudent in any people or person to dote upon, and admire
that which the great God of all the World is resolved to pull down. Certainly,
it is the Creatures folly to resist the Creators counsel, who ever set himself
either in desire, or design against the Lord, and did receive the one, or
accomplish the other; without doubt, if the most high rule in the Kingdoms of
men, and do whatsoever he pleases, there can be no resisting of his will. I am
apt to think, that the time hastens in which God will make all the Princes of
the earth ( Nebuchadnezzar-like) to graze with the Beasts, and to wander in the
Wilderness, that they may see, and know, and understand, and consider that he
is resolved to deal with them as rebels; and that their power, and pride, and
pomp shall be so stained, as that all their blood in their own, and vassels
veins, shall never be able to recover their splendour any more. Whatsoever God
will in Heaven, or Earth, that does he. And though Monarchy lift up it self
above the Skies, though it fix it self amongst the Stars, yet even thence
shall it tumble down, by that power which dissolves the Host of Heaven, and
causes the Stars to fall as the leaves from the Vine; and since this appears to
be his determined purpose upon the whole Earth, I persuade my self it will be
but a vain thing, for the Kings of the earth, and the Princes to take council
together, to resist the Lord, and his Christ; surely when he strikes they will be
but as a Potters vessel, and when God is breaking of them, why should not they
be to us as a vessel wherein there is no pleasure. Nay, why rather should not
all entertain with delight the change which God is about to make, since it is
from the worse to the better, from the unrighteous, and tyrannous power of
Monarchies and Princes, into his Government of Judges and Counselors, which
were from the beginning, which indeed were the first, and shall be last in this
world, till David himself do come again, and the Lord Christ be exalted in
his day.

Thirdly, it has been in my thoughts to consider, whether this Prophecy has
received its accomplishment; or be yet to be fulfilled; Though some Expositors
seem to be confident of the past impletion, the already fulfilling of this
Prophecy, yet many doubt it. True it is, that there was a
Tanquam-accomplishing of this Prediction, after the return of the Jews from
the Babylonish captivity, but yet I cannot be convinced (at present) that then
there was a total accomplishment of it, so as to rest therein, and to expect no
more from this Scripture; for let it be considered, whether ever after that
return (ever in their best and quietest estate) Jerusalem were so ordered and
established, as that it might in the fullness of the Letter, and in the whole
latitude of the intendment of the phrase, be called, the city of
righteousness, the faithful city; certainly, sacred word will not give my
faith a footing to believe it. Ezra and Nehemiah in their works, and writings,
speak at another rate, Nehemiah contests about Oppression, which was amongst
them rife and ridged (and that in the prime of their reformation and return)
makes me think then their state did not deserve the glory of being called, The
city of righteousness; and the posture, or rather preposterous, and disorderly
state of affairs, which some years after he found at Jerusalem; does give
little ground to call it all that time the faithful city, etc. This makes me
to think, that this Prophecy is but parallel to that of Jeremiah 31.23 and
therefore it received not its accomplishment at their return from Babylon, but
is to be fulfilled when God shall bring them up, and back from the North, when
not only Judah, the two Tribes, (which alone returned from Babylon) but
likewise Israel (the ten Tribes) with them should rejoice in that Government of
Judges and Counselors as at first, until they come to their Kingdome-state
under the reign of the Messiah, and David their King. And in case there were a
fulfilling of this Prophecy after their return from Babylon, I am apt to
think it was but such a fulfilling as has been of some others, which was
rather in part, and in assurance of the truth, then in whole and full
perfection of the Prophecy.

Fourthly, supposing then this Prophecy as yet not to be fulfilled, Why may
not the Isles of the Gentiles as well look after, and expect the fulfilling of
it amongst them (I say) as well as the remnant of the Jews? Is God only the
God of Jews, or is he not equally the God of the Gentiles? In the Prophecy of
Gods restoring and setting judgment in the earth, are not the Gentiles
expressly mentioned to share therein? Isa. 42. And are not they said to be
expecttants, waiting for his Law? Nay, does not the connection of this, and the
next chapter import, that this Prophecy relates to the times of the Nations
flowing into the light, and Law of the Messiah? certain I am, the Rabbis (who
use to make advantage of all Scriptures, to the utmost for their own Nation,
and are not favorers of us sinners of the Gentiles) do understand this
Scripture of the times of the Messiah, who shall prevail over the wicked (so
Kimchies phrase is for us Gentiles) And clear it is that the Gentiles are
promised (and so Prophesied of) to partake with, to share in, and suck of the
same breasts of consolation with the Jews; now whether it be a consolation to
have good Judges, and righteous Counselors (as Israel had at the first, and
in the beginning) let those speak who have felt the burden, and tasted the
bitterness of the tyranny of rebellious Princes and Monarchs. Since then this
Promise, or Prophecy (call it as we please) referres to the Jews expressly, as
a mercy to come in its season, let us not bind our selves with the cords of
fear, and diffidence from coming in to participate with them in the same, for
as much as we are now of the same body, and fellow heirs of the same hopes,
and partners in the same promises with them (that being destroyed which made
the difference) Neither let it be thought too great ambition for us Gentiles to
precede them in the enjoying of those Prophesies, since we do go before them
in greater matters. And why may not God hereby provoke the Jews to jealousy
and emulation, when they shall see us to love and enjoy what once they had, and
as yet want; and yet this will not hinder, but that the Jews shall have in time
a gradual (though not specificall) pre-eminence above us the Gentiles; for
albeit we be the first in the enjoyment of the fulfilling, yet may they be the
chief in the perfection of this promised mercy; though they come in last, yet
may they be advanced to highest place, and so the first shall be last, and the
last shall be first; they the first in the Promise, last in the performance; we
the last, first in the fulfilling, and yet they the last, come up to be the
chief in the enjoyment: And so Christ, who is first our salvation and
settlement, may yet be the glory of his people Israel in both, sending and
settling amongst us his Judges and Counselors, till himself alone shall come
to sit upon the Throne of his father David, that by us, as by a light, may be
seen what shall be the glory of the Jews, and so the final advantage of the Jew
above the Gentile, shall be much every way, when they shall (though last, and
after us) enjoy their Judges as at first, and their Counselors as in the
beginning, in a beauty as far exceeding us, as that of Rachel the younger,
did that of Leah the elder, and so they be the prime in beauty, though we the
first in birth, or beginning of this Prophecy.

Fifthly, in case these things be thus, let us a little consider what is this
Government of Judges and Counselors, which upon the change of Government we
may expect, and should acquiesce in, as a mercy promised. And here it must be
promised as an indubitable conclusion, That the government of Judges was but of
one Person, as chief Judge, at one time. The great space of time after the
division of Canaan by Lot (which is the Epoch from which the giving and
governing of Judges is reckoned, as Acts 13.19. and 20. compared with Judges
3.9.) had its course in the succession of Judges, one after another, and in all
that time there were never more then one Judge at a time. The Government is
expressed in the plural of Judges, by reason of their successive turns, one
after the death of another, and not because there should be, or were many at
once. Consult the Book of the Judges, and you will not in the least hesitate
herein; Othoniel, Elon, Deborah, Gideon, and the rest governed, or judged by
turns (during the time of their lives) and not any two of them at one time.

This being clear beyond contradiction, consider we a little the use of the
Judge at any time, what it was for, and upon which any came to that place; and
consider we the rule and power of a Judge so enabled; Now as for his rise; It
is evident it was upon a Martial or Military account, he that was the
deliverer was therefore, and thereupon the Judge; the person which providence
raised up unto Israel in the time of any of their streights to deliver them out
of the hand of their enemies, was ( Eo nomine, eademque ratione) the Judge
afterward, during term of life; Jephtah therefore did upon these terms
covenant to undertake the Office of being their General in War, that he
might be their Judge in peace. Had not the people promised that, and called God
to witness (as the seal and security of that Promise) he had not gone forth
either against the malignant Ammonites first, of the male-contented Ephraimites
afterward, but being assured of being Judge after the war, he engaged in the
war, and according to the engagement of the Elders unto him, he judged (or
governed as chief) six years afterward; upon whose death Ibzan succeeded him
in the Judicature of Israel, and judged seven years, even till he dyed. Now
albeit it appears not by the sacred History what was the ground upon which the
Judge (for the time being) was elected in time of peace; (for neither in the
days of Elon, who succeeded Ibzan) nor of Abdaon (who came to be Judge after
Elon, was there any wars) albeit (I say) therefore it appear not what was the
particular worth, or merit, eminency, or desert, for which the election in
those times was made, yet still it is evident, that in times of war, and
streights, the valiant and succesful management of the affairs then, was always
the ground which gave the rise and reason of the particular election unto the
power and honor of the chief Judicature afterward.

Having passed thus far in our inquiry, let us now consider whether or no
that during this government of Judges, there was not also annexed unto it, the
Synedrian of the Elders, and so at the same time there was the JVDGE, and the
COVNSELLOVRS, as having an hand in, and authority with the Judge to manage the
government of Israel. And there are (besides many conjecturall evidences) three
things, which may be of weight and sufficiency to attest, and carry us to
plenary belief hereof.

1 That no History, either sacred or profane does (or can) make it appear,
That from the first institution, or foundation of the Synedrian (which was by
Moses) there was not an abolition or dissolving of that power which they had,
and exercised in the Government of Israel. Cunaeus is clear and positive in
this, his words are, Id concilium cum constitutum a Mose esset semper deinde
sub judicibus, regibusque and pontificibus usque ad extremam Judaeae
desolationem fuit mansitque etc. neither have I as yet met with any Author of
name or note (indeed with none at all) that ever denied this, but that still
during the time of Judges (as afterward) there were also the Counselors (the
seventy Elders) who did always manage the affairs of Government, especial in
Civil things, as in matters of Fact and fault between man and man, throughout
all the Tribes of Israel.

2 The frequent mention of the Elders in the Book of Judges is so obvious that
it must be granted, that even in that time the Elders were. And that they were
of power appears clear enough, both by their calling of Jeptath to be
General of their Forces, and covenanting with him that he should be Judge upon
his success, Judge. 11.9, 10. And why should it be doubted or questioned,
whether or no this conjunction of Judges and Counselors were together at
Mizpeh at that time, when as its constitution was but yet new, and nothing
appears why it should be thought either to be altered, or abrogated.

3 The particular story of the Levite and his Concubine is of evidence enough
by it self to constrain us to conclude, that there were Counselors in the
times of the Judges; To whom but to the Elders did he address himself? Who
but they did do him justice? indeed in those days there was no Judge in Israel
(as there was not at some other times) but yet it appears then there were
these Counselors; and a very strong argument it is that they were, when and
while there were Judges, because they were when there were none. In Jephtabs
case they elected him General, and constituted him Judge; and now in the
Levites case, they hear his in jury, and do him Justice. Besides, had there
been a Judge at that time in Israel, its questionable whether or no the
complaint should have been made to him, unless the extraordinariness of the
case had made him to take cognizance of it, for in Civil affairs (as one well
observes) the Judges did but rarely appear, and when is was, the occasion or
affair was weekly; Upon all this it will appear, That indeed the Government by
Judges was mixed with the Synedrian of Elders, and Judges and Counselors were
Gods Government at first, or the kind of power and rule by which Israel was
governed at the beginning, so that this will be the result of the inquiry; that
God promising here to give his people their Judges as at first, and their
Counselors as at the beginning: The Government which hereupon we are to
expect, is, that form which the people of God had at first, when they were
possessed of the Land of Canaan, and were governed by Judges and Elders. And
the reason why this was called the Government as at the first, and as in the
beginning, is, because that this was the first form, or way of rule which the
Jews had after the seven Nations of the Land of Canaan were destroyed, and that
Land was divided, and enjoyed by Lot; till which time indeed they had not
Judges, i. e. not that Government, as Paul tells us, Acts 13.19, 20. Nor were
they capable till then of any settled form of Government, because till then
they were not a settled Commonwealth; Moses and Joshua were their Leaders from
a strange Land, and their Deliverers till they came unto Canaan, and they
guided, and governed them in their march, and military condition; but when
afterward they were settled, and had their Land divided by Lot, then God gave
them Judges; till then their state was but itinerant, and unsettled; but from
that time they became a Commonwealth, and (though not freed from wars, yet)
were settled where they were to abide, and therefore this was their first, and
beginning estate, the prime constitution of that Commonwealth. Then (Reader)
that I may apply this to our present time, let me expostulate the case with
malcontent, or dissatisfied persons about the late, strange, and unexpected
turn that has been amongst us.

Why may we not rather rejoice, and rest in it as in a mercy Prophesied, than
murmr at it, and slander it as being a design plotted? Or if we should grant
it a thing plotted by men, why may we not rejoice, that God by men has
accomplished his own intentions, howbeit (Assyrian like) they neither meant
so, nor did their hearts think so? Verily though the wrath, or pride of men do
not directly aim at, nor can therefore groundedly expect to accomplish the
righteousness of God; yet we have often seen, (and of late have had many
choice experiences of it) that when, or where man did but intend, and appoint
transactions to such, or such an end, God did overruled and order them unto the
fulfilling of his own purposes. Do ye not remember the former things? etc.
Have ye forgot the days of old? when necessity constrained us, both in
Parliament and Army to resolve, and do things, strange, and seemingly
eccentrick, which albeit they startled us at first, nor were intended for that
end (which yet was the blessed issue of them) have yet been such as we have had
cause to say, What has God done for us, and how came he down by terrible
things which we looked not for, doing and accomplishing the counsels and
purposes of his own will, which we never did (at first at least) expect, may
not it be so then now again? and upon the Premises may not we conclude this,
as the fruit of our last change; That God is now about to give us the blessing
of his people, and the fulfilling of a prophecy: for verily a Lord Protector,
and Counselors (especially those of the Grand Synedrian in Triennial
Parliament) is much like Isreal's Judges at the first, and their Counselors at
the beginning.

Object. No, but this is more like a King and his Lords; its more like that
which we have fought and prayed against, then like that which we have desired
and expected.

Ans. But are you not mistaken in your selves? or were you not misguided in
your aims? Did you, or durst you pray, or fight for any thing inconsistent
with, or opposite to any thing Prophesied of, or promised in the Scriptures of
truth? And is not one single person assisted by a Council, and concluded by,
yea and responsible to a Synedrian of Elders (Heads of our Tribes in
Parliament) I say, is not this like Judges of old, and Counselors at the
beginning.

Obj. But a Protector is but one single person, and God speaks of Judges, and
so it is Monarchy, and not that, etc.

Ans. It is a mistake (as has been hinted) to think there were more Judges
then one at a time. Though the expression in the Prophecy be plural, yet the
power and place in the exercise of it was single; and therefore though it be
called the time when the Judges ruled (as Ruth 1.1.) yet was there but one
Judge, who judged at a time. One Jephtah, one Tola, etc. and no more. Besides,
it is a gross mistake to think, and say, that this is a Monarchical, or
Kingly Government, and that hereby the Act, and Declaration for the abolishing
of Kingly power is transgressed; for know and consider, It is one thing to be
governed by one, and another thing to be governed by a Monarch; though every
Monarch be one, yet every single one is not a Monarch. The Duke of Venice is
but one, yet no Monarch; the State holden in Holland was but one, yet no King;
the Judges (for the time being) were but one at a time, yet no Kings. It is
true, in the time of their interval it is said, Then was there no King in
Israel; but that was rather from the general use of the word King, then from
their power, or rule as Kings; and this will appear evidently by two things
(besides that all Authors do specifically distinguish the times of that
Government of Kings and Judges, which they could not, in case they were the
same.

1 The People when they desired a King in opposition to Samuel, who was the
last Judge, did certainly know that there was a very clear and vast difference
between a Judge and a King; otherwise they would not have desired, and
contested for that which they had already.

2 God himself when he speaks of that business, does more then intimate what
a difference there would be between the persons and powers of Kings which they
desired, and Judges which they had; so that to say, that a King, and a Judge,
(or Protector, being no more then a Judge) is all one, bids very fair, and
goes very facre to clear the Israelites from sin, in their desire of a King,
and to charge God with folly, that he was so offended with them, when they
desired no more in effect then his own promise of Judges. Add to this, that
God in this place of Isaiah, does oppose his Judges and Counselors to Kings
and Princes, the government of the one, unto the government of the other, which
had they not been diverse need not be; for God might have said, I will destroy
Kings and Princes my enemies, and give them my Kings and Princes; No, but i will
give my Judges instead of those Kings.

It is true indeed, Josephus calls the Judges in Greek Monarchs, and the Hebrew
in Judges once and again styles them Melecks; but it is because of the more
lax signification of the words, and not because of the strict acceptance of
the thing, and the known and now frequent notion of Kings and Monarchs, The
Roman Dictators, Cinna, Sylla, (Mario) etc. where by the Greek Writers styled
Monarchs, and yet it is known they were not Monarchs, as the thing strictly
signifies. The Dictators were but (if I may say so) Protectors pro tempore; the
wise Tacitus, (and indeed all Historians of note) distinguish between the
Dictators and Caesar's, as between two kinds of Government.

It is not a single person, but a sole power which makes a Monarch so called,
and known, and this the late King knew very well, when upon discourses of a
limited Prerogative, he was wont to say; It was but a design to unking him,
and make him another Duke of Venice, SOLENES OF POWER, SOVEREIGNTY OF RVLE,
HEREDITARINESSE OF Title, IMSPONCIBLENES OF ACTION, etc. have been deemed, and
urged as the Regalia of a Monarch, and when these are not, the Masters of
Monarchy will tell you, Kingship is wanting, or at least waning, and in its
decay.

Object. But how soon may the Protector assume this if he please, and what
absolute power has he at present, etc.

Ans. Have we ground to think him a man of so much ambition, and so little
faith, as to violate his Oath, though for a Kingdom? Has not the Nation had
experiments strong and sincere, long enough to dash such jealous Brats in
pieces? For which of his good works is it that you thus suspect him?

Obj. But he is but a man, and temptations may overcome, etc.

Reply. Let this rather fill your soul with prayers, then foment in you
jealousies. But is not he bounded? Are not the Articles of agreement, like the
bounds of the Sea, such as if he would rage he cannot pass? And whatsoever
power he has at present, may not the next Parliament lessen it? And his
present Council check it; for how little a part of power has he without the advice and consent of his Council.

Obj. But yet he has the sword, and may break out, etc.

Ans. Yet still we have jealousy, and so make fear without grounds. Is there
no fidelity in the present Council? Is there no honesty in the Officers of the
Army to restrain, and oppress extravagancies? Or; is there no power in
Prayer, no God in Heaven to mend all? verily if the Protector should fall from
grace (which yet I am not so much an Arminian as to fear) and should either
misuse, and mis-improve his power to self power, and pride, etc. all that
fear God, would cry out, let him be accursed, and I should think my self
worthy to share in the curse, if I should not say, Amen, even so be it Lord.
Let him be the shame of men, the scorn of State, the abborrency of all that
fear God, if be make his Protectorship a step to Kingship for himself or his.
And here let me take the liberty to say, I could heartily wish, and upon my
knees humbly beg, that (as an addition unto that Article, that the Protector
shall not be hereditary) it might be annexed, that the Family of any one
Protector shall be wholly cut off from being elected to the Protectorship, at
least unto the third Generation. It would be a test of singular sincerity in
the now Lord Protector, to procure such an addition, and it would be a great
security to prevent Monarchy, or other evil which may arise out of this office.
We know, how that the Empire of Germany is not hereditary fundamentally, but
Elective, yet for want of such a caution, as I humbly motion, how long the
house of Austria has perpetuated the Imperial power, in its own Family, to
the grand injury of all Germany, is a thing that needs no History to confirm,
or set forth. I have heard (I confess) that many have said, and do say, that
there is a long line of pedigree drawn up, to prove the Lord Protector to be
lineally descended from Cadwallador; and this has been, and is still made use
of by some, to insinuate a design, a future Kingship for himself, or his; but
as I know no just ground for to believe the truth of this surmise, so I
persuade my self, his Highness the Protector, is more Christian, and less
Welch-man, then to mind such foolish vain Pedegrees; if he draw not his line
from Christ he will not be Honorable in the eyes of God, or Saints; and I hope
his conversation will fully prove this report a lie. Neither do I doubt in the
least that he will venture the peril of life and perjury upon so mean an
account, as an antiquated (that I say not abominated) piece of Heraldry.

There is also another idle report, which yet because its handed as from a
Knight, and a Bishop, i will hint in a word, and speak shortly unto. The report
is; That a Knight (whether errant or otherwise) having little to do at Bath,
should search for annosities in the Cathedral there, and at last found a
certain Story, which it seems was Jothams Apologue, painted and versified;
and that this should be one line in the Poetry, BUT WOE TO US WHEN OLIVER SHALL
BE KING. Hereupon it is commented and concluded, that woe will be now unto
England, since Oliver Cromwell is King. This is the Legend or Story.

To it I would say but this; What if it be merely (as other Legends) forged,
and the wandering Knight not to be found to verify it? Or what, (in case there
be any truth in the Tale) if the Knight wanted his Spectacles, and read OLIVER
instead of OLIVE, or the Olivet, for it is in the Apologue of Trees, as the
Tale confesses; or what if it were Oliver indeed, who will undertake to prove
the Poet an authenticke Prophet? Finally, what if the Poet should speak (as
some of the Heathen Oracles) truth at unawares? And should predict, That when
Oliver should be King, that is, in Jothams phrase, Judge (for the Apologue was
in the days of the Judges) then woe to us, i. e. Cathedrals, Painting and
Buildings too? would there be any great woe to Christians, to see (now Oliver
is Judge, or Protector) the ruin of Cathedrals, since they are of little use,
and of so great offense?

I will trouble my self no further with these or the like conceits, or
surmises, but let me entreat (thee Reader) to consider seriously for thine own
satisfaction if thou doubtest, or for mine if I err (for I would willingly be
convinced) whether or no any who fear God, who are the Children of the
Promises, and who converse with, and wait for the fulfilling of Prophesies; I
say, whether any of those have just cause to murmr, repine, or oppugn the
present Government, upon this turn and change? much less, whether they have
cause to resolve at last only to acquiesce, and sit still, and to gratify the
old and common enemy, which as much as possible they can wish, viz. to resolve
to stand NEVTRALS, and let all oppose or prevail that can, and dare against
this present power; which because it was not a Child of their conception, they
are willing to let perish by the power of an open and professed enemy, withal
putting to their helping or preferring hands; I will say no more, but reserve
the rest for thoughts and sighs in secret.

Only for a Cushion, I will suppose it possible for this paper at one time or
other to lie at the Lord Protectors feet, and thereupon I will presume upon his
low Spirit in his High place, to bespeake him thus: My Lord, you have but
little leisure, and I but little ability for many words, yet I beseech you of
your clemency to hear me a few.

1 You have much power, and are in a great place, but power and eminency are
slippery places, and expose to great falls if one be not cautious. The first
person of your place and power came to a sad end, not I think really for any
default of his, but by the malice and subtilty of his corrival; you have many
enemies, men of much malice, and not of simple slothful spirits; Beware what
you do, you have a Council, to advise with whom will be safety, the more you
act jointly with them, the less danger will be to your self, or the
Commonwealth.

2 You have Honors to confer, but be sure you honor none but such as honor
God. It is but an unwise, and a derided work to guild a rotten post; and to
confer Honor upon sinful, sordid, or undeserving Persons, will have but
little of Prudence, and less of Piety in it; such as are precious in Gods
sight, let them be honorable, and do you love them.

3 You have many eyes upon you, some expecting, some suspecting; disappoint not
the one, neither do any thing to strengthen the other. There are who suspect
you will KING it, and procure your Heir to succeed you; but dis-appoint those
men in their malice, who will thereupon cry, and strive to down with you,
down with you, even to the ground. Ask your Council, whether it were not good
prudence, and preventing policy, to provide against the Family of any
Protector, as well as the Family of the late King; and consider, if an addition
were made to the age of the Protector that may be chosen, it would not be
better. Certainly they of Venice find it advantageous that their Dukes are
old; and with ancient, above forty one, will be more wisdom, then with the
young though twenty one. The elder the Protector is, he will be the more fitter
to do men good, he will be the unfitter to do men hurt. By this (if your
Highness shall think it meet to endeavor) you will frustrate your enemies,
and refute the greatest of their calumnies, and surmises, and hereby you will
satisfy many of your cordial friends, who expect choice things from you, and
such as accompany holiness, humility, and self-denial.

Finally, remember while you study to be a terror to evil doers, you strive to
be an incourager and Protector of those who do well; do your utmost to pull up
every weed, but be cautious you pull up no good Plant therewith. While you are
zealous against a Superstitious, profane, ignorant, carnal Ministry (in which
zeal ride on and prosper) be careful, and diligent to perpetuate and encourage
an holy, spiritual, able, and peaceable company of Preachers, who may advance
holiness and godliness, and prevent prophanenes and barbarism, which begins
to put forth their monstrous heads in diverse corners of the Land.

My Lord, i will say no more but this; You are in as much need of help from God
now as ever, indeed more; your work as General is not yet at an end. I am much
inclined to think, that at least once more, you will be forced to draw your
Sword again, and to be a Deliverer to this Nation (and those of Scotland and
Ireland united now to it) which if it fall out according to my prayers and
hopes; you will thereby confirm your self of right to be our Judge, and I pray
God so to guide you in this your new Honor and Office, as that we may have as
good, and great a ground to admire, and bless God for you as a Protector, as
(your enemies themselves being witness) we have had to acknowledge you as our
General. And the same Lord so bless your present Council. (made up of men
who are deservedly esteemed wise and godly) and especially so dispose of the
Parliament to be, as that upon your and their account, we may have a good
ground to say, God has restored his Judges as at the first, and his
Counselors as at the beginning, that therefore hereafter we may call Englands
Triple-Common-wealth, THE CITY OF RIGHTEOUSNESS, THE FAITHFVL CITY.

FINIS.

