A GREAT AND Bloody Fight at Sea, BETWEEN The Parliaments Fleet, and the
Princes Navy, on Thursday last, near the Coast of Plymouth; the great James,
the Royal Fame, and five other ships taken, together with one hundred and
fifty pieces of Ordnance, five hundred Captains and Mariners, and great store
of powder match, and bullet; As also, the full particulars of the said Fight,
the manner of their boarding each other, and the number killed and wounded on
both sides. Likewise, prince Maurice his Letter to the prince of Wales,
concerning the Navy, and prince Charles his Resolution. With a Letter to be
sent from the parliament of England to the Ambassadors of foreign princes,
touching His Hi^^nesse.

May 9th

depictiion of battle between the Parliament's fleet and the Prince's navy

London, printed for G. Wharton, Anno Dom. 1649

Another great FIGHT AT SEA Between the Parliaments Navy, and the Princes
Fleet, The great ship called the James taken, and many others, with above one
hundred and fifty pieces of Ordnance.
Right Honored,
THe Princes Fleet being divided into three Squadrons, Captain Moulton took
Time by the fore-top, and embraced an opportunity to dispute the Western point
with a Squadron of the said ships, commanded by Prince Maurice, the manner
thus, viz.

The said Capt. Moulten Vice Admiral of the Irith Seas for the Parliament of
England, having received certain intelligence of the present motion of the
before said Squadron, immediately hoysted sail, and with the Leopard, and five
more ships hastened toward them, who coming within two leagues one of the
other, both parties hung forth their colors opened the Port holes, and when
they came within musket shot, several great vollies were exchanged, and a hot
conflict bogan, which continued for the space of an hour, the fight being
disputed with great gallantry on both sides; but the Priuces having not long
before their engagement, possessed themselves of rich Prizes, invited our
Mariners to a bold attempt; insomuch, that the Leopard boarded the James, but
were the first and second time repulsed and beaten off, by reason of the
enemies small shot which flew so violently from the Mortar pieces above Decks;
but the third time, they assailed so far, that after a short dispute with their
half pikes, and other weapons, they forced the enemy under Decks, where the
Captain of the said ship desired a parley, otherwise they were resolved to sink
the ship, and sacrifice their lives in the merciless Seas; which being
granted, they desired quarter, and freely resigned themselves up to the mercy of
Parliament. During which conflict between the Leopard and the James, the rest
of the ships were not idle, each party striving for victory, but so soon as
they perceived that the James was taken, immediately hung forth a white flag,
and sounded a parley, which being likewise granted, they also bequeathed
themselves to the mercy of Parliament: so that with the loss of about 50 men,
they possessed themselves of the whole Squadron, being seven in number, wherein
was above 150 pieces of Ordnance, and about 500. Mariners, with great store of
provision, ammunition, march and bullet, with other rich prizes which they had
taken at Sea. These ships are now all brought into this Harbor, and the
Captains, and others, committed to safe custody. Many of the Princes men are
sore wounded, so are diverse of ours; but in the engagement they lost above 100
men. Prince Maurice escaped narrowly, but by the swift sailing of the Charles
got safe to the Isle of Scilley; from whence he wrote a Letter to the prince of
Wales, intimating, That if speedy supplies of men, money, and shipping be not
sent unto him, the Royal Game will be soon lost at Sea.

Plymouth 5 May, 1649.
By an Express from the Hague in Holland, May 2. it is advertized, That Prince
Charles has absolutely declared against the high Demands of the Kingdom or
Scotland, resolving to expedito a Message and Declaration to his Subjects of
that Nation, for the clearing of all misunderstandings and false suggestions,
and to intimate upon what terms and conditions he is willing to unite and
comply with them; but the Results of his Council are very dangerous to the
wellbeing peace and tranquillity of a free people, and their daily buzzings into
his attentive ears, will suddenly (its feared) ^^rrupt and putrify his
Princely head, which if effuall, great are the troubles that He is to undergo.
And the chief motive which inciteth us unto this conjecturation is, by reason
that His Highness has given his final non-complying answer to the
Scommissioners, and that he intends suddenly for Ireland, and to be convoyed by
the Dutch Admiral.

Honored Sir, Charles, the declared King of Scotland, has given audience to
the Scots Commissioners, and upon the representing of their Message (in the
name of the whole Kirk and Kingdom of Scotland) after mature deliberation
thereon, his Highness rose out of the Chair of State, and made this ensuing
Speech, at the Council Table, in the presence of many English Peers.

My Lords,
SEeing that the Kirk and Kingdom of Scotland, have acknowledged Us to be their
true and lawful King, according to Bi^thright and Succession, We shall
therefore endeavor to discharge the trust reposed in Us, with all
faithfulness and integrity, and in order thereunto, shall leave no means
un^t^mpted for the satisfying of all Interests but speedily declare Our
gracious will and pleasure, in giving such Directions and Orders for the peace
and Government of that Kingdom, which shall prove satisfactory, to all Our
loyal Subjects, within the Territories thereof.

But notwithstanding all these affable and declaratory expressions, his
Highness seems to be very averse in his condescensions to treat with them
privately; but by the advice of his Council, has expressly declared, That he
will not treat upon matters concerning that Kingdom, but in the presence of
some of his Councillors.

And his Highness does more and more adhere to the Earl of Montrosse, but yet
with so much policy and art, that upon discourse with the Earl of Lanerick (who
is now called by the name of Duke ^^mbleton) he so far complemented with him,
that he protested to adhere to his Majesty in all Commands, I will try that
says Prince Charles, the Scots King, within three or four days; and some
three days after the Prince got them both private, taxed the Duke with his
promise, and thereupon commanded him to shake hands, and be friends with
Montrosse. The Duke replied, that the difference was great between them, and so
vast, that it required many days debate: but upon the Princes further pressing
of it, they shaked hands, protesting to unite really in affection.

The Scots Commissioners are not satisfied with the Demurs at Court, but have
some addresses to the States, to move the King in their behalf to hearken to
them, and condescend to what is propounded for the peace and settlement of his
Kingdom. For the faciliating whereof, the States have tendered a Representation
to his Highness, inciting him to a reconciliation, a perfect union, and
seriously to weigh and consider of what they offer to him.

Whereupon the Prince resolved, that the substance of their Desires should be
drawn up into form, and in reference to a paper which he had formerly received
from the Commissioners, communicated the same to the Estates, to the end, they
might clearly discern and be sensible of what high things they demanded of
him, which being urged by them to the Scots commissioner, they denied the
tender of any such paper: However, the Prince has declared a great
willingness to a concurrence with his Subjects of Scotland, and says, that he
is resolved to give his condescension to such things, that may tend to his
honor and safety, and the liberty and freedom of his people; but the Royal
Courtiers dissuade him, from signing to any thing, but that which may advance
their own design and interest.

Hague 4 May, 1649.
May 8. By an Express from the North it is advertized, that the Gourdens,
Oglebies, and Middletons are gathered to a great head, and have great Bodies
togegether; and whereas formerly they did intend a parley now they reject and
cast all aside they begun or intended with Lesley, they are grown to such a
height, that Lesley is enforced to withdraw his number of forces in any measure
not able to engage with theirs.

The parliament of England have ordered that a letter be forthwith drawn up, to
be sent to the several and respective Ambassadors and Agents from foreign
States, signifying, That they are resolved to seize on all ships whatsoever,
belonging to any King or State that have prince Charles his Commission, or
shall be designed against the Commonwealth or England, and in order thereunto,
are drawing up an Act for the some purpose, which may prove isntrumental for
(...) preventing of foreign Engagements against this Nation.

FINIS.

