GRADVS SIMEONIS: OR, THE FIRST-FRVITS OF PHILIP, Earl of Pembroke and
Montgomery, etc. [SOMETIMES] KNIGHT of the GARTER: And [NOW] KNIGHT of
BERK-SHIRE.

PRESENTED In a learned Speech upon the Day of his Ascending down into the
Lower HOUSE of COMMONS.

A^rill 24 1649In the first year of the LORDS Freedom.

Gradus Simeonis, etc.
MAster Speaker, and worthy Fellow Members, I am now advanced into the Lower
House; and am glad I can say unto you (as sometimes did another Worthy of this
House) BEHOLD YOUR KNIGHT. I am not ashamed to be a Knight; my Father was a
Knight before me: and why may not a man be a Knight after he is a Lord, as well
as before? I am the first Knight that ever You made; Who should make Knights
but you that have the Sword? I am a Knight of your making, and I hope I am a
Knight of Gods making. I was borne a Knight, and now I am chosen a Knight; why
should we not be twice Knights, as well as twice Children? The Presbyterian
Parliament made me a Knight Errant; I was then a Knight of All Shires. I think
They were the greater Levellers; for they brought me down to be a Spaniel or
Pack-horse: they could find no use for me but to Fetch and Carry. I had Hobsons
choice, either be a Hobson or nothing. I was then a plain ordinary Post, but I
thank God you have made me a Knight of the Post.

Mr. Speaker, I have been Knight of the Bath, and Knight of the G^^ter, and all
manner of Knights; I have been dubd so often, that I am now feign to wear a
Periwig. You may dub me what you will but a Lord Capel; I would be any thing
but a Saint or a Martyr.

Mr. Speaker, I am not very good at Speeches; but I had rather make twenty
in the Lower House here, then one upon the Scaffold.

Mr. Speaker, Reformation goes backward, and Crabs go backward, all things go
backward, and why should not I go backward? Now is the time of the year (you
know) for Lobsters. I had rather have gone forward, but we must all go that
way the Devil drives. I would still be growing, though it be downwards; why
should not old Lords as well as old men be Cowes tails? I was always a Dunce
you know; I used to learn my Lessons over again in the Horne-booke; and why
may I not do it so in the Heralds book? For a Lord to turn Knight is only
to wear his coat the wrong side out. It Is a hard world now; Lords may be
forced to turn their clothes. Had I not been a Knight, I must have been
nothing. I was (I knew) at a loss in my Lordship, and I learnt of my hounds to
hunt counter, and cast about. Would you not have me (Mr. Speaker) have as much
wit as a hound? None took me for a Lord, but only some silly people like my
self.

I am sure on it, I have nothing to show for it but a Star; A Horse for ought I
knew was as noble a beast as my self; a Star is but a Star whether it be worn
in ones forehead, or upon ones shoulders. If there was an Earl of Pembroke,
'twas my Cloak was guilty, not I. I never was so much as a Gentleman but only
while I swore. Since I left my Oaths, God confound me I am no more noble then
any Colonel in the Army. All my Titles of Honor were but nicknames to me; my
long Bill only made me a Woodcock, and now I have a short one, it will perhaps
make me but an Owl. My name was so long, I had much ado to remember it. What
profit do Titles bring in? it is a fair deal better I hope to be Knight of a
Shire, then a Knight of a Garter; and a Rope with Gregory at it would become me
as well (I think) as a Blew Ribbon with a George.

Mr. Speaker, I have been sick of the Nobility ere since my Lord of Holland wore
a nightcap. Pray God a man may be a Knight in quiet. I can as well ride with
two Horses, as six. I Will go on foot, or any thing, rather then be carted with
one.

God dam me, M. Speaker, I was cursed (I think) to be made an Earl. The Devil
did it to have me beheaded; and I had rather be hanged, if I must die; that is a
dogs death (M. Speaker) and you know I love Dogs. I would I had been a Brewer,
or a Cobbler, or any thing but a Lord.

M. Speaker, pray move it that Michael Oldsworth may be Earl of Pembrok, I have
been Lord long enough a conscience. Michael is a man of understanding; Pembroke
and Montgomery may be Welsh for ought I know. He has made me a Knight; and,
what can I do less then make him a Lord? He made me a Presbyterian, and he
made me a Visitor: and now he has made me as good a Member as himself. He makes
my Speeches; and I think I have as good Speeches made for me, as any Lord in the
Kingdom. He can make me an Independent, or a Leveller, or any thing as
occasion serves. God dam me, he is the best maker that ere I had.

M. Speaker, I was once in the Tower, you know, and must have gone to Tower Hill
but for him; and what a mad Earl should I have made with my head off? Some
say, I am none of the wisest now it is on; I have been alive this seven years,
and you know many a wiser man than I has gone to pot: They talk of the
Bishop, and Deputy, but and if they were wise, I thank God I am a fool.

All Religion is good (Mr. Speaker) and why should not all kinds of Religions
be good too? We cannot have too much Religion; and how can we have too many? I
loved the Common Prayer, the Letanie served me for swearing. I love Presbytery
too; you know that brought the Covenant; and we had no swearing a long while
before. I love the Independent too; why should we not have a pack of Religions,
as well as a pack of Dogs? I hope both Presbyter and Independent will concur
and agree; a man may be both, I think, as well as either of 'em. I can be any
thing, and I can be nothing, in a Parliamentary way. Though I am a poor
Christian, I thank God I am a contented one. I can be a Lord when I can; and I
can be a Knight when I cannot otherwise choose: I am not such a Fool, but that
in these times I can be a Changeling too. Michael Oldsworth will instruct me,
and I am not such fool neither, but to do as I am bid. If there should be a
King again, I shall, perhaps, be begged for a Fool, but till then I am not
such a fool as to be a Beggar. I Will be a Leveller so I may keep my own Estate;
We shall not be Levellers I hope (M. Speaker) among our selves.

M. Speaker, I think I can Vote as well as any man: though I am a goose I can
cackle. Michael Oldsworth and I shall carry it what ere it be; when he opens I
shall gape I warrant; and I hope we are enough to set the rest a yawning. I
hate division; when I am hunting I love a full cry, I am no stragler; I shall
never leave you till you turn me away. I had not left the House of Lords, had
it not left being a House of Lords. 'Twas all a poor COBWEB could do, to hang
till the House was blown up. Had I hang any longer, I might have been hanged
for ought I know. But I can be a Cobweb, Mr. Speaker, in the Lower House as well
as in the Upper. A Cobweb may be any where but in Westminster Hall.

The upper House has been Visited as well as Oxford; there are more Earls of
Pembrok (it seems) beside my self. FAUX had like to have blown it up, but hang
him Traitor, he would not have done it in a Parliamentary way. IN A
PARLIAMENTARY WAY, I say: I Will speak no Treason M. Speaker, that is as bad as
flinging Standashes. I could never see Faux his head, God forgive me, but mine
aked presently. I do what I can to keep it on; and yet I am afraid one time or
other 'twill be loose in the hilts. It Is a scirvy one, but it is better then
none. Should I want my Head, how should I do to wear a Periwig? Let 'em take my
Arms, so they leave my Head safe. Let 'em take Pembroke and Montgomery, so
they leave Philip and Herbert; and let 'em take them too, so they leave Me. I
do not stand upon names* My good name was gone long ago; and yet I thank God
I am a live, and keep Hounds still. One may be a Parliament man I hope without
a name; and a Knight without a name.

I shall do excellent well in a Representative. I know I can sit as like an
Image (though I say it Master Speaker) as the best in the House. I shall sit
still, till you make a new Oath: A fresh Oath M. Speaker in my judgment would
do very well; But I would have it contrary to all for only Variety is pleasing
to all men.

And now M. Speaker, that I am speaking of Oaths; I remember when I was sent by
your Order to undo the University of Oxford, according to the Duty of my
Place, which I hold there as Chancellor; I met with some troublesome Scholars
which talked to me of Conscience: They could not swear, and forswear themselves
(forsooth) because of Conscience. Their Conscience, they said, would not suffer
them.

M. Speaker, My first Motion therefore to this Honorable House, is, That it
may be put to a Vote, Whether or no there be any such thing as Conscience: Or,
if there be, that then an Act may be made by this House, that no man may be
allowed to keep a good Conscience but the wicked Cavaliers.

For alas! Mr. Speaker, this Conscience is good for nothing but to make a man a
Beggar. Would I have been troubled with it, I had been as poor as any of the
Kings Lords are now. It Is easier keeping two or three packs of Dogs, then one
good Conscience, and yet Oatmeale is very dear now God knows.

Mr. Speaker, I hope it is not unlawful to keep Dogs; Keeping Dogs, Mr.
Speaker, is no swearing. I love Dogs, and I love the Parliament; I may love
Dogs, and yet not love Kings; I must love Dogs now, Mr. Speaker, for else why
was I chosen Knight of Bark-shire?

FINIS.

