THE GRAND PLUNDERER: A SVBIECT Never before written; And great pity it is, that
so mischievous a subject as this is, should survive in such malignant Times as
these are.

Written by one, who hates not the man, but his manners; and loves his person,
but likes not his condition.

Printed in the year, 1643

The grand Plunderer.
Monstrum borrendem ingens cui lumen ademptum He Is a horrid, huge monster,
deprived of the eye of Equity; for indeed Justice (one of the four Cardinal
virtues) is in as much antipathy to him, as day to night, or the glorious
splendour of the Sun to cymmerian darkness. It Is the property of Justice,
suum cuique tribuere, to render to every one his own due and right; but it is
this monsters property (or rather his monstrous nature) to take away from us
our propriety, those goods which we may jostly lay claim to, and in which we
have sole interest: Admirandum est hoc monstrum, this monster is to be admired
at, for that he does desperately rav^sh from us our right, manu violento, by a
violent hand, unae habe at nemo quarit sed oportet habere; by hook, or by
crook, per fas, aut nefas, he neither fears nor cares how, or by what
unlawful means he comes by it, only so he may have it. He makes no more
conscience to swallow up speedily a man's estate at a bit, then our Dutch do to
devour nimbly pills of butter, and never purge for it. As his name is
formidable, so his nature is dreadful, being of himself physically (namely
naturally) a terrible scarrecrow, and horrible vulture to those persons and
places, with which he is resident, or wheresever he is present He rejoices at
others sorrow, and rises by their fall: He can hardly subsist but by the
spoil and ruin of his neighbor, to whom such is his implacable malice and
cruel hostility, that for his own ends his endeavor is to make him a
sacrifice. He is a bad servant to God, and as ill a Subject to the King, the
King of Kings vicegerent here on earth. His motto, is Have at all; either totum
aut nihil, All, or nothing at all: His dialect like that of the Carthaginean
Hannibal, Actum (inquit) nihil est, nisi Paeno milite ports frangimus; nothing
is by him performed, unless with a troop of soldiers he batters the gates,
and enforce 'em open: And for his actions, I may say of them, as sometimes
Catiline the Roman conspirator said of his, The ills that he has done cannot
be safe but by attempting greater. He is truly the Malignam Party (...), by
way of eminence, above all others, none so mischievousas he and he more
malevolent and ill affected then any: As he is malignus in Corcreto, so he is
that party in Abstracto. He is a spirit, but an evil one, for he has no spirit
at all unto peace; and that is the reason he delights so much in the rumors and
tumors of war: He is a true son of tumult and insurrection, the only
Antagonist to peace and union; like the Salamander, he lives by and in the fire
of contention: He himself is of himself malus ignis, an evil fire, (as the
word malignus signifies no less) the only incendiary and firebrand of
unnatural and intestine war; in which horrid time, he consumes and devasts
all that he meets with, and like a truculent Tyrant, spare; none whom he may
or can oppress. High and low, rich and poor, noble and ignoble, bond and
free, all are alike to him. As the Devil himself (that subtle and sly
Piscator) of all fish loves souls best, so the desire of his soul is the
heart of your estates; that is the maine mark that he aims at; nevertheless
all is fish that comes to his net, and then (having once caught you) he makes
money and emolument of the goods so gotten for his own advantage: He cares not
who buys 'em (whether a Jew, or a Christan, all is one to him) so he may
receive the gain and profit for them. He is altogether composed of sedition,
murder, and rapine; with which triple cord of iniquity he is so strongly bound
up, that from his impiety he can hardly be dissolved, but is strongly bound up
from his impiety he can hardly be dissolved, but ^s firmer tied (and as it were
obliged by an unhappy fate) to transgress more and more in an outrageous
manner, against God the King, and his Subjects. To plunder is properly
predicated of him, ^he more alluding and he himself inclining to those hideous
attempts and direful outrages, which in the horrid time by him, as ^orrid are
perpetrated and committed. He breaks in violently, and seises as unmercifully
upon the best he can lay his hands on. He invades first by force, where having
got entrance, sic volo sic jubeo stat pro ratione voluntas; his will is his
Law, and he fears no controllment nor contradiction, assuming to himself an
abitrary power and jurisdiction, and by no means will be persuaded to yield
conformity to the legislative authority of the Law of this Land.

Never was there more plundering and pillaging then has been in these latter
times, and is now at this time. What barbarous insolences, inhumane affronts,
and never the like heard of villainies have been and are still daily acted both
here in England, and also elsewhere in Ireland, in the famous cities and
countries of those two once flourishing and renowned (but now tottering, and
sick languishing) Kingdoms, the sad history of this unhappy age does
sufficiently testify. In pristine times the Plunderer was termed Damon
nocturnus, a Devil that ranged about in the night season. The act of
Plundering was then reputed so heinous a crime, that it was acounted no better
then Burglary, and that was then opus tenebraruns a work of darkness, and was
ashamed to show it self openly to the view of the world, but now in these
latter times, he is grown to that frontlesse impudence, that he is become Damon
meridianus, and dares attempt such facinorous actions, even at nooneday, as if
he had commission and authority to perform them Cumprivilegio. -- Audax omnia
perpeti.
Gens humana ruit per vetitum nefas.


Good God what an age do we live in! what a wilderness of we is this strange
world now come to! Vivitur ex rapto, men now a days live by catching and
snatching. Terras astrea reliquit, Justice has deserted the earth, and is
ascended into heaven. She is not more a pilgrim then a peregrine, and not so
much a sojourner as a stranger amongst us. There is little or no divine justice
administered, few or no wholesome Laws executed. Courts of judicature lie now
vacant, except the supreme Court, and supremest of all Courts, which in regard
of the weighty affairs of the state of this Kingdom cannot be silent, Toto
Mars savit in orb. What a havoc has this bloody hand of War made in the
world? The drum every night gives Martial summons, and the Trumpet every day
is sounding in our ears. Death has a long time marched into the field, where
two great and powerful Armies have resolutely met, and thousands on both sides
unfortunately sl^in. New forces for this civil, (uncivil) war have been and
are raised: both the Armies are at this instant still on foot in the very
bowels of this Kingdom, ready every house to fight, so that without Gods
gracious mercy to this Land and nation, a dreadful desolation like an ominous
and imuspicious meteor hovers over our heads. People talk of a cessation of
Arms for twenty days, and of a treaty in that time for an accommodation, but
for ought I hear, there is little or no hopes of a present pacification; it is
to be feared that the Sword (which has bin so long drawn) will not be in haste
sheathed, by which there has already been so much Christian blood spilt, that
nothing for satisfaction but it can decide this great contestation between the
King, and the Parliament. Who would have thought two years ago, that such
times as these would have been? Our Progenitors never knew the same, and I
pray God succeeding generations may never see the like. Sure this is the iron
age, and we that live in it durum genus sumus, we are a hard nation,
hard-hearted, and iron-like qualified, Misanthropi and Tymonists (men-haters
like Tymon of Athens) are common every where amongst us. I will not say Homo
homini Demon, Man is to man a Devil, but I may say, Homo homini Lupus. Man is
to man a Wolf. Many men do endeavor and aim at nothing more then to devour
one another, and that they do two manner of ways; either by the violence of
their hands, or by the virulence of their tongues; by exacting oppression in
their goods, or by detracting defamation in their good names. In the former
manner the Plunderer is injurious against all Law to his brother: Legem tenere
se putat nullam divinam, aut humanam, he will not be confined nor conformed to
any Law (which should regulate his actions) either divine or humane. Hence it
is that he breaks the Law of equity, and of charity; and hence it is that
either such an unhappy Ataxic, disorder and confusion in the fabric of this
Kingdom, that every one therein is altogether for himsef, for his own ends,
and particular advantage; so that there is no love little amity, less unity,
least of all uniformity or unanimity, and no peace at all now amongst us.

Lucian ingenuously feignes, that Charon was on a time conducted by Mercury to
a huge promontorie and ample high mountain, that he might there take a full
survay of the World; and being asked when he descended from thence upon the
earth, what he beheld, he said, he saw the heavens above him like a vast
circumference, the earth below him like a small Center, that appeared to his
view no bigger then a black spot; in which he could discern multitudes of men,
like so many swarms of bees, of several sorts, and all conditions; the greater
he perceived to be like so many Hornets, and they did sting the lesser, then he
beheld diverse motions and commotions various actions and passions, some
running, some riding, others swearing and swaggering; some again struggling and
striving, many quarrelling and fighting; plundering, and pillaging, killing and
slaving, all in a hubbub and hurly-burly, and nothing in the whole universe
(worth the seeing) but an universal uprore.

The morrall of this Apologue may be applied to these our times. It does
evidently appear (we may see it without a perspective glass) that in the
world there is a general confusion, and like to be a miserable combustion: It
is too true (I would to God it were false) that the whole world is up in arms,
and at this time in this Kingdom of England as there are Armies of fears
abroad, so there are myriads of disasters, distempers and distractions here at
home. This unnatural, illegal, civil war (which of all wars is the
worst) is the cause of all our woes. Were it not for this there would be no
news of towns taken, Lords, Collonells, Captains, commanders, and so many
soldiers slain, so many massacres (as there are) daily acted; were it not for
this, there would be no carrying into captivity, nor complaining in our
streets; no such plundering and pillaging as now there is amongst us: but in
regard of this, no man can be certainly confident of what he has, for he is
certain of nothing but uncertainty: neither is the King of his Kingdom, nor
the Peer of his Land, the Knight of his revenue, the Gentleman of his estate,
the Citizen of his commodity, nor any Subject of his property. Belli alea est
incerta, when once the Die of war is thrown, it is uncertain who shall win,
or lose; none can determine or know who shall have the victory, or the
overthrow, but the Lord of hosts that great General Commander who alone knows
all things.

Quidjam nisi vota supersunt? What now remains, but that we pray unto the Lord
God of our salvation, that he would save and deliver us from the hands of our
enemies. Pray we to the God of Peace that he would be pleased to grant us
Peace, and that Peace of God which the world cannot give, but which passes and
surpasses all humane understanding. Pray we to God for our gracious King, that
the King of Kings would preserve him from his false friends, and fierce foes;
for the Kingdom that God would open their eyes to see, and for all the people
that he would open their hearts to consider those things that belong to a
temporal, spiritual, and eternal Peace.

FINIS.

