THE SHEPHERDS FAREWELL TO HIS BELOVED FLOCK OF S. B. E. L. Where He has
been above twenty years their weak, yet vigilant Pastor, I. G. D. D.

PSALM. 37. 25. I have been young, am old, yet never saw
The just abandoned, nor those that draw
From him their breath, with beggary oppressed,
He lends in mercy and his seed are blessed.
En me, peracta part vitae maxima,
Senecta jam cana premit:
Nec me usquam rectam persequutum tramitem,
Meos ve, sensi deseri;
Quaerelave vidi voce, Divitum ad Ostia,
Miserum rogantes frustulum.
Printed in the year 1645.

TO THE PARISH OF St. BARTHOLMEWS EXCHANGE LONDON.
BEloved in the Lord, you have your desire, and I have mine ease to betake me
to a retired life, in my crazy estate and manifold infirmities of age crept on
me, which makes it to me a disease and summoning to the Grave.

God enable me, that patience in me may have the perfect work, and furnish you
all with all his graces, that shall have their continuation in glory.

This is my hearty prayer, to which God vouchsafe a blessed Ratification.

For Preaching once yours, For Praying ever yours, JOHN GRANT, aged 67.

THE SHEPHERDS farewell to his beloved FLOCK of S. B. E. L.
PHIL. 4. ver. 4. to 8. Rejoice in the Lord always; and again I say Rejoice.

Let your Moderation be known to all men: The Lord is at hand.

Be careful for nothing; but in every thing by prayer and supplication, with
thanksgiving, let your requests be made known to God.

And the peace of God which passes all understanding, shall keep your hearts
and minds through Christ Jesus.


IN this present evil world, the dearest of God's Saints are often militant
(in a warfaring condition often;) and whiles here they are, always itinerant
(in a wayfaring condition always.)

They have Enemies enough, and strangers are they unto all that are not right
to Heaven-wards, that are open sinners, or but pretended Saints.

They are hated by many, and not owned by the most; persecuted by not a few,
deserted (in their extreme wants) almost by every one, by all, sure in whose
hearts Christ dwells not by faith Ephesians. 3. 17.
; So this Apostolical exhortation is needful for their consolation, that they
take none offense at the Cross of Christ, but that they closely buckle
themselves to be with him crucified, and soundly animated, peremptorily to deny
their own selves, to take up their own cross daily, and so cheerfully and
undantedly to follow Christ Luke 9. 23.
, even unto death and in death to be his courageous and most constant Followers.

I called this Text an Exhortation; I may fitly call it a chain of
Exhortations, of suitable and seasonable Exhortations, and all of them closed up
in a pithy apprecation.

The first Exhortation is to the perpetuity of Rejoicing; the next to the
moderate behaving a man's self in all occurrences.

The last, to a dependency upon God amidst the throngs of whatever cares the
world presses us withal, and enforces continually upon us, to make us
forgetful of our God.

We are thus to the perpetuity of rejoicing, by our holy Apostle exhorted, and
the Exhortation (to work us seriously unto it) is redoubled, Rejoice in the
Lord always, and again I say Rejoice.

The again and again rejoicing, is the Christian rejoicing, the rejoicing it
is in the Lord.

Worldlings rejoycings are in their vanities, ever with vexations accompanied;
mad rejoycings are they, ever ending in horror: I have said of laughter, it is
mad, and of mirth, what does it Eccles. 2. 2
.

Mad laughter and profane mirth, does it knows not what.

Christ's woe is thereon; Woe unto you that now laugh, for ye shall mourn and
weep Luke 6. 25.
.

Extremum gaudij luctus occupat, all rejoicing out of Christ is wound up in
mourning, and that mourning shall have no ending, nor shall any of the tears
thereof be put up into the Lords bottels.

The right rejoicing (that shall be an evermore rejoicing) is the rejoicing in
the Lord: That our names are written in the book of Life, is the very life of
rejoicing Luke 10. 20
.

All other rejoicing is but madness, it is groundless altogether; it knows
not what it does, it does what it cannot know, that it shall have Gods
approbation; nay if it reflect upon Gods revealings, cannot but know, that
reprobation will thereof be the dismal conclusion.

But the Christian rejoicing, is an evermore rejoicing; Rejoice evermore, is
our Apostles expression These. 5. 16.
.

In the hope of the glory of God is their rejoicing, that have in their hearts
this assurance by faith, that their names are in the records of Heaven
indelibly registered.

In the hope of the glory of God is their rejoicing Romans 5. 2.
.

And not only so, the Apostle adds further, in the three annexed verses; but
we (the rejoycers in the Lord) glory in tribulations (not only rejoice, but
even glory in them) as knowing that tribulation works patience, and patience
experience, and experience hope, and hope makes not ashamed, because the love
of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost, which is given unto us.

You here may clearly see the wide difference now between the rejoycings of
sinners and of Saints, of profane worldlings, and of religious Christians.

The one is deceitful, vanishing, perishing and in perdition enwrapping; the
other fixed, eternal, happy making, and so continuing in those in whom it
takes place, being in prosperity and adversity still the same.

Plenties swell it not up, neither wants cast it down, calm times never make
it forgetful of God, nor tumults deter them from the constant service of
God, in whom God works it by the Ministers of his own appointing.

This rejoicing in the Lord always, this again and again rejoicing, is the joy
in the holy Ghost; it is that gladsome, that sweet, that comfortable motion of
the heart by the Spirit of Adoption, stirred up in the elect Servants and
Saints of God, upon the feeling of Gods love to them-wards in Jesus Christ, as
the forerunner and assurer of the life eternally happy. Both in earthly and
spiritual blessings have we the tokens of Gods love to us-wards in Christ,
especially in the spiritual.

The Kingdom of God is righteousness and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost,
writes our Apostle To. 14. 17.
.

When Christ's joy remains in us, our joy becomes the Full joy Joh. 15. 11.
.

It is the joy unspeakable, the glorious joy, so by Saint Peter styled 1 Pet.
1. 8.
: and fitly, because of Heavens Kingdom, it is a maine part.

With all joy and peace through believing, are the elected and selected ones of
God filled To. 15. 13.
.

A very Heaven is in their consciences, and a constellation is there of all
virtues and graces, beamed from the Father of Lights in his Irradiations upon
them.

This Saint Paul appreca^es to the Romans, and I in his words to you; The God
of Hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing, that ye may abound in
Hope through the power of the holy Ghost To. 15. 13.
.

This were a fit bough always to be chirping on; but our Text is a Tree of
many boughs and branches, and gladly bird-like, would I be upon them all in
this one Hour.

To the next then do I swiftly betake me, and that is Moderation, Let your
Moderation be known to all men.

Christian moderation is the bridler in of our affections, and the bounder of
our passions, throughout our conversation among men of all ranks and humors.

The self-willed are the perpetual disturbers of themselves and others, even
of all within their reach; they will do no right, they will endure no wrong;
but the soberly moderate and wel-tempered Christian so ballanceth himself,
that he carries every thing even, and in all occurrences, keeps him (so near
as possibly he can) in a stare of Aequality.

To neither hand swerves he, but always steadily behaves himself (never at at
any time giddily) in all manner affairs; extremity hurries not him on, but
Aequity povseth and guides him; never is he rigidly strict, to press on
others what is unmeet, but ever watchful to keep his feet from running into
injurious ways and courses, and his hands from wrongful doings, upon whatever
occasions or urgencies.

Right Christians accommodate themselves unto one another by way of concord,
whereas discord even in things trivial, makes wounds and keeps them open by
rigorous austerity and very niceties, not of conscience only but even of
credit.

That of Abraham, the Father of the faithful, is quite forgotten in these
riged and rugged times.

Says he to Lot (the elder to the younger, the Uncle to his Nephew) Let there
be no strife I pray thee between me and thee, nor between my Heard-men and thy
Heardmen, for we are Brethren Genesis 13. 8
.

When strife is not heeded soon and speedily moderated, a Gangrene makes it
uncurable, and nothing but rooting out and cutting off will be the issue; a
bloody issue, till the one or the other party even bleed to death (and not
seldom both) there is no stay.

Stories are fraught with such relations, and it were well that we seriously and
closely studied them, that we (in the same kind) become not a Tragick-history
to the times ensuing ours.

We are Brethren, is a strong argument to break off discords, and in the
closest bonds of concord to be reunited.

Nearness in blood presses the duty upon us, nearness in the faith of
Religion, and in the religiousnesse of faith, far much more.

Look we on the Vocation wherewith we are called, that of Christianity, a right
worthy Vocation, and be it our care (yea and our conscience) to walk worthy
thereof; we have it from Apostolical Entreaty and Injunction Ephesians. 4. 1.
, and it were well we hearted what is by him there subjoyned: Be your walking
(that is, your Christian behavior and converse in the world) in all lowliness
and meekness, with long-suffering, forbearing one another in love,
endeavoring to keep unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace: There is one
body and one spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of your calling. There
is one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all, who is above
all, and through all, and in us all.

And the close of the Chapter is suitable hereunto, and home to the point we are
on in our Text, the expression of our Moderation ver. 31. 32.
; Let all bitterness and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil speaking be
put away from you, with all malice, and be ye kind one to another,
tenderhearted, forgiving one another even as God for Christ's sake has
forgiven you.

And note here with me, that the Apostle says not bluntly, be ye moderate, but
let your moderation be known; so evident, that it may be undeniably apparent,
known, evident; apparent to men, to all men, to all men that have eyes and
wills to see it, and judgments to conceive of it as it is.

When we are moderate, not for Vainglory, but for Gods glory, not to be
pointed at for such, but to be such indeed; not to be admired of others, but to
build them up to Heaven-wards by our example, (in right ingenity and Dove-like
simplicity) is that which our Apostle labors to work us unto; and that of
our Savior likewise drives it home Mat. 5. 16.
: Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in Heaven.

Which passage of our Savior by that of his Apostle Saint Peter, is set forth
to the very life 1 Pet. 2. 11. 12.
.

Dearly beloved, I beseech you (as Strangers and Pilgrims) abstain from
fleshly lusts, which war against the soul, having your conversation honest
among the Gentiles, that whereas they speak against you as evil doers, they
may (by your good works, which they shall behold) glorify God in the day of
Visitation.

Pliny the younger, ( Proconsul under Trajane the Emperor, of Christians the
fierce persecutor) observing the Moderation of the Christians, then in all
their demeanours and lightsome behavior in the darksome world, recommended
them for such to that Emperor, and it turned his enraged fierceness against
them, into an order taken for their indemnity and security amidst the
maliciously bent against them: When a man's ways do please the Lord, he makes
even his enemies to be at peace with him Prove. 16. 7.
: And this leads us by the hand to that which follows in the Text (as annexed
with this Exhortation) The Lord is at hand.

At hand the Lord God is, as being every where, at all times present; at hand
the Lord is by the assistance of his grace, to bring his choice ones in Christ
out of* all the endangerments they are in, by the sinfulness and weakness in
their nature corrupted.

At hand the Lord is in the course of his judgments, to help them to right
that suffer wrong, and (in his last judgment) to render unto every man
according to that he has done in his body unpartially.

Our only present help, in whatever troubles, is the Lord our God. At hand he
is to rescue us out of our intricate dangers; at hand he is, to extract us out
of whatever plunges; at hand he is to pull us out of the hels and horrors of
our various sins and entangling perplexities, by sealing unto our believing
souls the pardons by Christ's blood sealed and ratified by the Spirit of his
promise: Let not the Epicures, Perepoteticks, Stoics of the times work their
poisons into our hearts: the former (Epicures) deny the providence of God, and
to the wheelings of Fortune ascribe the events of all the affairs in the world.

The middlemost (Peripatecians, Aristotle's close Adherents, Admirers and
Adorers) are in their Universalities (God with them, is no minder of
particulars:) The last (Stoics) bind God so unto causes secondary, that by
fatal necessity all things come to pass, and that nothing is by divine
providence ordered.

Besides these, the world has a rabble of vainly superstitious, conceiting God
after their own fancies, not as he has in his Word revealed himself to us,
namely, a God at hand and not a far off, to the moderators of themselves
according to his prescriptions.

Among all David's Psalms be that familiar unto you by frequent meditation (
Psalm. 107.)

A map it is of Gods being at hand to all his punctually, and stirs up all
(in all occurrences) to take notice of Gods Handiwork, and to praise him ever
for his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the children of men ( ver.
8. 15. 21. 31. of that precious Psalm.)

In the temporal blessings of our God, are his spiritual blessings therein
chanted forth most harmoniously.

At hand our God is to the wanderers in desert places; at hand God is to the
shut up in desmal prisons (feitered and tormented there;) at hand God is to the
cast upon their sick beds, and with various diseases tossed there, and
grievously turmoyled.

A fourfold exemplification of Gods presence in men's troubles, and of his
rescuing them graciously thereout, is in that Psalm distinctly specified.

The two former examples are of the calamitous in a vagring condition (in a
tossing on the Land and on the Sea) represented so as if we even saw them
tempestbeaten.

The two latter examples are in a condition not vagring indeed, but fixed; yet
so fixed, as tranf-fixed, as put to pains above humane supportment; External
violence in prison-extremities, internal grievance in varieties of diseases,
try the metals of Gods endeared ones; There is the patience of the Saints put
to it; Therein the ^ryall and the proof of them to be true and sound, cleer^y
evidenced; Gods temporal deliverances in these kinds are remarkable, but our
spiritual deliverances exceed all the temporal by far.

The Churches deliverances by her Savior the Lord Jesus, should often be
revolved in our thoughts, and all the year (yea all our years on Earth) should
be a Christmasse in this regard, a festival, continuated and celebrated
rejoycingly.

As Christ, before he was exhibited to the World in the flesh, was once
promised, and often re-promised, and our Forefathers in the faith thereby
sustained in their longings for him and expectations of him; so after his
manifestation in our nature, and finishing the work of our Redemption therein:
First he gave direction for the Faith Christian, by the Apostles and their
close Successors; and afterward, when Heresies and Scismes had tainted the
same, he again reformed it, and continues that blessed Reformation.

I have here before me a world of matter, but I must take up and speed me to
the next Bough, largely dispread and into many branches distinguished: Be
careful for nothing, but in every thing, by prayer and supplication, with
thanksgiving, let your requests be made known to God.

Be careful for nothing.) A double carfulness we read of, a carfulness
forbidden, and an enjoined carfulness.

This latter is a taking thought, both in what and how we may approve our
selves unto, and in our persons and whole deportment on earth please our good
and gracious Father which is in Heaven, wherein his Son our redeeming Lord he
has prepared the Mansions of eternity for us, after our pilgrimage in this
vale of misery.

By doing the will of our Father, as in his Word he has revealed the same to
us, is this care taken, and by us conscionably performed.

This is to us recommended in the Corinthians 2 Cor. 7. 11
, The sorrowing after a godly sort, what carfulness has it wrought in you?

This carfulness is a studiousnesse to avoid the track of sin and sinners,
and a closeness of adherence unto God in a way of holiness that leads to
happiness.

When we take due thought for the welfare of our own souls, and for the
drawing of others with us on to God, this way are we careful, and God
accepts of us in Christ, and highly approves us.

Yea, a moderate carfulness for the things of this life, without
distrustfulnesse in God, is both good and commendable; but when our Apostle
charge us to take care for nothing, it is Anxiousnesse he points at, and
disswades from.

This is interpreted by that of our provident Lord; Care not for to morrow Mat.
6. 34.
, our faith on Gods Providence must cast diffidence out of us.

Saint Peter thus expresses it; cast all your care upon God, for he cares for
you 1 Pet. 1. 7.
.

Where the word All is emphaticall, and very expressive.

It is not sufficient for a right Christian, to cast this care, or that care,
or the other on God.

Nothing must excrutiate us who have God for a Provider.

It may fall out that the very lightest cares may so press us down, that we
may become unfit to undergo the very lest burden of our calings, as not the
greatest can be too heavy for us, when the whole load of our cares are on God,
the perpetual care and provider for us.

And in the word Cast likewise, an intimation is there worthy our closest
observation.

It signifies, that we should rouse up what perplexeth us, and roll it all on
God.

Be we rid of Anxieties, as for us over-masterfull; but no burden is over-heavy
for his Shoulders.

And how shall we cast all our cares on God? by letting our requests be made
known to God.

God is ready to free us of our cares, and to take the charge both of our
persons, and of what concerns us for good; but he will be requested of us, and
then shall we be under his wings for shelter and for safety. It is not to
inform God that we put up requests to God; no, he knows our thoughts afar
off, he knows them ere they arise in us, knows them ere we can mold them up
into requests, and so put them up unto the Throne of Grace.

It is not simply for the manifesting of them to God, but to obtain Gods
approbation of them, and of us for them.

Christ will disclaim the knowledge of Hypocrites at* the last day ( I never
knew you*) and yet who are more in prayer then they? but their prayers are but
Ayrebeatings, as sounding brass, or tinkling Cymbals, all their devotions.

Requests made known to God are such, as God by effects makes it known, that
he has with approbation admitted them.

When we thrive to Heaven-wards, and are provided* for on earth to contentment,
it appears, that we have not been at our prayers in vain.

To all that call upon him God is near, but such must they be as in truth call
upon him Ps. 145. 18.
.

Otherwise he knows them not with approbation, with acceptance hears them
not.

When we are true of heart, Gods Ears are full open to our requests, and never
have we in them repulses from him.

Ask and it shall be given you, seek and ye shall find, knock, and unto you
shall it be opened; for every one that asks receives, and he that seeks
finds, and to him that knocks it shall be opened Mat. 7. 78.
.

When our requests unto God are faithful, earnest and constant, God takes
notice of them, and we from God have seasonable answers.

Requests put up to men are often frivolous.

Either to grant them is not in their power, or not in their will; but neither
are in God wanting, and nothing shall be to them wanting who are nor deficient
in this requesting duty, but are in it so earnest, that with Jacob the
Patriarch, they will not let the Lord go, till from the Lord they find and
feel a blessing, and in that blessing full sweetly enjoy God: Now our requests
unto are God made known by prayer, supplication, thanksgiving; A touch must I
needs give you of each of them, and God by his Spirit touch your hearts in the
use of them all.

(...), Prayer is our request unto God our Heavenly Father, for the supply of
what may sustain us and fit us for Heaven, that may enable us (both temporally
and spiritually) to hold on and to hold out in our callings, till hence we are
called to our abode in glory, to our Mansions of eternity.

(...), Supplication is our request to God, by way* of deprecation, either to
have evils removed from us, or sweetened to us: Sins and miseries involve us
here, but Gods providence is over us, and all shall work for the best unto us,
who by constant supplication refer our selves unto, and both always, and in
all things depend on God, and although he even nay us, are fully resolved (with
that man of the right metal, holy and patient Job) to trust in him.

(...), Thanksgiving is a request to God to accept of our thanks (our poor
thanks) for his richly multiplied benefits on us conferred in Jesus Christ.

As it becomes the righteous to be thankful, so in all things rendering
perpetuated thanks unto God, by them God is invited to the continuation of
blessings, to their settled assurance of his eternal favors.

In that which usually we do call the Lords Prayer are all these requests
uncomparably couched, Prayer, Supplication, Thanksgiving.

Be it in our hearts always, and in our mouths often upon occasions.

Thus pray we z, and pray we this; when ye pray, say Our Father a; and never
forget we that prayer, lest in our own (without an eye on that and close with
that) we be lost as in so many Wildernesses full of intricacies, full of
enormities, full of endangerments.

I close with that of our English Bernard. In the Lords Prayer, whether we
regard the brevity, perfection, authority, method, efficacy or necessity of it,
it is to be believed, that no Saint or Angel is able to march the plat-forme
thereof; being large for matter, short for phrase, and sweet for order: Take
withal (for the clearing of this branch in our Text, and for your right
apprehending and using of the Lords Prayer) the Explication and Application
thereof from the same Author (and others) thus; Our Father (by the right of
creation, by the merit of compassionate and bowell-mercies, by the gracious
provision of things needful and useful for us;) which art in Heaven, (the
Seat of thy Majesty in the very radiancy of glory, the Inheritance of thy
children by adoption and grace, the Kingdom of endless and un-disturbed
happiness;) hallowed be thy name (by the thoughts of our hearts, by the words
of our mouths, by the works of our hands) thy Kingdom come (that of grace to
inspire us, that of power to defend us, that of glory to crown us;) thy will
be done (in our weal and in our woe, in our fullness and in our needfulnesse,
in our life temporal, and at our death the change of this for a better life;)
in Earth as it is in Heaven, (in us below as it is in the glorious Angels
above; done willingly, readily, cheerfully, faithfully; done without the very
least murmuring, without any let or any manner hindering, without fraudulent
and deceitful juggling, the cheating way of serving God* in the
complementalnesse of Religion;) Give us this day our daily Bread, (for the
nourishment of these our decaying bodies, for the spiritual feeding of our
Heavenbred souls, for the relief of all our necessities, whether bodily or
spiritual, whether for our sustentation here for a time, or preparation for
hereafter, to the days of eternity;) And forgive us our Trespasses, (those
wher^by thou our Father art in the course of our sinful live dishonored, our
Neighbors any ways wronged, our selves heedlesly endangered, and with many
miseries perpetually even day by day enthralled;) as we forgive them that
Trespass against us, (that have hurt us in our bodies, that have hindered us in
our goods and estates, that have wronged us in our good names and reputations;)
And lead us not into tentation, (the tentation of the world, lying and rotting
in all manner of wickedness; the tentation of the flesh, our bosome-inticing
Dalilah, over-neare and over-deare unto us; the tentation of Satan, our common
adversary, the perpetual hunter of us to utter perdition and destruction:) But
deliver us from evil, (forgive that is past, remove that is present, what is
to come graciously so prevent, that nothing may ever make a separation between
thee and us, thee our Father, and us thine adopted ones in the Lord Jesus
Christ, the Son, as of thy nature, so of thine entirest love:) For thine is
the Kingdom, (to rule and overrule all:) thine the power, to command and to
do all:) thine the glory, (to be all in all to all thine:) and all these for
ever and ever, (in the world that is present, and in the world that is to
come,:) unlimited is thy Kingdom, thy power and thy glory, Amen, (thou say
it and so it is:) Amen, (thou do promise it and so shall it be;) Amen is our
echo to what thou say and promifest; so be it Heavenly Father, is the
faithful Amen to all the requests our gracious Lord has taught us, to put up
affectionately unto thee.

And now from the Apostles Exhortations to various duties, which (in a plain
way) we have explained; proceed we in the last place, to the Apostles closing
up of all with a right suitable apprecation; and the peaco of God which passes
all under standing shall keep your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus.

I shall briefly and closely open this, and leave it with you as an hearty
farewell of your worn-out Pastor, whose prayer ever shall be for your thriving
to Heaven-wards.

The peace of God was the Apostles apprecation to his Phillipians, and is mine
to you; once mine, but now left to your own choice of a Preacher, and God fit
you with one that may fit you for God.

By the peace of God (in this passage) conceive that peace which God works in
believing consciences, as an effect of the Gospel to them sincerely preached.

My soul assures me, that I never delivered any thing from this Pulpit that
was unsound, untrue; never hucstered the Word of God to the humouring of any,
for byends of mine own, never hood-winked any Parishoner by forged
interpretations, raked out either of the Channels of Rome, or Dung-hils of
Amsterdum; otherwise (even of a child from my believing Parents, soundly
Protestant) learned I Christ, and both in truth and cleernesse have so taught
him.

And this Testimony of mine own conscience (on it self seriously reflecting)
is to me as thousands of Witnesses: God so deal with my soul, as I have been
faithful to you-wards (in the whole course of my Ministry among you) for the
solid good of your souls: And now my prayer is for you, that the peace of God
may settle in you; only that peace is the peace surpassing, a peace that has
no bounds, no termination, no expiration.

The peace it is the only peace that passes all understanding.

The World conceives the Godly to have no peace, but the godly know that the
wicked World has none, no not when it is at the quietest; we have it from him
that had it immediately from God ( Isaiah, that Prophet Evangelicall, or
prophetical Evangelist) There is no peace (says my God) to the wicked; and in
that one Prophet we find it twice recorded chap. 48. 22 and 57. 21.
.

And he adds this comparison to set it forth to the very full; Sea-like the
wicked cannot rest; when any winds trouble them, their waters cast up mire and
dirt, and with their fulsomnesse and noysomnesse, not a corner is there any
where that stinks not of them; yet even in their disturbances, a peace there is
in godly consciences, a peace passing the capacity of worldly men's
understandings, a settled and a settling peace.

And no mervail, for it keeps their hearts and minds through Christ Jesus.

Listen unto the legacy of Christ's bequeathing.

The Hearts keeper it is, and the minds keeper, and both in the right temper of
un-disturbed tranquillity* Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you, not
as the world gives give I unto you; let not your heart be troubled, neither
let it be afraid Joh. 14. 27
.

The peace of the world is like the world, fickle; now on, soon again quite
off, ever giddy never steady: The children of men are deceitful upon the
weights, light as vanity, yea then vanity it self lighter Psalm. 62. 9.
.

And wise Solomon (the Son of religious David) proves throughout his
Ecclesiastes, that book of proofs by him experienced.

But the Peace of God through Jesus Christ, or that peace we have bequeathed us
from Christ is such a peace, which as the world cannot give us, so it cannot
take the same from us: Our Peacemaker is the securer of the peace we have from
him; our hearts and minds are in safe custody thereby. Out of Satan's reach they
are, and above the malice of every satanically-minded and handed wretch (yea
and tongued too) in both sexes. We may have our good names by slanderousnesse
blemished, our estates by the violence of plunder ruined, our temporary lives
by the bloodinesse of war or by any manner of disease (pestilentiall or
otherwise) taken from us; but the peace made between the God of faithfulness
and our believing souls is altogether unbereavable.

Hell! gates cannot there be prevalent, where Gods pardon and peace are entered;
and where in the blood of Christ believers are sealed (by the spirit of Christ)
to the day of full Redemption. I shall now refer you to the present close
perusal (and to the practical use, whiles you have a day on earth to live) of
that 91 Psalm, It begins thus, He that dwells in the secret place of the most
high shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty: and it thus concludes, he
shall call upon me and I will answer him, with long life will I satisfy him,
and show him my salvation. Here (and in the rest of that Psalm) is the peace of
God displayed, a peace passing the understanding of natural men, as not at all
therewith acquainted a peace keeping the hearts and minds of the regenerate in
an heavenly temper, and filling them with joy unspeakable and full of glory 1
Pet. 1. 8.
The Kingdom of God is righteousness, peace and joy in the holy Ghost To. 14.
17.
. And our Savior tells us that this Kingdom is within us Luke 12 11.
. A Kingdom it is that comes not with observation, lo, it is here, or, lo
(...) there, is but frivolous discourse: for behold the Kingdom of God is
within you, it consists (as formerly you heard from St. Paul) in
righteousness, peace and joy in the holy Ghost, all within all in the hearts
of believers. When Jesus Christ dwells in the heart by faith (as Saint Paul
averreth he does Ephesians. 3. 17.
) and every Believer knows it) there is rejoicing in the Lord, there is the
unstinted expression of Moderation, there is the assurance of the Lords
assissance, there is a casting on God the care of our welfare in a perpetuated
laying down of our requests before him in prayer, supplication, thanksgiving,
and there the peace of God which passes all understanding keeps through Jesus
Christ the hearts and minds of Christians. I hope what I have at this time
delivered is generally understood, and my prayer is that it may particularly be
derived into practice. If wirh this resolution you approach the Lords Table, my
hope is (and my prayer seconds it) that you will (hence-forward) prove thriving
Christians, that you will grow in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ 2 Pet. 3. 18.
. Not to go forward in Religion is to go backward, is to pull down what
formerly we have built up; is to end in the flesh, although we have begun in
the spirit. And from any such course the Lord divert us all, and make our wills
pliable to his will in all things, to his glory in our salvation. The Lord
evermore bless you and evermore keep you all; the Lord make his face to shine
perpetually upon you all and unto you all, and to all your posterity be
unstintedly gracious; the Lord lift up his countenance upon you all, and give
you al his peace that passes all understanding, to the keeping of all your
hearts and minds in all integrity through Jesus Christ the Righteous, to whom
(with thee; O Father, and the holy Ghost, from you both our comforter, three
Persons, one very God) b^ ^ll glory to all eternity, Amen*

FINIS.

