Great Britains Glory, OR A brief Description of the present State, Splendour,
and Magnificence of the Royal Exchange, With some remarkable Passages relating
to the present ENGAGEMENT. Humbly Presented To the several Merchants of the
City of LONDON, Who daily Meet, Traffic, and Converse in the said place.

By THEOPHIL US PHILALETHES.

With Authority.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Ratcliffe, and Not. Thompson, for Jonathan Edwin at
the three Roses in Ludgate Street, Anno Domini. 1672.

To the Right Honorable, AND To the Right Worshipful Merchants Of the City of
LONDON.
Much Honored Sirs,
I Have assumed the Dedication of these ensuing Lines, (wherein is a brief
Description of the present State, Splendour, and Magnificense of the ROYAL
EXCHANGE) unto your Worthy selves, many Reasons I could allege for my
inducement thereunto; But that which I hope will give you the best satisfaction
for my present presumption, is namely this, viz. because this stately Fabric
of the Royal Exchange, may (without a fallacy) in some sense be called Yours,
for it was first built, (and since the late dreadful Fire again rebuilt)
chiefly for your sakes, and for your accommodation: And moreover, because many
of you (as Aldermen, Common-Council-men, and as Members of the Right Worshipful
Company of Mercers) are at this day the proper and immediate Landlords thereof;
To whom therefore should a piece of this nature (when extant) be presented for
Patronage, but to your selves; My aim and principal design in this present
attempt, is, only yet farther to enhance the Fame, Glory, and Magnificence of
Your said place; and herein not only to my own Friends and Countrymen, but
also (as you may perceive by the Introduction) to Foreigners and Strangers
beyond the Seas, that so many of the Persons of Quality in the said places, may
be induced thereby (among the rest of their Travels) to embarque themselves for
our Island, to behold the State, and Splendour thereof, where I make no
question, not only the Citizens of LONDON in general, but the present
Inhabitants of the Royal Exchange in particular (in regard such persons seldom
travail into other Countries without good store of chink in their pockets) will
bid them freely welcome unto the said place; my hopes are, that you also will be
pleased (as much as in you lies) to promote and encourage this so honest and
harmless a design (which with much facility may be done when you shall either
Write or Travail unto your Correspondents abroad) In regard you will thereby be
instrumental to promote and advance the Trade of this once Famous and Renowned
City of LONDON, for the which (I must confess) I have so great and so
Honorable a Respect, and am much perplexed in my thoughts, that although the
City of LONDON, is again rebuilt (though contrary to the expectation of
Thousands) and that more Noble and commodious then ever, and that the Royal
Exchange in the said place is now built far more splendid and Magnificent then
formerly.

I have been somewhat unwilling to expose this small piece to public view, by
reason that we are fallen into an age, wherein though a man's primary intentions
(in what he undertakes) be never so good and warrantable; yet if they do not
succeed well, and according to the humor and expectation of the vulgar, they
will immediately thereupon brand his innocence, and reflect upon his Person, as
if he were guilty of some capital crime; but inasmuch as since the late
rebuilding of the Royal Exchange, I have seen none yet extant upon this
Subject, I thereupon thought it great pity that so Famous and so Noble a
Structure as this is, should pass over in silence, and not have something by
way of Encomium exposed to the World, as to the beauty and Iustre thereof. And
therefore if you will be pleased (night Worthy and much Honored Citizens) but
to make candid Interpretation of my present labors (which were only the
employment of a few vacant hours,) I shall not then much value or esteem what
the vulgar or common sort of People shall say or censure upon the same account,
and in so doing you shall for ever oblige him who is,

Your Honors and Worships most ready and Faithful Servant to Command,
Theophilus Philalethes.

To the courteous Reader.
Worthy Sir,
THese ensuing Lines now in thy hands do fairly salute you; my hopes are, that
you will be so courteous as to give some small entertainment, and although you
shall find therein some passages, not only of a Modern, but of an ancient
standing; Yet I hope they will not prove unsavory to your gust, nor offensive
to your occular Sense: For as some of our English liquids, half mild, half
stale, is not only wholesome, but toothsom, and by most men esteemed a good
composition; So also here, although there are some things which to you
peradventure may seem somewhat impertinent; and besides the matter in hand, yet
in as much as they did so freely present themselves to my mind, when I was upon
the Survey I could do no less (in common civility) then receive them into
custody; And now having mixed them together, I do not question your complacency
therein, when you shall have leisure to peruse the same. As for instance, you
will find here a brief Description of the late most Dreadful Fire in LONDON,
Anno Christi 1666. You will find also a small hint of the present Engagement
between His Majesty of Great Britain, and the States General of the United
Provinces. You shall find also, how Queen Elizabeth (of ever blessed memory)
with all her Nobles and Princely Train did come to this stately structure when
first built by Sir Thomas Gresham, and then gave it the name of the Royal
Exchange, by which denomination it has continued until the day of the Date
hereof, wherein peradventure we are not so exact in all punctilloes as is
thereby described, (inasmuch as our Ancestors have left us in the dark, as to
every particular circumstance at that juncture of time) yet in all probability
we may suppose the same; You will find also, what may probably ensue upon His
Majesty's late act of Indulgence for tender Consciences. These, cum multis
aliis quae nunc praescribere longum est, etc. I have there inserted hoping they
will not prove offensive to such as your self, ( viz. Courteous Readers) and so
I bid you Farewell.

The Introduction
MY Muse advance, fly to Parnassus Hill,
Invoke the Nine, for a Poetic Quill;
That by their aid thou may straightway rehearse
To Foreign Nations in plain English Verse,
What thou have seen, (and is a sight most strange,
The Stately Structure of the Royal Change:
That so thereby some may induced be,
To cross the Main, this famous Place to see.
To you therefore, who are of great Renown,
In every City, and each Country Town,
Beyond the Seas, these present Lines I send,
Hoping they will not in the least offend
Your Ears to hear, or Patience to peruse:
They come not here your Countries to abuse
With feigned stories, or with frothy stuff,
Whereof your Honors may have cause to snuff.
But they do come you freely to invite
Into Great Britain, where a stately sight
You may behold, which may be worth your cost
To cross the Main, and think no labor lost.
Read but these Lines, and therein you shall find
The Authors aim, when first into his mind
This Subject came, which he did undertake,
Was (pardon his boldness) partly for your sake.
And when you venture shall on English Ground,
His Labors will (and not till then) be crowned.
What is it for you, who have so great a Treasure,
To lay some by (wherein you will take great pleasure)
To spend in other Countries, where you may
Be freely welcome, or to come, or stay:
Your very presence in our British Isle,
Will make our Countries and our Cities smile;
The Coin you bring (which if it be but current)
Will be to them a good sufficient Warrant,
For your Passport, where ever you shall call,
Without the least suspicion to Whitehall
Of any danger that may thence ensue,
By letting in such noble Sparks as you
Into our Island, where you may be sure
To find such Friends, as will you soon procure
That favor here, which all esteem a bliss,
As it is indeed, our Caesar's Hand to kiss.
Come therefore Gallants, (some of every Tribe)
To see this Place which we will now describe.
A Brief DESCRIPTION OF THE Royal Exchange.
WIthin the limits of Great Britains Land,
Where Charles the Second has the sole Command
Of Regal Power, and of all that brings
Safety to Crowns, and Honor unto Kings,
There stands a City, large, fair, and immense,
As well in Length, as in Circumference;
Whose Banks are daily washed on each side,
By Thames great River every Eastern Tide:
In The midst whereof this Royal Place does stand,
Lately enlarged by the Kings Command,
In Statute Law, as plainly does appear,
By those high Arches facing Front and Rear.
This is the Subject of our present Muse;
And if we thought we should not much abuse
Your patience here, some lines for to rehearse,
We Will first present you in plain English Verse,
Not a Romantic, but a real Story,
Which did of late eclipse Great Britains Glory.
The great Fire in London, An. Dom. 1666.
This City then was lately burned down,
LONDON by name, though then a doleful Town,
As ever eyes beheld, a dismal sight;
The Sun, the Moon, and Stars that shine so bright,
Were then out-vi'd by a most dreadful Flame,
Sent from above in great Jehovahs Name,
For to chastise us, and to let us know,
That when lukewarm, and have no heat to show,
He can straightway raise such an Eastern Gale,
As shall, at length, make all our faces pale,
As then he did, because we wanted heat,
And now behold, our very Houses sweat,
As well as Bodies, by that scorching Fire,
Which then did burn, and never did expire,
Until such time as it had burned down
Twelve thousand Houses to the very ground.
Our stately Halls, our Churches, and our Quire,
Were the made fuel to that dreadful fire;
Our Royal Change, which was of so great fame
Over all the world, unto this dreadful flame
Was forced to stoop; where now you might espy
Our ancient Kings in ashes there to lie:
This doleful object troubled us much more,
Then many sights which we had seen before,
Sir Thomas stood, the Founder of the Place,
And this was deemed by all an act of Grace,
That this great Torrent should him so be friend,
As not to pieces his Trunck breeches rend.
It spared no place where ever it did come,
But Giant-like rejoiced his race to run:
All hands were now at work the same to quench;
And now behold, the Dutchmen and the French,
Some said, were up in arms, and in Moor-fields,
The noise whereof caused some to take their heels,
And to the Countries round about did fly,
Where cutting throats was all their present cry.
Who can express the horror of that night,
When people cried, Prepare your selves for flight;
The French and Dutch resolve to take our lives,
And when we are dead, they will ravish all our Wives.
What shall we do in this most desperate plight,
But take our heels, and save our selves by flight.
Though this proved false, yet to the present crew
It was all one, as if it had been true:
Their fears, their frights, their terrors were the same,
Until the news into the Country came,
It was not so; whereat the total Rout,
Who had escaped, began to face about,
And to the City once again inclined,
To fetch the Goods which they had left behind,
If not already burnt, and stolen away
By that rude sort, who now did make a prey
of peoples Goods; and by this sinful itch
Of stealing then, they did themselves enrich.
The Alarm false, much people now again
Use all endeavors for to quench that flame,
Which by this time had run nigh well so far,
As those great Gates which we call Temple Bar.
Our King himself in person did appear,
To give Commands, and Workmen for to cheer;
The sight whereof did pierce his heart with grief,
Although his Presence gave us much relief,
In giving strict Commands unto his Guard,
Within our streets to keep strong Watch and Ward;
Lest the rude Rabble in this doleful hour
Should pass the limits of his Kingly Power;
And getting head, they should now in conclusion
Bring all things here to ruin and confusion:
Which to prevent, he marched round our City,
And of our present case did then take pity.
The pensive looks in his Majestic Face
Did clearly show how much he loved the place.
Our Pipes did run, our Engines they did play,
Our Wives did cry, our Ministers did pray:
But all in vain, for still it did proceed
Along our streets, with sury and with speed.
But then at length, in mercy to our City,
The Lord himself did of our case take pity;
He that does say unto the raging Seas,
You shall not pass beyond the bounds I please:
He that does send the dreadful claps of Thunder,
He that is seen in all his works of wonder;
'Twas he that said unto this dreadful Fire,
Stop in this place, enough now of mine ire;
Called in his winds within their house of store,
And then straightway the fire burnt no more.
And having stayed his most dreadful hand,
Much people since from all parts in the Land,
Have been at work, the same again to build;
Whereat our hearts with joy has since been filled,
As formerly with grief, in hopes that now,
If God will please but yet to speed the Plow:
And in our Land still to continue Peace,
Our City Trade shall more and more increase:
And in short time this place shall Hourish more,
Then it has done for many years before.
Heavens say Amen, and fend it with all speed,
(This we will hope) And now my muse proceed
Unto thy main and principal design
At first intended, namely to define
The present state, and lastrie of that place
Which now is built, with so much greater grace
Then formerly, that here thou must confess,
Unto the life thou can not well express,
Only may hope, that when thy slender Skill
Has broke the Ice, some more refined Quill
May venture on the Stage, and be the next
That shall (with Art) enlarge upon this Text.
And since thou have unto thy Reader bound
Thy self by promise, go survey the Ground
Yet once again, before that thou do come
Upon the public stage; when this is done,
Fairly retreat from off this piece of Land;
Take now thy Reader (gently) by the hand,
Conduct him hither, where thou shall him show
The Walks above, and also them below;
And all things else what e're he shall desire,
As being curious, of thee will enquire.
Be not too hasty in thy Definition,
Go on and prosper, this is thy Commission:
Go on, I say, then with a cheerful heart,
Beg of thy Readers, that they in good part
Will take this present Piece, and be so kind,
As to the faults therein that they shall find,
To pass them by, because they must confess,
We all our faults have, either more or less;
Which if to us they should imputed be,
Who then amongst us would escape scot-free?
Come Reader then, let us join hand in hand,
And take a view of this rich-Piece of Land,
Which at this day, by Will and Testament
Of a good Knight, and Act of Parliament,
Our City and the Mercers do uphold,
And will maintain it as their just Freehold;
While Sun, and Moon, and Stars shall give their light,
They Will never forget Sir Thomas Gresham Knight;
That good old Man, who for this Cities sake,
This stately Fabric first did undertake:
And when he died, he left it unto them,
And to the Mercers, as Trustees for him.
Where by the way, we must now here delare
What e're th'intentions of Sir Thomas were
In his lifetime, and left to them by Will,
They do not frustrate, but the same fulfill
In all punctilioes, if it chance to be
An act of Grace, and his late Charity.
He was the Founder of this stately Place,
Which when complete, (this good old man to grace)
The Quueen her self in person did appear,
(Whose presence always did her Subjects cheer)
With all her Nobles, and her Princely Train,
She came on purpose for to see the same;
Where viewing it with a Majestic Grace,
(The people from all parts flockt in apace;
And throwing up their Caps, aloud did cry,
Vive la Regne, God bless your Majesty)
And musing for a while, She silence brake,
And to her Nobles round about her spoke,
My Lords, said she, this place which I behold,
Cost this brave Knight sure many Crowns in Gold;
I much rejoice this Infant place to see:
Speak good Sir Thomas, what the Name shall be;
For being nameless, now I have a mind
To be your Gossip, if you are inclined
Thereto, said she; whereat the courteous Knight
Did soon reply, My Liege, your very sight
Does so transport me, that I cannot well
Express my self, your Grace my mind to tell.
But since I may, with boldness soar so high,
As to the Ears, of Sacred Majesty;
Assume to speak, my Liege as to the name,
Unto your self I shall refer the same
Whereat the pleasant Queen, before them all,
Above did name it, The Exchange Royal.
Such acclamations then, as were up sent
Out of their mouths into the firmament
Who were the standers by we must confess
Here to the life. Our muse cannot Express
Such was the greatness of the peoples cry
Their very shouts did seem to rend the Sky,
Such was the greatness of the present throng
The Queen her self could hardly pass along
And still the burden of their present cry:
Was Vive la Regne, God bless your Majesty.
She likewise still, did for her people pray,
And this was that, which stole their hearts away;
What er'e she asked, they never did deny
What er'e they craved, She did as soon reply,
It shall be done, unto your hearts content,
And passed too, by Act of Parliament,
This Ladies virtues, then did shine so bright
Like glorious Cynthia in the lightest night.
And being dead, her fame shall yet survive
Over many Thousands, that are yet alive.
Here I should leave Her, but as I do write,
Her very Name, does help me to indite
This then was She, Who did the Scepter sway
When the stout English bravely won the day,
Near Tilbury-hope, when the proud Spanish Fleet
Did boldly come, this Nation for to greet
But this brave Queen, did straightway check their pride,
Her Heart of Oak served both for Wind and Tide;
Her Royal presence, on our English Shore,
Did make our demi, and whole Canons roar;
Her valiant Seamen with Sir Francis Drake,
Did quickly make the Spaniards for to quake;
The like success, we hope e're long to see,
Over Hogan Mogans, that so lofty be,
Who would supplant us in our present Trade,
And in our Rights so frequently invade,
Nor will they strike within our Royal Channel,
Until we bear them like a water Spannel,
(When as we teach him for to fetch and carry,
This way or that way, or the clear contrary)
Which we will do, when they top-Gallant ride,
(And will not congy) by our Vessels side;
We Will make them know, that English men are such,
Who scorn to stoop to the insulting Dutch;
So long as English Blood our Veins do fill,
We will not buckle to their stubborn will,
Ungrateful States, who have so soon forgot
Our former kindness, and now heed it not;
Much like a Thief saved from the Gallow Tree,
Next man he robs, perhaps the Judge may be.
They are the first who lately broke the Peace,
And now perhaps they melt in their own Grease,
For doing so, and for their wrongs of late,
Our English Boys may soon give them check mate,
Our Royal Charles may quickly let them see,
What it is to abuse his sacred Majesty
In Print and Pulpit as they often have done,
On purpose to Eclipse our rising sun,
And though we know his temper still is such,
To be at Peace with these ungrateful Dutch,
As well as with their Neighbors round about,
Yet if they come but once to be so stout,
As to break Truce with him, and for to jar,
He can as soon appear a Man of War:
Let them take heed least that perchance we see,
Them once again distressed States to be,
If they shall want our help we may deny,
Because of their insulting treachery,
If we should then but leave them in the lurch,
We soon may say a dieu unto the Dutch,
And unto all their juggling tricks of state,
For which they give the World such cause to prate
Of all their actions, which to us are known,
For which, some say they will be overthrown.
Let them remember that Amboyna Blood
Cries yet aloud (although not understood
By these great States) and will them overtake,
Sooner, or later when they must partake
Of Divine Justice, and for ought we know
Now is the time, wherein our God will show
His Arm against them, for those deeds then done,
Which was a shame unto all Christendom,
fitting for none to act but only such,
Who style themselves the Hogan Mogan Dutch,
A style too great for Mortals to assume,
And for this pride, Heaven may now them consume.
If they shall boast the liberty they give
To Non-conformists, we also do live,
Under a Prince, whose late indulgent care,
Unto such men, who Non-conformists are,
Is to protect them, and to set them free,
From penal Laws, and all things else that be
Alike offensive in our English Church,
No good presage some say unto the Dutch;
For by this means, we say his fame will ring
Over all Europe for a Gracious King,
This liberty for which so many lives
Have paid so dear, is brought home to our hives
When unexpected, Oh! the lively sense
That some now have, of this great providence;
Nay some do say, that for this act and deed
His present Wars, will prosperously succeed
And all things else that he shall take in hand
For time to come, either by Sea or Land
And after that, our Trade shall flourish more
Then it has done, for many years before
Heaven's say Amen. Now if it be your will
When this is done, Let peace continue still
We hope there is none will now be plotting treason
Against the Crown and Dignity of Reason.
For since we have, this Edict from White Hall
In things Divine and Supernatural
We all all alike, the liberty shall have,
To worship where we please, what can we crave,
Now more then this? Unless we male content
And will be worse, for all that punishment,
Which has so long been trampling on our head,
But by Gods blessing now is brought to bed,
And fairly lodged within our Caezars Breast,
By which said means, His Subjects are at rest,
From all those pressures which they underwent,
Since his return, by Act of Parliament,
Although averse unto his disposition,
Which is that all, should have a full fruition,
Of what, they do desire, if they will,
But live in peace and so continue still.
Which we do hope, they will not dare to break,
Who now shall have, the liberty to speak,
To their own people; they all to hear,
Their own great Doctors which they count so dear,
Which if they should now turbulent remain,
Then they should know he does not bear in vain
His sacred Sword, which is to punish such,
Who shall be like to the insulting Dutch;
We for our own part now have more content,
Than when we lived under that Government
Sirnam'd the Rump, and after that another
when we were made so much a younger Brother
By Nol himself, who would not have a King,
Yet afterward he owned the self same thing.
Come now good Reader let us fairly on,
The Skies are clear, the blustering storms are gone,
There Is nothing here I know that can affright thee,
But rather that which will (I hope) delight thee.
This pleasant place, which now thou do epsy,
Was so much graced by his Majesty,
That now the Scepter swayes within our Land,
He the first Pillar with his Royal hand
Did place therein, and after that his Brother
James Duke of York did also place another.
These Royal stems of Majesty and Grace,
Did bear such love, and good will to this place,
That they themselves in person did appear,
To give their aid the same again to rear,
These acts of Grace are counted so Divine
A Shop, above have got them for a Sign,
These Royal Pillars on the North side stand,
With Crowns and Septers (by industrious hand
Of curious workmen) carved round about,
As a distinction for the common rout,
To know them from the rest, that they may see,
There they shall stand unto posterity,
As two great signals of their present love,
For which we pray the God of Heaven above,
Them to reward in everlasting Glory,
This shall suffice then for the Pillars story.
Come Courteous Reader, let us pass on still,
We have a mind our promise to fulfill,
In all respects, whereby to make thee know,
Wherein this place does make so fair a show.
In Walks below, the Merchants daily meet,
The Vaults beneath contain the Indian Fleet,
The Walks above contain now Riches more,
Than some tall Ships, which from the Indian Shore,
Do yearly come into our British Isse,
Whose safe arrival makes our Merchants smile,
Whose lofty Tower Mounted is so high,
To us below it seems to reach the Sky,
Look on the top, and there you may behold,
The Founders crest, bedecked all in Gold,
This lofty Creature does at all times show,
Our City Merchants where the Wind does blow,
From whence they daily do presage no doubt,
Their Ships are coming in or going out.
The Sun Tavern be hind the Exchange, the Sign whereof was put up in the night
time.
Sols lofty Palace, on high Pillars raised,
And stately Rooms which are so highly praised,
Seems but a shadow to this stately place;
Nay Sol himself for fear of a disgrace,
Creeps now behind it, and dares not appear
I the front thereof, but only in the rear;
For when at first he did this place behold,
And on the top so much refulgent Gold,
As if on purpose it were placed there,
For to confront him in his full carreer,
He then withdrew his radiant Beams of light,
Set for a while, and after in the night,
(When most men are at rest and fast a sleep)
Raised up his bashful head, and then did creep
Out of his Bed again, his course to run,
Although unusual for the Morning Sun,
Then to get up, a most prodigious fight,
Bright Sol that rules the day, to rise at night,
A thing most strange (yet not so strange as true)
And if you would know, why he him self withdrew
That pay before, and now in sable night,
To use again to take his future flight,
The reason flowed from what he had espied,
Much troubled was to see himself outvied,
And thereupon withdrew his Beams so Red,
Took off a Gill, and fairly went to bed,
But being up, he with redoubled strength,
Did in a trice regain the former length,
Which he had lost, least that the world next Morn,
Should think him lost, and they themselves forrorn,
As left without a Sun, he thought it best,
Again to rise to welcome all his Guest,
And that he might be somewhat like this place,
And not for ever suffer such disgrace;
He straight way goes into his stately Hall,
Where all the Planets to his Council call,
Where Luna for the Sun did bravely plead,
Bills of complaint he unto them did read,
The Cause debated, they with one consenr,
(Just as our Members now in Parliament)
Did then resolve (where at the Sun did hollow)
That now god Bacchus and the great Apollo,
They would consult, and eke petition too,
In this hard Case, what they therein should do,
Whereat these feigned gods did soon reply,
Since unto us you do your selves apply,
Take this for answer to your said petition,
And unto you it shall be a Commission,
That to our workmen you do soon repair,
And let them know that they empowered are,
With full Commission from the God above,
(Because this place they do respect and love)
That some resemblance to the Exchange they make,
Within Sol's house for great Apollo's sake,
VVhereat our lofty sun was highly pleased,
And of his former grief was quickly eased,
For since that time he has (much people talk)
The French, the Spanish and the German walk,
So well contrived in his Vaults below,
Where Bacchus now does make so fair a show,
That people flock there now by day and night,
On purpose to aspect this comely sight,
And for to taste some of his wholesome Liquor,
To purge their Brains, and make their Tongues quicker,
Come gentle Reader, let us now leave the Sun
Unto himself, and once again return,
Unto your former station, where we may
Give you account still of our late survey,
Look round about it, and you may behold,
places prepared for our Kings of old,
And Queens also, who have the Scepter swayed,
In this our Island (though in ashes laid)
From good King Edward, and the Norman race,
Who gained by conquest this most pleasant place,
That so thereby we may their Memories keep,
Yet fresh with us, though they are fast asleep;
Here in the Front our Royal Charles's stand
Like Roman Caesar's, when they gave Command
Unto their Soldiers, stoutly for to Fight
When as assaulted, or by day or night,
With Foreign force, or by Domestic jars,
And if Victorious in those bloody Wars,
They had such marks of honor and renown
In every City, and each Country Town
Conferred upon them, that they seldom were
Found to be such, who ran away for fear.
Such marks of honor those may now expect,
(When the Dutch pride severely shall be checked.)
Who now like Sons of Mars, in Men of War
Shall scorn to stinch either for VVound or Scar,
Until they shall both Fame and Honor bring
Home to their Country, and to Charles their King.
Who for their Valor will them well Reward,
Since to his Honor they had such regard.
View now this Front, and there thou may espy
Such curious work, fitting for Majesty
It self to dwell in; And we do believe,
In all thy Travels thou did never perceive
A place like this; and herein thou may say
To all the rest, that they now must give way.
Out Merchants which our Shops do greatly store,
From Asia, Africa, and the Indian Shore,
With Pearls and Diamonds, and such other VVare
Which in our Country are esteemed most rare.
These do aver, and give it underhand
In all their Travels, or by Sea or Land
From East to West, from North to Sonthern side
There Is not the like, in all the World so wide.
So that we may, with Confidence declare,
There Is none with us can equally Compare.
We have the Phoenix in our English Nation,
All those that view it, stand in admiration.
View but the Stars here on the Southern side,
And thou shall see some reason for our pride,
And present boasting; when we say there is none
Which can compare unto this place of Stone.
Look now, my Friend, here is a piece of Art
That is enough to make a wise man start,
And wonder too, how these Steps hang together,
And fear no Weight, nor any stress of Weather
That shall confront them, for to make them yield,
They Are stouter Soldiers then to quit the field,
Since they are placed by the Workmans skill,
they scorn to flinch, but will continue still.
These we may call a Family of Love;
Though fixed by Mortals, yet sent from above,
As if it were to shame this generation
Who will not hear of an accommodation
'Twixt one another; but are still so high
As if they could not from each other fly
Scarce far enough. Such is their childish heat
They Will play at Push-pin, till they all do sweat.
Do but observe how these love one another,
They all agree, like Sister and like Brother:
Join hand in hand, and so all hang together,
And by this means you cannot now them sever.
If you break one, you must break all the rest,
And herein lies the Cream of this our Jest:
If we now do the like in this our Land,
Live but in Peace, and all join hand in hand;
And let but out these bitter streams of strife,
Which at this day, amongst us are so rise:
Then by this means (O that we were all such)
We need not fear the Hogan Mogan Dutch;
Nor Turk, nor Pope, nor any thing that shall
But seem pernicious to our King's White Hall.
The Workman here has showed his present skill;
By which it seems, he has his Art at will.
His rare Invention here is to the life;
Surely 'twas not by setting Stones at strife,
But since it was, by joining them together,
Which makes them strong, against all stress or weather.
And now our hearts, if that they will not break,
These Stones hereafter may against them speak,
And rise in Judgment at Heavens Justice-hall,
And there together may bear witness all
Against us Mortals. Why? Because that we
Will not now live in Love and Charity.
The times now call us to a fair retreat;
Our Trumpets sound, our Drums to War they beat:
And shall we still build on this Sandy ground?
(Like a Mill-horse, that goes the self-same round)
For shame let us now advance, our selves to Arms,
With one consent to meet these proud alarms,
From those who are our present mortal Foes,
And will not yield, until with downright blows
We shall broadside them, when, we do not fear
We shall so Maul them, both in Front and Rear,
That they straightway will strike unto our Flag,
Although at present they so much do brag.
Let Us now advance unto the Walks above,
Wherein great Ladies do freqent and love
There for to come, because of that Rich sort
Of VVares therein, which by famed report
There you may have, and no where else be found,
In all the Shops upon our English ground;
Search where you will, for goodness, and for fair
You shall not find the like for to compare.
What wares there are, if now thou have a mind
Here for to know, Come we will be so kind
As to inform thee of the minor part,
But for the whole, it is beyond our art
Here to Express. More fitting for an age
To tell them all, then for a single page
Here to relate, yet we will try our skill.
On some of them, Thy mind for to fulfill.
Here Is in the first place, that rich sort of ware
Which by our Gentry, are esteemed so rare
As Gowns, and Mantles, Twillets of all Sizes,
Rich Caps and Slippers, of all sorts and prizes.
Here is also, great choice of rich Bonelace,
Rare beauty waters, for your Ladies face,
Gloves for the hand and Garters for the knee
Here is also, good choice of point-Paris,
And if you will your purse, but farther squeeze
Here is likewise great choice of point-Venice,
Linen of all sorts, either laced or plain,
All sorts of Ribbons, that you well can name,
Within this place, is also to be sold
All sorts of Pendents, richly set in Gold.
Here is also, most rare Cornelion Rings,
Lockets and Bracelets and such pretty things,
Which by our Gentry, are esteemed so high,
And therefore come, unto this place to buy,
Here Is Toys of all sorts English French and Dutch
To please the Ladies, who delight in such,
Here they are tempted, of times over and over
To buy such knacks, they never saw before
And as they pass along, they often do cry.
That John Tredusk in here they do outvy.
In pretty knacks and toys, which to their sight
Seems very strange, but yet of great delight.
Here Is Caps of all sorts either Black or White,
To wear by day, or keep you warm at night,
Girdles of all sorts, Turkey work or plain
For those good men who do so beat their brain
By their hard study, though for our good,
We wish they were but fairly understood,
And not contemned, by that sort of people
Who neither care, for Parish Church or Steeple.
Mourning of all sorts either Crape or Love,
All sorts of Stockings either knit or wove,
Of Silk or Worsted, or of double Thread,
Wastcoats of all sorts either White or Red
Or any color, either Shag'd or Plain
Fitting for Merchants, when they cross the Main.
Here is also, such Shops, wherein you may
Be bravely fitted, for your Wedding Day,
With Silks and Sattins, and rich Silver Lace
Which to your worship, will be so great grace
When as you shall then, from your virtuous Bride
Have free consent, to sleep close by her side.
These and the like you always here may find,
When as to buy, you shall be so inclined.
View now the Ciellings and the Lanthorn-lights,
The curious Signs, which are such stately sights,
The rich Balconies fixed round about
As well within, as those which are without
The arched Tower and its lofty head,
The Marble-stones, whereon the Merchants tread
The Bells, the Clock, the Turrets and the Crest
Of good Sr. Thomas mounted over the rest,
With the large Statue of this worthy Knight
Which on the Southside, is exposed to sight.
As if our city did intend thereby
The name of Gresham here should never dye.
The Kings of England, and the Maiden Queen,
Which on the North-side, here are to be seen.
Six of these Caesar's there you may behold
All in one Shop, richly bedeckt with Gold;
Three for a Sign, and three for Ornament,
With choice of VVares too, for your good Content.
Where, if you shall, with your Full-pockets come,
Thence, if you please, you may go Empty home.
These, and the like, now fixed with such grace,
Do clearly show the Splendour of the Place.
DVRHAM, farewell; thou must not dare to say,
That thy small Shops do bear the bell away,
Now these are built. And though thou have a Trade
Because White Hall so populous has made
Thy spacious Streets; Yet know our loving friend,
As to the Flag, they must with thee contend,
And thou must say, (although against the grain)
That this said place, the best is of the twain;
Either for Building, or Rich Sort of VVare,
Which by our Gentry are esteemed so rare.
And though for Points, thou have there much to do,
They have a Rutland and green Dragon too:
The Dog, the Bear, the Dolphin, and the Doves,
The Flower de luce, and also the three Gloves;
The Lion red, the Bells in number three,
The Kings Pair-Royal, and the Orange-tree:
The semy-circle of that Planet bright,
Which was ordained of old to Rule the Night.
The Golden Horse-shooe, and the Siren sweet;
The long swift Vessel in the Turkey Fleet:
The silver Faulcon, and three Horned-beasts
Which make fat Pasties at our City Feasts.
The noble Queens Arms, and the ancient Crest
Of good Sir Thomas, there among the rest.
And many more, which now are of great Fame
In the same place, for selling of the same.
Wherefore they must and will Top-gallant ride,
So long as Gresham stands by their side;
With whom we will Conclude our present Story
Who was the Founder of
Great Brittain's Glory.

FINIS.
Errata.
In Epist. Dedicatory, p. 3. l. 19. after the word formerly add, Yet for want
of Trade therein, there are many complaints.


