A great and bloody FIGHT AT COLCHESTER,

AND The storming of the Town by the Lord Generals Forces, with the manner how
they were repulsed and beaten off, and forced to retreat from the Walls, and a
great and terrible blow given at the said storm, by Grenades and Gunpowder.
Likewise their hanging out the Flag of Defiance, and their sallying out upon
Tuesday last, all the chief Officers engaging in the said Fight, and Sir
Charles Lucas giving the first onset in the Van, with the number killed and
taken, and Sir Charles Lucas his Declaration.



London Printed for G. Beal, and are to be sold in the Old-Bayley, and near
Temple Bar, 1648.

A perfect RELATION Of the bloody storming at COLCHESTER
Right Honored,
YEsterday being the 18. of this instant, about four of the clock in the
afternoon the great Guns from Colchester played exceeding hard, both against our
great Mount, and several other Works and Fortifications. They killed one of
our Gunners at the great Mount, 3 or 4 private Soldiers, and wounded some few,
and dismounted one of our Pieces, and split the muzzle; but we answered them
again, and gave them three shots for one, playing six pieces altogether for
the space of two hours against their Royal Fort and in the high street.

Their chief Work which does most annoy us, is their new Sconce which they have
raised opposite to our great Mount, one Thompson a Gunner supplying the same*
who is an excellent Engineer, and an admirable marks man, and has endangered
two or three eminent Commanders; but one Mr. Smith, Gentleman of the Pikes to
Col. Ewers Company, desired leave to make a shot against the said Sconce, which
accordingly was granten, and indeed it proved an excellent one; for he
dismounted one of their great brass Pieces, and (its said) wounded the said
Thompson.

We have stormed one of their strongest Fortifications, near the town, but
before we could gain it, we had a hard disputation, they knocked us off of our
ladders, and threw down great stones and brick-bats upon us, and defended it
with great resolution; till at the last our men set to their ladders again, and
up they went with great fury and resolution, and got up to the Battlemens of
the Gate House, casting Granados out of their hands over amongst the Soldiers,
and one of the said Grenades falling into a room where their Magazine lay,
blew up diverse barrels of powder, and about 60. Soldiers, giving a most great
and terrible blow.

Whereupon the rest of their men that defended the said Fortification cried out
for quarter, but not above 12. men were left of 150. a very sad spectacle to
behold. Some arms were taken, but most of them spoiled with the blow.

This was a very considerable place, add advantageous to the Enemy, the loss
of which did infuse a great deal of wrath and terror in the heart of Sir
Charles Lucas, and caused him to make a desperate salley out upon us, but were
repulsed and beaten in with loss.

Whereupon he shot several Grenades out of the town and fired all the
Subburbs, and upon Sunday and Monday lais^ played with his great Ordnance into
the Leaguer, which did somewhat annoy us, and killed some of our men, one
having his leg shot off, another his skull broken, and some others wounded.

They have several advantages to play upon us, which does embolden them the
more, and upon Tuesday morning last, before the Trevalle had beat, Sir Charles
Lucas sallyed out in person himself, together with Genesis Hastings, Col.
Lunsford, and diverse other persons of quality, with about 400. Horse, and 1000
Foot, and having notice of their coming, prepared to receive them, who upon
their near approach gave them such a volley that they retreated, but immediately
rallied and came on again; insomuch that there happened a very shary dispute
betwixt both parties, and continued for the space of a quarter of an hour, Sir
Charles horse was shot under him, and diverse on both sides wounded; but they
perceiving Col. Whaleyes coming up with his horse, made good their retreat and
got safe into the town, only they lost about 20 men in this conflict.

We have finished our Battery against St. John's, and have made a great breach
in the town walls, notwithstanding their Woolsacks, which our Soldiers fetched
away upon their backs, and beat them out of one Court yard into another, and
out of the house into another great house, doing some execution still in the
pursuit.

Col. Whaley with his own horse and the Suffolk Foot has likewise given them
another great blow, and has taken two of their Courts of Guards and a Church,
and above 100. prisoners.

Yesterday we received further intelligence, that Lieutenant General Cromwell
and his Forces advanced from Pembrook toward the North of England on Friday
last, and is resolved to join with Major General Lambert, to hinder the Scots
marching Southward, and to fight with them; for we are credibly informed, that
they have entered England, and with a very considerable Army, are come on this
side of Carlisle.

we are advertized, that about 1500. men looked upon the English shore to
relieve Sandon and Deal Castles in Kent, but finding our Forces readier then
they expected to engage with them, they packt aboard again, and are gone to
Sea. It is thought they will strike in again at some other place; and to
prevent their landing on Essex side, the L. Genesis has sent a strong party to
Harwich, and has given notice to Norwich and Yarmouth, his Forces are even
under the walls on all sides of Colchester, and makes preparations as if he
intended to storm the town,

Colchester 19. July, 1648.
A brief Abstract of several Lettees from the North.
By letters from the North it is certified, That on Tuesday last Sir Marm.
Langdale joined with the Scots Army, they make about 12000 Horse and Foot; Maj.
Genesis Lambert has sent into Yorkshire and Lincolnshire for more Forces, that he
may fight them his Army is already considerable, and may fight them without
disadvantage nothing yet of action; before next Post day we may hear much from
thence.

The Scots poss^sse Barwick, Tuesday next Col. Lesley Nephew to Genesis Lesley, is
to be Governor.

The House receiving Letters from Major Genesis Lambert, signifying that an Army
of Scots were come into this Kingdom, under the command of D. Hambleton, the
Commons declared those forces which in a hostile manner have entered this
Kingdom to be Enemies, and that all persons which adhere unto them either of
this Kingdom or of Ireland, are traitors and Rebels.

They debate concerning the place for the Treaty, whether at London, or ten
miles distant, London not by any means thought secure, the inconveniences
being numerous, and therefore came to this Resolution.

That after the three propositions be consented unto, and signed, as is
desired, the King should be desired to name three places within 20 miles of
Westminster, two of which to be at least ten miles distant from Westminster,
where the Treaty shall be, and then both Houses of Parliament shall have
liberty to make choice of one of them as they shall think fit.

Letters from Hull say, that a Man of War rid near that Town, some ships went
forth to discover what she was they found her to be a Hollander laden with
Ammunition, and good store of Horse Arms, the Master of the ship says, that
they were designed to a Gentleman of Lincolnshire, which had formerly served
the King, whereupon the Governor Col. Overton sent out a party of Horse which
brought the Gentleman into Hull.

The last night the troops of Col. Rich his men, and those of com-Gen. Iretons
Regiment which have bin in pursuit of the D. of Buckinghams party returned back
again and ferried over at Putney into Surrey, and are designed again into Kent,
he fears increasing in that county by reason of some ships which are said to
be coming thither out of Holland, with whom, the report goes, is the Duke of
Yo^k or the Prine, but its rather believed (if there be either) that it is the
Duke, because some letters say, that he was entertained a board a little before
the Prince his coming into Holland.

There was a Gentleman taken at Rumford upon suspirion, and in his portmantell
was found many Commissions for Prince Charles to sign and seal, and other
papers of great concernment, he was brought to London, his person secured, and
the papers referred to the Committee at Derby house.

By Letters out of Kent it is advertized, that the Forces under command of
Commissary Genesis Ireton, and Collonell Rich are in a posture to receive the Duke
of Yorkes Forces, if they land, and are very vigilant to attend the motion of
them.

The Kentish-men have declared their resolution to assist them, protesting to
hazard lives and fortunes for the preservation of the peace of their native
Country, against all force or power either foreign or domestique.

It is further advertized from Colchester, that the besieged having received
intelligence of the Duke of Yorks coming to the Downs, are grown very
obstinate and resolute and have set forth a flag of Defiance, and refuses to
hearken to a surrender, notwithstanding the late summons, and fair promises of
the Lord General. Sir Charles Lucus tells the soldiers, that he has received
a message from the Duke of York, and declares, that his Highness will send
relief to them before Friday night.

Colchester 19. July, 1648.
FINIS.

