A great and glorious VJCTORY Obtained By the English against the French, upon
the Coast of Callice; with the dispiersing of the Royal N^vie belonging to King
Lewis, the taking of the Newfound-land Fleet; and the chasing of the King of
Scots Vice Admiral, and his Men of War, unto the Fort Royal.

With the manner how Captain Foster in the Phaenix, Cap. Benjamin in the Pearl
frigate, and Cap. George Grocknel in the Merlin, bare up to them within Canon
shot of the castle; and the event and success thereof.

Likewise, the particulars of a great and lamentable Engagement in Scotland,
the number of men killed and taken on both sides; and the taking of the field
again by both ARMIES.

Imprinted at London for G. Wharton, 1654.

Two great and desperate Engagements, both by Sea and Land: the first between
the English frigates, commanded by Cap. Foster Cap. Benjamin, and Ca. George
Cracknel, and the K. of Scots men of War, commanded by Vice Admiral Bannister.
etc.
ON the 8 of this instant July, 1654. diverse of the English Frigates having been
upon the Coast of Dunkirk, to convoy a fleet of Merchantmen; upon their return
toward the Narrow, they espied the King of Scots fleet, unto whom they gave
chase; and at last comwithin shot, saluted them with several broad sides;
Vice Admiral Bannister being in the Eagle, answered them again; but after a
sharp dispute, finding the Arguments too high to dispense withal from the
mouth of the English Canon, he tacked about, for Calis, and got under the
command of the Royal Fort, where he presently hung forth a Flag of defiance;
which Captain Benjamin Sa^heverel perceiving, attempted with the Eagle to
strand him; but the great Canon from the Fort and Blockhouses played so ast
upon him, that he was constrained to come off by the Leeward, his design
proving unfeasible. However upon their putting forth to the main Ocean, they
espied another fleet, which proved Frenchmen, and after 4 or 5 leagues chase,
sank one, and took another, without the loss of one man. We have also taken
their Newfound land fleet, and diverse ships coming from Malaga, which adds far
more Tryumphant Victories, when we fought the Royal Navy took their Admiral,
and diverse others, and totally dissipated the whole Fleet; which heroic
Atchievment, deserves to be eternized, with these Lines, in Letters of Gold.

TAke wing my Muse and mount the aerie sky,
View winged Bullets how they strangly fly
See how the swimming Castles march, they sail,
As if their Timber, ah! would never fail.
See! how the glorious Lamp does gaze to see
Cerulian Waves made, ah! a purple Sea;
Hark! how the warlike Trumpets call to fight,
And view the Monsieurs ship about, as light
As fancy sees them, BEN: does bravely stand,
Upon the Poop discreetly gives command:
Ben: Follows with the Pearl, Foster is
Adding to's Canvass, each brave ship do'nt miss,
To plow the liquid Ocean, which does swel,
Looks big: yet English spirits never could sell
To entertain base fear; the other run
As if they would set with the supping sun.
Ah! ah! immortal French are feared by Death,
The winds now give their scanted Canvass breath.
Ply after English hearts, and fetch from home
The haughty French. Let trembling Christendom
Hear of your Valors, were I Lucaniz'd,
My Pen this Victory had highly prized,
And made as famous as the Roman wars,
But I cannot by inauspicious stars.
Though in the fight, we saw Gods mighty hand,
And find he is great, both on the Sea and Land.
A Relation of the Fight in Scotland.
SIR,
COl Brayn with a considerable party is come into the North; ^ed diverse other
Regiments are expected, Since which time, we hear from the Camp that Colonel
Morgan had sight of Drummond, Montross, Dephop, and the Lord Ervin, who had
raised 2000 Levies; but upon his advance, and Major Knight, with 400 horse, and
200 foot, they courageously faec'd about, and put the English to the Run, by
our persuing of them. We killed one Cap. Good^ellow (an English man) and some
others, took ten prisoners, and 60 horse, with abundance of Cloakbags, meat
dressed and undrest, many Cowes, and other provisions, And since that we sent 40
nakad men to swim over with their swords, to an Island that stood out against
them, which they took, and some store of provisions laid in for Middleton, with
some plate, and other rich goods. The Marq. of Argyle has raised all from 16 to
60 throughout his Territories, and is resolved to sight either to Death or
Victory against the Tories.

St. Johnstons July 6. 1654. From Scotland further thus: The Ministers still
preach up young Charles their King, and pray for him as Gods Vice gerent on
earth. Their forces are endeavoring a conjunction, and the North Country are
generally disaffected, murdering the English privately; but a party coming
from Air, commanded by Quartermaster Stevenson, being pursued by a strong party
of the enemy, faced about, drew up and engaged them; and after a very sharp and
desperate dispute, took one Captain, a Cornet, and 11 others, killed one Capt.
Armstrong, diverse others, and wounded many; but this Atchievment was not
obtained without some blood, noses, and broken pates; for one of our men was
cut in the head, another had his nose slit, and some others were let blood in
their arms, and other places.



But that which appears more dreadful unto us, is, the enemies falling upon
the aforesaid Col. Bryans men, the manner thus: A party of 120 men being drawn
out to get off boats from the enemy; they being too eager of their prey, and
withal careless, and not keeping together, nor observing command, Sir George
Monro lying in Ambuscado, fell upon them, and kiled fourscore galant men, where
of some Officers, and quite frustrated us of our design. Yet other Letters say
to the contrary, and that the English has given the Scots a defeat. The truth
whereof seems too dubious at present, by reason, that the enemy are numerous,
and have the disadvantage amongst the Hills, the Weather being so extreme cold,
that we are scarce able to endure the field; besides, we have a perfect Winter
in this cold Angle of the World, having not any thing but nipping Frosts, and
tempestuous storms, so that we are exposed to abundance of danger and
difficulties, and involved in a Labyrinth of troubles; but We doubt not, but
that Hand of Providence which has hitherto preserved Us, will in the greatest
of our streights, still preserve and protect Us, and in the end crown us with
those trpumphant signals, whereby God may be glorified, the Truth maintained,
and the just Laws and Liberties of the people inviolably kept and preserved.

FINIS.

