A great FIGHT IN SCOTLAND BETWEEN His Excellency the Lord Gen: Cromwels
Forces, and the Scots, upon the advance of Lieutenant Genesis Lesley, and Col.
M^ssie, from Sterling toward Glasco.

WITH The manner of their Engagement, the particulars of the said Fight, the
event and success thereof, and the number killed and taken prisoners. Together
with the taking of C. Massy, and committing him prisoner to the Tower of
LONDON.

Also, a true Relation concerning the present state and condition of the Lord
Genesis Cromwels Army; and exceeding sad news from the Isle of Guernsey:
Comprising the last bloody fight, and the full particulars thereof.

May. 30th. London, Printed for G. Horton, 1651.

A bloody Fight in Scotland, between his Excellency the Lord General Cromwels
Forces, and the Scots, upon the advance of Lieu. Genesis David Lesley, and Col.
Massy with their Horse and Dragoons toward Glasco.
Honored Sir,
SInce my last of the sixth instant, somewhat has occurred very remarkable, in
reference to the proceedings of both Armies, which is, That upon the advance of
the Lord General Cromwell's forces to Edinburgh, Lieutenant General David
Lesley, and Colonel Massy took their march (Westward) toward Glasco, with a
resolution to fall into the English quarters; and accordingly attempted a pass
called Spaw, where a strong party of Collonell Sydenhams foot lay entrenched,
who had several Reserves of horse (likewise) within half a mile of the said
place; but it proved very disputable for the space of one hour, and the
conflict maintained with great gallantry on both sides, till at last captain
Sanders came in with a fresh Troop of Horse* who charg^d twice through the
Enemies main Body, doing great execution; each man riding knee to knee, and not
flinching from each other in the least; which done, he wheeled about, and
flanked the Enemy, with a resolution to charge the boots horse only; but in
the mean time so thick was the shot which they received from the English foot,
that they thought it convenient to make good their retreat, which accordingly
they did, leaving about 30 men behind them slain on the place, besides what
were wounded, which are supposed to be trebble the number. On our side were
Pain and wounded about 20.

The great day of Battle we expect suddenly, for both Armies are preparing for
an Engagement, and in order thereunto eight Regiments of Horse (...) come on
this side Sterling, the body of their Infantry lies in the Park near the
bridge, where they have pitched their Tents, and their Captain Genera issimo
(the King) often rides amongst them.

Most of their Ensigns are red and white, having this Motto engraven in a
large Character, For Religion, King, and Kingdom.

They have lately randezvouz'd about Fife, Sterling, Kinross, and Dunbarton,
and have mustered about 20000 hors^ and foot, though the frequent talk is about
40000. After the last muster at Sterling, diverse of the Lord Balcarras's
Regiment of foot attempted a flight from their Colors; but were soundly
cudgel'd and beaten back by coll. Crawfords Regiment of horse. His Excellency
the Lord General has not (as yet) attempted any thing considerable, for when
ever we go about to get into Fise, we must expect very hard service: and no
question, but they will dispute the passes with us; which we cannot do, unless
we are furnished with all manner of provisions both for horse and foot: We
cheerfully wait for the good season when the Lord shall lead us forth: and we
doubt not but our work will be well timed, if we can wait the Lords leisure:
Only there is an overhasty spirit in us g^ner^lly, which carries us out to
discontents and frowardness, which is both sad and grievous to diverse. I wish
that we may be all wrought up to an even frame of heart, to welcome all
dispensations which may befall us here.

Lithgow 18 (...), 1651.

By an express Letter further from Scotland it (...) ^hus certified; That
their King having received intelligence, that Mr Cook was taken, and sent
prisoner to the Tower of London, imm^diatly commanded L. G. Lesley to dispatch
a letter to the L. G. Cromwell, demanding civil usage both for him and others;
and that in case of nonperformance thereof, that no favor or mercy should be
given to Col. Axtel, Col. Lehunt, and Col. Sadler, pri^oners in the Isle of
^cilley. Whereupon his Excellency returned a very round and tart answer,
signifying, That Mr Cook was no prisoner of war, and that he doubted not but
speedily to have the said Colonels a^ liberty, etc. Their King is again
returned to Sterling, and has given an expre^s Order, That all the English
throughout his Army; shall be immediately reduced to the power and command of
Col. Massy, whose Brigade Increases daily, and occasioned chiefly by his
private-alluring letters to the L. G. Cromwels Foot, therein promising in the
name of the King, that if they would desert their present employments, and
engage for him, that each man should receive both horse and arms, and an
additional gratuity, which has wrought upon diverse persideous persons.

Middle^on is marched into Angus with his horse, where the Com. of the Army are
furnishing him with Arms. 1500 of his foot are come to Sterling, and he stands
much to be an Independent-Army, and distinct of himself. They talk much of
coming for England, especially Col. Massey, who is very courteous, and free to
the English that go over to him, and promises much. Some give out, that the
Scottish Army have a design to march by the L. G. Cromwell (if possible) and to
make England the seat of war; but there is great danger of putting those
projects in execution. Their King is removed to Dumferling; but the Army remain
still about Sterling, where they have entrenched themselves all along the River
side: they have likewise raised diverse Mounts, and planted great store of
Ordnance.

A Letter from the Island of Guernzey, May 16. 1651.
SIR,
BY yours I understand that the late transactions in Gueruzey are variously and
strangely represented in England; therefore I shall give you a true and
impartial account of the business as briefly as I can.

Major Harrison Deputy Governor of this Island, having intelligence that there
were but forty two persons in Castle- Cornet, and that eighteen of them were
sick, and able to do no service in defending the walls; he was very desirous to
take hold of this opportunity, and when the Ammunition was arrived, the ladders
fitted, with other things necessary; he consulted with the Officers concerning
the carrying on of the business, found them armed with courage and
cheerfulness to attempt the said Castle, knowing how acceptable, if
succesfull, the service would be to those who entrusted them in that Island.

We likewise had intelligence that some of the Island Captains had given out,
that they were resolved to take the Castle by storm, and had taken the
subscriptions of several, persons to that purpose; though I am very confident
they never intended any such things; but only a mere pretense to ensnare and
betray the Soldiers, by animating them by their pretented forwardness: But we
clearly found their villainy afterward, and that these were the men that most
of all opposed the coming of the Parliaments forces into the Island at the
first, and since their coming have endeavored the removeal of them; whereby it
is more then probable the Parliament would soon loose their interest in the
Island. But to return,

Had the intelligence been true which was brought to the Governor; in all
probability the Castle had been ours: For at the first onset (which was
performed with as great courage and resolution as has been observed since
these wars) thirteen of the Enemy were disabled being wounded or slain, which
being added to the eighteen which were said to be sick, there remained but
eleven: But we found it otherwise, and that there was above threescore able
men in it, many of them Reformadoes, etc. which is sufficient to keep the
Castle against three thousand: Our ladders beaten down and broken with stones,
timber, case-shot from the flankers, etc. many of our men wounded, and thirty
two slain; two Captains wounded, one Lieutenant, and one Ensign slain in the
place.

Major Harison used all the means he could to cause boats to fetch off the
party, but could not prevail either by reward or threatenings; and indeed it was
equally dangerous to go to and fro in boats, as to abide under the walls; one
boat came, and suddenly took in diverse wounded men; but going off, was sunk by
a shot from the Castle, and two, men killed in the boat: the rest that were
living, another boat took up and saved, and it was impossible that such a party
of 200 men should be fetched off in boats, the confusion would be such.


An Abstrast from Holland.
SIR,
LAst Friday night the Duk of Tork with thirty or forty of his followers came
to the Hague, and the next day kept a fast with the Princes Royal his sister,
they give out that he is sent for into France, which is not credible, but that
they do it out of design that he should be desired by the Stares to go from
hence; for he was afraid before he came, that they would not be pleased with
his being here lest some affronts should be offered to my Lord Ambassadors, or
those that belong to them, by some of his train, wherefore he thinks he will
not speak to him, because he says he intends not to stay. The States have
presented Mounsieur Belleur (the French Ambassador) with a golden chain worth
600 li. They have taken into consideration the proposals of the Merchants, to
send into the Straights 40 Men of War, to sight the French Pirates. They have
also sent a Message to the Queen of Bohemia, and another to the Duke of York,
requiring them to keep their Courts in Order, without giving offense or
molestation to the English Ambassadors and their servants.

But yet notwithstanding on Saturday last Her Royal Highness the young
Princess of Orange celebrated a Fast for the prosperous success and issue of
the Battle which her brother the King of Scotland intends to fight with Genesis
Cromwell.


Since the receipt of the last news from Scotland, we are further advertised,
That the party beyond Sterling have a (...) devotion to Monarchy, taking a
pride to count the succession of 110 Kings from Fergus his Family (above 50 of
which they have either capitally or totally condemned and executed, or
privately murdered) and they seem not yet persuaded of a necessity of a change
among us, or themselves, though they might be pleased to consider that their
Monarchy expired in the rise of Presbytery, which leaves nothing but the name
of a King (where it takes place) devouring the substance.

As for that strange and incredulous Report, of the revolting of 30 of the Lord
Genesis Cromwels Lifeguard to the Enemy, it is very absurd and false; for they
are both unanimous and faithful, and the Army in an excellent posture and
condition.

Captain Massy (brother to col. Massy) was lately apprehended at
Colledge-hill, and sent prisoner to the Tower of London, by Order from the
Council of State.

FINIS.

