GODS DELIVERANCE OF MAN by PRAYER. AND Man's Thankfulness to GOD in PRAISES.

In a Sermon, by reason of the Lecturers absence in the Church of Saint
Bartholmewes EXCHANGE, on Ash-Wendesday, at the General Fast, proposed. But at
that time, by a Company of CHURCH Intruders very rudely opposed. And now at
this time, for the public satisfaction of All men faithfully in Print exposed.

By I. G. D. D. Rector there.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Paybody, dwelling in Queens Head COURT in
Paternoster ROW. 1642.

TO My Parishioners of St. Bartholmews Exchange London, Respective, or
Disrespective, all manner Salutation.
ON our Fast Day (doubly, a Fast Day, by Ancient use, by Recent Authority) The
Curate, by the throng of people in the Church, not able to get in, I began
Prayers. The Exhortation, and Confession were endured; But, the Absolution
entered on, A Psalm was confusedly began. I read, They sang (rather howled.)
Such was the rudeness of the swervers from their own Congregation; and
Disturbers of all Congregations, whether they intrude.

Entreated I was, to be take me to the Pulpit; I yielded, The Lecturer being
not come, as I conceived. In the Pulpit I was outfaced; in every corner of the
Church, disgracefully nicknamed; outprated, rudely and savagely. Having got
through my Prayer, I propounded my Text: Such were the Yellings, they would not
endure the reading of it; for all my deep charge, and citing of the disturbers
to the Lords Tribunal. Well, down I came, and Master Ash (The Lecturer, then
come) went up, rebuked the disorder, orderly Preached, and soundly; In the
afternoon I finished my work; And here You have it to review; Which, my
Prayer is may be to your Aedification in the serious way of Right Christianity,

The loving Pastor of you All, John Grant D. D.

PSALM. 50. 15 Call upon me in the day of trouble, I will deliver thee, and
thou shall glorify me.
IN the forenoone few Auditors of those many had the patience so much as to
hear my Text named, I hope to find you in a better temper this afternoon,
however here I am again to do my duty, and from the Lord of Hoasts is my
message; It is the charge of that supreme General to all; Call upon me in the
day of trouble, I will deliver thee etc. A heavy load of trouble is on our
shoulders; yea, on our souls, a load for us unsupportable; we have long
burdened our God which our sins, and his judgments have we felt many ways
to our smart, I would I could once say, to our amendment. We are now under a
general humiliation, a fast by public authority enjoined the whole Kingdom,
and the first day falls on Ash. Wednesday, a solemn day of fasting in the
Church of Antiquity, in the purer times of the Gospel; when Jonah the Prophet
and Messenger of the Highest to Niniveh, the great, the Head City of Nations
began to enter therein (as his Commission served him) he cried, and said; yet
forty days, and Niniveh shall be overthrown, Jonah 3. 4. what followed? so
the people of Niniveh believed God and proclaimed a Fast, and put on Sackcloth
from the greatest to the least of them: For the word came to the King of
Niniveh, and he arose from his thrown, and he laid his robe from him, and he
covered him with sackcloth and sat in ashes, and he caused it to be proclaimed
and published through Niniveh, saying; Let neither man, nor beast, heard, nor
flock, taste any thing, let them not feed, nor drink water, but let man, and
beast be covered with sackcloth, and cry mightily unto God; Yea let them turn
every one from his evil way, and from the violence that is in their hands; Who
can tell if God will turn, and repent, and turn away from his fierce anger
that we perish not? And God saw their works, that they turned from their evil
way, and God repented of the evil that he had said that he would do unto
them, and he did it not. Our danger is as near (for ought we know) and as
great (we may fear) as was that by Jonah threatened unto Niniveh; Nay Gods
judgments have been, and are upon us in much Variety; we are all a public
Fast, a Fast by the highest authority over us on earth solemnly proclaimed, and
sadly enjoined: O let it not be a mock*fast in a bulrushed Popishness or
Pharisaicall disfigured-n^ss; what ever our outward garments, deportments,
abstinence be, betake we our selves to ardent prayers, and unfeigned resolutions
to shake off all our exorbitances, and sacrilegious actions, and intentions;
god-robbers can be no right fasters, neither the robbers of the honor due to
his great name, nor of his Church revenews, the maintenance of those set a part
to the administration of duties holy, and of Gods own appointment for the best
welfare of his people; Gods sword is drawn, and will not be sheathed till we
be amended, Gods wrath is out, and will not be recalled in, till our sins be
cast out, the troubles on us shall not be mitigated, but multiplied; not
remitted, but increased; not away removed, but with armies of new ones
aggravated till we be not humerous, but ingenuous, in our humiliations.

Soon, and easily may we be deceaved, and deceave each others, but God is not,
cannot, will not be mocked by any of us all; he is serious, be not we
ludicrous, regular be out approaches, and addresses unto him, and the blessing
of our text will come home into our bosoms, God will make us a yet more happy
nation then ever we have been, and we shall be the trumpeters of Gods praises
all the world over.

The Contents, and extents of our present text are these. A deep Invocation; A
seasonable exaudition; A due return of Thankfulness. Call upon me in the day
of trouble; there is the first, the deep Invocation. I will deliver thee;
there is the next, a seasonable Exaudition. And thou shall glorify me; there
is the last, of thankfulness a due return; a glorifying of the deliverour
out of troubles in trophyes of praises

Call upon me in the day of trouble; a deep Invocation. Out of the depths have
I cried unto thee O Lord, is the Psalmists expression, Psalm 130. He was
plunged in the depths of sins, and in the depths of Calamities for sins
committed. None can sin and escape unpunished, be they never so high in
worldly estate, or in the favor of the highest; presumptions have
precipitations, and heights of sin, have their depths of punishment. Gods
own people are not privileged from miseries, when against God they do harden
their hearts, provoke him, tempt him, grieve him with their transgressions;
when they do err in their hearts, and will not know his ways. Israel like
troubles upon troubles involve even them, and till they humble themselves in
repentance unfainedly, no hope of entrance is there at all into his rest: When
sin, one depth, has plunged us into misery, another depth, and misery into
sorrow, another depth; it is then high time to take hold on the encouragement
in our Text, Call upon me in the day of trouble. Had not we this gracious
warrant, with small comfort should we life up our drooping heads out of these
depths; by solemn Covenant, we Christians are the selected people of God,
drawn out of the Mass of corruption, to be the heirs of salvation.

The scope of our faith, and the aim of our Christian hope is to be joined
unto the God whom we seek to be undistractedly, and unseparably his for ever
in the Lord Jesus; this life of ours is but momentany: the life believed, and
expected is the life of eternity, this is but a breathing: after that now, in
our attendance by faith, and hope on that blessed day of eternity, which shall
not have any nights interposition.

God has not left us to our selves, but communicates himself to us, to uphold
us in that attendance, by His Word addresseth He Himself to us, and by our
Invocation, is he unto us open; Seek ye my face, is His expression to us; thy
face we do seek, is our hearts, faiths returned answer, and practice; a
blessed harmony in harmonious blessedness, Psalm. 27. 8. In the prophecy of
Hosea, we find this in an accurate way of expression set down, Thou shall call
me Ishai, and not Baali, chap. 2. ver. 16. Ishai, not Baali, My Husband, not my
Idolized Lord; God will have us entire, not divided, half his, half not his,
half the Idol of our hearts, what ever that Idol be: mungrell Religion, is
to the only true God abominable. Now go we on with the Prophet, verse 18.
and so forward; for I will take away the name of Baalim out of her mouth; And
they shall no more be remembered by their name: And in that day will I make a
Covenant for them, with the Beasts of the field, and with the fowls of the
heaven, and with the creeping things of the ground; And I will break the bow,
and the sword, and the battle of the earth, and will make them to lie down
safely, (and here comes in the Cordialnesse of the business) I will betroth
thee unto me for ever; yea I will betroth thee unto me in righteousness, and
in judgment, and in loving kindness, and in mercy. I will even betroth thee
unto me in faithfulness, and thou shall know the Lord. And it shall come to
pass in that day, I will hear (says the LORD) I will hear the Heavens, and
they shall hear the earth, and the earth shall hear the corn, and the Wine,
and they shall hear Iezreel, and I will sow her to me in the earth, and I
will have mercy upon her that had not obtained mercy, and I will say to them
which were not my people; Thou art my people, and they shall say, thou art my
God. Gods promises and our prayers thence make sure work indeed, none like it.
Without the Word of God, and that sounding, and resounding in our ears with
the ministerial application thereof to our hearts by the spirits operation we
should live and dye in the grossness of ignorance: and without Prayer also in
humble, and fiduciall manner put up unto our God in the merits, and mediation
of Jesus Christ, we should be hopeless, helpless, destitute altogether of
the consolations from above, the heavenly consolations in the times of
afflictions, disturbances, fears. That prayer is a most important part of our
Religious service to God ward, appears in this most clearly, that the sacred
book of God under those appellations of prayer, and Invocation comprehends
even the whole service of God: Let that among the rest be deeply weighed, and
pondred in our hearts, Whosoever shall call on the Name of the Lord shall be
saved, Acts 2. 21. Gods whole worship is contained under this one phrase, to
call upon God, no duty of godliness is to him more acceptable, no sacrifice in
better part taken, then is that: the calling on the name of the Lord is, the
open profession of him without dantednesse, Genesis 4. 26. Where ever Abraham, the
Father, and pattern of the faithful, where ever he came, there erected he an
Altar, and called upon the Name of the Lord, Genesis 12. 7, 8. The house of prayer
is the name of Gods house, and God gave it that name by his Prophet Isaiah, and
our blessed Jesus ratifies it; Preaching we have here, and Sacraments we have
here; but prayer gives it the denomination, as the major service of God, and
both implying, and including all the rest, needs must we all if there be any
ingenuity of Christianity in us, needs must we acknowledge prayer to be a
matter of the greatest consequence even upon this consideration deeply volved,
and revolved in our hearts, that every soul to heavenward settled makes the
recommendation of his spirit into the hands of God, his practice uncessant, as
being in no hands late but his; that of David's is by frequency made his. Into
thy hands I commend my spirit, thou have redeemed, me O Lord God of truth,
Psalm. 31. 5. Gods promises are the faithfulls encourgaments, and in them
presenting themselves to God, acceptance is to them confidently assured.

Prayer is that hand which we reach, and stretch forth unto our merciful God,
to receive from him all his (...), Saint James calls them, all his givings, and
all his good gifts, his good givings, and his perfect gifts; In the hand of
faith prayer is a key, Heaven it opens unto us, and from Heaven enricheth us
with the best of treasures, our wounds lays it open to the right curer of
them, the binder up, and exquisite healer of them all, up carries it, and
dispreads before our piteous God the sobbings and groanings of our disturbed
hearts in an humble, and holy familiarity, that will have no denial, no
repulse: of that force it is with God, when put forth a right, that it makes
the rods and scourges of Gods correcting hand even fall there out, (...)
powerfully his fatherly affections, and removes his justly conceived
indignations.

Prayer in parties, and in Families well ordered is the customary sacrifice, is
the Morning, and Evening perfume of the devoutly Religious: Let my prayer,
(writes David) be set forth before thee as incense and the lifting up of mine
hands as an Evening sacrifice, Psalm. 141. 2.

Call upon me in the day of trouble. Saint Paul utters it thus, pray (...),
without ceasing, without fainting, 1 These. 5. 17. What ever the troubles be.
Our Savior thus; Watch, and pray that ye enter not into tentation, Matthew. 26.
41. As justly we may, and sufficiently we cannot, admire the goodness of our
God daigning his word to address himself in speech to our capacities; So are
we to esteem likewise, that as an high, and honorable favor, that he will
hear us in prayer, and praises approaching unto him, giving way to our
importunities; nay even commanding us expressly to be importunate; to such
prayers, yea only to such are his ears opened, and his Fatherly affections
chayned; And mark it, he wills us to call upon him importunately, but so
rests not; he prescribes us forms of prayer in his sacred word, puts the
matter into our hearts and the very words, and terms into our mouths. Hence
it is, that the spirit by the Prophet is called the Spirit of grace, and of
supplication: Zach. 12. 10. Hence that also of the holy Apostle, The Spirit
helps our infirmities, for we know not what we should pray for as we ought,
but the Spirit it self makes intercession for us with groaning which cannot
be uttered; And he that searches the heart knows what is the mind of the
Spirit, because he makes intercession for the Saints according to the will of
God, Romans 8* 26, 27. Alas, faulty and guilty are we all of us, and durst not
without warrant and enablement approach unto our God; the troubles on us would
even overwhelm us, and as it were keep us from so much as looking up, were we
not thus amiably invited thereunto, Call upon me in the day of trouble.

What troubles of ^^te have these three kingdoms under one Sovereign been cast
into? Nay still are in, and under? Our sister Nation Ireland even weltreth in
blood, and burns in mutual enragements: none there secured of* his life,
scarce for a moment: and are not we, or we ought to be surely even drowned in
tears for them? for them: Yea, and for our selves too, who are in mutual
enragements and various sudden uproares through our misaffections, and
misinterpretations, and misconstructions of every thing; bloody mindedness
takes place in the most, and the casting about how to entrap, and enwrap one
another in miseries, is the common misery of us all; what calumniations are
vented, printed, uncensured, unpunished? what jealousies each against others are
every where closely fomented? Charity the badge of Christianity, and coverer of
what may be covered is from us exiled, and who can be most of all
uncharitable, is the thing every where labored after. By this shall all men
know (says the pattern, and Patron of Charity our Lord Jesus) even by this
shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another, John 13.
35. But with sorrow, and shame enough too may it now be said, All men by this
may know; We are none of Christ's Disciples, that we hate one another; So
raging, so outrageous, so notorious is our mutual hatred. Many knotts tie us,
none will hold us being one to another eye-soares, if not heart-soares: As
strangers are our enter-viewers not as compatriots, our conferences,
differences; our Moaning the practice of Separatists, etc.
protestations, detestations; Reformation is intended, deformation even in our
Church assemblies, and most remarkably there, and unblushingly practiced; O!
into what Schisms do we run? Into what Sects are we dissected? Assunder are
we rent, one from the other; yea where men rope together, it is but in a sandy
manner, the least motion dissipateth, parts the sandily roped together, and
commotions not usual in this age Amsterdam, England. Beloved who so is not
troubled with these troubles, has no life, no soul of Christianity at all
left in him.

These and the like considerations, as diverse others there are, ought to
incite us unto constant, and instant prayer amidst them all, in throngs upon us
of these Nations at this time; let us, I say, pray that from us they may yet
timely be removed, that the full, and final blow from heaven decide not our
controversies in so much rancor steeped.

O! that it were come to the Character of the Church, Christians Primitive age,
Corunum, via una. One heart, one way, and till it come to that, troubles will
involve us; and when it comes to that to all the world about us may we be a
President, and an encouragement thereunto; me thinks the many, manifold, and
manifest preservations of our God should frame us all as one Man to bring this
about, to be exemplary Christians to the whole world round about us; I shall
recite but a few, yet these pregnant, and of fresh memory, and remarkable
observation: Can that Octogessimus octavus mirabilis annus* that wondrous year
of 88. ever be forgotten? It was the year of Englands preservation, and of
Spaines, and Romes abasement, trouble was on us, and we rid of trouble, ere we
knew it was so near: nor must the year 97. pass unremembred, Spain then had
a second blow, and England, a second triumph; As formerly the Armado, styled
invincible was ruined; so then were their forces, and policies too shamefully
defeated, and the English fleet for another purpose designed, brought upon
them by the winds to sink them into the waters, or bring them Captivated unto
our Land: Those fell out in the days of the Maiden Queen, famous Elizabeth,
for peace at home, and victory abroad, renowned.

The next fell out in King James his Reign, in the year 1605. The powder
Treason was an hellish plot, contrived most strangely; Heaven went beyond hell
in the business, and providence outreached divellishnesse, entangled them who
long had the trap ready to have ruinated Protestancy for ever: In the year
1639. were not these two Nations in one Island, under one King (the present
breath of our Nostrils) put upon a mutual internecion? and is not that turned
into a most blessed reunion? We are both the wonder, and the envy of Popish
Territories; God even then preserving us when we were ready to be seized on as
a prey unto merciless teeth, and to the Sepulcher throats of the Pontifician
generation amongst us; no stories can more represent the vigilance of mercy
over any people then can ours, as David when he was to encounter Goliath, the
stripling shepherd (that Tower of flesh laden with Arms, and Instruments of
death) said, He that delivered me from the Lion, and the Bear, will likewise
from this uncircumcised Philistine deliver me; so may we say, He that delivered
us from such, and such troubles, is the same still, is willing, and ready to
deliver us from our troubles incumbent, and imminent, all these intricacies we
are in, and all the hovering and surrounding mischiefs what ever. If our
prayers can but lay hold on Gods promises, no troubles can trouble us.

Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee.

Will deliver thee. Gods promises are as good as performances, they are Yea,
and Amen in Christ unto Gods glory, 2 Cor. 1. 20. Yea in the giving forth, Amen
in the performance, certain, constant, most firmly firm for evermore. Our
welfare, and Gods glory are enwrapped in them: No marvel then is it that
Prayer is so effectual with God, when by the heart, hand, mouth of faith unto
him presented in the Name of Our Lord Jesus Christ: when thus we are enabled to
pray* no marvel that our prayer is to purpose effectual; No marvel, that
God hearing Himself in us, upon that audience gives us deliverance in a way,
and manner to the whole world remarkable: And observe with me that the
Commandment, Call upon me, includes the very promise of GOD therein. Beloved,
God never calls us to call upon him as humble, and faithful suitors, to send us
from him empty away, unsupplyed. Can we not be when our resorts are unto God
warrantable, regular, orderly? Our hearts, Eyes, hands are unto him never
lifted up in vain, never unanswered, but for the most part above our thoughts
and beyond even our hopes too answered.

Of prayers effectualnesse memorable are the examples we have in the book of
God, and recorded they are for our close imitation and encouragement to that
weighty and most useful duty. Moses the Man of God, stood often in the breach
between God enraged, and the people mad in their open rebellions against
him. We read of Ioshuahs prayer that made a stay of the Sun, and Moon in
the firmament, that he might cut off the malicious enemies of God, and the
Church. Jonah his prayer mounted powerfully, and prevailingly mounted out of
the Whales belly, (which he calls hell) unto GODS Throne of Mercies, and
Glories in the highest Heavens, Chapter 2. verse 2. Eliah by prayer both
stayed, and procured rain, kept close and opened those cloudy bottles. And
Daniel thereby kept the affamished Lions paws, and jaws from doing him the
least harm amidst them. Ecclesiastical stories mention, that the Christian
Soldiers were Legio fulminatrix, the lightning and thundering legion of
Aurelius the Roman Emperor; by their prayers were the enemies thundered to
destruction, and the whole Camp whereof they were a part with a supply of
rain in their extremity of drought refreshed.

Sweetly remarkable is that passage, Isaiah 65. 24. Before they call, I will
answer, and while they are yet speaking, I will hear. A preventing God often,
and a God timely succouring is our God ever, none wait, none depend upon him
in vain; He that supplies the Lions, and Ravens in their affamishments (as the
Psalmist relates) will not be wanting in extremities to the redeemed with his
Sons blood, and by his spirit in them, calling in prayer on him. Even that
unjust Judge importuned by the oppressed Widow righted her: much more will God
help them that suffer wrong, much more will he avenge the cause of his chosen
in all their tentations, tribulations, persecutions, instantly calling upon
him. Say not, Often have I prayed in trouble, but still in troubles am
entangled; prayed I have for my King, for my Country, for a reunion of all our
distractions, but the work comes on slowly, has many pullbackes, and various
interruptions; I have prayed for friends in Captivity, but still they are
unfettered, for friends on their sick beds, but their death beds have they
proved; against the Churches open, and close Enemies have I prayed, but more,
and more are they prevalent; prayed for peace, but behold War in his dismal
colors; Nay that favorite of God; holy Paul prayed to God to be rid of
Satan's buffeting: yet must rest in this, My grace is sufficient for thee, for
my strength is in weakness perfected. To these and the like objections might
this be an unreplyable answer: Ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask a
miss, that ye may consume it upon your lusts. Saint James gives us that,
Chapter 4. verse 3. how may we say, and say truly, God not hearing us, hears
us the more? Hurtful things demanded, and received would be a curse on us not
a blessing, would be to us as were the Quails to the Israelites, not
blissfull, but banefull; Plato the Heathen Philosopher could fay, O God give us
good things though we ask them not, give us not evil things though we ask
them; but to that of Saint John, I refer you, and in that may we all rest as a
direction, and as an encouragement, God has given to us eternal life, and
this life is in 1 John 5. 11.
his Son. By believing on the name of the Son of God we may know that we have
eternal life, v. 13 Mark now his inference, v. 14. and 15. And this is the
confidence that we have in him, that if we ask any thing according to his will
he hears us, and if we know, that he hear us whatsoever we ask, we know,
that we have the petitions that we desired of him, eternal life, and the things
thereunto directly tending are the proper object of our faith Christian. The
Creed Apostolical is closed up with that, and for that have we an absolute
warrant to pray, and are enjoined not to waver in expectation thereof: hear
the Apostle; Let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith,
Heb. 10. 22. hold we fast the confidence, and the rejoicing of the hope firm
unto the end, Chapter 3. 6. 14. Where we have an Implication of their
condemnation who so in a proud humility, and in a modesty impudent enough teach
men to hold the life eternal and their salvation by the Lord Jesus in a
doubtful tenure. What do they other, then labor to be faithless with
reason? Methinks closely, thus they seem to be speak God; We find ourselves
unworthy to pitch our credence on thy Word, unworthy to believe what thou
promisest, the life eternal in Christ Jesus.

These do make the Gospells doctrine, a doctrine of unsetlednesse, of
distrustfulnesse, of distraction, which is the only setler of a waving and
wavering Conscience; no rest has this Dove, but in this Arc; yet these not
relyers on eternal life by Christ, a rockie foundation and a building
answerable are ridiculously persuaded to rely on their own sandy merits, in
which no marvel is it that they do sink into distrustfulnesse, and are
swallowed up in the gulf of desperation. Leave we the Popish generation to
their rotten absurdities, and be we close in our mutual and spiritual
edification of one another to Heaven-wards, in that faith which was once
delivered unto the Saints, in Saint Iudes words, verse 3. of his Epistle; On
that faith, most holy faith build we up our selves, praying in the Holy Ghost,
and keeping our selves in the love of God, looking for the merry of our Lord
Jesus unto eternal life, ver. 20. 21. of the same Epistle. It is prayer that
holds us in acquaintance with God, the peace making acquaintance, yet in this
acquaintance, we must in the next place, in our prayer approaches to him both
remember what he is, and what we are, he our God, we his dependant subjects,
not able one moment to subsist without his protection and suppliance of good
givings and perfect gifts, from whom they all descend, James 1. 17. he Jehovah
the eternal, we mortals, and miserables, in our selves vanity, yea lighter
than vanity it self, dust and ashes, borne in sinful, and hastening to
shamfull corruption in the slime-pits, our graves; Worms meat and our selves
worms most contemptibly contemptible. As those who address themselves often
to the Potentates of the Earth, Princes, Kings, Emperors, Monarchs, cloth
themselves the more neately, and more heedfully order their language then
others do; So he that frequently betakes himself to God in prayer, the duty
of every Christian must compose himself aright, and be ever readier to hear
than to offer the sacrifice of fools, babbling, raw, undigested prayers unto
the GOD of awe, and order.

In the third place know, that prayers rightly modelled and molded up will
frame us to avoid that defiler of all good exercises, base hypocrisy. It is
before God, that we appear in prayer, whether it be in private, or in
public, alone in our closets, or with others in our Families, or in Church
Assemblies, God sees us, hears us, observes us, there is no dallying with him,
no deluding of him. The Copy of a fair countenance, and looks demurely
composed cannot in his sight be availeable, whose eyes pierce all darkness
even that of hell, and do see through, and through the thickest mantles, and
coverture of the closest hypocrisy, even that which hypocrites in the very
cabinets of their hearts cannot themselves discern.

Further Prayer in conscience binds us that use it, not to wrong any, no not
the easiest to be wronged; to quit our hands speedily of what is others, not
our own; Nay it importunes us to detest and abhor even as hell, all ravenous,
greedy, oppressing courses; None of which in whomsoever can possibly stand with
the right profession of Christianity; observe that expression of God in his
Prophet, Isai. 1. 15. When you spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes
from you, yea when you make many prayers, I will not hear: your hands are full
of blood. In that consideration religious David said, I will wash mine hands in
innocence; so will I compass thine Altar O Lord, Psalm 26. 6. Hence that
exquisite counsel of Saint Paul, advising us to pray every where lifting up
holy hands without wrath or doubtings, I Timothy 2. 8.

Further yet prayer advises us to be rich to Godwards in the relievance of his
poor Saints, as now the distressed and dissipated Irish Protestants: The
ablest in power, honor, wealth is, or ought to be a daily begging suitor unto
God. And can any think of God to be heard and answered in his petitions, that
suffers the godly to perish for want of their redundancies? Suffers bleeding
Ireland, which makes our Kings heart bleed, still to wallow, and welter in
blood, without stenching that bloody issue? Who so perish through want of our
timely compassionate remedy, their blood, (I fear me) will be put on our
accounts against the reckoning day of the Doom final. Can our prayers work
our deliverance, our ears and hearts rejecting the suites of bleeding
Protestants, or not seasonably relieving their almost desperate condition, and
humanely forlorn hopes? The sentence is peremptory, Prove. 21. 13. Who so
stops his ears at the cry of the poor, he also shall cry himself, and
shall not be heard. On the contrary, Blessed are the merciful (evermore
blessed) for they shall obtain mercy, Matthew. 5. 7. Nothing so sure as their
deliverance out of what ever troubles, dangers, cares, fears.

In the fifth place, Prayer it is that obliges to diligence in hearing Gods
Word, and using aright the Sacraments of his Ordination. For how think we that
God will regard our prayers, if we be overly in the observation of his serious
enjoyments? will he receive our demands, if we ^light over his commands? if we
wait not constantly in his Sanctuary, on his sacred behests and appointments?

Sixthly, Prayer does bind us all to the good behavior, one toward another,
nay more to the Reciprocation of enterchangeable Reconciliation in the
occurrences of what ever differences and offenses. That passage is full and
fair, Matthew. 5. 23, 24. If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there
remembrest that thy brother has ought against thee, leave there thy gift
before the Altar, and go thy way; first be reconciled to thy brother, and then
come and offer thy gift. If we serve not one another in love, which is an
enjoyment Apostolical, neither our persons, nor our prayers can please God.
When our Savior had prescribed us a form of Prayer he reassumeth and
reinforceth that Petition in it, Forgive us our debts as we forgive our
debtors, for, says he, If ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly
Father will also forgive you, but if ye forgive not men their trespasses;
Neither will your Father forgive your trespasses, Matthew. 6. 14, 15. We have it
thus related by Saint Mark, chap. 1. verse 25. 26. When ye stand praying,
forgive if ye have ought against any, that your Father also which is in Heaven
may forgive you your trespasses. Hold we to this, and we shall be happy in
deliverances; but if thus cordially and really we pecce not up, in pieces shall
we be like a Potters vessel graceless, useless, in all troubles remediless,
which God avert, and bring us all into the right tune and temper of
Christianity, and regular charity.

I now pass on to the last parcel in our* Text;

Our due return of glory to our deliverer out of all troubles. We are never
right till God ingenuously be acknowledged by us, to be (...), the remover of
evils, and of whatsoever is good the gracious bestower. What we do must all be
done to the glory of God, 2 Cor. 10. 31. To this end were all things made, in
all creatures God sets forth his glory, and in them all will he be glorified;
light cannot be hid, and God of lights is the Father, and in them all is
represented; to be glorified by Men, the Son of God became man; he is God
manifested in the flesh, and for that manifestation never can we men glorify
our God enough. By this has God made his wisdom manifest in finding out a way
to satisfy his Justice exactly, without the least prejudice at all to his
Mercy.

Nay, His Mercy is most evident in his Justice, his Sons death on the Cross
was the price of our Redemption, and the purchase of Heaven for us who had
merited hell by the heinousness of our transgressions. To be glorified will
God again send his Son, and in our nature too, but glorified. To be judged
and to death sentenced for our offenses was his first coming; to be the
visible Judge both of quick and dead shall his second coming be. To be
glorified, God sets up, and takes down whom he pleases, Kings and Kingdoms
are at his disposal; to the Kings of the earth is he terrible (writes the
Psalmist) Psalm. 76. 12. And the Courtly Prophet is plain; The Nation and
Kingdom that will not serve thee shall perish; yea those Nations utterly shall
be wasted Esaias 60. 12. To be glorified, God remarkeably punishes his own
transgressing people, and at his own house many times begins his judgment,
but ends in The ruin of his enemies. We see that in part fulfilled, and to
the height at last shall it be made full; As truly as I live all the earth
shall be filled with the glory of the Lord, Number. 14. 21. Yet think not here,
beloved, that God stands in need of being glorified by men, or felt in himself
a titillation from men; No, no, before we were, before the world was, glorious
was he above our thoughts. Stood he in need of Glory, the Angels are abler,
and readyer to extol him then all the whole race of Mortals possibly can.

As we are less than the very least of all his mercies, so his praises are to
him an abatement, to us only an advancement; our very thanksgivings are
beggings, and our own Interest and improvements in his various blessings, the
foundation of our exalting his Name. It is a most Gracious vouchsafement of our
God that he will by us be glorified.

I might expatiate here, but my weak and spent lungs press me to abreviate,
and to contract much, which I purposed largely to have discoursed of into a
narrow compass of time. Thus then we are to glorify God.

First, by speaking of his supreme Majesty with all due submissivenesse and
reverence; All colloguings, all dissemblings, all hypocrisies must here be
far, far from us; this, this it is to give glory unto God, to speak the
truth though it be against a man's self: Give God the glory, (said Ioshuah to
Achan.) That giving of glory was the open confession of his close sin, Josh.
7. 19. It is the acknowledgement that of all hearts God is the searcher, and
the just avenger of wickedness, though never so palliated. We must not shrink
from confession in the case of Gods honor although it be to our own temporal
confusion; It was Achans case, and in every oath and solemn protestation we
make and take, it is ours. Juggle we not with our all knowing God,
equivocations, mental reservations, and other cunning evasiions, may deceive,
elude, and delude men, and be we not deceived; God can we not deceive, he
will not be mocked: as we sow, we shall reap, or corruption or life
everlasting, Gal. 6. 7, 8. If we hide our sins, we shall not prosper, God
will not lose his glory, but if we confess them and forsake them, God shall
have the glory, and we shall have the comfort; He that confesses, and
forsakes them shall have mercy, Prove. 28. 13.

Again we do glorify God when his promises even in all our troubles are
laid hold on by our faith. We read of Abraham, of all in the Faith the Father,
that he staggerd not at the promise, through unbelief, but was strong in faith
giving glory to God, Romans 4. 20. The Receiver of Christ's testimony has set to
his Seal, that God is true (as Saint John the Baptist has it) in the Gospel
by Saint John cha. 3. 33. When God has made known his will unto us in his
Word, good reason it is that every one of us should thereunto give our full
assent and consent, we must confess it ingenuously, and profess it openly
never be ashamed thereof. And this is as a setting too of our Seal, that God
is true, and in so doing, we do glorify our God, and it is a chief point of
honor which of us he requires, and indeed to repent, and believe the Gospel
is the sum and substance of the Gospel, the full of a Christian, of God
accepted for man's Righteousness, Mark 1. 15. Romans 4. 3.

Thirdly, we do glorify God in a perpetuated course of good works; So our
Savior plainly and expressly. Let your light so shine before men, that they
may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in Heaven, Matthew. 5.
16.

Fourthly, we then do glorify our God when we do prostrate our selves in the
truth of humility, and and humiliation before God. That of Jesus Christ to the
proud generation of the Pharisees is remarkably observable. How can ye believe
which receive honor one from another, and seek not the honor that comes
from God only? John 5. 44. An usual and a just course is it with God to abase
the lifted up, and to lift up the abased in their own eyes, to cast down the
mighty from their seats, and to exalt the humble and meek; As the not givers
of glory unto God shall be unglorious at the last for ever; so the glorifiers
of God in the right way of humbleness shall after petty disregards and
disgraces here from unadvised men be shining stars above in glory.

Lastly, we do glorify our God in our close defending the cause of God,
where ever and however opposed and vilified in the scornful world, and in
being seriously transported with a regular zeal unto the glory of our God, not
regarding at all our disesteeme in the world in that regard. In this frozen age
variously humerous this is rarely practiced, the least, very least word that
touches our own reputation, goes as a dagger to our hearts; but God in horrid
oaths and execrations is every where lewdlic and lewdly blasphemed: his Church
servants by the most vilified and scorned, and it troubles not our hearts at
all, yea scarce our ears. O times, O manners!

Alas! how few Lots are there in this Sodom, the present evil world? Lot
vexed his righteous soul day by day, in seeing and hearing the unlawful deeds
of that City where he sojourned. 2. Pet 2. 8. We see and hear enough the like
every day, and every night, and all hours and moments of both: God is
dishonored impudently every where, his ordinances abused, his holy name and
attributes odiously polluted with rotten language, out of their reeking
Sepulcher throat vented, and poisoning where it is with delight entertained: no
sin abstained from, yea even with greediness unashamedly committed. It may be
said of the most of both sexes in this age which the Prophet Esaias utters of
Jerusalem, and Judah, Their tongue, and their doings are against the Lord, to
provoke the eyes of his glory, the show of their countenance does witness
against them, and they declare their sin as Sodom; they hide it not, woe
unto their soul, for they have rewarded evil unto themselves, Esaias 3. 8, 9.
We may add with the Prophet Ezechiel, and parallel this Nation with that.
Behold this was the iniquity of thy sister Sodom. Pride, fullness of bread,
and abundance of Idleness was in her daughters, neither did she strengthen the
hand of the poor and needy; And they were haughty and committed abomination
before me, therefore I took them away as I saw good, Ezekiel. 16* 49, 50. That
our selves prove not an History in this kind let the recorded Histories of
Sodom, Gomorra, Jerusalem be our forewarning, their plagues will befall us, if
by serious and timely repentance we break not off our courses in the very same
kind and degrees of sinning. Saint Paul's spirit was exceedingly stirred in
him, when he saw the City of Athens wholly given to Idolatry, Acts 17. 16. And
do not some doat on Images with the Romanists, and others on Imaginations with
Factionists? How few are right in the right way of Gods prescriptions? which is
Jehovah Elohenu, Jehovah Echad, the Lord our God is one Lord, Deuteronomy. 6. 4. Out
of him all is but a fiction; and no Religion sound and solid, but what we have
from the dictates of his holy spirit. This Lord our God, this one Lord has
made all things for himself, even the wicked for the day of evil, Prove. 16.
4. Assuredly God will be glorified if not by us, then on us; if not for his
mercies in our deliverance* Surely then for his judgments in our sentencing to
hell, according to that in the Psalmist, The wicked shall be turned into hell,
and all the Nations that forget God. He that will not voluntarily glorify God
as the Father of mercies, in the rigor of justice will our God glorify
himself in his eternal ruin. If we prove not the Heralds of his glory;
examples shall we be of his just indignation. When his wrath is kindled but a
little, O blessed are they that in him repose their trust, Psalm. 2. 12.
accursednesse shall enfetter all others in the chains of everlasting
darkness. O! my beloved in the Lord; What ever we have been heretofore, be
this hence forward to the end of our pilgrimage, and warfare on earth, our
mainest care never any more to receave the grace of God in vain, never turn
the same into lasciviousness, which Saint Jude fitly calls, the denying of the
only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ: improve we rather with all manner of
alacrity and industriousnesse the talents thereof unto us concredited to the
glory of our God, upon our receiving the end of our faith, even our endless
salvation.

By words; by works, in our lives and at our deaths set we forth the praises
of our gracious deliverer, with the Psalmist from the ground of our hearts,
saying; Blessed be the Lord God, who daily loadeth us with his benefits, even
the God of our salvation, he that is our God, is the God of our salvation, And
unto God the Lord belong the issues from death, Psalm 68. 19, 20. Endangered
is the Church of God at this day every where in the world, and in this Island,
from the world divided endangered amongst Atheists, Papists, Sectaries, in
troubles are all right Christians involved; O! now is the time of instant
prayer for their gracious deliverance out of them all; Call we heartily upon
our God, and his bowell mercies will tenderly reach us, and savingly relieve
us, we shall find and feel his timely succors, there is yet balm in Gilead,
yet mercies and the plenteous redemption with our God; He, he it is that shall
redeem Israel from all his iniquities, bring all his people every where out of
all their depths of sins, sorrows, miseries, Psa. 130. Utterly will he never
forsake his own people, the Israel of God, but upon their unfeigned repentance
and faith without hypocrisy, settle them unremovably in himself, and let them
see even their full desires on al their malicious enemies, and ungratious
opposers; for, seeing God for the love of his Church made the world; Satan who
labors the worlds ruin cannot with all his forces and devices ruinate the
Church. The eternal God, the Lord of Armies, and Mercies, who from that
roaring, and circuiting Lion, has many times and many ways delivered us from
the hands of men his Captives, and instruments how ever maliciously bent
against us will still and still deliver us. Our Petitions shall be prevalent
with him for us, and against them. And after he has given us deliverance, upon
deliverance here on earth, he will possess us in Heaven with our inheritance
there, our Inheritance immortal, undefiled, and that can never fade away, 1
Pet. 1. 4. to this inheritance the King of glory bring us that there we may
for evermore glorify him und^stractedly.

AMEN.
FINIS.
Postscript W. A. D. D. Minor invidia I. G. D. D. Major contemptu.
Lesser than Envy; greater than contempt;
From the One, and the other, let me be exempt:
I wish not Much; with little am content:
So let My Years run on; My Life be spent.
There are some words mis-printed, others mis-placed; and the pointing here and
there, unobserved. Pardon, and amend, friendly; then peruse, courteously.

The LORDS Prayer enlarged. The PREFACE.
Gracious and glorious Father, all good, all mighty thou art, with us always
present; but thy Majesty principally demonstrates it self in and from Heaven;
in thee do we live, move, and have our being; as thou have created us of
nothing, so do thou nourish, maintain, defend us in the order, and rank of
our creation. We have our gracious enjoyment to betake our selves in prayer
unto thee, whose title is the hearer and answerer of prayers, the helper of us
to pray aright* and the succourer of us too in right prayer to thy glory in our
salvation.

Petion 1. O! cause thy Name and thy Self to be made known upon Earth, and
thy saving health among all nations, manifest thy self yet more and more in
and to the habitable world, and be thou, holy and heavenly Father, by all of
all conditions and sorts of Mankind honored, and glorified in the thoughts of
our hearts, in the words of our mouths, in the deeds of our holy lives and
conversations even upon earth, heavenly.

Petition 2. O! grant that the Scepter of thy Kingdom, the word of thy power,
and the power of thy Word may be efficacious and prevalent all the world over;
let us receive it humbly, retain it in our hearts closely, grow up thrivingly
by it in the clear knowledge of thee and thy Christ day by day. O let all
Christian Churches agree in the truth of thy holy and lively word, and be
strengthened in grace by it, and fitted by degrees for glory.

Petition 3. What thou willest be that accomplished, and all the opposers of
thy will confuted really, and everlastingly confounded. O be thy revealed will
the rule of our thoughts, words, actions, and thy very least beck, our sway,
as it is of all thy holy Angels thy ministering spirits by thee sent forth to
minister for them, who shall be the heirs of thy salvation.

Petition 4. What is needful for this outward man let thy divine providence
supply us withal, and on that let our dependence be always and in all things,
and teach us that lesson, in what estate so ever we are with thine allotments
to rest contented, and in every thing to be unto thy Majesty unfainedly
thankful.

Petition 5. O! look not severely upon our innumerous errors, transgressions,
sins, but cover them, pardon them, cast them all into the Seas bottom, never
to rise thence against us unto condemnation, and separation from thee, and give
us all mutually forgiving hearts in the case of arising differences, and
offenses.

Petition 6. We are in the midst of snares, O let us never be ensnared, uphold
us in thy fear, and deliver us from the fear of all thine and our enemies,
Satan, sin, death, hell, destruction.

The Doxologie.
WE are in thy Kingdom, O with thy golden Scepter rule us: we are under thy
power, O shelter us from all adversary forces, we breath after the propagation
of thy glory in our eternal salvation, O manifest the same in thy due time,
and that in all clearenesse and fullness to our redeemed souls. Amen, So be it
is our prayer. Amen, be it so, will be thy ratification, thou art faithful,
and we are happy.

Amen, Amen.

