A Cure of deadly Doctrine; Which is death in the Pot: OR Mr. Royles Light
proved to be Darkness.
By J. G. a lover and a Member of the holy Army of God, although the most
unworthy.
SIR;
YOur Glimps of some truths, as you call it, is a mysting and darkening of the
clear light of the Scriptures; an adding to and taking from the testimonies
and Books of the Prophesies of God, which whosoever does is to bring upon him
all the plagues that are written therein, and to deprive himself of his part
in the book of life, and in the holy City, and of all the precious things that
are written in Gods Records.

And first for the general title of your Paper, it is palpably false, to
ascribe to your particular matters the name of truths, and to be made known in
these last times; when as many in London know them all to be old Germane
errors. The first publisher we read of, who plainly and openly professed them,
was David George, and one Henry Nicholls, sometimes a tradesman in Holland, who
through pride fell to gross and strange delusions of Satan, and printed many
blasphemons tenants in diverse small books, known by several titles, As the
Gospel of the Kingdom; The Prophecy of the Spirit of love; the Proverbs of H.
N. The glass of Righteousness; and diverse others; many of them being lately
reprinted; as, The Revelation of God; The spiritual King of P^; and the
Prophecy of the Spirit of Love; in all of them setting forth himself to be
greater then Jesus Christ our Lord: having these expressions in one of his
books; There is eight through breakings of the light, and each one exceeding
the other, and the last the greatest; in which number he makes Jesus Christ the
seventh, and himself the eight: and as Jesus of Nazareth was greater then all,
or any before him, so himself H. N. to excel, in all manner of gifts and
graces, our Savior Christ; for he says, Christ is no other in the Scripture
then Anointing, and in that he himself exceeded. And the Names also that are
given in Scripture to Christ only, by them he calls himself; as, the Son of
God, the holy One of Israel, etc.

And now to your three particulars; and first of the first; how you can prove
your affirmation by Scripture or reason, that all the offices, gifts, and
ordinances given to the Apostles were figurative; these are your own words, and
I shall keep you close to them; for he that makes error his Proposition, can
make no better of his Conclusion: I confess, the term Ordinances, as you
expound them to be the Supper of the Lord, and Elements Baptism, are
figurative; but how you will prove the other two terms, offices and gifts
figurative, it is very doubtful to conceive; for if you mean the office of an
Apostle, Deacon, Evangelist, Bishop, Elder, Overseer, or any other office
mentioned in the New Testament, then how are they figurative. And by gifts, if
you mean, as the Apostle does, 1 Cor. 1 2. the manifold gifts of the Spirit,
some peculiar to the Saints alone, who are spiritual, and others common to all
believers, although carnal; then how in either respect are they figurative?
for in right reason of ordinary expression, a figure cannot be the thing it
self, but some other thing that has in it the resemblance of the substance it
signifies; as in Circumcision, the Passover, the Brazen Serpent, the Manna,
the Sacrifices, the Priesthood, the washing away the filth of the flesh, and
the Bread and Wine in the Lords Supper.

Again, I require of you to show in right distinction and sound understanding,
^^ what respect the Apostles gif^^* and those with them that had received the
gifts of ^he Holy Ghost, descending on them at Jerusalem, Acts 2. that th^se
should be weak in their gifts and dispensations, compared with those after
them in St Paul's ^^me, and now in our time* ^^ you seems to prove it by Romans 8.
18. If you have not a new way to clear this, the Scriptures will make it very
soul against you.

Again, where do you read^, that the coming of Christ in the flesh, put an
end to all the Ceremonies of the Law, to them of whom they were required? And
how can you prove, that the promise of his coming again is fulfilled, in the
sending, giving, or pouring forth of his Spirit; I hope you hold the
distinction of the persons in the Godhead, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
neither confounding the persons* Excellencies, or Offices of either, so that
these Appellations are only proper to the Son, and not to the Father, or
Spirit* Th(...)y ^o^^^, this day have I begotten thee: Again, The Lord has
sworn, and will not repent, thou art a Priest for ever, etc. Again, The Lord
said unto my Lord, sit thou a^ my right hand, etc. Again, Whom t(...)s must
contain, or receive* till the restitution of all things, etc. And again* As
you have see^^ him go, so shall you see him come. Now observe, it is said, he
shall come, ^^ is no^ said, the Father, or the Spirit; wherefore do you
strain the Text? And whereas the Lord says* ^^ will send the Spirit, he does
not say nor meant, he will send himself; for as he has assumed the humane
nature, and exalted it ^^ Gods right hand, even so there he i^ to abide and
continue till the time appointed of his return. Likewise other Scriptures
speaks properly of the Father, and not of the Son, nor Spirit; as this is
properly spoken of the Spirit, and not of the Father, nor the Son; therefore
vain and incredulous is it to affirm, that Christ's sending his Spirit to his
Church, is his second coming, or coming again to them according to the
Scriptures, Joh. 14. 2, 3. Heb. 9. 28. Matthew. 16. 27. Luke 19. 11, 12. etc.

Friend, if I may call you so, take heed how you expound Scriptures; for th^^
to affirm, as you have done, is to abuse the Scriptures; and to force,
violate, injure, wound and kill the Witnesses of God, which whosoever does,
shall perish and be slain by them, Rev. 11. 5. For fi^e proceeds out of
their mouth, and devoureth, says the Text such enemies: The truth is, when a
Christian wants his principles and beginnings of Christ, and yet will take upon
himself to be a Teacher in Christianity; he is like the Martiner that takes
upon him the office of a Pilot, and yet understands not the Art of Navigation;
for to know the common terms, without the perfect skill in the mystery, by
the theorick or by the practick, the more he acts, the farther he ingages the
Ship to destruction, notwithstanding all his pretenses to the contrary.

Sir, Blame me not thus to charge you, for you prove your self to be the
unskilful Christian, as in what is past, so in that which is to come; for you
using the term Baptism, and not rightly distinguishing in the different
acceptance thereof; you make that obscu^e in your reasonings, which otherwise
were plain in the holy Scriptures, comparing Scripture with Scripture; for
there is a Baptism of Water in the Element, and a Baptism of Water in the
Mystery; and John the Baptist and St Paul with all the Apostles and servants of
God were more conversant in this last signification of Water, then in the
first; and this last has differing meanings also; as sometimes repentance,
sometimes remission of sins, and sometimes the gifts of the Holy Ghost, as I
have elsewhere proved largely; therefore well says he that is Worthy, It is
the definition, not the names of things by which they are rightly known: and
you being not skillful to define, to distinguish, and divide between things
that differ, make as false constructions in the second part of your Paper, as
in the first; for although therein you have a seeming pretense of a Christians
spiritual death and resurrection, which rightly understood, is a truth, yet
the thing you aim and drive at to reveal under these specious pretenses, is
to deny the resurrection of the natural body; for these are your own words, I
deny that to be a truth, speaking of the resurrection of the natural body,
page the ninth.

To which error of the Sadduces and Familists, I say thus much, that the
Scriptures affirm plainly, that the natural body is sown, that is, buried in
the earth; which natural body at the resurrection shall be raised a spiritual
body, 1 Cor. 15. 44. And if there be no resurrection of the dead, says the
Apostle, then is Christ not risen, that is, his body is not risen, and if
Christ be not risen, says he, then is our preaching vain, and your faith also
vain, Verse. 13, 14. Now to wave your Allegory of Christ's Sepulcher, as also of
his death and resurrection, making it a fancy; for although there be a
spiritual death and resurrection in the regenerate, daily to dye to, and arise
from sin, and live to righteousness, yet there was no such thing in Jesus
Christ, which was, and is, the King of life and righteousness, the Author and
giver of life, the brightness and glory, the express image of the Father,
from all eternity, and to all eternity. And notwithstanding the Saints
spiritual death and resurrection, which is in, by, and through Christ, Col. 2.
12. yet this does not nullify and take away their natural death, nor bodily
resurrection to life and perfection at the last day; for as the first is by the
power and voice of God spiritual in our regeneration, through the operation of
God, so the resurrection of our bodies out of the graves, is by the same power
and voice, to incorruption, life, and salvation, Joh. 5. 25, 26. and verse. 28,
29.

This your allegoriz^ng Doctrine does not only destroy the Faith of some in
particular, but it overthrows the whole Doctrine of faith it self, which was
once delivered unto the Saints, and turns the true and faithful witness, who
once was dead, but now is alive, and lives for evermore, into a lie, a
fancy, or conceit, imagining another meaning then what is real and
substantial, of his conception, birth, childhood, full age, temptations,
fastings, preaching miracles, his being accused and apprehended by the Jews,
his being adjudged and condemned by Pilate, his crucifixion, his death and
burial, his lying three days in the grave, his resurrection and ascension,
and now his sitting at the right hand of the Father; to deny the literal sense
and substance of all these things, and to turn them to allegories, and other
meanings, as they shall severally imagine or fancy, is to deny the Lord that
bought them, whatsoever glosses and fair pretenses soever they make.

I proceed now to the third part of your Paper, the day of Judgment, as you
call it, what it is, and when it shall be: and here you say, you will lay open
such a mystery as has been hid from many ages, but has showed it self to you
within these few days, which is as false as the former I condemned; for these
depths of Satan are not of yesterdayes birth and manifestation, but are ancient
and of long continuance; and their Books are extant, although those of your
delusion have endeavored to buy up all they could me^ withal heretofore, that
they might have the more credit to affirm a lie, in calling these visions of
their own hearts, new Lights, as if never heard of, nor known before: And
therefore you much mistook to speak of your self as the only man to be
acquainted with this Revelation; for what think you of Doctor Everit, D. G.
Master Dell, Master Saltmarsh, Master P^rdig, Master Randall, Master Den, and
Master Galtorne, and many more preachers tha^ maintain the same delusion and
mistake with your self; besides Lords and Ladies, and many thousands amongst
the common people.

But to your present matter, you boldly affirm to your friends, as you call
them, that the coming and day of Christ is spiritual; And for proof hereof,
you say that Eliah the Prophet, spoken of by Malachi, Chap. 3. 1. is that
spiritual Appearance of Christ in us, and that Eliah is he that shall suddenly
come to his Temple, even the Messenger of the Covenant, his coming being now in
the Spirit, as he says; and the Spirits presence is the dreadful day of the
Lord, consuming and burning up all fleshly excellency in us, destroying the
son of the bondwoman, which he expounds to be creature-wisdome and darkness
in us: Here Is his relation of the Scripture, and his exposition also.

Now how contrary he is to the truth of the Text, let all that hear, judge;
for he makes Eliah, and the Messenger of the Govenant to be one and the same,
whereas the Spirit of God shows the contrary, prooving thereby that Mr Royles
spirit is a spirit of contradiction to Gods holy Spirit; for thus says the
Lord of truth himself; If you will receive it, this is Elias that was to com^,
Matthew. 1^. Prooving it was John the Baptist of whom the Prophet Malachi spoke,
both of Person and Office, to prepare the way of the Lord, which Lord is called
the Messenger of the Covenant; for although there be many Messengers, yet there
is but one that can be said to be the Messenger, who indeed is the only Au^hor
and bringer of light and salvation. Now for this Impostor to turn the Offices
and Persons of our Lord, and his forerunner John the Baptist, that great
Prophet, whom none before him amongst all the holy Prophets of God since the
world began, exceeded in spiritual power and efficacy: I say, to turn this
Almighty God, and this great and extraordinary servant, into spiritual
appearances of a fancied conceit, is to cross, ruinate, and destroy, both the
body and spirit, the letter and meaning of the Text of Scriptures, and what a
cursed thing it is, the Records of God declare.

But as a man d^stracted does no sooner pass one danger but presently ^uns
into another, so this blind Leader proceeds to farther error, for he falsifies
the seventh Verse of the 114. Psalm, in making that an allegorical myst^ry,
that is a plain literal history, by bringing Israel out of Egypt through Gods
wonderful and almighty power, in dividing the great Sea, and the swelling
River Jord^n, that the hi^l^ and mountains removed, melted* and fled away, the
massi^ and huge Earth trembled a^ the presence of the Lord, at the presence of
the God of Jacob. And further he sh^mes not to affirm contrary to the consent
of Scriptures, that before this earthly Tabernacle be put off which we bear
ab^ut u^, when Christ says he comes in the Spirit to reign within u^, then
all his enemies are made his footstool: which notwithstanding his fancy, it
shall not be truly so, as faith the Prophet and Apostle, till the end of this
world, when Christ's Mediatorship shall be finished, not ^i^l the Lords return
in the Clouds of Heaven, with ten thousands of his Sa^n^^, for the Lord
himself shall descend from Heaven with the voice of the Archangel, and with
the Trump of God; and then, and not before, shall the dead in Christ arise ^u^
of the E^rth, and then shall the Lord execu^e judgment upon all ungodly
sinners, of all their h^rd speeches wherewith they have spoken against him. And
Mr Roylie, I sp^ake seririously to you, and desire you would let my words take
place in your heart, except you repent of this writing, which you seem to
glory in, you will be found an enemy to Christ, and guilty of hard false, and
evil speeches against him; to turn all the holy history of him, his person,
office, reign, and kingdom, with the reality of all of them, into a
deceitful mystery.

And those real truths of his incarnation, death, resurrection* ascension, and
intercession, to turn these also into saigned allegories of your own devifing,
even imagining all things, past and to come, to be present, and to be ^u^^i^d
in our bodies before o^r dissolution, all things that are written from the
beginning of the world unto the end; and that we, that is, the first Adam,
becom^ Abel, and Enoch, and ^^a^, and Abraham, and Moses: And so Christ the
second Adam, and all things of him and them, in us fulfild from his conception
to his ascension, to be s^t at the right hand of the Father: N^y, which is
more, that his coming again in the Clouds, the general resurrection, and
great day of Judgment, and the world to come, also that all these things
should be in this life here, and fulfild in u^* i^ a blasphemy beyond
comparison; for in setting up your Idoll-phansie, of wicked invented
Allegories, never heard of, nor taught by the Word of God, for these inventions
of you and your generation, as it does deny the Messiah in the true
understanding of him, and also it does obscure and exclude all the heavenly
benefit^ by him, as the clear Doctrine of the Gospel of repentance and
remission of sins, with the hope of salvation, purchased by his own blood,
and to be preached in his Name; and also you show your self to be wholly
ignorant of the estate of a true Christian in his spiritual birth and
heire-ship, and of the hope of glory in him to be entered into, and possessed at
the Resurrection, called in Scriptures the inheritance, the purchased
possession and salvation. The more you give credit to these delusions, the more
impossible is it for you to come to see the truth, the straight way of the
Lord: for your wo^d of light and truth, as you call it, is gross blasphemy
against God, blaspheming his Name and his Tabernacle, and them that dwell in
heaven: Wherefore never write nor speak any more for it; and finally, remember
what is written: Add^ tho^ not to Gods Word, lest he reprove thee, and thou be
found a liar, Pro. 30. 6.

And as Gods Word binds me ^o d^sswade you from your error, so it does likewise
command me to persuade all my Christian friends to take heed and beware of the
great deceit of this dangerous doctrine, of which there is no^ the like in the
world; for in terms it grants unto you all the substantial truths that are;
as God and man, Nature and grace, the new man and the old, thi^ lif^ and that
to come, the spiritual resurrection and that of the body, mortification and
vivifica^ion, repentance and remission of sins, the present time and that
hereafter, suffering and triumphing: which in the trial will prove but a
dream, as it is indeed. That man is cheated with ^ shadow for the substance,
that dreams he has rich and costly food* when it is nothing but a fancy,
and when he awakes he feels it to be so by his hunger. Now there is no chea^e
to the chea^e of the understanding; for a man to be cheated of his meat, he
may get more for his money, if of his horse, he may go a^oo^e, or buy one, if
of his money, he may labor for more; but that man that is cheated of his
understanding, is wholly left without all manner of remedy, so is he that is
cheated of the true knowledge of the way of life, and mystery of salvation.

By John Grant.

London; Printed by M. S. for John Handcock in Popes-head-alley, 1649.


