A GREAT DISCOVERY OF A PLOT IN SCOTLAND, By a Miraculous means.

Two great ACTORS in the same being so taken with the sweet disposition of
those Worthies, against whom they Plotted; that their troubled Consciences
would not permit them to proceed in their wicked Intents.

As also, the Names of those Lords, that should have bin cut off in this Plot
of Scotland. And the Names of the Conspirators.

With the COPY of a LETTER sent to the Paipists in LONDON.

London, Printed by Bernard Alsop, MDCXLJ.

A LETTER Sent to Mr. PYM.etc.
SIR, things were lately in a very hopeful way of Accommodation. But on Monday
night last, there fell out a great interruption, for upon information given to
Marquis Hamilton, the Earl of Argile, and the Earl of Lanericke, that there
was a design to seize upon their persons that night, they removed presently
from their Lodgings, and stayed in the City all night, and the neut morning,
the Relation being made to the Parliament, there was present order given for
the shutting of the Ports, and setting of the Guards of the Town, which
continue so still, and the same day, the Marquisse Hamilton, the Earl of
Argile, and the Earl of Lanericke, departed hence to a house of the
Marquesses, about 12. miles of, where they continue still.

Edenburg Castle October. 14. 194. Sir We are your Friends and Servants John
Hambden, Nath. Fines. N. Axmine. Phil. Stapleton.


THE REPORT OF The Discorery of a PLOT in SCOTLAND.
WHy do you seek to work such mischief! O ye mischievous Sons of Rome, do
ye not know, that God will find you out, what though you have thousands in
readiness to surprise those Noble Worthies: yet is your policy but as chafe
before the wind.

Though the wretched Papists in Scotland were agreed, in a moment, on a sudden,
to call their Forces at unawares to fall upon those Stars, which shine so
clear in our Horizon.

With powder, wildfire, men, and arms, and had by great sutlely got together,
and with great Cost, and toil provided in readiness, and thought also to have
cut off. those honorable and worthy Peers, who were entered into Covenant with
the Lord, Such is their bloody designs, no more, but a word and a blow. Nay,
more no more but a word and blood, life, liberty, and utter ruin: but
consider, ye fond Jesuits, and treacherous Papists; for it is most certain,
that God who sits in the highest Heavens, does see you, and does certainly
laugh you to scorn, and your selves shall fall into the same Pit, which you
have dug for the Righteous.

The day was appointed, wherein the blood-thirsty hoped to see the Lambs
slain before them, the Honorable Covenanters of Scotland cut off, and the
best of them blasted in the Air, and dashed to pieces; O most cruel Satyrs.
But such is the goodness of Almighty God, that the Righteous are preserved,
and the Wicked are taken in their own nets.

Two of their Agents, whom they thought were as true to them, and faithful to
their unfaithful Plots, even as their own hearts; yet were they smitten in
Conscience. What (says the one) shall I embrue my hands in the blood of those
who never thought on ill, shall Ibe confederate with traitors, and Rebels, to
slay the Innocent. And says the other, what shall I plot and bloodily seek to
take away the life of such Peers as these, whose Noble gifts deserve so much
honor, who are admired for their worth; and are become even the very wonder,
and Admiration to all Europe. Who can but love them; it were great cruelty to
wish them any harm: what would it then be, to conspire in cruelty to work
their utter Destruction? How lamentable a spectacle would it be, to see those
Stars which shine so clear in our Parliamentary Assembly, so torn and rent to
pieces with powder, and trodden under the feet of Rebels! Surely it were a most
unchristian thing to be so treacherous against those who have adventured both
life, liberty, honor, goods, Estates, and all that they have, for the
perpetual good of our Nation, and still make it the uttermost of their
endeavor to pitch upon our happy being, and to make us an happy Nation. Did we
plot against Rogues, and Vagabonds, against Tyrants, and cruel Pagans, it were
more tolerable. Nay more, were it against furious Zoilis spirits, or
merciless, uncharitable, envious Rascals, it might seduce us: shall we so
treacherously plot, to destroy such Nobles, as these: whose sweet, courteous,
affable, loving dispositions, would prick the heart, and wound the Conscience
of the fiercest Turk, or Pagan, if any spark of humanity has biding in him.
Having thus considered with themselves these two imparting, each their minds to
one another, and thereupon advising what to do.

It beseemed at first too impossible a work to discover without great
prejudice, many thoughts they had, how to wind themselves out, and little hope
of finding any course pleasant, or any resolution to give them any
satisfaction. Such were the issues of their former designs, with the Plotters
in their Evil ways, that now they were brought into a thousand straites what
to do. If they proceed, a thousand to one, but in the end they will be found
out, and dye like Traitors; or if they leave of, now they have begun, they are
yet in a great strait.

Jf we leave off, and reveal nothing; then we are in danger, that the same
Conspirators with whom we wrought, will conspire against us.

Jf we reveal part, and not entirely, we may be trapt; and so without further
delay dye Traitors.

If we reveal all, we are to answer a great matter, and our lives, Estates,
and all we have may be taken from us, and we live all our days in ignominy
and disgrace.

Now the Lord-by his all-ruling hand directed there course to take the safest
way, both for themselves, and the Kingdom.

They address themselves to the King and Parliament, there they discover what
they know, and lay open what is plotted against them, casting themselves upon
their mercies, exposing themselves rather to fall into their hands, then to go
on, and lie at Satan's mercy, or dissemblingly to lie still, between hot and
cold, continually under the burden of a troubled Conscience.

ow may we see, how graciously still the Lord is pleased to work for his
People, and to overthrow the evil Plottings, and Conspiracies, of the Papists,
and all ungodly Blood-thirsty Rebels.

The Names of those Lords that should have been cut off in this Plot of
Scotland.
The Marquise Hamilton. The Earl of Argile. The Lord Balmerido. The Lord
Lowdon. General Lesly. The Lord Lindsey the Marquisses Brother, and some
others.

The Conspirators Names.
The Earl of Craford. The Lord Aymond Lieutenant General. The Lord Carre. The
Lord Craford committed as a Prisoner.

A coppie of a LETTER brought to LONDON.
T, C. Y. W. A. Ne.
MAster Lee with much grief and sorrow has this discovery come to us, we
fear some false brethren among you at London, or in Westminster, therefore be
careful, and swear all as we ordered you, and be sure you set the right,
IHS and the true word before you therefore take the oath, and seeing the former
will not take that happy success and effect much wished by all true hearted
Catholics, yet we entreat you to put in practice your work, and according
to Sir S, H, his order, and divide your companies to those parts of the City as
you had the last direction, let the Tower be the chief aim, draw the prople
from the Tower by the first and second commotion, and we will warrant Master
B, G. will third you, for he of all, least of all will be suspected. At 9. in
the morning is the time, fall on, if we die, ye die together, but having begun,
hold on till death which will at the least will be Honorable martyrdom, Now
the better to proceed, make no noise, lest the proud City Captains prevent your
designs, for now or never, if now then ever. Therefore publish it to the true
members, the sign-perfit to all the Actors, you see we are prevented, now let
no fear make you fail in this so good a work, you all know our lives lie at
the stake, therefore now fight for life and Relgion.

Money for pay, you shall have in full, as we agreed now remember what is to
be done, make ready the 300. at M. gate, and all with Pistolls and Swords, and
for the C. W. dit with m. rn. suddenly, as we appointed, and see you fail not
as you love your lives.

In the mean time Pray, And so I rest. Your servant T.W.S, M.N. Amicus certus
in certi cernitur.

The Postscript of the letter which was sent to London being in the first
Impression left out.
WE must be revenged on this base City, we now must not desist, be valiant
for some (that is not the least) in this Kingdom is verily for us, I have
counternamed my hand least it should miscarie, therefore be careful, and when
you have read it, and showed the five Captains, take it and burn it, so least
all our events be wished

FINIS.

