THE PLOTT AND PROGRESS OF THE JRISH REBELLION.

WHEREIN Is discovered the Machavilian Policy of the Earl of Straford, Sir
George Ratcliffe and others.

Showing what Countenance that Rebellion has had against the Protestants of
England, (which does now too manifestly appear) by his Majesty's granting a
free and general Pardon to the Rebels in Ireland.

And Authorizing the Calling of a New Parliament in Ireland, according to the
Rebels desires. of late Condiscended unto at Oxford.

Printed and Publshed according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by I. N. for Henry Twyford at the three Daggers in
Fleet Street, 1644.

THE PLOTT And Progress of the Irish REBELLION.
Look into all Machavillian Policies they first pretend unto a seeming good;
as may appear in the Government of Ireland, under the Lord Lieutenant Straford,
in his first coming to regulate the sword, with an austere hand of Justice
over all, seeming to befriend, and ease the Subjects from a letigious course of
Law, and Monopolized the major part of Causes, and reduced them to an Arbitrary
Government.

2. The advantage raised unto his Majesty by affording agreater Revenue for the
customs of Ireland, then formerly was given, and so a grant of farming the
customs was afforded ('it was said to Sir George Ratclife) the world may be
satisfied for whose use it was, then presently customs were enhanced, of all
forts, as Yarne. Tallow, Hide Butter etc. and especially Tobacco from six
pence, to two shillings in the pound, by which increased an estate by any
unjust exaction from the Subject.

3. In obtaining thirty thousand Arms, Ammunition, Artillery, etc. pretending
for the security of the Kingdom, then the confiscating of the lands of
Conaught to bring them to the Crown as also diverse other Estats, in that
Kingdom, by which it might seem to his Majesty and the state of England, good
service done to the Crown, it cannot be denied but that the said Lord
Lieutenant, showed himself very severe against the Natives, neither were the
British much favored, when they came under his hand: This is but a preamble
for their intended project.

Touching matters regulated in the Church it is worth a consideration, what
innovations were crept in and in the regulating of Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, as the High Commission Court, and. it is worth observation, that
what power the Bishop of Derry, Bramble in clawing and never ending for (...)
not only his fellow Sovereign Bishops, but also Arch Bishops, to void tennants
estats, and enhancing rents nigh the double value what formerly they were, this
may conduce ^o a Romish policy, to keep the Subject as poor as may be, that
when time serves to inact farther, and impose on them (...) they please; so the
tennants as the Tribe of Jssachar, must ^eare what Levi would impose on them,
in a temporal Government, as also the high Commission Court being so prevalent
(that Hillary Term last 1643. at Dublin) in which Doctor Harding was
censured, to be degraded of his ministerial function and also of his degrees
in the College and after to be left to be proceeded against at Common Law: the
cause alleged was for maintaining, Blasphemy in the College about four
years since, alleging he should declare that 'twas injustice in God to
condemn Adam for eating the apple, another charge there was laid against him,
for causing a book to be printed in Dub lin (though he had the approbation of
the Archbishop of Dublin) entitled Irelands advocate, being none of his own
work, but sent by an acquaintance of his from England in manuscript, and he
putting it to the press, with an Epistle Dedicated to Sir John Temple, of his
own framing, in which book they pick forth treason (as they term it) the
first exception is because the Author is invective against Bishops, the other
was in an other place of the book, giving the Almighty thanks for the
several deliverances that England has had, from the plots of the Papists, as
instancing that of 88. and that of the 5. of November and that of the 4. of
January, at which of the 4. of January they storm, and infer, to be treason,
interpreting that was the day his Majesty with his attendance went to demand
the five members forth of the house of Parliament, and therefore conceived
treason, for rancking or comparing that day to the known Papisticall plotts,
and for ought as yet is known he is like to loose his life: and the books that
could be found printed were adjudged by the said high Commission Court, to be
burnt by the hand of the hangman; which accordingly was done: This is not the
bondage aimed at, but one far deeper the spiritual bondage of the soul; as
look into that Cozen-jerman to plain Popery, Superstitious and Alter-like
Service how it was enforced throughout that Kingdom of Ireland and they that
refused, how severely they were handled in the high Commission Court, it is two
well known, that diverse Ministers that refused that way were forced to quit
that Kingdom, especially some in the North.

Power being once prevalent, both in State and Church, then time served to set
forward that Diabolical plot, for the ruin and destruction of the Protestant
Religion in the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and especially Ireland,
and the first practice (as well it is observed by the author of the Book
entitled The Mystery of iniquity yet working) Scotland, (not resenting to
what the Prelates would have forced in their Church) took Arms to defend
their Religion: a Passification was ye^lded to by his Majesty, till after
invited by the Earl of Strafford, and others, to take arms De nove: he
having prepared matters sufficiently in Ireland, pretending against the Scots,
and so drew down an Army of eight thousand, (of which it is well known of
Officers, and soldiers, there were not nigh one thousand Protestants) to the
Scottish shore, where the inhabitant Scot of that Kingdom of Ireland, was by
his Commands disarmed, and Garrisons planted from Strankford to London-Derrie
along the shoare-side. Matters then beginning to come to a ripeness, the Earl
of Straford brought with him into that Kingdom of Ireland, at his last going
over, one Sir Toby Mathews an arch Jesuit, made him his Comrade, (observed)
none was more honored by him then this grand Jesuit: Now observe how easy a
matter it is for a Jesuit once understanding the intent, to state the hearts
of other Jesuits, Friars, Seminaries, etc. and then how easy a matter, it is
for them to state the hearts of all their people, and adherents, any man may
judge that knows any thing.

So then if the Lord Strafford did show himself never so great a Tyrant (as
certain he did) not only to the Natives, but also to the British; the rather
to cast a cloud before the State of England then otherwise; how easy it was
for the Jesuits, Priests, etc. to inform the Common people, that he was for
all their good, though he showed himself otherwise to them, as time has
brought it forth.

We may now evidently see, what his Plott (with others was,) as I hope to
produce such conducing Circumstances as may satisfy the hearts of all good
Christians, for others that are or may be of the same faction, I leave, for
who are blinder then they that will not see. A Minister who lived in the County
of Kildare in Ireland, had some Conference with a Popish Priest living not
far from him, who informed the Minister, of a Plott that was contrived beyond
Sea against the Protestants in Ireland, relating that the Irish intended to
rise shortly, and that he had seen Letters to that purpose from beyond sea, and
that those letters were in such a Closet, with such a Jesuit, in such a man's
house, naming every particular; this was about April 1639. The Minister
finding the Priest serious, went along with him to the Earl of Straford, to
the Castle of Dublin, waited his opportunity in the Gallerie, and at last
presented this Priest to the said Earl, expressing that he had informed him
of a Plott the Papists had against the Protestants; the Earl answered, 'twas
some busie-pated knave or other; being urged, he could say much, replied; what
could he say? the Priest being taken privately by the Earl to the further end
of the Gallerie, after half an hours space was dismissed, there was given him
by his Lordships Command, twenty pounds, a horse, and a suite of clothes to
conceal the matter, and Commanded never to appear again, which according to
his Commands was obeyed.

Time began to draw on, the Earl of Straford was to return to England, but
before he went was pleased to express, that if ever he returned to regulate
that honorable Sword again, he would leave neither root, nor branch, of the
Scottish Nation in that Kingdom. Well, over he goes to the North of England,
where he intended the stroke should be struck between the Armies, it
pleased God to prevent, beyond the Expectation of men. The Earl was taken
notice of, and according to his merit was requited; Is this all? No, as now
it is evident by the relation of some Irish Jesuits, and others, that as soon
as the stroke was struck by the Armies, between England and Scotland, (which
was to be about Michaelmasse 1640.) the Earl of Straford was to return for
Ireland, then was it, that the Irish Army being drawn down to the North as
aforesaid, was to fall upon all the Inhabitants Scots, and English thereabouts,
and so the Irish to fall upon all the English and Scots Protestants in that
Kingdom, but not to murder them in such a massacring way, they only were to
secure their persons and estates, till further order, and that they were called
to an account for their religion, and then refusing, should suffer.

Their Plott failing in this particular, the Irish waited on, as amazed, to see
the issue of their Earl (as they after termed him) 'twas May following before
his head was taken off, and after that, the Irish Army was disbanded, which
was no small vexation to the Irish (as may further appear in the Irish
Remonstrance to his Majesty, that being their sixth grievance) they must then
another way to work, their agents being in England, they waited their return
and taking their advantage of the year, after Harvest, the 23. of October
1641. began their bloody massacre, Donnagh Mac Guire, the Lord of Eneskillings
Uncle, and Hugh Mac Mahoune, the said Lords Secretary, and chief Counselor
affirmed, that they should have begun that time twelve-moneth, had the Lord of
Straford returned according to expectation; and also they expressed, that there
were the like distempers in England, and that Plott was for the three
Kingdoms, and had the Castle of Dublin been taken, they would have sent
forty thousand men to England. Being opposed by the hearer, that he could not
believe that the Earl had any hand in such a business; they affirmed he had,
and was to be Lord of Ireland, as in former ages they had; and that they would
not begin when they heard his head was off, but forbore till harvest was in,
and nights long, that they might set themselves in a posture of war. For they
well knew how easy it was in Summer, for England and Scotland to send an Army
to qualify them.

Some notice may be taken of the Earls words before he parted with his head,
speaking of a Reformation in Charracters of blood, and that there was a Cloud
impending, which since has proved too true to our woeful experience. (What
will not ambitious Machavilians attempt to make them and their posterity
great.) Most certain it is by relation of those that were about the Lord
Ambassador to Spain, that about Michaelmasse 1640. the Jesuits, Priests, and
Friars, in Spain expected to hear news of the distempers in Ireland, (the
Rebellion I mean) upon which the Lord Ambassador sent to the Court in
England, to know the certainty, return was made all well and quiet, yet the
said Lord Ambassador stayed in Spain till about Michaelmasse 1641. all that
whole year, the Jesuits, Priests, etc. expected daily to hear of disturbance
in Ireland: Each particular seriously considered and compared one with another,
I believe may satisfy any reasonable man, that the said Earl must needs have
a hand in the Plott of Ireland; Sir George Ratclife may be so far taken
notice of, that he stormed very much against the Church warden of Saint Warbres
Parish in Dublin; for presenting a Masse-house that was newly erected within
four or five houses of the Castle gate, in which Mass was frequently said,
and he Commanded the presentment to be cast forth of the Court, and never could
further endure the said Churchwarden. There is no wonder in this, for all men
that knew him, might quickly discern his inclination to that Idolatrous,
Babilonian whore.

Now, since this massacring act it has been frequently spoken by the Rebels,
that what they did was by Commission, which still they justify. Let all
Christians stand here amazed to behold the cessation of Arms to be granted to
such Butcherly Hell Hounds, who have wallowed and embrewed their hands in the
destruction of at least two hundred thousand Protestants, of men, women, and
children, which will be particularly proved if occasion be offered. Yet it is
reported that there is Brian mac Neale, the Ferry-mans son of Strangford in
Ireland, who has assumed the name of O Neale, one of those that at first
should have surprised the Castle of Dublin, and who is now made Knight and
Barronet, called Sir Brian O Neale, that does justify to his Majesty, that
there was not above ten persons destroyed in all Vlster. Again, their
Remonstrance set forth, entitled, A Remonstrance of Grievances presented to
his most Excellent Majesty in the behalf of the Catholics of Ireland)
wherein the Rebels do declare, and turn the whole Rebellion on the
Protestants, and stand on their own justification that what Massacries were
committed were done by the English. Are not these a people to be had in high
estimation, committing such Acts as they did to stand out in their own
justification and for any thing I can see as yet like to carry it so. How
prevalent the Irish faction is about the Court, is sufficiently app^rent,
little question their is to be made, of there obtaining a sudden peace.

There is one thing to be taken notice of that when the Lord of Ormond marched
forth this last Summer 1643. with four thousand horse, and foot, kept the
randevous at Curr in Kildare, when they might have done good execution against
the Enemy were kept above a fortnight in the field and Starved above three
hundred of them returned (though they saw the enemies Colors flying in the
field) taking only one poor old Castle not worth a consideration, then after
that, they were disperced by Companies (some three thousand of them) into small
Garrisons in the pall, to secure old Castles; a week before the Cessation was
concluded the Irish forces both of Linster Connaught, and Vlster, (they well
knowing when to conclude the Cessation) joined together and fell on the said
small Garrisons, and destroyed many, and took diverse prisoners, possessed
themselves of a great part of Mead which still they enjoy. Oh let all
Protestants either now open their eyes, or else resolve to undergo the yoke
that they are not, or will not be willing to bear, when it will be to late for
them, then to wish I had done this or that etc. May we not now observe in what
a Cloud still we are under, though fair shaddows are cast before our eyes; As
that the new Lord Lieutenant Marquess of Ormond, has commanded that no Papist
shall be either of his retinnue, or of his Companies, in his regiment and
Guard, when it may be well observed how forward he is to give way to Papists to
be transported into England, to serve against the Protestants, as also it is
worth a consideration (that since the Lord of Stratfords time, and the time
that James the Pedlar song down derry) the second or Alter-like Service, has
been omitted at Christ-Church in Dublin in the Lord Justices time, yet now
newly revived, since the Marquess of Ormond received the sword, how near
still they presume to declare themselves, not what they would be at, that
bewitched drunken cup of fornication; let notice be taken likewise of the
second Ratclife alias Sir Morris Eustace the chief Counselor of that
Kingdom, that in some measure declared himself, (one may see daylight at a
little hole) there was one that had an estate in houses in Dublin, and set them
to tennant, the Landlord that set them, has been in Rebellion at this time
until the Cessation of arms, then repaired to Dublin, demanded his rents,
from the tennant and arrerages, for two years past, the tennant answered, that
it had been less charge to him to have paid his rent, then to have borne that
cease and press, and billiting of Soldiers as he did, and so declared he was
unable to pay his rent, the Landlord threatened to destraine, for he observed
there was household stuff left that would discharge the rent and arrerages,
the tennant being thus threatened, desired the oppinion of Sir Morris Eustace,
and informed him his case, who declared that he was bound to pay his rent,
otherwise by the Law of the Land he might be distrained on.

This is a hard case that Rebels shall have their rents paid them, and that
many hundreds of us Protestants ruined (with their wives and children) in their
estates by the Rebels, and are daily begging and starving in Dublin, and other
parts of that Kingdom (besides those that are forced to fly for succor into
other Kingdoms, and no reparation can be thought of, for the keeping them
alive, out of their own estates, enjoyed now by the Rebels; whilst our army
was on foot (God so blessed our poor handful of men) that still they had the
better of the enemy, and spoil was gained to relieve them and others, now we
all suffer, and that justly for dispairing of Gods providence to us; let the
authors of the Cessation look to it; it is but in us to observe, and morn, to
see that a Cessation of arms must be yielded unto such Antichristian infernal
Locusts as they are, and no understanding for the Protestant reformed Religion,
can be hearkened unto in England, our own men brought from Ireland to be made
instruments against our selves; Is not this the depth of a Machavillian
mystery, we may observe the providence of the Almighty on the officers and
Soldiers, (that did do gallant Service against the Irish Rebels) which were
sent into England how soon it pleased the Lord to declare, he was not well
pleased with theit coming showing his hand on them at Nantwitch.

Now fair oppertunity may the Irish have to play their after gain, as they
have sufficiently envited and set forth in print from Waterford. Entitled,
Admonissions by the supreme Counsel of the confederate Catholics of Ireland:
To all his Majesty's faithful, loyal Subjects of the three Kingdoms, of
England, Ireland, and Scotland, against a solemn League and Covenant framed by
the Malignant party, in the Parliament of England; as also a Declaration of the
English Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament wherein they ensite, not only
their own Nation to stand to their Arms offensive and Defensive, but envite
them to a timely and a fit prevention; as also envite all Romish Catholic
Kings, to take notice how far they are engaged in it; as much as if they should
say to their Countrymen, play your after game, take a fit time to cut all the
rest of the Protestants throats and to envite other Princes to fall upon the
Massacring of all the Protestants, within their verdge.

Thus we find how active they are at the pen let us look a little further, and
conclude what their intentions are, as does evedently appear by their
diligence, in slacking no time to set forward their intended project, how busy
they (the Irish) have been in procuring Arms and Ammunition since the
Cessation. Sir Pierce Crosbie, who about the time of Concluding the Cessation,
brought over with him to Waterford, (for the Rebels) five thousand Arms and
Ammunition.

Again, the Popes Nuntio (who is there frequent with them (brought over
Treasure to maintain the war, as is said fifty thousand pounds.

And now lastly, about Candlemas there landed two Agents from Foreign parts,
who brought over with them to Waterford store both of Arms and Ammunition, and
much more is brought daily, though we cannot discover every particular; Does
not this demonstrate unto us their intent, and how cautious they were in the
concluding of the Cessation (that proviso) to have liberty to buy Arms, and
Ammunition where they pleased, either in that Kingdom, or from Foreign
parts, how frequent they are at Dublin, in buying Arms from the Cutlers at
what rate soever, without ay interruption, that a good Sword no Cutler can
keep by him, the Irish Gentry buy them so fast, and give any rates for them;
What advantage is this against us, they arming themselves, and we disarming our
selves, by sending our men and Arms, and Artillery out of that Kingdom to
maintain war our against our selves, how insolent the Irish Nobility and
Gentry, do now show themselves against our English Nobility and Gentry at
Dublin, it is apparent, as in the Case between the young Lord Moore. and the
Lord Tate, as also in the Case between Sir Thomas Armstrong, and Captain
Flower, on one part Protestants; and Cornet Mac Gragh and Routh Papists, of the
other part, the Papists taking opportunity in the streets of Dublin to affront
our Protestants, Lords and Gentry; they do well to demonstrate unto us, that
when their second Plott is to be set in agitation, may in Dublin begin upon
such like Quarrels in the streets, thereby to take occasion for the second
cutting of throats, and once being past to flourish it over, and say 'twas some
drunken quarrel or other, for at this instant, Dublin may take it self, the
major part being Irish now in it.

To Conclude, now the Scottish Army are resolved to depart from the North of
Ireland, as already appears, three Regiments are wafted over into Scotland,
(which makes still for the Irish) and to bring to a period their Jesuiticall
Plott, so as the Irish may the better perform their offer to send away ten
thousand of their chief Soldiers, under the Command of experienced
Commanders, to keep the Protestants in Arms in other Kingdoms, either in
England or Scotland; Oh! that we might in some measure use the Policies of the
Ancient Romans, or of late Queen Elizabeth of famous Memory did, who when the
Spaniards strove to envade England, did afford some aid unto the Hollander to
keep the Spaniards on work at home, by which she preserved her Kingdoms
(under Gods Providence) from being a Seat of war: So if timely prevented by
England and Scotland, to keep the war afoote in Ireland, to prevent further
mischief, (which is like to ensue, if the Irish break forth into other
Kingdoms) and so turn the Sword into their own bosoms: which that we may,
the Lord of Hosts enable us to do.

Here now it is manifest that the Irish have obtained not only their first
request desired in their Remonstrance, which was to have one placed in chief
Authority, of Honor and Fortune, approved by His Majesty, and acceptable to
the Rebels, (which proves to be the Marquess of Ormond) but also the other
to have a free Parliament held there, and and an Act of oblivion to be made for
their Rebellion; and Poynings Act to be repealed: and there the Rebels to hold
their Parliament; which is reported His Majesty has yielded unto, by granting
Pardon to the Irish Rebels. Lately, at Oxford Confirmed under the Great Seal
of England, for Pardoning all Murders and Robberies whatsoever, and authorizing
a new Parliament to be called there according to the Rebels desires, so that
now we must expect they will perform their promise to his Majesty in sending
ten thousand men and Arms into England; Yet we know there is a King of Kings,
that can turn the wisdom of the wise into foolishness.

Published according to Order.

FINIS.
A POSTSCRIPT TO THE READER.
CHristian Reader be pleased in this trackt to consider the depth of an
adversary, that aims at the destruction of the true Protestant Religion, had
the Plott held according to their jesuiticall intent, by this time there would
have been few left, to observe for future, their infernal projects, the
Almighty who preserved Joseph from the malicious intent of his brethren (to be
under him) the instrument to preserve them from calamity; is the same who will
deliver them that trust in him, from that which might prove worse, then the
Egyptian Bondage, which every true Christian is bound to endeavor a
prevention, and to take no exceptions, though they are envited by him that has
been and is a sufferer (for Christ's cause) and his Countries sake.

Tho: Crant.


