A GREAT FIGHT IN WALES Between Collonell Horton and Collonell Powel: AND The
number of those that are slain and taken Prisoners: With the names of the
Chief.

ALSO The manner of that, and other Fights, between both ARMIES.

WITH The taking of Brecknock. And 10 considerable Officers and diverse Prisoners

May 3. 1648. Imprimatur Gil. Mabbot.

Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson in Smithfield, near the Queens-head
Tavern. 1648.

The Copy of a LETTER FROM WALES Concerning The fight between Colonel Hortons
Forces, and the WELSH. And several passages of both Armies.
Right Honorable,
I Am sorry I have occasion to write such red Letters, we looked for peace,
but behold fresh Alarmes.

Collonell Horton since his first coming hither, has deported himself well,
(according to his strength, for he is very ill.)

There were diverse Gentlemen of the county, Mr. Games and others had drawn in
some to Garrison this Town for the King, who do daily increase their strength,
it is reported that they are above five thousand, and most armed. And the
Malignant Gentlemen wear Blew Ribbands in their hats, with this Motto:

I long to see His Majesty. CR


Collonell Horton sent a party hither, who took this place, and ten Gentlemen
of the County (who should have been chief Officers here) prisoners with diverse
others.

From hence he marched toward Carm^rthen, where Colonel Powel then was
drawing up his Army, consisting of English, Scots Irish, but most Welsh, and
many are come from London to them. They declare, For GOD, and King CHARLES.

There was a Messenger taken with letters to Colonel Horton by the Welsh, and
being tried by a Council of War many would have had him hanged; But one of
them stepped up and said, that it would be a bad example, and so he was only
kept prisoner until he purchased his liberty.

Colonel Powel, upon the advance of Colonel Horton took an a Alarm, and
placed several parties, to keep some passes, whilst he retreated with his
whole Army, And diverse Bridges were broken down in several places to stop the
English from coming upon them.

Colonel Horton beat up some quarters, and took some straglers, and faced the
whole Army diverse days.

But the Welsh were gotten upon the top of a large Hill, to which they came:
The English would have drawn them down, but they would not, but stood to their
ground though they were faced in several places.

Colonel Horton advised with his Officers whether he should march up the Hill to
force them to engage, but it was not thought fit to do so, because it would
give too much advantage.

Then the English wheeld off, supposing that that might allure them to fall
upon the rear, and so get them to engage, But still the Welsh kept the Hill,
and would not come down.

Then Colonel Horton sent Colonel Fleming with a party of Horse and Dragoones
to gain a pass on the other side of the Army, some seven miles from his own
Quarters.

The party that marched with him on his design, were two Companies of
Dragoones and one Troop of Horse.

As soon as ere the English approached, the Welsh quit the pass, and
retreated to their Army, and gave them an Alarm on that side.

Then Collonell Powell sent out a forlorn hope, commanded by Major Roach to
oppose Collonell Fleming, both parties met and engaged, and the fight was but
short, but very sharp, and diverse of the Welsh was wounded, and some slain,
And the whole Forlorn Hope totally routed, which was pursued very far into
the welsh quarters, And no reserve or releife here Collonell Fleming who had
then taken many prisoners.

Then Collonell Butler was sent up from Colonel Powell with a reserve to the
Welsh, who Ambuscado'd the way, and whilst the English were in pursuit, rise
upon them, and so over-powred them, that they were al forced to fly and shift
for themselves, leaving most of their Horses behind them.

Yet diverse of the Welsh were slain, and many wounded; And of the English
there were four killed, And Captain Molineux shot through the thigh.

Colonel Fleming with 119 more got into a Church which they kept against them
a while, but after a parley agreed to surrender upon quarter of their lives. But
gallant, valiant Collonell Fleming is slain, by an unhappy accident with a
Pistol in his own hand.

Collonell Horton has sent a Drummer to Collonell Powell, for exchange of
prisoners, for he has about 50 prisoners (and some very considerable ones)
besides those that were taken before he came into these parts, and he endeavors
daily to give them battle.

They give out in the Welsh quarters; that the King is to come to London; That
Bishops are established, and the Book of Common Prayer set up again, in all
parts about London. And that the City of London have cut off thousands of the
Army, and other such like fictions they spread abroad, to animate the people to
comply with them.

Here is a great desire that some eminent Commander would come with additionall
strength, because Collonell Horton has his health very ill.

Brecknock, April 29. 1648
FINIS,

