THINGS Now-a-doing: OR, THE CHVRCHES TRAVAIL Of the Child of Reformation
now-a-bearing. IN A SERMON Preached before the Honorable House of Commons, at
their solemn Fast, July 31. 1644.

By Stanley Gower, sometimes Rector of Brompton-Brian in the County of
Hereford, now Preacher of Gods Word at Martins Ludgate, London: And one of the
Reverend Assembly of Divines.

MATTHEW. 24. 21, 23, 24, 25. V. 21. Then shall be great tribulation, such as was
not since the beginning of the world to this time, no nor ever shall be. V. 23.
Then if any shall say to you, Lo, here is Christ, or there: believe it not. V.
24. For there shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, etc. V. 25. Behold
I have told you before. Published by Order of the said House. LONDON, Printed
by G. M. for Philemon Stephens at the sign of the Golden-Lyon in Paul's
Churchyard, 1644.

TO THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS Now assembled in PARLIAMENT.
Right Honorable;
DAniels Prophecy concerns the Jews Dan. 1^. 1. Thy people.
in Hypothesi, the whole Church of God in Thesi, for no Scripture is of private
interpretation, says 2 Pet. 1. 20. 1 Cor. 10. 11. (...).
S. Peter, and These things happened to them as ensamples, says S. Paul.

To them it speaks two things;

1. Their Calamities under the four great Monarchies now almost at an end.

2. Their Consolation afterward, and now approaching.

To us it speaks two things more;

1. Our Hope, living in days of trouble, but withal, of delivery; it is not a
Tympany, but Dan. 1^. 1.
a Child, that the Churches of the Saints go withal, if they stick long in
the place of birth, it Hose. 1^* (...)
is because they are foolish; but at length a safe deliverance is promised, the
man-child of Reformation shall be borne, and Heaven and earth shall cry grace
grace unto it. Zech. 4. 7.


2. Our Help, ( for hope deferred makes the Prove. 1^. 12.
heart sick,) in this book two ways it is afforded.

First, From the History of it, See here how the Church, though it be a little
and but a despised flock, yet is it of that esteem with God, that for the
Churches sake he wheels about all the Monarchies of the world; the Persian
shall dash in pieces the Dan. 2. and 7.
Babylonian, the Greeks the Persian, the Romans the Grecian, and the God of
Heaven the Roman Empire and them all, and set up the Kingdom of Jesus Christ,
that stone cut cut without hands, which shall become a great mountain and fill
the whole earth.

Secondly, From the Prophecy of it, not Humane, but Divine, that sacred
Calendar, and great Almanac of Prophecy: the four Kingdoms of Daniel, are
not only, an Historical, but a Prophetical Chronology of times, measured
from the beginning of the Jews captivity till all the Kingdoms of the world
should become the Kingdom of Rev. 11. 15.
our Lord and his Christ; a course of time, during which, the Church and Nation
of the Jews should carry the veil upon their hearts, but afterward should
turn to God, and be raised up from the death of sin; are turn so strange, a
delivery so Dan. 12. 2. Romans 11. 15.
great, that it is resembled to a resurrection from the grave.

To this great Calendar of times the Apostles in the new Testament relate, when
they call the times of the fourth Kingdom, the last times, and the latter
times of that Kingdom, the latter times; (viz.) the latter part of that last
Kingdom (as says a learned Interpreter:) Go we then to this Mr Mede Apost.
of latter times, p. 64, 65, 66.
Prophetical Calendar, we have the Roman Monarchy almost at an end, and
concerning the Jews, ( whose coming in succeeds their going out) two things
foretold.

The final end of the Turkish Empire ( as learned 1.
men conceive) the only obstacle to those Kings of M. Brightman, and many
others. Rev. 16. 12.
the East as the Jews are called, and the last defense of the Beast; whose
beginning, was about the year 1300. and the addition of 350. (which is the
time, Dan. 12. 7. M. Brightman, in locum.
times, half a time) does bring that Turkish tyranny to an end, in the year
1650.

The beginning of their gracious delivery, this 2.
shall be after a twofold epoche.

1. The taking away of the daily sacrifice, Dan. 12. 11.
which was wickedly done by Antiochus, long before, but de jure by our Lord
Jesus Christ his death, destroying Dan. 8. 10. 11, 24. 25.
all other sacrifices by the sacrifice of himself, the fullness of all their
shadows, and defacto by Titus Joseph Antiq.
Vespasian, who took away the place of sacrificing, when he destroyed the
Temple.

2. The setting up of the abomination of desolation, ( or which makes
desolate) this was wickedly attempted by the Jews in the days of Julian the
Apostate; he in contempt of Christ gave license to the Jews to build their
Temple, and renew their Jewish worship, hereupon they took up every Tripart.
Hist.
stone of the old foundation, but before they laid any new one, they were
dispersed by a special hand of God. A fearful earthquake in the night
destroyed all their work^, a sudden fire consumed all their tools, and
themselves so dispersed that from that time the Jewish superstitions did for
ever cease. Cyril Bishop of Jerusalem, who admonished them of this Prophecy of
Daniel, but after no disswasion could prevail, he openly professed, that now
the time was come which our Lord foretold, that there should not be left one
stone upon another. M^t. 24. 2.


Now understand we this to be the epoche, Iulians reign fell out in the year
360. to which add 1290. they make up 1650. the very time formerly designed for
the finishing of the Jews dispersion.

These things being so, I knew not (Right Honorable) a Text speaking more to
You, Us, Our times,
then what I preached on, and by your Authority have exposed now to more
public view.

To you it speaks by way of Caution, that no 1.
spot, nor blot, nor shrinking back be found amongst you, that are repairers of
our breaches, and restorers of paths to dwell in.

To us it speaks by way of Crisis, it discovers the 2.
temper of the sick body of both Church and State under you our great and
(under God) only Physician, your physic stirs the humors; makes some better,
some worse.

To our times it speaks by way of comfort, they 3.
are troublesome, but trying times, and after trial, there shall be delivery
to those that are purified, made white, and tried, but destruction to those
that do and will do wickedly, true wisdom and understanding is hid from
them, and revealed to the godly wise. Let then a bloody crew fight on, and fill
up their measure, and let a foolish people refuse to assist you as they ought,
the Lord himself has said the word, to you as to Cyrus. He is my shepherd,
and Isa. 44. 28.
shall perform all my pleasure, even saying to Jerusalem, Thou shall be built,
and of the Temple, Thy foundation shall be laid: and to them, the Lord will
throw down his hail upon them that Rev. 16.
stand against Reformation, and rend their hearts with indignation and
blasphemy; he will go an end with his work, though they swear and storm,
till he have utterly consumed them from the face of the earth. Perfect is the
work of God, and (as the Lord Deuteronomy. 32. 4.
spoke concerning Eli) when he begins, he will also 1 Samuel 3. 12.
make an end.

Thus craving your pardon, and (which is more) your acceptance, as you have my
faith, so shall you have my prayers, that what Caesar once said of Rome, He
found it brick, but left it marble, Romam latericiam inveni, marmorea^ relinquo.
may much more Honorably be said of you, you found our Church and State
Atheistical, Prelaticall, you leave the beams of our house Cedar, Cant. 1.
17. Plin. l. 43. c. 5 and 16. c. 41.
and our galleries fur; famous for durablenesse, acceptable for sweetness;
by laying in the walls of the Church such solid and eternal truths of God as
may hold out instead of Socinianisme, Arminianisme, and many more; and by
setting up such Worship, and Discipline, and Government, as may keep off wind
and weather, that Gods people may walk hand in hand together, as in galleries
of fur.

Your Honors, both at the throne of grace, and in the work of Christ* STANLEY
GOWER*

Things Now-a-doing.
DAN. 12. 10. Many shall be purified and made white, and tried; but the wicked
shall do wickedly; and none of the wicked shall understand, but the wise shall
understand. YOu heard in the morning (Right Honorable Coherence showing.
and the rest dearly beloved in the Lord Jesus) God by Jeremy counselling to
amend your ways and your doings; Hear Mr R^th^a^d, on Ier. 7. 3.
now God promising by Daniel that many shall be amended, and this promise
illustrated by the contrary, but the wicked shall do wickedly: be as attentive
I beseech you to God promising, as unto God persuading.

These words stand in the nature of a Parenthesis, the verses before and after,
cohere well enough without them; the former, as Daniels question, v. 8. what
shall be the end of these things? the latter, as the Angels answer thereunto.
v. 11. From the time that the daily sacrifice shall be taken away, and the
abomination that makes desolate set up, there shall be a thousand two hundred,
and ninety days. My text comes in between, as a prophetical prognostic of
that time Daniel would so feign know, ver. 8. and the Angel somewhat obscurely
calculates, ver. 11. Some copies insert the word [ Interim,] and read,
Complures interim; mean time many, etc. which show the verse to be dependent:
and indeed we must consider a little, the time, and scope, ere we can bring
home the prophecy, and I shall give you both very briefly.

The Time foretold, is, the call of the Jews, [thy people] 1.
says ver. 1. for Daniel was a Jew, not second son to The Time.
David by Abigail, of whom you read long before, but 1 Chronicles 3. 1. ^^^ 1. 6.
(...), and c. Joseph ^ntiq* l. 10. c. 11. 2 Samuel 12. 24, 25.
a Prophet of the Princely tribe of Judah, and (if we may credit * Josephus) of
the blood Royal also. He is elsewhere spoken of as a very excellent man, but
we must here look upon him as withal, penman of the Holy Ghost, and that of
a very choice piece, the Jewish story. Solomon beloved of God, (called
therefore Iedidia^) son of David King of Israel, writes the Churches
Epithalamia, and Lovesongs: S. John, the blessed Evangelist, beloved Disciple,
and amongst the 12. Apostles, parallel to Joseph amongst the 12. Patriarchs; as
Evangelist writes his Gospel, as Apostle, his Epistles, and as Prophet, his
Revelation to the Churches. And this our Daniel, eminent with men, whose Ez^k.
8. 3. Ez^k. 14. 14, 16, 18, 20, D^n. 10. 11.
wisdom grew into a proverb: -- Thou art wiser then Daniel:) powerful for
men, and greatly beloved of God, writes the history of the Jewish Church (then
the only people of God, and as yet beloved for their fathers sa^e) in the Romans
11. 28.
six first Chapters, and their prophecy in the six latter M Brigh^man on Dan.
Willet. on Dan and others.
Chapters, as some have made the distribution of this Book: or (as others,)
their troubles under the four great Monarchies, to this twelfth Chapter; and
their deliverance under the fifth perpetual Monarchy which the stone cut out
without hands shall set up (as Christ is called in this book) in this twelfth
Chapter. King Solomon admires, the rise of the Gentile Church in Cant. 3. 6.
his song* and admires after that, the rise of another Church, which he calls a
Shulamite, alluding to Shalom, Cant. 6. 10. and c.
the ancient name of Jerusalem, the mother City of the Jews, looking forth as
the morning, because that Church shall rise out of the Eastern Countries; Rev.
16. 12.
that her nut should be cracked, the shell which was over her kernel, the veil
which was over her heart should be taken away, and that she should be as a
flourishing Vine and budding Pomgranate, bringing forth wholesome fruit to
refresh God and man, is matter of admiration, and no less indeed than a
resurrection from the dead, to which it is resembled in this Chapter, and
elsewhere. S. Paul would not have Romans 11. 15. Romans 11. 25.
us ignorant of this mystery: That we might not be so, we have a twofold
assurance of it in this book; One, by dream of Nebuchadnezzar, as we see at
large in the second Chapter: The other by vision of Daniel himself, in the
seventh Chapter: of both which I may say as Joseph of Pharaohs two dreams, It
is doubled Genesis 41. 32.
twi^e, because the thing is established by God, and God will shortly bring it
to pass* How soon, let him that has understanding count from the verse
following, where there are two (...)s, 1. From the taking away of the daily
sacrifices; that was when Jerusalem was destroyed, the place of sacrificing; 2.
From the setting up of the abomination of desolation; which is supposed by good
Authors, to be in the days of Julian the Apostate, ^360. years after Christ,
or thereabouts* Cyrill of Jerusalem observing how they had taken up Socrat
Scholast Ecclesiast. Hist. l. 3. c. 17.
every stone of the old foundation, and were dispersed ere they laid a new one
as they had thought, said, the words of our Savior, ( There shall not be left
a stone upon a stone,) was then fulfilled: and if so, then the time comes out
in the year 1650. as appears to any that shall add 1290. to 360. Then shall
the Turkish power be broken also, as appears from another account, ver. 7. and
then shall Hallelujahs ring for the marriage of the bride, the Lambs wife; and
before these things come to pass, Rome shall be destroyed, whose last scene is
now acting, and her ruin at hand, and the things that shall come upon her make
have. This is the Time, and it is a desirable Time.

The scope now of Daniel in this Chapter, is to 2.
comfort the hearts of Gods people, against the troubles, The Scope.
and trials of that time, by giving them two prognostics of this great
deliverance. ( viz.)

The Troubles, ver. 1. of that Time. The Trials, ver. 10. of that Time.
The Troubles of that time shall be such, as never was since there was a Nation
even to that same time, etc.

The Trials of that time shall be such, as makes godly men better, wicked men
worse: For so says my text* Many shall be purified, made white, tried, but the
wicked shall do wickedly, etc.

And now (Right Honorable) if a word fitly spoken, Prove. 2^. 11.
be as apples of gold, with pictures of silver, then 3.
these words beg your acceptance, as being, not only The Accommodation.
profitable (for so they are at all times, being the words of the Holy Ghost)
but also seasonable, for so they are at this time, they are our very Crisis.

1. The Times alike; purifying, whitening, trying times. 2. The Persons alike;
some wicked, some wise. 3. The Properties alike; they act accordingly, none of
the wicked understand, but the wise do understand;
So that I may say of my text, as our Savior Christ did of his, taken out of
another Prophet, This day is Luke 4. 21.
this Scripture fulfilled in your ears. We read, that the same day that the
Lord thundered and rained, the people 1 Samuel 12. 18.
greatly feared the Lord.

This day God thunders many ways, and in my text he also lightens, God grant
the effect may be answerable;

So much for the Time. Scope.


I come now to the text: Many shall be purified, etc. Text showing.
It is prophetical; and in such, we consider The Credit of the Prophet. The
parts. viz.
Prophecy it self.


The Credit of the Prophet, is not only this, that he 1.
was an excellent man (as we have showed) but that he The Prophet
was also the Holy Ghosts penman. Wicked Porphyry, enemy to Christian
Religion, makes him little better than an impostor, and affirms this book was
an History, writ by some prophetick-wise, that lived in or after the days of
Antiochus Epiphanes; but the Septrogint have translated this book into Greek,
100. years before that Antiochus* and Josephus tells, how Joseph Antiq. lib.
11. cap. ^.
Iaddus an High Priest, showed. Alexander the Great, that Prophecy in this
book, which foretold of a King of Graecia that should destroy the Persian
Monarchy, in confidence whereof Alexander proceeded to that war; and this was
at least 60. years before Antiochus, as Chronologers compute: Some Robbins
Vide Theodor. presat in Dan* Item Polan. in prolegom.
dream, that the book was writ by the wisemen of the great Synagogue, who
were in the time of Ezra: but how came it then that Daniel is so often named in
the book, and that the Title of the book in Hebrew, is, The book of Daniel?
But both the one, (...)
and the other are confuted by our Savior Christ, which determines it both to
Daniel, and that he was Matthew. 24. 15.
a Prophet, and bids us (by the way) when we read, consider, the words of
Daniel the Prophet, in the verse next following my text. And therefore this
book is not to be placed amongst those Scriptures which they call Holy
writings, but amongst those they call Prophets.

The Prophecy it self of these words, is (you see) 2.
of great siding, and each side acting accordingly, The Prophecy.
something before the time of the Jews conversion;

In which consider two different Subjects, Wicked. Wise.
Predicates.


Different in Effects, Many shall be purified, made white, tried, but the
wicked shall do wickedly. Degree, None of the wicked shall understand; but the
wise shall understand.


Now if the least filing of gold is precious, then of Truth; yet shall I but
name some severals, and insist only (according to my time and your patience)
upon one Proposition. I might observe then, 3.


1. Godly men are wise, and wicked men are souls. The Points. Raised but not
prosecuted.


This appears from the opposition of subjects. Wicked. Wise.


It should be either Wicked. Godly.
or Foolish. Wise.


By rendering therefore as opposite to wicked, wise; it shows that wicked are
not wise; and by tearming those that are not wicked, wise; it imports, that the
wise are not the wicked, but the godly* indeed the word used for wise, is
applied to godly Teachers, ver, 2. but when it is opposed (as here) to wicked,
it (...)
signifies, not teachers only, but others too. Receive it therefore for a
divine maxim (I pray you) That piety is the best policy, and godly men are
in the Holy Ghosts judgment the wisest men.

2. There are many godly wise.

If many shall be purifide, made white, and tried, then (God be thanked, and
the Lord increase the number of them) there are many such: and not only many,
(...)
but many great men too; the word in the Original signifies both many, and
great; many in number, and great in condition; as when it is said; Many are the
troubles of the righteous: that is to say, many in number, great in nature: It
is indeed rare to have great men good, a little goodness stands for a great
sum amongst great men: but yet it is no singular thing, there are many such:
be not ashamed therefore, you that are great, to be, and to be thought to be,
godly.

3. Best may mend, and shall be mended.

They shall be purifide, made white, and tried, that their dross may be
purged: The Lord has his ^laile to thresh out their chafe, his water and soap
to make them white, and his fire to melt and try them; and therefore they are
proud, not perfect, that think they have Phil. 3. 1^*
sound an Hercules pillar to write a ne plus ultra upon.

4. Wicked men do, and shall do wickedly.

5. The reason why they do so, is, because none of the wicked shall understand.

6. The godly wise shall understand when none of the wicked shall.

Now none of these severals I can insist upon, what of them my time and your
patience will permit me to speak of, I shall graspe in this one Proposition,
that contains the sum of the verse.

That the same times, and troubles in them, which make Doctrine. The maine
Doctrine handled. Showing.
godly wise men better, make wicked men worse.

And I will not speak so much of Times, which comes in more properly in the
verse following; as of troubles in those times, these are hinted in the words,
purified, made white, and tried.

My method for the doctrinall part, shall be to show,

1. What tribulations they are by which God does purify, make white, and try
his people. 2. How they are by these purified, made white, and tried. 3. What
is the reason that they have such different effects upon the godly, and the
wicked.
For the first: They are not all of one sort, nor size. 1.
Here there are three sorts, lighter sprincklings, in allusion What ^^^ulations.
to Jewish purifyings; heavier rubbings, in allusion to Jewish cleansings; and
sharpest trials, in allusion to Jewish trials. The Apostle elsewhere reduces
them to two: Inward fightings, outward fears: but it 2 Cor. 7. 5.
matters not so much what they are, as whereto they serve, for they are but a
means to an end, their bettering; Tantum sumendum quantum ad finem prodest.
and therefore as we say of means, so much as will serve; so does the Lord
proportion the tribulation to the good of his people, so much and no more, as
will serve to purify, m^ke white, ^^^ try them.

For the second; I will show you, how the Lord by these, does 2.


1. Purify. How they pu^^fie, make white and try.
2. Make White. 3. Try them.
The Jews had their purification, so have Christians.

There is Christ's Blood, Heb. 9. 14. Word, Ioh. 15. 3. Spirit, Mat. 3.

But I am no^ speaking of these, which do directly, and properly tend thereto;
but of afflictions, which by accident serve to that end: as you may see, Isa.
4. 4. By these now Gods people are purified 2. ways.

First, From sin committed, both original sin, and 1. They purify ^ro^ sin
committed. Pro. 22. ^5.
actual; For original* Solomon tells us, Folly is bound up in the heart, and
the rod of correction drives it away: And for actual, Isaiah shows, that by
correction, the iniquity of Jacob shall be purged, and this is all the fruit,
Isa* 27. 9.
to take away his sin:

Secondly, From sin to be committed. I mean 2. From sin to be committed.
to prevent your sinning for time to come: Tribulations are not only medicines,
but also antidotes: God in this does as wise Statesmen, when they see a man
busying himself much with matters of state at home, prying into things
concern him not, they send such into the wars abroad: so does God, send
tribulations to exercise his people, and keep them pure, least they fall
soul: thus did he with S. Paul, he had his thorn, least he should be exalted,
etc. and thus they are 2 Cor. 12. ^.
purified both in heart and lift, to cu^e sin past, and prevent sin to come.

Again, by these they are made white; so Dan. 11. 2. They make white.
35. And some of them of understanding shall fall to try them, and to purge,
and to make them white, even to the time of the end.

It is not enough to be pure, which renders a man holy to God, but to be bright
and white before men: Inward purity makes no great show before men unless
whiteness and unspottednesse do accompany it; now there are two ways that
God will have his people white, as well as pure at this time.

First, From their own -- other men's sins. You ^. From their own other men's
sins.
(Right Honorable) have confessed justly, that the guilt of Idolatry and blood
lay upon our forefathers; I may say of these, as of the iniquity of P^or, we
are not Josh ^2 17. ^ King. 23. 26.
cleansed from it to this day. Manassehs sins lay heavy upon the Land in good
Iosiahs days; God will have our Land made white from these.

Secondly, From their own-suspected sins. Two 2. From their own suspected
sins.
sins the enemies of our peace suspect in you and falsely charge upon you,
(give me leave to speak plainly) Disloyalty to our Sovereign, from which your
Declarations, and proceedings may acquit you; K. Declar^t. Aug* 12. 1642.
and Sacrilege against our God, from which the world expects how you will
acquit your selves; certainly when God has purified you, he will make you
white, as he did David against S^ul, even by his 1 Samuel ^4. 17. Genesis 4^. 38.
own confession; and Joseph against his Mistress: nay as he has done you
already in many things, and what remains you have in promise, for the cause is
before the Lord, who will give a perfect lot: He has said, Commit thy way
unto the Lord, trust also in Psalm. 37. 6.
him, and he shall bring it to pass. And he shall bring forth thy
righteousness as the light, and thy judgment as the noone day. Thus the Lord
will by tribulation, both purify them in heart and life, and whiten them from
the spot of other men's sins, and their own suspected sins.

Thirdly, By these, both times and troubles, they 3. They try their
are tried: The Jews had not only their sprincklings and washings, but also
their water of jealousy, and other means by which they were tried; so has
God his troubles, not only to rid his people of sin, and to render them
spotless before men, but also to try them; Gods trials are of two sorts, some
for humiliation, then he leaves them to know all that is in their heart, as he
did Hezekiah: others for confirmation, 2 Chro. ^2. 31. Genesis 22. 1.
then he assists them, as he did Abraham. By these tribulations God tries his
peoples

Sincerity. Graces.
First, He tries their sincerity, if they will stick to a 1. Sincerity.
good cause without defection, and go on in a good course without deflection.
Certainly, these times and troubles make the same discovery of men as former
did; then there were some confessors, some Martyrs, others Traditors, that in
time of tribulation went Eusebius Eccles. Hist. 1 Cor. 11. 19.
away. Errors must be, that they that are approved may be known: and doctrines
and practices of liberty must be, that well rooted and grounded Christians may
be distinguished from children, tossed to and fro, Ephesians. 4. 14.
and carried about with every wind of doctrine by the sleight of men, and
cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive. Tribulations are
like great winds, which fasten trees well rooted, but throw down the rest;
There have been and daily are many both in Church and State thus tried* some
Darius-like, labor Dan. 6. 14.
earnestly to the going down of the Sun, and then they go back. It was great
trial a while ago, what men would set themselves against the Prelates and
their proceedings, how men would fortify their spirits against their summons,
Courts, Censures, imprisonments and sore oppressions: God has delivered us
thence, and after these, brings more public and universal trials, how men
will stand in and for the public, who be the Calebs and Ioshuahs that will go
on Numb 14.
to the accomplishment of reformation, against the Anakims, and who will lust
after the flesh pots of Egypt; who will wait upon God, and go when he bids,
and stay when he stays; and who will go their own way, as they then did; we
are just thereabouts now* and if any fall off, we are told before hand, it is
the issue of their insincerity. They went out from us, but ^. Joh. 2. 19.
they were not of us: for if they had been of us, they would no doubt have
continued with us: but they went out that they might be made manifest that they
were not all of us.

Secondly, He tries their graces: He that has any 2. Graces.
grace may now know what he has; I will instance in three;

First, He tries their Love, how fast they are gl^wed 1. Love.
to God and his cause, that no affliction can part them, whether they are as
willing to be turned into a prison for his sake, as into their own habitation;
Love is of this nature: Many waters cannot quench Love, neither Cant. 8. 7.
can the floods drown it.

Secondly, He tries their Faith: Our Savior 2. Faith.
Christ is still upon this with his Disciples; O ye of little Faith! Had men
Stephens eyes to see a Iosus in the Act. 7. ^5.
Heavens, when stones were ^^ying about their ears* or a Moses eyes, to see
the recompense of reward; did they by faith see Gods attributes put forth for
their help, they would not stagger what side to take to, nor what to do, but
would readily answer as those Heroes: O King we are not careful to answer thee
in this Dan. 3. 16, 17, 18.
matter: If it be so; our God whom we serve, is able to deliver us from the
burning fiery furnace, and he will deliver us out of thy hand O King, but if
not, be it known to thee O King, that we will not serve thy gods, nor worship
thy graven images which thou have set up: All the graces which grow among
thorns and thistles, attending upon faith, meekness, patience, etc. will now
be tried and discovered.

Thirdly, He tries their Love to one another, what 3. Sympathy.
sympathy they have to those that suffer with them, or for them: You have
Ministers, the Country wants them; hither come the godly and faithful of the
land, that have suffered the loss of all: God tries now, what have you will
make (Right Honorable) to settle the business of Ordination, and releeve
those Churches that for the present are as sheep without a sheapheard: and how
you will employ those that are faithful in the land about you, as David did.
Thus you have Ps^. 101. 6.
seen how they are by these purified, made white, and tried.

Now remains the third and last thing proposed, ( viz.) what is the reason,
and whence it is, that these 3.
times and troubles have such different effects and operations What is the
Reason of so d^fferent operation.
upon the godly wise, and upon the wicked, and those three that are in my text
shall serve. I will add no more.

First, This comes to pass from the diversity of subjects Reason 1. From
diversity of subjects.
on whom they light, (viz.) godly, and wicked. Afflictions as Physic make
better or worse; they are resembled to a fan, the godly are the Lords wheat,
purified by it, but the wicked are as the chafe, blown Jer 15. 7. and 51. ^.
away, nor is there any thing to be seen amongst them, but Apostasies, abusing
Gods truth, and what not? Jesus Christ compares tribulation to the Sun; the
Mat. 13. 6.
same Sun which warmes and perfecteth good-seed, scorcheth that which has not
depth of earth, depth of root, and enough of moisture, as that which was sown
upon high way, stony, and thorny ground had not. It is in the Prophet compared
to water and fire; Isa. 43. 2.
now as things are which are cast into water and fire, so is the operation:
cast gold into the water, it keeps its yellow shine, cast it into the fire, it
becomes brighter; cast earth into water, it turns it into mudd, cast it into
the fire, it crumbleth to dust; cast hay into the fire, it gives a blaze, and
turns to smoke and ashes; cast it into water, it rots it presently; The
Apostle tells us; the day shall declare every man's work of what 1 Cor. 3. 13.
sort it is. Tribulation is such a day; it presses every Rom* 5. 3, 4. (...).
godly man, and out comes their grace; it presses the wicked, and out comes
their wickedness; as dunghils, the more they are raked, the more they stink;
whereas the godly, are as the spices, which bruised cast forth a sweeter
savor: the Eagle tries her young ones by the Sun, God tries and differences
godly from the wicked by afflictions; wicked men are as the wood of the vine,
good for nothing but the fire; godly Ezekiel. 15. per totum.
are such as are still on the mending hand.

Secondly, This comes to pass from the different Reason 2.
adjunct or privilege, godly wise men, have every From different adjunct or
privilege.
thing (and so afflictions) sanctified to them, wicked men have every thing
accursed to them. The Prophecy here, you see, is by way of promise to the one,
they shall be purified, etc. by way of judgment to the other, the wicked shall
do wickedly. The charter of the Christian is large, All things, even death it
self, is 1 Cor. 3. 21, 2^.
yours, and you are Christ's: godly men have as cursed hearts as any wicked men;
but being in Christ they are sanctified, and have grace to be improved and
bettered; therefore all runs passive; purified, made white, tried: and the
Prophet Malachy tells you how; He Mal. 3. ^.
(that is to say, the Angel of the Covenant, Christ) shall sit a refiner and
purifier, etc. to compose the fire (for though sin merit trouble, man or
Devil be instruments of the trouble, yet God is the chief agent) and to order
it for the good of the metal he casts into the fire, to increase the flame
one while, when Lev. 26* 14, to 40.
they are not purified* and to quench it another while, when they are: but
afflictions are not so to wicked men; Christ is a swift witness against them;
they are given Mal. 3. 5.
up, and being so, must needs do wickedly.

Thirdly, This comes to pass from the different Reason 3. From different
cause. Pr^v. 1. ^.
cause; None of the wicked understand, but the wise understand. There is a
threefold wisdom and understanding of heavenly things, and they are
distinguished (...)
by three words: The wisdom of the art, the best of all Philosophy, the fear
of the Lord, which is the beginning of wisdom: The wisdom of the teacher,
the Lord, none teaches like him: And the wisdom of the scholar, who is made
wise to salvation. Now wicked men have none of these, at least they have not
them all, but the godly wise have: wicked men either have no light, they
consule not with Gods word, and then how should they understand* They have
rejected the wisdom of the Lord, and what Jer. 8. 9.
wisdom is in them? or they have no understanding, no eyes opened, no grace
infused, and so they judge amiss of things that differ; or their eyes are not
well disposed, they have misguided judgments, something or other makes them
mistake. Ask them concerning the wars in Germany, Scotland, England; they
call evil good, and good evil. Thus you see the Reasons.

Now remains only the practical part, having done The doctrinall part
finished.
with the Doctrinall; the point you see is proved, there rests the Application.
And though this might be manifold, I will not trouble you with any more then
three;

It serves therefore for Instruction. It serves therefore for Exhortation.
The use threefold.
It serves therefore for Consolation.
This may in the first place give satisfaction to three Use 1. Instruction in
three points. 1. Why ^odly are afflicted, wicked spared.
great scruples which trouble many.

First, It shows the reason why godly persons are afflicted, and wicked
prosper. Though it pleases God sometimes to bless his people with peace, and
to give them rest against their enemies round about them* yet for the most part
in the ordinary way of his dispensations, many are the troubles of the
righteous* and for the wicked, they are active and strong, and no ^ands in
their Psalm. 73 4.
death: When Jacob is ^o^sed to and fro, Esau is at rest in mount S^ir,
increased in riches and power: when S^^l is on the throne, David is hunted as a
partridge: when Mordecai is at the gate, Haman is in favor in the Court; and
when the Co^^tiers are at the banquent of wine, the City (...) is perplexed
upon this cross dispensation arises a dangerous temptation, which drives many
back, some sometimes to deny a Providence; not only are Gods Children liable
to these temptations in consideration of the trouble of the Righteous, and
prosperity of the wicked, but when God is in a way of mercy, if there be any
stay in the That the one may be purified, and the other do wickedly.
course of Justice, any delay of deliverance, they are ready to be troubled. Is
God just? Is God merciful? why stand things at a stay? Now (...) text resolves
this scruple; It Is that the godly may be purified, made white, tried; and it is
again, that wicked men may do Psalm. 73. 17. Jer. 12. 3. Hab. 1. 13. 14.
wickedly, and may fill up the measure of their sin: thus do even those that
stumble at this, at last resolve themselves (...) and certainly when God has
accomplished his work, it shall be otherwise.

Secondly, it shows the reason why it is so troublesome 2. Why this time more
troublesome than former?
a time now more than at other times. We were quiet, why are we now so
distempered? It is because this is a time of Reformation: as the Lord told
Rebecah, It is a Time of Reformation.
when she went to enquire of him concerning the struggling in her womb* Why am
I this? He says, Genesis 25. 22, 23.
Two ^^^i^ns are in thy ^^^be^^ and two manner of people Such times have been
always troublesome.
shall be separated from thy bowels, etc. God is now about to purge his ^^oore,
and never was there a time of Reformation which differ^^ced good and bad, but
it was a time of troubles* when the Jews came out of Egypt into Cannan the
sive Books of Moses tell you their troubles: when out of captivity, ere they
got up their City and Temple, (...) and N^^^^^^h tell you what trouble: and
when they shall come out of Judaisme, ver. 1. of this Chapt. tells you it shall
be a time of trouble such as never was since it was a nation to that time: When
the Gentile Church came out of the Heathen persecutions, Revel. 12. tells you
what troubles; and when they shall come out of the Antichristian persecution,
the same book tells you of their several sorts of troubles: whilst we made
brick for Prelates, and suffered the Egyptian taske-masters to lay on us all
their burdens, we did not resist unto blood, as now we do since we have cast
them off: and whilst Satan keeps possession all things are at peace, but when
the stronger Luke 11. 21, 22.
then he comes to bind him, he rents and tears. What working against Christ's
coming in the flesh, from Abel to the birth of Christ? what attempts against
the Prophets, Apostles, and Ministers of Christ that offered Mat. 2^. 34, 35.
and preached the Redemption wrought by Christ? and what resisting of the Holy
Ghost coming ^ Cor. 10* 5, 6.
to apply the grace so offered? therefore stand not amazed at our troubles now,
Christ is about a great work of Reformation, and therefore there will be
opposition, Jerusalem is to be built, both walls, and streets, Dan. 9. 25.
in troublous times.

Thirdly, it shows the reason why the Lord stands 3. Why the Lord forbeares so
long to deliver?
so far off in trouble: this was always a great affliction to the godly in
times of trouble, not so much that they were troubled, as that the Lord stood
far Psalm. 10. 1. and 22. 1.
off from their cry, and from the voice of their rearing. We fast and pray, and
yet we are not delivered; why is it thus? why? it is, because the godly need
yet more purifying, and the wicked must yet do more wickedly, for that they
neither do nor can understand. View each of these distinctly.

First, it is, because none of the wicked will understand; 1. Because none of
the wicked will yet be brought to understand.
they might else take notice of Gods avenging hand; every stroke proclaims
him a sin-revenging God, and of Gods protecting hand, the bush burns, and is
not consumed. Religion, Laws, and Liberty, have as Candles under water,
strangely been preserved. Their project was by oppression to keep them down,
the oppressors now are oppressed; they would keep off Parliaments, or break
them if they could not serve themselves of them; there is now a standing
Parliament to plague them, they would bring in first Rebels to help them, and
employ bloody Papists, now three Kingdoms are in one Covenant, and their ships
2 Chronicles. 20. 36, 37.
are broken at Ezi^^-G^ber; the Lord has every where said to them; Associate
your selves, and ye shall be broken Isai. 8. 9* 10.
in pieces: and give ear, O ye of far Countries: gird your selves, and ye
shall be broken in pieces: gird your selves, and ye shall be broken in pieces,
Take counsel together, and it shall come to naught: speak the word, and it
shall not stand. ver. 1^, 13.
And he has said to us, Fear not their fear, nor be afraid; Sanctify the
Lord of hosts himself, and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread*
and he shall be for a sanctuary, etc. but the wicked will not understand any
That appears in 3. things.
thing at all: three ways is this expressed here, if we mark it strictly.

First, they will do wickedly; that is to say, they will 1. They will do
wickedly. Isai. 2^. 10.
go on in ^inne securely; so elsewhere. Let favor be showed to the wicked,
yet will he not learn righteousness: in the land of uprightness, will he
deal unjustly, etc. Solomon Prove. 22. 3. Luke 17* 26. Isai. 47. 8.
says, The prudent man sees the evil, and hydeth himself; but the simple
passes on, and is punished; so did the old world, so did old and new Babylon;
so shall it be also in Rev. 18* 7.
the days of the Son of man. Wicked men are as ignorant and blind as those
Philistines* If he go up the way of his own coast to Bethshemesh, then he has
done u^ 1 Samuel 6. 9.
this evil, but if not, then we shall know it was but some chance that
happened to us. They neither see the hand of God that smites them, nor their
own desert that Isai. 26. 11.
provokes the Lord thus to smite them. Strangers devour his strength, but he
sees it not, yea, gray hairs are Hos. 7. 9.
here and there upon him, but he knows it not, as says the Prophet.

Secondly, they will be more wicked for the trouble, 2. They will do yet more
wickedly.
this is not ordinary with all wicked men (some like Ahab will be humbled for
the time) but with the wicked of our times, we are here foretold it will be so;
and Saint John in the Revelation speaking of Antichristian enemies, all along
their going down, tells us Rev. 16. 9, 10, 11, 21.
the same, that they will break forth to further wickedness, even to
blasphemy against the Name of God, and look at Reformation as rebellion. It
was a brand upon Ahaz, that when he was in distress on 2 Chro. 28. 22.
every hand, yet in his distress he did trespass yet more against the Lord.
And a concomitant of their destruction in Esaias, They shall fret themselves, and
curse their Isai. 8. 21.
King, and their God. And it is foretold concerning these last times, that,
Wicked men and seducers shall wa^^ ^ Tim. ^. 13.
worse and worse, deceiving, and being deceived: and we see all this made good
upon the men of this generation; the more God plagues them, the more they sin.

Thirdly, They will not understand; i. to repent, and give ^. They will not
repent. Rev. 16. 9, 11.
glory to God, to give him the glory of his Sovereignty, in whose hands all
troubles are, to inflict, order and remove them; the glory of his truth and
justice, to acknowledge the justice and truth of God by reason of their doings
which have procured all these plagues to themselves, as the godly do. Thou art
just in all that is Nehem. 9* 33.
brought upon us, for thou have done right, but we have done wickedly, they
contrarily keep wickedness sweet within Job 20. 12, 1^. Lam. ^. 22.
their mouth; and the glory of his mercy, that they are not consumed. Surely
the sins before reformation, in reformation, since reformation, and now most of
all that men hate to be further reformed, might make Isa. 26. 11. Rev. 16. 9,
etc*
men tremble: but this is one of their plagues, that they cannot see, they
cannot repent. This is now one reason why the Lord stands so far off; wicked
men will do wickedly, and not understand, and therefore more plagues must
come, that they that will not see, may be made to see.

There is another reason, and that is, because godly 2. Because the godly are
not yet sufficiently purified, etc.
wise men are not so purified, made white and tried, as they shall be; and
indeed there is more cause to fear this than the other; God can soon take
order with the wicked, were but his people as they should be; I will therefore
abruptly break off here the use of Instruction, and fall into the second use
of Exhortation.

This serves in the second place therefore for Exhortation, Use 2. Exhortation,
Preface thereto.
that you would be purified, made white, tried; let not our deliverance, and
the deliverance of Gods Church, stay, and be deferred for want of this. And
here (Right Honorable) suffer the words of exhortation Heb. 13. 22*
patiently. I shall borrow the benefit of the M. Rat^^and Jer. 7. 3. his
preface before his application.
mornings preface to speak unto you plainly. We rejoice in the authority we
have from you, besides the encouragement to seek the Lord by fasting and
prayer, but you had need call the land to one fast more, to Ezras, to Ezra 8.
21.
seek of God a right way, to know why we are not delivered. God we are sure is
a God that hears prayer, especially Psalm. 65. 2.
extraordinary prayer; but are we purified, made white, tried? Ioshuah fasted,
but the Lord told him that was not the thing, Israel had sinned, that must be
Josh. 7. 11, 1^. Exhortation it self to three duties.
done away ere God would help them.

It is not for me to charge any fault upon you the great assembly of the Gods;
but give me leave to set the great God before you as your pattern, and thereby
charge your selves; in his Name: only let me exhort you to these three things.

First, Be purified. Me thinks the Lord calls upon ^ Be purified.
you that are the repairers of our breaches, and restorers of paths to dwell
in, as sometimes to Jerusalem, Jer. 13. 27.
Will you not be made clean? when shall it once be? I am not able to charge
impurity upon you, but God can, and your own consciences may help you to find
it out: This only let me say unto you, that an ordinary More than ordinary
purity expected from Parliamentmen.
purity will not serve your turns (though it is wont to be said, a little
holiness goes for a great deal amongst our Nobles and Gentry) You are great
men and wise; the Worthies of the Land, think I pray you what a disgrace a But
puts upon you, such a But I mean as was on Naaman, Now Naaman Captain of a
King. 5. ^.
the host of the King of Syria, was a great man with his master, and
honorable, because by him the Lord had given deliverance unto Syria: He was
also a mighty man in valor, but he was a leper. As you stand for your selves
and for us, so give us leave to beseech you to a double purity, one for your
own sakes, another for ours; and because in this second consideration you move
in a high sphere, I beseech you pattern your purity by his whom you
represent: no less holiness must you aim at, than to be holy as he is holy;
me thinks if every second cause works so much more strongly as it is united to
its first cause, then you that represent one Kingdom at the least, and are (as
I said) the great assembly of Gods, should be so much more pure and holy as you
are nearer to God than others both in name and office: You are engaged in an
Honorable cause, and you have as Honorable a call thereunto, now as in both
you would prosper, purify your hearts, your hands, your houses, remember the
Lord will be sanctified Lev. 10. 3.
in all those that draw near him.

Secondly, Be made white as well as pure. I cannot 2. Be made white.
(again) but the world does, bespo^ your innocence: now do you as the Lord:
he cleares his righteous dealing before the Sun; do not you let any spot lie
upon your proceedings. I will instance only in three of your graces.

Be made white in your Truth, by executing your ordinances, In 1. Truth.
that you may not only say but do.

Be made white again in your Justice, upon delinquents, 2. Justice.
that what you seek, when it is put into your hands we may see you execute;
The very Heathens called Justice the daughter of Jupiter married to him, and
sitting close by his side, etc. (...), Hesiod. (...)
and the Lord says, what a do is here with fasting, execute true judgment,
etc. else you fast not to him; Zech. z.
look into the prisons if this fasting day be not a feasting day, and if they
mock not God with something else than religious fasting on their Friday.

Be made white once more in your Zeal, and sincerity 3. Zeal, quit the land
of Sacrilege.
to reform the house of God by denying your selves and giving up thereto that
which may make it glorious. It was a good observation of an Honorable Member
of your society, upon the Tears of Germany, Sir R. H.
that their deliverance was not like to be yet, because in the catalogue of all
their sins then made in a Sermon, the chief sin was not named,
Sabbath-breaking, whereof that Country was notorlously guilty. Truly, I am
sorry that in so excellent an Ordin(...) Provide for the Ministry.
for Repentance, Sacrilege is not mentioned, whereof this Land has been too
much guilty, unless by you it be purged from it, which we all expect.

You well heard in the morning, there is great necessity of speeding the
business of Ordination, now before you; but let me add thereto, that the
ministry you shall ordain, will be rendered very contemptible and vile before
all the people, unless you take care they be not disabled for want of
Maintenance, ^. Maintenance. 2. Authority, not civil, but sacred, not
Prelaticall but Ministerial.
nor discouraged for want of Authority; the former they are in danger to be by
Impropriations, the latter, by Patrons. I plead not for authority civil, but
sacred, not Prelaticall, but pious and Ministerial; that they may not be
afraid to tell the people their transgressions, and the house of Jacob their
sins.

Lastly, Be tried; and be faithful when you are 3. Be tried.
tried; some you have had, more you may have; shrink not, stand to it and you
shall have the Crown of life. The time prevents me, therefore I will conclude
with a word of the thirduse, which is of Consolation. Use 3. Consolation, upon
three grounds.


Be you thus faithful, and three things may sustain your spirits against all
discouragements.

First, You shall be sure to prevail; for look upon 1. Sure to prevail.
ver. 1. It is not a Timpany, but a Delivery these times foretell, and what an
Honor will it be to you, to be midwives to the birth of such a child of
reformation, as Heaven and earth shall cry grace, grace Zach. 4. 7.
unto it? sore troubles you have had, and may have; but a woman in travel has
sorrow because her hour is Joh. 16. 21.
come, but as soon as she is delivered of the child, she remembers no more
the anguish for joy that a man is borne into the world. To encourage you
hereto, consider For the enemies blaspheme.
the wickedness of the enemy (if you be purified) does assure you, they shall
not prevail; they make lies their refuge, and under falsehood hide themselves,
you Isa. 28. 14, to 20. And none ever hardened himself against God and
prospered. Job 9. 4.
know what God says he will do with such a people: They blaspheme God which
has power over the plagues, and repent not to give him glory; therefore they
lie under the vials of his wrath; you may write upon it, they shall never
prosper.

Secondly, You may live to see this delivery, as he 2. You may live to see the
day; for not long to it.
says, who shall live when God does this? that shall you I am confident, if
the calculation be true, which has been given of the time in the verse next
following my text; its not twice so long as you have sitten already in
Parliament, ere Rome be destroyed; and therefore could I be heard over all our
Militia, I should wish them not fear employment if these wars be ended, which
many are too loath to finish soon enough, least as Demetrius said in another
case, their craft should fail: For this ended, a more noble war, and more
unanimous would be occasioned, to help the Lord against the mighty in other
Countries. God seems to have confirmed this Parliament for some such purpose,
as if he would have you immortal till the work be done.

Lastly, (and so I conclude) if any of you die before 3. If you die, your names
shall be honored, and your posterity blessed.
you see this great salvation of the Lord, your posterity shall inherit the
blessing; and for you, it is Honor enough that you expire in so great a cause;
Heathens thought no greater Honor than to die for their Country; for you to
lay down your lives in being the Angels of God, as blessed Luther, famous
Queen Elizabeth, renowned King of Sweden was in pouring out the vials of Gods
wrath on the throne and seat of the beast; you have Honor enough; they shall
not need to come to Westminster to read your Epitaphs, all the Churches of the
world shall read at distance the Epitaphs so truly and worthily M. Obad.
Sedgwick, before Parliament, May 15. 1642. on Ier. 4. 3.
preached to you by a renowned watchman, whose praise is in the Gospel. These
are Scotlands umpire, Irelands guard and revenge, Englands preservation, the
Churches safety, and Religions glory.

FINIS.
An Appendix, Giving light from History sacred and Ecclesiastical, to some
passages of the Sermon, humbly presented to his much honored Patron Sir ROBERT
HARLEY Knight of the Noble order of the Bath, and one of the Members of the
Honorable House of COMMONS.
SIR,
AS the Honorable House of Commons by your mouth commanded me both to preach,
and print this Sermon, so I trust you will patronize this short Appendix which
I am encouraged by good friends to affix hereto.

The four great Monarchies are now almost come to an end; out of the third
comes up a little Horn, conceived to be Antiochus Dan 8. 9. Hugh Broughton.
Epiphanes, (as the circumstances of the eight Chapt. show) for it is of the
Goat, which is called a Leopard, Chap. 7. 6. out of the fourth comes up another
little Horn, conceived to be the Turk (as the circumstances of the seventh
Chapt. Dan. 7. 8.
show) for he rises among the ten horns of the fourth beast, which is the
Roman; Otthoman first assumed the title of Hen. Isaackson. page 343.
Sultan; and about the year 1300. laid the foundation of the Turkish Kingdom,
from thence reckon a time, times, and an half prophetically, days for years.
The time 100. times M. Brightman in Dan. 1^. 7.
200. half time 50. in all 350. years, which added to 1300. expires* Anno
1650. Then shall the King of the North (the Dan. 11 40, 44 M. Mede Apost.
latter times, page 111.
Turk) come against the King of the South (the Saracen) like a whirlwind;
Then tidings out of the East, shall trouble him: and then, from the taking away
of the daily sacrifice by Titus Vespasian, who burnt both City and Temple, and
the setting up of the abomination of desolation by Julian, shall be 1290.
days, which added to 360. the time of Julians Onuphr. 360* Isaa^son. 367.
reign, makes also 1650. though 3. or 4. years difference there is amongst
Chronologers.

For confirmation whereof consider two things, 1. Christ's Prophecy. 2. Its
accomplishment.

Our Savior Christ, a little before his death, prophesied 1.
There shall not be left here, stone, upon stone, which shall not Matthew. 24. 2.
be thrown down. His Disciples ask him when this shall be? He bids them that
read, consider when they shall see the abomination ver. 15.
of desolation spoken of by Daniel the Prophet stand in the Holy place. Here is
the Prophecy and the time when it shall be fulfilled.

To find the accomplishment now, Ecclesiastical story must 2.
speak. There I find Titus Vespasian as before, burning Joseph. Antiq.
both City and Temple, where alone it was lawful to sacrifice; but yet for all
that there were stones upon stones left; I find also Julian the Apostate
endeavoring to restore Jud^is^e, Tripart. Hist.
by authorizing, encouraging and assisting the Jews to reedifie their Temple,
and they taking up every stone of the old foundation over night, and intending
to lay a new foundation the next day, but when they had fulfilled the Prophecy
of Christ, they were dispersed that very night, and never able to lay a new
stone there, as they had intended. I Will give you out of Greek and Latin, the
testimony of four very famous Historians, (viz,) Ruffinus, Socrates, Theodoret
and Sozomen; the two former mention the Prophecy of Christ, and Cyril of
Jerusalem, his observation upon it; the two latter imply the Prophecy, but say
nothing of Cyril, all of them, though several writers, in several places and
times, agree in testimony.

First, Ruffinus tells, that Julian conveened the Jews, and Ruffin Hist. Eccles
^^. c 37, ^8, 39.
asked them, why they do not sacrifice? they tell him, they may not except it
be in Jerusalem, as their law commands them; He asks, why then they do not
build their Temple? They tell him they are not able. He gives them authority,
encouragement and assistance. They thereupon fall about it as if some Prophet
had spoken to them. They prepare lime and sand, and all things else, and then
they take up the old foundation; which done, the next day, nothing was wanting,
why they might not lay a new one, the old being removed. But when Cyril the
Bishop of Jerusalem had dilige^ly considered what they had done, and what they
were about to do, he was confident either out of those things which he had
read concerning the times in the Prophecy of Daniel, or which our Lord had
foretold in the Gospels, that by no means it could be that the Jews should
there lay a stone upon a stone, but that the saying of our Savior should now
be fulfilled. Neither was his prediction vain, For behold in that night which
only staid them from beginning their new work, an earthquake turned all down
to the ground, and confirmed the very truth of our Saviors words, and so being
frighted, both Jews and Gentiles went away, and gave over their foolish
beginnings.

Then Socrates to the same purpose; Julian calls for the Socrat. Hist. Eccles.
l. 3. c 17. Secund* Graec. c. 20.
Jews, and demands of them the cause why they did not sacrifice? After they
had answered, it was not lawful for them so to do, but in Jerusalem, he
commanded that in all have their Temple should be built; accordingly all
necessaries were provided, as timber, stone, brick, clay, lime, with other
things requisite in building. At that time Cyril Bishop of Jerusalem remembered
the Prophecy of Daniel which Christ had foretold in the holy Gospels, that
the time was now come, when there should not be a stone of the Temple left upon
another, but that the Prophecy of our Savior should now take place and be
fulfilled. When the Bishop had thus said, accordingly it came to pass, for a
great earthquake the night following, shook the old foundation of the Temple,
and so instead of raising it up, it was utterly overthrown.

In the third place, Theodoret; The Emperor having called Theod. Hist. Eccles
l. ^. c. 20.
the Jews together, asks them why they sacrifice not as they are commanded?
They answer, their worship is confined to one place; This wicked enemy of God*
commands their Temple to be reedified, hoping foolishly, that he should thereby
make our Lords Prophecy a lie, but he contrary to his thought, hereby declared
it much more to be a truth. All the Jews came together from all parts of the
world, and contributed both pains and purse unto the building; and it is said
they had made them spades, baskets and other tools of silver, for that work;
themselves cast down with their own hands the relics of the old Temple,
thinking to build it new from the lowest foundation, etc. But a mighty
earthquake and other fearful prodigies destroyed all their preparations, so
that they fled, etc.

In the last place, So^omen, though the Emperor hate^ So^om Hist. Eccles. l.
3. c* 17 S^cund. G^^c. c. ^^.
the Christians, yet he carried himself courteously toward the Jews, because
they were great enemies to the Christians. Having called them together, and
exhorted them to observe the Law of Moses, and they having answered him that
their Temple being destroyed, might not worship in any other place; he supplied
them out of the public, with money to reedifie their Temple, that he might
reduce them to their old sacrificing; They fall to the work with
cheerfulness, and begun to prepare the place they were to work in, and the
Gentiles helped them, thinking to prove Christ's words false, That their Temple
should never be repaired, but instead thereof, every stone thereof destroyed.
They took away the relics of the old building, and the next day intended to
lay a new foundation, but were frustrated by an earthquake, etc.

By all these, you see every word of God is true, and every man a liar: in the
mouth of two or three witnesses every word Romans 3. 4.
shall stand: here are four in one book, all bearing witness to this Truth,
that as Christ had said, it came to pass, there was not left stone upon stone
in the Temple; From that time therefore is the full epoche of the abomination
utterly made desolate

These things I have annexed for others, not for you, who have diligently
sought out the accounts: Accept only my first fruits; you have laid out much
upon the Promises, and you shall receive much, the things which shall be
accomplished make have.

The unworthiest of all that serve you in the Gospel of Christ STAN. GOWER.

FINIS.
Die Mercurii, 31o Iulii, 1644.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That Sir Robert Harley, and
Master Hallowes, do from this House give thanks to Master Gower, for the great
pains he took in the Sermon he preached this day, at the entreaty of this
House, at St Margarets Westminster, it being the day of public Humiliation,
and to desire him to print his Sermon. And it is ordered that none shall
presume to print his Sermon, but whom he shall authorize under his handwriting.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.
I do authorize Philemon Stephens to print my Sermon, and no other, but with
his consent. Stanley Gower.


