THE COVENANT OF GRACE, Not ABSOLUTE, but CONDITIONAL, Modestly asserted.
WHether the Covenant of grace be conditional or absolute, is, says Vind. Ley
Lect. 26. page 249.
Mr. Burges, a very troublesome question. So indeed it proves in places where
it is vented. It troubles the faith of some, the lives of others, and the peace
of very many.

New England has felt the troubles it occasioned; And many places in old
England are now suffering. I could therefore from my heart have wished that
either none at all had broached it in these parts, or if it must have been
published, some other, rather then you, my dearest Friend and Reverend Brother,
might have been the Author of that, merely out of the great respect and entire
affection I bear unto you. But seeing you have not only set it on foot, but
when a modest defense was made of the contrary Doctrine, without any either
bitter invective against your tenent, or so much as reply unto your Arguments;
you in diverse Sermons renewed the quarrel, replied unto the Arguments of the
contrary side; not sparing to asperse them in too open a manner.

I thought it my duty I owe to truth, oppugned by, notwithstanding my love unto
you, to let you know, both wherein your Reply appears unsatisfactory unto me,
and wherein offensive. Of the latter in the first place, which is as follows.

First, in the whole series of your discourse, you seemed to me to rank those
of our Divines, who hold the covenant of grace to have conditions, in the same
file, with Arminians, as if both had maintained the same conditionate
redemption or salvability; wherein, whether you dealt fairly, I refer it to
your conscience to consider. Now, though I do not doubt, but that you know full
well already how far we differ from them: yet shall I set down the
difference in some particulars, and then endeavor to satisfy your Arguments,
so far as they seem to reflect upon our Tenants. The Salvability or
potentiall and conditionate redemption maintained by the Arminians, may (I
conceive) be reduced to these four particulars.

1. That Christ in dying, intended not the salvation of any particular persons.

2. That the end of his death was not to bring some actually to salvation, but
only that God thereby might have power (his justice being satisfied) to give
remission of sins to sinful man, on what conditions he pleased. So that Christ
might have had his end, though never a man had been actually saved.

3. That this is the will of God, that none should enjoy remission of sins, but
on condition of faith.

4. That Christ has purchased faith and regeneration for none, but remission
and reconciliation for all, which they shall actually partake of, who do
believe. Nor is there need of infusing any spiritual vital, principle into
the hearts of men to enable them to believe, they may do it of themselves.

The third excepted, which of these positions is maintained by any of those our
Divines that hold conditions to be in the new Covenant? Nay, they all maintain
that Christ in dying, intended the actual salvation of particular persons, viz.
of all those whom God from all eternity had chosen. That for all those Christ
has obtained the actual application of salvation to them, as well as the
purchase of it for them; which actual enjoyment of salvation, being according
to Gods appointment to be obtained in a way of faith, or upon condition of
faith, by or through faith, as the Scripture speaks. They further aver, that
the Lord Jesus Christ by his death, has also obtaind at God the Fathers hands,
that the blessed Spirit should in time work this faith in the hearts of his
chosen, that so through faith they might come actually to partake of all the
benefits which he has purchased for them.

So then, Arminians maintain conditions to be performed by us of our own power:
Such ours disclaim, maintaining that it is God that works in us both to will
and to do. Arminians maintain conditions so as if the efficacy of Christ's
death were pendulous thereon; This also ours disavow, maintaining that Christ
has purchased both salvation to be given upon condition, and ability also to
be given to perform that condition.

Ames coron. artic. 1. c. 1. 4
Arminians maintain conditions preceding Gods very electing us to salvation.
But ours maintain conditions antecedent of actual salvation indeed, but
consequent in regard of Election.

The difference between our Divines and the Arminians about conditions being
thus great, as has been showed, I think it would have been fair dealing in
you to have severed them, and not have crowded them together into one and the
same refutation, as if they had mantained one and the same thing. Do you not
think the friends of Pemble, Preston, Ames, Perkins, Ball, etc. would take it
ill to have them refuted under the title of Arminians, and for maintaining
Arminian Salvability (a notion more abhorring to their spirits then to your
own, and which some of them have expressly written against?) yet do they all
hold conditions in the Covenant. And you refute all such, who hold so, under
that head and title. I challenge you to show me any one of ours, that in
pleading for conditions in the Covenant, does in the least degree assert that
conditionate Redemption or Arminian Salvability.

Before you come to our Arguments, you tell us, that though you are against
conditions, yet you hold that God has his order and method in conferring of
his benefits. And that in regard of this order one benefit may depend upon an
other, etc. And that none are saved but such as do repent and believe.

I was heartily glad to hear so much from you: for this is the maine I contend
for, That God gives faith, and then salvation; And that salvation depends on
faith, and therefore in order of nature follows faith. And here I would argue
ex concessis. Those benefits which according to that method and order of
conferring that the Lord has set down to himself, must go before other, and
on which others do depend; Those (I say) are required in us, before the other
which do depend on them, and follow them, can be obtained by us.

But faith and repentance are benefits which according to this method of God
are given before Salvation, and on which salvation does depend.

And therefore faith and repentance are actually required in us, before we can
actually partake of Remission, Reconciliation. Justification, and other
benefits and branches of Salvation purchased by Christ.

It this were granted, that they are required, and that to the obtaining of
Salvation (which must needs be granted, the benefit of Salvation not only
following them, but also depending on them as you confess) let them be
required, as conditions, or as something else in Gods method and order; I would
not strive about terms. But I feate that you had here your reserve, and that
you understand this priority of one benefit before an other, and this
dependence of one benefit upon an other, either in reference to the
manifestation of salvation, or the perfection of that, and not in reference to
the beginning and being of them; for so much some following passages hint out
unto us; of which we shall speak more when we come unto them. Not long after,
you challenge Malice it self to show, if it can, any one of your side that
maintains salvation without repentance and faith.

And here Sir, if I should produce some that do assert it, should I not very
prittely get me the odious name of malicious? Well, the Lord give us to hate the
affect and fact as much as we do the name. Truth is truth, and must be
discovered. And I would to God there were not too many expressions vented both
in Pulpits and Presses, too much tending this way.

I find in Mr. Saltmarsh, Free grace. p. 102. Do not the promises belong to
sinners as sinners? And p. 104. The promises of Christ are held forth to
sinners, as sinners; not as repenting sinners, or humble sinners. p. 105.
Whatever promise has a condition in it, is ours in Christ, who only is the
conditioned person for all promises. p. 84. So as we are to believe our
repentance true in him, who has repented for us. p. 126 All the conditions
were on Christ's part, none on ours. So p. 153 In the new Covenant God gives
himself freely in Christ, undertaking all both with the Father and the Soul,
nothing being required on man's part. Occasional word: That those Ministers who
press repentance and faith, do overheate the wine of the Gospel with
conditions and qualifications, so the poor souls cannot taste it. So also in
Doctor Crispe, I meet with many such like, or the same passages, as in his
Christ alone exalted. vol. 1. p. 120. Christ belongs to sinners as sinners. p.
211. He receives sinners as sinners. p. 164. All the tie lies on Gods part to
do every thing that is mentioned in the Covenant. p. 73. Have thou but a mind
to Christ, come and taste of the water of life freely; there is nothing looked
for from thee to take thy portion in this Christ. And in his second Volume, p.
420 We are justified without works not only without the concurrence of them to
justification, but even without the being of them, and presence in the person
to be justified. I might name many more, but these may suffice; and I pray
consider seriously whether from most, if not all those assertions does not
follow by natural and necessary consequence that monstrous conclusion now
enquired of, viz. that we may be saved without faith and repentance. Or, that
faith and repantance are not necessary to salvation. Truly they speak so fully
to this particular, in my apprehension, that all that I can see left you to
save your self is, not to own these men for men of your side, which I should
be heartily glad to hear. But consider one passage more frequent, as in these
Authors, so in your own Sermon; This, That the Covenant of free grace is as
free as that with Noah. Now concerning that we know, that men are partakers of
the benefits promised in it, though they neither know nor believe any such
Covenant. And if this of salvation be as free, will it not thence follow, that
men may be saved in it though they never believe it, or so much as know it? To
me it seems to follow without any constraint at all, as I shall labor to
manifest by reducing it to an Argument, which I form thus.

By virtue of the Covenant with Noah, men are sure to be saved from an
universal deluge, though they neither know nor believe such a Covenant.

Therefore if the new Covenant be as free as that with Noah, a man may be saved
in it, though he neither know it, nor can believe it: More of this particular
you may read in Mr. Gataker against Saltmarsh, both in the former Treatise page
25. and in the Rejoinder page 11, 13, 88. where he clearly shows this very
inference to be unconstrained, and makes good the charge now in debate against
Mr. Saltmarsh: which Reverend Author, if you had any reference unto in that
unsavory and noisome passage in your Sermon, I challenge malice it self, I must
needs tell you, you were exceedingly to blame.

Come we to your Arguments, whereby you labor to prove, that no conditions
are annexed to the purchases of Christ's death in regard of application. Your
first was from those places of Scripture, which declare the all sufficiency of
Christ's death, and the perfection of that in regard of impetration, as Heb. 10.
14 and 1, 3, 9, 12 Unto which may be added your second head of Scriptures, viz.
those which hold out unto us Gods acceptance of this price and acquiesence in
it: as, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, etc.

Now these do prove, that the price paid by Christ was perfect and sufficient;
yea, that it did fully impetrate, merit and purchase at the Fathers hands, the
perfect and complete redemption of his Elect; So that God looks for nothing
more to be done, or suffered toward the making up of the price, but rests
fully satisfied with the sufferings of his Son. But they are of no force at all
to take off any requisite necessary to the application of this purchase, be it
qualification, condition, instruments or agent: for instance, If I should on
your ground argue, Jesus Christ has by himself purged our sins, and perfected
etc. Therefore there is no need the Gospel should be preached unto men, or
that the spirit of grace be sent unto them to regenerate them; I doubt not, but
you would deny my inference, as well you might. So where you reason, Christ by
dying has paid a perfect price, which was also accepted of God the Father.
Ergo, there are no conditions annexed to the purchase of his death; you must
give me leave to deny your Argument. And the reason is, because they are not
annexed as any part of the price, to make up it complete: But only as the way
and manner in which, the means and instrument by which, the terms and condition
on which, and according to which God does give, and man receives salvation
purchased: Notwithstanding that, Christ has thus perfectly purchased it, yet
himself does tell me, that unless I repent, I shall perish, Luke 13. 3, 5. And
If I believe not, I shall be damned, Mark. 16. 16. As for that maxim you cited
in the prosecution of your Argument, Impetration is the foundation of
application.
Impetratio est fundamentum applicationis, it makes for us, and not at all
against us. For if it be fundamentum, the foundation, then it is not ipsa
applicatio, the application it self, which is the monster your side do hug and
suckle. It makes indeed against Arminian salvability; for which end it is used
by our Authors, viz. to show that though impetration and application may be
distinguished, yet they cannot be separate or divided in their object. But that
for whomsoever Christ does impetrate, to him the benefits impetrated must be
applied; for application (say they) is the end of impetration, and impetration
the foundation of application. So that the Arminian doctrine of conditions to
be performed by man's own power, which make the issue of Christ's death to be
uncertain and pendulous on man's free will, is wholly razed thereby: but our
doctrine of conditions purchased for us by the death of Christ, and to be
wrought in us by the Spirit of Christ are no way shaken. The purchases of
Christ's death may be surely applied to them for whom they are purchased, though
they be applied conditionally.

Nor is that other maxim of any more strength, posita causa totali sequitur
effectus, the total cause being put, the effect follows; for if you speak of
man's actual salvation, or the application of salvation unto man, you cannot say
that Christ's death is the total cause of it. The whole and sole meritorious
cause it is; But I hope Gods grace is the impulsive cause, Christ's spirit the
efficient cause, and faith the instrumental cause. And, bonum est ex integris
causis, Good does arise from all causes entire. Now though an instrument be the
meanest of causes, yet is it necessary in the way of an instrument, nor can the
effect be in act before it be used.

Your third head contained such Scriptures as speak of Christ and salvation,
as of a gift, a free gift: In pursuance of which you delivered, Christ is
given, freely given of God. And if by grace, then not of works. And what can be
laid on the creature that is not a work. If but a Rose, not free. To be freely
and by condition, is an absolute and flat contradiction.

For answer, the Covenant with Adam, in a passage before, you aver to be
conditional; And in a passage following, you seem to intimate, that it is
free, by saying that he could not have merited, had he kept the condition. It
seems then that to be free, and yet to be conditional, as flat a contradiction
as it is, you your self have admitted in the Covenant with Adam.

Did you seriously consider what you spoke when you said, if but to pay a rose,
the tenure is not free? Certainly my Country men in Gloucestershire account
that a very free tenure, nor think I them therein mistaken. And if some
Gentlemen should bestow on you an hundred pound a year, on condition you should
be more liberal to the poor to the expense, not of a rose or two, or a penny or
two, but (it may be) ten or twenty pound a year, which unless you constantly
exhibit, you were to lose the principal. If for all this condition you should
not say that this were a free gift, I should account you fowly unthankful. If
my memory fail not, our ancient godly Divines use those similitudes of a Rose
or pepper corn, to set out the condition, not of faith, but of good works,
which they maintain to be required under the Gospel as a consequent condition.
By which expression of theirs, they do, (as you say) destroy the freeness of
grace. But your bare saying so does not prove it. The truth is, the Arminians
and Papists were more beholding to you for some passages in your Sermons, then
our ancient godly Protestant Divines.

But come we to your Argument, which if not taken out of Doctor Crispe, is yet
certainly the same with his, vol. 1. p. 64. and p. 179. By gift, and on
condition, is a flat contradiction.

But take heed that you and the Doctor make not the Scriptures to speak
absolute and flat contradiction, which say, we are saved by grace through
faith. Ephesians. 2. 8. And therefore it is of faith, that it might be by grace. Romans
4. 16. And being justified freely by his grace through faith in his blood. Romans
3. 23, 24. And in the very place cited by you and the Doctor, Rom 11. 6. If by
grace, then it is no more of works, otherwise grace is no more grace. But if it
be by works, it is no more of grace, otherwise works are no more works; where
it follows, what then? Israel has not obtained what he seeks for. And if
you ask, wherefore? the Apostle will tell you Romans 9 32. Because they sought it
not by faith, but as it were by the works of the law. So likewise, Where is
boasting then? it is excluded. By what Law? of works? Nay, but by the law of
faith. Rom 3. 27. And to him that works not but believes, Romans 4. 5. The
Scriptures join faith and free grace; yea they tell us, that freeness of grace
is upheld by that requisite or condition of faith. But you call it a flat
contradiction. The Scriptures oppose faith and works. But you say, What can be
laid upon the creature, that is not a work? You would bear men in hand that we
teach contradictions. But I am sure these passages of yours contradict the
Scripture.

Again, did not Christ lay repentance and faith upon the creature, when he
said, repent and believe the Gospel? Matthew 4. 17. Mark 1. 15. yea, does he not
lay it on them upon pain of damnation, when he doubles it Luke 13. 35. except
ye repent ye shall perish? Did not the Apostles lay something on the creature,
when they thus answered their troubled converts, who in anguish of spirit came
with these queries to them, men and brethren what shall we do? Acts ^. 37. And
Sirs, what shall I do to be saved? chapter 16. 20. I say, when they thus answered
them, repent and believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and be converted; Did they
not require something of them, and lay something on them? And did Christ or his
Apostles (think you) preach any thing contradictory to free grace, or free
gift? I hope, whatever contradictions you pin on our Sermons, you will take
heed what you fasten on the sayings of Christ and his Apostles, whose doctrine
we must take leave to believe and follow, how contradictory soever it be deemed
in the world. Do not say here, that Christ did not require them, nor his
Disciples press them, as conditions, or as a work (which is the Doctors
evasion) for you your self know that we disclaim faith as a work, as much as
you. We maintain not any worthiness, excellency or merit in faith. I desire
you to show me if you can, in any of ours, that faith does justify as a work
done by us or for any worthiness or excellency that is in it. I am sure that I
can show you the contrary, and you may also see it if you be pleased to peruse
Mr. Gatakers rejoinder to Saltmarsh. p. 51. 53. This is that we maintain, that
faith is so required of God, that if we have it, we shall have salvation; and
if we have it not, we cannot have salvation, and that not only in knowledge,
but in the being of it: not only the evidence, declaration, and manifestation
of that (which is the Doctors opinion. p. 168. and I fear is also yours) but
not the receipt, benefit, or being of it, and that because it is required to
the very obtaining of it, not in any meritorious, but in an isntrumental way.

Now do not the Apostles aver as much when they answer this quaerie, what
shall I do to be saved? thus, repent and believe etc. do they not in these
answers lay repentance and faith on the creature as things required of God in
them that would be saved, and that toward the obtaining of their salvation,
not the evidencing or manifesting it only to themselves. And when the Apostle
says, the Jews came short of righteousness which the Gentiles attained unto,
because they sought it not by faith as the Gentiles did Romans 9. 31. Does he
speak of the manifesto of Righteousness, and not rather of righteousness and
justification it self, the being of it? Certainly the Jews fell short, not
only of the assurance, but of the essence and being of righteousness, and that
because they sought it not by faith. So that faith is required of God from the
creature so, and laid on the creature so, that by it the creature must seek
everlasting righteousness, the being of it, or he shall for ever go without
it.

But for the thing it self, that a gift may be free, and yet conditional, is
no such contradictory proposition, but that both parts may be true, well stand
together, and uphold rather then destroy each other; you might have seen in our
Authors, if you had been pleased to look in to them, or to have called to mind
what I persuade my self you have formerly read in them. Camero in Ps. 68. inter
Arg Solut. Med. ult
Camero would have informed you that all conditions do not destroy free grace,
Sed eae quae possunt habere rationem meriti, but only such as are meritorious.

And Doctor Prideaux Ser^ Draught of the brook. And Perk. Ref. Cath. of Merit.
Prideaux, That to a meritorious work, four things are required, which are
all of them wating in our conditions.

First, it must wholly and entirely proceed from the undertaker. The person
that will merit, must do it of himself, out of his own strength and power:
So was the condition of works to have been performed. Man had strength conveyed
to him in created nature, and was to have kept the condition by this his
strength. But thus it is not in the conditions of the Gospel: we receive
strength from grace, to perform the conditions of grace. God who requires them
of us, works them in us; he gives to repent, he gives us to believe: which I
think is the Crown of free grace, that gives us a crown upon our bare
receiving it, and gives us also withal a hand to take it.

Secondly, It must be a man's own, no way due or belonging to the person of
whom we me merit Suppose a tenant be three or four years rent behind with his
Landlord, to the value (it may be) of one hundred pound, or two hundred pound;
and having nothing to pay, should be freely forgiven by his Landlord, only on
this condition, that he carefully pay his rent for time to come. Shall this
person say, the gift was not free because upon this condition? Why the
condition is due unto the Landlord, whether he forgive what is past or no, and
therefore, can no way detract from the freeness of the gift. So is our faith
due, our repentance is due (the fall, and the recovery by Christ supposed) to
God from us, whether he forgive and justify upon them or no. And therefore the
frenesse of the gift of righteousness is no way impaired by the requirement of
them. When we have done all we are commanded, we must say we are unprofitable
servants, Luke 17. 10. unprofitable says Panstr. Cathol. tom. 3. l. 14. c. 16.
and 21. ad 25.
Chamier to our selves, we have not earned so much as thanks for our selves;
and that because we have done no more then what is our duty. Ibid. 9. 38.
Opposita sunt solvere debitum et mereri: To pay or discharge a debt, and to
merit or deserve, are opposite.

Thirdly, It must be some way profitable or advantageous to the person of whom
we merit.

Now this also fails: for, can a man be profitable to God, as a wise man is
profitable to himself? Is it any gain or pleasure to him, that thou make
thy ways perfect? Job 22. 2. and 35. 4, 5. What profit is it to the Sun,
that we receive its light into our houses? or to the spring, that we drink of
its water? God is no way indamaged by our impenitency, nor advantaged by our
return in to him; All the emolument accrues to us our selves. And therefore
though he require our return unto him, and belief on him, if we will be saved
by him, yet is his gift of salvation nevertheless free, because he is no way
the gainer by the things required Nay, the conditions required by him are
matter of further charge and expense unto him, he being the worker and donor of
them, as was showed in the first particular. Suppose that some rich person
should adopt a poor man's child to be his heir, upon condition that the child
be sent home unto him, to live with him, and to be trained and bred up in
learning by him. Shall the young man say, it is not free? because it is upon
condition, he leaves his fathers cottage for it, he goes to school for it etc?
Alas, what profit are either of these to his forster father? Nay, rather they
are matter of further charge to him; For by reason of these, he is at cost for
his food, apparel, schooling, and other necessaries to his breeding and
education: So when the Lord who chooses amongst his enemies those whom he
adopts to be heirs of salvation, does require of them, that they repent of
their sin, believe on his Son, leave off all their vain ways, and learn to
be like himself who is their father: These heirs of grace cannot say that
their inheritance is not freely given, because it is given on these terms and
conditions: for the things required are no way profitable to God who does
require them; but rather matter of further cost and charge unto him, who sends
his word, his messengers, his graces, his spirit for the working of them.

4. It must be some way proportionable to the reward we expect for it, which
also fails in our conditions; for what proportion is there between our
repentance and remission, between our faith and justification. As the Apostle,
our light afflictions, 12 Cor. 4. 17.
which are but for a moment, work forth unto us an exceeding, and eternal
weight of glory. So may we also say of our repentance and faith. If the
Landlord should say to his Tenant (one hundred or two hundred pound indebted to
him) These sums you owe, and I do not see where you have a penny to pay, I
might use extremity toward you, cast you into prison, and there let you rot;
but I will not deal so severely with you. Do but make an ingenuous
acknowledgment of what you owe, and that you will be beholding to me, and I
will freely remit it. Shall this person say, he was not freely forgiven,
because it was on this condition, his acknowledgment? Alas, what proportion is
there between the debt and the acknowledgment? Thus God seems to speak to us
in the matter of repentance. Jer. 3. 13.
Only acknowledge thine iniquities.

The sum of all is, That a man gives freely, which he gives on condition,
when withal he gives ability to perform the condition; else salvation given
for, and through Christ would not be free.

But such are the conditions we plead for, as our duties, so Gods gifts and
graces: and therefore the gift of salvation, notwithstanding them, is free.

Again, That we give on condition, the condition being the parties duty to
whom we give, is free, else the portions that parents give dutiful children
would not be free gift.

But such are the conditions maintained by us; such as we owe of duty to God,
whether he give or no; he gives therefore freely, though he require them.

3. That we give on conditions, the conditions being no way beneficial to us
who give, no way equivalent to the thing we give, nor any way causal of our
giving, we give most freely.

But such also are the conditions defended by us, as has been made apparent,
they no way benefit the Lord at all, they are infinitely disproportionable to
the gift of salvation he bestows, nor do they any way move him to bestow
salvation; but rather his will and purpose to bestow salvation, moves him to
bestow them, that by receipt of them, his people might be fitted for the
salvation he intends them.

And therefore notwithstanding that they are required, the gift of salvation is
most free.

Thus have we done with your Argument, from the freeness of grace (which, that
it may well stand with our conditions, I hope is well cleared) as also with
your Arguments taken from scripture. We come now to those you fetch from Reason
The first of which was taken from the intent of Christ in dying, which the
Scriptures hold out to be the salvation of those for whom he died. Now (say
you) if he died conditionally, it will follow that he willed not their
salvation at all, but their damnation, as much or more then their salvation;
for he wills their salvation if they believe, otherwise their damnation: and it
is natural to them not to believe.

This and all that follows in the Argument, may make against the Arminians,
who hold that Christ has purchased salvation for us, but not faith, and that
he died for us conditionally (i. e.) that we should be saved if we did believe
but did no way procure for us, that we should believe; and accordingly it is
used by our Authors, though in other terms, to destroy the Arminians
conditionality; as you may see in (...)
Owen. But conditional redemption, in which the conditions are purchased, as
well as the salvation (which is that we maintain) it no way oppugneth. Put case
an outlandish man should procure for his Son some inheritance in our Country
to be enjoyed by him upon his infranchisement; you cannot say he intended his
Sons non-enjoyment of it as much as enjoyment, because of the condition of his
Infranchisement, if that the Infranchisement be procured by the father as well
as the inheritance. The purchasers intent (I hope is) full and firm.
Notwithstanding the conditionality of the purchase, when the condition is
purchased, as well as the thing. So when we maintain that Christ has procured
salvation for us, to be enjoyed conditionally, if we do believe. You cannot
infer thence, that he intended our damnation as much as salvation, because we
have no power to believe; for we maintain also, that Christ has purchased
for us, that we shall believe.

Sir, Arminians say, That Christ died for us that we might be saved if we do
believe; (...) p. 112.
we, that Christ died for us, that we should believe, and believing, have life
through his name.

Dare you say that Christ died for any so absolutely, as that they should be
saved whether they did believe or no? I hope you will not, though your
parallelling the new Covenant with that with Noah does naturally yield such an
inference, as has already been showed.

Your second Argument was the same with one you used in your former sermons,
where you asserted the absoluteness of the new Covenant, viz. That this
conditionality infers a liberty of will.

But Sir, that those who plead for conditions are no way maintainers or
abettors of free will, their writings sufficiently declare.

Gataker Rejoynd. p. 31.
You make men believe that we preach not repentance as the grace of God by his
Spirit, wrought in our hearts in and for Christ, which is most untrue; and who
of us denies faith to be the gift of God, or that God out of his love to us in
Christ, freely works it in us, that thereby we may be enabled to receive
Christ. That we are not only half dead, but quite dead, and can do nothing
that is good until the spirit quicken us; cannot go to Christ til God the
Father draws us: cannot believe on Christ nor repent of sin until the Lord
give it unto us, and enable us thereto, is a doctrine I have long ago learned
from their Sermons, and often meet with in their writings. And as for the
inference, he which charge the Patronage of free will on that kind of
preaching, that holds out life and salvation upon condition of faith and
repentance, let him look to it how he will quit Christ and his Apostles from
that charge, whose Sermons are full of counsels, commands and calls, that
require men to repent and believe, if ever they would be saved. Sir, conditions
to be performed by us of our own strength and power, which the Arminians
maintain, argue a power in man's will indeed. But conditions purchased by
Christ for us, and to be wrought by his Spirit in us, which we maintain;
Infer no power of free will at all.

Your third Argument was taken from election. That from this conditional
redemption would follow, that men are elected but conditionally, so that Gods
election should be undetermined and uneffectual, and the will of God should be
made subordinate to the will of the creature.

Sir, God may be said to elect conditionally two ways.

1. So as that the condition be considered as anteceding his election, moving
him to will salvation to such a person. This conditionality indeed subordinates
the will of the Creator to the creature, and causes election to be
undetermined and ineffectual. But such kind of conditions, we oppugn as
Arminian.

Or 2. so, as that the condition preceede indeed the actual enjoyment of the
benefits to which men are elected, but follows election it self. And this
consideration of conditions of election we propugne, as no way evacuating
either the efficacy or determinatenesse of Gods election, nor yet in any wise
subjecting the will of God to the will of man therein. Hear what Dr. Ames says
to this very thing. Fidem poni^ ut conditionem salutem quidem antecedentem; sed
electionem ipsam consequentem nunquam a nostris negatum fuit; summa^ vero cum
religione constanter traeditum. Cor. de Elect. c. 1.. 4. p. 7.
It never was denied by our Divines, that faith was maintained as a condition
antecedent indeed to salvation, but consequent unto, or following election it
self; (i. e.) but has been constantly religiously maintained. No Sir, our
doctrine concerning conditions, does no way destroy the certainty of election.
But on the contrary, the doctrine of election does confirm this our Tenent of
Conditional Redemption. For so as God from all eternity purposed salvation unto
us, and elected us thereto: So did Christ purchase it, and so is it actually to
be applied. But God 2 These. 2. 11.
has from the beginning chosen us to salvation through sanctification of the
spirit, and belief of the truth. And heretofore Christ did purchase it to be
obtained that way, and that way it is actually to be enjoyed. So that till we
be brought over, to the belief of the truth and some degree of Sanctification;
we cannot be said actually to partake of any part of the salvation purposed or
purchased. That God elects for faith foreseen, we uterly deny; but that he
electeth through or by it, i.e. salvation to be obtained through or by it, we
religiously maintain.

Your fourth Argument runs thus, If the purchases of Christ's death have any
condition annexed to them in regard of application, then these conditions share
with Christ in the business of salvation. It is the same with another of your
Arguments used in your former lectures, and near of kin to that of Doctor
Crispe, vol. 1. p. 168. Then Christ justifies not alone. Is faith Christ
himself? if not, then Christ must have a partner to justify.

But the sequel both in yours and the Doctors Argument is notoriously false;
and that because conditions are not required in the same way of causality that
Christ's righteousness is. For that is required as a meritorious cause,
purchasing and procuring man's peace; faith is an instrument apprehending it,
and Christ the cause of it; repentance as a way leading to it, or qualification
fitting a person for it. Now when an effect depends on diverse causes of a
different kind, the necessity of the one, argues not the insufficiency of the
other; but the one may be sufficient in its kind, though the other be required.
The wounded person must apply the plaster to the wound, if he will have it
heal him. The diseased person must drink the potion, must travel to the bath,
and bathe himself therein, if he will have either the potion to purge him, or
the bath to cure him: Yet would it be great weakness in either of these, to
say, that the plaster, the potion, the bath were not sufficient, because they
were required to go unto the one, to take and apply the other; for their
taking, going, drinking, applying, are not required in the same sanatory and
medicinal way as the bath, the plaster, or the portion are; but only in an
instrumental way, to bring these home to him, that so they might work upon
him. So, nor is my repentance and faith required in any satisfactory or
meritorious way, to satisfy Gods justice together with Christ, or merit
remission for me; no, Christ does that alone, they are only required to fit me
for Christ, and bring me to Christ. Did we ascribe any merit or worthiness to
our conditions, then you might say indeed that we made them partners with
Christ; but we abhor this as much as you. Faith, says Mr. Rejoinder p. 47.
Gataker, affords not the least mite toward the making up of that price,
wherewith our debt is to be discharged.

That this answer would be made unto your Argument, you your self foresaw; and
therefore to Anticipate it. You say, -- But some distinguish between
Conditions, and meritorious Conditions, etc. Unto which you reply, That this is
a most weak evasion, for Papists themselves ascribe no merit to the
preparations they plead for; and cite for it Conc. Trid. Sess. 6. c. 8.

And here Sir, is a second calumny. For as before you ranked us with
Arminians, so here you would insinuate that we join hands with Papists in
maintaining of this conditional redemption. But as I hope I have vindicated it
from the charge of Arminianisme; so I doubt not also to clear it from this of
Papisme.

Is it enough, my good friend, to make a thing evil, to say that Papists hold
so? Why did you cite Aestius and Lessius, both Papists, among the Champions of
your opinion? Papists agree with us, and we with them in many things. Nor call
we that Popish where they are sound, and agree with us, but that only wherein
they being erroneous we dissent from them, and protest against them. Now
whether or no Papists maintain any meritoriousnesse in the preparations they
defend, sure I am, that Protestant Authors chiefly oppose this meritoriousnesse
of them, as I shall prove unto you.

First then, consider that what Chemnitius reply, to that very place and
passage of the Counsel that you cite, If I have not mist your quotation. His
words are these.

Si igitur haec esset men's et sententia Synodi, quod simpliciter vellet
monstrare illum, de quo jam diximus, modum et ordinem, quo juxta Scripturae
traditionem Deus utitur quando homines vult deducere ad justificationem; et si
illa quae Scriptura tradit procedere, tribuerent non viribus liberi arbitrii,
sed gratiae Dei, et operationi Sp. Sancti, nec in illis praeparationibus
constituerem meritum aut dignitatem, propter quam justificemur: facile posset
de vocabulo praeparationis, dextre juxta Scripturam intellecto, conveniri.
Exam. part 1 p. 172.
If therefore this were the mind and judgment of the Synod, that it would
simply show that manner and order which God does use according to the Doctrine
of the Scripture, when he intends to bring men to justification; and if they
would not attribute those things which the Scripture teaches do go before it,
to the strength of free will, but to the grace of God, and operation of his
Holy Spirit, nor place any merit or worth in those preparations for which we
may be justified; we might easily be agreed concerning the word preparation,
rightly understood according to the Scripture.

Out of which of Chemnitius, I observe three things. (1) That however in that
Session they did daube over the matter, yet they did hold a dignity, worth, and
merit of congruity to be in these preparations, which the same Chemnitius does
afterward prove at large, spending three or four leaves therein. (2) That
Chemnitius held something, some work wrought by the Spirit in man to precede
his justification, or his reception of justification; for in the following
paragraph, thus he speaks.

Falsum est igitur quod in 9 canone nobis tribuunt, quasi docemus nullum plane
motum voluntatis divinitus donatum et excitatum, praeced ere acceptionem
justificationis: Omnino enim docemus poenitentiam et contritionem praecedere.
Non dicimus, praecedere tanquam meritum, quod sua dignitate cooperatur ad
justificationem consequendam, sed sicut sensus morbi aut dolor vulneris non est
meritum sanationis, sed urget et impellit ad desiderandum, quaerendum, et
sucipiendum medicum.
It is therefore false, which in the ninth Canon they attribute to us, as if we
taught that not any motion of the will given by God, and excited by him, does
go before our receiving of justification: for we do altogether teach that
repentance and contrition do go before. We do not say, that they go before
as a merit, which by its worth does cooperate to the obtaining of
justification; but as the sense of sickness or grief of a wound, is not any
merit of the cure, but does raise and stir up to desire, seek out and
welcome the Physician. For the whole has no need of the Phsitian, but they
that are sick, as Christ says.

And in this sense, those things (as the Scripture says) do go before.

3. That he could easily have agreed with those Tridentine Fathers about
preparations (the word preparation being rightly understood, and according to
Scripture expressions;) if they would not have ascribed them to the strength of
free will, nor have put the worth and merit of justification upon them. By this
(I think) it is plain, that they were meritorious preparations that Chemnitius
did oppose in his writings against the Papists. And truly I wonder, that you
should cavil at that distinction I gave between a condition and a meritorious
cause: And more, that, you should say that Papists ascribe no merit to
conditions, and preparations. You know the question concerning the conditional
promises of the Gospel is handled under that concerning the necessity of works,
where our Writers grant a necessity of presence, but not of efficiencie, which
Bellarmine contends for. Now I pray, what do they understand by that
efficiency, but a meritorious efficiency? or, what other then that can be
ascribed unto works? yea, that our Authors understand merit by that
efficiency, they deny. Add to Chemnitius, Chamier, and consider two passages
in him.

At Evangelium non promittit salutem absque ulla condition legis observandae;
neque id nostrumquisquam docuit: modo ne conditio pro merito sumatur. tom. 3.
l. 15. c. 2. 9. nam et fidei conditio non est antecedens sed consequens, quia
nullum fidei meritum attenditur, sive fides non est causa salutis.
But the Gospel does not promise salvation without any condition of observing
the law, nor did ever any of ours teach that: so that he do not take the word
condition for merit. And in chapter 5. Sect. 11. For the condition of faith is not
antecedent, but consequent, because there is no merit of faith considered, or
faith is not the cause of salvation. To these join Doctor Ames, who says.

Non negamus bona opera ullam relationem habere ad salutem; habent enim
relationem adjuncti consequentis, et effecti ad salutem (ut loquuntur) adeptam;
et adjuncti antecedentis, ac disponentis ad salutem adipiscendam; atque etiam
argumenti confirmantis, fiduciam ac spem salutis: sed negamus ulla opera nostra
causam esse posse meritoriam justificationis ac salutis. Bell. ener. tom 4. lib.
6 cap 6.
We do not deny that good works have any relation to salvation; for they have
the relation of an adjunct consequent, and of the effect to salvation obtained
(as they speak;) and of an adjunct antecedent, and disposing to salvation to
be obtained; and also of an Argument confirming our assurance and hope of
salvation: But we deny that any works of ours can be a meritorious cause of
justification and salvation. And in the Chapter before, Promissiones cum
condition obedientiae ut causae juris quod habemus ad rem promissam, sunt
propriae legis: sed promissiones cum condition obedientiae, ut adjuncti aut
effecti rei promissae, vel dona^ionis ejus, locum suum habent in benignissimae
gratiae regno, ubi meritis nostris nullus habetur locus. cap. 5.. 2.
Promises with a condition of obedience as the causes of that right which we
have to the thing promised, are proper to the law; but promises with condition
of obedience, as of the adjunct or effect of the thing promised, or the
donation of it, have place in the most bountiful kingdom of grace, where
there is no place found for our merits.

Bishop Davenant shall be the next, who averring repentance, faith and love to
be necessary to justification, adds by way of explication, and in opposition to
the Popish sense of necessity,

Haec et hujusmodi opera cordis interna sunt omnibus justificatis necessaria:
non quod contineant in se efficaciam seu meritum justificationis, sed quod
juxta ordinationem divinam vel requirentur ut conditiones praeviae seu
concurrentes, sicuti poenitere et credere; vel ut effecta a fide justificante
necessario manartia, ut amare Deum, diligere proximum. De just. act. cap. 30.
Q. 1. Argum. 1.
These and the like inward works of the heart are necessary to all that are
justified: not because they contain in themselves that efficacy or merit of
justification; but because according to Gods ordination either they are
required as conditions precedaneous to, or concurrent with justification, as to
repent, and to believe; or else as effects necessarily flowing from justifying
faith, as to love God, to love our neighbor. And in his next Chapter, stating
this question, whether good works may be said to be necessary to justification
and salvation? he sets down in his first and second conclusions, that in
controversies with Papists, and Sermons to vulgar people, we should not use
such expressions without due explication of them, and that because both Papists
and people will be ready to understand them necessarily as meritorious causes of
salvation. Showing by example of the Ancient Fathers how careful they have
been to forbear some forms of speech, by reason of the corrupt sense of
heretics: to which purpose he alleges that of Hierom; that which may well be
spoken, is not sometimes to be spoken by reason of the Ambiguity.

Nevertheless in his fifth, sixth and seventh Conclusions he maintains, that
they are necessary thereto, though not as meritorious causes, yet as previous
and concurrent conditions. Let Mr. Perkins be the first we name for this
particular; who in his Reformed Catholic, besides the head of Merit, (which
wholly makes for us, and shows sufficiently the Papists to be Patrons of
merit) in that of Repentance, speaking of the differences between us and
Papists, therein says, The fourth abuse is touching the effect and efficacy of
Repentance; for they make it a meritorious cause of remission of sin, and of
life everlasting, flat against the Word of God. And a little after: They
ascribe to their contrition the merit of congruity, which cannot stand with the
sufficient merit of Christ. We for our parts hold, that God requires contrition
at our hands, not to merit remission of sins, but that we may acknowledge our
own unworthiness, be humbled in the fight of God, and distrust all our own
merits; and further, that we may make more account of the benefit of Christ,
whereby we are received into the favor of God, and more carefully shun sin for
time to come. But we acknowledge no contrition at all to be meritorious save
that of Christ. I might add to these, learned In Psalm. 68 in solut. arg. med.
ult.
Camero, and repeat that which I cited out of him before, it being the very
distinction which you call a most weak evasion; and the defense of which, we
are now upon. As also renowned Tract. of Justif. Sect. 2. c. 1. Per modum
causae efficientis and meritoriae, impetrando, promerendo; and suo modo
inchoando justificationem.
Pemble, who spends a whole Chapter in refuting that opinion of Bellarmine, and
the Romanists; viz. That faith justifies us as an efficient and meritorious
cause obtaining, deserving, and in its kind beginning justification. But I
shall content my self with the recital of two more, who handle the very
Question now in controversy, Whether the Promises of the Gospel be absolute or
conditional? And determine that they are absolute, not conditional. The first
of these is Broachman, who says, Non controvertitur an promissiones
Evangelicae ut sint fructuosae and salutares, requirant fidem: Nocum est illud
Christi, Mar ult 6. Johan. 1. 16. Nec in controversiam vocatur, An promissiones
Evangelicae ita gratuitae sint and absolutae, ut absolvant hominem a dolor
serio ob peccata, et ab omni studio b^norum operum? Infans enim sit oportet in
Scriptu^is, cui non innotuerae bae Spiritus sancti assertiones: Romans 6. 1, 2.
and 8. 1. Tit. 4. 10. Genuinus autem quaest: onis status est, An Evangelium
propter ullam nostram dignitatem, intentionem, opus, me itum, ullamve in nobis
dispositionem, promi^tat nobis gratiam, misericordiam, remissionem peccatorum,
and vitam aeternam; an ve o per and propter Jesum Christum fide apprehensum?
Syst. tom 2. art. de Evang. c. 2.
It is not controverted, Whether the promises of the Gospel, that they may be
fruitful and saving, do require faith: Neither is it called into controversy,
Whether the promises of the Gospel be so free and absolute, that they discharge
a man from a serious sorrow for sins, and from all study of good works? For he
must be an infant in Scripture, that is not acquainted with these assertions of
the holy Spirit. But the true state of the question is, whether the Gospel for
any our worth, intention, work, merit, or any disposition in us, does promise
to us grace, mercy, remission of sins and eternal life; or rather for and
through Jesus Christ apprehended by faith. And again, in answer to Bellarmines
fifth objection, which was, that the promises of the Gospel do always require
the condition of Faith: Thus he says; which we grant. And further averrs,
that this condition of faith will stand with his Assertion of absolute
promises: For says he, We warned you in the beginning, that it is not
controverted, Whether the promises of the Gospel do require faith, which we
willingly grant: An in gratuita remissione peccatorum, requiratur conditio
fidei, ut aliquod opus nostrum, aut aliqua in nobis dispositio; cui ut cau^ae
efficienti, adjutanti, aut cooperanti, ascribatur gra^uita remissio peccatorum;
quod rotunde negamus
But whether in the free remission of sins, the condition of Faith be required
as any work of ours, or certain disposition in us; to which, as to an
efficient, helping, or cooperating cause, the free remission of sins may be
ascribed; which we do roundly deny.

The other is Mr. Vind. Leg. Lect. 26. p. 249.
Burges, who asserts the same out of Broachman, as I conceive. By these
Citations I hope it will more then sufficiently appear to an eye not strangely
possessed with prejudice,

1. That the distinction between a Condition and a meritorious Cause, is no
slender and weak Evasion, but a maine and fundamental Distinction in this
Controversy, such as on which the very hinges of the Controversy does turn.

2. That your saying. That Papist ascribe not any meritoriousnesse to
conditions, etc. is most false, if there be any truth in these Protestants
collections; yea, that it does asperse these reverend Protestant Authors
forenamed, who oppose the Papist in the very particular.

3. That those of our Divines who maintain conditional promises in the
Covenant, whilst withal they exclude all claim of dignity, worth, merit, or any
such causality from these conditions, do not join with Papists, as you would
make the people believe, but with Protestants against Papists; and differ not
one hairs breadth from those who aver the Covenant to be absolute, not
conditional: for by the Conditions which they deny, they understand meritorious
Conditions.

4. That in rejecting this distinction between a Condition and a meritorious
Cause, and asserting the Covenant to be without, not only meritorious
conditions, but all other also: you oppose all Orthodox Divines that ever I met
with, not only those that hold the Covenant to be conditional, but those also
who in terminis aver the absoluteness of it, (for by the conditions they
reject, they understand meritorious ones, as has been showed) and join with
Mr. Saltmarsh, Dr. Crisp, and such other whom the Othodox, not out of malice,
but for distinction sake, and for the due desert of some of their Tenants do
call Antinomians.

But let us see what further strength you bring to the battering of this
distinction: for your charge of Popery will not hold. You add therefore
farther; Did Adams doing merit life? None will say it. Yet the Grace of God is
more showed in the latter then in the first Covenant. Therefore in it no
conditions at all.

Sir, The Apostle says, To him that works the reward is reckoned, A Reward
of is Justic. Ball. ^ov. p. 25.
not of grace, but of debt, Romans 4. 4. I know some hold the Covenant with Adam,
wherein works were enjoined, to be a Covenant of Grace. I have heard Mr.
Symonds of Holland deliver that in a Sermon at Rederith, and thereupon divide
the Covenant of Grace into the Covenant of Works, and the Covenant of Faith.
Certainly, had Adam kept the condition of the first Covenant, he had done no
more then his Duty; nor had he profited God at all; besides, there would have
been small or no proportion between that his Work and the reward; all which are
required to merit proper. So that in some sense that may be called a Covenant
of Grace. Nevertheless in the latter Covenant of Faith, the grace of God is so
far more fully, richly, and gloriously manifested, then in that of Works, as
that it obtains the title of the Covenant of Grace. The Apostle says, it was
by Faith, that it might be by Grace, Romans 4. 16. And the Scripture being so
plain for it, I ought to believe it, though I could not make it out to others,
wherein it was freer, nor yet apprehend it my self.

But my good friend, the business is not so difficult but that it may be, and
has been already dispatched by some of our side, and the freeness of the
latter above the former, notwithstanding the conditionality of both, at large
discovered. And that not by excluding faith, or the condition of faith from the
latter (as you would have it) for that would interfere with that of the Apostle
now cited, By Faith, that it might be of Grace; where Faith is taken in, not
left out to make out the freeness. Nor yet only because faith is given of God,
and so ability to keep the latter Covenant is given, which is something. For
though that strength Adam had to keep the first Covenant was freely bestowed on
him by God in his Creation, yet when God was pleased to enter into a Covenant
with him, he had it in him, and was to work in his own strength and power.
Whereas in the New Covenant God finds man in an impotent, weak, and dead
condition, and graciously promises to work in him ability to do what he
requires: This (I say) is something that serves to show the freeness of
Divine Grace in the new Covenant; for the Apostle says expressly, Ephesians. 2. 8.
We are saved by Grace through faith, and that not of our selves, it is the gift
of God; where the giving of the thing required, to wit, Faith, is introduced by
the Apostle to show the freeness of Grace.

But the superabundancy of Grace in the latter Covenant appears mostly in this,
that in the former, the matter of man's Justification had been something of his
own, his own exact and perfect obedience to the Law of God; but in the latter,
the matter of it is an others, the perfect Righteousness of Christ. In the one,
man runs into himself for the price of his life and happiness: But in the
other, faith carries him out of himself unto another, the Lord Jesus Christ for
all. In the one, the condition it self and the keeping of it, was to have been
the matter of man's Righteousness, the ground of his Justification. In the
other, it is only the Instrument and Mean. In the one, the condition it self
(Works) procured life, in and of themselves, without any reference to any
other; but in the other, Faith is looked on, not as a Work, but as an
Instrument; nor does it save for any excellency, worth, or virtue that is in
it; but only because it lays hold on Christ. I cannot better express my self
then in Mr. Gatakers words, Rejoinder. p. 46, 47. In the one, Works are
considered, as in themselves performed by the Parties to be justified and live.
In the other, Faith is considered and required, not as a work barely done by
us, but us an Instrument whereby Christ is apprehended, in whom is found, and
by whom that is done, whereby Gods Justice is satisfied, and life eternal
meritoriously procured for us; so that they differ as much as these two
Propositions. 1. Pay your debt of a thousand pounds and be free. 2. Rely on
such a friends satisfaction made for it, and be as free as if you had made full
payment and satisfaction your self. All this and more you may find in that
reverend Divine, your contempt of whom, and all other not of your way, sads the
hearts of your friends, and makes them fear that which they are loath to
suspect concerning you.

You proceed, and tell us that though it be not meritorious, Conditio
Antecedens est effectiva.
yet if it be Antecedent, it must be Effective; For an Antecedent condition is
effective.

Sir, By your own maintaining faith to be an instrument in the work of our
salvation (which I think is more then a condition, though no more I believe
then truth) you must of necessity grant it both a precedence and efficiency
therein; for instruments are always reckoned to the efficient cause, and in
order of nature precede the effect. And thus I conceive that faith is effective
in the work of our salvation, as an instrument receiving Christ, not as a
condition. Conditions are not effective, but instruments are. As for that of
Tom. 3. l. 5. c. 5.. 2.
Chamier, that a condition* Antecedent is effective; I conceive he means
meritorious, the passage cited out of him already leading me to that
conjecture: For (says he) the ibid.. 16
Condition of faith is not Antecedent, but consequent, because no merit of
faith is considered, or faith is not the Cause of Salvation. Now that
Conditions are meritorious, yea or so much as impulsive, is altogether denied
by the Assertors of conditions, who allow no causality at all to them. It rests
on you to prove that the Antecedency of a condition does infer its causality:
For though Chamier aver it, yet I see no ground for that his assertion,
especially in such conditions, as those we maintain in the New Covenant.

Your first Argument runs thus: If Conditions be annexed, etc. Then no man can
be sure of the benefits purchased whiles he lives; for the conditions must be
performed, etc. To which we may add two Arguments of your former Sermons, the
first the very same with this: If salvation were on condition, then none could
be sure of salvation, for none can be sure to hold out in performance of the
Condition. The other, If any condition be required, then none can be saved, for
none can perform the condition. Adam could not abstain from one tree when he
was in the state of Innocence. Much less. --

First, Sir, your instance of Adam, we conceive it unsound. That he did not
abstain, we find by woeful experience; but that he could not, we deny. Recepit
posse si vellet, non autem velle ut posset, says a Father. Adam had power to
have abstained if he would, only his will was not confirmed in good; whereupon
it came to pass that he freely fell.

Secondly, Your weapon may be turned against your self: For whereas you hold,
That none are saved but such as believe, it may be objected unto you out of
your own Argument, Then none can be saved, for none can believe; or, Then none
can be sure of Salvation, because none can be sure to hold out in believing.

Thirdly, It seems to me directly to cross the Apostle, who tells us, That it
was of faith, that the Promise might be sure to all the Seed, Romans 4. 16.

Fourthly, Whereas you say, That if Conditions be required, then none can be
sure, because none can be sure to hold out; Do you not seem to intimate that
salvation is sure to the Elect, whether they hold out in the faith or not?
which is the Monster Arminians would father upon our Tenants.

For answer therefore to your Argument, the main of it may wound an Arminian,
who holds falling from grace: but as for those who hold no such uncomfortable
Doctrine, it no way touches them. We say with David, 2 Samuel 23. 5. Although my
house be not so with God, yet he has made with me an everlasting Covenant
ordered in all things and sure. For he has promised to circumcise our hearts,
to write his Laws in our hearts, to give us a new heart, and then through
grace, after our recovery, we may do that which in our sick, dead, and corrupt
estate we could not do; namely, keep the condition in an Evangelical way,
wherein though exact perfectness be required, yet is repentance admitted, and
sincerity accepted.

Again, he has promised to put his fear in our hearts, that we may not depart
from him, Jer. 32. 40. And we are confident that he who has begun a good work
in us, will perform it to the day of Christ, Phil. 1. 6. Qui operatur ut
accedamus, idem operatur ne discedamus. We answer therefore the main of your
Argument, even as we answer the Arminians, That though in regard of our own
strength, which is weak, we may fear, yet in regard of Gods manutenency we are
sure. Who will keep us, not without, but by and through the Means he has
appointed us, even faith; by which, as he brings us into a state of Salvation,
so through the same he will keep us by his Almighty power unto salvation, 1
Pet. 1. 5. We are as sure of perseverance in observation of the condition as of
Salvation; holding both of God by like tenure of free promise.

Salvation, you see then, may be obtained, notwithstanding the conditions
required, because God has promised to give ability to perform them, and to
persevere in the performance of them. This you foresaw would be replied, and
therefore anticipate it by saying, But God has promised to give faith. To
which you rejoyne, I demand, Whether that Promise be absolute or conditional?
And anon, There is no reason why one Promise should be more absolute then
another.

But 1. Sir, Whether absolute or conditional, a Promise it is, and such as does
assure the soul of the condition on which salvation is given. So that Salvation
is sure, notwithstanding the conditionality of the Covenant, and the sinews of
your Argument are cut in two.

2. For your Quaerie, Whether it be conditional or absolute? I conceive it
absolute. Christ procured Salvation for us to be bestowed conditionally, if we
do believe; but faith it self has he absolutely procured without prescribing
of any condition; Quum promissiones de perseverantia obsolutas esse negant, sed
conditionatas tantum, etc. Ames. Cor. p. 389.
so that it is equivalent to an absolute purchase in respect of the event and
issue. Owen Universal Redemp. l. 3. c. 1. and 2. For my part, I cannot imagine
how any condition (I mean Antecedent condition, for a Consequent condition they
may admit of) can be annexed to those Promises, I will write my Laws in their
hearts, and I will put my fear into their hearts, and I will take the stony
heart out of their bodies. etc. unless free will be granted. And therefore I
conceive those promises to be absolute in regard of Antecedent conditions. Now
whereas you say, There is no reason why one Promise should be more absolute
then another; the will of the Covenant Maker to have it so, is it self a
sufficient Reason. Is it not the will of God to give Christ absolutely, and
then salvation for Christ's sake to them that do believe in him? Shall I say
here, That there is no reason why one gift should be more absolute then
another? He who works all things according to the counsel of his own will,
has infinite reason both for his will and working. In the mean while, Sir,
your Reason from the certainty of Salvation, is (I think) sufficiently
discovered to have nothing of force against Protestant conditional Redemption.

Your last Argument was taken from the Analogy or Resemblance betwixt Christ
and Adam; As by the one, sin is conveyed; so by the other Righteousness: but
by the one sin and death are conveyed without Condition; Ergo.

I doubt not Sir, but that you will remember the old rules; viz. 1. That
similitudes run not on all four. 2. Nor are Argumentative. I might as well
argue hence, That all mankind are redeemed by Christ, because they were all
destroyed by Adam: Or that all were not corrupted by Adam, as Peter Martyr on
the place tells me, Ambrose and Origin did hence hold, because all are not
repaired by Christ: Or with Bellarmine, That Adam conveyed inherent sin to his
posterity whereby they perish, and therefore the Righteousness of Christ
conveyed for our recovery must be inherent. We should many ways clip the truth
of God, if we should every way make these lines run parallel. Hear Peter Martyr
to the very point, This Analogy holds true only in the general: In Cap. 5. ad
Romans v 14. In illa verba Qui est typus su uri.
but in respect of the particular, and the kinds, there is great difference.
Adam conveyes sin by Propagation to his Posterity: But Christ conveyed
Righteousness by faith.

After this you had a passage concerning actual Righteousness and actual
Reconciliation, to this purpose: Unless men will grant that Christ purchased a
salvability, the salvation purchased must be actual; for Inter actum and
potentiam non datur medium.

Sir, I know none of ours that deny, that Christ purchased actual salvation for
those for whom he dyed; i.e. That in time they should be actually saved in that
way and method agreed on between the Father and the Son. The thing we deny is,
That the salvation purchased, is actually theirs for whom its purchased before
they come actually to believe. You must give us leave to distinguish between
the Purchase and the Possession: the Grant or Donation of a Benefit, and the
actual exhibition and reception of it. The child may have an Inheritance
purchased for him, and bequeathed to him before he is born, but he must be born
before he can enjoy it. Abraham had the grant and Donation of Canaan, long
before his had the actual possession of it. Hear we Dr. Ames in this
particular; Donatam igitur and gratiam and salutem omnes and singuli habent;
quamvis rei donatae possessionem non habent ante fidem. Cor. p. 126, 127.
All and each have grace and salvation given, though they have not the
possession of the thing given before faith.

Now unto these Arguments let us add one or two more out of your former Sermons
about the absoluteness of the Covenant; many of which having fallen in with
those already discussed, and not above one or two remaining.

The first, If any thing were required on our part, then beasting could not be
excluded. This also Dr. Crisp vol. 10. p. 71. If any thing were done on our
parts to partake of Christ, we might have wherein to boast, Romans 4. 2.

But I pray consider seriously how cross this your Argument is to the very
Text: For did not Abraham, the party spoken of there, do something for his part
to partake of Christ, when he believed? yet was he excluded from boasting. And
does not the Law of Fath, the Gospel, require faith on man's part, that
Righteousness may be imputed? why else is it called a Law? Yet the Apostle
says expressly, that by this Law boasting is excluded, Romans 3. 27. If indeed we
could do any thing in a meritorious way, we might boast, not otherwise. The
beggar I hope, has little to boast of, and yet does he both crave and receive
his Alms. The sinner has less: for as that he does can no way merit, no more
then the beggars craving and receiving; so nor can he do that, until the Lord
enable him. God must give him both a mouth and a hand, before he can speak for
Christ to take him. Yet both he must have, before he can receive, the Lord
having set down to himself (as you your self acknowledge) such a method and way
of giving.

The other which seems to be of more strength, and I think the strongest you
bring, is this, If the Promise of Salvation were upon condition of believing,
then men should believe before they be justified, contrary to Romans 4. 5. where
it is said, God justifies the ungodly. Now no where in Scripture Believers are
called ungodly; The same almost totidem verbis you may read in the Doctor, vol.
1. p. 170, 171.

Now for answer unto ths, I desire you to consider, what the Papists say
concerning this Justification of the wicked. That wheresoever in Scripture God
is said to justify the ungodly, it must be understood that he also makes the
ungodly just and righteous; for otherwise the judgment of God would not be
according to truth, and the Lord should do that himself which he forbids his
creature to do, and abhors in his creature when ever he does it, Exodus 23. 7.
Isaiah 5. 23. Deuter. 25. 1. Prove. 17. 15. And lest you should think light of
it, Fas est ab hosto doceri.
because it comes from them, though it is right to learn even from an enemy;
hear what the learned Pemble says of this very rule cited by him. 1. c. 3. of
Justific.
We embrace this rule (says he) and the reason of it, acknowledging that where
ever there is Justification, there must be Justice some way or other in the
party Justified* The God of truth should otherwise call darkness light, and
evil good. And therefore both that Author, as also Paraeus and Chamier, tells
us, that the Righteousness of Christ imputed to this ungodly person is the
ground of this gracious sentence of God, whereby he does absolve, acquit, and
justify him. So that the person, though he be ungodly and unrighteous in
himself, and so unjustifiable, yet is he godly, just, and righteous in Christ
and through the Righteousness of Christ imputed to him justifiable. Let this
then be agreed on; i.e. 1. That the ground of this gracious sentence of God,
whereby he justifies the ungodly must be some kind of Righteousness. And 2.
That it is the righteousness of Christ imputed to the sinner. The Quaerie then
will be, Whether this Righteousness of Christ be imputed to the sinner before
he does believe, or not till he believes? Now I think the Scriptures are very
clear for the latter, that Righteousness is not imputed to the sinner til he
does believe: that very Text it self confirms it, To him that believes on him
that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for Righteousness. It is to
him that believes that Righteousness is imputed; and again, His faith is
counted, etc. Take faith how you will, it must come into the imputation, the
imputation is not without it. So again, Abraham believed God and it was
accounted to him for Righteousness, ver. 3. When was it so accounted?
Certainly when he believed: It was whilst he was in uncircumcision indeed, but
not whilst he was in unbelief: He received Circumcision (says the Apostle)
the Seal of the Righteousness of faith, which yet he had being uncircumcised.
As he had Righteousness then, so had he faith too, for it was a Righteousness
of faith. And as it was imputed unto him upon believing, so shall it be imputed
unto us if we believe on him who raised up Jesus, verse. 24. Hence it is called
the Righteousness of faith, for that it comes to be ours through faith. Faith
takes it, receives it, puts it on. The Righteousness of God by Faith, Phil. 3.
9.

We answer then that place in the Romans thus,

1. An ungodly person may be taken either for one who is wicked, We grant that
God does justify an ungodly person but in sensu diviso, not in sensu
composito; so as he makes the lame to leap, the blind to see Isai. 33. 6. Mat.
11. 5. By order of Nature he is first a believer, and then is justified.
Rutherford Survey of Antin. p. 110
and goes impenitently on in his wickedness, never once looking after Christ; a
sinner continuing in his impenitency and unbelief. Now such an ungodly person
God does not justify; for it is against both his truth and justice.

2. It may be taken for one that is ungodly and unjustifiable in himself; but
yet believing on Christ, is through him and his satisfaction Just, and so
justifiable. Such an ungodly person God does Justify; and thus Ames, Paraeus,
Bishop Downam, and those other Divines I have in their descriptions of
Justification, make not a sinner simply, but a believing sinner to be the
subject of Justification, or the person to be justified.

Now whereas you say, That no where in Scripture a Believer is called ungodly.
I conceive it false, He is called so there: For who is the ungodly person
spoken of there, but Abraham? and he was justified (as has been showed) when
he did believe. Besides, God the object of faith Justifying, who is described
there to be the Justifier of the ungodly is said in ver. 26. of the foregoing
Chapter, to be the Justifier of him that believes in Jesus. I beseech you tell
me, does not the Apostle speak of one and the same Justification in both
places? Does he not in both places describe one and the same person, the person
that is justified? Him then whom he calls a Believer on Christ in one place,
the same he calls an ungodly person in the other; and whom he calls an ungodly
person in this, in that he styles the same a believing person. Certainly,
seeing (as it is Chap. 3. verse. 30) that it is one God that justifies both the
Circumcision by faith, and the uncircumcision through faith, i.e. All that are
justified, both Jew and Gentile, circumcised or uncircumcised, by or through
one and the same mean of faith. It must needs be that the ungodly person spoken
of in the next Chapter, is such an ungodly person, as has faith, and does
believe; or else God should justify some without faith, to which the former
place does aver the contrary. That place in the Romans then concerning Gods
justifying the ungodly, will not bear the Position you ground upon it; viz.
That sinners are justified before they do believe; or that we do not believe,
that we may be justified, as the Doctor expresses it, an assertion as rotten
as the foundation on which it is built; and expressly contrary to the Apostle,
who tells us, Galat. 2. 16. that he had believed on Christ, that so he might
be justified by the Faith of Christ.

Thus have I given you an account of some, and those of the main of your
Arguments, both wherein they have not satisfied me concerning the Tenent you
endeavored to maintain, and wherein also they have offended me, whilst they
wounded that I hold for truth through the sides of Popery and Arminianism. I
shall now show you some grounds of my belief on the contrary: first taking
leave in a word to state the Question, and to set down how, and what I hold
concerning it

First then, I distinguish between both a condition and a meritorious cause, as
also between it and an impulsive cause. By condition, I understand neither any
thing meriting Justification at Gods hands in the least degree, nor yet any
thing moving the Lord to Justify or bestow Salvation on us.

Secondly, By Conditions I understand the restipulation or repromission in a
Covenant, the terms and Articles of Agreement in a Covenant between equals,
and the thing commanded or required in a Covenant between Superiors and
Inferiors, such as is the Covenant between God and man.

Thirdly, Whereas there are conditions, yet I assert them not in any rigid and
legal, but in an Evangelical way. Not so, as if they were not strictly and in a
rigid exactness perfectly kept, there were no hope of Salvation; but so, as if
that they be not in some measure sincerely observed, there is sure damnation.
Mr. Ball will tell you, that New Cov. p. 26.
whereas in the Covenant of Nature, perfect obedience is exacted, so that if
there be the least failing in any jot or tittle, and that but once, a man can
never be justied thereby, nor can the breach be made up by any repentance. In
the Covenant of Grace, perfect obedience is indeed required, yet so as
Repentance is admitted, and sincerity accepted. Conditions in this Evangelical
way I plead for, and conceive, That God in the New Covenant does not promise
life and salvation absolutely unto his chosen, whether they believe and repent
or no: but does require from, and command them to repent and believe, if they
will be partakers of the benefits purchased by his Son, and promised by himself
in that his Covenant: which that they may do, he himself of his own grace, and
for his own Sons sake bestows faith and repentance on them. Nor have they a
right to any actual enjoyment of these benefits until they do actually repent
and believe.

The Grounds of my persuasion in this particular follow.

1. That Covenant, wherein is a mutual stipulation, is conditional. But such is
the new Covenant; therefore that is conditional. As on Gods part life and
salvation are promised, so on man's repentance, and faith, and perseverance
therein are required, and to be promised. Mar 1. 15. Chap. 6. 12. Acts 2 38.
chap. 3. 19. chap. 20. 21. John 6. 28, 29. chap. 3. 15, 16. John 8. 24. Romans 10
6, 7, 8, 9 John 8. 31. Chap. 15 5, 6, 7, 10. Heb. 3. 6. Chap. 10, 38. He cannot
see wood for trees, that does not take notice of these Evangelical commands,
wherein performance of Gospel conditions, and perseverance in that performance
are required, they every where so abundantly occur. Choose we out one of the
places named, and a little insist on it; that Romans 10 9. the rather for that in
your answer to Mr. S. you make some reply thereto. How (say you) do you prove,
that Romans 10 9. is set down the form and tenure of the New Covenant? I deny
it; The Apostles intent is. etc.

Sir, It is clear, as Calvin notes, that the Apostle here opposes the
Righteousness of faith to the Righteousness of Works. It is also clear, that
in describing the Righteousness of Works he sets down the very tenor and
form of that Covenant, The man that does them shall live by them, ver. 5. And
in opposition thereunto, delivers this to be the speech of the Righteousness
of Faith, If thou confessest with thy mouth, and believe with thine heart,
etc. If then it be granted, which cannot be denied, that in these words, The
man that does them shall live by them, the tenor of the Covenant of Works is
contained; it must needs follow by the rule of opposition, that in these words,
If thou confessest and believe, etc. the tenor of the Covenant of Grace is
also contained. Besides, when the Apostle says, The Word is nigh thee, etc.
That is the Word of faith which we preach, That if thou confess, etc. What (I
pray you) does he mean by the Word of Faith, but the Gospel? or what else did
the Apostle preach but the Gospel? The sum of which he says to be this, If
thou confess, if thou believe. etc.

Sir, That Word or Gospel which the Apostle preached, wherein he held out the
Righteousness of faith, and which he set in opposition against the Covenant of
Works; That same must needs be the Covenant of Grace. But such is the word
here; the tenor whereof he says is, If thou confess, etc. Ergo, It is the
Covenant of Grace. And whereas you say, That the Apostles intent there is to
show Gods order and method in fulfilling the promises of the Covenant, and to
describe those whom he will bring to Glory: though it make nothing against us;
for if that were his intent, he might have his intent, and describe both the
one and the other, in setting down the Covenant. (The conditions which lead to
annexed promises, holding out Gods method unto us, and the counterpane of the
Covenant or Conditions engraven on the heart, being the best character of a
person to be glorified.) Though (I say) this makes nothing against us; yet if
you consider the sense of the Apostles discourse, both in the latter end of the
the foregoing Chapter, and in this; or if you please to consult with Junius
Parallels, where he has a Lib. 2. Par. 16.
whole Parallel about this place; you shall find that the Apostles intent and
scope is otherwise then you say; namely, to prove unto the Jew, even out of
Moses, that the end of the Law was not that they might be justified thereby,
but that by the impossibility of keeping it, they might be driven to seek
Justification from Christ by faith in another Covenant; which Covenant of faith
Moses (though obscurely) did intimate unto them in those expressions, Say not
in thy heart, etc. The Word is nigh thee. By which he meant no other then that
Word of Faith, Gospel, or Covenant of Grace which the Apostle preached; the sum
whereof was, That if thou confess and believe, thou shall be saved.

Come we to some other Texts formerly alleged to prove a stipulation in the
Covenant of Grace, and replied unto by you in your Sermon. That out of Genesis 17.
touching the Covenant with Abraham was one. To which you say, If any condition
were required, then that of Circumcision, which ought also to be performed by
all under the Gospel; so we should obtrude Judaism upon Christians.

First, (My good friend) Are intimations of preaching Judaisme, Papisme, and
Arminianism no calumnies? Consider (I pray you) how you besmear the adversaries
of your Opinion to bring an odium upon them.

Secondly, What you reply, serves only, ad faciendum populum, there being no
manner of Answer made unto the Argument. For whether Circumcision belong to us
or no, it was required of Abraham and his Seed; and the soul that refused to
take it, is said to break the Covenant, and was to be cut off, ver. 14. So that
the Argument remains firm against you; yea, not at all replied unto; which is
this; The Covenant with Abraham was the Covenant of free grace: But in the
Covenant with Abraham there was a Condition required of the federates, Abraham
and his Seed: Therefore in the Covenant of free grace, there is a Condition
required of the Federates.

Thirdly, As for that you say, We distinguish between the external Sign of the
Covenant, and the substance of it. The one is alterable, the other remains
still the same. Now Circumcision was but the external Sign of Abraham's part. The
things or duties God did especially require of Abraham, were faith and sincere
obedience, Romans 4 3. Genesis 17. 1. Now these belong to Christians, as much as to
Jews, and to press them on Christians is no Judaism.

Circumcisio erat signum obligatorium foederatorum, seu restipulationis
Abrahami, obligans eum and postoros ad fidem and obedientiam foederis Deo
praestandam. Peraeus in Genesis 17. 11. Who adds, that both Sacraments,
Circumcision and Baptism, do agree, as in other ends, so in this, Quod utroque
fit obligatio solennis ad fidem and obedientiam oederis Deo praestandam. Ibid.
Circumcision was a Sign obligatory to those which were in Covenant; or a token
of the restipulation of Abraham, obliging him and his posterity to faith and
obedience of the Covenant to be performed to God. says Paraeus.

Fourthly, I conceive that mandate from the external sign of Circumcision to
reach to us Christians. Though not in the letter, yet in the Analogy, and by
virtue of it Christians stand to be baptized themselves; also to bring their
seed to partake of that Sacrament, which as the Apostle teaches us, is our
Christian Circumcision; and he that wilfully refuses may be said to break the
Covenant, as well as he that formerly refused Circumcision. The same Covenant
which gave a Commandment or Word of Restipulation for that Circumcision of
Abraham and his Seed, gives the same commandment or Word of Justification for
Baptism of Believers and our seed, says Grounds and Ends of Infant Baptism p.
38.
Mr. C^tton of New England.

The next places of Scripture to prove a stipulation were Heb. 8. 10. Heb. 2.
23. To which you reply by Interrogation: Is there any condition on man's part
intimated here? Does not God promise to do all? Does he say, If you will be my
people?

1. Sir, what you me an by that expression, Does not God promise to do all? I
wist not, Mr. Saltmarsh says, It is enough for us to believe that Christ has
repented for us, believed for us. But I hope you are not so far gone. If you by
it understand Gods gracious inabling of his creature to perform the conditions
he himself requires, I readily join with you. It is he gives us to repent
and to believe, as has been said already. But then I hope you will distinguish
between, Gods gift and man's duty; though the Ability be given of God, the
Exercise of it, or work is man's. It is man himself that believes and
repents, though he receive ability from the Lord for both.

2. We answer your Demand, Is there any condition on man's part? Yes, that there
is; namely this, They shall be my people. Can they be his people without
dutiful subjection and obedience to him? Here is this then, that God requires
of them, that if they would have him to be a God to them, to pardon them,
defend them, save them, etc. then they should take him for their God, depend on
him, submit to him, obey, worship, and serve him, and carry themselves toward
him as become his people: Hos. 2. 23.
They shall say, Thou art my God: Upon which Paraeus glosseth, Dicere Dei est
efficere; dicam ego, i. e. efficiam populum meum. Dicere nostrum est fides and
obedientia nostra.
God says, we are his people, making us to be his people. Our faith and our
obedience is our saying, The Lord is our God. Nor is it material that God does
not formally condition with them, saying, If you will be my people, etc. The
restipulation required, is no whit the less firm, when in the next Chapter the
Prophet says, Chap 3. 3.
Only thou shall abide for me many days; and not, if thou will abide for me:
it was nevertheless a conjugal Compact. The cause of this kind of expression
may be either 1. for brevities sake: or secondly, as Mr. Ball notes, God enters
into Covenant with man, not as his equal, but as his Superior or Sovereign,
appointing man his conditions in form of commands, which it is man's duty to
accept of and obey: Or 3. Which I should rather choose, to intimate thereby his
gracious purpose of giving ability to perfom the Conditions, I will put my
Laws in their hearts. They shall be my people; i e. I will not only require of
them, that they know my Laws, and obey me as becomes my people; but by my
Grace, I will cause it to be wrought within them. Whether way you take it,
either for Gods command injoyning them to be his people; or for his promise to
make them his people, it is not much material; this still remains either way,
that they were to be his people. And this we have, even from the most absolute
Promises, those of taking the stony heart away, giving a heart of flesh, a new
heart, circumcising the heart, writing the Law on the heart; which admit not,
as I conceive, any antecedent condition, yet do they clearly show that these
things are required. This new heart is required, the writing the Law on the
heart is required, and so of the rest: God does require them in his people, and
without men have them, they cannot be the people of God, nor expect salvation
from God.

These things (Sir) persuade me, notwithstanding all that you have hitherto
replied, to adhere still to what I have formerly conceived and delivered
concerning these Texts; viz. That they do hold out a stipulation in the
Covenant, and then it will be conditional. Now because this work is swollen
bigger by the one half already then (when I set pen to paper) I intended it
should have been, I shall briefly add some more Arguments, and draw toward a
close: And because we are upon stipulations in the Covenant, add we an Argument
or two of that nature.

1. That Covenant which is mandatory as well as promissory, and contains a Law
as well as a promise, that Covenant has a stipulation which they must
subscribe to, who will be federates and Covenanters therein; for whenever the
Lord annexeth a command unto a Promise, the Promise is not absolute but
conditional: there is something required in the command of him who will enjoy
the benefit of the Promise. Now the New Covenant is of this nature; it is not a
mere Promise (as some would have it) but a Law as well as a Promise, and
therefore called by the Apostle, The Law of faith, Romans 3. 27. Lex fidei
doctrina fidei. quae fidem exagit, per quam sine operibus expectatur a Deo
justitia. Alio nomine lex Evangelii. Par. and Mart. in loc.
The Law of faith is that Doctrine which does require faith to the obtaining of
that Righteousness which is freely imputed, says Paraeus. That is the Law of
Works which teaches that Righteousness is to be obtained by Works but the Law
of faith teaches, it is to be hoped for from the mercy of God alone, says
Martyr. The Doctrine teaching Righteousness by faith, is that which the Word of
the Gospel does bind us to if we will be saved, says Bernard in his Thesaur.
The Condition which offers and promises Salvation, is this Condition, If we
believe. Wilson in his Dictionary on the words.

2. That Covenant which man is forbidden to break, commanded to keep, and
wherein man is tied and bound unto God; that Covenant must needs have
conditions and restipulations on man's part; for it is in regard of the things
required from man, that man is said to break or keep, or be bound by the
Covenant. But such is the New Covenant. Abraham's was such, My Covenant shall
thou keep, Genesis 17. 9. David's was such (though you averred the contrary in your
Sermon) Psalm. 132. 12. If thy children will keep my Covenant. Such was Isreal's,
Ezekiel. 20. 37. I will make you to pass under the rod, and bring you into the
bond of the Covenant: and what Covenant does he mean but that mentioned, Ezekiel.
36. 26. and Hos. 2.? The places considered seem to me to hold out one and the
same. Such is also that administration of it under which we are. The Romans
were Romans 6. 20.
free from righteousness, before they believed on Christ, and entered into
Covenant with him; but after they were baptized into Christ they were Ver. 18,
19, 20
Servants unto Righteousness. The style of Gods people formerly was, they were
Covenant keepers, Psalm. 25. 10. Psalm. 103. 17. And is it not as proper to them
now, as it was then? May not the people of God under the Gospel be guilty of
breach of Covenant, and that not only in regard of their Covenants with men,
nor yet in regard of those necessary engagements which occasionally they make
unto the Lord, but in regard of their Baptism, See Dr. Preston N. Coven. p. 458
459. 500. etc.
and that solemn Covenant between God and them, which Baptism does seal. I
have not quite forgotten Mr. Perkins Catechism, which I learned when I was a
child, where I was taught in the fifth Principle expounded, to answer this
Question, How comes it to pass that many after their Baptism for a long time
feel not the effect and fruit of it, and some never? Thus answered, The fault
is not in God who keeps his Covenant, but the fault is in themselves, in that
they do not keep the condition of the Covenant, to receive Christ by faith, and
repent of all their sins. And a little after, How if a man never keep the
Condition to which he bound himself in Baptism? Answer, His damnation shall be
greater, because he breaks his Vow made unto God. Mr. Perkins you see, teaches
Conditions in the New Covenant, in regard of which it may be kept or broken by
us Christians.

3 This brings to my mind another Argument; That Covenant wherein a Promise is
required of the federates, which Promise they do also seal to God in receiving
of the Covenant Seal, that Covenant has a restipulation; But such is the new
Covenant. For the confirmation of the Minor, I desire you to consider how in
the Primitive times grown persons were required to profess their repentance
and faith in Christ before they were admitted unto Baptism. Repent (says
Peter, Acts 2) and be baptized: Whence also it is called the Baptism of
Repentance; Mark 1. 4. Acts 19. 4. And John is said to Baptize men unto
repentance, Mat. 3. 11. So when the Eunuch desired Baptism of Philip. Acts 8.
36, 37. saying, What does hinder me to be baptized? Philip replies, That if he
believed with all his heart, he might; whereupon followed both his confession
of Faith and Baptism. The Baptist also requires those whom he baptized to bring
forth fruits worthy amendment of life. From which places Zanchy and Piscator
collect, that faith and Repentance and new obedience, were required of all
those grownpersons who were baptized, they were to make profession of their
repentance and faith, and to make Promise of new Obedience. Take Piscators note
upon Matthew. 3. Baptismus nulli adulto conferendus est, nisi priu^ ediderit
confessionem peccatorum and fidei in Christum; ac praterea primissionem sanctae
vitae. in Mat 3. Obs. ex ver. 6, 8, 10.
Baptism is to be administered to no person that is of years, unless he shall
first of all make a confession of sins, and of faith in Christ, and withal a
Promise of leading a holy life. These Professions were afterward for the ease
of the party to be baptized, turned into Interrogations and Answers: The
Minister demanding of the party to be baptized, Do thou believe in God? the
party was wont to answer, I do believe. The Minister again inquiring. Do thou
renounce the Devil? etc. he replied, I do renounce. Which Answer when Infants
could not make of themselves, they had Parents and Sponsors who made it for
them. Thus was there a formal stipulation required of grown persons at their
first admission into Covenant and the administration of the seal of the
Covenant to him.

Farther, As before baptism, grown persons did thus profess and promise, so
by being baptized did they seal. For this Seal of Baptism, as it is Gods seal
to us assuring us of remission and other benefits promised in the Covenant: so
is it also the Christians Seal unto God, whereby he seals the promise of
Repentance, Faith and new Obedience: Hence are they said to be baptized into
Christ; into his Death, into the Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost.

Baptizari in nomen alicujus est illi consecrari ad cultum, ut quis ab illo
tanquam suo Domino denominatur ciusque servitio se totum ad^rcat. Pisin Marth.
28 v. 19.
To be baptized into any ones name is, to be consecrated to his Worship; so
that he is named from him as from his Lord, and that he dedicate himself wholly
to his service, says Piscator. And learned Zanchie having at large expressed
the same in several particulars, does briefly sum up all, Est tess^^a and nota
qua sicut differimus ab iis omnibus Gentibus, sic etiam protestamur velle
differ, and cum solo populo Dei communionem (...) bear, ac foederis quod
sancitum est in Christo inter Deum and nos conditiones servare velle. In cap. 5
ad Ephesians. de Bapt. cap. 3. These. 37.
Baptism is a note and mark whereby we do protest that we will observe the
Conditions of that Covenant which in Christ is established between God and us.
Baptism is (says Bishop Davenant) A Baptismus est pactum purioris cum Deo,
curandum itaque ut quod semel gestum est in baptismo Sacram entaliter semper in
vita peregatur veraciter, Dav. in Colos. 2. v. 1 2. Cor. 2.
Covenant made with God of loading a more holy life, therefore we must take
care that what was once Sacramentally done in Baptism, may be performed truly
throughout our whole life. Quemadmodum milites jurant in nomen Imperatoris,
atque ita illi obstring untur, ut postea non liceat eis versa^i in castris
hostium, quod si secus fecerint sit Capital: ita nos in baptismo obstring imur
Christo, ju^amusque nos postea nunquam defecturos ad Diabolum. Martyr in Rom 6.
3.
As Soldiers (says Martyr) swear in the name of the General, and are so bound
to him, that it is not lawful for them afterward to be conversant in the
enemies tents, if they do, the offense is capital: So by Baptism we are obliged
unto Christ, and we swear that we will not afterward at any time revolt to the
Devil. So also Paraeus, Notum est ex catechesis nos baptizari in nomine Sacrae
Sanctae Trinitatis tanquam unius Dei, quia in fidem, cultum, obedientiam Dei
nomine astringimur, and nos haec ipsa Deo restipulamur. Baptizamur in mortem
Christi dupliciter: Primum respectu Dei, quatenus is beneficia mortis Christi
baptismi signaculo nobis donat and obsignat: Deinde quantum ad nos,
restipulando fidem tantorum beneficiorum Christi, and mortificationem peccati
virture mortis Christi, ne nobis dominetur. Paraeus in loc.
It is known from the Catechism, That we are baptized in the name of the
Trinity, because we are bound in the name of God to faith in, to Worship and
obedience of God; and we do also promise again these things unto God. We are
baptized into the death of Christ in a double respect; first, in respect of
God, in as much as he does by the Seal of Baptism, give and seal to us the
benefits of the death of Christ. Secondly in respect of our selves, by
promising again faith to believe these so great benefits of Christ, and the
mortifying of sin by the power of the death of Christ, that it reign not over
us any more. With these forementioned does also Mr. Byfield concur, who tells
us, that Baptism is a Byfield in Col. ^ v. 12.
Bond that tyeth us to the desires and endeavors after the beginning and
finishing of our death to sin and Spiritual life, according to these Authors
sense of the places forenamed. Baptism seals our promise of Repentance,
Faith, and new Obedience to God, as well as his promise of remission unto us.
It is our pledge, our Covenantmony, and military oath, whereby we do tie and
bind our selves to the service of the Most High; which I cannot possibly
conceive how it should be such, if there were no restipulation, or repromission
in the Covenant, as you maintain.

Thus much at present concerning Restipulation in the Covenant; pass we on to
some other Arguments: and because I remember you told me, that I had in my
Sermons a number of Citations out of the Old Testament, you shall hear some
more of the Arguments I used then, for some of them I have set down already.

To what has been said add then, Gods mercies are to be obtained in Gods way,
that way and manner which God has from all eternity pitched on therein to
bring men to the enjoyment of these mercies: But God has from all eternity
purposed to give Remission, Justification, Adoption, etc. as through Christ
(for he has predestined us to the Adoption of children, through Jesus
Christ, Ephesians. 1. 5, 7.) so through faith in Christ* and in a way of
repentance, Romans 3. 25, 28. chap. 8. 28. Acts 13. 38, 39, 48. chap. 5 31. chap.
11. 18. Therefore till men actually repent and believe, they cannot actually
partake of remission, Adoption, Justification, and those other benefits and
purchases of Christ's passion.

Again, those mercies which the Prophets and Apostles propose and promise unto
men, not absolutely, but on terms of Repentance and Faith: they are not
absolutely, but upon performance of the proposed terms to be expected; but the
faithful messengers of God, both in the Old and New Testament, do both proffer
and promise remission in this manner.

Look into the Sermons of the Prophets, and we shall find in their fullest and
highest descriptions of free grace and offers of mercy, they still require
repentance of men. So Isai. 1. Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as
white as snow. But when? when they should seriously set upon the practice of
Repentance: for so in the words foregoing, Wash ye, cease to do evil, etc.
Come now and let us reason. No parley at all before this to be expected So cha.
55. a place much insisted on by Dr. Crisp for to prove the absolute freeness
now in hand. There are many things required, as thirsting, coming, hearing,
seeking, calling, forsaking of sin, and turning unto God. So the other
Prophets, Jer. 3. 12, 13, 14. Ezekiel. 18. 31, 32. chap. 33. 11. chap. 36. 26, 27.
Zach. 1. 3. Now whereas you told me, That these were proofs out of the Old
Testament, I hope you neither deny proofs thence to be authentical, nor yet the
Prophets then to have been Preachers of free grace. The Covenant (I hope) was
for substance the same then that it is now; not a conditional one then, Luth.
Gal 3. verse. 19. All the Faithful have had al way one and the self same Gospel,
and by that they were saved.
and an absolute one now. The Fathers of the Old Testament (says Luther)
before Christ appeared in the flesh, had him in the Spirit, believed in him,
and were saved by him as we are, according to the saying, Jesus Christ is one
yesterday, to day, and shall be the same for ever. Luther in Galat. c. 4. v. 2.

Come to the New Testament, and we shall find that salvation was held out in
the same manner then. Christ and his forerunners were Preachers of Repentance*
So also Pemb. vind. fid. 138 p. Treat. of Justif. Sect. 4 cap. 1.
yea, the Commission for preaching of the Gospel which is still on record, does
show how it was then, and is still to be published, not without, but on terms
of Repentance, Luke 24. 47. That Repentance and remission often sin should be
preached to all Nations. The rule of which their commission the Apostles
observed, as they themselves tell us, Testifying both to Jews and Gentiles
repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, Acts 20. 21.
Nay it would be no difficult task to pick out most conditional Particles out of
their, and our Saviors Sermons, etc. scil. Mark 9. 23. Acts 8. 37. (...),
Matthew. 6. 14. Romans 10 9 (...), si modo, Coloss. 1. 23. (...), Matthew. 6 15. John
8. 24 Matthew. 18. 3. (...), Mark 11. 26. (...), Mark 5. 36. If, but if, unless,
except only si, sin, modo, dum, dummodo, were conditional, when I learned my
Grammar.

3. The Office of the Ministry, what is it for, but to prepare people for mercy
by working something in them that may fit them for the receipt of the benefits
promised in the New Covenant. As John was, so are they to be Christ's
Harbingers, and are to make ready a people prepared for the Lord, Luke 1. 17.
To preach to them that they might be saved 1 Thessalonians. 2. 16. To open their eyes
and to bring them from darkness to light, and from the kingdom of Satan unto
God, that they may receive remission of sins, etc. Acts 26 18. Thou have
ascended up on high, thou have lead captivity captive, and have received gifts
for men, even for the rebellious, that the Lord God may dwell among them, Psalm.
68. 18 On which Dr. Crisp thus glosseth, Vol. 2. p. 410. Who is that Them? The
Rebellious says the Text: And p. 412. The Holy Ghost does not say that the
Lord takes Rebellious persons and fits and prepares them by Sanctification, and
then when they are fitted, he will come and dwell with them; but even then,
without any intermission, without any stop, even when they are rebellious the
Lord Christ has received gifts for them, that the Lord God may dwell among
them: Thus the Doctor. But certainly the Apostle Paul was more acquainted with
the mind of the Holy Ghost then Dr. Crisp: now he, Ephesians 4. 8. alleging this
of the Psalmist, opens it far otherwise, and delivers it, so as to me it
seems full for the confirmation of that we have in hand: When (says he) he
ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts to men: I hope he
gave no other then what he received for them. Now what gave he? It follows, He
gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors
and Teachers: and for what end? For the perfecting of the Saints, for the work
of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ; till we come, etc. He
did not then receive this gift, that though they were rebellious, the Lord God
might dwell among them whilst they remained so, as the Doctor avers. But on the
contrary, he received and gave abroad these gifts of the Ministerial function,
that thereby people might be taken off their rebellious principles, and broken
off their rebellious practices, and fitted for the communion with the Most
High: The sum is, the Ministers of the Word are sent on this business to
prepare people for the Lord, for remission and salvation; therefore there is
something required of them, some work to be wrought in them, on them, before
they can actually partake of remission or salvation from the Lord, or enjoy
communion with the Lord.

4. That which these Ministers of the Gospel have directed sinners to do for
the obtaining of Remission, Justification, and Salvation, that in order of
nature is to be done before Remission, Justification and Salvation can actually
be obtained: But the Ministers of the Gospel have directed sinners to repent
and believe for the obtaining of, etc. Acts 2 38. chap. 3. 19. chap. 16 30, 31.
Gal. 2. 16. Nor was it remission or justification in cognoscend, only, that
they were directed to seek in this way of faith and repentance. Can any imagine
that the meaning of that Query of the Jailer, Sirs, what shall I do to be
saved? should be no more then this, What shall I do to be certified and assured
of my Salvation? Besides, that Justification, that Paul did himself, and
directed others to seek by faith, Romans 3. 28. Gal. 2. 16. was such in which
works have no hand. But to Justification in cognoscendo, or in foro
conscentiae, to the evidencing to us, and assuring us that we are justified,
works do concur, James 2. 16. 24. A man is justified (assured of Justification)
by Works, and not by faith only. So that the other Justification must be of
another and different kind, works being wholly excluded from having any thing
to do therein.

5. They who are in an estate of wrath and death until they do believe, and
then upon their believing pass out of that estate into an estate of life; they
are not actually justified till they do believe: But the Elect are in such an
estate of wrath and death till they do actually believe Ephesians. 2. Children of
wrath, Dr. Preston N. Coven. p. 398. When a man does this, at that very hour
he is entered into Covenant, he is translated from death to life.
even as others. Tit. 3. 3. and then when they believe, they pass out of that
estate. 1 John 3 14. We know we are passed from death to life. Under the power
of death we were then, otherwise we could not have passed from it. And when
passed we from it? the same Apostle in his Gospel tells us, John 5. 24. chap.
3. ult. in one of which places he assures us, that he that hears and
believes, is passed: and in the other, He that believes not, the wrath of God
still abides on him; which terms of passing and abiding, clearly show that all
the Elect are, and continue actually in that woeful estate, until they do
believe. I hope you will not say, they pass in their own sense and
apprehension, and so are children of wrath according to their apprehensions.
The Apostle says, They are children of wrath even as others: and certainly
others are not only sensibly and appearingly so, nay, perhaps neither of these
ways, but really so. For my part, I conceive no difference between a vessel of
Election and a vessel of wrath, but only in regard of Gods purpose and Christ's
purchase, which til it be brought into act does make no real change in the
parties state and condition.

6. Until men come actually to have Christ, to be united unto him, and one with
him, they cannot partake of Justification, nor have any right thereto, 1 John
5. 12. He that has the Son has life, he that has not the Son, has not life.
But until men have faith they have not Christ, nor are united to him, for by
faith they receive him, John 1. 12. go to him, John 6. 35, 37. Feed on him;
dwell in him, and he in them, John 6. 40 56. By faith they live in him, and he
in them, Gal. 2. 20. By faith he dwells in their hearts, Ephesians. 3. 17. Ergo,
Until men have faith, and by faith do actually believe on him, they cannot
partake of Justification through him, John 3. 36.

I remember that when in a private conference I pressed some of these places of
Scripture, in stead of answering to them, you demanded, Whether the Elect had
no benefit by Christ, nor right to Christ before they did believe? To which I
replied,

1. That though there be a purpose in God to give salvation to them, and a
purchase of it by Christ for them, yet had they no right thereunto until they
had faith.

2 That they might have benefit by Christ before they had right to Christ, as
in the instant of their Conversion, when the Spirit of Christ did work faith
and repentance in them. That first Benefit (they had (I conceive) in order of
nature, though not in time, before they had right, it being the very conveyance
of right over to them, and stating them therein,) must precede their having of
right, or otherwise they should have right before they had it. This you told me
then was gross nonsense; and since you have averred in Pulpit, that to say men
have benefit and not right, is palpable nonsense.

But 1. Sir, Whether nonsense or no, what is it you say to the places cited?
These Texts tell me plainly that unless I have faith, I have not Christ, and
that unless I have Christ I cannot have life, no nor right to, or interest in
it; unless a man may have right to, and interest in life through Christ, and
yet for all not live, but perish everlastingly: which I think will be worse
then nonsense to aver: So that the Argument remains firm and unanswered.

2 For your Crimination, though you might have dealt more fairly, and produced
the manner of our asserting it, as well as the assertion it self; yet we must
be content to take what you give, and as you give it, and shall cast it up into
the sachel to the other Legacies you have bestowed on us; as Arminianism,
Papism, Judaisme, absolute contradictions and weak evasions, etc.

3 For the gross and palpable nonsense it self, Benefit and not right. I must
profess unto you, that as gross and palpable as it is, my dull pate does not
yet apprehend it. All the while the father lives, the child has benefit by his
fathers means, but what right he has thereto I know not: the coats he wears,
the food he eats, are not his own by right, I think, but his Fathers; yea when
the father dies and gives a Legacy to his child to be paid at such an age,
until the child come to that age it cannot challenge the Legacy or portion
given him by his father, nor dispose of it, if he dye before, yet has he
benefit thereby; if he has jus ad rem, a right to the thing, he has not jus
in re, a right in the thing, until that period of time, notwithstanding the
Donation of his father. But to come yet nearer to the matter in hand. Suppose
that some poor woman cast in prison for debt, where she is like to perish,
should happily meet with a rich friend, who pitying her sad condition, and taking
an affection to her, should procure her enlargement out of prison, intending to
wed and marry her: I hope here it would be no nonsense to say, that this woman
had benefit by this intended husband, before she had right to him, and
inteterest in him: for, till the match or contract she cannot have any right in
him at all. The case is ours, we are indebted to God, and in prison too, the
Lord by his Spirit delivering us, does make us his heavenly Bride. This first
benefit, our delivering out of bonds, we must have in some measure from Christ,
in order of Nature, before we can give our consent to the Match, and by faith
take the Lord Jesus for our husband. May we not say in this case that we have
benefit? viz. the grand benefit of Regeneration by him, before we have right to
him? Is it nonsense to say so? I am sure Mr. Thomas Goodwin writes something
after this manner, Christ set forth in his Death, etc. p. 28.
The promises of forgiveness are not as the pardon of a Prince, which merely
contein an expression of his royal word for pardoning; so as we in seeking of
it, do rest upon, and have to do only with his word and Seal, which we have to
show for it: but Gods promises of pardon are made in his Son, and are as if a
Prince should offer to pardon a Traitor upon marriage with his child, whom in,
and with that pardon he offers in such a relation, so as all that would have
pardon, must first seek out for his child: And thus it is in the matter of
believing; the reason of which is, because Christ is the grand promise, in whom
all the Promises are Yea and Amen. 2 Cor. 1. 20. The Interest in a heiresse
Lands goes with her person, and with the relation of marriage to her: so all the
Promises hang on Christ, and without him, there is no interest to be had in
them. So Mr. Reynolds Life of Christ p. 466. tells me, That till there be this
consent on our side, it is but a wooing, there is no marriage, no Covenant
made. Page 478. That our union and communion with Christ, is on our part the
work of Faith, whose office it is to unite to Christ and gain possession of
him. Yea, Luther also on Gal. 2 20. Faith therefore must be purely taught,
namely, that thou art so entirely joined to Christ, as that thou may say, I
am one with Christ, his righteonsnesse and Victory are mine, etc. For by faith
we are joined so together, that we are become one flesh and one bone. So that
this faith does couple Christ and me more near together, then the husband is
coupled to his wife. And Dr. Preston New Coven. p. 458. avers the same.

Sir, these men know how to write sense; now they tell us, that our right comes
through our marriage with Christ, and that spiritual match is not made up
until we believe, which be the two main pieces of that you call gross
nonsense For, as for the third, that we cannot believe till God for Christ's
sake vouchsafe us that benefit, that they all maintain it, I need not tell you.
In fine your nonsense bespeaks you in this Argument, which perhaps may puzzle
both your senses and intellectuals solidly to answer.

All that be united unto Christ, and quickened by him, before they have right to
him, do receive special benefits from him before they have right to him: But
all the Elect are united unto Christ and quickened by him, before they have
right to him, or to salvation through him: Ergo, All the Elect do receive
special benefits by Christ, before they have right to him, or to salvation
through him. Or, All that have union before they have right have benefit before
they have right; But all the Elect have union before they have right; Ergo, All
the Elect have benefit before they have right.

But we have right to those benefits (say you) by virtue of Gods Largess and
Donation. The same I also find in Jus and proprictas doni ex donantis benefica
largitione resultai: acciperet alias non suum donatorius quum rem donatam
teneret. Cor. p. 127.
Dr. Ames.

But this I conceive to hold true only in absolute Grants; for if the Gift or
Grant be conditional, then is there a right unto the benefit granted, when that
condition is wrought in the Legatee, and not before. Swynborn in his Treatise
of Testaments, p. 150. tells us, That if the Testator give his daughter an
hundred pounds, if she marry with advice and approbation of her Uncle, in case
the party marry without advising with her Uncle about it, she loses her right
to the Legacy given her; (which by the way, may show the weakness of that
Argument that is taken from the word Testament, which some use against
Conditions: as if Conditions could not stand with a Testamentary disposition)
Now such is Gods grant of salvation: it is made in Christ, it is made in him
unto Believers; it is not made to sinners, as sinners, as some aver, but to
repenting and believing sinners, John 6. 38. 39, 40. This is the will of him
that sent me, that every one that sees the Son and believes on him, have
everlasting life. The Grant being made unto us as Believers, I conceive we have
not right unto the benefit granted until we do believe. Sure I am, we cannot
have right, but by and through our union to him; which union being an
inestimable benefit, we cannot have right before we have benefit.

7. Because you are so ready to charge your Adversaries with nonsense and
contradictions, Qui alterum incusai probri ipsum se intueri oporiet.
let us mind you of the old rule, He that accuses another of dishonesty, must
look well to himself: and let the inconsequences which necessarily follow from
your Doctrine be our last Argument. I beseech you therefore to read me those
riddles your Tenants seem to me to contain; and to lead me out of those mazes
and Meanders which I think your Positions lead unto, at least to deliver your
self out of them; for perhaps my senses may not lead me to follow your clue
unless I see better solutions then I have seen or heard from you hitherto. I
beseech you tell me then,

1. How there can be Many, yea or any true Believers who were never humbled,
when yet all men must see their Righteousness dross and dung, must be
schooled by the Law to know their need of Christ, before they can or will make
out unto him?

2. How the same man may be actually reconciled to God, have wrath removed from
him, and be beloved of God with the love of complacency, See this distinction
of complacency and compassion confirmed by Rutherford his Survey of
Antinomianism.
and yet at the same time in regard of the same evil works, be an enemy unto
God, a child of wrath, and have wrath abiding on him?

3. How the same man may be actually justified and quickened, and yet actually
dead in regard of the same sins, at the same time?

4. How the same man at the same time can be a member of Christ, one in him,
and united to him, as he must be who is actually justified, and a member also
of the devil, as he cannot but be who still remains an ungodly, impenitent, and
unbelieving person?

5. How faith in the work of Justification serves for any farther use then to
assure us that we are justified, seeing it does not concur to the essence and
being of it, or to the constituting of us in a state justifiable? and how we
are said to be justified by Faith and not by Works, when Works assure us of our
being justified as well as Faith.

6 How in the Petition, Forgive us our debts, we can pray for any thing more
then assurance of pardon, when actual pardon is passed long before? And how
sins can be actually pardoned before they be committed, and the guilt removed
before it is contracted?

7 How God who promises pardon to Believers only, and condemns thousands for
their impenitency and unbelief, can without blemish of his Honor, Truth, and
Justice, give pardon to any in his impenitency and unbelief?

8 How a man can be said to be bound by Covenant, to keep or break the
Covenant, when yet in the Conant there are no conditions on man's part required
to be performed?

9 Why it does not follow from your Tenants, that a man may be actually
Justified and saved without faith, when yet you maintain actual Justification
before faith and faith to be required not to the essence of it, or interesting
of persons in it, but only to the assuring them of their interest therein?

10. Why it follows not also from them, that Christians may live as they list,
seeing you hold that no conditions are on their part required, so that they
cannot break the Covenant? Whether Doctor Preston dares the Believer to sin if
he can, I yet find not; but this I find, That he holds that the Believer may
both sin, and by sinning may break the Covenant, as you may find in his
Treatise of the New Covenant. p. 458, 459 460. etc.

These are some of the many (for more might be named) straites and intricacies,
your Positions lead your self and your followers into; out of which, how you
will rid your self I wot not: but sure I am, that your Solutions hitherto
given, do yield no manner of real satisfaction, not only, not to my self, but
not to any other of your godly and intelligent Auditors, that I have yet met
with.

Toward the close of your Sermon, you ushered in your Authorities with this
Objection, But many good Divines call it a Conditional Covenant.

But Sir, you are meal mouthed in the very Objection; for not only many, but
the most part of Divines call it so. All that I have ever yet met with, Dr.
Crisp, Mr. Saltmarsh, and your self exepted. As for those Authors you bring, I
shall by and by show your foul play in citing some of them, and your mistake
of others; and discover most, if not all of them to be on my side, and to be
only against meritorious Conditions. The like mincing you used in a passage in
the beginning of your Sermon; viz. That some good Divines say; That Faith and
Repentance are the way to glory. Whereas if you be pleased to rub your poll, I
believe you may call to mind, not only that some, but most good Divines call
these Conditions, and say as much of good Works as you here allow to Faith;
namely, that they are via ad regnum, the way to the Kingdom, though not Causa
regnandi, the cause of reigning. I am sure Mr. Perkins, Dr. Preston, Bishop
Davenant, and most others I have read, do call them so. But you are politic in
these expressions; for thereby you would persuade your hearers, that you had
many on your side; like some Travelers who passing on in solitary ways, keep
a whistling and a hooping as if they had a great deal of company, whereas alas
they are either wholly alone, or at most have but one or two Companions.

Now Sir, for your reply to this Objection, we shall refer it to the close of
all, and at present shall look into the Authors you bring, and see whether
they stand for the opinion for which you cited them, or rather against it, as
shall be made to appear; and then shall add some others to them.

You begin with the Fathers, but there you are sparing in your citations; you
tell us the Question was rarely agitated then. But you might have said, that
the Fathers, if they faulted in any thing about the matter in Controversy; it
was in giving too much to Faith, Repentauce and good Works, by their
hyperbolical commendations of them, stiling them meritorious, and the like; as
both Mr. Gataker in his Rejoinder to Mr. Saltmarsh, p. 53. and Bishop Davenant,
de Justit. Actual. cap. 53. Men better versed in the Fathers then you or I,
will tell you. That you bring out of Augustine, makes not at all against
conditions in the Covenant, but against the power of free will asserted by
Pelagius. The same Author will tell you,

Qui creavit te sine te, non salvabit te sine te. Quemcunque trahit volentem
trahit. Nostra fides justos ab injustis, non operum, sed ipsius fidei lege
discernir. In quo dormit fides, non vigilat Christus. Justificatio per fidem
Jesu Christi data est, datur, and dabitur credentibus ante legem, sub lege, and
post legem eadem. Credendo invenimus quod Judaei amiserunt.
He that made thee without thee, will not save thee without thee (as I have
often heard out of Pulpits when I was a Scholar.) And Whomsoever he draws, he
draws him being willing. Our faith distinguishes the just from the unjust,
not by the Law of Works, but of Faith it self. Christ is not awake in him in
whom faith does sleep. The Justification by the Faith of Jesus Christ has been
given, is given, and shall be given to Believers, before, under, and after the
Law. By faith we find that which the Jews have lost. And elsewhere answering
the Objection of the Pelagians, from the command of faith and repentance,
whereby they would prove that we had power to do them, else the command of them
would be to no purpose; he says, By commanding, he (God) does admonish us to
do what we can, and to beg for that which we are not able to do. Jubendo monet
and facere quod possumus, and petere quod non possumus. O homo, in praeceptione
cognosce quid debeas habere, in correptione cognosce tuo te vitio non habere;
in oratione, unde accipias quod vis habere. De Cor. and gra. c. 3.
Know O man (says he in another place) by the precept, what thou ought to
have; in the reproof, that it is through thy own fault that thou have it not;
in the prayer learn from whence thou may recieve that which thou would
have. He shows in another place in what respect the Apostle says, The
Justification of life came upon all men; Non quia omnes in eum credunt, sed
quia nemo Justificatur nisi in eum credat. Itaque omnes dictum est, ne aliquo
modo alio praeter ipsum quisquam salvus fieri posset, credatur. De Not. and
great. c 41.
Not because all men do believe in Jesus Christ, but because no man is
justified except he do believe in him. It is therefore said, all men, that it
might not be thought that any one might be saved by any other means
whatsoever, but by him. Yea, this Champion of free grace, has so many high,
yea, happily over high commendations of faith, that out of him Bellarmine
produces not one or two, but many Citations to prove a meritorious cave sality
of faith in the work of Justification, as you may sein his first Book de
Justific. c. 17.

2. Prosper I have not, yet by the allegations I have read, cited out of him, I
cannot conceive that Author to be against Conditions, but rather for them. I
shall name a sentence or two.

Fides est justitiae fundamentum quam nulla bona opera praecedunt, sed ex qua
omnia procedunt. Inde, i.e. ex Doctrina Apostolica, capit quisque vitam, quam
parit una fides.
Faith is the foundation of Righteousness, which no good works go before, but
from which all do proceed; from thence (i.e. from the Doctrine of the Apostles)
every one does receive life, which faith alone does bring forth.

3. Add to Prosper, Jerome in Psalm 5. Hoc ergo byssopo asperges me, quando vit
tutem Sanguinis ejus effundes super me, quando and fidem habitabit Christus in
me. Moses distinxit in Levitico inter utramque justitiam, fidei scilicet atque
factorum, quod altera operibus, altera dola fidei credulitate accedente fiat.
Therefore thou shall besprinckle me with this hysop, when thou shall pour
upon me the virtue of his blood, when Christ shall dwell in me by faith. And
Moses distinguished in Leviticus between the Righteousness of Faith and Deeds,
that the one is by works; the other only by the credulity of faith.

4. So Ambrose. Secundum propositum gratiae, sic decretum est a Deo, ut
cessante lege, solam fidem gratia Dei posceret ad salutem, in Romans 4. Haec lex
(scil. Spiritus) dat libertatem, solam fidem poscens. Idem. in 2 Cor. 3.
According to the purpose of Grace it is so decreed by God, that the Law
ceasing, the Grace of God should require faith alone to Salvation. And this Law
(to wit of the Spirit) does give liberty, requiring Faith alone.

5 Chrysostom, as I find him cited by Bishop Downham. (...).
Thou obtainest Righteousness, not by sweat and labor, but receivest it by
gift from above, bringing one thing only from within; viz. to believe. Nothing
therefore in us does concur to the Act of Justification, but only faith; in
Romans 1. 17. and again in Romans 3. 27. What is the Law of Faith? to save by
Grace: Here he shows the power of God, that he has not only saved, but
justified, and brought to glory, and that not requiring works, but seeking
faith only.

6. Theodoret, cited by the same Author. Our Lord Christ has by his blood
procured our salvation, Solam a nobis fidem exigens, requiring of us faith
alone; in Romans 3. 25.

7. Theophylact, in Romans 4. 5. Does he that is to be justified bring any thing?
Faith only. By these I hope it does sufficiently appear, That the Fathers held
not Redemption to be absolute, as if nothing were required from us in regard of
Application; but on the contrary, that faith was required of us if we would be
partakers of the Salvation purchased; that it was required of us before our
actual Justification, and did concur thereto.

Pass we from these to later Writers, among whom, let Martin Luther be the
first. Now it is true, that in the place you cited, he says, The Promises of
the Law are conditional, but the Promises of the New Testament have no such
conditions, nor require any thing of us, nor depend upon on any Conditions of
our worthiness. But here I conceive he excludes meritorious Conditions,
partly, because he expresses himself very cautelously, saying, No such
conditions, and no conditions of our worthiness. And also because he does
elsewhere often aver, that something is required of us. I might here mind you
of what Chemnicius says in the place before cited, who being a Lutheran, could
not but be better acquainted with Luthers Tenants then you or I; namely, that
Luther was not against Preparations of order, but only Preparations of merit;
and for proof of it, cites him on the third Chapter to the Galatians, where we
find verse. 30. this passage, The use of the Law is to terrify and fright to
Christ, who is the end of the Law for Righteousness. And verse. 2. Christ's
coming profits neither the careless nor the desperate, but only such who have
been tormented and terrified with the Law for a time, and now with sure trust
come to Christ. Which passages do clearly show, that he held, there ought to be
a work of the Law upon the heart before its close with Christ, not to make it
worthy of Christ, but to make it long and gasp after Christ. I might tell you
also, How in a Letter written to Mr. Gasper Guttil, and translated by Mr.
Rutherford, the same Martin Luther vehemently inveighs against those who would
have the Doctrine of Grace to be preached in the first place, and afterward
the revelation of wrath, calling it a new method, a curious crotchet, and the
broachers of it juggling Gypsies; and averreth expressly, that the Apostles
method, Romans 1. 2, 3. was directly opposite thereto, which was first to
denounce the wrath of God from heaven, and make all the world sinners and
guilty before God; then when they see this, to teach them farther how they may
obtain grace and be justified. As also that notable place on Gal. 2. 16. The
true way to Christianity is this, that a man do first acknowledge himself by
the Law to be a sinner. A little after, When a man is thus taught and
instructed by the Law, then he is terrified and humbled, then he sees indeed
the greatness of his sin, and cannot find in himself one spark of the Law of
God; therefore he justifies God in his Word, Like to which he has another
passage: The true office of the Law, which can be never enough magnified, is to
show us our sins, to humble us, kill us, bring us down to hell, that we may be
justified. Cha. 3 us. 23. ad finem.
and confesses that he is guilty of death and eternal damnation. The first
part then of Christianity is the preaching of repentance, and the knowledge of
our selves. And some few lines after, The Law does nothing else but utter sin,
terrify and humble, and by this means prepares us to Justification, and
drives us to Christ. And about two leaves after, Being thus terrified by the
Law, the man utterly despaireth of his own strength, he looks about, and
sigheth for the help of a Mediator and Savior. Here then comes in good time
the healthful Word of the Gospel, and says, Son, thy sins are forgiven thee,
believe in Jesus Christ crucified for thy sins. These sayings of Luther, Sir,
do fully assure me that Luther held a necessity of Legal sorrow and humiliation
in persons to be justified, and that to prepare them for Justification, which
is directly against the second Position of your former Sermons, concerning the
absoluteness of the Gospel, wherein you pleaded what you could, against the
necessity of such legal sorrow, and humiliation.

But pass we over these, and consult we Luther about that necessary mean of
faith; Let the Question be, whether in the Gospel faith be not required to the
actual enjoyment of Justification, and Remission, and to the obtaining of a
right thereto, and interest therein? Or whether we may have a right to, and
interest in, or actual enjoyment of these benefits without faith, or before
faith? We will not go beyond his Commentary on the Epistle to the Galatians for
the discovering of his mind herein; and begin we where we left, Chap. 2. ver.
16. Here is to be noted, that these three, Faith, Christ, and Acceptance, or
Imputation must be joined together; Faith takes hold on Christ, and has him
present as a Ring does a precious stone; and whosoever shall be found having
this confidence in Christ apprehended in the heart, him will God account for
Righteous. This is the mean, and this is the merit whereby we attain the
remission of sins and Righteousness. So on verse. 20. of the same Chapter, a
place cited already, he teaches that it is through faith we are united to
Christ, and come to call the benefits we have by him, ours, Cap. 3. 13. about
the middle. For as much then as Christ reigns by his grace in the hearts of the
Faithful, there is no sin, no death, nor curse. But where Christ is not known,
there all these things do still remain; Therefore all they that believe not, do
lack this inestimable benefit, and glorious Victory. And on ver. 14. We are all
accursed before God, before we know Christ; and there is no other way to avoid
the Curse but to believe. A little after, This gift of the Spirit, we receive
not by any other Merits then by faith alone: Ver. 26. Faith in Christ makes us
the children of God. And Verse 28. comparing our believing to the looking on
the brazen Serpent, says thus, This is true faith concerning Christ, and in
Christ, whereby we are made members of his body, flesh of his flesh, and bone
of his bone. In him therefore we live, move, and have our being: Christ and our
faith must be thoroughly joined together. Verse. 29. If ye be Christ's, then are
you Abraham's Seed; that is to say, If ye believe, and be baptized into Christ;
If ye believe I say, etc. then are ye the children of Abraham, not by nature,
but by Adoption. Yea, in the place first cited, with which we shall conclude
this testimony, cha. 2. 16. Because thou believe in me (says the Lord) and
thy faith lays hold on Christ, whom I have freely given unto thee, that he
might be thy Mediator and High Priest, therefore be thou justified and
righteous. Wherefore God does accept or account us as righteous only for our
faith in Christ. Because we do apprehend Christ by Faith, all our sins now are
no sins; But where Christ and faith be not, there is no remission or covering
of sins, but mere Imputation of sin and Condemnation.

I hope Sir, in those places Luther speaks plainly enough to the purpose in
hand, and does sufficiently declare his belief in this particular to be, that
faith is required to our justification, and that to the obtaining of it, that
it does marry us to Christ, and so state us in a right unto his benefits, that
till we have this faith, we are accursed caitiffes, under death, wrath and
condemnation, and that before God, or in his sight. Nay Sir, he does say, that
it is because of our faith, and for our faith, and that faith is the merit by
which we have it; which though I doubt not but may pass with a favorable
construction, yet are higher titles of Honor then any of our Divines do give
unto her in pleading for Conditions in the Covenant.

Your next Author was Peter Martyr, his Commentary on the Epistle to the Romans
I have; where I meet with that common place, De Justificatione, in it the
passage you cite; viz. Negamu: testamentum Dei de remissione peccatorum in
Christo habere adjuncta^ conditionem. Com. in Romans c. 11. p. 1281.
We deny that the Testament of God concerning the remission of sins in Christ,
has a condition annnexed to it.

But first, I conceive, that Martyr here denies only a condition of Works, or a
Legal condition. Such legal conditions Pighius did plead for. And that these
are the conditions which Martyr does deny, his own words in the very same page
do clearly express. For having in the line next after the passage you quote
out of him, alleged that of the Apostle at large, Gal. 5. 15, 16, 17. he
presently from this Testimony draws this inference, as an Explication of his
former negation of conditions in the Testaments, Haec verba clarissime docent;
These words do most clearly teach, that the Testament which God made with
Abraham, was pure and absolute; et sine ulla legali condition, and without any
legal condition. But that he should deny the condition of faith, or that faith
was required to Justification, that common place shows not, but rather the
contrary; for about some leaves after, speaking of that, Romans 4. It shall be
imputed to us, as it was to Abraham, if we believe; he thus says,

Nonne hic satis perspicue dicitur, oportere nos credere, illum Jesum Christum,
quem Deus refuscitavit, mortuum fuisse and resurrexisse, ut nos justificaremur,
and nobis omnia delicta condonarentur. Page 1292.
Is it not here clearly enough said, That we must believe, that that Jesus
Christ whom God raised again, died and rose again, that we might be justified,
and that all our sins might be forgiven us? And a little after; Omnis qui videt
filium and credit in eum, habet vitam aeternam. Sic ergo inferimus, At ego
credo in Filium Dei, ergo hab^^ Jam, et ^abebo id quod promisit. p. 1293
Every one that sees the Son and believes on him, has eternal life. Thus
therefore we infer, But I believe on the Son of God, therefore I now have, and
shall have that which he has promised. Nisi fides desit, qua oblata
apprehendamus, per promissiones justificamur. Page 1294.
Unless faith be wanting where by we may apprehend the things offered, we are
justified by the Promises. Martyr in that common place reasons wholly against
Justification by works. And the condition there spoken of, unless we will do
apparent injury to the Author, we must understand the condition of works, or of
the Law, which both there, and in this eleventh Argument he excludes, both from
the Covenant with Abraham, and the work of Justification.

2. Let but Martyr expound himself, and then it will appear what conditions he
denies, and in what manner; nor shall I lead you any further for discovery of
this, then this his Commentary on the Epistle to the Romans. Look then Chap. 10
on those words, For righteousness to every one that believes; and you shall
find the difference between the Law and the Gospel, thus set down by him.

Lex recipitur faciendo and exactissime praestando quod praecipitur; Evangelium
autem per vivum and effic^cem fidei assensum. Moses quoque Deuteronomy. 30. de eadem
lege scripsit, se prop^suisse populo vi^am and mortem; manifest docens, si
reciperetur lex and impleretur, vitam and quidem ae^ernam secum fore allaturam.
Verum cum excludamur hoc commodo, misericors Deus aliud verbum providit, nempe
fidei; quod si assentiendo recipiatur, vitam secum habet. Ex hoc loco apparet
promissiones legis datas ex hypothesi, seu condition praecedentium operum. In
Evangelio autem si promissionibus annectantur opera, ea non sunt accipienda vel
ut merita, vel ut causa illarum promissionum: sed ita statuendum est, ut illa
Dei dona quae promittuntur post opera sequantur, cametsi non perfecta fuerint
and absoluta ut a lege imperantur. P. 1026, 1027.
The Law is received by doing, and most exact performing that which is
commanded: But the Gospel by a lively and efficacious assent of faith. Moses
also Deuteronomy. 30. writes concerning the Law, that he had set before the people
life and death; manifestly teaching that if the Law be received and fulfilled,
it will bring eternal life with it: But seeing we are shut out from this
benefit, the merciful God has provided another word, to wit of faith; which if
by assenting to it, it be received, brings life along with it. From this
place it appears, that the promises of the Law were given from the
supposition or condition of Works going before. But in the Gospel, if works are
annexed to the Promises, they are not so to be understood, as either the merit
or causes of those Promises. But we must thus conclude, That these gifts of God
which are promised, follow after the works, though they be not perfect and
absolute as they are commanded in the Law. This place, (I hope) will show that
Peter Martyr was only against the condition of Works, and there too against
their merit or efficiency; for as for their presence, he allows that they are
required in the Gospel. But as as for the condition of faith, he is not at all
against it. Turn to one place more, Romans 8. If we suffer with him, etc. Where
setting down the differences between the Promises of the Law and of the Gospel,
he says, Non in eo discrepant, ut quidam putant, quod Evangelicae non habeant
adjectas conditiones; Legales autem sine conditionibus nunquem offerantur.
Quemad modum enim dicitur, Honora patrem and matrem, ut sis longaevus super
terram; and si volueritis, and audieritis me, bona terrae comdedatis. Ita in
Evangelio etiam legimus: Remittite and remittetur, Date and dabitur, etc. quare
cum hoc discrimen non sit, aliud quaerendum est. Quamobrem apparet diligenter
intuenti, conditiones leges potuisse causas esse consecutionis praemiorumquae
promittebantur. Nam fi^illae perfectae and absolutae fuissent, ut erant a e^e
imperatae, cum ipsis praemils comparari potuissent et meriti rationem
habuissent. Sed cum illae prestari ab hominibus non potuissent, Deus ex sua
misericordia subjecit promi^siones Evangelicas illorum loco: quae quamvis
conditiones adjectus habent, tamen offeruntur gratis. Page 667. Quare si haec
tria conjungis, praemiae Evangelica promitti gratis; conditiones illis non
posse aequari, and promissiones oportere esse firmissimas; and meriti rationem
auferes, quo discrimine illa a segalibus differant, facile cernes. Pa. 668.
They do not differ in this, (as some think) that the Promises Evangelical have
no conditions annexed; but the Legal Promises are never offered without
conditions; for as its said, Honor thy Father and thy mother, that thou may
live long upon the earth. And if ye be willing and obedient ye shall eat the
good of the Land. So we read also in the Gospel, Forgive, and it shall be
forgiven; give, and it shall be given, etc. Wherefore seeing this is not the
difference, we must seek out some other. It appears therefore to him that
diligently considers, that the conditions of the Law might be causes of the
obtainment of the rewards promised: for if they had been perfect and absolute,
as the Law required them, they might be compared with the rewards themselves,
and had also had esteem of merit; but seeing these cannot be performed by men.
God of his mercy gave in their stead Evangelical Promises, which although they
have conditions added, yet are offered freely. Wherefore if thou join these
three things together, that the Evangelical rewards are promised freely, that
the conditions cannot be compared unto, or equalized with them, that the
Promises must be most firm, and take away the account of merit, you may see
wherein these differ from those of the Law.

And thus I hope it is manifest, that they were conditions of Works which Peter
Martyr did deny; that he did not deny them simply neither, but only as
meritorious and causal of the benefits promised; that he held faith to be the
Requisite or the Condition of the Gospel. So that you must give me leave to
take Martyr from you too, and put him down with the forenamed Authors, for a
patron of our Cause.

3. Next unto Peter Martyr, you cite Olevian, but whether with any more
advantage to your Cause then the former, or disadvantage to us, is the
business of our present enquiry.

If you please with second thoughts (which are most commonly the best) to look
into him, you shall find that when he denies conditions in the Covenant, they
are only such as, first, are performed by and proceeding from our own strength;
which we with him do acknowledge to be none, and therefore also deny the same.
2. Which arise from, or carry along with them a consideration of dignity, or
worthiness in our selves. 3. Are of a meritorious nature. Such conditions as
these, we together with him disclaim. That these are the conditions which he
does deny, is so clear and plain, that he which runs may read. If you begin
with his definition of the Covenant of Grace, you shall find him in the close
thereof expressing himself thus; (...) conditionem aut stipulationem ulli^
bonae cogitationis ab ipsorum viribus. De subst-foed. great. p. 3 edit. Genesis
Anno 1585.
Without the condition or stipulation of any good thoughts from their own
strength. Having spoken concerning God, who makes the Covenant, he comes
afterward to consider the persons with whom this Covenant is made, and shows
that the very Elect themselves to whom it does especially belong, are by nature
children of wrath, dead in sins, such whose hearts are hearts of stone, unable
to think a good thought of themselves, mere darkness, enemies to God, slaves
to sin and Satan:

Qui cum tales sint, nolle se, ait Dominus, ejusmodi ^oedus cum illis
percutere, cujus vel minima pars in ipsorum viribus fundata sit, Page 12.
Now forasmuch as they are such, God (says he) promises he will not make any
such Covenant with them, which in the least part thereof should be founded on
their own strength to perform it. Quamobrem, ne concidat foedus apud mileros
homines, in peccatis mortuos, corda habentes lapidea, qui legi Dei non
subjiciuntur, and ne possunt quidem, Rom 8. qui denique non idonei sunt ad
cogitandum quicquam boni ex se ipsis 2 Cor. 3. Sed ut firmum maneat, ejusmodi
foedus promittit, cujus universa essentia a se solo dependeat, and in Christo
suo fundata sit. -- Modum etiam exequendi sui decreti in nobis ejusmodi
promittit, cujus vis and efficacia non a corrupto homine, sed a se solo
Proficiscatur. Page 13.
Wherefore lest the Covenant should fail and be of none effect, men being
miserable, dead in sins, having hearts of stone, such as are not subject to the
Law of God, neither in deed can be, Romans 8. Who are not able of themselves to
think any thought that is good: but that it may remain firm and everlasting, he
promises such a Covenant, the whole essence whereof does depend on himself
alone, and is founded in his Son Jesus Christ. -- He promises also such a
manner of executing in us this his decree and purpose, the strength and
efficacy whereof does not proceed from corrupt man, but from himself alone. A
little after, he sums up all that he had said concerning the nature and
substance of the Covenant, thus, Wherefore, if you look upon God, the efficient
cause, and those to whom he promises the Covenant; or if you consider the
matter and form thereof, you shall still find it is a Covenant of free grace,
and that it does not Nulla^ que condition nostrae dignitatis, meritorum, aut
propria^ virium niti. Page 14.
Depend on any condition of our worthiness, merits, or our proper strength. --
The most merciful God did see the promise would be vain in respect of our
vanity, which should depend on the condition of our own strength. What here he
does deliver so plainly, and in such express terms, you may (if you please to
look into him) find him afterward P. 211, and 215
repeating again and again.

Sir, By these passages you may see you have not gained any thing by Olevian,
nor your Adversaries lost by what he speaks against conditions in the Covenant.

Now that you may further see, that he speaks rather on their side whom you
oppose, then for you; I shall entreat you to consider some other passages in
him.

1. He tells us that in this Covenant there is, and must be a mutual consent
between God and us, yea, a consent testified by both parties: for immediately
after his definition of the Covenant in the substance of it (which we
mentioned before) he comes to consider the administration of it, which he says
is dispersed by the Lord, by voice and visible signs, Page 3.
In testimonium mutui consensus inter Deum and nos; In testimony of this mutual
consent which is between God and us. The same he does elsewhere more largely
repeat, as I shall show you by and by. How both parties do give their consent
in making the Covenant, he does afterward declare, and withal the freeness of
the Grace of God in both.

Universa substantia foederis gratuita est: Quoad Deum, is proprie foedus
nobiscum percuti^, cum promissionem reconciliationis gratuitae in Evangelio
oblatam per Spiritum Sanctum cordibus obsignat, and renovationem ad vitam
aeternam inchoat, in^ies promovet, ac tandem perficit, Quoad nos, qui mortui
eramus in peccatis, recipitur foedus, dum gratis nobis donatur Spiritus
Sanctus, per quem excitati e morte in vitam, fit, ut non modo velimus and
possimus credere gratuitae promissioni de reconciliatione per Christum, and
instauratione nostri ad adeundum haereditatem regni Coelestis; sed etiam ut
credamus, seu ipsam fidem accipiamus. Page 15.
The whole substance of the Covenant (says he) is free: In respect of God, he
properly makes the Covenant with us, when he does in our hearts by the Holy
Spirit seal the Promise of free reconciliation offered in the Gospel, and
begins our renovation to eternal life, does daily carry it on, and at last
does perfect it. In respect of us who were dead in sins and trespasses, the
Covenant is received when the Holy Ghost is freely given to us, whereby being
raised from death to life, it comes to pass that we not only have a will and
power to believe the Promise of free grace concerning reconciliation by Christ,
and the renewing of us, that we may enter into the inheritaace of the heavenly
Kingdom; but also do believe or receive faith it self. So that the freeness
and absoluteness of the Covenant does not consist in this, that there is no
condition or duty required on our parts, but none that is to be performed by
our own strength; as he some few lines after does express himself.

Atque ita totum haec foedus mere esse gratuitum, and nulla condition
nostrarum virum, sed gratuita Dei misericordia in Christo, per fidem, quam ipse
donat, apprehensa, constare, certum est; oblatio duplicis promissionis in
Christo, remissionis scil. peccatorum, and sanctificationis, atque ipsius
Christi donatio, quoad Deum, est gratuita: acceptatio ex part nostra etiam est
gratuita, quia est Dei actio in nobis, qua promissionem suam obsignat cordibus,
ut acti agimus, etc. Page 16.
Thus (says he) it is certain, that this whole Covenant is merely of free
Grace, and does not depend on any condition of our own strength, but on the
free mercy of God in Christ, apprehended by faith, which himself does bestow;
The offer or tender of a double Promise in Christ, to wit, of the remission of
sins, and sanctification, and so the donation of Christ himself, is, in respect
of God, most free. The acceptance on our part is also free, because it is the
action of God in us, whereby he does seal the Promise to our hearts; so that
being acted by him, we do act; being by him made Believers, we do believe; and
being quickened or created by Christ unto good works, we do walk in them.

Thus far Olevian in that place: and who is there Sir, of these whom you
oppose, that does not say the same with him? So that your quoting of him is at
least to little purpose for your opinion: I might farther show you, that he in
another place, repeating the same thing, adds, Page 211, 212 213, 216.
once and again, that God in giving faith to his Elect and chosen ones, does
thereby give with it to them also universam substantiam foederis, the whole
substance of the Covenant. So that the remission of sin promised in the
Covenant is not Antecedent but Consequent to faith; which in effect is as much
for the conditionality of faith in reference to the pardon of sin, and the
salvation of souls, as is contended for by those whom you oppose; but I will
not insist on that. I shall, for your and the Readers better information and
satisfaction touching the judgment of this learned Divine in this point,
entreat you to observe.

2. That as he does plead for a mutual consent of both parties in the Covenant;
So he does withal maintain, that when God for his part performs the
federatory action (as his phrase is) Prius assensum a nobis stipulatur: he does
first require our assent to the Promises and Duties or Conditions of the
Covenant. Quia foedus non inter invitos, sed volentes contrabitur, testimonia
visibilia instituit, quibus and assensum nostrum in gratuitum foedus in verbo
oblatum stipuletur, quem ut ipsemei in elect is operatur, ita public ad suam
gloriam apparere, vult, and fimul in verbo oblatum foedus symbolis (solemni
contestatione prius facta, velle vim, ipsos esse suum populum) obfignat. Part
2. p. 311. Quia Deus non aliis jurat quam credentibus, ideo cum ad actionem
foederatoriam descendit, prius assensum a nobis stipulatur, mandando ejus
testificationem solenni ritu, quam ad promissionis obsignationem atque
impletionem ipse descendat. Page 302. vide plura page 304, 305. ad 320.
Thus he expresses himself more then once, showing withal, that this Position
is most agreeable to the Scripture of the Old and New Testament; alleging to
this purpose, that voluntary and federal Contract between God and the people
expressed by Moses; Thou have avouched the Lord this day to be thy God, and to
walk in his ways, and to keep his Statutes, and his Commandments, and his
Judgments, and to hearken unto his voice. And the Lord has this day avouched
thee to be his peculiar people as he has promised thee. Deu. 26. 17, 18.
Setting down at large several Reasons why the Lord is pleased thus to proceed
in the administration of his Covenant, and that in reference to both the Elect
and Reprobate; those which are sincere, and those which are but hypocritical
professors of, and parties in the Covenant.

So that if you lay all the passages of Olevian together, you may (at least
wise the indifferent Reader may) see that you have gained nothing by him, nor
have your Adversaries lost him.

4. Having dispatched Olevian, in the next place I turn to Zanchy, whom you
alledg as being fully for you. And I confess, at the first sight looking on
him with a bare superficial glance, he does seem wholly to be yours, especially
if you pitch on one passage, and do not compare it with others in the same
place. It Is true, he does affirm that God says, Sine ulla interjecta vel poeni
tentiae vel fidei condition absolutissime ait Desponsabo te mihi in perpetuum.
In Hos. 2. onal. in v. 21, 22. 1.
Most absolutely without any condition of Faith and Repentance inserted, I will
betroth thee to me for ever. But if you please seriously to weigh what he
delivers in his Commentary on the same Chapter, and compare one thing with
another, you shall find, that

1. The absoluteness which he speaks of lies in this, not that faith and
repentance are not required on the Churches part to make up the match; but that
the making or dissolving of the Matrimonial federal Contract between the Lord
and the Church shall not depend on any condition to be performed by the Church
of her own power and strength, for the Lord does undertake even for the
Church, to work in her Faith, Repentance and ^ll other Graces requisite to the
making and perpetuating of the match, that it be not broken* so he speaks, and
does declare himself in the end of that very Paragraph, the beginning whereof
you take hold of as serving, our turn.

Promittit and novum connubium, and omnia quae ad hoc connubium etiam ex part
exotis contrabendum, ^um confirmandum inperpetuum pertinent.
God promises both a new Marriage, and also all things which even on the (...)
are necessary for the making and confirming of^ the Match. And more fully
afterward, Promittit se effecturum and perpetuo connubio simul ei copulati.
Perpe^uum autem esse non potest connubium, nisi sicut in Deo, sic etiam in
nobis perpetua sit fides and Spiritus Christi, per quem hoc connubium and
contrahitur, and conservatur. Ergo promittit se effectum ut perpetua in nobis
e^ect^s, sit fides, and Spiritus Christi. Ibid^. 25.
He promises, That he will cause that we shall be joined to him in a perpetual
marriage. But the marriage cannot be perpetual, unless as in God, so also there
be in us Faith and the Spirit of Christ continuing to the end, by which this
marriage is both contracted and preserved. Therefore he does promise that faith
and the Spirit of Christ shall continue in us. You may there at large see him
assert,. 26, 27, ad 33.
That there are connubi^ leges, as he calls them, Laws of the marriage, or
conditions thereof which are to be observed by the Church for her part which
God does undertake to write in her heart, that so the marriage may be made and
continued. And what does Zanchy, I pray you, here say more, then any of those
whom you oppose? or who is there of those against whom you allege him, that
does not assert the very same? If you look back into his Commentary on the same
Chapter and verse, you shall find him speaking the same thing, and explicating
himself, in what sense he says it is a Promise without a Condition. Notandum,
hanc esse simplicem and evangelicam sine ulla condition promissionem. Hic enim
nihil exigit Deus, sed simpliciter promittit quod velit ipse ecclesiae suae
facere; adeo ut promittat etiam fidem, sine qua reliquae promissiones in nobis
locum habere non possunt.
It is to be noted, (says he, explicating those words, I will betroth thee to
me) that this is a simple and Evangelical promise, without any condition; for
here God does exact nothing; (to wit, to be done by their own strength) but
does simply promise what he himself will do to his Church; so that he does
promise faith it self, without which the rest of the Promises can have no
place in us.

2. You may observe, That when he says, The Promise is made without any
condition, his meaning is, without any Condition in us Antecedaneous, as a
moving cause, inducing or inclining the Lord to enter into this Covenant, and
to make this matrimonial Contract: all the cause thereof the Lord finds in, of,
and from himself; in which regard he prevents us, not we him. Thus he does
afterward clearly express himself. Innuit illa dictione, Ego, Deum esse
authorem nostrae reconciliationis, and consequentur nostrae salutis. Ipse est
qui prior venit ad nos, and nos sibi ipse desponsar. Nos non ipsum praeve nimus
aut quaerimus in sponsum, sed ipse praevenit nos ut desponset nos sibi. Ego,
inquit, desponsabo te; huc illud 1 John 4. Non quod nos prius dilexerimus eum,
sed ipse prior dilexerit nos. Vae nobis si Deus nos non praeveniret, 5.
Desponsabo.
By that word, I will betroth thee; he does give us to understand, that God is
the Author of our Reconciliation, and consequently of our Salvation. He it is
that does first come to us and betroth us to himself. We do not prevent him,
or seek him to be our husband; but he preventeth us, that he may betroth us
unto himself. 1 John 4. Not that we loved him first, but he loved us first. Woe
be to us, if God did not prevent us. Thus Zanchy, and what have you gained by
him in this particular, or your opposites lost? Do they not speak the same
things? and when they assert Conditions, yet deny them to be on our part
antecedaneous, or any moving causes, acknowledging that all does proceed from
the mere good pleasure of God, according to the purpose which he purposed in
himself, and that Deuteronomy. 7.
he loves his people with whom he makes the Covenant, because he loves them,
as Moses sometime said to Israel.

3. That in denying of Conditions, he does deny conditions that are
meritorious, and that the Covenant it self, as also the Promises are free
without respect unto, or dependence on any thing that is of merit in us. Thus
in the very next page setting down the substantial or essential heads of the
Covenant, he delivers his mind; Ratio foederis faciendi seu promittendi, est,
qua Deus ex gratia, extra nostra merita foedus hoc nobiscum init; foedesque hoc
nullis nostris suffultum est meritis. Page 44.. 3. Ratio.
The manner of making the Covenant, or of promising, is, that God of his free
grace, without any merits of ours, does make this Covenant with us, and it does
not depend on any merits of our own at all. And do not those whom you oppose,
and think to strengthen your opposition against them by Zanchies Authority,
produced and urged for you; do not (I say) they speak the same thing with him
in this particular? Hitherto I showed, that Zanchy is not so much for you, as
you would make the world believe he is; I shall now make it appear, that in the
same place, however he does not use the word Condition (which yet he does in
other places) yet he speaks the same thing for substance which they do against
whom you alledg him. And that there are such conditions required on the
Churches part as we plead for, Consider with me to this purpose.

1. His explication of that phrase, I will betroth thee to me. Foederis vinculo
se unit cum populo, and populus vicissim unitur Deo: sicut sponsus cum sponsa,
and sponsa cum sponso, fide conjugii utrinque data. P. 43. Cum autem.
When God does make a new Covenant with any people, he is said to betroth them
to himself, because that by the bond of the Covenant he will unite himself to
that people, and they are likewise joined to God, as the Bridegroom is to the
Bride, and the Bride to the Bridegroom, faith of the Marriage being given on
both sides, or by both parties. And

2. His definition of the Covenant, which he does afterward largely insist on,
setting down the chief and essential heads thereof. Ibid. 43. Col. ^.
The Covenant of God with man, (says he) is mutua pactio, a mutual agreement
between both parties; wherein God of his mere grace, and for Christ's sake, does
promise two things; 1. That he will be a God to us, or receive us into his
favor, pardoning all our sins for Christ's sake, and impute his righteousness
unto us. 2. That he will bestow the Kingdom of Heaven on us for our inheritance;
And does also require of man two things; 1. Faith, 2. Obedience, that he order
his life according to the pleasure of God: and both parties do by outward
signs confirm Fidem sibi invicem datam. You may find the same thing delivered
by him in the first and second Heads of the Covenant. Ex part nostri
substantia foederis est id quod a nobis stipulatur, and nos premittimus. etc.
p. 45.
And in the next page, The substance of the Covenant on Gods part, (says he)
is that which God of his free grace does offer and promise us; on our part,
that which he does require of us, and which we promise to perform, That we do
embrace this reconciliation offered and promised, That we will be his people,
etc.

Now Sir, if you will be pleased to consider these several assertions of
Zanchy, in this very place which you your self did quote, 1. Faith is that
Grace which is on the Churches part necessary to make up the marriage Covenant
between the Lord and her. 2. This grace the Lord does promise absolutely to
give, it being that grace without which the rest of the Promises have no place
in us. 3. It is also our duty; God does in the Covenant command it, we promise
to perform it. 4. It is that wherein, on our part, the substance of the
Covenant does consist. Lay them altogether, and you may clearly see here is an
acknowledgment of the thing, faith is the condition of the Covenant, though he
does not give it the name. But to give you a further taste of him, that it may
be out of all question that he does assert conditions, both name and thing; I
shall only entreat you to peruse In 1. Epist. Joha. cap. 1. loc. de rem.
peccat. q. 6.
one place more in him; where he does largely handle that great blessing and
benefit of the Covenant, the remission of sins; Quibus conditionibus remissio
peccatorum offeratur and conferatur.
in the sixth place he comes to consider, On what condition it is offered and
conferred; and mentions three: 1. The first and chief, is the true and constant
practice of Repentance. 2. Confession and acknowledgment of our offenses to
those whom we have injured and wronged. 3. A brotherly forgiving of those which
have sinned against and offended us. Where he does withal maintain, that Sunt
conditiones non propter quas, sed citra quas peccatorum remissio non obtinetur.
-- Et si citra bas conditiones obtineri remissio peccatorum non potest, non
tamen propter eas tanquam propter merita. Ideo Johannes ait, Si confiteamur,
ecce conditionem; non tamen ait, propter confessionem -- Nam etiam citra fidem
haberi non potest justificatio, non tamen propter dignitatem fidei haberi eam
dicimus, sed gratis. -- Deinde illud notandum est, etiam has conditiones quas
requieit a nobis Deus, donari nobis a Deo, and esse dona Dei; non ergo meritis
ullo modo, sed soli Dei gratiae danda est remissio peccatorum.
they are conditions not for which, but without which the remission of sins is
not obtained; denying them to be conditions meritorious. Therefore S. John
says, If we confess, behold the condition; yet he does not say, for our
confession, he will forgive. Justification cannot be had without faith; but we
do not say, it is obtained for the worth of our faith; but freely, or of
freegrace. Moreover this is (says he) to be noted, that even the very
conditions which God requires of us, are given to us by God: Therefore the
remission of sins is not to be ascribed in any sort to our Merits, but to the
grace of God alone. You have here Zanchy, speaking as fully and as plainly for
Conditions, as any of those whose Doctrine you oppose, in which regard I must
entreat you either to quit your claim to this Author, and leave him to stand on
our side against you; or else to change your mind and judgment, come over to
us, and then Zanchy is yours when you are ours.

5 The Testimony of learned Junius is next produced by you, as that which
seems to be most for you of all the Authors; and yet not so much as is
pretended. The oration of his which you mention, I have not. In his Parallels
he does indeed make mention of it, Vsum istius nominis in hac significatione
Classicis authoribus non fuisse incognitum ante in oratione quadam
demonstravimus. Patal. l. 3. c. 9.
as that wherein he had proved, that the Hebrew word, (...), often time, in the
Scriptures of the old Testament; and the Latin word Foedus, both according to
the Etymology and use thereof in classical Authors, are not restrained to those
federal promises wherein there is a mutual stipulation between diverse parties
expressed, but for such declarations and dispositions as proceed from one
alone, so that the Hebrew word might well be rendered by the Apostle, (...). Now
this is a thing which is not denied, but acknowledged and granted by those,
which yet nevertheless do assert a mutual stipulation, and conditions (in that
regard) in the Covenant of Grace. So that if this be the scope and drift of
that Oration, as it seems to be by his mentioning of it for this end and
purpose; it is alleged by you to little purpose, seeing it does neither make
for you, nor against us. In prosecution of this, which is the main drift of
that Parallel, and as I conceive by his own citing of it, of the Oration also;
he adds, Dei gratiam luculentiorem hominibus explicatam esse, quod suis non
foedus, sed Testamentum dederit. Quiae foedus conditiones mutuas fuisset
habitum, quas si altera pars non praestet, foedus est irritum. Testamentum vero
liberalitatis and gratiae, citra ullam conditionem instrumentum est, ex quo
haeredes vocantur and instituuntur citra contemplationem ullius officii quod ab
ipsis proficissi possit.
That the grace of God is manifested much more clear to men, in that he does
not give a Covenant, but a Testament to those that are his: For the Covenant
would have Conditions, which if either part do not perform, the Covenant is
made void. But a Testament is an instrument of liberality and grace, without
any condition; by which men are called and appointed heirs, without respect to
any duty which might proceed from them. By this passage of Junius you may take
notice, who that Vir maximus is whom Dr. Ames cites, in that place of his
Coronis, which is quoted by you. Now as for this place of Junius, we must
either expound it of meritorious Conditions (which those words, without respect
to any duty, seem to intimate;) or of Conditions Legal, to be performed by our
own strength, such as were in the Covenant of works: for Conditions Evangelical
and not Meritorious, he does in express terms aver in the new Covenant or
Testament. Substantia utriusque restamenti una quidem atque communis est in
Christo Jesu; eaque partibus duabus comprehensa pro ut Abrahamo primum, Genesis
17. deinde vero posteris illius fuit exposita; una, promissionis, quum Deus
inquit, futurus sim ipsis D^us: altera, conditionis appositae, qua Deus petit
ut nos viciss^m pareamus ad stipulationem ip^^^, quam ^i, and ipsi e^unt mihi
populus. Par. l. 3. c. 8.
The substance (says he) of either Testament, is one and the same, common in
Jesus Christ; and that consists of two parts; as it was first manifested to
Abraham, Genesis 17. and afterward to his posterity; the one containing the
Promise, when God says, I will be their God; the other the condition added,
wherein God requires, that we should in like manner obey him, when he says,
And they shall be my people. And if you please to peruse the Chapter, out which
the next Quotation in the Margent is cited at large, or the passage it self
that is alleged, you shall find him acknowledging, that the Hujus
promissionis Evangelicae antecedens sive (...) conditio poterat multorum animos
deterrere, ac potius omnium si legis (...) in carne nostra (ut necesse est)
expendissent; cujus (...) inde a principio sermonis hujus conditionem Moses
expresserat, dicens, nondum dedit vobis Jehova mentem ad cognoscendum. -- Ne
igitur impossibilem conditionem propositam sibi a Deo fuisse quererentur,
commoditatem istius Moses his verbis explicat; Nam praeceptum hoc quod ego
praecipio tibi, etc. quasi dicat, hactenus proposui tibi partem priorem
foederis, ut obsequaris Deo: sed quia altera quaeque pars foederis est tibi
necessaria, ut Deus tuus quasi novo foedere (quod tamen reipsa unum est) suis
partibus erga te defungatur cum tu ipse non possis; and circumcidens cor tuum
inscribat ei legem suam and foedus suum ad obedientiam fidei. Par. lib. 2. part
16.
Covenant of the Gospel has its conditions annexed, as well as the Covenant of
Works; and withal such a condition, as to man in himself is impossible, though
in regard of the Lords gracious promise, who does undertake to work in his own
Federates the very condition it self, it is to them through power of his grace
and efficacy of his Spirit, made profitable and easy; where when he had fitly
showed the agreement between Moses, setting down the tenor and condition of the
Covenant which God did make with Israel, (besides the Covenant which he made
with them at Horeb) and S. Paul expressing the tenor of the Gospel, which is a
declaration of the same Covenant of Grace which Moses mentions, he does thus
paraphrase those words of the Covenant, which both do express; Hoc praeceptum
fidei quod cloquor neque occultum, neque longinquum, and cum id ipsum in ore
tuo, and cord tuo gratiose Deus ind^, si tantum fide potes prehendere.
The word is nigh thee, in thy mouth, and in thine heart; i.e. This Commandment
of faith which I declare is neither hidden, nor far off from thee, seeing God
does graciously put it into thy mouth, and into thy heart, if thou by faith
wilt lay hold of it.

Thus you have Junius against Junius, or rather Junius expounding himself,
telling you in plain terms that he holds conditions in the New Covenant, which
God of his free grace gives his Creature to perform. So that the former place,
where he excludes conditions from the Covenant, must (as I said before) be
understood of legal and meritorious conditions, which sort of conditions we
shut out of the Covenant as well as he.

6. Leave we Junius, as much, if not more on our side then on yours, and come
we to the next, Dr. Ames, (for as for Estius and Lessius, though I value one,
the former of them, yet I shall not look after them at present, not for that I
doubt they are against me, but for that I care not much to have them for me,
being by you upbraided already with joining with Papists, though it seems you
can your self accept of the patronage of Papists when you can get it.) Come we,
I say, to Dr. Ames: and I could willingly chide you for open foul play in
citing an Author expressly against his own words in the very place you cite out
of him. Immediately before your very citation, Ames has these words,

Concedimus, hominis officium requiri, illud insuper contendentes, Deum hujus
premissionis vi effecturum in suis, ut officium illud faciant, quatenus
necessario est faciendum Cor. act. 5 p. 400.
We grant that man's duty is required, maintaining this withal, that God by
virtue of this promise will cause those that are his, that they shall perform
the duty, as far forth as it is necessary to be done. And immediately after
your Quotation (which is verbatim the same with that Junius delivers in his
Parallel, where he mentions his Oration that you allege, he does thus express
himself; The whole disposition is after the manner of a Will and Testament,
To^a dispositio Testamentariam habet (...), ut simpliciter (...) conditio;
atque hac ratione, ad modum foederis aliquando proponitur: qui tamen proponendi
modus non sic est accipiendus, ut Testamenti naturam in ulla part mutet.
Utrumque a nostris optime conjungi solet, quum justitiam ac vitam, sub
condition fidei promitti docent, and fidem ipsam electis dari, vel conditionem
foederis in ipso foedere simul promitti. Page 40.
as it is considered simply, either in whole, or according to the part of it;
but if the benefits that are bequeathed, be compared within themselves, then
one is to the other as it were a condition. And in this respect it is sometimes
propounded after the manner of a Covenant: which manner of propounding is not
so to be taken, as that it should in any part change the nature of a Testament.
Our Divines are wont excellently to join both together, when they teach that
righteousness and life are promised upon condition of faith, and that faith it
self is given to the Elect, or that the condition of the Covenant is also
promised in the Covenant. How plainly on both these places does Dr. Ames
express himself for that conditionality in the Covenant which we maintain;
and that in the same place whence you fetch your proof against us? Was it for
this, my good friend, that you took the pains to write so much out of the
Doctor? and that you showed me your written copy, and not the book when I was
with you, lest if you had brought the book, the place it self should have
spoken and answered for it self? Whether this were the cause or no, I leave it
to your conscience; but assuredly your carriage in this and that other passage
about Chamien, whom you would not take notice of to hold conditions proper
(though it followed immediately your allegation out of him) until I read it to
you, and then would not look upon it, nor hardly hear it, but put it off with
saying, that he did eat his own words. I say, these carriages make me and
mine, and your dear friend who was with me, fear that your Opinion sticks more
in your will then in your mind. Your eyes and ears are open and ready to
entertain any Author, though a Popish one, that makes for your opinion; but if
he be against your Tenent, though he be never so godly, hardly have you
patience to look upon him. Well (Sir) what has now been, as also what was
formerly alleged out of Dr. Ames, do abundantly prove him to have been for
that conditionality of the Covenant we defend.

7. Pass we on to Doctor Preston, where again you may be blamed, for when the
Doctor laid down a distinction between the Covenants, or rather between the
Promises of the same Covenant; viz. the promise of Grace, which he calls an
absolute Covenant made with the Elect, Jer. 31. Ezekiel. 36. and the Promise of
life which he calls a conditional Covenant made with all, Mark 16
If thou believe, thou shall be saved. You run away with a piece, and put down
Dr. Preston for a defender of the absoluteness of the Covenant, though both
there, and in his Treatise of the Covenant (of which I believe you were not
ignorant) he writes many leaves to the contrary. But I hope you will wipe this
Author also out of your list, after I have rehearsed some passages unto you out
of him. Look then either in that, or the Sermon foregoing (for I have not the
Book now by me) and you shall find Dr. Preston asserting faith to be required,
and that precedently to our being in Covenant: For thus he writes, That which
is required of them is only, that they take it. And there is nothing
precedently required or looked for on our parts, but taking and applying of it.
So page 18 The taking of Christ makes Christ ours. -- Faith is that whereby the
right of Christ is made ours unto salvation. Page 62, 63 he tells us of the
reconciling and justifying act of faith; which, he says is direct, and is that
whereby we take Christ; as well as of its pacifying act, which he calls reflex,
and says it is that whereby we know we take him: yea, he tells us, that
Humiliation is required, not as a qualification: but as our sense of sickness
is required to our seeking of cure, so this to our seeking of Christ, without
which we will never come to Christ. And would you know what this taking of
Christ is, which he says is precedently required? He tells you toward the
latter end of the first Sermon, that it is to know Christ rightly, as Prophet,
Priest and King. -- To obey him. -- To forsake all other for him. -- To pitch
on him with our whole deliberate and sincere will. Moreover after this our
receipt of him, We are (says he) required to obey him, to be holy as he is
holy, to forsake all; which he calls after-clap conditions, and hard
conditions. And page 25. Those that be humble and see Gods wrath what it is,
that have their consciences awakened to see sin, will come in and be glad to
have Christ, though on these conditions: but the other will not. If you will
have Christ on these conditions, you may. But we preach in vain, all the world
refuses Christ, because they will not leave their Covetousness, Pride, etc.
And all because they be not humbled. Now whereas he excludes conditions in some
passages, he tells you in what sense he excludes them. Page 15. When we exclude
all conditions, we exclude such a frame and habit of mind, which we think is
necessarily required to make us worthy to take him. By which it appears
clearly, they were meritorious conditions he excluded. To these I may add how
in his Treatise of the New Covenant, page 217. he gives this for his fourth
Reason, why uprightness is required; viz. That there might be an integrity on
both sides; A Covenant, as on Gods part, so on ours: That as he promises he
will be all-sufficient, so he requires this again on our parts, That we be
altogether his. And page 357. That the Condition God required of Abraham was,
that he should believe; where he spends many leaves in showing that, and why
faith is the condition of the New Covenant, Page 389. That Repentance, the
condition required of us, is part of the Covenant, both on Gods part and on
ours. The condition that is required of us, as part of the Covenant, is the
doing of this, the action. But the ability whereby we are able to perform these
is a part of the Covenant on the Lords part. Page 398. That when we do believe,
at that very hour we enter into Covenant, and are translated from death to
life: And page 458. When the heart gives her full consent, and takes the Lord
for her God and Governor, then is the Contract made up between them.

These passages (Sir) abundantly satisfy me concerning that holy and reverend
Author, that he held faith to be the grand condition of the Gospel, precedently
required to, not only our knowing our selves in state of Grace, but our very
being therein, and right thereto. If he say, that the Covenant, that is, one
part of it, viz. the Promise of Grace, is absolute; he says no more then
others, for I know none of our side that hold that part to be antecedently
conditional. Some call it a Free, others an Absolute promise, others a Covenant
with Christ for us, etc. Yea, in regard of the freeness and absoluteness of
it, they grant the Covenant in respect of the Elect to be equivalent to an
absolute Promise, and the purchase equivalent to an absolute purchase (as you
may see Owen Vniv. Redempt. lib. 3. c. 2.) the conditions on which salvation is
promised, being purchased and promised as well as the salvation. Notable are
the expressions of Mr. Rutherford in this particular, Survey of Antinom. p. 129.
We teach faith a condition on our part, and also a grace promised: Christ
brings himself, his righteousness, and the condition of faith too, which does
receive him. As if some Prince should freely promise to marry some maid of low
estate, on condition she wear a gold chain, with a rich Jewel of the Crown in
it, and withal should bind himself to give her both the chain and a will to
wear it. Again, He is both without doors knocking, and within doors opening,
yet he never comes in, but upon condition we open, which condition is also his
own work. He offers Righteousness so the sinner believe, and he works belief
that the sinner may have Righteousness, page 109. Thus you see others as well
as Dr. Preston, assert the absoluteness of the Covenant in that part; who yet
still maintain the other part, viz. the promise of life and salvation to be
conditional; which as has been already showed, Dr. Preston does maintain.

8. As for Mr. Socin. Disc and Consut p. 225.
Walker, he denies not all kinds of conditions in the place cited, but only
Conditions Legal, and conditions for which; meritorious ones: but conditions
which are as a means by which the free gift is received, and as a qualification
whereby one is made capable and fit to receive and enjoy the free gift; such he
grants, and calls them Conditions in the place cited by you; saying, There
is no condition of the Covenant propounded, but only the way and means to
receive the blessing, or the quality and condition by which men are made
capable and fit to enjoy the blessing: which is as much as I plead for under
that Title.

As for Mr. Strong, though both what I have heard from him my self, and also
what I have heard from others who have seen his Sermon, induce me to believe
that he is not against our conditions, yet having not his Sermon, I must be
altogether silent at this time concerning him.

By this (Sir) you may see, that I have looked into the most of the Authors
which you cited, and amongst them all I must profess unto you, that I find not
one that speaks fully for you, but more against, then for your Tenent: and
for that sort of conditions, whose cause I plead, I must entreat you therefore
to shake hands with them, and leave them to stand on my side. To them I shall
add some few more.

1 Mr. Perkins shall be the first, who puts down conditions in the very
description of the Covenant, saying, Order of the causes of Salvation. c. 31.
The Covenant of Grace is that, whereby God freely promising Christ and his
benefits, exacteth again of man that he would receive Christ by faith, and
repent of his sins. In the Covenant of Grace two things ( Ref. Cath. tit. of
Justif. Diff. 2. 2.
says he elsewhere) must be considered the substance thereof, and the
condition. The Substance of the Covenant is, that Righteousness and life
everlasting is given to Gods Church and people by Christ. The Condition is,
that we for our parts are by faith to receive the foresaid benefits, and this
condition is by grace as well as the substance.

2. Mr. Reynolds shall be the next; in his Treatise of the Life of Christ, p.
399. he calls Faith the conveyance: and p. 403. We expect Justification by
faith in Christ. -- Faith unites us to Christ, and makes his death, merit,
life, kingdom, sonship, victory, benefits to become ours. You may see p. 451,
452, 453. That to marriage between Christ and his Church, whereby the Church
has a right and propriety created, to the Body, Name, Goods, Table,
Possession, and Purchases of Christ, -- is essentially required consent, which
consent must be mutual; for though Christ declare his good will when he
knocks at our doors, yet if we keep at distance, stop our ears at his
invitations, there is then no Covenant made. It is but a wooing, and no
marriage, etc. Page 465, 466, 467. That the office of Faith is to unite to
Christ, and give possession of him, till which union by Faith be made, we
remain poor and miserable, notwithstanding the fullness that is in Christ. Page
478, 479. and to name no more, page 512. setting down the difference between
the two Covenants, he says, They differ in the Conditions, for in the old
Covenant, legal obedience; but in the new Faith only is required, and the
certain consequent thereof Repentance.

3. Mr. Ball shall be the third, who says, Treat. of the N. Cov. p. 17.
The Covenant of Grace does not exclude all conditions, but such as will not
stand with grace: and page 18. The stipulation required, is, that we take God
to be our God; that is, that we repent of our sins, believe the Promises of
mercy, and embrace them with the whole heart, and yield love, fear, reverence,
worship, and obedience to him according to the prescript rule of his Word: and
p. 20. If then we speak of Conditions, by conditions we understand whatsoever
is required on our part, as precedent, concomitant, or subsequent to
Justification. Repentance, Faith and Obedience, are all conditions. But if by
conditions we understand what is required on our part, as the cause of that God
promised, though only instrumental, Faith or belief in the Promises of free
mercy is the only condition.

4. Let learned Pemble be the fourth, who speaking of the difference between
the Law and the Gospel, says, Of Justif.. 4. c. 1.
The diversity is this, The Law offers life unto man upon condition of perfect
obedience, cursing the transgressors thereof in the least kind with eternal
death. The Gospel offers life unto man upon another condition, viz. Repentance
and Faith in Christ, promising remission of sin to such as repent and believe.
That this is the main essential difference between the Covenant of Works and
the Covenant of Grace, we shall endeavor to make good against the Romish
Apostasy. And about a leaf after, Hence we conclude firmly, that the difference
between the Law and the Gospel assigned by our Divines, is most certain and
agreeable to the Scriptures, viz. That the Law gives life unto the Just upon
condition of perfect obedience in all things: The Gospel gives life unto
sinners, upon condition they repent and believe in Christ Jesus. Where you may
take notice, that he lays it down not as his own private opinion, but as the
general Tenent of all the Orthodox Divines in his time, and that in opposition
to our Popish Adversaries. It was then no Popery to hold conditions in the
Covenant: and as he of the Divines of his time, so may I of the Divines of this
present age. See their consent and harmony herein, Larg. cat. p. 9.

5. Doctor Downam shall be the fifth; Tract. 1. of Justif. l. 6. c. 8.. 10.
That which is the only condition of the Covenant of Grace, by that alone we
are justified. But Faith is the only condition of the Covenant of Grace, which
is therefore called, Lex fidei. And l. 7. c. 2. Sect. 6. Our Writers
distinguishing the two Covenants of God, that is, the Law and the Gospel,
whereof the one is the Covenant of Works, the other is the Covenant of Grace,
do teach that the Law of Works is that which to Justification requires Works
as the condition thereof. The Law of Faith, that which to Justification
requires faith as the condition thereof. The former says, Do this and thou
shall live; the latter, Believe in Christ and thou shall be saved.

6. Doctor Davenant does also fully express himself several times to the like
purpose, and may in the sixth place be added to the former. His words are these:

In fodere Evangelico aliter se res habet; nam in hoc foedere ad obtinendam
reconciliationem, justificationem and vitam aeternam, non alia requiritur
conditio quam verae and vivae fidei: Sic Deus dilexit mundum. Joh. 3. 16. Romans
4. 5. Gal. 3. 8. Justificatio igitur and jus ad vitam aeternam ex condition
solius fidei suspenditur. De just. act. c. 30. in resp. ad ob. 3.
In the Covenant of the Gospel it is otherwise; for in this Covenant, to the
obtainment of reconciliation, Justification, and life eternal, there is no
other condition required then of true and lively faith; God so loved the world,
John 3. 16. Therefore Justification, and the right to eternal life does depend
on the condition of faith alone. Where he does afterward thus briefly show the
difference between the Law and the Gospel, considered as two distinct
Covenants; Lex in condition operum habet ipsam vim and formam icti foederis:
At Evangelium in Mediatoris sanguine fide apprehenso collocat ipsam vim and
formam foederis. Ibid.
The Law (says he) has the very strength and form of a Covenant made in the
condition of Works. But the Gospel places the very strength and form of a
Covenant, made in the blood of the Mediator apprehended by faith. What can be
said more expressly then this? I will not trouble you with repeating what has
been already delivered out of him in his next Chapter, but only mention one
passage or two out of him: Promissio vitae aeternae juxta pactum Evangelicum
and foedus gratiae, pendet ex condition fidei. Id. cap. 32. in sol. ad ob. 1.
p. 407.
The Promise of eternal life according to the Covenant of the Gospel, and of
Grace, does depend on the condition of faith. A little before, explicating in
what sense we deny good works to be required as conditions of Salvation, Si per
conditiones salutis intelligamus conditiones foederis quibus recipimur in
favorem Dei, and ad jus vitae aeternae: haec enim pendent ex solo condition
fidei Christum Mediatorem apprehendentis. Ibid. p. 406.
he thus speaks, If by conditions of salvation, we understand the conditions of
the Covenant, whereby we are received into the favor of God, and to the right
of eternal life: for these depend on the only condition of faith apprehending
Christ the Mediator.

7. With the fore mentioned Divines does the learned De trip. foed. These. 8, 9.
In foedere naturae exigitur Justitia naturalis, at in foedere gratiae exigitur
tantum fides.
Cameron fully agree, who handling the agreement and differences of the
Covenant of Nature and of Grace, observes they both agree in the extrinsecal
form, that to each there is annexed a restipulation, though in the thing it
self required in each by way of stipulation, they differ; for that in the
Covenant of Nature, natural Righteousness is required; but in the Covenant of
Grace faith alone is required. Whereupon in the conclusion of his whole
Discourse concerning that Subject, he gives this definition of the Covenant of
Grace; It is Foedus gratiae est illud quo Deus proposita condition fidei in
Christum, remissionem peccatorum in ejus sanguine, and vitam coelestem
pollicetur, idque eo fine ut ostendat divitias misericordiae suae. These. 82.
that wherein God on the Condition of faith in Christ proposed, does promise
the remission of sins in his blood, and life everlasting in heaven, and that
for this end, that he might show the riches of his mercy.

8. Unto these I may add Paraeus, who observes that the Apostle does make
mention of faith, that In 3. ad Romans 23 in illa verba, Per fidem.
he may teach us, fidem esse conditionem, that faith is the condition under
which Christ is given unto us, as the propitiation for sins, and that it is the
Instrumental cause by which alone we obtain the propitiation in Christ. And
elsewhere setting down the difference between the righteousness of the Law, and
of faith, or of the Gospel. He says,

Ex illa vitam nemo consequitur, quia conditio faciendi omnia leg^s, nulli est
possibiis extra Christum. Ex hoc fructum and vitam consequi facile est, quia
conditio confitendi Dominum Jesum, and credendi ejus Resurrectionem prope est,
in ore, and in cord nostro. In cap. 10. ad Romans v. 9.
By that no man does obtain life, because the condition of doing all things
required by the Law is not possible to any besides Christ. It is easy to
obtain the fruit, and reap life by this, because the condition of confessing
the Lord Jesus, and believing his Resurrection, is nigh in the mouth, and in
the heart.

9 The learned Chamier, that great Assertor of the truth of God against the
Romish corrupters of it, is the next. Nos legis and Evangelii discrimen cum
quaerimus utrumque nominare contracta illa significatione, secundum quam Paulus
oponit legem operum, legi fidei. Hoc est, legem operum proponere salutem sub
condition legis per ficiendae. At legem fidei candem preponere, sub condition
tantum credendi in Christum: nimirum, ut u^rinque conditio sumatur codem sensu.
Tom. 3. lib. 15. cap. 3. 26.
He disputing with Bellarmine concerning the difference between the Law, and
the Gospel, speaks as fully and plainly as any of the rest forenamed Protestant
Divines, That the Law of Works does propose salvation upon condition of
fulfilling the Law. But the Law of Faith does propose it upon condition only of
believing in Christ; the word condition being taken in the same sense in both
sides. And having distinguished conditions that are in Contracts and Covenants,
that some are precedent, others are consequent; the former being such as are
essential to the Contract or Covenant; yea, constituting the very essence and
foundation of it. The other being such, the defect or want whereof does make
the Contract or Covenant to be void and of none effect, though they do not make
the Covenant and Contract it self. 27, 28, 29.
He does apply it to his present Subject, The Law of Works requires the
fulfilling of the Law as a condition antecedent, without which any man has
not, either the actual possession of, nor so much as a right to eternal life.
The Law of faith does not admit works as such a condition antecedent, but only
consequent, so that they are necessary, ex vi donatae jam propter fidem vitae,
by virtue of that right to eternal life, which is already conferred on them
through faith; Where you see Chamier does clearly assert Faith to be the
condition by which we do receive the right to life, given us by grace; Works
the condition consequent in the Covenant of Grace.

10. Mr. Bayn on the Ephesians, Remission of sin is communicated from Christ in
manner following. 1 Christ sends his Ministers, as Legates, with the word of
reconciliation or pardon, inviting them to believe on him, that they may
receive forgiveness of sins. 2. He does work together by his Spirit, making
those who are his children, believe on him, if they may find forgiveness in
him. 3 He does communicate to them the forgiveness which himself had procured
and obtained for them. And on that fourth verse, God does not bind any directly
and immediately to believe salvation but in a certain order, for he binds them
first to believe on Christ to Salvation, and then brings them in Christ to
believe that he loved them, and gave himself for them.

11. Mr. Burroughes upon Hosea, upon those words, I will betroth them unto me;
how frequently has he those words, It must be mutual, it must be mutual in
every particular branch of it. He shows it must be mutual on the Churches
part, as well as on Gods part; and how can it be so without stipulation. In
Moses his self-denial. p. 188. Faith has the greatest honor above all other
Graces to be the condition of the Covenant.

12. Last of all, it is the general Tenent of our brethren in New England, as
appears by Mr. Bulkly of the Covenant. page 280, 281. where he handles that
very Question. And also by the Catalogue of Errors that did arise there, and
were condemned by an Assembly at the Church of New Town, August 31. 1637.
attested by Mr. Weldes, Err. 27. It is incompatible to the Covenant of Grace to
join Faith thereunto. Err. 28. To affirm there must be faith on man's part to
receive the Covenant, is to undermine Christ. Er. 37. We are completely united
to Christ, before, or without any faith wrought in us by the Spirit, Err. 38.
There can be no true closing with Christ in a Promise that has a Qualification
or a condition expressed, Err. 82. Where faith is held forth by the Ministers
as the condition of the Covenant of Grace on man's part, as Justification by
Sanctification, and the acting of faith, in that Church there is not
sufficiency of bread. By condemning these opinions for Errors, they declare
their judgments to be for conditions in the Covenant.

You see (Sir) with what a cloud of witnesses we are compassed, and how the
stream of Protestant and true Religion has run in this channel: certainly, it
should be some more then ordinary cause that should make us run counter to so
many grave, learned, and godly Authors. Well, let us see what moves you to
dissent. First, Many of them confess it to be conditions improperly. Secondly,
Many are driven to eat their own words. Now if both these were true, would they
be of moment to make you dissent from your godly brethren? Is propriety of
speech such a Jewel, that for the preservation of it the good names of the
godly and orthodox Divines, and the peace of the Church must be said to stake?
But who (my good friend) shall be judge of this propriety? Certainly, if it
shall continue for language that was in the Doctors time, you will be cast;
Penes quos est vis (...) loq^di
for I am sure conditions in the Covenant has been, and is the language most
in use among the Orthodox.

I remember when I had some conference with you in your Committee house about
your Sermon, you told me, Pemble was for you, and Chamier for you, and all
Polemick Writers were for you: and now the contrary proves true, and they are
brought against you, now they speak improperly, and are sometimes forced to eat
their words. I am sure you speak not properly when you told me that they balked
the word Condition.

But proceed we to the other Grounds. You go on and tell us, that another thing
that causes your distance was, the vigilance of the Adversary, who was ready
to make use of such expressions for defense of their Tenants. This I confess
is of more weight then the former, for we should be careful that we minister
not the least advantage to the Adversary. Bishop Davenant, as has been heard
already, would not have us in conference with Papists, use such speeches as
these, That Works are necessary, and the like, because they will be apt to
understand merit by them: yet nevertheless that reverend Author does use the
word Condition, and very frequently: it seems he thought there was no such
peril in the use of it. Again, the adversaries you speak of, must be either
Papists or Arminians. Now as for Papists, you have delivered us from all fear
that way, by telling us they stand not for any merit in the preparations they
plead for; now if they took any advantage from the word Condition, it would be
to approve of merit. As for Armininas, they may take as much advantage from all
Commands, Calls, and Counsels to Faith and Repentance to prove their free will,
as from conditions: So then these also must be laid aside. Besides, if there
were danger in the expression, can it not be qualified, so as that neither
Papists nor Arminians may take any ground therefrom for the spreading of their
Errors? must it needs be wholly cast away? Moreover, is there not as great a
care to be had of Antinomians and Libertines, with whom our English Church
begins to be pestred? and may not these spiders increase their venom on your
own gay flowers of absolute freeness, to the poisoning of the power of
godliness, both in their own and other men's conversations? May they not say,
Seeing no conditions are required, nothing on our part is to be done, I may
live as I list, for I cannot break the Covenant?

Sir, This is an inference not only may be made, but has been made by too
many in these loose times. I have heard sad stories of it whilst I lived in
London; I have known the persons there that have cast off Sabbaths, Duties,
Ordinances, with this inference: and scoft at the followers of them; calling
them, Dutymongers, Men of an Old Testament spirit, and the like.

You cannot be ignorant that such a horrid inference is practically made from
that Doctrine: And however you may think you have a salve for it in your
thoughts (which how sollid it may be I much question) yet how can you remedy it
in the hearts and lives of others? Oh do not destroy by one Sermon more then
you can build by ten.

But last of all, that that most moves you is your compassion to vulgar
hearers, who hearing of conditions, take not hold on the Promise because they
have not the condition. Now here, in the bowels of this compassion, I do
beseech you to consider what you do, and tell me seriously, Dare you bid a
sinner, whilst he goes on impenitently in his evil way, never repenting of it,
nor turning from it, nor looking after Christ; dare you (I say) offer such a
wretch the precious blood of our blessed Savior? And dare you bid such a one,
continuing such, to lay hold on the promise of mercy? Dare you tell him, That
the Gospel belongs unto him even while he is such? Dare you say, Here Drunkard,
Swearer, Whore master, here is salvation for thee, here is a Christ for thee,
here is life for thee, though thou go on in thy swearing, drinking, whoring;
Salvation is thine, take it, assure thy self of it, it is thine? If you do,
fare you well. I dare not, lest I strengthen the hands of the wicked; Old and
New Testament are both against it. But if your meaning be, that such a sinner
should alter his mind, leave his course, repent him of his evil way, give up
himself wholly to Christ, and then, though never so foul, here was water to
cleanse him, and blood to purge him, mercy to pardon him, and a Christ to
justify him. If your meaning (I say) be this, what do you but hold out mercy
conditional, even as we do, and to what end have you raised all this dust and
stir?

To conclude, The peace of the Church, and edification of souls should be most
dear unto us; things we should both preach and pray, study and labor for, and
by all means possible endeavor to procure, preserve, and propagate. Now I do
beseech you (my dear brother) seriously and sadly to consider, whether your
present Tenent, and the broaching of it, does not make a disturbance in the
one, and a stop and hinderance in the other? My heart aches to think of the late
stirs in the New England Churches, occasioned by Master Wheel-write, Master
Hutchison, and their followers, especially when I consider, that this very
Tenent, No Condition in the Covenant, had a great influence thereon, if it were
not the maine cause thereof. For here began they to look upon all those
faithful Ministers of Christ, who maintained conditions, as no Preachers of
free Grace, no Gospel Ministers, Legal Teachers, not yet acquainted with the
Gospel Covenant, not able to give sufficient bread to their people, as appears
by the examinations of Master Hutchison, and others in the book fore mentioned.
Thereupon they fell to a neglect of their Sermons, contempt of the public
Ordinances, siding and faction, till in the end, for troubling of the Church
her peace, they were some of the chief of them cut off and banished. May not
(my dear brother) the like use be made of your present Doctrine? Yea, is it not
(think you) already made by diverse? Are not the hearts of many taken off
thereby from their faithful Ministers and Pastors whom before they loved,
prized, hearkened to, received good from, yea happily received their conversion
by (if they be indeed converted?) are not (I say) their hearts taken off from
these their spiritual Fathers, so that they neglect their Sermons, contemn
their counsels, call them, nickname them Legal Teachers, and Ministers of the
Old Testament? when yet I hope you your self cannot in your conscience but
acknowledge them for the true Ambassadors of the Lord Jesus. May not this ill
issue of your Doctrine lie heavy on your spirits? Again, may not the Writings
of Pemble, Preston, Perkins, and other our Worthies now with God, for their
holding of Conditions, and professing the conditions of Faith and Repentance,
as without which we cannot have life, be laid aside and neglected? Nay, are not
these Authors themselves contemned as men of darker times, and not acquainted
with such clear light as now shines, though you know there is more of the
power and marrow of Christianity in one of their pages then in ten leaves of
your new lighted Meteors? Beside, are not many of the godly who love you, and
were hearers of you, driven from your Lectures, or at least cannot come to them
without fear and jealousy? others thereby amazed, not knowing whom to follow?
and most called away from the practice of Religion, to that needless
disquisition of a curious speculation? When he builders clash, the Building
must needs be interrupted; and when the Witnesses disagree, the Jurors can
bring in little better then an Ignoramus in their Bill.

I do beseech you (Sir) to consider how by this your Tenent the names and
Doctrine of Gods faithful Ministers, dead and living, are aspersed, the minds
of the godly troubled, the peace of the Church disquieted, the hands of the
wicked strengthened, the mouths of the Adversaryes opened, and the hearts of
your friends exceedingly sadded; This Book was delivered unto Mr. Air in the
Authors life time, some years since, before his Book against Mr. Woodbridge,
Mr. Crauford, and Mr. Baxter came forth.
and to draw back your foot before you are gone too far. By the wicket of an
interpretative absoluteness, I should hope that you might yet recover your
self in safety; however, by the door of retractation I am sure you may: and
though that work be an unpleasing business to flesh and blood, yet is it one
of the noblest Offices of a Christian soldier, in which spiritual warfare, as
well as in temporal, as much honor may be gained by a good Retreat, as by a
courageous Encounter, or prosperous Victory.

FINIS.
PAUL'S SAD FAREVVEL TO HIS EPHESIANS. OPENED IN A SERMON At the FUNERAL of Mr.
JOHN GRAILE, Minister of TIDWORTH in the Country of WILTS.

By HUMPHREY CHAMBERS, D. D. And Minister of the Gospel at Peusie in the same
County.

Praelucendo periit.

He was a burning and a shining light,

John 5. 35. The Righteous perish and no man lays it to heart, and merciful
men are taken away none considering that the righteous is taken away from the
evil to come.

Isai. 57. 1. London, Printed for Math. Keinton, at the Fountain in Paul's
Church Yard. 1655

A Funeral Sermon.
COncerning the very sad occasion of our present meeting, there is no need that
I speak unto you, seeing it is, or may be known unto you all, that we have at
this time accompanied, though not a very aged, yet an able, faithful, Job 30.
23.
painful, and godly Minister of Jesus Christ unto his grave, that house
prepared for all the living, where, as to his body, he is to rest until that
great day, John 5. 28, 29
when all that are in their graves, shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and
shall come forth, they that have done good to the Resurrection of life, they
that have done evil to the Resurrection of damnation: at what time the faithful
Ministers of Jesus Christ, how much soever contemned, clouded and clothed with
reproach in this world, 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3, 4
who have fed the stock of God, taking the oversight thereof not by constraint,
but willingly, not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind; neither as being
Lords over Gods heritage, but being example: to the flock, when the chief
Shepherd shall appear, they also shall receive a crown of glory that fades not
away. Yea, they shall then, together with all other Gods servants, enter in all
fullness into the joy of their Lord, and be possessed of an inheritance
incorruptible and undefiled, that fades not away, reserved in heaven for them.

The Holy Ghost tells us in Eccl. 7. 11. That a good name is better then
precious ointment; with that rich Embalming is our dear Brother gone unto his
grave, which will make his memory sweet and precious enough to all that knew
him, and love God. And of such a one, who is buried with this sweet Odor the
Holy Ghost witnesses in the end of that verse, That the day of death is better
then the day of birth. The day of Birth brings every one to an afflicted dying
life, but the day of death brings every such one, yea every child of God to
an everlasting life of never dying glory.

Whether you that are the Inhabitants of this place were sensible of your
blessing in the enjoying the Ministry of this our deceased Brother, or are
apprehensive of your loss in his departure from you, I cannot say, (for you
are all strangers unto me;) but this I am sure of concerning very many, who
have occasionally enjoyed the fruit of his Labors, that they sadly bewail the
removing of one so furnished with skill and will to declare the truth of God,
and to oppose the old Superstitious, and new, or rather renewed Errors which on
the right, and left hand do oppose the Progress of a blessed Reformation
amongst us.

And upon this Account my heart greatly mourns over this brother of ours whom
God has taken away from us, by whose death a great breach is made amongst us
of the Ministry in these parts at this time, wherein open profaneness and
pernicious Errors do so much abound.

When we consider our Brothers Ministerial Qualifications and Graces, his
Ability and Humility embracing and beautifying each other; his conscionable and
Christian circumspection over himself and his Doctrine, it is very doubtful
whether he were more ripe for life, or fit for death: Questionless this our
Brother after he had notice of deaths approach toward him, could not but be
sensible of the Apostle Paul's strait, between a desire of living to do good to
others, and dying to receive good for himself; of serving the Lord Christ in
life, Phil. 1. 23
and possessing the Lord Christ more fully in death: yet I am confident, that
in this case he did prostrate himself obedientially at the feet of the will of
God. And seeing the Lord has now declared his purpose to make this our dear
Brothers gain our loss, we must likewise submit without murmuring and
repining, and say, The will of the Lord be done. But though we are thus to
quiet our selves in the will of God, and to part with our Brother in all humble
submission thereunto, yet are we not to part with him without sense of, and
sorrow for ours and the Churches damage in his removal from us. Indeed, there
is no cause why we should mourn as men without hope of, and comfort in the
blessedness of this our Brother, who now sleeps in Christ, and enjoys his
presence, yet there is cause and warrant too to mourn as Christians, that so
precious an instrument of good in the Church of God is taken from us.

And that it may appear that we have Scripture warrant for such our mourning
at this time, I shall speak something through Gods strength, from a Scripture
which upon this sad occasion the Lord has guided my Meditations unto, which we
find in Acts 20. 37, 38.

ACTS 20. 37, 38. And they all wept sore, and fell on Paul's neck and kissed
him. Sorrowing most of all for the words which he spoke, That they should see
his face no more, and they accompanied him unto the Ship.

THese words are a History of the mournful parting of the Apostle Paul, and the
Elders of the Church of Ephesus, together with many other faithful Brethren,
when Paul took his final farewell of them, and left them hopeless of ever
seeing his face again.

I will not hold you long in the Entry to my Text: We may take notice that the
Apostle Paul preached the Gospel for the space of two years in Ephesus, with
much diligence and happy success, till he was by the violence of furious
enemies driven out thence, as we have it at large related in chap. 19. And
being to depart from Ephesus, he called unto him the Disciples, and confirmed
their hearts in the truth which they had received, and embracing them, departed
from them, as appears in ver. 1. of this twentieth Chapter. After this having
bin in Macedonia, and made his abode in Greece for three months, he resolved
upon a speedy Journey to Jerusalem, and made haste thitherward by the way of
Ephesus, that if it were possible he might be there on the Day of Pentecost,
which was then at hand, ver. 16, In prosecution of which resolution, he came to
Miletus, and from thence sent to Ephesus, and called the Elders of the Church
that he might speak with them, and encourage them in that great work that God
had called them unto, ver. 17. And when they were come, the Apostle, not in a
way of carnal ostentation, but that he might be looked upon as a leading
President to other Messengers of the Gospel, set forth his own diligence and
fidelity in preaching the Word of God, ver. 18, 19, 20, 21. And ver. 22, 23,
24. he showed that God had acquainted him with many afflictions which would
befall him for the future in the discharge of his duty, all which he made very
light of in comparison to the joyous accomplishment of his course and Ministry
received from the Lord Jesus. After this the Apostle told the Ephesians, that
he knew that this present parting would be his final parting with them in the
flesh, ver. 25. and thereupon he appealed to their consciences concerning his
diligent, full, and faithful dispensing of the Word and Counsel of God amongst
them for the effecting what in him was, the salvation of all, ver. 26, 27. then
from ver. 28. to the end of ver. 31. there is a very solemn charge given by the
Apostle Paul to the Elders of Ephesus to look to themselves, and to the dear
bought flock of God, over which the Holy Ghost had made them Overseers, to feed
them with the Word of Truth, and defend them, what they might, from those
Wolvish Seducers, who rising up amongst them, should make purlyes, and seek to
engrosse and draw away Disciples after them, so disturbing, and what in them
lay, destroying the Peace and Unity of the Church of God. Having finished this
charge, the Apostle commended them to God and the Word of his Grace for their
farther edification to eternal life, ver. 32. And then protesting his freedom
from the sin of Covetousness, and withal his known endeavor to avoid the very
appearance of it, ver. 33, 34, 35. he concluded all that he spoke unto them
with prayer, ver. 36. and when prayer was ended, the Apostle and the Ephesians
in a most affectionate mournful manner parted each from other, as the words of
my Text give us a relation thereof, And they all wept sore, etc.

In these words we are to consider,

1. The occasion of that sad mourning of the Elders of Ephesus, and other
Believers mentioned in the Text; scil. the Apostle Paul's final departing from
them, according as he told them, that they should see his face no more. But
these words of the Apostle must be understood with a due restriction or
limitation to this present world. The Apostle did not at all doubt whether this
should be a final parting between him and his believing Converts of Ephesus for
ever; he knew well there should be a happy time of meeting for them again, as
we may be assured from his own words to the Thessalonians. 1 These. 2. 19, 20
For what is our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing? Are not even ye in the
presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming? For ye are our glory and our
joy. These words of the Apostle inform us, that he knew that no earthly parting
should be absolutely a final parting betwixt him and other Believers, when as
he looked beyond this world to the coming of the Lord Jesus; but in respect of
his personal presence with the Ephesians, to counsel, instruct, and comfort
them, as he had done in the ways of God, so the Apostle told them, that they
should see his face no more, and when they were apprehensive thereof, they wept.

2. The description of the mourning of the Elders of Ephesus, and other
believers at their parting from the Apostle; which is laid down in three
particulars.

1. The greatness of it, They wept sore.

2. The generality of it, they were not some weak hearted ones alone who were
the mourners at this parting, but this was a great universal mourning of all
that were present, They all wept sore.

3. The pathetick expressions of affection which the believing Ephesians used
toward the Apostle Paul in this mourning, at their parting from him, They fell
on his neck and kissed him; and went as far as possibly they could with him,
till earth and sea necessitated their parting, They accompanied him to the Ship.

I purpose at this time to gather up the sum of all these Particulars, and give
it unto you in one Doctrinal Observation, easily arising from the words of the
Text; viz That

A faithful Minister of the Gospel of Jesus Christ is enjoyed with much love,
Doctr.
and finally parted from with much sorrow by those who truly believe the Gospel.

The sorrow here recorded of the Elders of Ephesus and other Believers for the
final parting of the Apostle from them, was not under any other notion, but as
he was a faithful Minister of Jesus Christ unto them, so they loved him whilst
they enjoyed him, so they mourned over him when he was going from them.
Ministerial faithfulness admits of degrees in those in whom it is in truth.
Amongst the Ministers of the Gospel in our days such as attain the measure of
the Apostle Paul's faithfulness, are, I say not rarely, but (as I conceive) not
at all to be found. How beit, I doubt not but that through Gods grace there are
some Ministers of the Gospel in our days, the desire of whose soul is, that
they may be faithful, and who do actually attain to some degrees of
faithfulness in the Ministry which they have received from the Lord Jesus, and
shall therefore be enabled to give up the account of their Stewardship with
comfort and approbation, to him their great Lord at his appearing and Kingdom.

I intend through Gods assistance, in order to the opening of the Doctrine now
before us, in the first place to discover when a man may be a faithful Minister
of Jesus Christ.

A man may be said to be a faithful Minister of Jesus Christ,

1 First, When being called, and set apart to the Gospel of God, as the Apostle
was Romans 1. 1. he looks to, and minds the discharge of the duty of the
Ministry, as the great work incumbent on him, in relation to Gods glory, and
the good of his people. It is fit they should turn Farmers, Merchants,
State-Counsellors, any thing rather then Ministers of the Gospel, who make it
their chief aim and work to get Manors, Moneys, or the Advancement of this
present world. Whosoever they be that mind their corporal dues more, or as much
as they do their Spiritual Duties, who look carefully after the reward, and
carelessly after the Work of the Ministry, shall never be acknowledged by the
Lord in the number of the faithful Ministers of the Gospel. They who account
their Ministerial being to consist in their Ministerial Duties, (...). 1 Timothy 4.
15
and the^ discharge of them, and accordingly press after the same, though they
trade but with one talent, and possibly bring not in visibly much advantage to
their Lord, may yet expect to be accepted as faithful Ministers of the Gospel,
and to hear at last from their Lord that sweet voice, Well done, good and
faithful servant, thou have been faithful over a few things, I will make thee
Ruler over many things, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord, Matthew. 25. 23.

2. Secondly, When a man applies himself to the dispensing of the whole, and
of the pure Word of God to those among whom he labors in the Lord. He is an
unfaithful Steward who withholds any part of that from the Household which
was committed to him for their good, and he cannot have the esteem of a
faithful Minister of the Gospel, who wittingly keeps back any portion of that
good Word and Counsel of God, which he has received from the Lord, to impart
to others for the making of them wise unto salvation. The Apostle appealed to
the knowledge and conscience of the Elders of Ephesus, that he had kept back
nothing which was profitable to them, ver. 20. and that he was pure from the
blood of all men, in that he had not shunned to declare unto them the whole
counsel of God, ver. 26, 27. It is certain that all Ministers of the Gospel do
not arrive at the same height of knowledge in the Mysteries of the Gospel, and
counsels of God; howbeit every Minister of the Gospel is to look and enquire
diligently into the Scriptures after the Mysteries of the Gospel and mind of
God, and as he has received, so he is to administer the good Word of God to
others, without imbezeling or concealing any part of it; which whilst he makes
conscience, and is careful to do according to his measure, how small soever, his
Ministerial Fidelity in this regard is to be acknowledged, and he shall be
accepted according to what he has, and not according to what he has not. And
as a faithful Minister is careful to dispense the whole, so likewise the pure
Word of God, not allaying and attempering the same by carnal mixtures unto the
Lusts and likings of corrupt men. The Lords charge in this kind is full of
divine Majesty. Jer. 23 28, 29. The Prophet that has a Dream, let him tell a
Dream, and he that has my Word, let him speak my Word faithfully. What is the
chaff to the wheat, says the Lord? Is not my Word like to a fire, says the
Lord, and like a hammer that beats the rock in pieces? And herein the Apostle
with much joy testified his own, and the fideity of his fellow Laborers in the
Gospel, professing that they were not as many which corrupt the Word of God,
but as of sincerity, as of God, in the sight of God, spoke they in Christ, 2
Cor. 2. 17.

3. Thirdly, A faithful Minister of the Gospel is one that takes care rightly
to divide the Word of Truth, and give every one in Gods family that portion of
the Word which belongs unto him. At this branch of Ministerial fidelity the
Apostle pointed in that charge, which with so much seriousness and solemnity
he gave to Timothy, I charge thee before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Timothy
4. 1, 22
who shall judge the quick and dead at his appearing, and his Kingdom: Preach the
Word, be instant in season, out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort with all
long suffering and Doctrine. Gods faithful Messengers are careful to dispense
instruction to the ignorant, comfort to the feeble minded, terror to the
obstinate: On some to have compassion, others save with fear, Jude v. 22, 23 ^
plucking them out of the fire. This Ministerial fidelity and wisdom is very
necessary, and highly accounted of by the Lord in his servants, as appears
evidently from our Saviors words, Luke 12. 42, 43
Who then is that faithful and wise Steward, whom the Lord shall make Ruler
over his household, to give them their portion of meat in due season? Blessed is
that servant whom the Lord when he comes shall find so doing. This fidelity
the Apostle Paul again and again called Timothy unto: that commanding counsel
cannot be overlooked in this kind, 2 Timothy 2. 15
Study to show thy self approved to God, a workman that needs not to be
ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of Truth. And doubtless, every faithful
Minister has it upon his conscience, and in his care and earnest desire,
according to the degree of wisdom received from God, to dispense the Word of
God in such wise, that every one may have a seasonable and suitable portion of
the same, as shall be necessary for the bringing him in, or building him up, to
receive an inheritance amongst those that are sanctified by faith in Christ
Jesus.

4. Fourthly, As a faithful Minister of the Gospel is careful to preach, so
likewise to pray for the people amongst whom God has set him. A Preacher that
speaks not oftener to God for, then from God to his people, may partingly shake
hands, but cannot partakingly join hands with the faithful Ministers of Jesus
Christ as belonging to their number. The Prophet Jeremiah witnessed his
fidelity toward the people in praying to the Lord for them, Remember how I
stood before thee to speak good for them, and to turn away thy wrath from
them. Jer. 19. 20
This is much of the close and closet-work of the faithful Ministers of Jesus
Christ. Very many there are now adays, who think slightly of the Ministers of
the Gospel and their work, supposing that they have little to do, and might
well be spared. But did such persons know what is done in private by the
faithful Ministers of Christ, how they ply the Lord with prayers for the
people, that he would divert his judgments from them, continue and bless his
Ordinances unto them, subdue their sins, increase their graces, comfort their
hearts, and save their souls, they could hardly retain such thoughts, or utter
such words as they do concerning the despised servants of Jesus Christ. But how
ever they are esteemed, or dis-esteemed by men, it is known to the Lord, and
that is enough, that a faithful Minister is an importunate suter unto him in
the behalf of his people, as the Apostle Paul assured the Philippians he was in
respect of them. I thank my God upon every remembrance of you, always in every
prayer of mine for you all, making request with joy, Philip. 1. 3, 4.

5. Fifthly, A faithful Minister of the Gospel is to exemplify what he
teaches others in the course of his own life. A wicked well speaking
Minister, shall never obtain approbation for fidelity from the Lord Jesus.
Though a man's words be celestial as of an Angel of Heaven, yet if his
Conversation be low, loathsome and corrupt, his prophesying in Christ's name,
will not prevail with the Lord Christ in the day of Judgment, ^o own and
acknowledge him for one of his faithful servants, but he shall then be found
amongst those wretches to whom our Savior will utter that dreadful voice,
Matthew. 7. 23
I never knew you, depart from me ye that work iniquity. The Apostle Paul
exhorted Timothy, and in him all Ministers of the Gospel, who desire to be
found faithful, to look to it that they be an example of Believers in Word, 1 Timothy 4. 12
in Conversation, in Spirit, in Faith, in Purity. He multiplied words, as we
see, that Timothy and every faithful Minister of the Gospel might see a
necessity laid upon him, to make it his great aim and endeavor to walk
exemplarily and inoffensively before Gods people in all things. The Proto-Type
of Holiness is our Lord Christ, all his faithful Ministers are to be followers
of him, that they may be examples to the flock, 1 Cor. 11. 1. He that fails
in this Duty, and is not deeply humbled for his failing, is far from
Ministerial faithfulness, and by his evil conversation does more effectually
cry down, then by his good Doctrine preach up the power of godliness.

6. Sixthly, Of a faithful Minister of the Gospel it is required that he watch
over the souls of those amongst whom he lives, both for the preventing of
hurtful errors, and practical evils, both which tend to the destruction of
souls. It appears from Heb. 13. 17. that a special part of the work of the
Ministers of the Gospel is to have an eye to the souls committed to them, that
they be not unawares surprised by Errors in Doctrine, or evils in practice.
Errors against the truth or holiness of the Gospel, are of an insinuating
nature, if they be not timely resisted they will make room for themselves, and
bring on a shipwreck of faith and a good conscience together. Ministers of the
Gospel are therefore in faithfulness to hold fast the faithful Word as they
have been taught, Tit. 1. 9
and by sound Doctrine both to exhort and convince the gainsayers: They are
with all circumspection, specially in such Apostatizing times as we are fallen
into, to look to the flock of God, that they be not led away by the error of
the wicked, or possibly of some good men misguided in some particulars, to fall
from their own sted fastness, but may stand fast and grow in grace, and in the
knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. It may seem at first a small
matter to let error against the Truth or Holiness of the Gospel into the
judgment; but the judgment tainted with such Error, is apt to grant out
dispensations for the practice of sin, and so a little Error many times
draws a great sluice to let in a sea of pollution upon men to the drowning of
them in everlasting perdition. It therefore belongs to the faithfulness of
the Ministers of the Gospel to fortify and establish their people, what in
them lies, in the Truth of the Gospel, that they may not be as children tossed
to and fro, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine, Ephesians. 4. 14
by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to
deceive. but may have their ears shut up against the voice of strangers, and
opened only to the teaching of that good Shepherd who has the words of eternal
life. And as faithful Ministers are to watch over the people in respect of
Doctrinal Errors, so also of practical evils, that they do not overspread them;
they are often to inculcate the Apostle Doctrine, that the grace of God which
brings salvation, Tit. 2, 11, 12 and 14
teaches us, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live
soberly, righteously and godly in this present World; and again, That our Lord
Jesus gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and
purify unto himself a peculiar people zealous of good works; 2 Timothy 2. 19
and therefore that every one that names the name of Christ should depart from
iniquity. Gal. 6. 1
And if they see any one taken in a fault through infirmity, it belongs to
them not only in the right of charity, but special duty to restore such a one
with the Spirit of meekness; and when they discover others hardening themselves
obstinately in their evil ways, 1 Timothy 5. 20
they are boldly to reprove them, and yet with meekness to instruct them, yea
though they oppose themselves, if God peradventure would give them repentance
to the acknowledgment of the truth, 2 Timothy 2. 25, 26
that they may recover themselves out the snare of the Devil, who are taken
captive at his will.

The sum of all is, When a servant of Jesus Christ separated to the Ministry of
the Gospel carefully minds his work, and bends himself to deliver the Word
of God wholly, purely, and seasonably, laboring instantly with God by prayer
to procure a blessing on his people, and his labors amongst them, and withal
is careful to exemplify his own Doctrine, that the people may see in him what
they hear from him; and lastly, has his eyes open to observe, and his mouth
open to g^ve warning of such pernicious Errors and Practices, as he sees
breaking in upon such as are committed to his oversight, such a one, however he
speed in his own judgment, and the judgment of others, shall not fail before
the Judgment Seat of God, to stand in the rank, and pass in the account of the
faithful servants and Ministers of Jesus Christ.

Having thus showed when a man may be said to be a faithful Minister of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, I come in the next place to consider, who are they who
truly believe the Gospel to whom such faithful Ministers are precious, who
enjoy them in love, and part from them in sorrow.

There is hardly any thing (as I conceive) in our unsettled times more
pernicious, then the mistake which many are subject to about the nature of
believing. Much talk there is of faith and the Gospel, whilst few consider what
is indeed the faith of the Gospel. I shall therefore endeavor in few and plain
words, to clear unto you from the Scriptures who are the truly faithful, the
true Believers of the Gospel.

1. First, They truly believe the Gospel, who glorify the Word of the Lord, as
it is testified of the believing Gentiles, to whom Paul preached the Gospel at
Antioch. When the Gentiles heard this, Acts 13. 48
they were glad, and glorified the Word of the Lord, and as many as were
ordained to eternal life believed. Every true Believer glorifieth the Word of
the Gospel, by yiedling a firm assent unto it as a word of Truth, setting a
high price upon it as the only saving Truth, holding it fast as a stable,
everlasting Truth, and still desiring of it, and delighting in it, as an
edifying and perfecting Truth, which is able to build men up, and give them an
inheritance amongst those that are sanctified. If men boast never so much of
believing because they are confident that Christ is theirs, and that all the
benefits which flow from the Lord Christ are theirs; yet if they do not
glorify the Word of the Lord, the Word of the Gospel, making an high account
of it as a Word of Truth, a saving, everlasting, edifying perfecting Word; they
shall never make it out before the presence of God, that they have the true
faith of the Gospel in them.

2. Secondly, True Believers of the Gospel are such as receive the Word of the
Gospel with spiritual gladness, as we read of that flock of faithful Converts,
brought in at one Sermon, Acts 2. 41
Then they that gladly received the word, were baptized. The Word of the Gospel
cannot by faith enter into the soul, but it brings in spiritual gladness with
it. Temporal believing has a slight and sudden joy accompanying it, as our
Savior testified in the interpretation of the Parable of the Sower, as to the
stony ground, (...). 13. 20, 21
He that received the seed in stony places, the same is he that hears the
word, and anon with joy receives it, yet has he not root in himself, but
dureth for a while. An unrooted faith yeildeth an unsettled joy, but when the
Word is with a steadfast, sound, and saving faith received, it usually, out of
the state of strong temptation, and spiritual disertion, ^om. 15 13
fills the soul with joy and peace in believing. Now this receiving the Word
by faith imports a taking of it into all the faculties of the soul, to new
mould and transform them according to the holiness of the Gospel. The Apostle
James calls it, ^ames 1 21
the receiving of the engrafted word, because the word of the Gospel thus
received, as the graft set into the stock, causes all the sap of the inward
faculties of the soul to bring forth such fruit as is suitable to the holy Word
of the Gospel. It is a very unworthy and ungrounded Opinion, that a man can
believingly receive the word of the Gospel, and not be new molded by it unto
holiness. If any think that the Word of the Gospel shall be mighty to save them,
when it is not effectual to sanctify them, they deceive themselves, and should
attend to the Apostle James his Doctrine for right information in this point,
who shows that the Word of the Gospel is received as an ingrafted, new
moulding word, in all those toward whom it is effectual to save their souls.

3 Thirdly, They that believingly receive the Word of the Gospel, are brought
off from trusting upon their own works and righteousness, to trust, and rest
their souls upon the Lord Jesus Christ, as the one, which in Scripture dialect
imports the only Mediator between God and man, for forgiveness of sins, peace
with God, righteousness and eternal life. The Apostle Paul called believing in
Christ, hoping, or trusting in Christ, Ephesians. 1. 12, 13 because all that truly
believe, cast away the thought of acceptance with God unto life in the merit of
their own Righteousness, and as worthless sinners build their hope of
righteousness to life fully and wholly upon the Lord Jesus as the Mediator of
the New Testament, through whom they finally bottom their faith and hope on
God, 1 Pet. 1. 21.

4 Fourthly, They truly believe the Gospel who trusting on Christ for
Righteousness and life, have their hearts brought on by believing, to the love
and high prizing of the Lord Jesus as most precious and desirable, 1 Pet. 2. 7.
Faith looking and resting upon Christ's love, inflameth the heart with the love
of Christ, Gal. 5. 6
according to the Apostles words, In Christ neither Circumcision avails any
thing, nor uncircumcision, but faith which works by love. And this true love
of Christ, the necessary and inseparable product of Gospel faith in all true
Believers, is obediential, causing the faithful heart to stoop to the yoke and
work of the Lord Christ, as we learn from our Saviors own mouth, If ye love
me keep my Commandments. Joh. 14. 15. 21, 23
And again, He that has my Commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves
me. And yet further, If any man love me, he will keep my words.

By all this it is manifest, That they who truly believe the Gospel are such as
glorify the Gospel, by embracing it as a saving, everlasting, edifying, and
perfecting Word of Truth; who with gladness receive this word into all the
faculties of the soul, to mould them into a frame of Gospel holiness, who rest
themselves upon the Lord Christ for Righteousness and life according to the
Gospel, and in the strength of that faith have their hearts knit to the Lord
Christ, in high prizing obediential love of him.

These two Points being dispatched; viz. Who is a faithful Minister, and Who
are the true Believers of the Gospel: I proceed in the next place to show that
such a Minister is enjoyed with much love by such a people.

This we have fully ascertained by the Apostles testimony which he bare unto
the Galatians, when the faith of the Gospel at first prevailed amongst them, My
temptation (says he) which was in my flesh, ye despised not, Gal. 4. 14.
nor rejected, but received me even as an Angel of God, even as Christ Jesus.
It is not possible to make a higher expression of enlarged love, then this is,
whereby the Apostle set forth the affection which the believing Galatians bare
toward him as a Minister of the Gospel; who loved him, and welcomed him upon
this account, as they would have done an Angel from Heaven, or the Lord Jesus
Christ himself, if he had personally appeared and spoken to them.

The Grounds of this enlarged love of true Believers toward the faithful
Ministers of the Gospel are, amongst others, which it would be too large
exactly to treat of, these which follow.

1. First, Believers look upon the faithful Ministers of the Gospel, as a
special gift of Christ unto his Church. What thoughts soever others have of
faithful Ministers, yet true Believers know that they are in much love, given
by the Lord Christ, for the edifying of his body, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12
till all the Members thereof come in the unity of the Faith and Knowledge of
the Son of God unto a perfect man, to the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ. And therefore Believers cannot but love such a gift of
love proceeding from their beloved Lord and Savior.

2. Secondly, True Believers look upon the faithful Ministers of the Gospel as
Ambassadors for Christ, in whom he negotiateth with them in much mercy for
the accomplishing their reconciliation to God, and eternal happiness. 2 Corinthians. 5. 19, 20. And therefore beholding Christ in them, they cannot but
greatly love them in Christ, and very highly esteem them in love for their
works sake.

3. Thirdly, True Believers are experimentally assured, that the faithful
Ministers of the Gospel are Ministerial Fathers to some, and Nurses to all Gods
people who hear the Gospel from their mouths.

To such as are brought out of a state of ignorance and wickedness, unto the
faith and obedience of Jesus Christ, by the Gospel which they preach, they are
ministerial Fathers, as we learn from what the Apostle wrote to the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 4. 15
Though ye have ten thousand Instructors in Christ yet have ye not many
Fathers; for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel. The Lord
of his own will originally begets his children by the word of Truth, James
1. 18
dispensed in the mouths of the Preachers of the Gospel; for, How shall they
believe in him of whom they have not heard? How shall they hear without a
Preacher? and how shall they preach except they be sent? As it is written, How
beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of them that preach the Gospel of
peace, and bring glad tidings of good things? The faithful Ministers of the
Gospel of peace, given by our Lord Christ for the work of the Ministry, are
therefore Ministerial Fathers too, and so as spiritual parents acknowledged and
beloved by those who through their Ministry are brought to the faith of the
Gospel.

To others who have formerly entertained the truth of the Gospel in a
regenerating power, the faithful Ministers of the Gospel are as Nurses,
cherishing and strengthening them by the Word of God, which they preach. For
the same Word of the Gospel which begets, nourishes and builds up the
people of God unto eternal life. And in this second cherishing work the
Ministers of the Gospel are and are acknowledged by believers for spiritual
Nurses, according to the Apostles expression to the Thessaloniuns, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 7
We were gentle amongst you, even as a nurse cherishes her own children. Now
Nurses (we know) sometimes get away the love of children from their true
parents; and in the case before us it is often seen, that though true believers
cannot forget their ministerial Fathers, yet they are apt to fall much in love
with their spiritual Nurses, who at present feed and refresh them with the word
of Truth: The sum is, that as Fathers, or Nurses, or both, all those that truly
believe the Gospel, are ready to love the faithful Ministers of the Gospel
whilst they enjoy them.

Now this Truth being acknowledged, the last point I am to speak to in the
Doctrine, becomes evident of it self; namely, That a faithful Minister is
finally parted from with much sorrow by those who truly believe the Gospel; for
love is a strong bond, knitting the soul so fast to that which is beloved, that
it cannot lose it, or be loosed and parted from it without much sorrow.

We read, that Jacob loved Joseph more then all his brethren; and when he
thought that Joseph was finally taken from him, Genesis 37. 34, 35
He rent his clothes, and put sackcloath upon his loins, and mourned for his
son many days. And all his sons and daughters rose up to comfort him, and he
refused to be comforted; and he said, For I will go down into the grave unto my
son mourning. And even thus it is between true Believers and faithful
Ministers of the Gospel, the true and great love which such Believers bear unto
such Ministers, makes their presence sweet, and therefore necessarily their
final parting very grievous unto them.

To this I will briefly add two further grounds of much sorrow in those who
truly believe the Gospel for the final removal of faithful Ministers by death
from them.

1. First, When faithful Ministers are taken away by death, Believers are at an
utter loss, as to the enjoyment of any comfort or benefit from the person or
personal Ministry of them that are so removed from them. If they could have the
least hope of re-enjoying a faithful Minister after death, there would be yet
some string of comfort to hold by at their departing; but Believers know that
this is a final parting from a faithful Minister, they must never seek counsel,
or comfort, or instruction more from his mouth; death unavoydably puts the
servants of Christ to silence, and takes them off from being in their persons
useful in the work of the Ministry unto the living, for ever. The Apostle Paul
wrote to the Philippians, that his abiding in the flesh would be needful for
them for their furtherance and joy of Faith, Philip. 1. v. 24, 25. and thereby
intimated, that when he was by death removed from them, they neither could
expect, nor should receive any farther benefit from his person or personal
Ministry. Herein our blessed Savior happily differs from, and has a
transcendent pre-eminence above his servants in the Ministry, that whereas
their final parting from their people in the flesh makes them personally
unuseful to others for the time to come; it was not so with our Lord Jesus
Christ. His parting from his people in the flesh, caused a greater imparting of
himself unto them in spiritual benefits, as is testified by our Savior
himself saying to his Disciples, John 16. 7
Nevertheless I tell you the truth, it is expedient for you that I go away;
for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you, but if I depart, I
will send him unto you. Our Savior went away as a Mediator and Advocate
between God and Man, and not as a bare Minister of the Gospel; and in that
regard he was forward by his departure in doing good to his servants, and
continues more able to communicate himself in all celestial and spiritual
blessings to those that wait upon him; Revel. 1
for, he is still walking in the midst of the golden candlesticks, and has the
stars in his right hand; Heb. 7. 25
and is able to save to the uttermost them that come to God by him, because he
ever lives to make Intercession for them.

But none of these things hold in the inferior Ministers of the Gospel; when
they are removed by death, their personal Ministry, from the moment of their
death, cease for ever as to all uses and advantages in respect of others; and
that consideration lays a heavy weight of sadness upon the hearts of
Believers, when their faithful Ministers are by death taken from them.

2. Secondly, True Believers know that the final removal of faithful Ministers
from any people, carries in it the face of a Judgment from the Lord. It was a
Promise of great love, Jer. 3. 15
I will give you Pastors according to my heart, which shall feed you with
knowledge and understanding. And on the contrary, when the Lord takes away
faithful Ministers from any people, he then depriveth them of one of his
choicest mercyes upon earth, which cannot therefore but have the appearance of
a Judgment in the eyes of true Believers.

The Prophet Micah represented evil men as weary of the faithful Teachers, and
saying to them, Prophecy ye not, Micah 2. 6
and then from the Lord denounced the Judgment of their ceasing from amongst
them, They shall not prophecy unto them. Their refusal of the Prophets was
their great sin, and the Lords removal of his Prophets was his heavy judgment
upon them.

If it be asked concerning a faithful Minister when he dies, of what Disease
he dyed? it may be often truly answered, of the judgment of God upon an
unthankful people. When men are sick again of their faithful Ministers, and
long to be rid of them, it is a righteous thing with God to let them dye, that
such a people may dye without instruction. The contempt of the Ministers of the
Gospel who desire to be faithful, is a spreading Disease amongst us at this
day. Men looking diverse ways, do yet unanimously consent to render the
Ministers of the Gospel in this Nation as odious as possibly they can. Without
distinction they are all branded as Tythe-Mongers, Time servers, Antichristian,
Self-seekers, and what not? But it is enough, that God is the supreme Judge of
those that are thus traduced, and of their Accusers (...) howbeit, whilst this
Disease so generally reigns and rages, it is no marvel though many of Gods
faithful servants dye of it, whose removal by death, though possibly some
triumph in, yet the true Believers of the Gospel, of whom there is (blessed be
the Lord) a very considerable number throughout our Land, cannot but be, as
they are, much sadded at it, as carrying the face of an ill presaging judgment
in it.

Having thus gone through the Doctrine proposed, I come now to a few words of
Application.

1. Here is one work whereby they that truly believe the Gospel may have
reflexive knowledge of themselves; namely, by their enjoying the faithful
Ministers of the Gospel in love, and parting with them in sorrow.

I know there is great difference of judgment at this day, who are to be
accounted the faithful Ministers of the Gospel of Christ? To this an answer may
be gathered from what I have before delivered; at present I shall only say
this, That they who being in the place of the Ministers of the Gospel, do
visibly apply themselves to do the work of the Ministers of the Gospel,
laboring in the Word and Doctrine, that they may ministerially translate men
out of darkness into the Kingdom of Gods dear Son, and build them up in faith
and holiness to eternal life, are so far (doubtless) unto others at least,
the faithful Ministers of the Gospel, that they who take them to be such, and
as such, enjoy them in love, and part from them in sorrow, may from that
disposition of theirs receive some evidence in themselves that they are in the
number of the true Believers of the Gospel, whereas they who make it a chief
ingredient of their Religion, to scorn and revile the Ministers of the Gospel
whilst they live, and to insult over them when they dye, to vomit out their
choler upon them both living and dying, are not likely, for ought I can learn
from the Scriptures, to be approved by our Lord Jesus Christ at his appearing
as true Lovers, and Believers of his blessed Gospel.

2. Secondly, This should be a strong inducement to those that are employed in
the Ministry of the Gospel to make it their special desire, care, and study to
be found faithful in the Work of the Lord committed to them, that they may be
enjoyed in love, and have the true Believers of the Gospel their unfeigned
Mourners at their Funeral. The Apostle says, 1 Cor. 4. 1, 2
Let a man so account of us, as of the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the
mysteries of God. Moreover it is required in Stewards, that a man be found
faithful.

The Office (as we see) which God has called the Ministers of the Gospel unto,
calls upon them to be faithful. Without faithfulness a nominal Minister of
the Gospel, how much soever he boasts and prideeth himself in his Office, is
but like unsavory salt, good for nothing but to be trodden under foot with
contempt both by God and men. But when faithfulness is found in a Minister of
the Gospel, it makes him shine as a Star, very gloriously in the eyes of the
Lord, and all true Believers. That Minister of the Gospel has the best
monument to perpetuate his name with honor, whose faithfulness in the
Ministry, has procured him the love of true Believers, so that his presence is
pleasant to them in life, and his memory precious with them after death.

3. In the third place, the servants of God may here read their warrant for
sadly bewailing and mourning over such as have been faithful in in the Ministry
of the Gospel, when they are by death finally taken from them.

Heathenish mourning over the dead accompanied with murmuring and impaciency
against God, becomes not the children of God in any wise. It is the Lords
command given of old to the Jews, Ye are the children of the Lord your God,
Deuteronomy. 14. 1.
you shall not cut your selves; nor make any baldness between your eyes for
the dead. Because they were by Covenant the children of God above other
Nations, therefore they were not to follow the practice of other Nations in
their excessive mourning for the dead, but to quiet themselves in the will of
their God and Father, knowing that his Saints are precious in his sight both in
life and death. And accordingly the Apostle Paul carefully provided that the
Thessalonians having embraced the Gospel of Christ, might not sorrow over their
dead as Heathens, destitute of hope of a future happiness or glorious
Resurrection, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 13. Howbeit, with due moderation, in humility of
soul, and quiet submission to the will of God, it is not only warrantable, but
laudable; a practice which grace brings the people of God unto, to mourn
over the faithful Messengers of God, when they are by death called home out of
this present world.

When Steven was slain by the Jews, Devout men carried him to his Burial,
Acts 8. 2
and made great lamentation over him. This is mentioned by the Holy Ghost not
as a groundless, but as a gracious practice of these Believers, evidencing
their Christian love to Stephen, that blessed Martyr of the Lord.

In proportion to this great lamentation made by devout men at Stephens
Funeral, and the sore weeping of the Believers of Ephesus, at Paul's final
parting from them, mentioned in my Text, I doubt not but our mourning over our
deceased Brother at this time is lawful, and laudable in the presence of the
Lord.

I will not multiply words in reference to this our Reverend Brother now taken
from us, I shall leave his Works to praise him in the Gate, being well assured,
that many who have felt and tasted the power and comfort of his Ministry, will
bear witness to him, and the working of God in him for their good.

One thing there is relating to his death which I cannot omit, that the Lord
greatly testified his acceptance of him in his Work, in that he dyed of
Epaphroditus his sickness, Phil. 2. 30
of whom the Apostle wrote, That for the work of Christ he was nigh unto death.
The Work of Christ, of which Epaphroditus was sick, was, as far as we can
judge, a special part of the Disease of which this our Brother dyed; for after
that some symptoms and beginnings of a bodily weakness had seized upon him,
his turn came to supply a Lecture at a place somewhat remote from his own
habitation, which therefore some, nearly related to him, earnestly persuaded
him to forbear for that time; but such was his Zeal toward the work of Christ,
that it caused him to neglect his friends advice and his own health, and to
overlook his present danger, and so undertake the Work of Preaching the Gospel
in his course, under the weight of which labor of love, his weak body did
apparently sink in the time and place of that public service; after which
returning home, he declined more and more until the time of his death.

Our Saviors words therefore seem plainly to reach this our Brother, and
pronounce him blessed, Blessed is that servant whom the Lord when he comes
shall find so so doing. Matthew. 24. 4 6.
The Lord when he came to this our Brother, by death, found him doing, so
doing, doing his Lords Work faithfully, and therefore looking on him, we have
cause to part with him rejoycingly, being much assured of his blessedness; yet
looking at our selves, we have cause to part with him sadly, when we consider
that we shall have his help, and see his face no more.

A Pillar is fallen, and by the fall thereof a great breach made in this place,
this County, this Land; which that the Lord may be pleased in mercy to make up,
by increasing the number, strengthening the hands, and blessing the Labors of
his faithful Servants in the Ministry, we have great cause to bow our knees
before him, and to beg this favor from him in the name of the Lord Jesus; to
whom with the Father, and blessed Spirit, be praise and Glory for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

