A GREAT AND BLOODY FIGHT IN IRELAND The killing of Colonel Cook, and many
other Commission Officers and Soldiers to the Parliament of England, by a
party of Irish Tories Commanded by General Owen Oneale.

ALSO, A Letter from the great Council of the Irish holden at Galway to Lieut:
Gen: Ludlowe, with some Propositions for the Parliament of England.

WITH The Articles of Agreement made between Commissary Gen: Reynolds and
Colonel Fitz Patrick, in behalf of himself and his whole party of the Irish,
and the form of their Engagement to the Commonwealth of England.

LONDON: Printed by F: N: Ap^^ll 12 1652

A Letter to Li^ut: Gen: Ludlowe from and in the name of the Irish Council
holden at Galway, March 9th. 1652.
BY the return made from you upon the overture made by his Excellency the Lord
Marquis of Clanrickard, Lord Deputy General of Ireland, for a treaty, in order
to a general settlement of this Nation: We understand that you, as being not
qualified with sufficient power decline it, leaving the same unto the
Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, unto whom although you give but
little encouragement, for addresses to be made in that kind: yet to the end we
may perform our parts in humbling our selves before the omnipotent hand of God,
by whose permission, they are raised to their present height and leave no way
unattempted for quenching an unnatural Quarrel, between two Nations (of late)
linked in love, allied in blood, and not different in Laws. And upon
consideration had that probably, the Parliament of England will in their
wisedoms listen and condescend unto the reasonable desires of this Nation, for
a general settlement: when they shall duly weigh the necessity and duty
forcing, and obliging their continuance in Arms hitherto: The good desires the
people of this Land, and affections to support the interest of England, the
manifold benefits arising to the Parliament by a good peace, and voluntary
acceptance of this people, of their protection, and many other advantages to be
derived from thence, and on the other side, the expense and uncertainty of a
tedious war, prooved by the experience of former Ages, which besides the
injustice of it, against a people desiring peace, numerous in arms, and
capable of foreign succors, can bring no return of profit, rouse their
thoughts, (hopeless of other remedies) unto the highest pitch of a desperate
Resolution, which by Gods assistance may alter the present state of their
Affairs, and produce almost but a conquest of a wasted Country, not to be
paralleld to a peace, grounded on a treaty, and willing concurrence of the
people: Therefore the great Council of the Kingdom here Assembled, have
thought fit to direct this express unto you, desiring that you will be pleased
to send a safe conduct in blank unto such Commissioners with their retinue, not
exceeding the number of thirty in all, as shall be employed for this Kingdom
unto the Parliament of England, ^o represent the desires of this Nation unto
them: And it for the avoiding further effsiuon of Christian blood, a cessation
of Arms, and acts of hostility be consented unto, until the pleasu^e of the
Parliament of England shall be known, we conceive it may principally conduce to
the satisfaction of the Parliament, and settlement of this Kingdom: All which
I had in Command from the said Council, to intimate unto you, and so I remain
your servant,

Galway 9 Martii 1651. Richard Blake.

For Lieutenant General Ludlow, Commander in chief of the Parliaments Forces
in this Kingdom.
Lieut: Gen: Ludlowes Answer to the former Letter.
IN yours of the 9th: instant which came to my hand the 17th: (signed by
command of the great Council at Galway, assembled as you are pleased to style
them, whose Authority I may not acknowledge) you reiterate in effect the former
application from the Earl of Clanrichard for the settlement of this Nation;
differing only in this, That whereas he would have capitulated in that Affair
upon the place, you propose for License to be given unto Commissioners to
repair unto the Parliament about the same, which has been occasioned through
this mistake (as I conceive) you apprehending that deny all to proceed, merely
from the want of power in the Ministers of the Parliament here, whereas indeed
the chief ground thereof was the unreasonableness of the Proposition it self:
which was in my judgment in effect thus. That such (who are guilty of a bloody
and cruel massacre, at least engaged in the withholding of them from Justice,
who are so whom the righteous hand of God has prosecuted from Field to Field,
from City to City, even to the gates of Galway) should be admitted to
capitulate, about the settlement of this Nation, which the Parliament of
England (their lawful Magistrate) whom God has not only permitted to be
raised to their present height (as you term it) but by his own outstretched
Arm, and glorious presence, has enabled to become a terror to evil doers, and
an encouragement to them that do well. And this Capitulation to be before they
have either owned their guilt, or delivered those Achans to Justice, for whose
iniquity the Law mourns. Indeed if once the Lord would truly humble you under
his omnipotent hand for your raising and fomenting this unnatural quarrel
between two Nations of late linked in love, allied in blood, and not different
in Laws (as your selves confess) and would incline you timely and readily to
submit to their Authority (as the greatest part of the Nation have already
done) I should then hope, that deliverance were drawing nigh (at least) to a
remnant of those amongst you, who yet continue in disobedience; and that such
of you might be capable of that settlement which (at this time) the Parliament
of England is intent upon. But while you insist upon the Justice of your Cause,
and persevere, in your hostility, its not the advantages we may partake of by a
settlement, nor the uncertaintie of a tedious war proved by experience of
former Ages, or backed by a number of people in Arms capable of foreign
succors, nor fear of having this Country rendered waste, and useless to us,
that ought to deter us from doing our duty, or invite us to this sinful or
unworthy compliance with you. As touching the Cessation you propose for the
avoiding of the further effusion of Christian blood, I could wish that this
tenderness had (in the beginning) possessed your spirits; but how such a
Cessation can be satisfactory to the Parliament of England appears not to me,
seeing they have been at so vaste a charge in their preparations for the
putting a speedy issue to this War, which by the Lords assistance shall be
heartily prosecuted by

Dublin, this 19th: March: 1651, Your Servant, Edmond Ludlowe.
To Sir Richard Blake this.
Some few days before this one Coll: Fitz Patrick, the most eminent in Command
amongst the Irish in West Mead, made an Agreement for himself and his whole
party with the Commissary General, they engaging not to act any thing in
prejudice of the Parliament of England, as appears by the Articles themselves
which I have herewith sent you.



Articles of Agreement mad^ and concluded the 7th day of March, 1651. at
Streams Town in the County of West Mead, between Commissary Gen: Reynolds,
and the rest therein authorized of the one party; And Coll: John Fitz Patrick
of the other part as follows: viz.
1. THat pardon for life shall be assured to Colonel Fitz Patrick aforesaid,
and all others of his party, except such persons as had a hand, or were actors
in any of the Murders, Massacres, or robberies which were committed upon the
English, and Protestants in Ireland, during the first year of the Rebellion: Or
any Murders, or Massacres, since the first year committed upon any person, not
being in Arms.

2. That Colonel Fitz Patrick shall have liberty to transport himself, and his
party, and Priests (except before excepted) into any the parts beyond the Seas,
in amity with the Commonwealth of England. And that they engage to act nothing
prejudicial to the Commonwealth of England, and that he shall have six
months time allowed for transporting them at the Port of Waterford, and in the
mean time to reside in the Parliaments Quarters, or elsewhere, free from
violence or injury offered them by the Parliaments Forces, they engaging not to
do any hostile Act in the Parliaments Quarters.

3. That if the transportation of Coll: Fitz Patricks Party as aforesaid, may
be effected in a shorter time then six months, it shall be done accordingly.
And if for want of wind or shipping, the said transportation cannot be done
within the said time of six months, a further time shall be allowed as by the
Right Honorable the Commissioners of the Parliament for the Affairs of Ireland
shall be judged necessary.

4. That if any of Col: Fitz Patrix party, to be by him transported as
aforesaid, shall be found to be within the exceptions before given, advantage
shall not be taken against them for the present, but liberty given them to
return.

5. That Col: Fitz Patrick or his party, (except before excepted) shall not be
subject to the suit of any person or persons, for any act by them, or either of
them done, since their being in Armer.

6. That Col. Fitz Patrick and his party, shall at the waters side, where they
shall be transported as aforesaid lay down, and deliver their Arms to such as
shall be appointed to receive them. And that the said Col: Fitz Patrick, and
his party, shall have liberty to sell their horses for their best advantage, to
those of the Parliaments party, and to none others: And that the said Col. Fitz
Patrick shall within twenty days from the date of these presents, give to the
Commissary General at Athlone, or to the Officer there Commanding in chief, a
true List of the names, and numbers of his party, who are to receive the
benefit of these, and the following concessions. And that thenceforth they do
no hostile act to the prejudice of the Parliaments Quarters, or Party.

7. That the consideration of Quarters for Col. Fitz Patrix party who are to be
by him transported as aforesaid, be deferred till the time of his giving in the
lift of the names, and numbers of his said party, mentioned in the precedent
Articles: at which time the said Col: Fitz Patrick shall deliver the
particulars of his present assignations, whereby a course for the subsistence
of his party, until the time of their transportation as aforesaid may be taken
into consideration, to be in order to the place of their transportation, as
shall be thought most convenient.

8. That if Col. Fitz Patrick, or any of his party, (except before excepted)
shall desire to live peacably in Ireland, they shall be admitted so to do, they
submitting as all others to payment of contribution, and to all Ordinances of
Parliament: Provided that this shall not extend to give protection to Priests,
and Jesuits, or others of the Popish Clergy to live in the Parliaments
Quarters. Provided also, that this their desire be declared to the Commissary
General aforesaid, within twenty days from the date of these presents, and the
names of the said persons be delivered in writing, to whom protections (if
desired) shall be given as is usual.

9. That for performance of these Articles Col: Fitz Patrick shall deliver
sufficient Hostages to the Commissary General at Athlone, or to the Officer
there commanding in chief, when the same shall be required by the said
Commissary General.

10. That Col. Fitz Patrick shall not be personally answerable for any unjust
act done by his Father.

11. That particular or personal actions of Col. Fitz Patricks party, or any of
them, shall not extend further then to the persons so acting. Col. Fitz
Patrick, and the rest or his party, and every of them using their utmost
endeavor for bringing to justice the persons so acting.

12. That if any doubt shall arise concerning the true intent, and meaning of
the premises or any part of them, it shall be left to the Commissary General
aforesaid, to clear the same as occasion shall be offered.

13. Lastly, for performance of all, and singular the premises, the parties
hereunto have to these presents interchangably set to their hands and Seals,
the day and year first above written.

Signed, Sealed, and delivered in the presence of John Fitz Patrick. Hen:
Oowen. Cypryan Grace. Waller. Jo: Coghlane.

Dublin 12. March 1652.
A party of the Tories being abroad, Colonel Cook went out with a party of the
English, and meeting with them he gave the onset, which proved a sharp
encounter; and after two hours fight, and many persons killed and wounded on
both sides, the Commander in chief of the Irish received a shot in his belly,
of which he dyed presently after. We also slew of the Enemy about 60. and took
80. prisoners; amongst those that were slain and taken were 30 Commission
Officers, of which number was he that commanded the Irish party. And that which
most affects us is the loss of that worthy Commander Colonel Cook, and two or
three other Officers of approved fidelity to the Commonwealth of England.



FINIS.

