GREAT BRJTTAJNES DISTRACTIONS: OR An Alarm to awaken all good Subjects;
Showing them the Cause and Cure of their present Evils. And briefly answering
some false frivolous Objections, made by one of the Chief RABBIS of these
Times. WITH An Exhortation in the Conclusion to all good Subjects, for to put
in practice their just duty.

Written by a true lover both of God, his King, and Country.

London, Printed. 1642.

GREAT BRITAINS DISTRACTIONS: OR An Alarm to awaken all good SVBJECTS.
GOd never leaves Man until Man first leaves God; Punishments are but the sad
Concommitants of sin, if every soul would avoid the cause, any soul needs
not dread the effect. Sin (my dear Countrymen) has caused distraction, as
a just revenge, to fall heavy on us. Let every one examine privately his own
heart, And I dare boldly say, it will evidently and manifestly appear, that
this Hell-poysoning venom [Sinne] has too much taunted his soul, and brought
upon us this present evil: and hence comes it to pass, that as the shadow
attends the substance: so a deluge of miseries wait upon a multitude of
enormious sins, crying, as it were, for Vengeance, Vengeance. Yet see, see
beloved, and justly Ponder and Admire Heavens Sacred Mercy, though our Nation
has been swift in sinning, for these many years past: Yet our good GOD has
been slow in punishing; Witness those Halcyon Days, those Nestor Years, I
had almost said, even Heavenly ones, that we have many of us sweetly enjoyed
for these threescore years and upwards. I might add more, under that Mirror
of Women kind, the ever truly Famous Queen ELIZABETH, under that renowned
Monarch, King JAMES, of ever blessed memory: and in a word, under our most
happy and Vnparalled example of all Princely and Heroique virtues, our
Illustrious King CHARLES, until these three last years of His present Reign.
And then, O then, and I fear, Woe ere long; me thought I perceived a black
Cloud teeming in the North, in which were not darkely seen Armed men, of
which I should remember to expatiate my discourse, but that I cannot, and ought
not to forget, that there has by Royal ascent passed an Act of oblivion
touching that unhappy business. Only this, from the inward of my soul, I do
wish there never had been such a president, or being, That like Apes our
British had not too greedily persued to soon to imitate them. Then should I
have had just cause to have held my peace in peace, and no way have had so
undesired a Subject to treat of, as is said; unhappy distraction! of which,
least I might seem too much to distract you with a bare Denomination of it
only, my subsequent Discourse shall more fully and lively Portraiture it unto
you.

Distraction is nothing else, but a strange Metamorphosis, or a sad change of
welcome joy, into unwelcome sorrow; of smiling peace, into a frowning war; or
if you please, a drawing in of men into a maze of confusion, if it preoccupate
the understanding; it is enough to hazard the utter confounding of it, if the
republique subvert and ruinate it, if the minds of men do allienate them from
their duty: and lastly, if it have seized upon the heart of the subject, it is
unfortunately all-sufficiently able and powerful to withdraw him from his due
loyalty, yea even to sovereignty; and I fear it does too many, yea too too
many; in a word, it is a frenzy that so captivates poor man, that he often does
he knows not what, and less cares, (more is the pity) against he knows
not, or will not at least know, whom. And does not our British Nation groan,
groan, yea even to death almost, sorely vexed and miserably tormented, withal
the several species and kinds of distraction City, Country, Court, Nobles,
Gentry, Poor men, Good men, Clergy men, Lawyers, Physicians. Finally, all
sorts of men are spiced with this distemper; some more, some less, yet all in
some, though in a different measure, no sex, no age, but a taint of this
malady. Go into the City, and there you shall hear, a numberless number of
all sorts of people lamenting at a dearth of Trading: Visit the Country, and
there you shall find the abler Sort complaining that they cannot get money for
their Commodities. Poor men they want money to buy Commodities, and work to
gain moneys. Frequent the Court, and then you will there find a world of
Distractions caused, for that they cannot be made Masters of a world of
Possessions. The Nobles, they emulate each the other, I wish I could justly
say, not envy one another. The Gentry, are doubtful they shall hazard the
loss of what they have. The poor man is as much perplexed, how to get
wherewithal to subsist. Good men are distracted, for to see Vice so much
promoted, Virtue contemned, and Clergy men, many of them, (God forbid) I should
think or say all) are more sorely perplexed for fear of a diminution of their
yearly revenues, then an alteration in Religion. Lawyers are molested for want
of Clients, and Physicians enforced to have Patience instead of Patients.
Finally, all sorts of men, all Sexes are distempered sorely, for fear of what
will become of all: But what has caused this Epidemicall disease. I shall not
positively take upon me to afirme, but only probably lay open unto your view,
what my conjecture is, if I Augurate aright, you have cause to side with me;
yea and to thank me: If amiss, I pray excuse me.

Undoubtly, This unfortunate distraction, or fraction, shall I call it; for it
has indeed broken already too many, since God in his justice has permitted it
to fall amongst us; For that we have broken and fallen from his Commandments.
I will not Commemorate at large, the crying sins of our Nation, Pride, Envy,
Whoredom, Drunkenness, Ingratitude, and a Thousand such like Diabolical
vices. Nor will I particularize any man's frailety, only this I must deal
plainly with you, I cannot but with unspeakable sorrow of heart, condole
abundantly, to see how our good and gracious God, as well as our pious and
Religious King is less graciously treated with by many of us; then justly
beseems such, who carry the name of good Christians, and loyal Subjects;
Witness our neglect of due obedience to Sovereign power; Witness our
undervaluing of holy men and holy exercises, I mean such, as efficaciously
endeavor to invite and press us to Fear God and Honor the King; Not such,
who however pleasing to the times, or plausible in outward show in their
Doctrine, vent little else but malice and Sedition, making it their
inauspicious emulation and ambition, to draw the hearts of men, rather to
themselves then to GOD, or their good King, Gods anointed, and the place where
Divine Oracles should be enucleated, a place where Gods Word is wrested to
their own ends, to maintain that which I should iniure Truth, and wrong my
own Judgment, if I should brand with any better appellation then Schism,
Faction, yea down right Treason. Treason against God, Treason against the King.
For Tell me, dear Soul who ere thou art. Art thou in holy Writ denominated to
be a creature, made after Gods own Image. Then let me tell thee, Gods own
command is, Honor thy Creator. Would thou gladly learn to honor Him, O
then obey and put in practice his Celestial commands, Be subject unto thy
Prince, for Kings are Gods Anointed here on earth: and not he that knows the
will of his heavenly Father, but he which does it, shall receive the reward. I
pray God direct all Christian hearts to put in practice this, and all other
their just duties.

Then shall we have no grounded reason to take up Arms, and imbrue one
another hands in each others blood.

Then shall we have no hopeless hope, either of our Kingdom, or our own
particular safety.

Then shall we have happy Testimonies, that if we will yet return to God, by a
contrite sorrow for what is past, God out of the riches of his accustomed
mercies, will cause Peace to be within our walls, and plenteous* within our
Palaces.

Lastly, Then shall all the people unanimously yield a due Loyalty to their
Sovereign Lord the King, and the good King like an indulgent father seek all
Auspicious means dexterously to preserve his people.

Thus breifely, and plainly, I have made apparent unto you one cause, and a
great cause of our present distractions, intimating unto you, how originally it
took its first breath, essence, and being from our neglect of duty both to
God, and the King, in not awefully fearing the one, and readily, and
cheerfully honoring and obeying the other. I have also prescribed you a
celestial Cordial for the cure; let every one in Gods name make use of it:
and I dare confidently affirm, that it will produce peace and plenty unto us;
peace at home, and peace abroad, peace Temporal, and peace Spiritual, plenty
of good works, and plenty of good rewards. O then dear soul, have thou
through negligence lost yesterday, yet through double diligence gain tomorrow:
it is never too late to mend, and never too soon to begin. And thus much I
recommend briefly unto you all, out of a Christian desire, prudently to direct;
I dare at least say, most safely to admonish you all. I should now give a
Period to this unpollished peroration, but that me thinks, I hear some
factious Rabby, a man too well known in this age, too much favored, and
indeed, famous only for his infamous life and doctrine, who has more piety in
his tongue and outward show, then in his heart; impudently begins to teach
you another kind of lesson.

I animated you to seek after peace, but he roares cut amain, crying aloud,
Arm, Arm, turning himself this way, that way, and the other, but never the
right way.

I gave you wholesome advice to fear God, and honor the King, he makes it
(more is the pity) the sum total, almost of his discourse, to deswade you
from obeying your lawful Prince; and so by consequence instigateth you to
commit treason, both against God and Gods anointed: Nor fears he to teach
you this lesson again and again, he has taken Sanctuary already, and will
not I fear quit himself of his Pulpit this two hours, nor stops he where
many lose themselves, At Arm, Arm: after which Alarm he casts himself so
furiously about to the people as if he had meant to cast away his own arms.
No, he has found out many weighty motives and reasons to spur on many of
his Auditors, which in one half hour, he had preached almost fast asleep;
fear and jealousies possess his brany, and he is fully resolved ere long,
they shall enter into the minds of his Auditors; for which end, he roares
like a Lion, and cries amain, plots! plots! unheard of plots! Popish plots! At
the report of which his Auditory awakes, and begin to prick up their ears to
give attention to his frivolous seditious discourse.

These, even these, (though none such ever were,) he avoucheth to be true,
and unless you will take Arms now to defend your selves, these plots menace
your utter ruin. And thus he poisons not a few of his auditory.

Stays he here? no, yet further he goes, and impudently affirms, that
Bishops are Limbs of Antichrist, decent Ceremonies are superstitious, he
counts order in praying, as the Church has set down unto us, as Papisticall;
nay, the Lords prayer is abomination in his mouth.

Stays he here? surely no, further to enliven you in this cause, he dares
tell you, your life, your liberty, your religion, all that is near or deer unto
you is now at stake, except you fight, or at least assist with your purses this
cause.

Desire you to know your enemies, why they are at hand, I am sure, at least
they are in his mouth; who who are they? marry heel tell you, they are those
damned Cavaliers, he is sure they are damned. And I am sure he said so, there
is nothing wanting to complete their damnation, if you will believe this grand
Assertour; in truth, this uncharitable Christian: but that you reciprocally
resolve to cut them off, and so send them immediately into Hell, where he
leaves them in his own imagination, and having wasted away two hours, takes
his leave of his Pulpit.

I will not take upon me to judge what may become of this man in the World to
come, because sacred writ commands me not to judge, least I be judged. Let
him that condemns another take heed, least he be condemned: But sure I am,
these and the favorers of such as these men are, who ever they be, next to
our sins are the only cause of our woes, our miseries, our distractions. And
as they are justly odious in the sight of God, who greets with a heavenly
blessing the Peacemaker: saying, Blessed be the Peacemaker, etc. So he
denounces nothing but judgment, and direful curses to fall on the
contentious man, who sowes discord as tares to poison and hinder the good seed;
I will close up all in a word.

My dear Countrymen, and truly dear, if dear in the sight of God, as I hope
and wish you all ever may be; God has pleased to bless this Nation above all
others with all manner of blessings, for many years past as I told you before.
Under one Soveraignesse, and two Sovereigns, the latter of which God long
preserve, he being the mirror of all Christian Princes, unexampled for his
piety, unparalleled for his free acts of grace and mercy, and one who so long,
and no longer, desires the blessing of the Almighty to him and his Royal
posterity, and his good Subjects lawful assistance, as he shall maintain
their religion in the purity of it; their estates, liberties, and laws for the
safety of them, their lives, and their posterity. And so long beloved
Contrymen, I dare sacrifice my life for to maintain the assertion, if a
just and necessary occasion should invite me thereunto; we are all bound to
defend his Royal Person, Crown, and Dignity, against any power whatsoever,
that shall labor to hazard the one, or infringe and debilitate the other. And
if it should fatally fall out, that our King on his part should not perform
his Royal and sacred word, for the word of a King, is and ought to be as
sacred, as is his Person, (which as yet I deem a kind of impiety the least to
doubt of;) then, when he breaks on his part, (which fatal omen God avert:)
we have some color, though I cannot truly say, any just and lawful cause to
keep from him any of his just rights, which we are bound by the law of God to
render unto him by the law of this our Nation; and finally by the oath of
Supremacy, Allegiance, and the late Protestation; and in the name and fear of
God I dare confidently assure you, that if you all faithfully resolve actually
to perform this duty, God will restore you abundantly to your former
happiness, and multiply his mercies on you and your posterity. Yea, though the
malevolence of some Sectaries, (those who are indeed the true Malignants;)
maugre their spite, and spit their utmost venom. God dispose every one of
your hearts, as may be best for his honor, and glory, your King his Kingdom,
and every one of your own safety.

FINIS.

