A DIAL, WHEREIN Is contained a remembrance of DEATH, and the uncertainty of
the time of DEATH.

With many good Rules how for to lead a good life.

clock FOR WE MVST

YOVTH MIDDLE AGE OVLD AGE



1 THESE. 5. 1. Try all things, and keep that which is good.

LONDON, Printed, Anno, 1648.

To the Reader.
KInd Reader I desire, and wish to thee
All health and happiness, may ever be,
This little book which hear I do present
Is for no ill, but for a good intent,
It is a dyall, so I have it named
According to some motions, in it framed
Likewise unto a garden we may it compare
Wherein both flowers and weeds there are
To both of these, you may it use at leisure
As time will serve, for you to take your pleasure,
It Is both, to put us all, in mind of death
While on the earth God lends us life and breath
As in a dyall, is motions of the hours
So in this garden is motions of sweet flowers,
As in some dyalls, be some false deeds,
So in this garden is some bad weeds,
All dyalls goes not true, that I do know
Some go too fast, and some do go too slow
But this may prove, to thee a true dyall
If thou thereof, do make a true trial
This garden to, though, but a little ground
Yet there are here, sweet flowers to be found,
This dyall do thou buy, it is not dear
Learn by it how to live, while thou liv'st here
Though in his center, thou no tongue discern
Yet thou by it, may some good lessons learn,
Prepare for death while thou have time and space
Aad pray to God, to gvide thee with his grace,
Death he will come, though we know not the hour
At one, or two, at three, or else at four,
Suppose he stay unto a farther line;
Till five, or six, to seven, eight or nine,
But if he stay till ten, eleven or twelve
It Is high time then for thee a grave to delve,
Choose this thy ground, do thou not it refuse
And delve therein, it is made for thee to use
Do thou peruse it well, and spend some hours
To cast the weeds out, but preserve the flowers:
Gather some flowers, to deck you to your grave.
Observe this dyall well, and so it may
Serve for thy use, both for the night and day
In day time for to read, while it is light
And for to meditate on, in the night,
God grant us grace, that we may learn hereby
In goodness still to grow and multiply.
So I desire thee, for to read it over,
And give to God the praise for evermore.
So I rest thy loving friend and well willer, William Granger.

A DIAL.
GOod Christians all, of whatsoever degree,
Give ear a while, and harken unto me
Both old, and young, it does us all concern
The oldest he, is not too old to learn
We must dye all, by ordinance divine
How ere so high, we must at last decline
Our God he has ordained it to be so,
Our Grandsire Adam brought us to this woe
In Genesis the third we may it read Genesis 2. Genesis 3.

The sequel why, and how it was decreed
God pardon me, in plainness to bestow
A little time his wondrous works to show;
In Eden God, did choose a plot of ground,
And planted fruitful trees about it round
Fruits of all sorts, herbs of all sorts likewise
And made it be a pleasant Paradise,
And in that place; there water was enough
For pleasant strames, did run, this garden through
In midst of this fair garden, God even he
Did place the tree of knowledge for to be
This pleasant place, abundantly expelling
God gave to Adam for to be his dwelling
God of the earth, a little time before
Did make him there, to rule all creatures over,
Then made he Adam a heavy sleep to bide
While he a rib did take out of his side,
And made a woman his helper for to be,
The case was altered soon, from that we see
Then God did say to him, of all the trees that be
Within this garden set, and placed by me
Take thou the fruit thereof, and freely eat
I give them thee, they shall be for thy meat
But of the tree, in midst this garden great
I do command thee, that thou shall not eat
For this I say to thee assuredly
If thou do eat thereof thou sure shall dye,
Then Satan he, envying Adams state
Began unto, himself thus to relate,
Shall man possess, that place of high renown,
That glorious place, from whence I am cast down
O! no I say, I will away devise,
He shall not to that blessed place arise
Though he be blessed now, he shall accursed be,
And so I Will overthrow his Majesty,
But he no way could find to make the man be cursed,
But by enticing of the woman first;
Then did he take on him the Serpents shape,
And thought by this device man should not escape;
He presently got up without delay,
Into the Tree, and thus to Eve did say,
Woman, quoth he, what is your charge so great,
Of all the fruits that is here you may not eat?
We eat said she of all that here do grow,
He that has made us does the same allow,
But of the Tree amidst this Garden great,
He has commanded that we shall not eat,
And if we eat thereof we sure shall dye:
The subtle Serpent then made this reply;
No no, said he, you shall not dye at all,
You are unwise to keep your selves in thrall,
Your Maker knows that when thereof you eat,
You shall be like to God in knowledge great,
You then shall understand both good and ill,
For this same cause he will keep you from it still,
But how can you forbear this fruit so fair?
Why is it kept from such a loving pair?
He plucked an apple then, and gave it unto Eve,
She saw it fair, did gladly it receive,
When she did taste, and found it savoury meat,
She gave to Adam one and he did eat:
Then opened were their eyes, Immediately
And they ashamed were, their nakedness to spy
God knowing this, in cool of day came down
And in the garden thus, his voice did sound
Adam where art, then they durst not abide,
But ran among the trees themselves to hide;
At last poor Adam spoke, and thus he said.
We hard thy voice, and therefore were afraid.
Because that both, of us now naked be
And art thou naked now, who told it thee
Have thou now eaten, of the forbidden tree
Said he, The woman that thou did me give
She gave it me, and I did it receive,
Then unto Eve, God did these words express
Why have thou caused, thy husband to transgress,
Said she, the Serpent, he enticed me
And made me do this great offense to thee
So every one of us, our sins do smother
And put it from our selves, unto some other
Then God unto, the Serpent presently
Did say these words, which I do now descry
Thou Serpent vile, which by thy subtilty
Seduced have this woman against me
And caused her so, her husband to betray
And my Commandment, so to disobay
I will torment thee, with continual woe
Upon thy belly, thou shall ever go,
Dust of the earth, shall be thy daily meat
The very vilest of it thou shall eat
Between the woman's seed, and thine and thee
For evermore, there shall contention be, Genesis 15.

Her seed shall break thy head, thine bruise his heel
These torments thou, for evermore shall feel
And woman then, which by enticement have
Thy husband from, his happiness down cast
By which thou have, undone, both him and thee
And made you both, vile bondslaves for to be,
For this thy breaking my Commandment,
Thou shall receive from me this punishment,
I Will punish thee in thy conceptions,
Because of this, thy sore transgressions;
And for thou have not lived in my fear,
With pain and sorrow thou shall children bear
Unto thy husband, thy desire shall be,
And he shall still have power and rule over thee:
And Adam, thou that did not stand in fear
Of me thy God, but to thy wife gave ear,
I will no more so careful be upon thee,
But I pronounce this sentence to be on thee:
For that you have been to me so unjust,
Out of this Garden now I will you thrust,
Now thou may say thou art of me forsaken,
Go dig the ground, from whence thou first wast taken:
Thou art but earth, therein go take some pains, Genesis 3. 19.

For unto earth thoushalt return again,
You both shall die, as you do well deserve,
But when, I will unto my self reserve,
Because you have lived so rebelliously,
You both shall dye, and your posterity:
The earth also shall Thistles bear, and Thorns,
And thou shall suffer many grievous storms,
With sweat of brows thou now must get thy meat,
Thou must not idle be if thou will eat:
So I have done, now I have past my doom,
Learn to live better now before death come.
Thus God did curse what he before did make, Genesis 3. 18.

He cursed the very earth for Adams sake,
His disobedience made him have this curse,
And we his offspring all do fare the worse,
For of our father Adams grievous sin,
We, as his heirs, have all our shares therein,
And thus was Adams sin our great downfall,
Therefore remember death, We must dyall:
But here a comfort does again arise,
Which subtle Satan never did surmise,
Though we were cursed by the woman's deed,
We now are blessed again by a woman's seed,
As in the Scripture we may daily read,
The woman's seed should break the serpents head,
Our Jesus Christ both God and man was he,
Came to this world our Savior for to be;
Our Jesus Christ he has our ransom paid,
For on his shoulders all our sins was laid, Esaias 53. 4. 1 Pet. 2. 24. Matthew.
8. 17.

He offered up himself a sacrifice for sin,
For to redeem us from the bondage we were in,
Those that believe in him by a true faith,
They shall be saved as the Scripture says,
But it is ordained that once we must die all, Heb. 9. 27.

And yield our life to death when he does call,
And death at Gods command does still atend
To bring each mortal wight unto his end,
Death is Gods Herrald, when command is given
To go to all the Nations under heaven,
For to arrest and take into his power,
Some people therein every day and hour;
The greatest King cannot deaths power withstand,
When he comes with the King of Kings command,
No age can escape from cradle to the crutch,
No sex can keep them from his fatal touch;
Kings and beggars to death are all alike,
There Is none at all can say Death dares not strike,
But there is a time for all things under Sun,
Time has been ever since the world begun,
A time for to be borne, a time to dye,
The wiseman says, and none can it deny.
In time was Adam made in Gods image,
In a short time he lost his heritage,
And infulnesse of time God sent his Son Gal. 4. 4.

For to redeem us that were all undone,
Death takes time unto him as a brother,
To go with him and follow on another;
Time with his sithe, Death with his dismal dart,
These two between them both the world does part.
Time he has wings, a speedy pace to hie
And death can run as fast as time can fly,
Time takes our lives, and post to death does run
Death meets with time, and so our lives are done
How careful ought, we be, our lives to mend
Since two such watchmen, do on us attend,
Time he does number all, our hours and days
And death does watch, to catch us on our ways,
We must die all, and yield to death his due,
Though we know not the time, nor place, nor how.
Death he has weapons more, besides his dart,
He has more ways then one to kill the heart:
Some in the seas and brooks, are daily drowned
Some in the fires, are utterly consumed,
Some are by powder all to pieces torn,
Some have their lives, in deserts overworn;
Some there are daily, killed with the sword
Some die a death, that most they have abroad
Some has by poison got a deadly stroke.
Some in their drink, a silly fly does choke
Some die of surfets, eating too much meat,
Some die by famine having naught to eat,
Some conquering Captains, fighting in the field
Death conquers them, and makes them for to yield,
To strike old age in bed, death does not scorn
Nor does he spare, the infants that's newborn
Thou can not pass, no time a long the street.
To be assured no danger for to meet
Some wood or stone, may fall upon thy head
Down from church or house and strike thee dead,
Be careful then, to be as thou should be
Since death so many ways, may come to thee
Repent in time, and do thy life amend.
Before that death do come, thy life to end,
Be thou for death, all times, prepared be,
That sudaine death, may never come to thee
Unto the wicked death does come with terror, Proverbs 28. 1.

For of his coming, he is still a fevour,
But to the godly, death is welcome ever,
He does acknowledge God, of his life the giver
And that he must, return it back again
To him from whom, he did it first obtain
Death he will come, though we know not how soon. Luke 12. 40.

In midst of night, in morning or at noon,
In the spring time, or else upon the fall.
But sure enough it is, we must dye all
Although that Christ for all our sins did dye,
Yet we must careful be, from sin to fly,
For sin within us still there does remain,
O let it not within thee rule and reign,
Be careful then, thy God to serve and fear
And patient be affl^ctions to bear
Lead a good life, an evil life abhor Romans 12. 9.

That thou may live with Christ, for evermore
Live well and dye well, that proverb is true
But few in these days, that will do so now,
Some that would dye well, there were and there is
But yet they have lead, their lives for a mis Numb. 23.

Balam desired the righteous death to dye Mark 14. John 18. 10.

Although he lived not righteously
Judas that traitor, did not so in either
He did not live well, nor dyed well neither
Lets pray to God, to grant to us his grace
To keep us all, from such a desperate case
Live thou a righteous life holy and pure
And thou shall dye, a righteous death be sure
There is a rule by Gods commandment
To teach thee how to live, and not be shent Exodus 20.

Gods ten comands that he to us has given
To be our guide, to lead us into heaven,
God be my guide, me to direct a right
For to explain them, as I do recite.

There is but one, and I am only he
That brought thee out, from Pharoes cruel hand
Where thou in bondage wast in Egypt land
I am that God, that can condemn and save
And therefore thou, no other shall have

Thereby Gods honor, from him for to take
Likeness of anything, in heaven above
Or in the earth below, to like or love
Fowls of the air, or fishes in the sea,
An Image shall thou make, of none of these
I say thou shall, no image make at all
To bow to it, or down before it fall
Of any kind of met all, wood or stone.
All worship does belong, to God alone
The Lord thy God, he is a jealous God
And he will visit daily with his rod
The fathers sins, upon their children here
That do him hate, whom they should love and fear
Unto the third, and fourth generation
All those that live in any land or nation
But unto thousands, mercy show he will
Of those that his commands, keep and fulfill.

Thy mind to please, or cause for to maintain
In any case, do not blaspheme his name
That gave thee breath and did thy body frame
He that to take his name in vain is bold,
The Lord has said, he will not guiltless hold.

Abuse it not, by any kind of folly
Six days thou labor shall, and do what longs thee to,
And keep the Sabbath, as thou oughtst to do:
For in six days, the Lord did all things make
And on the seventh, he his rest did take,
In it I say, thou shall not work at all,
Thou nor thy servant, nor Ox within thy stall
God blessed, the Sabbath day, and hallowed it:
Therefore look that no work thou do in it.

And do them reverence, as thou oughtst to do,
That thou long days and good on earth may live
In any place that God shall to thee give: Mat. 15. 4.

He that his father, or his mother curse,
His days on earth shall fewer be and worse.

In any case, thy brother to abuse
By this word murder we must understand
Some other mischeifes, used in our land
As envy, hatred, malice, and the like
And wicked slander, that man's life does seek
He that his neighbor, does slander and defame
As good were take his life, as his good name
A good name is a good man's chief delight,
And highly is esteemed in good men's sight. Prove. 22. 1.


Nor any other kind, of lechery
Of Sodoms odious sins, do thou beware
To keep thy body chaste and pure have care,
After a woman see thou do not lust.
For if thou do, thy heart it is unjust,
If thou do so, I tell thee for thy part
Adultery thou do commit in heart. Matthew. 5. 8, 28.


Lest it does chance, to turn unto thy woe
In dealing falsely, do thou not delight
Remember still, that thou art in Gods sight Jer. 23. 23, 24. Levit. 19. 36.

Weights too light, or measures which be small
Do thou not use, lest thou in danger fall.
Deceit is stealing, in a kind of way
Which thou shall answer for another day.

But for the truth stand up, and do not fear;
Do thou have God at all times in thy mind,
And take no bribes lest they do make thee blind.
Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house or land,
His wife or servants that be at his command,
His Ox, his Ass, nor anything that is his,
If so thou do, be sure thou do amiss:
Think how King Ahab and Queen Jezabel 1 Kings 21. 13.

Against this last commandment did rebel,
Ahab did covet, and Naboth's Vineyard crave,
Naboth denied what Ahab fain would have,
Then Jezabel false witnesses did bring
To swear that Naboth had blasphemed God and the King,
For that good Naboth he was stoned to death,
And with his Vineyard he did lose his breath:
What punishment they had the proof is plain,
The dogs did eat her flesh, and he was slain:
And now the ten Comandments I have rehearst,
Some other things I have to be rehearst;
Pride do thou shun, in any kind of case,
Decent apparel is a comely grace,
But above all, be thou not proud in heart, Prove. 16. 5, 12, 18.

I give thee counsel whosoere thou art:
Remember this before it be too late,
The proud in heart the Lord thy God does hate, 1 Pet. 5. 5.

Be humble minded then, and meek in heart
And God will love thee then, if so thou art,
God will exalt the humble and the meek, Matthew. 23. 12.

But the proud heart he will in pieces break,
Nabuchadnezar that mighty King, Dan. 4. 30.

His pride of heart did him great damage bring,
For God out of his Throne did down him cast,
Among the beasts to feed till seven years past.
Of Gluttony likewise do thou take heed,
Eat not too much, give some to them that need,
Rich Dives he did feed on dainty fair, Luke 16. 19.

But to poor Lazarus, no crumbs would spare,
What came to him after his dainty fair?
He is in durance now where all vile torments are,
Vile drunkenness do thou in no wise use,
Drink not too much thy self for to abuse,
For drinking much may make thee for to want,
And so may death come to thee just upon it,
When Holifernes had drunk of wine his fill, Judith 13. 8.

His head was quite cut off by Judith's skill,
It was Gods will for his own peoples sake,
In their revenge that she this way did take:
Noah crushed his grapes, and too much of the same Gen 9. 21.

Did make him drunk, and so he showed his shame,
This is no pattern left for thee to follow,
If thou think so, thy wit is very shallow.
Some of Gods chosen have great sins committed, 2 Samuel 11. 4.

And by repentance they have been acquitted;
Then let this be unto thy mind to call, Mat. 26. 74, 75.

That Gods dear children may at sometimes fall,
Not totally, but they may rise again,
And live with Christ above where he does reign.
Envy no man, though he has done thee wrong,
Take not from God what to him does belong,
For we may read that God himself does say it,
Vengeance is mine, I will my self repay it,
For envy Cain did kill Abel his brother, Romans 12. 19. Genesis 4. 8.

So by envy now do we kill one another:
Hatred it is abominable thing
Against our God that is heavens great King;
For hatred Jacobs sons did Joseph sell, Genesis 37. 28.

Which God did turn to good, though they did ill,
For Jacobs sake it needs must be confessed,
Unto Gods chosen all is for the best;
Joseph in Pharoahs house so well did speed,
That he his fathers house did help at need;
God has commanded that we should not hate,
But now we daily do it imitate,
To malice be thou not at all inclined,
It is much like to hatred his kind,
And therefore for it I say no more but thus,
From all those sins the Lord deliverus.
To covetousness I now am come again,
A little farther for to make it plain,
What wretched man art thou that with annoy
Do covet wealth thou can not long enjoy?
Think thou what God did to the rich man say,
When he had made large barnes his goods to lay,
Thou fool this night thy soul shall taken be, Luke 12. 20.

Then who shall have those goods laid up by thee?
If thou have riches, set not thy heart thereon,
Thou do not know how soon they may be gone;
Say thou not unto thy self that thou do ow them,
They are but lent thee well for to bestow them;
Thou art a Steward, God lends thee them to use
Unto his glory, not for thee to abuse,
Do thou bestow them well, that so thou may
Give up a good account at the last day,
Give to the poor that at thy door do cry,
Cloth thou the naked that in street do ly,
Comfort the widows that are in distress,
Relieve the children that be fatherless,
Visit the sick that are almost spent,
And those in prison that have long been pent;
Lay not thy treasure on earth for to enjoy them, Matthew. 6. 19.

For there be many ways for to destroy them,
But lay them up in heaven for to be
Where they may prove a great estate for thee,
For there no evil comes for to destroy it,
But at the last thou safely shall enjoy it,
All this if thou do so God will thee bless,
And thou at last a Kingdom shall possess;
When any work thou undertak'st in hand,
Remember still thou art at Gods command,
And when thy work unto good end is brought,
Do thou not brag that thou thy self it wrought, 1 Cor. 4. 7.

But give the praise and glory unto God,
Lest he do cross thee with some kind of rod:
When any journey thou do mean to make,
Pray unto God that he may undertake
To be thy guide, and to direct thy way,
That thou may come to heaven at the last day,
Observe all these good rules and do them keep,
And blessed shall thou be whether thou wake or sleep;
Thou shall be blessed whatsoere befall,
Yea treble blessed when death thy life does call.
Now to conclude, this work is at an end,
God grant us grace our lives for to amend,
And thou kind Reader that have read it over,
Though it be weak, do thou not it abhor,
The matter it is good, though not the writing,
The meaning is as good, not the inditing.
Let not a little fault in thee disliking move,
But take it as it is, it is done in love;
Let him that in it sees not any ill.
Forgive the fault, and mend it when he will;
Full foute score years and three the Author is,
A younger man may do some things amiss.
FINIS.

