GRATI FALISCI Cynegeticon. OR, A Poem of Hunting BY Gratius the Faliscian.

ENGLISHED And ILLUSTRATED By Christopher Wase Gent. Niess de Ort. and Occ. L
L. GRATIUS aurei and Latinissimi seculi poeta.

London Printed for Charles Adams, and are to be sold at his shop at the sign
of the Talbot near St. Dunstans Church in Fleet Street. 1654.

SILVARUM. REGNATORI. EQVUM. DOMITORI. MUSARUM. SPEI NOBILITATIS. PIGNORI.
LAETO. JUVENTUTIS. PRINCIPI. GVLIELMO. HERBERTO. D. DE. CARDIF. COMITIS. DE.
PENBROKE. ET. MONTEGOMERY. FILIO. NATU. MAXIMO. GRATIUM. FALISCUM. EX. LATINO.
ANGLUM. HUMILLIME. PORRIGIT.

C. W.

Illustrissime Domine,
EVenit iis qui pueritiam nondum excesserunt, ut studere nimis quam laborio sum
opinentur, ludant vero etiam laborio sius. In campis quidem curritur: esuritur:
sititur: algetur: aestuatur: Quid item agitur in iudo literario? Sedetur. Aut
legendus liber. Aut praelegentis vox cum silentio audienda* Aut denique stylus
exercendus Magnae scilicet molestiae! Optarem vero (mi Domine) ut tua indoles
altius quam pro aetate sapiat, and ut ipse rectae institutioni obsequutus veras
opiniones ante diem assequaris. Quamobrem non indignum putavi and (quae tibi
est insita comitas) non ingratum habebis ut hic rei venaticae quam elegans
author tibi comes accedat. Habes in omnia paratum officia clientem. Siquidem ubi
otium ad silvas allicit, hoc praeeunte, doctius venaberis. Rursum ubi negotij
ratio in scholam vocat, and hic idem te minime deseret; and ipse illi intentus
studebis amaenius: ita enim mira fide literas voluptate, voluptatem literis
temperat, ut and ubique delecteris, nec usquam cesses: unde sua menti constet
sanitas, and justum corpori accedat robur: quorum utrumque mihi erit summae,
dum res sinit, curae; and usque quidem in flagrantibus votis quo ad vixero.

Illne Dne Dnationis tuae Illmae Humilis, Fidelis, studiosus Servus. Chapter WAS I.

On my Worthy Friend The Author.
THus by the Music we may know
When noble Wits a Hunting go
Through groves that on Parnassus grow.
The Muses all the Chase adorn,
My Friend on Pegasus is borne,
And young Apollo winds the horn.
Having old Gratius in the wind,
No pack of Critiques e're could find,
Or he know more of his own mind.
Here huntsmen with delight may read
How to choose Dogs for sent or speed,
And how to change and mend the breed.
What arms to use, or nets to frame,
Wild beasts to combat or to tame,
With all the Mystery's of that game.
But (worthy friend) the face of war
In ancient times does differ far
From what our fiery battles are.
Nor is it like (since powder known)
That man so cruel to his own
Should spare the race of Beasts alone.
No quarter now, but with the Gun
Men wait in trees from Sun to Sun
And all is in a moment done.
And therefore we expect your next
Should be no Comment but a Text
To tell how modern Beasts are vexed.
Thus would I farther yet engage
Your gentle Muse to court the age
With somewhat of your proper rage.
Since none does more to Phoebus owe,
Or in more languages can show
Those arts which you so early know.
Edmund Waller.

A Preface to the Reader.
HEre is an ancient Latin Poet contemporary with Virgil and Ovid; who bore an
high esteem in that pure age, when the greatest Wits flourished, and Poetry
underwent the severest Judges, such as would not allow of a mediocrity in that
Art. His style is every where concise, chaste, and florid. I cannot any way
better match it, then to say it may come into comparison with a Georgique of
Virgil: it treats near upon the same subject, and amounts to the same quantity,
or thereabouts, for the number of Verses. In this comparison, I would not be
thought to depresse Virgil, for whom I have a deserved esteem, but to assert
Gratius into a just degree of reputation, among those who are yet unacquainted
with what Character they should set upon this Poet, who has not been ordinary
amongst us; this censure I doubt not will be verified to them, when they shall
take the pains to look over the work it self, which is so small as it will not
require the expense of much leisure. Ovid likewise will avouch the same. The
last Elegy of his 4th Book De Ponto is an excellent piece, in which are
registered all the wits of his age: more durably through the Monuments of his
lasting verses, then if they had been inserted into a Chronicle to have been
preserved in the Capitol. In that Elegy he ranks this Poet with Virgil.

Tityrus, antiquas and erat, qui pasceret herbas:
Aptaque venanti Gratius arma daret.
He seems indeed to have come nearest to him precisely in Age, as it appears,
he does in matter and style. And I am confident that there is none who are
either active or Studious, but will be entertained with his Music, or Art:
and those accomplished persons who have wedded both those qualities so rarely
competible in one breast, will be thoroughly sensible of the Harmony of his
Expressions.

Yet particularly this matter seems to be proportioned to the spirits of youth.
That Age (as is observed) Gaudet equis, canibusque and aprici gramine campi,
which noble industry surely is to be regulated and moderated in them, but not
extinguished. There are diverse Authors which are but Incendiaries of irregular
desires, ease and vanity in that flexible age. The subject of this Poem is not
of those Historiae peccare docentes (as Horace says.) These might be removed
from those years of purity; and the insensible corruption which flows from them
would be stopped. Others inflame the hot spirits of young men with roving
ambition, love of War, and seeds of anger. But the exercise of Hunting neither
remits the mind to sloth and softness, nor (if it be used with moderation)
hardens it to inhumanity; but rather enclines men to acquaintance and
sociablenesse. It is no small advantage to be enured to bear hunger, thirst and
weariness from ones Childhood, to take up a timely habit of quitting ones bed
early, and loving to sit fast upon a horse. What innocent and natural delights
are they, when he sees the day breaking forth, those blushes and Roses which
Poets and Writers of Romances only paint, but the Huntsman truly courts? when
he hears the chirping of small birds pearched upon their dewie boughs, when
hedraws in that fragrancy of the Pastures and coolness of the Air? How jolly is
his spirit when he suffers it to be imported with the noise of Bugle Horns,
and the Baying of Hounds, which leap up and play round about him! Nothing does
more recreate the mind, strengthen the limbs, whet the stomach, and clear up
the spirit when it is overcast with gloomy cares, from whence it comes, that
these delights have merited to be in esteem in all Ages, and even amongst
barbarous Nations by their Lords, Princes, and highest Potentates. Then it is
admirable to observe the natural instinct of enmity and cunning, whereby one
beast being as it were confederate with man, by whom he is maintained, serves
him in his designs upon others. A curious mind is exceedingly satisfied to see
the game fly before him, and after that has withdrawn it self from his sight,
to see the whole line where it has passed over with all the doublings and
cross-works which the amazed beast has made, recovered again, and all that
maze wrought out by the intelligence which he holds with Dogs; this is most
pleasant, and as it were a masterpiece of Natural Magique; Which in this
Author is amply set down in great variety. Afterward what Triumph is there to
return with Victory and Spoils, having a good title both to his meat and
repose. Neither must it be omitted, that herein there is an especial need to
hold a strict reine over our affections, that this pleasure, which is allowable
in its season, may not entrench upon other domestical affairs. We must
consider, that it wastes much time, and although it have its own praise, being
an honest recreation* and exercise; yet it is not of the noblest parts of life.
There is great danger lest we be transported with this pastime, and so our
selves grow wild, haunting the Woods till we resemble the Beasts which are
Citizens of them, and by continual conversation with dogs become altogether
addicted to Slaughter and Carnage, which is wholly dishonorable, being a
servile employment. For as it is the privilege of man, who is endued with
reason, and authorized in the Law of his Creation to subdue the Beasts of the
field, so to tyrannize over them is plainly brutish.

In reading this present Poet, those which have a favor to Hunting will be
much affected to see both the History and the Antiquities of it. Xenophon has
indeed described the manner of the Greek Hunting: and Oppian about two Ages
after our Poet has written a Poem expressly of this Art, being a great imitator
of Gratius, as is observed by Vlitius, who has likewise promised to illustrate
with notes the whole Cycle of the Greek Cynegeticall Authors. Now those which
are curious Artisans do not content themselves that they have attained to so
great perfection in their Art, but are extremely pleased to look back and
reflect upon the periods and steps whereby that Art has made its graduall
progress; if perchance by comparing the former with the latter even the
present state of it may be advanced. Neither will this be gathered only out of
writings, it may be much cleared if we resort to diverse Bassi rilievi of
Trajans Pillar. With those things which Perier has recovered out of other
Antiquities touching the same subject, on which P. Bellonius has subjoyned his
learned Notes. For later helps, excellent are the pictures and cutts of that
famous Florentine Painter and Sculptor Antonio Tempesta: He has rarely
expressed the Arms and Instruments with the Game and spoils, and Boscage
work, and whatsoever else belongs to this Art.

Here it may not be unfit to advertise the Reader, that this book though it was
before praised for its authority and pureness of that ancient age, has
likewise the commendation of a new song, having been never before printed in
England. Where one may justly wonder what may have been the occasion that a
polite and classical Poet treating of the whole Method of the Hunting in his
own age, should have been so long unlooked into, unregarded, and unsought for
in our Land, which is so great a Mistress of Hunting, and no small friend to
learning: both which will be allowed us by our unpartiall neighbors; or if any
should demurre to allow them unto us, I would use only this demonstration to
evince it to him, and as it were lay it before his eyes by leading him to that
multitude of Forests, Chases, and Parks which are all over the Land: And in
like manner on the other side, to those Illustrious Universities, Schools and
Colleges, where sumptuous Edifices, and large endowments have been established
for the encouragement of those who set themselves apart to the study of Arts,
and true Wisdom, surpassing any other Nation both in the former and latter.
Possibly the rareness of Copy's, and the little mention which has been made
of him through the succession of following writers; was the chief occasion that
we little admired what we could hadly have notice of* But there are now some
eight years since this Author has been set out by Janus Vlitius a Dutchman:
who although he is not of our Country, yet gives this account of that which
moved him, being a man of the gown to meddle with hunting; that while he was in
England upon public affairs, he went down into the Country to spend one
winter, in which he had leisure; where he conversed with some young
Gentlemen, in whose company twice a week he hunted all that Winter with so
great content, that the season otherwise unpleasant was past, before he
perceived how it went; here he examined the difficult* passages of Xenophon,
Gratius, and Oppian, which were best resolved by evident experience. In all
this we may see that he own's England to have been the School from which he
took the dictates of those learned Commentaries.

Let the Reader be advised of this piece of Dutch Orthography, that Vlitius is
a trysyllable, Vli -- ti -us. Vli being pronounced by v. consonant as we do the
Vly or Fly, a point at the Mouth of the Texell.

Aequoreis Vliti non inficiande Batavis
Si decorant civem men's proba, culta manus.
Anglus ago grates, tibi quas non invidus orbis
Debebit, doctus ponere jura feris
Cinge comas quercu, servatus Gratius ambit
Vt de se merita fronde tegare caput.
Retibus, et pinn^, pedicis instructus, and hasta,
Et cane cinctus eques jam nova bella parat.
O ego si quicquam tentato in carmine possem!
Si mihi Pieriae vena saliret aquae!
Jane meo (si forte) tulisses munere primum
Laudatos Belgas inter habere locum.
Sed me Musa fugit, Grantam pudet hujus alumni,
Et coeptis studiis otia rapta queror.
Accipe quod faveam, tenues de pectore lauds
Deprompsi, tacitae caetera mentis erunt.
Te nemus omne canet: resonabilis accinet Echo
Parnassusque biceps, Caucaseumque jugum.
Nequicquam Momus latratibus obstrepet, ultro
Sub tua signa venit quicquid ubique Canum est.
I cannot so readily assign what is the cause that since this setting him
forth, and so learned notes with him, he has not yet obtained a name amongst
us. Only much may be imputed to our minds, being possessed with particular
sollicitudes, by reason of our civil disorders. If this Author were read with
so due attention and diligent inspection, into those notes as would give a
sufficient understanding of his work, it would entertain the Reader with great
delight. But we do not love to take much pains. Very few will give themselves
the trouble to look upon large disquisitions, and turn upon every occasion to
the latter end of a Book to find them. We can sometimes afford to turn our eye
upon short marginall Annotations; because they do less check our careere of
reading, and the pleasure of connecting the sense and matter is not so much
cooled.

In this Edition of Gratius, I hope there is yet more done to prepare the Poem,
that it may be understood with ease, and the delight of attending to the
elegancies in it, rather doubled, then intermitted: by adjoining a Translation
in equal confort: wherein I shall have pleased either those that have an
affection to see our Language enriched with the wit of former ages: or on the
other side, even those men, whose inclinations do rather move to look upon the
native beauties of every piece. Such men have the sense of the Author in a
strict Metaphrase; the whole 540. Latin verses being rendered into a like
number of English. Whenever the matter is obscure (as it is in many places,
by reason of unusual terms) here is the whole account drawn under the eye; so
that what was gained by reading large disquisitions, will be delivered in the
precise sum. I have taken on me the pains, and only the fruit will extend to
all that accept it.

The work of rendering terms peculiar to any Art out of one Language into
another is generally difficult, it must be done with inquiry; we hardly know
the terms of most Arts even in our Mother Tongue; but here we must find them
out in both, and measure them carefully together, that they may be adequate.
This work is not easy; but at other times it is impossible to render them
properly. If any man have confidence of his own abilities and erudition, that
there is no expression so difficult which he could not put into apt Latin; let
him make an assay upon these several preparations of hemp. To ripple it. To
brake it. To swingle it. To heckle it. Or if he rely more upon his Apollo and
Muses, let them translate these lines into a terse Latin Epigramme.

And ye speak of the bucke the first year he is,
A Fawn soukynge on his dame, say as I you wys,
The second year a Prycket, the third year a Sourell,
A Sour at the fourth year, the troth I you tell,
The fyfth year call him a buck of the first head
The syxth year call him a bucke and do as I you read.
The reason of this inequality of languages is, that common names are of
general imposition, but luxuriant titles are only of private combinations. We
are a Nation much addicted to hunting, we particularize in the degrees of it,
as Tradesmen in the work of their art: The Romans also had proper terms in
their old way of hunting, which are retriv'd in this Poem: Ulitius has made an
Index of the words which are appropriated to hunting out of this Author and
others, comprehended in the same volume, as he has set it out: Here are many
expressions in which the Dictionary is deficient, for those who compiled it,
seem not to have digested any thing of this Poem into it; some instances shall
be given. Praedexter: this in Homers Iliads, (...), one that can use both hands
indifferently. Metagon, a Dog that draws after a Dear, or Beast, these
Metagontes are commended by him, because they did taciti accedere, which
quality is described in the heroical Poem set out by Sir William Davenant.
Canto 2. Stanza 30.

And Dogs, such whose cold secrecy was meant,
By Nature for surprise on these attend,
Wise temperate lime-hounds that proclaim no sent,
Nor harb'ring will their mouths in boasting spend.
This Dog is named from the Greek (...), but another is from the Gallish
Vertragus a Greyhound. Xenophon Junior Chapter 3. (...). This was not known in
the age of the great Joseph Scaliger, who turning this Epigramme of Martial
into Greek Verse, misrenders Vertragus into (...): as Vlitius has rightly
observed.

Non sibi sed Domino venatur Vertragus acer:
Illaesum leporem qui tibi dente feret.
Turnebus derives it from (...) to bear the hare; Young Gerardus Vossius from
Verdigh nimble; he adapts his conjecture to the small light which Xenophon
shows forth. Janus Ulitius from (...). which (he says) in Saxon signifies a
Dog for the Champion; all consenting that the name and Dog came together from
Gallia Belgica. Again, from Petronius Canis or Petro, which is a hard soald Dog
(...) from this I say comes the Spanish un perro, with them a common
appellation for all Dogs: There are other words in this Author which are rarely
found viride feretrum, a Chasse* upon which Images and consecrated gifts are
carried in processions, being tricked up with May and green boughs. Tensae,
the charriots or Tra neaux on which they are charged. Sacraria the groves
whither they are born. But to go beyond all this, from hence may be drawn a
fair collection of words appropriated to hunting; which words are common
amongst us, yet neither do we know the propriety of them in this juncture of
sentence (for words are perfectly of different signification according to
different positures in matter,

Dixeris egregie notum si Callida verbum. Reddiderit junctura novum.) Nor on
the other side, when we have occasion to express those signal passages in
this art, are we furnished with definite terms to signify them in Latin, but
impute that to the barrenness of the language, which should in some measure be
laid upon the narrown^sse of our enquiry: observe some examples with
attentiveness. Lustrare, to range or beat over a place. Legere signa
intemerata vapore fer^o, to fall upon the trayle. Turba loci qua Canes
falluntur, the doubling with which the Dogs are at a fault. Secare spatia
extera majore gyro, to cast it about again in a great ring. Egressus, the
making out the fault. Accessus, the harboring the beast; this in Greek is
called (...). Abitus, the unharbouring, in Greek (...). Domus ferarum, the
layre of beasts. Terere latebras, when they brush the Coverts. All which
curiosities have been acutely observed by Janus Ulitius in one little Paragraph
of the Poem, so that I would desire the reader from this proof, to form a
right esteem of what Character is to be allowed that Commentator; by a right
digesting these observations which will occure in this elegant piece, the
limits of the Latin tongue will be enlarged; for there is a certain set of
latin words which we have by us, they are numerabilia, and should all be
entered into the Dictionary, as we keep a set of counters in a Box. Now these
are collected from the Classical Authors, which have come down entire to us,
or by fragments; and our collection will be the fuller, when we have added the
terms of speaking properly among Wood-men. Besides, here we find Cannabia
Silva, a Hemp-croft, Stupea messis, a Flax-plat, expressions which we should
not have attempted, but rather have contrived into some more frigid terms,
unless the authority of so pure an age had warranted the use of them. Now may
it not be doubted, whether it can be, that much innovation should arise from so
little a piece: although it should, that doubt will receive a satisfactory
solution, when we consider that the subject is new, and no where professedly
handled by any Roman, or writer of that exact age: It contains the whole body
of an art somewhat out of the way, wherein the studious or voluptuous (which
two divide the Gentry of most nations) are wont to tread: nether is the City at
all acquainted with it, so that little is spoken of it, and less written of
it, Virgil in the third of the Georgiques comprises all his Cynegeticall
instructions in ten verses; here is therefore matter introduced, differing from
the ordinary subjects of writing, so that it is far from just occasion of
wonder, if an extraordinary matter do prompt unusual notions and terms. The
advancement of experience does necessarily propagate new words; therefore
Pliny, who has written the History of Nature, must needs contain a lucid
catalogue of words, and is undoubtedly the best Dictionary, or to speak more
modernely, the best Janua linguae Latinae. Here is an art not very common, and
that does fashion to it self peculiar Instruments. His Pinnatum, called
Formido, Metus, of which Nemesian.

Linea quinetiam magnos circumdare saltus
Quae possit, volucresque metu concludere praedas,
Digerat innexas non una ex alit^ pennas.
Namque ursos, magnosque sues, cervosque fugaces,
Et vulpes, acresque lupos, ceu fulmina caeli
Terrificant, linique vetant transcendere septum.
Afterward he speaks of Laquei curraces, or a round hoop of yeughen wood made
of boughs, which stood bent by force, in fashion of a Coronet, they were all
stuck with Iron nails, and wooden pins. To them was fastened a clog on the
other side long and heavy; through these the Nervus or Pizzle of a beast was
drawn, and all the engine hid in a pit: diverse pits and such engines were set,
that whenever the beast trod upon any of them, the string might yield, and
the coronet might be drawn together, to cling to the foot of the beast: This
Ulitius observes out of the old Xenophon, whereby to verify his exposion of
the Dentatae pedicae. The Morae ferri, are Forks which were upon their
Venabula, which I shall more explain in reflecting upon the body of ancient
Hebrew hunting, with a superficial view, which being compared with the
precepts delivered in this work, will mutually illustrate each other.

^anaan was hemmed in with deserts, There was the great Lebanon, and there was
Mizpeh, and Tabor, and other Mountains which abounded with game; and in the
Royal age, I believe, Hunting it self was much frequented; for though the
sacred History do not ex professo take care to deliver us any thing concerning
those lighter recreations, yet the frequent representations made by it
throughout the writters of that age, do give some probability that it was a
frequent object among them, and taken from the common use. David's persecutions
are sometimes likened to fowling, oftentimes to hunting: His enemies dig a pit
for him, they set a snare to catch his feet in. No authors of human learning
whose works yet survive, make so much mention of grins as the Psalms have
made: His enemies bend their bow, and make their Arrows ready upon the string
to shoot at the righteous. This was Esaus Artillery. So that according to that
age, Hunting was so instituted; for our Author speaking of these two* intimates
that they were courses of an elder date, for Ginns says he

Nam fuit and laqueis aliquis curracibus usus:
Cervino jussere magis. etc. --
He says likewise for Bows and Arrows

Magnum opus et celeres quondam fecere sagittae. David's enemies hide a net for
him. The proud have hid a snare for me, and cords, they have spread a net by
the way side, they have set grins for me. Neither was it unknown to the Jewish
huntsmen the way of driving beasts, by an immission of fear, which is the
Formido and Pinnatum here mentioned. This may give light to that place, Isaiah
24. 17, 18. Fear, and the pit, and the snare are upon thee O inhabitant of the
earth, and it shall come to pass, that he who flees from the noise of the
fear, shall fall into the pit, and he that comes out of the midst of the pit,
shall be taken in the snare. Here is the noise of the fear. They did anciently
amaze Beasts with Color, Odor, shouting, as before, Latratu turbabis agens,
and -- clamore premes ad retia cervum.

Moreover there will arise a very considerable illustration of some verses from
that which I now am about to propound: The Poet describes his Bore-speares in
these verses.

Ille etiam valido primus venabula dente
Induit, and proni moderatus vulneris iram
Omne moris excepit onus, tum stricta verutis
Dentibus, and geminas subiere hastilia furcas.
There is one letter in the Hebrew Alphabet, which has fairly preserved the
picture of this weapon that is here set down, insomuch that it is called
Venabulum, or Tzadde.

(...)

This is litera bidens, in which there is the Hastile and geminae furcae; yet
it may be seen with somewhat more plainness in that character which is called
(...) the round, small, and fair type of the Italians. Thus have we a Tradition
of the figure. And indeed no marbles, no reverses of Coins, no Medalls have
preserved the lively shape of this Borespear with so much durablenesse, as it
has been kept by painting in this liquid Oil and Colors.

And as the Borespear may be in some measure retriv'd from that Hebrew
Character: so may the Formido by looking into the Sicilian hunting where it
continues in use at this day. When the Nobles or Gentry are informed which way
a herd of Dear passes, giving notice to one another, they make a meeting.
Every one brings with him a Cross-bow or Long-bow, and a bundle of staves.
These staves have an Iron spike at the Bottom, and their head is boared with a
cord drawn through all of them. Their length is about four foot. Being thus
provided, they come to the herd, and there casting themselves about into a
large ring, they surround the Deer, and then every one of them receives a
peculiar stand, and there unbinding his faggot, ti^s the end of his cord, to the
other who is set in the next station, then to support it, sticks into the
ground each staff about the distance of ten foot one from the other. Then they
take out feathers which they bring with them dyed in Crimson for this very
purpose, and fastened upon a third which they tie to the cord, so that with the
least breath of wind they are whirled round abount. Those which keep the
several stands* withdraw, and hide themselves in the next cover^. After this
the chief Ranger enters within the line, taking with him only some Ho^nds
which draw after the Herd, and coming near with their cry rouse it. Upon which,
the Deer fly till they come toward the line, where they turn off to the left,
and still gazing upon the shining and shaking feathers, wander about it as if
they were kept in with a Wall or Pale. The chief Ranger pursues, and calling to
every one by name, as he passes by their stand, cries to them that they shoot
the first, third, or sixth, as he shall please, and if any of them miss or
single out any other, then that which was assigned by the Ranger, it is counted
a disgrace to him: by which means as they pass by the several stations, the
whole Herd is killed by diverse Hands. This Relation is of undoubted truth,
being received by Joannes Pierius from Joan. Antonius Pollio Geloum Princeps,
and delivered by him in his Hieroglyphiques, Book 7. Chap. 6. These stakes are
of the same use with those Ancones mentioned in our Poet, but it might seem
that they are farther improved. These things may be of use to have been
premitted. The Reader may give himself both delight and profit, if he shall
look upon that piece of Hieronymus Fracastorius the Veronese, which he intitles
Alcon, or de Cura Canum: also the Poems of Adrian the 6. but especially if he
enquire into the Edition of this Author by Vliti^s, where he shall find the
Poem of Nemesian written upon the same subject in the time of Carinus the
Emperor: besides the learned Annotations. Of these I have often made instances,
wherein I might bring the Reader to be acquainted with him. But otherwise the
whole delight of reading that Commentator has been by me left entire to him.

For that which has been effected by my own pains, let it be warranted by the
courteous Character of Mr. Rob. Creswel, rather then that I should be a worse
advocate for it.

To my learned and dear friend Mr. C. Wase upon the ensuing work.
IF to reprieve an Author of that state
And Ancestry, to rescue him from fate,
To clear him wrapped in Dust, laid in the grave,
That he may here his resurrection have,
Be Piety and Justice; I approve
(My honored friend) your diligence of love,
Which what it likes will with great labor raise,
And of the World deserve a double praise,
As works of Charity wherein men do
Service to others, are their Glory too.
Your choice commends your pains, and you did find
A Poet worthy of your equal mind.
One who may make, if this they can rehearse
Gentlemen Scholars, while they hunt in verse.
On who has all the right that man can do,
You set forth him, and noble Waller you.
It remains that the Reader be alike Candid. I shall only beg his favor, as
the Poet will deserve his attention.

A POEM OF HVNTING, By GRATIVS the Faliscian.
GIfts of the Gods I sing, the Hunters Arts
By Dian's aid. Once men relied on Darts,
And unadvised did by bare valor drive
The woods, and wholly with ill conduct live.
After a way more near and safe they tried,
Taking thee, Reason, their affairs to guide;
Hence life was helped, and the true course did shine,
And Arts they learned on bordering Arts to join.
Hence brutish hardiness was overthrown,
But God gave Arts their first foundation,
And propt them round. Then each his share contrived,
Thus is Invention to full growth arrived.
When life through war on Beasts was unsecure,
Diana, thou were first pleased to immure
With helps, and re^^ue* mortals from this bane^;
Then all the Nymphs came flocking to thy train;
Hundred of Fountains, hundred named of Groves,
Naiads, and Faune who pleasant Latium loves.
The Arcadian Lad, and the Idean Queen
By Lions drawn, and Sylvan decked with green.
I with these Guides, though thousand Beasts with*
Nor without verse will make our party good. (stood
In verse too hunting arms I will bestow,
Pursue their art; and toils and harness show.
First, it is enjoined with slender yarne to twist
The edge, and with sour threads to bind the List
That line will last, that is for service fit.
But for the nett which in the midst is knitt
Into six Tunnells wind it round, that all
The foes though troops into 'its back may fall:
Twice twenty paces that the net extend
I like, and ten full knots in height ascend
Hay's of more cost are not of greater use.
^yniphian ^ens (doubt not) best flax produce,
Good fruit Ae^lian Sibylls vale does yield
And the hemp-crop on Tuscans sunny field
Drawing a dew which the near s^ood does send,
Where through still Bowers Tyber Latiums friend
Slides, and salutes the Sea with a broad mouth;
But weak our flax is of Faliscian growth,
And Spanish Seatab other service takes,
That Linen too which at Bubastian Wakes
The Morrice-dancers of Canopus wear,
Whose whiteness hurtful in this close affair
Bewrays the plot, and puts the foes to guard;
But the poor Alaband in his watered yard
Plants grounds of hemp. Harness most fit indeed*
For our design; but they in strength exceed;
You may in these, tangle Emonian bears
Only before lest moisture (...) your snars
Take heed. No use of lines the wett has took,
No faith, if in the cutting then some Brook,
Scour the low vale, or fens a taint have wrought,
Or your green crop by sudden shower be caught,
Either against the dry North wind oppose,
Or it at home with gloomy smoke enclose.
Hence they forbid to touch Flax* harvest, ere
Maturest heats have scorcht the turning year:
And the bright Pleiade show'n her golden ray,
It steeped in rain the sooner will decay.
A mighty work, and which great care requires,
Do thou not mark whom story much admires,
The Demigods, that durst Olympus scale,
Walk seas, and from the Gods their Matrons hale?
Yet with small gain did hunt without my skill;
Sad Venus for Adonis moans, and will,
An^aeus too was slain in his own field,
Though he both handed two huge Bills did wield.
That God Alcide that made men safe to dwell,
Who forced Sea, Earth, and the steep gate of Hell,
Attempting all, what ere might be admired,
Hence honor first, and bright renown acquired.
Then learn if any Grace these Arts repeat
Which may the strength of Beasts by wit defeat.
Some pluck the plumes from the ^anck Vulturs wing
Their tackle this: and no mean help they bring.
But dapple them with down of Silver swans
This all their Arms. In the clear day these glance
Objects that fright, the greedy Vulturs smell
Offend the wood, these intermixed do well.
But as thy plumes may well be bright and sleeke,
So be they soft, nor quilted on too thick,
Lest the line drawn in its own pineo^s caught
Tangle thy have and useless show its fault.
This most affrights the dear, others again
Their shining quills in Libyan Sandyae stain
And Linen rags on forks erect appear,
It Is rare, if any Beast ^lude this fear.
Time was when men did Ginns and Fetters use,
They bid to make them a Deeres pizzel choose,
This helps the plot by its own kind disguised,
But what great Woodman upon this devised
The dragging Rake, since in untraced snares
One often falls in to reap another cares*
O happy Author, whom all times enroll
For such high thoughts, some ged, or god like soul
Which through gross darkness shot his piercing sight,
And led the silly Vulgar into light.
Dian', to thy Castalian Priest disclose.
An o^d Arcadian, thus the story goes,
Spartan' A^yclae first and Menal saw
Over unhaunted vales his nets to draw,
Then Dercyl, none for justice more renownd,
Nor was on earth a man devouter found.
Therefore of old him the wood-goddesse wrought,
And for her mighty work meet Author thought,
Bid him come near, and he her art should spread
He too first bore spea^s with tough fangs did head,
And checked the wounded beasts advancing rage,
While the cross guards their forward force engage;
Then staves two ^ines, or their sharp wings displaid;
Some their long spear invested with a blade,
Lest in the wound their steel be unimploy'd,
Here flattering novelty thou shall avoid:
Want or excess offend, but sickle mode
Vary`s, and always shuns a beaten rode.
I might vast Macedonian pikes propound,
And how long poles with slender forks are bound:
Or how again the swift Albanian loads
With mas^y plate for their thin bark w^ak rods.
All weapons best the safer measures frame,
Wherefore in Darts we at this use must aim
Not to wound light, nor yet short space to go*
Dian' with Lycian quiver and loose Bow
Armed her own Mates. Darts of the Goddess hold
Great work, swift arrows too have done of old.
Now come, and learn how tough shafts must be chose
In Thracian Hebers flats much Cornel grows,
And Myrtle which on Cyprian shore does bloome,
Y^ugh too, and Pine, and the Altinate Broomk,
And Cypress more for rustic service sought,
There is a stick from Eastern Saba brought;
The specious mother of sweet incense famed,
This has her use and grace from nature claimed:
Nor to be soiled (thus the wood-Nymphs or dain)
But not without great tendance we obtain
Those other shafts which in our forests fly.
Twigs of themselves never rise straight and high,
And under-woods are bowed as first they shoot,
Then prune the boughs, and suckers from the root
Discharge. The leavy wood ^ond pity tires;
After when with tall rods the tree aspires,
And the round staves to heaven advance their twigs
Pluck all the buds, and strip off all the sprigs;
These issues vent what moisture shall abound,
And the veins unimplo^d grow hard and sound:
When five just feet the stately poles ascend,
Cut them, while green leaves the ripe fruit defend,
Ere Autumn on them his warm showers discharg;
But why on small parts do we thus enlarge?
Dogs claim chief ear, our art no greater knows,
Whether you boldly drive the salvage ^oes
With naked forced, or war by stratagem.
Dogs thousand Countries have, and kinds from them.
The Mede will nothing learn, but stoutly fight:
And Celtiques in a different praise delight.
Gelonians boast no strength, and combat loath,
But quick they sent. The Persian good at both.
Some keep the Ser a race of untamed ^age:
Lycaons mild, yet mighty to engage.
But the Hircanian valor of its breed
Does not content, in woods they seek fierce seed,
Love gives access, and in soft fette^s locks,
Then strays the wild Adulterer through safe flocks,
And the full bitch dares to the tiger couch,
So does her race the nobler blood avouch.
But this ripe kind beasts in your yard will drive,
And on much blood of slaughtered sheep will thrive;
Feed him how^'re, what he at home offends
His courage in the wood will make amends.
But Vmber finds, yet dares not meet his foes,
Would, what his faith, and his quick sented nose
Such were his force and courage were so true,
What if the Belgique current you should view,
And steer your course to Britains utmost shore,
O how great gain will your expense restore!
Though not for shape and much deceiving show
The British hounds no other blemish know,
When fierce work comes, and courage must be shown,
And Mars to extreme combat leads them on;
Then stout Molossians you will less commend;
With Athamaneans these in craft contend:
Acyrus, Pherae and Acarnan sly
(Acarnans once did in famed ambushly)
So that bitch silent does her foes surprise.
But the Etolian yelping ere she spies
Rea^s the couched Bore (a service ill addressed)
Bent that fear this brawling does suggest,
Or eager have betrays, yet from our arts
Cast not that breed as useless in all parts;
Most fleet they are, and in sharp sent excel,
Nor labor can their active courage quell.
Therefore of various lands the virtues blend
From Vmbrian dam Sent will on Galls descend,
Gelonians from Hyrcanian sire grow stout,
And the open Calidonian will wash out,
That stayne corrected by Molossian seed.
Thus do they draw the flower of every breed,
And Nature ownes it: but if you respect
Fleet work, and trembling Roes to chase affect,
Or winding steps of the small Hare to trace:
Petronians famed, and the Sicambrian race,
And choose the Grayhound py'd with black and white,
He runs more swift then thought or winged flight.
But courseth yet in view, not hunts in traile,
In which the quick Petronians never fail.
But if their joys in height of Game suppressed,
They Silent would approach the unwarned Beast,
Theirs were the VVoods, which now the bloodhound gets:
But this fond virtue all their praise defeats.
To your high kind, Country's of Dogs not base,
Sparta and Creta may compare their race.
But Glympike first in slip and collar held
Beotian Hagnon brought into the field,
Hagnon Hastilian, Hagnon, whom most Grace
In our affairs shall give the highest place;
To doubtful arts, and scarcely yet allowed
He cut a nearer path, nor drew a crowd
In company, or netts abroad to lay,
But to his work, the hope and mighty stay
One Lime-hound led, he seeks over fields where late
Beasts fed, by springs, by coverts where they sat;
An early work* then hunting on the trayle
Vnstain d, if any crosse-work make him fail,
Searches in larger ring the hedges round,
And when he has the clear way surely found,
Puts on, as over the Lechaean plain
Thessalian Mares, whom glory of their strain
Enflames, and high ambition of the prise;
But lest from too much heat some loss arise
Make him with opening not himself betray,
Nor for mean quarrey, or some nearer pr^y,
Changing the sent, his first endeavors soil.
But now when good success attends his toil,
And the enquired form approaches nigh,
That he may know and point where the fo's ly,
Or lightly moves his tail for joy, or gnaws
And prints the very steps with crooked claws,
Or snuffles the hot air with turned up nose.
And in these marks lest eager joy impose
Round the whole close with quicksets fenced about
What way the beasts came in, what way went out
Make him go hunt: and if this hope prove vain,
Rare chance, he runs with the hot sent amain
To the fresh steps, and makes a ring unstained.
Therefore when the full conquest is obtained
Let thy companion share the prey, and prove
His due reward: and well paid service love.
This is desert, the palm this of renown
With which the gods did thee great Hagnon crown;
Therefore while verses last, while woods have Game
And Dian' arms, so long shall live thy fame.
He too from Thoes brought a mongrell strain,
No other breast like virtue does contain,
Or to obey, or ^iercely to fall on.
Engaged Lions Thoes are well known
To creep beneath, and with short legs to came;
For a small race and ugly, is their shame,
Shaped like a Fox; yet at this sport complete;
Nor can you ever train to works so great
Another breed; or if with care you try
That error ill success will rectify.
Then match them well; and thus a noble seed
Derive, these parents will your Talbot breed,
Which this strange beast got in their lusty prime,
First those of courage proved together Lyme;
Nor let this second care your choice escape
For graceful limbs, and a becoming shape.
High be their looks, their hairy ear's hang low,
Their mouth be deep, and flashing fervor blow
From open flews. Their well* trussed panch be round
Short stern, long side* Hair in partitions found
Run down, not shagg'd, nor yet by cold distressed
Then from strong shoulders let them spread a chest
Which for long winds a spacious room bestows.
Slight him who wide his scambling foot steps throws.
Lazy he is, Dry Legs with sinews tough
I like, and hard soals for these combats proof.
But this long labor falls in vain* except
The Bitch removed be for one Lover kept;
And with some large one Lim'd when she is proud,
Nor her choice worth submitt to the low crowd.
First joys, the first embraces sweetest prove,
Impatient nature works this furious love*
If she be loyal, and no lewdness act,
Let the big Bitch have rest, nor work exact.
She scarce will draw her load. I counsel next
Lest she with throng of useless whelps be vexed
By marks to prize, and the best puppies choose,
Themselves hold tokens forth: his limbs hang loose
Who will oneday the fi^rce assault maintain,
And does already equal share disdain.
Usurping 'ore the Teats to domineer
He sucks alone; makes all behind him clear
What time the day does gentle warmth dispense;
But when cold Syren's of the evening pierce
His anger quail^s. Might falls to the base throng,
Poyse in your hands, if he will prove most strong;
He all his lighter brothers does outweigh:
Nor marks shall me, nor thee my lines betray.
Now for the Dam you must provide new fare,
Cherish, and tend her with deserved care!
Like tendance will she to her young impart
And lasting help; but when with pain her heart
Is tired, nor she the work can longer bear
On the deserted whelps bend all your care;
With milk and barley meal your young train feed,
Nor let them know high fare, or to exceed:
This kindness would to their great harm redound
Clearly: naught human wit does more confound.
And Reason to assaulting Vice betray.
Riott undid the Pharian Court, while they
Old Mareotique Wine with pearls infuse,
Reap Sy^ian Spikenard, and high wealth abuse.
Thus too fell Lydia by great Cyrus hands
For her rich rivers covered golden Sands,
Whose plenty to no higher pitch could rise.
And whilst thou Greece new Methods do devise,
Neighboring excesses being made thine own,
How art thou fallen from thine old renown!
But our Camilli did but plainly fare,
No port did often triumphant Serran bear:
Therefore such hardship, and their heart so great
Gave Rome to be the Worlds imperial seat.
By them our courage has high heaven scaled
And touched the clouds with honored wreaths empal'd.
Great things on small may rule and light reflect,
Then for your Hounds one Governor elect,
He must allot their work, Correction, food,
He leads the band, which must command the wood.
Nor slight his charge who shall this power obtain:
For Huntsman choose some lusty youthful swain,
Who must be skilled, and a courageous man:
Know where to find the so, when to fall on,
And dare to his oppressed allies come in:
Else they would fly, or bloody conquest win.
Then heed your work, and proper arms provide,
Arms will make way; Your small let buskins hide,
A Leathern pouch your servants must convey
Wear a short jump, and Bonnets from a Gray.
Gird a Toledo Hanger on their thigh,
From their right hand a thrilling javeling fly,
And let them clear the way with crooked bill.
Your Ammunition this; but be you skill
Both Martial wounds, and creeping sores to cure,
With pain's, and all the plagues which Dogs endure.
Fate hangs aloft, and on all worldly things,
Greedy death stoops clapping her sable wings:
Then to great danger greater help apply,
Use means approved, now learn we to descry
What course will make incensed Heaven relent.
Cure is at hand, though wide and deep the rent.
Though blood and gutts at once drop from your Hound,
Staight from that very foe which made the wound
Get thee warm stale; and wash his tattered panch,
Till with salt juice the gushing blood you stanch.
For gates of death stand open. The cleansed wound
Then must be closed, and with fine third be bound.
But if the sore contract some lesser blane,
Rather it Lance, and the hid matter draine.
All rising evils are with ease suppressed,
Let them be wiped, or with soft Tar be dressed.
But being rased only with some slight wound,
He brings a native salve, and licks it sound.
There is a taint, nor can it be withstood,
When through the whole corrupted Mass of blood
Causes unknown ill humors propagate,
Which all break out at last, descri'd too late.
Then reigning plagues and hot infections spread
Over the whole Camp, and all your train ly's dead.
An undistinguished fate destroys your bands,
Nor strength, nor merit, nor complaint withstands.
Whether Proserpine from the Stygian Lake;
Send up this banesome hid revenge to take,
Or the close air sulphurous vapors shoot,
Or the contagious earth her gifts pollute.
Remove the plagues first cause, over the vales drive,
And the broad river pass, I counsel give.
This is the first relief; but then apply
Our helps prescribed, and art not vainly try.
But passions vary, nor one cure require,
The difference learn: and to due means aspire.
Madness with dogs is rife and threatens fate,
If you defer, what you might antedate
That plague in its first causes to confound;
For where the tongue is with fast tendons bound,
The fury (called a worm) is thence conveyed
When this their salt Gutts does with Thirst invade,
Fevers inflame: their lolling tongues they shake,
Attempt to fly, and known abodes forsake*
Which stings by motion chafed do Dogs enrage,
Therefore with steel pare in their tender age
The native roots of this advancing fault
Soon is the soreness healed: sprinkle white salt,
And with some oil supple the bleeding wound,
E're night has fully spread her shadows round,
Your Dog will come forgetful of his sore,
Wait at your Trencher, and some food implore;
I might Arts of plain years, and ancient term
Recount, which long experience does confirm.
Some have with Badgers furr their collars lyn'd
And in a string mother of pearl do bind,
With Talk, and Melitaean Coral tied,
And simples by enchantment fortified.
By which means heaven appeased will put by
Spells and the glances of an envious ey:
But if the mange with loathsome pleasure send
A tedious way to an unhandsome end,
When it breaks out, though sad the cure may seem,
You must with that one life your Pack redeem,
Where the contagion first it is taint has wrought
Lest your whole flock by the dire plague be caught,
Yet if with gentle steps the ill proceed,
Learn proper Arts by which he may be freed:
Then Brimstone that offensive airs does send
And pitch, and lees of oil together blend;
All which the fire into one Mass compounds:
Here bath you sick, the raging plague this bounds:
Suppling the stiffenes; yet least ought suspend
The cure, from rain and colds your Dog defend;
And rather in warm vales, where no shrubs grows,
Out of the wind, to the South-sun oppose,
That the ill humor may by sweat perspire,
And ointment through the subtle pores retire.
Those too which in the salt strand drench their whelps,
Poean propitiously regards, and helps.
O what great gifts does wise experience throw
On the rude world, would they but sloth forgo,
And reach their wishes with industrious hands!
In the Trinacrian Rock a deep Grotte stands
And winding Vaults within, the walls are topp'd,
With gloomy woods, and streams by Cinders stopped,
Vulcans black fane; in which as down you sink
Gross puddles stand, and Lakes of Sulphur stink.
Hither I often have seen sick cattle haled
By Heardsmen, when their weaker skill has failed.
First Vulcan we implore thee and thy grace,
O Reverend power of this hallowed place
Extend last helps, and though we want desert,
Spare all these souls, nor thy blessed springs avert*
Thrice each invoke, thrice on the hearth each cast
Incense; a pile with holy Boughs is placed,
Here a strange sight, and else of small request
Behind the Dens, from the cleft Mountains breast
Comes riding on Southwinds and rolling flames,
The Priest starts up, and a strict charge proclaims
Shaking an Olive branch, far hence retire
From the Gods presence, and his present fire,
All ye who crimes have acted, or designed:
Horror upon this threat dissolves their mind;
O that the man which has oppressed the poor,
Sold his dear brothers head, or what is more,
His friends, and durst his Country-Gods betray,
Would hither with bold guilt direct his way;
Straight should he find what vengeance does his fault
Pursue: but he that bears an honest thought,
And worships God; God on his Altar shines
Gently, and sacred fire his pile entwines,
Then back retires and shrinks within its Cave.
That man may come to Vulcans healing wave.
Straight, though the taint his fivers should devour,
Bath him herein, and his torn body scour,
Clensing the far* gone plague. God first descried
The cure, which constant nature does provide.
What bane more fierce, or mortal? yet that wrath,
Though most it burn, yields to this healing bath.
But if the first disease pass undescry'd
To stop its course, the next means must be tried,
Quick remedies must wait on quick events,
Their Nostrills slitt, their shoulder-ligaments
Cut down; from either wounded ear draw blood,
From hence the plague derives his poisoned flood*
Then by sit helps let their dull limbs be cleared,
With Lees of Oil and aged Massick cheered,
Bacchus from every breast does cares expel.
Bacchus the rage of this disease does quell.
Why should I colds, or surfets why propound?
Or if for frettish'd legs a help be found?
Thousand infections reign which cure defy;
Forbear. Our Arts do not aspire so high.
Forbear. God must devoutly be adored,
And by processions Heavenly aid implored.
Therefore in stately groves we Altars rear,
And Spiked torches to the forest bear
On Dian's day. The Dogs with wreaths are crowned,
And arms unused thrown on the flowery ground
In joyful peace, the solemn feast adorn:
The wine before, and smoking cakes are borne
On a green hearse; a Kid from whose young brows
The horns bud forth, and apples on their boughs.
As at those feasts where all the youth appear
To cleanse themselves, and bless the fruitful year.
The Virgin thus thy stay, and sole defense
Her grace obtained, great favors does dispense
What e're you wish, be it the Woods to clear,
Or, escape what ever plagues you feel or fear.
It rests that we, what horse our arms admit,
Define. All breeds are not for hunting fit,
Some courage want; some have too weak a frame;
Again ungoverned mettle spoils the Game:
What Steed Thessalian Peneus drinks inquire:
And how Mycenians their own Gray admire,
Lofty he is; and high his Gallop bears
None better to the Olympic course repayrs:
Yet for this work his mettle does deny
Through woods to rake, and the hard combat try.
Rough horses do not fit Syenes mold.
The Parthian on his own soft downs does hold
Some fame; but let him Caudian Taburn knock
The craggy Gargan, or Ligurian Rock
In the midway his flinching hoof will start,
Yet has he courage, and affects our Art;
But weak his nature is* Again the stiff
Gallician Gennet climbs Pyrenes cliffe,
Yet durst I not the Gennet trust in fight,
Hard-mouthed Murcibians even steel will bite.
All Nasamonia with a switch can wind,
Their horse. No bridles the Numidian bind*
A bold and hardy kind, which fresh will strain
An hundred Posts, and eager speed maintain.
Nor dainty is of fare; but gladly takes
What deserts yield, and thirst in rare streams flakes.
So the Bisaltian Courser hardly fares
O that he could but learn Aetnean airs
The Pyrrhich dance! What though his Crest be blamed
And thin chine sway's? he Agragas has famed,
And from Nebrodes chased the flying Dear,
O for our arms how great does he appear!
Whose noble studds derive an active strain,
That with Chaonians may the strife maintain,
Whom Greece with praise not due does yet adorn;
Sorrel Ceraunians by their Pella born,
Their breed of Cyrrha too, Apollo's fane
Scarce to the wood can draw our sacred wayne.
Some colors favor hunting more, the best
Are feet of black, and bay upon the breast,
And backs which do the dying cole express;
Italian Damms (the Gods our land thus bless)
Highly excel: our soil all plenty yields,
And sprightly colts adorn the fruitful fields.
CYNEGETICON GRATII FALISCI.
DOna cano divum, laetas venantibus arteis,
Auspicio, Diana, tuo. prius omnis in armis
Spes fuit, and nu^a silvas virtute movebant
Inconsulti homines, vitaque erat error in omni,
Post alia propiore via, meliusque profecti
Te sociam, Ratio, rebus sumpsere gerendis.
Hinc omne auxilium vitae, rectusque reluxit
Ordo: and contigu is didicere ex artibus arteis
Proserere. hinc demens cecidit violentia retro,
Sed primum auspicium deus artibus altaque circum
Firmamenta dedit, tum parteis quisque secutus
Exegere suas, tetigitque industria finem.
Tu ^repidam bello vitam, Diana, ferino,
Qua primam quaerebat opem, dignata r^pertis
Protegere auxiliis, orbemque hac solvere noxa*
Ascivere tuo comites sub nomine divae,
Centum omnes nemorum, centum de fontibus omnes,
Naiades, and Latii cultor qui Faunus am^^i,
Maenaliusque puer, domitri^que Idea leonum
Matter, and inculto Silvanus termite gau^ens.
His ego praesi^ibus nostram defendere sortem
Contra mill feras, et non ^ine carmine nifus,
Carmine et arma dabo venandi, et persequar artem
Armorum, cassesque, plagarumque ordiar a^us.
Prima jubent tenui nascentem jungere filo
Limbum, et quadruplici tormento astrin gere limbos.
Illa operum patiens, illa usus linea longi.
Tunc ipsum medio cassem qui nascitur ore,
Persenos circum usque sinus laqueabis, ut omnem
Concipiat tergo, si quisquam est plurimus, hostem.
Et bis vicenos spatium praetendere passus
Rete velim, plenisque dec em consurgere nodis*
Ingrati majora sinus impendia sument.
Optima Cyniphiae, ne quid cunctere, paludes
Lina dabunt, bonus Aeoliae de valle Sibyllae
Foetus, and aprico Tuscorum stupea campo
Messis, contiguum sorbens de flumine rorem,
Qua cultor Latii per opaca silentia Tib^is
Labitur, inque sinus magno venit or^ m^rinos.
At contra nostris imbellia lina Faliscis:
Hispani^ue alio spectantur Saet^bes usu.
Vix operata suo sacra ad Bubastia lino
Velatur sonipes aestiui turba Canopi;
Ipse in materia damnosus candor inerti
Ostendit long fraudem, atque exterruit hosts.
At pauper rigui custos Alabandicus horti
Cannabias nutrit silvas, quam commoda nostro
Armamenta operi: gravis est tutela sed ill is,
Tu licet Aemonios includ^^ retibus ursos.
Tantum ne subeat vitiorum pessimus humor,
Ante cave: non est humentibus usus in armis*
Nulla ^ides ergo, seu pressa flumina valle
Inter opus, causaeque malum fecere paludes,
^ive improvisus coelo perfud^rit imber.
Illa vel ad flatus Helices oppande sere^^ae
Vel caligineo laxanda reponito fumo.
Id circo et primas linorum tangere messes
Ante vetant, qu^m maturis accenderit annus
Ignibus, et claro Pleias^se prompferit ortu
Imbiberit tanto despondet longius usu,
(Magnum opus) et tangi nisi cura vincitur impar.
Nonne vides, veterum quos prodit fabula rerum
Semideos, illi aggeribus ^entare superbis,
Ire freta, et matres ausi tractare de^rum,
Quam magna mercede meo sine munere sylvas
Impulerint, flet adhuc et porro flebit Adonim
Victa Venus, ceciditque suis Ancaeus in arvis.
Vt predexter erat geminisque securibus ingens.
Ipse deus, cultorque feri Tyrinthius o^bis,
Quem mare, quem tellus, quem pr^ceps janua Ditis.
Omnia tentantem, qua laus erat obvia* passi.
Hinc de us et famae primus patravit honerem*
Exige, si qua meis respondet ab artibus ergo
GRATIA, quae vires fallat collata ferin^s.
Sunt, quibus immundo decerptae vulture plumae
Instrumentum operis fuit, and non parva facultas
Tantum inter nivei jungantur vellera ^ygni:
Et satis armorum est. Haec clara luce coruscant,
Terribiles species: ab vulture dirus avaro
Turbat odor silvas, meliusque alterna valet res.
Sed quam clara tuis and ^inguis pluma sub armis,
Tam mollis tactu and non sit creberrima nexu,
Ne reprensa suis properantem linea pinnis
Implicet, atque ipso mendosa coarguat usu.
Hic magis in cervos valuit metus. ast ubi lentae
Interdum Libyco fucantur sandice pinnae,
Lineaque extructis lucent anconibus arma:
Rarum, si qua metus eludat bellua falsos.
Nam fuit and laqueis aliquis curracibus usus:
Cervino jussere magis contexere nervo;
Fraus t^get insidias habitu mentita ferino*
Quid qui dentatas iligno robore clausit
Venator pedicas, cum dissimulan^ibus armis
Saepe habet imprudens alieni lucra laboris*
O felix, tantis quem primum industria rebus
Prodidit auctorem! deus ille, an proxuma div^s
Men's fuit, in caecas aciem quae magna tenebras
Egit* et ignarum perfudit lumine vulgus?
Dic age Pierio (fas est) Diana ministro.
Arcadium stat fama senem, quem Maenalus auctor,
Et Lacaedemoniae primum vidistis Amyclae
Per non assuetas metantem retia valles,
Dercylon; haud illo quisquam se justior egit,
Aut fuit in terris divum observantior alter.
Ergo illum primis nemorum dea finxit in annis,
Auctoremque operi dignata inscribere magno.
Jussit adire suas and pandere gentibus arteis.
Ille etiam valido primus venabula dente
Induit: et proni moderatus vulneris iram
Omne moris excepit onus: tum stricta verutis
Dentibus ei geminas subiere hastilia furcas.
Et quidam totos clauserunt ensibus orbs,
Ne cessaret iners in vulnere massa ferino.
Blandimenta vagae fugies novitatis ibidem:
Exig^^ nimiove nocent* sed lubricus errat
Mos, and ^b expertis festinant usibus omnes.
Quid Macetum immensos libea^ si dicere contos,
Quam longa exigui spicant hastilia dentes:
Aut contra ut tenero districtas cortice virgas
Praegravat ingenti pernix Albania cultro?
Omnia tela modi melius finxere salubres.
Quocirca and ^aculis habilem perpendimus usum:
Neu leve vulnus eat, neu sit brevis impetus illi.
Ipsa arcu Lyciaque suas Dianapharetra
Armavit comites, (ne tela relinquite divae)
Magnum opus and volucres quondam fecere sagittae)
Disce agedum and validis delectum hastilibus omnem
Plurima Threicii nutritur vallibus Hebri
Cornus, and umbrosae Veneris per litora myrtus,
Taxique, pinusque, Altinatesque genistae,
Et magis incomptus operae Lutoser agrestis.
Terms ab eois descendet virga Sab^is,
Matter odorati multum pulcherrima turis
^lla suos usus intractatumque decorem
(Sic nemorum jussere Deae) natalibus haurit
A^bitriis: at enim multo sunt ficta labor
Caetera, quae silvis errant hastilia nostris.
Numquam sponte sua procerus ad era terms
Exii^, inque ipsa curvantur stirpe genistae.
Ergo age luxuriam prim^ foetusque nocenteis
Detrahe: frondosas gravat indulgentia silvas.
P^st ubi proceris generosa stirpibus arbor
Se dederit, teretesque ferent ad sidera virgae,
Stringe notas circum, et gemmanteis exige versus.
His si quis vitium n^citurus sufficit humor,
Visceribus fluet, et Venas durabit inertes.
In quinos sublata pedes hastilia plen^
Caede manu, dum pomiferis advertitur annus
Frondibus, et tepidos autumnus contin^t imbres.
Sed cur exiguis tantos in partibus orbs
Lustramus? prima illa canum, non ulla per arteis
Cura prior, sive ind^mitos vehementior hosteis
Nudo Mart prem^s, seu bellum ex art ministres.
Mill canum patriae, ductique ab origin mores
Cuique sua. Magna indocilis dat proelia Medus,
Magnaque diversos extollit gloria Celtas.
Arma negant contra Martemque odere Geloni,
Sed natura sagax: Perses in utroque paratus.
Sunt qui Seras alant, genus intractabilis irae.
At contra faciles, magnique Lycao^es armis.
Sed non Hyrcanae satis est vehementia genti
Tanta: suis petiere ultr^ fera semina ^ilvis.
Dat Venus accessus, and blando foedere jungit.
Tunc and mansuetis tuto feruserrat adulter
In stabulis, ultroque gravis succedere Tigrim
Ausa canis, majore tulit de sanguine foetum.
Sed praeceps virtus ipsa venabitur aula.
Ille tibi and pecudum multo cum sanguine crescet,
Pasce tamen, quaecunque domi sibi crimina secit,
Excutiet silva magnus pugnator a^epta.
At fugit adversos idem quos repperit hosteis
Vmber, quanta fides, utinam, and solertia naris!
Tanta foret virtus, et tantum vellet in armis!
Quid freta si Morinum dutio refluentia ponto
Veneris, atque ipsos libeat penetrare Britannos?
O quanta est merces, et quantum impendia supra!
Si non ad speciem mentiturosque decores
Protinus: hoec una est catulis jactura Britannis.
Ad magnum cum venit epus premendaque virtus,
Et vocat extremo praeceps discrimine Mavors,
Non tunc egregios tantum admirere Molossos;
Comparat his versuta suas Athamania frauds,
Acyrusque, Pheraeque, et clandestinus Acarnan.
Sicut Acarnanes subierunt proelia furto:
Sic canis illa suos taciturna supervenit hosts.
At clangore citat quos nondum conspicit apros,
Aetola quaecumque canis de stirpe (malignum
Officium) sive illa metus convicia rupit,
Seu frustra nimius properat furor. and tamen illud
Ne vanum totas genus aspernere per arteis,
Mirum quam celeres, et quantum nare merentur:
Tum non est victi cui concessere labori.
Idcirco variis miscebo gentibus usum.
Quondam inconsultis matter dabit Vmbrica Callis
Sensum agilem, traxere animos de patre Gelonae
Hyrcano, and vanae tantum Calydonia linguae
Exibit vitium patre emendata Molosso.
Scilicet ex omni florem virtute capessunt,
Et sequitur natura favens: at te leve si qua
Tangit opus, pauidosque iuvat compellere dorcas,
Aut versuta sequi leporis vestigia parvi:
Petroni^^ (sic fam^) canes, volucresque Sicambros,
Et pictam macula Vertraham delige falsa.
Ocyor affectu mentis pinnaque cucurrit,
Sed premit inventas, non inventura latenteis
Illa feras; quae Petroniis been gloria constat.
Quod si maturo pressantes gaudia lusu
Dissimulare feras tacitique accedere possent:
Illis omne decus; quod nunc, Metagontes, habetis,
Constaret silvis: sed virtus irrita damno est.
Ad vestrum non vile genus, non patria vulgo
Sparta suos and Creta suos promittit alumnos:
Sed primum celsa lorum cervice ferentem
Glympice, te silvis egit Boeotius Hagnon,
Hagnon Hastilides, Hagnon, quem plurima semper
Gratia per nostros unum testabitur usus.
Hic trepidas arteis and vix novitate sedentes
Vidit, qua propior patuit via: nec sibi turbam
Contraxit comitem, nec vasa tenentia long.
Vnus praesidium atque operi spes magna petito
Adsumptus Metagon lustrat per nota ferarum
Pascua, per fontes, per quas trivere la^ebras,
Primae lucis opus: tum signa vapore ferino
Intemerata legens, si qua est qua fallitur ejus
Turba loci, majota secat spatia extera gyro.
Atque hic egressu jam tum sine fraud reperto
Incubuit spatiis, qualis permissa Lechaeis*
Thessalium quadriga decus, quam gloria patrum
Excitat, and primae spes ambitiosa coronae.
Sed nequa ex nimio redeat jactura favore,
Lex dicta officiis: ne voce lacesseret hostem,
Neve levem praedam, aut propioris pignora lucri
Amplexus, primos ne quidquam offenderet actus.
Iam vero impensum melior fortuna laborem
Cum sequitur, juxtaque domus quaesita ferarum,
Vt sciat, occultos and signis arguat hosteis:
Aut effecta levi testatur gaudia cauda,
Aut ipsa infodiens uncis vestigia plantis
Mandit humum, celsasve adprensat naribus auras.
Et tamen ut ne prima faventem pignora fallant
Circa omnem aspretis medius qua clauditur orbis,
Far pedem, accessusque, abitusque notasse ferarum
Admonet, and si forte loci spes prima fefellit,
(Rarum opus) incubuit spatiis ad proxima versis,
Intacto repetens prima ad vestigia gyro.
Ergo ubi plena suo rediit victoria fine,
In partem praedae veniat comes, and sua norit
Praemia: sic operi juvet inservisse benigno.
Hoc ingens meritum est: haec ultima palma trophae^,
Hagnon magne, tibi divum concessa favore.
Ergo semper eris, dum carmina, dumque manebun^
Silvarum dotes, atque arma Dianea terris:
Hic et semiferam Thoum de sanguine prolem
Finxit. non alio major sua pectore virtus,
Seu noritvoces, seu nudi ad pignora Martis.
Thoes commissos (clarissima fama) leones
Et subiere astu, et parvis domuere lacertis.
Nam genus exiguum, et pudeat quam inform fateri
Vulpina specie; tamen huc exacta voluntas.
At non est alius, quem tanta ad munia soetus
Exercere velis, aut te tua culpa refellat
Inter opus, quo sera cadit prudentia damno.
Junge pares ergo, et majorum pignore signa
Foeturam, prodantque tibi Metagonta parents,
Qui genuere sua pecus hoc immane juventa.
Et primum expertos animi, quae gratia prima est.
In Venerem jungunt, tum sortis cura secundae,
Ne renuat species, aut quae detrectet honorem.
Sint celsi vultus, sint hirtae frontibus aures,
Os magnum et patulis agitatos morsibus* ignes
Spirent, astricti succingant ilia ventris,
Cauda brevis, longumque latus, discretaque collo
Caesaries, non pexa nimis, non frigoris illa
Impatiens: validis tum surgat pectus ab armis,
Quod magnos capiat motus, magnisque supersit.
Effuge, qui lata pandit vestig ia planta,
Mollis in officio siccis ego dura lacertis
Crura velim, and solidos haec in certamina calces.
Sed frustra longus properat labor, ab^ita si non
Altas in latebr^s unique inclusa marito
Foemina, nec patitur Veneris sub temp^re magnos
Il^a, neque emeritae servat ^astigia laudis.
Primi complexus, dulcissima prima voluptas.
Hunc Veneri dedit impatiens natura furorem.
Si renuit cunctos, and matter adultera non e^^,
Da requiem gravidae, solitosque remitte labores.
Vix oneri super illa suo; tum deinde moneb^,
Ne matrem indocilis natorum turba fatiget,
Percensere notis, jamque inde excernere parvos.
Signa dabunt ipsae, teneris vix artubus haer^t
Ille tuos olim non defecturus honores:
Jamque illum impatiens aequae vehementia sortis
Extulit* affectat materna regna sub alvo.
Vbera tota tenet, a tergo liber aperto,
Dum tepida indulget terris clementia mundi.
Verum ubi Caurino perstrinxit frigore vesper
Ira jacet, turbaque potens operitur inerti.
Illius, e manibus vires sit cura futuras
Perpensare: levis deducet pondere fratres:
Nec me pignoribus, nec te mea carmina fallent.
Protinus et cultus alios et debita foetae
Blandimenta feres, curaque sequere merentem:
Illa perindesuos, ut erit delata, minores;
Ac longam praestabit opem. tum denique foetae
Cum desunt operi, fregitque industria matres,
Transeat in catulos omnis tutela relictos.
Lacte novam pubem facilique tuebere maza;
Nec luxus alios avidaeque impendia vitae
" Noscant* haec magno redit indulgentia damno:
" Nec mirum: humanos, non et magis altera sensus
" Tollit, nec ratio vitiis adeuntibus obstat.
Haec illa est, Pharios quae fregit noxia reges,
" Dum servata cavis potant Mareotica gemmis,
" Nardiferumque metunt Gangem, vitiis^, ministrant.
" Sic et Achaemonio cecidisti, Lydia, Cyro.
" Atqui dives eras fluvialibus aurea venis,
" Scilicet ad summam ne quid restaret habendum:
" Tu quoque luxuriae fictas dum colligis arteis,
" Etsequeris demens alienam, Graecia, culpam,
" O quantum et quoties decoris frustrata paterni!
" At qualis nostris, quam simplex mensa Camillis!
" Qui tibi cultus erat post tot, Serrane, triumphos?
" Ergo illi ex habitu, virtutisque indole priscae,
" Imposuere orbi Romam caput: actaque ab illis
" Ad coelum virtus, summosque tetendit honores.
Scilicet exiguis magna sub imagine rebus
Prospicies, quae sit ratio, et quo fine regenda.
Idcirco imperium catulis, unusque Magister
Additur, ille dapes poenamque operamque ministrans
Temperet: hunc spectet silvas domitura juventus.
Nec vile arbitrium est* cuicunque haec regna dicantur,
Ille tibi egregia juvenis de pube legendus,
Vtrumque and prudens, and sumptis impiger armis:
Quod nisi and accessus, and agendi tempora belli
Noverit, and socios tutabitur host minores:
Aut cedent, aut illa tamen victoria damno est.
Ergo in opus vigila, facilisque ades omnibus armis;
Arma acuere viam, tegat imas fascia suras:
Sit famulis vitulina, tuis aut tergore fulvo
Mantica, curta chlamys, canaque e macle galeri;
Ima Toletano praecingant ilia cultro:
Terribilemque manu vibrata falarica dextra
Det sonitum, and curva rumpant non pervia falce.
Haec tua militia est* quin et Mevortia bello
Vulnera, et erranteis per tot divortia morbos,
Causasque, affectusque canum tua cura tueri est.
Stat fatum supra, totumque avidissimus orcus
Pascitur, et nigris orbem circumsonat alis.
Scilicet ad magnum major ducenda laborem
Cura, nec expertos fallet Deus. hinc quoque nosse
Est aliud quod praestet opus placabile numen.
Nec long auxilium, licet alti vulneris ora
Abstiterint, atroque cadant cum sanguine fibrae.
Inde rape ex ipso qui vulnus fecerit host
Virosam eluviem, lacerique per ulceris ora
Sparge manu, venas dum succus comprimat acer.
Mortis enim patuere viae, tum pura monebo
Circum labra sequi, tenuique includere filo.
At si pernicies angusto pascitur ore,
Contra pande viam, fallenteisque argue causas.
Morborum in vitio facilis medicina recenti.
Sed tactu impositis mulcent pecuaria palmis,
(Id satis) aut nigrae circum picis unguine signant.
Quod si districto levis est in vulnere noxa,
Ipse habet auxilium validae natale slivae.
Illa gravis labes, et cura est altior illis,
Cum vitium causae totis egere latentes
Corporibus, seraque aperitur noxia summa.
Inde emissa lues, et per contagia morbus
Venere in vulgum, juxtaque exercitus ingens
Aequali sub labe ruit: nec viribus ullis
Aut merito venia est, aut spes exire precanti.
Quod sive a Stygia letum Proserpina nocte
Extulit, et furtim commissam ulciscitur iram;
Seu vitium ex alto, spiratque vaporibus ether
Pestiferis, seu terra suos populatur honores:
Fontem averte mali. trans altas ducere valles
Admoneo, latumque suga superabitis amnem.
Hoc primum effugium leti. tunc dicta valebunt
Auxilia, and nostra quidam redit usus ab art.
Sed varii motus, nec in omnibus una potestas.
Disce vices et quae tutela est proxima tenta.
Plurima per catulos rabies invictaque tardos
Praecipitat letale malum. sic tutius ergo
Anteire auxiliis, et primas vincere causas.
Namque subit n^dis qua lingua tenacibus haeret,
(Vermiculum dixere) mala atque incondita pestis,
Ille ubi salsa siti praecepit viscera longa,
Aestivos vibrant accensi febribus ignes,
Moliturque fugas, et sedem spernit amatam.
Scilicet hoc motu, stimulisque potentibus acti
In furias vertere canes. ergo insita ferro
Iam teneris elementa mali causasque recidunt.
Nec longa in facto medicina est ulcere* purum
Sparge salem, et tenui permulce vulnus olivo.
Ante relata suas quam nox been complete umbras,
Ecce aderit, factique oblitus vulneris ultro
Blanditur mensis, Cereremque efflagitat ore.
Quid priscas arteis inuentaque simplicis anni
Si referam? non illa metus solatia falsi
Tam longam traxere fidem. coilaribus ergo
Sunt qui lucifugae cristas inducere Maelis
Iussere, aut sacris conserta monilia conchis,
Et vivum lapidem, et circa Melitesia nectunt
Coralia, et magicis adjutas cantibus herbas.
Ac sic offectus, oculique venena maligni
Vicit tutela pax impretata deorum:
At si deformi lacerum dulcedine corpus
Persequitur scabies, longi via pessima leti,
In primo accessu tristis medicina; sed una
Pernicies redimenda anima, quae prima sequaci
Sparsa malo est, ne dira trahant contagia vulgi.
Quod si dat spatium clemens, and promovet ortu
Morbus, disce vias, et, qua sinit, artibus exi.
Tunc et odorato medicata bitumina viro,
Imponasque pices, immundaeque unguen amurcae.
Miscuit, et summam complectitur ignis in unam.
Inde lavant aegros. est ira coercita morbi,
Laxatusque rigor, quae te ne cura timentem
Differat, et pluvias, et Cauri frigora vitent;
Sic magis ut nudis incumbunt vallibus ^stus,
A vento, clarique faces ad solis, ut omne
Exudent vitium, subeatque latentibus ultro,
Quae facta est medicina, vadis, nec non tamen illum.
Spumosi catulos mergentem litoris aestu
Respicit, et facilis Paean adjuvit in arteis.
" O rerum prudens quantum experientia vulgo
" Materiem largita boni, si vincere curent
" Desidiam, et gratos agitando prendere fines!
Est in Trinacria specus ingens rupe, cavique
Introrsum reditus, circum atrae moenia silvae
Alta premunt, ruptique ambustis faucibus amnes.
Vulcano condicta domus, quam subter eunti
Stagna sedent venis, oleoque madentia vivo.
Huc defecta mala vidi pecuaria tabe
Soepe trahi, victosque malo graviore magistros.
Te primum, Vulcane, loci pacemque precamur
Incola sancte tuam, des ipsis ultima rebus
Auxilia: aut, meriti si nulla est noxia tanti,
Tot miserere animas, liceatque attingere fontes,
Sancte, tuos. ter quisque vocant, ter pinguia libant
Tura foco: struitur ramis felicibus ara.
Hic dictu mirum, atque alias ignobile monstrum
Adversis specubus, ruptoque e pectore montis
Venit, ovans austris, et multo flumine flammae.
Emicat ipse, manu ramum pallente sacerdos
Termiteum quatiens: procul hinc extorribus ire
Edico praesente deo, praesentibus aris,
Queis scelus aut manibus sumptum, aut in pectore motum est,
Inclamat. cecidere animis trepidantia membra.
O quisquis misero fas unquam in supplice fregit,
Qui pretio fratrum, meliorisque ausus amici
Sollicitare caput, patriosve lacessere divos;
Illum agat infandae comes huc audacia culpae;
Discet, commissa quantum Deus ultor in ira
Pone sequens valeat* sed cui bona pectore men's est,
Obsequiturque deo, Deus illam molliter aram
Lambit, and ipse suos ubi contigit ignis honores,
Defugit ab sacris, rursumque reconditur antro.
Huic fas auxilium and Vulcania tangere dona*
Nec mora; si medias exedit noxia fibras,
His lave praesidiis, adfectaque corpora mulce
Regnantem excutiens morbum. Deus auctor, and ipsa
Artem aluit natura suam. Quae robore pestis
Acrior, aut leto propior via? sed tamen illi
Hinc venit auxilium valida vehementius ira.
Quod primam si fallet opem dimissa facultas,
At tu praecipitem, qua spes est proxima, labem
Adgredere, in subito subita est medecina tumultu.
Stringendae nares, scindenda ligamina ferro
Armorum, geminaque cruor ducendus ab aure.
Hinc vitium, hinc illa est avidae vehementia pesti.
Ilicet auxiliis fessum solabere corpus:
Subsiduasque fraces, diffusaque Massica prisco
Sparge cado. Liber tenueis e pectore curas
Exiget: est morbo Liber medicina surenti.
Quid dicam tussis, quid maesti damna veterni,
Aut incurvatae si qua est tutel a podagrae?
Mill tenent pestes, curaque potentia major.
Mitte age: non opibus tanta est fiducia nostris.
Mitte animae ex alto ducendum numen olympo,
Supplicibusque vocanda sacris tutela Deorum:
Idcirco a^rijs molimur compita lucis,
Spicatasque faces sacrum, ad nemora alta, Dianae,
Sistimus, and solito catuli velantur honor;
Ipsaque per flores medio in discrimine luci
Stravere arma, sacris and pace vacantia festa.
Tum cadus and viridi sumantia liba feretro
Praeveniunt, teneraque extrudens cornua front
Haedus, and ad ramos etiamnum haerentia poma,
Lustralis de more sacri, quo tota iuventus
Lustraturque Deae, proque anno redd^t honorem.
Ergo impetrato respondet multa favore
Ad parts qu^ poscis opem, seu vincere silvas,
Seu tibi fatorum labes exire minasque
Cura prior, tua magna fides tu^^laque virgo.
Restat equos finire notis, quas arma Dianae
Admittant, non omne meas genus audet in arteis.
Est vitium ex animo, sunt quos imbellia fallant
Corpora: praeveniens quondam est in commoda virtus.
Consule, Penei qualis perfunditur amne
Thessalus, aut patriae quem conspexere Mycenae
Glaucum, nempe ingens, nempe ardua fundet in auras
Crura. quis Eleas potior lustravit arenas,
Ne tamen hoc attingat opus jactantior illi
Virtus, quam silvas, durumque lacessere Martem.
Nec soevos miratur equos terrena Syene
Scilicet et Parthis inter sua molliarura
Mansit honor: veniat Caudini saxa Taburni,
Garganumve trucem, aut Ligurinas desuper alps,
Ante opus excussis cadet unguibus, et tamen illi
Est animus, fingetque meas se jussus in arteis*
Sed juxta vitium posuit deus, at tibi contra
Callaecis lustratur equis scruposa Pyrene.
Non tamen Hispano Martem tentare minacem
Ausim. Murcibii vix ora tenacia ferro
Concedunt, at t^ta levi Nasamonia virga
Fingit equos. Pisis Numidae solvere jugales,
Audax and patiens operum genas, ille vigebit
Centum actus spatiis, atque eluctabitur iram.
Nec magni cultus; sterilis quodcunque remisit
Terra, fuit, tenuesque sitim producere^rivi.
Sic and Strymonio facilis tutela Bisaltae;
Possent Aetnaeas utinam se far per arteis:
Qui ludus Siculis, quid tum si turpia colla
Aut tenuis dorso curvatur spina? per illos
Cantatus Gratiis Agragas, victaeque fragosum
Nebroden liquere ferae. O quaentus in armis
Ille meis, cujus dociles pecuaria foetus
Sufficient, queis Chaonias contendere contra
Ausit, vix merita quas signat Achaia palma*
Spadices vix Pellaei valuere Cerauni,
Et tibi devotae magnum pecuaria Cyrrhae
Phoebe decus, nostras agere in sacraria tens^a.
Venanti melius pugnat color: optima nigri
Crura illi, badiosque legunt in pectore crines,
Et quorum fesson imitantur terga favillas.
O quantum Italiae, si ^dii voluere, parents
Praestant, and terras omni praecepimus usu!
Nostraque non segnis illustrat prato juventus.
Certain Illustrations of the Cynegeticall Poem of Gratius.
CHAP. I. A Caution to the Reader, not to censure Gratius because he ow's so
little to Common Fame.
IT is obvious enough in daily conversation to observe upon what slight
information men are wont to pronounce and pass very definitive sentences often
upon the persons of others, but generally upon their writings. Yet some will be
found more equal Judges, who taking an accurate survey of that which comes to
them to abide their judgment, do not rely on the uncertain censures of other
men, nor are contented with a superficial view, much less imported by
groundless passions to detract or flatter; but receive all into a breast
adorned with wisdom and candor, so that they are not only able to praise or
dispraise those works which fall under their cognizance, but can show what
those particular excellencies are which they commend, and where they encounter
only bold negligence affectation or impertinence, there their sponge leaves a
trace for ever indeleble. The hope I have that such ingenuous critiques are not
wanting amongst us, has made me employ some leisure in presenting Gratius to
my Country in this dress, that so he may be drawn forth from a double
obscurity; both that of his matter* and the other of his fame. The former has
been made facile by the learned Ulitius, who could with more aptness and
certainty reduce this Author to his genuine sense, (which surely the most
famous of our late Philologers did not so thoroughly reach) because the
perplexity was couched only in this, that the subject is unfrequented, and the
manner of it somewhat antiquated, but otherwise the phrase is clear candid,
and perspicuous. Then for the latter obscurity which may seem to be upon his
reputation, that will suddenly vanish away when his naked worth shall appear;
I say he may seem obscure because he is more rarely known, then his elegant
writings may deserve, yet it is worthy the noting that no succeeding Author
has made mention of him, but favorably and with a character of honor. And
surely a great reason that has suppressed the Fame of this Poet, and so long
masked the beauties of his excellent verses was, that in his own Age, the
manners of his Countrymen began immediately to decline, and though there were
then growing up the most choice wits, yet they were all so far addicted to
ease, luxury, and the delights of Rome, that they had little Gusto for
Excercises of industry, and the entertainements of a Country life. Afterward
in tract of time, those who have most flourished in Philology, have rather
affected a Sedentary retirement, so that they have not been much acquainted
with the subject of this Poem, nor sensible of the curiosities in it, through
which means it has long layn by as it were out of knowledge. And now I
conceive how hard a thing it will be for a Georgicall Poem to emerge after so
long privacy. Virgil and Ovid have been through many Ages born up by the wings
of Universal Fame. We bear an early reverence to them, even forced from us by
the general testimony of uninterrupted Antiquity, rather than formed in us by
our own judgments. Their Character is so far warranted that they are every
where safely honored by those who cannot render any account wherein those
excellencies lie which they so highly celebrate. I shall not think him to stand
in need of mean authorities to commend him, neither am I worthy to undertake
for him: Only I shall as it were point at some particular graces of the Poem
which have affected me, and shall not spare to discover wherein the
disadvantages of Translation consist. And then why may not this Author, like
some refulgent star, after long disappearance, raise up into our Hemisphere
his head incircled with its native lusture? Why may he not find the same fate
with those Philosophers, Legislators, and Monarchs, who returning from their
concealements, obtained double Veneration? Or if these measures of honor may
be thought too ambitiously strained for the reward of rural Poesy, why may
he not like his own Heart discover himself with his head newly frayed and
burnished, full of lusty vigor, and renewed into a vivacious youth? We shall
do right to our judgment when we can own the true perfections of an Author,
though commended unto us by no Q^intilian. I have here singled out the parts of
this work and some ornaments thereof.

CHAP. II. The Distribution of the Poem.
When we would consider the chief trial of any piece, we must diligently
read it all over; and that being done, draw under one view the coherence of
every member with the other, and of the whole body with its Title: For as is
the beauty of a Man, so is that of a Poem; most of all consisting in the
Symmetry, and figure of the Organicall parts; Now Gratius has a great
perspicuity of method throughout this work.

Dona cano divum] After his proposition of the subject comprised in one verse;
and his Invocation in half a verse, the first entrance is to a Remotion of
the abrogated style of Hunting, which was inconvenient, yet agreeable with all
the other actions of man in that ignorant nonage of the world. Then he
proceeds to set down who they were that had deserved so well of mankind, as to
reduce Hunting to an Art: where the Founders and Patrons of that Noble Art are
all reckoned up, which gives the Poem an illustrious Frontispiece: rendering it
not unlike the public Hall of some Sciences or Arts, where over the Portal,
or in the outward Court are set up the Images of those who have beeen Inventors
and Advancers of that Science or Art.

Prima jubent tenui nascentem jungere filo] Of netting. These latin Titles
which will follow according to their places are in the Paris and Aldine
Editions, and in a Manuscript compared by Ulitius. De Retibus conficiendis. In
which Paragragh, with what discretion and exactness does he give the measures
of Nets; nay afterward, with what curiosity does he descend to the choice and
ordering of Hemp. These things may seem minute and contemptible to some, but
they are absolutely of the greatest importance; for if the first preparations
of matter be faulty, the following pains of all those hands through which it is
to pass may disguise, but cannot redress it.

Nonne vides veterum] In his Transition while he passes thence forward to the
other Snares, he confirms the usefulness of those Arts by the presidents of
diverse illustrious personages, some whereof have to their ruin neglected
them, and others made use of them with great advantages.

Sunt, quibus immundo decerptae vulture plumae] De Pinnatis conficiendis. In
this Perioch he gives direction how to make the line with white and red
feathers, which was to be drawn about the Woods in the intermitted spaces where
the Toils were pitched, that so the Dear (than which no creature is more
timorous) might balk them and be cast upon the Net. Which feathers are so
ordered that they beset the Dear with a double fearfullnesse both from their
smell and Colors.

Nam fuit and laqueis] Pedicae Grinns. These he intimates to have been
antiquated; yet proposes the exactest Rule of making them, and gives the
farthest emprovement of them; subjoyning every where the reason of the
structure: And then being ravished into an Admiration of such ingenious
inventions, enquires into the first Author and registers the Arcadian Dercylos;
Whom he records to have been a very holy man, both for justice and Devotion,
(where he expresses both Tables) and thereupon great in the divine favor; so
that in his youth he obtained this knowledge by revelation from the Goddess of
the Wood; to him also he imputes the contriving of Borespears, by which fair
Transition he implicates this Paragraph with the next.

Ille etiam valido primus venabula] Genera jaculorum. The Diversity of Spears,
is taken chiefly from the several shapes of the sockets which are fastened upon
them, so that he first determines their Figure, Quality, and Weight. Herein he
shows himself a great Curieux, and so well traveled that he could examine the
lances of remote Countries: then having demonstrated plainly before our eyes
the unusefullnesse of them, he gravelly cuts between those irregularities, and
fixes a perpetual standard for all Darts, which is only moveable when nature
shall alter, and this he opposes to the fantastical innnovations which were
without due judgment brought in fashion continually.

Ipsa arcu] He commends the Bow and Arrows which was the Artillery of the
ancient Heroes.

Disce agedum and validis delectum hastili^us] L^gna apta jaculis. In the
second place he directs the judgment in choice of Trunchions. Here are reckoned
up all the proper trees which are foreigners or natives of Italy. The
qualities required are, that they be solid and straight, but because those may
be wished for, and long sought, yet not often found; he descends to give
instructions for the right ordering of them in their Nurserie.

Not without much exactness, like Mothers who perceiving their children to
grow crooked, do as it were new mould them with inventions of Bodies; and swath
them up in Girdles to make their Wast slender.

Then he defines the measure to which they must grow, and show's the proper
season of cutting them down.

Sed cur exiguis tantos in partibus orbes] De canibus. Here we may see the Dogs
of various Nations, lying as far distant even as the East Indies are from
Britain, not only enumerated, but all of them uncharacterized, and compared one
with another. An admirable work, and which could not have been performed by our
Author, although he be of so large wit as is evident, thus inquisitive, and
thus judicious, had he not withal been a Citizen of Rome the Empress of the
World, and contemporary with her greatest height.

Id^irco variis miscebo gentibus usum] These seven verses contain a Crossing
the strain in Breeding. When our Author had survay'd that great variety of Dogs
in several Nations with their diversity of instinct; seeming not thoroughly
satisfied with all those single excellencies which were discovered in them, he
propounds a way to meliorate Nature by Art, that so the distinct good qualities
which are required for use, may all meet implanted in one race; and the ill
conditions which are complicated with any one kind, may be covered by the
superinduction of a contrary virtue.

At te leve siqua] He does not omit to mention coursing though lightly, for it
was then but lately discovered and come into practice in Italy; yet he directs
in the enquiry after Greyhounds, and in chasing with fleethounds.

Illis omne decus quod nunc, Metagon^es, habetis] Here comes in the Lime-hound,
and in this paragraph is put down the whole image of their hunting; He begins
with falling upon a trayle, coming to a loss, working out that loss, then
running away with the sent, till he come to the laire of the beast, or if it be
gone forth from that, to the very covert where the Beast is; There your Nets
must be pitched and drawn upon it. Then he enjoyn's to reward your Dog being
Victour. All this discipline of hunting is so exquisite, that he records Hagnon
to have been the first that made his Dog to it, and registers the name of the
Hound to have been Glympicus. Moreover he make this eminent Huntsman to have
been not only Master, but Author of an admirable race of hounds derived by the
commixture of Cattomountaines, to which he attributes unusual and almost
fabulous strength.

Junge pares ergo] He shows the marks to discern a good Bratch for breeding,
which he requires to be li^'d with a choice Dog, for goodness of courage and
greatness of limbs, and comeliness of shape, to be shut up with him, and
separated to him alone. Then proceeds to the indulgence which must be given the
Bitch when she is big, and after she has whelp'd how she must be eased of so
great a burden in bringing up the young ones; Here are set down prognostiques
to govern our choice, that so the most promising whelps may be reared, and the
l^sse hopeful made away then to treat her tenderly while she suckleth them;
When they are weaned with what Mang to feed them, and what thrifty allowance
to bestow upon them, that so they may be kept in a fine and clean sent; where
with incomparable neateness he recounts the deplorable sad effects of Luxury in
Humane Manners, Instancing in the known examples of ruined Monarks, Empires,
Nations. All which ruins of Commonwealths may be a fair warning to him that
bears any respect to his Hounds, as there is tacitly implied a great
enforcement of Temperance to man by pointing at the Institution of these
inferior creatures, and if we rightly consider what he presents, the very
Kennell of Dogs may be our School. Neither do they herein only resemble man,
but he likewise attributes to them obedience.

Id^irco imperium catulis unusque magister] The H^ntsman. His Qualifications,
his Office and Duty, his Dignity. It is no mean place to be as it were Consul
of the Woods, and T^ibune of that Victorious Legion. Then does our Author
dress him that goes forth a hunting from his Mounteroe to his Halfboots; and
arms him, with weapons to cast at distance, to charge with at hand, either to
cut up hedges, or to open his Beast.

-- quin and Mavortiabello Vulnera] Canum remedia. Here has been care in
sending forth this stout Brigade, into the Forest where they encounter hard
combats, and not without much exposing themselves to dangerous service do they
obtain the Victory: now here are instructions given to be their Chyrurgion at
their coming home, with the whole cure of Dogs in all diseases, whether
arising through ill habits, or from heats and colds, whether contagious or
less malignant, where he shows to prevent Madness by Worming, to remove
Epidemicall diseases proceeding from Universal causes by change of Air; and
prescribes for particular Maladies, very proper Receipts. He lays down all
the diverse Methods of curing: In the first place, Natural, which are commonly
experimented; afterward Superstitions, such as have been received by old
tradition: but in the last and highest places he resorts to Divine; where he
fixes his utmost refuge borh for the intension of diseases which humane
endeavor cannot subdue, as also for the extension of them; there being such
vast numbers of infirmities incident to them, that no experience could provide
special Remedies for every one. How noble and sublime this passage is, will
appear enough, if we should transfer it to humane use. As Physicians do
laudably insist upon approved conclusions, wherein consists Art; and as they
should make evidence of their discretion by detecting groundless curiosities
built upon imposture or Magique: So chiefly must their Piety be manifested in
acknowledging the transcendency of Divine Operations, besides and beyond the
limits of Humane skill.

Restat equos finire notis] De equis. His last directions are for the choice of
a good Hunting Nagg. In this part he removes some specious kinds of Horses,
which though they were deservedly famous, yet were unfit for this employment,
either for want of spirit, or weakness of their bodies, or by reason of an
untractable stubbornness, and fiery metal. Yet he reflects upon the
different Chorographies of Countries, and allows for Champaines and the light
mould horses of a soft hoof which would be unserviceable in Rocky and
Mountainous tracts of ground. In all this Paragraph our Author shows his
wonted curiosity enumerating the most eminent sorts of Horses, declaring their
courage, management, strength, and keeping; all which he reduces to the
properties required in this occasion; not omitting the advantages of Colors;
and when he draws to a conclusion insinuating himself into the praise of
Italy, crowns his work with a splendid Epilogue which is a monument of
gratitude to his own most noble Country.

Thus have I Analy'sd and deduced the different heads of this Poem, in which
naked platform much clearness of distribution will resemble a fair Ordinance
of building. This again so enterweav'd with solid Philosophical discourses,
that it seems like a fair Edifice supported with Rafters of firm Timber. What
curious disquisitions upon every occasion does he insert? which speak him a
great Vertuoso in his time, and even then to have been conducted purely by the
light of his own gallant wit to the true Method of Physiology. He falls in with
the Novum Organum and that illlustrious Scheam of Philosophia, Instaurata, for
while he reflects on an Harmony of diffused Experiments, he seems to write (if
I may be allowed to use that significant term of my Lord Verulam) the
particular Histories of Hemp, of Dogs, of Horses. My design in taking him thus
in piece s, is, that every distinct member may be seen in its proper
dimensions: how natural they are, and how aptly conjoined; which may in some
sort illust rate the work; and if by any means we can be invited to look
attentively into it, I should not doubt but the Author would soon be enstated
in his deserved celebrity.

CHAP. 3. Of the Figures and Colors of the Style.
THE whole work of the former discourse has been to lay open the structure
and Artificial Lineaments of this Poem; it will be of good use to observe some
Graces and Beauties which shine in particular Members of it.

There is scattered very frequently throughout the Work, a cheerful Artifice
of communicating light by the opposition of contrary terms; for the subject of
the Poem is narrative, which requires frequent quickening, lest it become no
better than a dead tale. Now the Author was not only fraught with vast
experience, but had an acute wit which could distinguish and marshall his
conceptions with great perspicuity: this makes him so much abound in that neat
Figure; the Ancients called them Antitheta rasa. I shall instance in some.

He begins with one if it be looked nearly into. His Arts and Arma. The two
Modes of hunting. This a desperate and gladiatorlike entering the lists with
Beasts, and assaulting them by violence; which was the School of cruelty and
ignorant course of the Ancient Nimrods; the other a crafty circumventing them
by wiles, which is the child of ingenious invention, much assisting man to
re-establish him in his Empire over the Beasts of the field that has been so
much empayred. Then again, his Magnum opus which is bold and hazardous, hunting
of great beasts, and Leve opus which is hard-riding and pursuit of little,
fugacious Quarry. In the Javelins, Macedonum immensi conti to which were long a
hastilia, exigui dentes, and by them are set Albanorum jacula, in whose framing
was ingens culter, tenera virgae. Then among the Dogs

Sunt q. S. alant genus intractabilis irae.
At contra faciles m. Lycaones a.
Again,

Excutiet s. magnus pugnator a.
At fugit adversos idem q. r. h.
Umber. --
Again,

Sic canis illa suos taciturna supervenit hosts.
At clangore citat quos nondum conspicit apros
Aetola quaecunque canis de gente
Again, he brings in the Grayhound as swift but not Sagacious, which praise he
allows the Fleet-hound; yet the Fleet-hound, however swift and sagacious, is
not secret; but all three virtues are united in the Lime-hound. These
differences and Gradations are full of delight, and conveniently lodged in the
Memory. Moreover

Os magnum, and patulis agitatos mor^ib. ignes
Spirent. Astricti succingant ilia ventris.
And the next,

Cauda brevis, longumque latus -- A little below

Caesaries non pexa nimis, not too thick
-- non frigoris illa Impatiens, not too thin,
In this place observe the like speaking.
Licet alti vulneris ora Abstiterint etc.
-- tum pura monebo
Circum labra sequi, tenuique includere filo:
At si pernicies angusto pascitur ore,
Contra pande viam, fallentesque argue causas.
The great gash must be sowed up to keep in the guts: The lesser Ulcer must be
lanc'd to let out the corruption.

I purposely omit sometimes as will be obvious to the reader. In the last
description of Horses the same gloss appears. The fierce Syenian, soft
Parthian, hard-hoof'd Gennet but cowardly the bold Murcibian, yet hardmouth'd,
the Barbary to be governed with a switch. All which apt disposition of
sentences gives much luster to the Narration.

Another Virtue of his style is to be observed in his Metaphors which are
Natural, and Familiar; He does almost every were allegorize hunting under
Terms of the Roman Militia, as where the Dogs are called in the Assault Socij,
and after it comites Victoriae, the young Whelps nova pubes and silvas
domitura juventus, the pack of Dogs, Exercitus, the huntsman, Catulorum
magister like Magister Equitum. To hunt vincere silvas, the sorts of hunting,
Mars nudus or bellum ex art ministratum. It is wonderful elegant when he
moralizes to precepts of Temperance from the allowance given to dogs that they
may be kept to have a quick fine sent. Lacte novam pubem, etc. He shows the
seeds of ambition in a generous puppy.

Jamque illum impatiens aequae vehementia sortis
Extulit, affectat materna regna sub alvo.
He attributes loyalty to the Bitch,
Si renuit cunctos, and matter adultera non est.
Matching according to her Rank and Dignity,
-- emeritae servat fastigia laudis.
There is an excellent image contained under these two verses.

Stat fatum supra, totumque avidissimus orcus
Pascitur, and nigris orbem circumvolat alis.
He represents death under the figure of a Night-Raven flapping the whole world
with her wings, and preying upon all the works of Nature, wherein he alludes to
that whole story made in the last Book of Virgil within an hundred verses of
the end

-- ne me terrete timentem
Obscaenae volucres, alarm verbera nosco,
Lethalemque sonum. --
There is another facetious Parody from Homer. Our Author of his Huntsman.

Utrumque and prudens, and sumptis impiger armis Drawn from that character in
Homer upon a more Heroical personage.

These Ornaments I have thought worthy the taking notice of, that so the reader
may be somewhat satisfied in in the style, and the more detained in observing
it, not only for the purity of it, but also for its splendour.

CHAP. 5. Of the disadvantages of this Translation.
ALl those who read Translations, do find by experience, that even the best of
them do not move a like delight in their minds, as the Originalls themselves;
but wherein this difference does consist, it is not so easy for every one to
assign. Which could it be discovered, surely an exact Translator might wave all
those inconveniences, and make his work so complete as would give full
satisfaction to any impartial Judge. I may therefore be thought to have had good
reason to enquire into it.

Whatsoever ancient History is rendered into our Vulgar Language, comes under
the cognizance of all those that can read English: but every one is not
sufficiently acquainted with Antiquity to understand it readily: for Arts have
their several periods: Ceremonies of Religion are National, and small
Chorographies with the Terriers and Boundaries of Countries are continually
removed to and fro. Now those which have not their minds through much reading
imprinted with the Scene of things as they stood in that Age, however they may
have great natural parts, yet are apt to measure such Authors by a false Rule:
expecting from them the perfections of Operations in the present road of Arts,
and an uniformity with the gallantries that are now in fashion. But when they
miss of those expectations, the matter will seem obscure, and subject to
contempt, although it have its due perspicuity and accomplishments. Who can
deservedly tax our Author because he has not commended Brasill-wood for the
making of Spears? or Sugar-chest (as we call it) for the making of neat
arrows? Who could expect that he should praise the Irish Greyhound? When as
yet those places were not discovered by the Romans, or not subdued. We read not
of Fox-hunting, of Tarriers nor other Verminers in him: These sports were not
yet in request with the world. He has no reason to cry up our good hunting
Nags, for at that time it is not likely that the Barbarian Britains did train
up running horses after their Fleet Northern hounds. On the other side what
delight can we find in the Heathens Canon of fabulous Gods? When he comes to
treat of the sorts of Flax, Linen, and Tow, who can be affected with this
discourse but a Hemp-master? and then the Marts for Hemp are so much altered,
partly in that the nature of grounds is in tract of time changed, the humor of
Planters turned, and the communication of places broken off by the Translation
of Government; and partly in that Countries have lost their ancient limits and
names; so that who can give a right judgment of those instructions but an
Antiquary? And indeed there are but very few so much Curieux, that they can
break through those double bars of obscurity; since learned men think it a
disparagement to inform themselves of those Arts which they call illiberall:
and Mechanical Artisans have not usually much leisure to employ upon
universal studies. The same difficulty of lost Topography is very much
propagated through this Poem in his assigning the particular races both of Dogs
and Horses, which will therefore merit that in the next Chapter the names of
Places throughout the Book be cleared. It is to be considered likewise that our
Country is not stored with those harmfull Beasts of Venery, the Wolf and
Wild-bore. So that we are not sensible of his great Care in the choice and
ordering of Spears, nor of his provision in showing to set Engines, and dig
pits which men prize in those Countries where Bears and Lions with such
ravenous Beasts do abound. Again, we seem to have a different end in our
hunting, which has introduced a different style of hunting. For in England
till even now since the respit of these Wars, there were so many Forests,
Chases, and Parks; as were not to be matched in any Kingdom. These were
Vivaries for Beasts (the design of their Lords being to preserve Game) where
they were safe, not only by the Pale, or Wall: but under the protection of
many severe Laws: as if they had been naturalized, enfranchised, and Citizens
of our Commonwealth. But now how can we approve those directions of Hunting
which propound to themselves rather Victory then Game? That was the condition
of those Countries; for either they designed upon Beasts of prey: and these
were looked upon as Bandi^os and Outlaws; which only kept their holds in
Woods, but too frequently sallied out to lay wast the Cornfieldsd and Meadows
of the Countryman, to devour his Flocks: or if they pursued Beasts which are
more useful and less harmefull, yet they were such as being under no man's
propriety, Seignieury or Royalty, gave encouragement to every man, that he
should seize himself of the most plentiful booty to the utmost might of his
wit or industry. This incongruity to our factions may make an Englishman the
less disposed to delight in it, unless he inform himself of the diverse
sorts of Hunting, which are, or have been in use abroad; And to this I shall
deliver some helps. For though the words and phrase were in chaste English, yet
the strangeness of the habits, and Arms, and Motions, the outlandish Customs,
Land^schaep and Borders do presently betray that it it a Latin Poem taught to
speak English, yet not having so perfectly attained to it, but that it plainly
appears to be naturally Latin.

CHAP. 5. The Geography of Gratius.
WHen Rome was at her highest degree of Glory and Empire, it was the ambition
of those Lieutenants which were set over the several Nations under their State
to gather up all the rarities which were in their Provinces; some after
Victories, some by exaction, others by purchase: which were upon several
accounts conveyed to Italy, for their spoils were sent to set forth their
Triumphs as we may see in the Cuts of Trajans Pillar. Again, they did often
gratify their friends in furnishing them with curiosities for public show's;
thus Flavian sent his brother Symmachus seven Scotch dogs to grace a Quaestors
show, which played so fiercely upon Beasts, that the Romans admired and thought
they were conveyed thither in Iron Grates. The story is famous, or rather is
and will be to all ages infamous, how Verres did strip and rob Sicily in the
time of his Government. Besides that the most incorrupt Prefects over Countries
must needs be enriched, what with presents, and what their revenues furnished
to them, whereby they might depart honorably whenever they were recalled
home by the Supreme commands. So that it must needs be that in Italy, all the
treasures of the known parts of the Universe were to be found. If there were
curious Linen in any remote Country, there it was to be seen. If a good race
of Dogs in the most foreign parts, thither they were transmitted. If an
excellent horse were bred in Greece, or Numidia, or Egypt, it must be sent to
Italy: So that one may justly compare Italy to a rich Cabinet adorned with an
universal collection of what rarities the despoyled world could afford. This
advantage accrued to them from Inferior Kings and Commonwealths, as to
Landlords from their Vassalls. And there must needs arise another occasion to
increase their gallantry, for Commerce attends Wealth. And surely when they had
the World as tributary under their power, which was in the reign of Augustus,
under whom our Author flourished, how great Commerce must that immense revenew
draw after it! We are apt enough to flatter our selves, but our communication
is contained within straighter limits; neither have so full and ocular
understanding, especially of inland Commodities, as they had who held such
strict Intelligence in that vast Body Politic. This may be evident in the
Georgiques of Virgil, and Natural History of Pliny; but no where more
illustrious then in this small piece of Gratius; wherein is contained so great
choice of all Subjects that he writes upon, as it may easily appear how he
conversed in a well-furnished shop. It will therefore be useful to enquire
into that multiplicity of places which is spread through the Poem, in which I
shall chiefly follow the guidance of Ferrario in his most exact Geographical
dictionary, which as yet is very rare to be met with, but will within a short
time come forth thoroughly corrected from innumerable negligences in the
Millaine Edition, being now under the press, and having advanced some part of
the way.

Acarnania. At this day is called Carnia and Despotato, it is a Region of
Epirus bending toward the South, bordering upon Aetolia toward the East. The
people are called Acarnans, their Cities were Ambracia, Actium, Leucas,
Halyzaea, and Astacus, their rivers Aracthus and Achelous. Our Author in
praising the craftiness of the Acarnanian breed of Dogs, does ingeniously
allude to the History mentioned by Thucydides, of the 400. Acarnans planted in
Ambuscado by Demosthenes, which were ordered to fall upon the Peloponnesians,
and accordingly did with great execution and success.

Achaia, Is taken largely for a great tract of Greece; now called Livadia and
Rumelia, bordering toward the North upon Thessaly, Westward on Epirus,
Southward on Peloponnesus, and toward the East encompassed by the Sea. But
Achaia proprie dicta is a Country of Pe^oponnesus between Corinth and Patrae,
Iying to the Bay of Corinth.

Acyrus, This place is suspicious of corruption. Gesner substitutes, Acytus,
and Vlitius, out of Virgil, Taygetus, taking it for the Spartan Dogs.

Aemonius. I take it here to signify* Thessalian. It also is a City of
Histria Citta nuova, and another of upper Pannonia, called Igg.

Aeoliae Sibyllae vallis. He means Cumae, as Vlitius has corrected it: which
Salmasius at the same time so corrected; both directed from the praise which
Pliny gives to the ^uman Fl^x. Sibylla in Virgil is called Aeolica, who
afterward translated her prophetical cave into Campania, there she had a
Temple built, and the whole City was under her patronage, so that Juvenal says
of one going to dwell at Cumae, that he did -- unum^ivem donare Sibyllae.

Aetnaeae arts. The Dance of Curassiers instituted by Aeneas in honor of his
deceased Father; which required a strong horse: this Mountain which is the
greatest of Sicily is now called Mongibello.

Aetolus. The Country of Aetolia is at the present named Artinia and Lepant^. A
Region of Achaia, seated in the borders of Epirus westward; Between the Locri
East, and Acarnans west: divided from the former by the River Evenus, and from
the latter by Achelous, having these Cities Naupactum, Calydon, ^halcis, and
Olenus. This therefore is observable in the comparison of the Acarnanian Dogs,
which were close, with the Etolians their very next* Neighbors, which were so
blamed for being open; that in the nearest vicinity of Countries, may happen
the greatest Opposition of Manners.

Nemo est tam prope, ^am procuque nobis. Agragas. A Territory of Sicily; the
Town is called Agrigentum also; now Girgenti, and the Rive^ at this day Drago,
and a great Hill, as in this place, and so observed by Vibius.

Alabanda, Now by the Turks called Eblebanda. An Inland City of Caria, between
Amizo on the West and Stratonice on the East. Pliny commends the Alabandique
hemp for nets.

Albania. A Region of Macedonia, North of Epirus. The Albanesi are a people
warlike as they have since approved themselves under Scanderbeg, pernix Albania
from their great force and strength of body.

Altinum, Afterward Altino, once a famous City of Venice at the mouth of the
River Silis, lying almost midway between Padua and Concordia: it was razed by
the Hu^ns, what time Attila overthrew Aquileia and Concordia. Altinates
g^nistae. It appears that the ginostra in Venice must bear a considerable
growth to be a fit matter for Spears and Darts; which afterward he requires
to be.

In quinos sublata pedes hastilia plena. The Wood is indeed of a tough Nature;
and in those warmer Countries all vegetables are encouraged with a more geniall
Sun, but otherwise in our Island I have not ordinarily seen Broom grow up to
that height req^iq^ir'd. It is a Frutex very frequent, and a^turally
overrunning many grounds with us, which gives denomination to the adjacent
Towns that are from thence called Bromley. Of these Towns I have seen two in
Tendering hundred in Essex, where all that Tract of land was spread with Broom,
as thick as Marasses use to be covered with Rushes, or Heaths with Brambles,
and indeed they are generally as low as a Suffrutex called by Virgil, Humiles
Genistae. Yet I am informed by knowing Arborists, that Broom oftentimes rises
to a far higher pitch than what is here determined, and though it be commonly
ranck'd amongst the Frutices, yet it is of an Arboreous nature, and has a
stock which ascends, and spreads into a body of some B^lke.

Amyclae. It is here set down Lacedaemoniae Amyclae, which distinguishes it
from the Italian Amyclae, of which Virgil. Aen. 10.

-- ditissimus agri
Qui fuit Ausonidum, and tacitis regnavit Amyclis.
This other is a City of Laconia in Peloponnesus, famous for hunting.

Virg. 3. Georg. Armaque, Amyclaeumque canem, Cressamque pharetram.

Athamania, A Region of Epirus on the borders of Thessaly and Acarnania* The
words of Gratius in this place are doubtful, for either he says, that as the
British Dogs do excel in courage, so do the Athamanians in craft: which
agrees with his usual way of Antithesis; taking opposite qualities and setting
one against the other, or else he speaks a more noble thing in commendation of
our Country-Dogs; saying, that as the British Dogs exceed the Molossians in
stoutnesse, so they equal the Athamanian, Thessalian and Epirote, in subtilty:
and this interpretation may be verified from the Nature and usual experience
of our Mastiffes that play at the Bull or Bear; which will ( subire) play low
and creep beneath till they fasten upon the Beast.

Boeotius. The Country is a Region of Achaia lying between the Corinthian Bay
and Aegean Sea; bordering upon Doris, Phocis, Attica, and Phthiotis, anciently
called Ogygia, now Stramuzuppa. The head City is Thebes now almost ruined,
built by Cadmus, whom Ovid brings in hunting too in these parts, and when
Countries were less planted with Cities and Towns; Hunting must needs have
been more frequented; for then beasts were every where obvious: but where man
inhabits they are either frighted away, or extirpated. So that as we have
increased, they have decreased.

Bisaltes. A people of Thrace bordering upon Macedonia, inhabiting all about
Amphipolis and Philippi.

Britanni. Though he mean all this great Island, comprehending England and
Scotland: yet at that time only part of that which is now called England was
open to the Romans. Therefore it has great Emphasis when he says

-- atque ipsos libeat penetrare Britannos. It was but in the Age before that
they said Virg. Ae^eid. 9. Extremique hominum Morini -- reputing the Picards to
be in the uttermost line of the World. Now therefore how suddenly come they to
be acquainted in Italy with the Mastiffes or Hounds of Britain? yet they had
not that particular notice of them all, as (it may be the land then afforded;
but as it is certain) they are now. Besides* our Mastiffe which seems to be an
Indigena or Native of England; we train up most excellent Gre^-hounds (which
seem to have been brought hither by the Galls) in our open Champaines. Then for
hounds, the West-Country, Cheshire and Lanca^hire, with other Wood-land and
Mountainous Countries breed our Slow-Hound; which is a large great dog, tall
and heavy. Then Worcestershire, Bedfordshire and many well mixed soiles, where
the Campaigne and covert are of equal largeness, produce a middle sized dog of
a more nimble composure than the former. Lastly the North-parts, as Yorkshire,
Cumberland, Northumber-land, and many other plain champaign Countries breed the
light, nimble, swift, flender, Fleet-hound, (which Mr. Markam with his wonted
curiosity does observe) After all these the little Beagle is attributed to our
Country, this is by Ulitius shown to be the Canis Agassaeus of Oppian against
Cajus. All these Dogs have deserved to be famous in adjacent and remote
countries whither they are sent for great rarities, and ambitiously sought for
by their Lords and Princes, although only the fighting Dogs seem to have been
known to the ancient Authors: and perhaps in that Age Hunting was not so much
cultivated by our own Countrymen.

Bubastiasacra. Feasts consecrated to the Goddess which was worshipped at
Bubastus, or Bubastis a City of Egypt upon the Nile within the Delta, where she
had a stately Temple. Ovid. 9. Met. Sanctaque Bubastis -- called at this day
Pibesseth or Azioth.

Callaeci equi. It is a Country of Arragon in Spain. The most remote toward the
Sea, called vulgarly by the Italians Gallicia. The people by the Spaniards are
named Gallegos, they border upon Las Esturias; the Astures by the Cantabrian
Sea over the Pyrenean Mountains. The Asturcones are a famous race of ambling
horses, and such was accounted the swiftness of the Spanish horses, that they
were fabled to have been begotten of the wind.

Calydonia. This same vanae Calydonia linguae is but a special name of that
babbling, japping hound which he had before discommended.

At clangore citat, etc.
Aetola quaecunque canis de stripe, etc.
Calydon is a City of Aetolia upon the River Evenus; seven mile to the North
from its Mouth.

Caudinus Taburnus. Caudium was a Town of the Hirpini afterward called,
Harpadium now Arpaia, it is between Capua and Beneventum within Mountains, four
miles from Abella. Hence was the name Caudinae fauces, Stretto d' Arpaia, and
Giogo di S. Maria, the narrow passes in the valley of Caudium which is commonly
said Val di Gardano, through these the Romans were made to pass under the
Gallows by the Samnians. Called Caudinae Furcae and Caudinum Jugum. Two miles
off from this Pass stands Taburnus now Taburo an Hill of Campania abounding
with Olive Trees.

Celtae. A people of the Galls from whence that part of Gallia which is Lions,
was called Celtique. I have conceived in their elogy of of the Celtique Dogs,
that diversi Celtae may import not only remoteness in country from the Mede,
but that they were differing from the indocilis Medus: being both pugnacious
and sagacious. Ulitius understands them to be of the same conditions with the
Mede.

Cerauni. Horses bred in the Mountains of Epirus called Ceraunii and
Acroceraunij; but at this day Monte della Chimera; they may be hence thought to
run up into Macedonia, and receive a denomination from Pella.

Chaoniae. The Mares of Chaonia anciently Molossia, modernly Canina. Chaonis
ales the Dove, Chaonia glans, the old fare of rude mankind.

Creta. Now called Candy* in old times it had some reputation of hunting.
Virgil Cressamque pharetram. Lucan. Gnossasque agitare Pharetras.

Ovid. Nec Gortyniaco calamus levis exit ab arcu. Here was one of the hundred
Cities Dictynna, another Cydon

Ovid.

Armaque equosque habitusque Cydoneasque pharetras. Now as Gratius. Sparta suos
and Creta suos promittit alumnos, so Ovid joins these two famous races
together.

Gnossius Ichnobates, Spartana gente Melampus.
Et patre Dictaeo, sed matre Laconide nati Afterward
Labros and Agriodus, and acutae vocis Hylactor.
And indeed from this example appears that Gratius by promittit does signify
offers, presents: rather then boasts, co^pares; by which he implies that this
most excellent Limehound must be of a mixed breed from the Cretan and Spartan:
that they proved of such generous conditions beyond others. Thus Ulitius has
truly interpreted it in the latter place.

To your high breed Countries of Dogs not base
Sparta and Creta de confer their race.
Cynips. A River of Africa, rising from the deserts of inward Libya, and after
a long course flowing into the little quicksand by Tripoli between i^ and
Barathia; the River is now called Magra: near which were Goats of no common
size.

Cyniphij Hirci. Cyniphia lina. Anciently Carthaginian Flax was in great esteem.

Cyrrha. A City of Phocia now Aspropiti, at the roots of the Mount Parnassus,
upon the Crissaean Bay, 60 furlongs to the South of Delphos dedicated to Apollo.

Elis. A Region of Peloponnesus between Arcadiae and Achaia, and the Ionian
Sea with a City of the same name, now Belvedere of Morea. Here were the great
Matches for horseraces every Olympiad.

Falisci. Phalisci. A people of Hetruria inhabiting between the Mountain
Ciminus, and River Tiber; their Cities Falisca, Faleria, Fescennia and Horta.
The Mountain of the Falisci Soracte a Mountain of Hetruria, in the bounds of
the Falisci upon the River Tiber. Monte S. Oresto, and M. di S. Silvestro.

Galli. When he says inconsulti Galli he may well enough mean it of the
Grayhounds which are ^reckon'd by the ancients for the canis Gallicus which can
premere inventam, not invenire feram latentem.

Ganges. Ganga, that great river dividing the farther India from the hither, of
these Ptolomy calls the hither India intra Gangem, the farther extra Gangem
breaking forth from the Emodi montes, and issuing toward the South in two
channells whose farthest mouths are distant from one to the other eighty
Spanish Leagues; in which it falls into the Indian Ocean: this is Physon one of
the four great rivers which flow out of Paradise, according to St Hierom and
Isidore. Upon this river is seated the Royal City and great Mart of Spices
Bengala: and from this Gangetica tellus, or Realm of Bengala our East India
Merchants bring all those rich Odours which are dispersed not only through
Europe, but over the whole world. For which reason it is by our Elegant Author
worthily styled Nardifer Ganges.

Garganus. Monte Gargano and Monte di S. Angelo, by which name the late City in
it is signified, distant from Sipontum five miles; a mountain of Daunian
Apulia, having in compass 200 Miles as Pliny: where is the Garganian
promontory between Sipontum and Hyrium: of this, Lucan Apulus Hadriacas exit
Garganos in undas.

Geloni. These are Tartars inhabiting part of the European Scythia, bordering
on Borysthenes the River, accounted with Moeotae Alani, Agathyrsi and
Sauromatae which dwell round the Maeotica Palus; Mother of the Euxine Black
Sea. This Fen is called Mar bianco by the Italians. They have great Deserts, and
may exercise much hunting.

Graecia. He speaks of the glorious Republique of the Athenians in which under
select Commanders they did such heroical acts against the great King of
Persia: and afterward overthrew that Monarchy by Alexander the great, which
achievements is that renown of their ancestors registered in Monuments of
their own wit, so as it is never to be forgotten, and although they knew the
Assyrian Monarchy to have sunk under Sardanapalus, the opulency and softness
of the Chaldean and Persian; yet they insisted on the same Steps of ruin. We
know how famous the Corinthians were for Luxury. There were Grecians who
professed precepts of cookery such was Mithaecus a culinary Philosopher; who
gave formal doctrines of Sauces and Confections, which actions argued their
low and degenerate spirits.

Hebrus Marizza. A great river of Thrace rising out of the Mountain Hamus,
issuing into the Aegeaen sea, between the Cities of Maronia and Aenos, having
washed the Cities of Filippopoli and Andrinople and Trajanopoli.

Hyrcanus. It is of a Country in Asia lying upon the Sea between Media on the
West, and Margiana on the East. Having at the present various names Diargument
and Strava, and Casson, and Hyrach, and Massandraen and Corcan, which are not
total names of the Country; but partial names of several Regions. The chife
cities heretofore were Hyrcana and Amarusa. In this land fruitful of Wine and
Corn, Panthers are generated and Tigers.

Italia. The Poet may well conclude his Poem in a rapture upon the praises of
Italy not only because he deferrs Honor to his own Country, but from the
just merit of the place; for where the land is exposed to so benign an influx
of the Heavens, there the ground must needs be well digested for a most perfect
production of all species. Their Wits how refined and subtle? Their arm's how
bold and prosperous? here our Author seems to commend their breed of Horses
We much value the Neapolitan Courser, which Country is now Italy, though I
question whether so esteemed in that age.

Lechaeum. A Town and Harbor of the Corinthians upon the Saronique Bay,
opposite to Cenchrea another Town and Harbor upon the Corinthian Bay, distant
from Corinth twelve furlongs; from Cench^ea seventy to the East. Lesteriochori
is the present name.

Ligurinae alps. These are also called Maritimae: these begin from the shore
of the French Sea called Le Montagne di Tenda, and the Cottiae Alps or
Cottianae called Moncenis, closing in part of the Duchy of Monte ferrato and
Millain, and part of the principality of Piemont. Alps Ligusticae are
stretched out between Nicaea, which is Nizza de Provenza, and Taurini, which is
Piemont.

Lycaones. Vlitius takes these dogs to be of the Country of Lycaon, Arcadians,
for dogs of that Country are famous, and he does believe they may be Heirs of
his own body naturally begotten, if it be true that he was turned into a
Wolf. Otherwise Licaonia is a part of Cappadocia divided from Cilicia by
Taurus: whose Metropolis is Iconium; from whence they receive their corrupt
appellation of Cogni at this day. The inhabitants of this Country are called
Licaones, and the land abounds with wild Asses.

Lycius. This is from Lycia a Country of Asia, lying between Caria on the West,
and Pamphylia on the East, called at this day Aidinelli and Briqitia.

Lydia. This is a Region of Asia comprised between Ionia on the West, and
Phrygia magna on the East: which was also named Maeonia. It is called Lud by
the Hebrews; being a Nation derived from that Grandchild of Noah by Shem,
which was named Lud. hence (...) their royal Seat was at Sardis while Croesus
was King of it, and had several times rebelled against the Persians, Cyrus
overthrew him and dissolved the government. There are diverse proverbs of the
villainy of this people. Diogen. Lydi mali and improbi, post hos Aegyptii, ac
demum pessimi omnium Cares. They were wont to adorn their heads with Hoods.
Whence the Proverb upon effoeminate people Lydio more. They gave their minds
wholly to riot and dainties. Carica Lydorum, also Lydus cauponator. Then for
unseasonable amors, Lydus in meridie. Their Country is now called by the
Turks, to whom they are subject, Carafia, and Carafieli.

Maceti. The limits of Macedonia at this time were large, having been reduced
into the hands of the Romans, when it fell to be their Province out of the
power of so potent a Prince as Perseus. I shall not consult with any Geographer
either ancient or modern to circumscribe that Country, but excerpt it out of
the Annalls of Titus Livius, Book 45. as it is reported from the Authentic
decree of Paulus the Consul for settling the Macedonian affairs. In the first
place it was ordained that the Macedonians be free having the same Cities and
Lands, using their own Laws, creating yearly magistrates: that they should pay
the people of Rome half that Tax which they were wont to pay their Kings. Then
that Macedonia should be divided into four Cantons. Whereof one and the first
part to be that land which lies between the Rivers Strymon and Nessus, taking
in whatever Villages, Castles, Towns, were formerly held by Perseus over Nessus
to the Eastward, except Aenos, and Maronea, and Abdera, as also over Strymon
to the Westward all the Bisaltique region with Heraclea which is called
Sintique. The second Canton to be that which the River Strymo embraces from the
East, excepting Heraclea Sintice, and the Bisaltae, and which the River Axius
bounds on the West, adding thereto the Paeonians, who dwelt near the River
Axius to the quarter of the East. The third Canton that to be made which the
river Axius surrounds on the East, and the River Peneus on the West: the North
of which is bounded by the Mountain Bora. Thereunto was added that quarter of
Paeonia that runs up along by the River Axius to the West. Edessa also and
Beraea fell to that part. The fourth Canton to be beyond the Mountain Bora,
bounding upon Illyricum on the one side, on the other upon Epirus. That the
provincial Towns where their assemblies should meet, be for the first Canton
Amphipolis, for the second Thessalonica, for the third Pella, for the fourth
Pelagonia. It was ordained that the assemblies of their respective Provinces
should be summoned thither, that Assessements should be there imposed, that
there the Magistrates should be created.

Maenalus. A famous Mountain of Arcadia by the City Tegea where is a Town of
that name and Maenalis ora.

Mareoticum. This is a white Muscatell much affected by the Egyptian Kings;
thus Horace of Cleopatra, Mentemque lymphatam Mareotico. It has its name from
Mareotis pali^s a great Fen of Egypt by Alexandria containing in circuit 600
miles, and in breadth 30. called Lago di Buchiara, that it is a white Grape
appears from Virgil. sunt and Mareotides albae; some leaning upon the authority
of Columella, say that this is a Greek Wine receiving its name from a Region of
Epirus called likewise Mareotica, others (and those most Greek likewise)
absolutely express it to have been of the growth of Egypt and called
Alexandrian. Ulitius contends for this, nor without good ground.

Massicum. This wine is from Mons Massicus (Monte Masso) a Mountain of Campania
celebrated for excellent Wine, it is joined upon the Mountains Falernus and
Gaurus, between Suessa, Calenum, and Sinuessa. Hence Martial lib. 13. Ep. 108.
De Sinuessanis venerunt Massica praelis, where the title is Falernum.

Medus. Media is a Region of Asia, between Armenia major on the West; Parthia
and Hyrcania on the East, touching upon the Caspian Sea at the North, and
Assyria, and Shushan at the South, called vulgarly Madai Their Dog is fierce,
not unlike their neighbor the Hyrcanian.

Melitesius. It is the judgment of Ulitius that this Coral is from Melita by
Pachynus, forhe finds in Pliny a commendation of Coral that grows in the
Sicilian Sea; and indeed it is a production found in many places, even in our
Seas there is a sort of Corallines. There are two Melita's, the one an Island
of the Adriatique, near Dalmatia, from whence are called Canes Melitaei.
Vulgarly Melida. The other an Island of the African Sea, between Sicily and
Afrique lying off from the Promontory of Paehynus 70. miles, from Camarina 84.
we call it Malta, this seems to be the Island meant by the Author.

Molossus From a Country of Epirus, called anciently Molossia, at the present
Pandosia (of their City Pandosia) comes a noble race of Dogs celebrated by all
antiquity, and preferred before those of any other Nation whatsoever for
matchless stoutnesse, until Britain being discovered, and our Dogs brought to
trial, the Molossians were found to be surpassed in courage by the British
Mastiffes, and here it is acutely observed by Ulitius, that the Molossian is
not that deep-mouthed hound, as Lucan denotes him to be: but so stanch and
silent besides his courage, that his mixture with the bawling Etolian Bitch
will rectify that ill quality. For more is to be presumed upon the Testimony
of Gratius an approved Huntsman, than either Lucan or Martial do appear to
deserve.

Murcibii. Ulitius reads in this place Murcinii and understands Thracian
horses; those may well be denoted for that quality. Sophocles in his Electra,
makes the Aenian to be carried away with his hard-mouthed Steeds, and Aenos is
a City of Thracia upon the border of the Aegean Sea, by the mouth of Hebrus.

Morini A people of Belgium lying in Picardy and Artois, they were esteemed the
extremity of the world. Freta Morinu dub^o refluentia ponto, by that infallibly
is designed the narrow Sea between Callis and Dover, which our Mariners can
tide through being some 20. miles in breadth, called by the ancients Fretum
Gallicum, Britannicum, Occani.

Mycenae. A Town of Peloponnesus in the Country of Argos between Corinth (as
distant 15. miles) and Argos (as ten) now called Agios Adrianos.

Nasamonia. This is a name common to several regions of Africa. Some dwell
about the Atlantique Ocean. Others upon the great Syrtis. Others in Libya
Marmarica, and are all called Nasamones.

Nebrodes. A very high mountain of Sicily, in the midwa between Enna toward
the East, and Thermae Himerae to the West, now called Madonia; out of this
Gelas the River flows to the South. It is higher then any other Mountain in
Sicily, except Aetna, spreading far and abounding with springs of water, so
called from the multitude of Dear. (...).

Numidae. Are a great part of Africa, the one country which they denominate is
now called Billedulgerid; and this is inland. Another is Maritime upon the
Numidian Bay: Numidia nova, or Regno di Constantino, and corrupted by the
Arabian inhabitants into Cuzuntina, or Guzuntina; they spread over no small
tract; their horse is famous for very good temper, and trained up to an
excellent management, so as they can turn and wind, check, or put him on by
their switch alone: they are called in Virgil, Numidae Inf^aeni.

Parthus. A known people of Asia, lying between Media, Aria, Persia, and
Hyrcania; their country is of a soft mould, and the Horse which is bred upon
it has a tender hoof. Where it is worth the observing, that according to our
institution of horses; we shall find even their nature to answer. Those horses
which have trod delicatly from their first running ever since they were foal'd
become to have a soft hoof, nor can afterward be brought to travel upon
ragged and stony wales; but the hardy Genoway that was brought forth and bred
up amidst the Ligurian Alps through continual beating upon cragged rocks, in
the issue hardens and (if I may be permitted to use the expression) even pave
her hoof, insomuch that she will break in pieces any other that shall contend
with her upon that native ground. So that it is not all to be attributed to
nature, however our Author would here intimate the contrary, saying, Sed juxta
vitium posuit Deus, no, more commonly I believe sed juxta vitium posuit male
cautus agaso. Either the Groom and Ostler, or the first breeder up of the horse
may be thought to mar him. For some such thing may be perceived in our own
education. Those who never put their hand to any labor or manly exercise, but
have carefully kept it delicate, let them pull at an O^re, or draw in a coil
of Cables into a ship, and their hands will contractblisters, swell and be
gal'd, which things those are not sensible of, who through long use have their
palms hardened, and fenced with a brawny firmness.

Pellaeus. Our Poet means the Macedonian horses, and at that time Pella was the
provincial Town of the most noble part of Macedonia that extended as far as
Peneus, and is shut in by the Mountain Bon^: being as it were within the
^eraunians, it is now called Jeniza and Zuchria.

Peneus. A River of Thessaly much celebrated by the Poets, now called
Selampria, or Pezin, or Asababa; receiving almost all the Rivers of the
Country, amongst others Salambria (with which it bath now changed the name)
Enipeus and Sperchius, it rises from the Mountain Pindus, and through the Tempe
flows into the Pagasique Bay, hence Virgil Peneia Tempe.

Perses. Although the bordering Mede and Hyrcanian be only courageous, yet the
Persian is sagacious withal. At the present, the name of Persian relating to
their Empire includes Media, their Country is now by them called Farsistan.

Pharos. The name I should believe to be Coptique. It is a Tower built by King
Ptolomy at the rate of 800. Talents; so magnificent, as that it is reputed
among the seven miracles of the World: it stands upon an Island almost joined
to the continent, and from the top of it lights were hung out for the direction
of Mariners, from whence all such promontories have been called (as we may see
frequently in the Map) Faro and Fero by Portugal and Spanish Navigatours? and
that I may not only propose my own fancy, Cambden has allowed* that our Dover
Peer is so called from being a Pharos or place for Lanternes, to direct in
steering near that dangerous shore: from this place which was anciently the
Palace of the Egyptian Kings, they are called Pharii tyranni, and if Pharaoh be
in the old Coptique Rex, why may not Pharos be Regia?

Pherae. A Town of Thessaly between Demetrias and Pharsalus, near the lake of
Boebe, called at present Fere.

Pisa A City of Peloponnesus upon the river Alpheus, by which the Olympian
Games were celebrated.

Pyrene. All that Region which lies upon the Pyrenean hills. Los Montes
Pireneos where is Guascoigne and Aquitain divided from Navarre. These hills
separate the two potent Kingdoms of France and Spain, being extended from the
Cantabrian Ocean to the Mediterranean Sea for the space of 80. Spanish miles*

Roma. This City in the time of our Author being in flore, did far transcend
all the pride of other Nations in building, it was then the Imperial Seat, and
is now the Pontificiall Sea.

Sabaei. A people of Arabia felix. Their Country is famous for bearing
Frankincense. Jeremiah 6. 20. To what purpose comes there to me incense from
Sheba, and the sweet cane from a far Country? Virgil in his Georgiques.

-- Solis est thurea virga Saboeis.
And India mittit ebur, molles sua thura Sabae^.
Saetabes. A people of Hispania Tarraconensis in the Kingdom of Valentia where
the City Saetabis stands upon a River of the same name at this day, the place
is called Xativa, it was famous amongst the ancients for the fine flax which it
brought forth.

Catullus, Sudaria Saetaba, Pliny linum Saetabum, this was commendable to make
fine Linen for Ornament in wearing; though our Author do not make choice of it
for Nets.

Ser. This is a Nation of Interior Ethiopia, about the rising of Nilus among
the Blemyes, and a people of Hither India between Indus and Hydaspes, but the
famous Seres are a people of Asia the farthest to the East beyond China toward
Scythia without Imaus. Their Country is Serica, now Cathay.

Sicambri. Those of Gelderland and Zutphen. A people of Holland. The title of
which Dukedom Count Egmond does at present bear, they dwell between the Maze
and the Rhine.

Siculi. In this Island which is the greatest of those in the Mediterranean
were anciently horses famous for fleetnesse, and from a Country neighboring to
them, we have at this day an eminent race of horses. For the Neapolitan
Courser is not unlike them.

Sparta. The chief City of Laconia. The Fleet-hounds of this Country were
famous among the old Poets. Virg. Georg. 3. Veloces Spartae catulos --

Strymonius. The reason of this Epithet to Bisalta, will plainly appear out of
Livy, 45. Book. Pars prima Bisaltas habet fortissimos viros: trans Nessum amnem
incolunt, and circa Sirymonem; their Provincial Town was Amphipolis, so called
because the Strymon was about it.

Syene. Only in this place I am not hasty to consent to the learned
Commentator, who attempts to alter Terrena Syene, either into Turrita, or
Extrema. By which change he would destroy the Antithesis between Savi equi, and
Terrena regio. The Poet seems to me to say, that the heavy bottomes of Syene
were not proper for a sternacious horse; it is the farthest City of Egypt in
the confines of Ethiopia, heretofore the bound of the Roman Empire, as it is
now of the Turkish, called at the present Asna; the whole region derives the
name of Syene from it. When the Sun is in Cancer, they cast no shadow, because
the Country lies directly under that Tropique. It is situate upon the Nile, so
that probably the foil is of a slimy substance, and proper only for light
horses.

Taburnus. A craggy Mountain in the borders of Samnium upon the tract of the
Caudine Rock, in Campania.

Thessalia A Region of Macedonia enclosed by the Mountains of Olympus, Ossa,
Pelion, on the North, Othrys and Oeta on the South, and Pindus on the West. It
is now called Com^nolitar^, Th^umnestia, and Lamina, anciently divided into
four Provinces, Thessaliotis, Phthiotis, Pelasgiotis, and Estiaetis. The
tradition is that horses were first taught to be broke in this Country. It is
certain that at present they have an excellent race of Horses. Some of which
come unto us under the notion of Turkish Horses, and are deservedly in high
esteem, as they were with the ancient Poets, both Greek and Latin.

Toletum. Toledo a City of Hispania Tarraconensis distant from Madrid 12.
leagues in the heart of Castile, heretofore the most famous seat of the Gothish
Kings; it is upon the River Tayo (which is Tagus) famous from Antiquity, for
good mettle, wherewith they tempered the Blades of swords, which at present
retain great praise as may appear by that ingenious Epigramme of Grotius.

Unda Tagi non est uno celebranda metallo
Utilis in cives est ibi lamna suos.
Trinacria. Is a name for Sicily out of their language which was formerly
Greek; it imports a place of three Promontories from Felorus, which points upon
Italy, Pachynus upon Greece, Lilyboeum upon Africa, it is in Latin called
Triquetra.

Tusci. This is written also Thusci, they are likewise named Hetrusci, a most
ancient people of Italy, the Toscani; but not only that part of Florence, Pisa,
and Arezzo, which is under the great Duke of Tuscany, but was in old time more
large, and comprised a great part of that which is now called Peter's Patrimony,
being in subjection to the Pope.

Veneris litora. The shores of Cyprus, where was anciently Paphos, but now
destroyed both the old and new, Neapaphos, and Palaepaphos, called now Baffo.

Umbrosae Veneris p^r litora myrtus, is the same which was named by Virgil,
Paphiae myrtus.

Umber. From a province of Italy, even at the present called l'Ombria as it was
anciently Ombria; it is divided by the Apennine, containing some Cisapennine,
other Transapennine Cities. Here Umber is the Bracco of Italy: and as their Dog
is timorous, so their Bore is not very courageous. Whence the Poet, -- Thuscus
aper generosior Umbro.

Hitherto I have been emploi'd in defining the places mentioned by this Poet,
and in affixing the modern names by which they are at present known: It will be
necessary to subjoyne an advice concerning this matter; I would desire that no
Reader should require an exactness in Topographicall knowledge, for it is not
any way possible nor necessary; Of many countries whose names we have, there
were never any Terriers delineated, the butts and boundarys were never
particularized; in many others the evidences are lost, and consumed by time;
but in all the marks have been removed through daily revolutions; so that this
tradition is altogether confused: Empires are continually in progress, or
declyning, and France signifies one thing this week, and another the following;
nor can we have any certainty how far the signification of that name does
extend any week, till the Gaziette for that week be come forth: The Earth
indeed is stable, and abides generation after generations; the figures which
adorn the heavens have not been observed to be much obnoxious to great changes;
and the individualls of those species which are upon the earth, after their
appointed season and age, are renewed into the same figure with those former
individualls which have past away, and resemble their kind, from whose seed
they sprung; so that where the conception is permanent, simple, and
individual, the passage is easy from one language into any other, nor does it
perplex the understanding, but may be rendered per (...), or one word by
another: for in saying Equus, or a Horse, we have always in all ages meant a
body consisting of the same integrate parts, which is readily understood,
because it is so ordinarily seen: But it is far otherwise in human and
politic institutions. Cities and Empires pass away; not only the name
alters, but the notion cease, and is removed out of our sight.

Clara fuit Sparte: magnae viguere Mycenae.
Necnon and Cecropis, necnon Amphionis arces.
Vile solum Sparte est: altae cecidere Mycenae
Oedipodioniae quid sunt nisi nomina Thebae?
Quid Pardioniae restant nisi nomen Athenae?
Who can precisely determine what these cities were? or how far those regions
extended? By daily experience we perceive how difficult it is to preserve the
bounds of parishes, and Lordships: where there is nearer concernment of
interest, to watch over them that they do not pass into oblivion: But for
these uncertainties of the Mapp, we may content our selves with a general
satisfaction, there being no absolute necessity of more precise knowledge; for
Horace could content himself without any express decision even of his own
country.

-- Lucanus an Appulus anceps,
Nam Venusinus arat finem sub utrumque colonus.
And although the modern names of places do no where exactly answer the ancient
as to the bounds; yet if they do rudely as to the situation; they are to be
esteemed to have given a sufficient knowledge, and to have performed what in
reason may be required of them.

CHAP. VI. Of the Styles of Hunting different from the English, both Antique
and Foreign.
THe Hunting used by the Ancients in the time of our Author, as appears by
this Poem, was much like that way which is at present taken with the Raindeare
which is seldom hunted at force, or with hounds, but only drawn after with a
blood-hound, and forestalled with Netts and Engines. So did they with all
beasts; and therefore a Dog is never commended by them for opening before he
has by signs discovered where the beast lies in his layre, as by their
drawing stiff our Harbourers are brought to give right judgment. Therefore I
do not find that they were curious in the Musiquc of their Hounds, or in a
composition of their Kennell and pack, either for deepenesse or lowdnesse, or
sweetness of cry like to us. Their huntsmen were instructed to shout. Virgil*
3. Georgiques.

Ingentem clamore premes ad retia cervum So that it was only with that
confusion to bring the Dear to the Netts laid for him.

But we comfort our Hounds with loud and courageous cries and noyses both of
Voice and Horn, that they may follow over the same way that they* saw the Heart
pass, without crossing or coasting.

We have no wild-boares in England, yet it may be thought that heretofore we
had, and did not think it convenient to preserve that Game. For our old
Anthours of Hunting reckon it among the Beasts of Venery; and we have the
proper terms belonging to it. Somewhat will not be unworthy the reciting. In
an old Poem printed by Wynkyn de Word (whom I have heard to have been the
second that printed in England) in the year of the Incarnation of our Lord
1496. in the reign of Henry the seventh, and all the instructions of terms
for hunting. Amongst them are set down these Verses.

Now to speak of the Boore the first year he is
A pygge of the sounder called as have I blys.
The second year an hog and so shall he be:
And an hoggestere when he is of years three.
And when he is of four year a boore shall he be:
From the sounder of the Swyne then departyth he,
A synguler is he so: for alone he woll goo.
This authority will not be unproper to give a right understanding of the
appellation which is given to this Beast, Psalm 80. Sec. Hebr. V. 14.
Exterminavit eam aper de sylva: et singularis ferus depastus est eam. And
therefore called by the Greeks (...). It is a game usual in France, they call
it Sanglier, which is the same. In this sort of Hunting, the way is to use
furious, terrible sounds and noyses, as well of voice as of horn, to make the
chase turn and flee, because they are slow, and trust in their tusks and
defense, which is agere aprum, to bayt the Boore as in the halieuticon.

-- Actus aper setis iram denunciat hirtis. Therefore Virgil, Saepe volutabris
pulsos Sylvestribus apros Latratu turbabis agens -- incomparably does he
express it by turbabis: yet this must be done after his Den or Hold is
discovered, and the Netts be pitched, or else it is blamed (as in the Aetolian
Dog) to rear him, and give him warning to escape. The Huntsmen give judgment
of the Wild-bore by the print of his foot, by his rooting: a wild swine roots
deeper then our ordinary Hogs, because their snowts are longer; and when he
comes into a cornfield (as the Calydonian Bore in Ovid) turns up one continued
furrow; not as our Hogs root here and there, and then by his soil, he soyles
and wallowes him in the mire: these are his Volutabra sylvestria, where his
greatness is measured out, then coming forth he rubs against some tree which
marks his height; as also when he sticks his tuske into it, that shows the
greatness of it. They observe likewise the depth of his Den, with the bigness
of his Lesses; for so they call the Dung of those beasts. Whenever the Bore
is hunted and stands at Bay, the Hunts-men ride in, and with Swords and spears
striking on that side which is from their horse wound or kill him: This is in
the French hunting; but the ancient Romans standing on foot, or setting their
knees to the ground, and charging directly with their spear, did opponere
ferrum, and excipere aprum: for the nature of the Bore is such, that he spitts
himself with fury, running upon the weapon to come at his adversary, till he
press his very Bowels upon it, and sink down dead.

There are no Roe-Deer in England, but there are plenty of them in Scotland. An
old Scotch Poet, Sir James Lindsay, who flourished in the time of King James
the fifth, wrote this, much about 1550. in the praise of his own country.

The rich Rivers plesand and profitabill:
The lusty Lochis with fische of sundry k^ndis:
Hunting, Halking, for Nobilis convenabill
Forrestis full of Da, Ra, Hartis and Hyndis.
Yet it may be thought that they have been more common in England, because our
ancient Hunts-men acknowledge the proper terms for this chase; and in the first
place we have distinct ages for these Dorces in Dame Julians precepts to her
Berne.

And if ye of the Roo-Bucke wol know the same,
The first year he is a Kid, soukyng on his dame
The second year he is a gerl, and so ben such all:
The third year an hemule look ye him call.
Roo-Buck of the first head heis at the fourth year:
The fyfth year a Roo-buck him call I you lere.
These make good chase, stand long, and fly end-way. Compellere Dorcas, is to
force the Bevy, and to drive them into the Toils.

Although we have no Wolves in England, yet it is certain that heretofore we
had routs of them, as they have at this present in Ireland; in that country is
bred a race of greyhounds, which is fleet, strong, and bears a natural enmity
to the Wolf. Here I would take the boldness to examine that 77. Epistle of
the second book of Symmachus, where he speaks of Canes Scotici. It is well
enough known, that in the age of Claudian, which was near to his, the Irish man
had the name of Scotus.

-- totam cum Scotus Jernen Moverit. Now in the greyhounds of that natio, e
there is incredible force and boldness, so that they are much sought for in
foreign parts; and the King of Poland makes use of them in his hunting of
great beasts by force: wherefore it may well be intended of the great
fierceness which these Dogs have in assaulting, that when the Romans saw them
play, they thought them so wonderful violent, as that they must needs have
been ferreis caveis advecti. Or, if it will better fit any other sort of Dogs
in Scotland, I am only not as yet informed what that other sort of Dogs is,
especially seeing it must not be understood of the British Mastiffes, which
for a long time, even from the age of our Poet, had been no strange and unknown
novelty to the Romans. From the experience of this country that Semifera
proles, or Whelps that come of the commixture of a Bitch with a Dog-Wolfe is
verified, called anciently Lyciscae, and this ill quality they find inherent to
that sort of Dogs, that they can by no way of bringing up be restrained from
preying upon Cattle, by which vice they have merited to be esteemed criminal
before they be Whelp'd, and there is a Law in that b^halfe, which straightly
enjoins, that if any Bitch be Iimed with a Wolf, either she must be hanged
immediately, or her puppies must be made away: this may serve to avouch
somewhat, all that character which he gives of the Semiferous Mongrels, of his
Hyrcanian, and the Tiger.

In Poland when the King hunts, his servants are wont to surround a wood,
though to the space of a mile or better in compass, with toiles, which are
pitched upon firm stakes: This being done, the whole Town, all sexes and ages
promiscuously rush into the Enclosure, and with their loud shouts rear all the
beasts within that wood, which making forth, are intercepted in the Nets. There
small and great beasts are together entangled, after the same manner as when
amongst us, we draw a net over a pond, and after beating it all over with
Poles, we bring out not only Pike and Carp, but lesser fry: So they enclose at
once, Dear, and Bores, and Roe-Bucks, and Hares: for so they order their Nets,
that the space of those Meshes which are twisted with greater cords, for the
entangling of greater beasts; that space I say is made up with smaller
whip-cord, for the catching lesser prey. He has a great race of English
Mastiffes, which in that country retain their generosity: they are brought to
play upon the greater beasts. It is not counted amongst them disagreeable to
the Laws of the chase, to use gunns.

Tempesta has described the manner of Italian hunting in a fair Book, in
Taille douce

The Spaniards have a blood-hound which is called un podenco, he is exactly as
is here described Vulpina Specie, and genus exiguum; wih him they do montear*

-- montesque per alt^s.

Ingentem clamore premes ad retia cervum, or ca^ar, and pr^ck through the
woods, or follow any chase.

The Romans had another sort of pugnacious assailing beasts, which was in shows
to entertain the people. After they had spread their arms into the countries
of Elephants, Tigers, and Lions; those beasts being sent to Rome, were either
bayted by other beasts, or assaulted by Fencers: Which sights were at first
presented in the open Cirque, till afterward Titus built an Amphitheater for
them, which answers to our Bear-Garden. These reflections I hope will not be
unprofitable, and may conduce to a proper end: I hope it will not be unpleasant
also, if I communicate to the Reader a civility sent me by an ingenious friend,
and fellow collegiat. Now he is prepared with the History of Hunting, and has
been abroad to view the diversity of game: I hope he may be in good humor for
it.

Come Lads and wind your Horn, and Summon up
Your well-tuned hounds unto yon mountains top:
There lurks the pride of the woods, the Lion fell,
At whose decease our troops shall yelpe a Knell.
In yonder vale a jumping Stagge I spy,
Whose feet will shame the winds celerity,
Whose branched Horns being crowned with sturdy threats
Contemn our Dogs, our Iavelins, and our nets.
In this thick sedge there lies a tusked Boar
Who challenges free quarter, and all'ore
The fens and woods he domineeres to see
N^ne is so strong, none is so stout as he.
Let Us on the hills, the vales, the fenns to beat,
Nor Claw, nor Horn, nor Tuske shall mak's retreat.
We Are armed with force, we are cataphract with Art,
The one our Troops, the other Books impart.
Books, did I say? one book has taught us all:
It Is Gratius does all Authors praise forestall.
Whose name, whose age, whose style, whose argument
Is Pleasant, Reverend, Candid, Innocent.
All current are; but what is obscure and blind
None but this Mighty Nimrod-wit can find.
Who having stripped his Cynegetick wight
Makes him appear an English Adamite.
No Sectary, but Orthodox and true,
Whether you would range in th Park, or hunt purlue.
Such high-borne fancy, quick, and nobly bred,
Would make Diana leave her sport to read;
As do the Muses in Diana's Chase
Delight to rove, and her wild games embrace.
William Price Fellow of Kings College in Cambridge.

CHAP. VII. Of the Modern Authors who have written upon this subject.
ALthough I were very much experienced in any art, and were apt to conceive a
good opinion of my own ability therein, yet being to publish a discourse
concerning it, I were obliged to inform my self of what others have formerly
proposed in the same matter, as far as may conveniently be attained: there are
some who esteem it glory to be thought to have declined any other helps, but
their own wit, which I should charge upon my self as negligence. It might
have been thought sufficient that this excellent Author has come out lately in
Holland, with the learned notes of Janus Ulitius; and although I have not since
that time found the fame of this Poet to have been much celebrated amongst us,
with whom hunting is in very high esteem, yet that judicious commentator has
deserved very highly of him, and withal infallibly raised himself a monument
of late and lasting honor.

This learned Ulitius has compared our Author with the Latin, and Greek
writers which have handled this subject ex professo, which or touched upon it:
so that if I should make that my business, it would seem that I did in alienam
messem falcem mittere. I shall endeavor to reduce this Poem to the
instructions that I find in the modern, both French and English.

The chief amongst the French is La Venerie per Jacques de Fouilloux. This is
translated into English by Mr Turbervill: it was indeed done into very proper
English with great care and judgment, some forty years since: But now the
book is hardly to be met with: That discourse too of Hunting that is in La
Maison Rustique is but an abridgement of this former. There is another in
French who may merit the name of an Author with Fouilloux his Contemporary
under Charles the 9. and that is Iean de Clamorgan, who has written a
particular treatise of La chasse du loup.

In our language there have been diverse old writers, that have delivered rather
some proper terms for hunting, then that have compiled the Art. I read cited
Sir Tristram, and the book of St. Albans; I have seen Dame Iulians Bernes
doctrine in her book of hunting: But these Authors are not to be procured
publicly; as they are indeed of less use. I set a far higher esteem upon a
late writer, many of whose works are frequently to be had. Mr. Gervas Markham
may undoubtedly be compared with any of the ancients, who have written de Re
Rustica, and if his style be not so pleasant as that of Pliny, yet certainly
his experiments are more certain and profitable; he has reported the fruits of
his own experience, as in the whole Cycle of Husbandry accurately; so in
Cynegetiques excellently. The former French Author, and this English Master of
Oeconomicall Philosophy, I look upon as fountains: With these I have been
conversant, that so I might draw from experienced men, if they delivered any
thing which might more largely explicate that upon which Gratias may happen to
touch. With this preparation I shall in the threefollowing Chapters examine the
difficult words, and obscure passages as they lie in order in this Poem. In the
Citations I have abbridged Clamorgan by Cl. Fouiloux by F. Markham by M.


CHAP. VIII. Of Nets, the line to fright Dear, snares, and spears with the Bow.
BIS vicenos passus) Columella lib. 5. de R. R. Passus pedes ha^et quinque. So
that 40 Paces make 200 feet. This must be understood of the Roman standard,
which comes short of the English: The most exact and minute deduction of the
Roman foot is by Mr. John Greaves, who preferres the foot on the monument of
Cossutius before others, and finds it to be to the English as 967 to 1000. So
that two hundred foot Roman, comes precisely short of 200 foot English by 6
English feet, half a foot and one tenth of a foot.

Nodis. Meshes.

Optima Cyniphiae. The soil fittest to sow Hemp upon must be a rich mingled
earth of clay and sand, or clay and gravel well tempered, and so on, as is
worthy to be observed in M. The English houswives skill, B. 2. From this place
I reconcile Gratius, who says Optima C. paludes lina dabunt, with Pliny,
saying, Seritur sabulosis maxim. Ulitius being somewhat gravelled at it, is so
hardy as to propound that the place be altered into Paludosis: but he should
rather diffide his own experience, and suspend such rash judgments till
farther inquiry. Simple sand is too barren, hot, and light, bringing forth
withered increase: simple clay again is too tough, rich, and heavy, bringing
forth all bun and no rind; so that the Sabulum of Pliny is a mingled gravel,
or the red hazel ground.

Stupea Messis. We should know that to speak properly, they say Vellere linum:
To pull Hemp or Flax, which is the manner of gathering it; for it is not cut as
Corn is, either with Since or Sickle, but it is pulled up by the roots.

Sonipes turba. Those of the East used to wear bells about their legs in
ornament: thus the Jews, Isa. 3. 16. 18. And the leaping about with bells tied
on the legs after an Hoboy, and a Horse, is not originally an European
frolique, though brought amongst us by Spain: but the name imports to dance
Alla Moresca.

Vix velatur. Like our Cambricks, Lawns, and Tiffanies, which serve rather to
transmitt nakedness, then to hide or cover it; as by drawing a transparent
chassee of glass or cristall over any rarities, we rather allure the gazing of
an eager spectator, then keep off his sight. Includas retibus ursos. Comme on
doit chasser et prendre les loups avec les rets et fil^ts. Cl. Chap. 9.

Primas linorum tangere messes. The best time for the pulling of it is when the
leaves fall, or it is yellow at the tops, for then it is full ripe; which for
the most part will be in July, and about Mary Maudlins day* Pliny. astate
vellitur.

Terribiles Species. The ancients did formerly set up feathers on a line in
their hunting to fray the beasts.

We know that if one set up a piece of white paper, it will make the Dear
blanch, and balk that way.

Turbat odor silvas. A deer is of most dainty sent, and upon the least fault
will fly and leave his feed. When a deer smells or venteth any thing, then we
say he has this, or that in the wind. Nam fuit et laqueis. At the present our
Deer-stealers have such inventions: In France they use the same for Wolves. De
la form de prendre les loups par pieges, et autres instruments, Cl. Chap. 10.
Also Maniere de tender le piege. In the same place Dentatae pedicae were gins
that had pegs in them, like that of a rake or harrow, which left the print of
their steps when they fled.

Dente induit. Dens is the piqued end of a staff: Dentale, and Dens ancorae.
So Bidens a prong, Tridens a Fork with three grains.

Hastilia furcas. Our old English writers who lived in the time of Jousts and
Tournaments, when the Lance was in request, divide it into the Trunchion
Hastile, and the Socket, Orbis clausus ferro. Ipsa arcu We use more ordinarily
in hunting the cross-Bow. Of shooting in the long-Bow, M. in his country
contentments Chap. 8.

Lutoser. Vlitius has made a fair conjecture to solve this difficult place;
for either it is likely that Cupressus should be read, or that the Cypress is
intended; and he makes it appear out of Virgil, that it was used by the
Wheel-wrights of Italy.

Luxuriam fetusque nocentes detrahe. Of the right dressing of Trees, William
Lawson, an Orchard. set out at the latter end of some of M. works collected
into one volume of 6 Books.

CHAP. IX. Of Dogs, their sorts, breeding, entering, and of the Huntsman.
HAving already recited the several places mentioned in the Poem, that which
was to be said of Dogs in relation to their Country has already had its place.

Ille tibi and pecudum multo cum sanguine crescet] It is not possible to
reclaim that natural ill quality in this semiferous breed of the Tiger, they
are like those Dogs which the French call Forcenants: ils sont fort subjects a
bestail prive. Excitat apros. As we say in proper terms to Harbor and
Unharbour a Stag which lies in his layre, or to kennell and unkennell a Fox; so
says Turbervill, it is required to say to Couch, and Rear a Bore.

Versuta vestigia leporis parvi.] The footing of an Hare is diversely expressed:
for when she is in plain field, she soreth, when she casts about to deceive
the Hounds, then she doubleth, and when she beats a hard high way, where you
may yet find and perceive her footing, there she pricketh: also in time of
Snow, we say the Trace of an Hare: thus the accurate Turbervill, these deceits
of the Hare are called in French Les malices d'un lieure. At large, des
finesses et malices (ruses) des lieures. F. Chapter 56.

Petron^i canes] from Petrones, a special name of Dogs which seems to have
been much used in Spain, may be deduced their common appellation of a Dog,
which they call un perro. Vertraha. The Italians call un leuriere, veltro or
Can di giugnere. Of Grayhounds Xenophon the younger has written excellently,
and amongst us of coursing with Gray-hounds, and the excellency of that sport.
M. C. C. Cap. 6.

Metagontes] (...). Dogs that draw after a beast. Limiers, Chiens qui ne
parle^t point. F. in his Interpretation des mots de Venerie.

Lex dicta Officiis. Observations in the entering of whelps. M. C. C. Chap. 3.

In partem praedae veniat comes and sua norit Praemia. This custom does yet
abide amongst our Huntsmen to preserv their Hounds in courage after they have
slain a Heart or Bore, they give the Hounds the Bowels for a Reward, it is
called Curee in French, which must be the same with the Italian Curata or
Corata; and that signifies the inwards of a Beast. Coradella the Giblets of a
Goose or, Foul, or small beast: so that by this Curee which is called Droict
de Limier, we may see what is the natural and primary sense of Quarry. In
ancient English writers, it is also called the Halow.

This is done with much formality, it is prescribed how to blow the Horn, a la
curee; and how with the voice to halow the Hounds a la curee; how to speak to
the Dogs while they are eating it, and what to do to them. How to blow the
Bugle after the Curee. F. Chap. 42. Also how to make the Reward after killing
the Hare. Chap. 59. Ordering Dogs after coursing. M. C. C. chap. 6.

Thoes. These beasts are still brought in by the Poets slaying of a Hind, from
which enmity they are named Lupi cervarii. The French call that Un loup
cervier, which we call a Cat of Mountain, and that the old Authors of Latin
understood the same by that name appears from the description of it in Pliny.
It has the spots of a Leopard or Hyaena, it is longer in shape, but shorter
legged then a wolf, nimble in leaping, lives upon hunting, and such like.

Iunge pares. Hounds must suit one another. M. C. C. Chap. 3.

Expertos animi q. g. p. est in venerem jungunt. De l' Eslection d'une belle
Lyce pour porter chiens. F. Chap. 7. Here it will not be unpleasant to see how
Lyce came to signify a Bitch in French. Though it have a touch of Lycisca as
Vlitius observes: yet it is derived from the plain primitive Lyce; so Horace,

Audivere Lyce dij mea vota, dij Audivere Lyce -- He gives his old Mistress
whom he desires to abuse the name of Bitch: which was with them proper, but is
with the French Appellative. He calls her Lupa. The old Greeks make it Epicene
(...). But it seems in some Age and Place it was said (...).

Sint hirtae frontibus aures. He falls in to describe the Tal^ot-like
blood-hound, which sort of Dogs is likewise described by M. C. C. Cap. 1. The
shape and proportion of Hounds. His ears exceeding large, thin, and down
hanging much lower then his chaps.

Os magnum. The flews of his upper lips, almost two inches lower then his
nether chaps, which shows a merry deep mouth, and a loud ringer.

Cauda brevis. M. says long, and rushgrown, that is, big at the setting on,
and small downward.

Longumque latus. For a large bed to hold her young ones: So Virgil in his Cow
for Breed. Et longolateri nullus modus. Siccis dura lacertis Crura. His legs
lar^e and lean, which shows nimblenesse in leaping or climbing.

Solidos Calces. His foot round, high knuckled, and well clawed, with a dry,
hard, soal, which shows he will never surbait.

Percensere notis, jamque inde excernere parvos. Parquels indices et signs on
peut connoistre si les petits chiens seront bons, E. Chapter 9.

Cultus alios et debita faetae Blandimenta. Ordering of Braches after Whelping,
M. C. C. Chap. 3.

Foetae cum desunt operi. When to weane whelps, M. C. C. Chap. 3.

Lacte novam pubem facilique tuebere maza. Comme on doit nourrir les petits
chiens apres quo'n les a tirez de la tetine de leur mere Nourrice, F. Chapter 10.
11.

Sensus Tollit. To feed them for perfectness of hunting, and to keep their
sents fine and clean, the best food is to give them Mang, made either of ground
Oats, Barly-meal, Bran, or Mill-dust well scalded, and boiled together. Cavis
potant M. gemmis. He speaks not only of their crystallina as Lucan. gemm^que
capaces Excepere merum --

Martial -- quot digitos exuit iste calix.
Juvenal, -- Virro gemmas ad pocula transfert
-- Quas in vagin^ front solebat
Ponere Zelotyp^ juvenis praelatus Iarbae.
Imperium catulis, unusque Magister Additur.
Du valet des chiens and comme il doit penser, conduire, and dresser les
chiens. F. Chap 13.

Accessus noverit. How to find a deer, where to find hares, M. C. C. Chap. 4.

Toletanus Culter. A Wood-knife. Culter venatorius, Curvo solves viscera cultro.

CHAP. X. Of the diseases of Dogs, and their Cure. Of Horses.
THE subject of curing the diseases of Dogs, has not been omitted by our late
Authors, though no where handled so largly, with so much Philosophical
solidity, and such Poetical ornament as by Gratius.

Mavortia bello Vulnera et errantes morbos tua cura tueri est. At the latter
end of F. are Receipts to heal sundry diseases and infirmities in Dogs. There
is likewise in M. C. C. the whole second Chapter of the curing of all manner of
infirmities in hounds.

Licet alti vulneris ora Abstit^rint atroque cadant cum sanguine fibrae. This
is in use to this very day: If a Dog be hurt in the belly, and so that his guts
fall out, and yet the guts not broken nor pierced; let the varlet of the
Kennell take the Dog quickly, and put up his guts softly into his belly with
the ends of his finger; then let him cut a slice of Lard, and put it within the
belly right against the hole that is made, and he must have a Lyngell in
readiness to sow up the skin, and at every stich that he takes, let him knit
his third: for else, as soon as the third should ^ot or break in one place, all
the rest would slip, and so the wound would open again, before it be thoroughly
healed. Always anoint the wound which you stitch up with fresh butter, and put
lard in it, for that will make him lick it. The needle wherewith a Dog should
be sowed, should be apiece at the point: and the varlet of the Kennell
should never go on field to hunt either Bore, Bear, or Wolf, without such a
needle, lingels, and lard in readiness.

Plurima per catulos rabies. It is a frequent disease Les sept especes de rage.
Rage chaude and desesperee.

Courante, mue, ^ombante, flastree, endormie, ^heumatique.

Vermiculum dix^re. The opinion and practice of worming Dogs we see very
ancient, and popular: yet for the certain benefit of it, see it questioned by a
very experienced Master in this knowledge. F. says

Il y a plusieurs homm*s qui ont voulu dire que le ver qui vient sous la langue
du chien est la cause de le fair enrager. ^eque ie leur nie. Combien quo'n die
que le chien ne court pas si tossed en cette malady, quand il a le ver ost^ de
la langue. Ie m'en rapporte a ce qui en est.

Lapis vivus. He means Gypsum, or more plainly Calx viva, lime.

Corpus persequitur scabies. There are quatre especes de galies. The Mange,
Tetters, Ring worms, and Scabs.

Oleum vivum. By this he seems to mean Petroleum.

Restat equos finire not is. This I have only seen spoken upon by English
writers, (I mean in the body of hunting) and by our exact Poet. M. besides that
he writes of the ordering and dieting of the hunting horse, in his cheap and
good Husbandry, Book 1. Chapter 5. he has likewise spent one whole book in his
Cavalerice (as he intitles it) in treating of the hunting Nag. After such
exquisite treatises of the Courser, I shall not be bold to enquire farther;
being desirous not to seem to have missed altogether those things which I
esteem very difficult, yet worthy to be pursued, either a felicity of speaking,
or at least the time and place of silence.

FINIS

