TRUTHS VICTORY AGAINST HERESY; All sorts comprehended under these ten
mentioned: 1. Papists, 2. Familists, 3. Arrians, 4. Arminians, 5. Anabaptists,
6. Separatists, 7. Antinomists, 8. Monarchists. 9. Millenarists, 10.
Independents. As also a Description of the Truth, the Church of Christ, her
present suffering estate for a short time yet to come; and the glory that
follows at the general Resurrection.

By I. G. A faithful lover and obeyer of the Truth.

Now I beseech you, Brethren, mark them which cause divisions and offenses,
contrary to the doctrine which you have learned, and avoid them,

Romans 16. 17. Imprimatur, JOHN DOWNAME.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, Sir BENJAMIN RUDYARD, Knight, one of the Honorable
House of COMMONS.
SIR;
AS formerly I have acquainted you with two small Treatises, which were
dedicated to his MAJESTY and the Right Honorable the High Court of Parliament,
so now I have presumed on Christian affection, to dedicate this victory of
Truth to your religious view and meditation. The odds in the conflict was much
ten to one, and every one of them being roots of a thousand branches, even so
many in number, and so gross in nature, that if I should speak all I know of
them, it might seem incredulous to your exercised and experienced judgment,
and prejudicious unto many that want the like knowledge and discernment, so
that for this time I thought thus briefly to disarme the Leaders, that so the
following multitude of the Army may have premonition before the time come that
all the enemies of Christ shall be slain before him, and the secrets of all
manner of hearts discovered. And for my own particular, Sir, finding the
boldness and impudency of error, as well as the multiplicitie, whereby the
whole City is in every part and place infected, and from thence, as from a
fountain, the Countries also, I could rest no longer silent, for as much as God
of his own goodness and infinite mercy, has been pleased to communicate and
impart the knowledge of the mystery of his Word unto me in some measure,
notwithstanding my own unworthiness and weakness: this truth received in my
heart, has been as a fire which I could no ways hinder from burning into a
flame, through the light whereof, by the means of your grave and prudent
countenance, he that reads it may have information of the evil and error
without prefigured, and within this Treatise manifestly revealed; as also the
good and happiness of truth, the old path and straight way of the Lord, in
some measure opened and declared; to which all that are not of the household of
faith are strangers, and most of them perverters. And Sir, I pray of one thing
take notice in the figure, that he that is most obscure in his person, is most
dangerously subtle and mysterious in his doctrine; and at this very time, in
which you sit in Parliament, with the whole Counsel of the Kingdom, he does
more hurt in one hour then in ten heretofore; his badge is F. Wherefore Right
Worcester: be pleased to take notice of the Churches enemies, and let the despised
and persecuted wife of Christ, and her little children, have your love, help,
and assistance. These are all that are entreated for to be granted by you, most
virtuous and noble Senator, to him that is your faithful and humble servant,

JOHN GRANT.

Truths Victory against Heresy.
TRVTH. NOw all you Heresies, new and old, that have mustered up your powers
and forces against me that am the Truth of God, and have drawn out your
Companies into Regiments, and your Brigades into an Army of strong armed
fighting cruel men, whom all this world long have plotted, devised, and waged
battle against me and my generation; and by your subtle discipline in the
artillery of error, iniquity and deceit, have made your selves so skillful and
artificial, that you have always boldly and scornfully given me many
alarmes, summons, onsets, skirmishes, underminings, stormings, killings,
firings, poysonings, murdering of my Children and Witnesses, denying us
quarter, or any mercy, although we have cried out for pity and compassion,
above these four thousand years. I pray you take notice therefore, that I do
now, in these last days of the world, even now in this little time to come,
that makes an end of sins, and finisheth transgressions: and which also
accomplisheth my injuries and sufferings, my tears and sorrows, my
lamentation and weeping: Now, I say, even in this day, in which you are so much
increased, and grown so innumerable; I challenge you all, even all your
multitudes and gatherings, of what degree and condition, Sect or Religion, sex,
age, tongue or nation soever you are of; for that you have usurped my names and
titles, my house and children, my birth, my birthright and inheritance, my
privileges and my dignities, my honor and authority, my kingdom and Throne
it self: and that you all have robbed, oppressed, spoiled, reproached, belied,
persecuted, beaten, wounded and killed me in my truth and innocence, at all
times, and in all places with despite and scorn; contemptuously have cast me
out from amongst you, and defamed my sincerity with heresy, my purity with
iniquity, my fruitfulness you have called barrenness, and my faithful
fervency you call hypocrisy.


HERESY. What strange voice is this that we hear, ( Truth says she) what
is that* were you made to reprove our thoughts? we tell you, you are grievous
unto us to behold, let us therefore examine her with despitefulnesse and
torture, and let us condemn her with a shameful death.


Truth. Thus has ever been your dealing with me and mine from the beginning;
for your Cain killed my child Abel, and so your Ishmael mocked and persecuted
Isaac, my son of promise, and my Lord of life was slain by your children of
death, and as always you have been at enmity and sworn adversaries: so from
the beginning of this world, to this very day, you have had power and authority
in your own hands, to work your will and pleasure against us, even the
greatness of the pomp and glory of temporal dignity and majesty, in and by
whom you have wrought your malice and implacable anger and wrath upon us*

The great Image, consisting of the four Metalls, which the Prophet Daniel
described to be the four great powerful Monarchs which should rule and govern
in this world: the golden head; the silver breasts and arms; the brazen belly
and thighs; the iron legs* and the feet and toes, they consisted part of iron;
and part of clay, Dan. 2. 31* 32, 33, 42. And all you my old sworn enemies,
have, in and by them all, even in all and every part of this terrible and great
Images power and strength; you I say again, have wrought and effected under*
and in a seeming bright and excellent way your own wicked spleen and
indignation against me; your father the Devil exercising his false accusation
and lies, his enmity and cruelty in the Monarchy of the Babylonians, which was
the head of gold; and after him he stirred up the Assyrian Monarchy to the
self-same purpose, deciphered by the breasts and arms of silver; and when that
power grew old, weak, and so failed him, then he stirred up the Grecian
Monarchy, who exceeded for strength, though not for wealth, whereby my children
were cruelly oppressed to their great destruction; for as their nature, so is
their operation, declared by the Prophet to be a belly and thighs of brass.
And lastly, for the space of this long season* near unto the time of seventeen
hundred years, that great and huge Monarchy of the Romans, our universal and
mighty oppressors, have dealt very cruelly with us, even worse then all that
were before them; for their sword has had a double edge, called Force and
Deceit, cunning and cruelty; and for power, worse then all that were before
them: as Iron is the basest for value, and hardest for strength, for it
breaks in pieces, and subdueth all things, as one of my dear sons affirms,
Dan. 2. 40. which I and mine have found by doleful experience, all their
tedious, woeful and odious reign of the Iron legs, and durtie toes, how
doleful was it in the days of our blessed Savior; that, that holy Prophet
John the Baptist, that takes his name from his office, the harbenger, the
forerunner, and preparer of the Lords own way, that he should be killed, and
our innocent Lord grievously abuseded, wounded and crucified also; and how was
I and my children havocked, and cruelly destroyed and wasted presently after
the resurrection and ascension of our Lord in those numerous and unparalleld
ten persecutions, and all wrought and prosecuted against us by those legs of
Iron? all which power and authority of the legs are now gone and past, as a
storm that is over, and a tale that is told, and as a great fire that is
quenched, excepting only the feet and toes, consisting of Iron and Clay, matter
of two contrary natures, in them the solidness and strength of Iron, and the
weakness or bricklenesse of Clay; and yet such a powerful enemy, whose
cunning craftiness is managed by deceit and policy, in which time iniquity
has, and does abound under the pretense of verity; this fourth Monarchy, from
the first to the last, in all the parts of it, is deciphered by a strange
beast, diverse from all the beasts that were before it, dreadful, terrible,
and exceeding in the greatness of power and strength: it had Iron teeth, says
the Prophet, and they were great ones, to tear and kill by, and it devoured,
says the Text, and brake in pieces, and stamped the residue with the feet of
it, and it had ten horns, Dan. 7. 7.


Here Is. But let us prove if his words be true; for what is the Babylonian,
Assyrian, Grecian, or Roman Monarch to us? for we have been, and are, the
spiritual seed of Abraham by faith, we are Christians, who have believed, are
baptized, and communicate in all the Ordinances of God; we are warranted in the
Scriptures for our Churchdiscipline and government, and we walk in a Church
state, and Church way, in constituting our Congregations, in ordaining our
Ministers, our Pastors, our Deacons and Elders, Widows, Eunuchs, and diverse
holy orders; as that of Jesus, and John the Baptist, Mary Magdalene, and
abundance more orders, of men, women* and Angels, and all these by authority
of Scriptures, and yet will you rank us amongst the Heathens, and compare us to
the four Ethnic Monarchs long ago past? we doubt not, but upon further
discovery, to prove your self to be untruth.


Truth. What ever you are, whether Papists, Familists, Arrians, Arminians,
Anabaptists, Brownists, Antinomians, Millinarists, or Monarchists of all sorts;
and although all and every one of you, of each sort, gird and bind your selves
with the new found common With of Independency, yet my self and my little
children, are able to prove against you all, even against the oldest and
strongest of you, (and therefore observe and take notice of it, even of the
charge it self) that so many of you that are not born of sorrow and comfort,
and have not your parts in mourning, and rejoicing of water and the Holy Ghost,
as the Scripture speaks, I tell you plainly, notwithstanding all your outward
names and distinctions, your affirmed Christianity, your Church Way and state,
your participation in the Word and Sacraments, your ordinations and orders, and
what discipline you are of, or any kind or manner however, except, I say, you
be separated or dissevered from natural men by the vail of regeneration: as
the Temple of God, the Altar, and them that worship therein, were separated by
a vail from the outward and common court, erected for the multitude of the
house of Israel, to offer and sacrifice; yea, again, because the matter I speak
of, is of such great concernment, I speak it the third time, except you are by
true repentance and assurance of mercy* made capable spiritually to eat Christ's
flesh, and to drink his blood, thereby to have eternal life in you, except you
be thus gracious, and made spiritually living by regeneration, Gods Word, I
say, and the Spirit of truth denominates you, reckons and accounts you all
among the Heathens and Gentiles, Rev. 11. 1, 2. and notwithstanding all your
outside and overcast Christianity, the whole, wicked; cursed, defiled and
unregenerate world and you, make but one castaway part, one flock of goats for
ever to be excluded from the sheep of Christ, their sweet and pleasant pastor,
that flock and fold also.


Here Is. This fellow condemns us all; we are esteemed of him as counterfeits,
or false coin, he abstaineth from our ways as from filthiness, yet we
marvel how he can prove that we that are Christians, are a part of those
Monarchs, whose several times and powers are wholly expired* consummated and
gone*


Truth. As I have in general proved it already, in showing that all the wicked
party in the world make but one fort, one cursed side on the left hand: so also
I prove it further by our Savior Christ's words to the Pharisees, in his days,
Matthew. 23. 35* That upon you, says he, may come all the righteous blood shed
upon the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel, unto the blood of Zacharias,
son of Barachias, whom ye slew between the Temple and the Altar. Here our Lord
lays the murder of Abel and Zacharias to the Scribes and Pharisees charge*
although the personal actors were dead many years before, saying to them
present, whom ye slew; and the reason is, because all murderers from the
beginning of the world to the end thereof, make but one generation all of them,
even one generation of Vipers, persecutors and destroyers.

Secondly, as yet the whole Monarch of the Romans is not expired and past, but
still in being; the feet that were partly iron, and partly clay, are not wholly
consumed* nor the mixed matter is not yet abolished: for yet craft and policy
does prosper in wicked practices, to destroy the mighty, the people of the holy
One, by standing up and opposing the Prince of princes, who notwithstanding
shortly shall be destroyed without hands, Dan. 8. 24, 25, even that man of sin,
that son of perdition, even that opposer and exalter of himself above all that
is called God, and as God sits in the Temple of God, whom the Lord that he
opposes, shall consume with the Spirit of his mouth, and destroy with the
brightness of his coming, notwithstanding all his serpentine working, his
power, his signs and lying wonders with all deceivablenesse and unrighteousness
of them that perish, not yet ended, 2 Tehs 2. And although this part of the
Image have already continued from the 406* years of salvation, 1238* years, and
shall remain and live yet 22. years more to fill up and accomplish his
determined complete number of 1666, Rev. 13. 18. then, even then, a stone says
the truth, that was cut out without hands, smote the Image upon his feet that
were of Iron and Clay, and brake them to pieces together, says the Text; and
they became like chafe of the summer threshing floors, and the wind carried
them away, that no place was found for them: and the stone that smote the
Image, became a greet mountain, and filled the whole earth; of which great
mountain we shall speak further in its due place, according to the Prophets
understanding it, Dan. 2. 34, 35. 41, 42, 43, 44, 45.

And all the false Christ's, and false Prophets, false Apostles, and false
teachers, who shall privily bring in damnable heresies, deceitful workers,
Matthew. 24. 29. Mark. 13. 22. 2 Pet. 2. 1. 2 Cor. 11. 13. 1* Joh. 4. 1* are all
denominated by the name of Antichrists, as the Apostle says, 1 John 2. 18.
Little children, it is the last time; and as you have heard that Antichrist
shall come; even so now are there many Antichrists, whereby we know it is the
last time: and this Apostle was well acquainted with these Antichrists, these
teachers of errors, and calls the Antichrist himself the false Prophet, Rev.
16. 13. and with him all his wicked Clergy, and lying Priests, Rev. 19. 20.
and as the false teachers of the Synagogue of Rome; and by their cunning
corrupt doctrine, have deceived multitudes, and if it were possible, would
deceive even the very elect: so all false teachers, before Popery was, and such
as are now, and shall be after it, are of the same company, the same Church,
the same Synagogue with them, of what sect, order, or name soever they be, as
before is touched: for as Rome is spiritually called Babylon, which by
interpretation is confusion; so are all the Congregations and Churches amongst
us, that are gathered, built, and covenanted by men, and according to their own
invention, and the vision of their own hearts; and so are not purchased by the
same blood, gathered by the Spirits power, and built by Gods own hand, they are
all, even all of them spiritually, as Rome is, even Sodom and Egypt, Rev. 11.
8. where also our Lord was crucified, Rev. 18. 24.


Here Is. You are very plain, and exceeding round with us, take heed you be not
too wise, nor over bold.


Truth. Plainness and roundnesse is Truths badge, or note of distinction from
others; so Jacob my son, my chosen one, is said to be a a plain man, Genesis 25.
27. and all my works are perfect round, that is, without any error, as David
says, he has made the round world, Psalm. 89. 11. which shows the globe of
the earth to be round; and so says the Prophet, Isa. Chap. 40. 22. it is he
that sits upon the circle of the earth, that is, the round of the earth.
Prove. 8. 27.


Here Is. But why do you rank us of the Church of Rome amongst the Heresies, and
new doctrines of late devised and nominated? for we can reckon our antiquity
from the Apostles, and that we are descended from them, we have, and continue
still the very form of the Church of Christ and his Apostles; for we have the
Pope, Peter's successor, Christ's Vicegerent here on earth, and answerable to
the twelve Apostles, we have twelve Cardinals, we continue the imposition of
hands, the washing the Saints feet, the holy Unction, auricular confession, and
spiritual absolution; we have the Word and Sacraments, discipline and
execration, and therefore we are the Church of Christ, and not an Antichristian
Church.


Truth. You speak like a Papist, and for the maintenance of the Romish Church;
for the Church of God, or Kingdom of heaven stands not in outward observation,
Luke 17. 20. there is as much difference between the Church of Christ and the
church of Rome, as there is between outward show and inward truth, and as St.
Paul in Romans 14. 17. shows us, what the Church is not, so he shows us what
it is; namely, Righteousness and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost, and as it
follows, For he that in these things serves Christ, is acceptable to God,
and approved of men; that is, spiritual men. A man may be in the outward place
and office of the Church, an Apostle, as Judas, an Evangelist, as Demas, a
Disciple, as Simon Magus, and yet not of the true Church; such men may be
amongst them, and yet not of them; as St. John speaks: and the outward form
and manner of true Christian Churches are not always the same; for the
Primitive Church was as true a Church before they had Deacons, and ordained
Elders in every city or Church, as it was afterward; and for your great ones,
chief of Cardinals, except they be least in humility, the most vile in their
own eyes; for this is a Paradox, a mystery, a riddle to the world, that the
lowest is the highest, the least the greatest, the humblest the most
honorable; and this is quite contrary to the fashion of your Cardinals, which
our Lord lays down for an eternal truth, Luke 22. 25, 26* Chap. 9. 49. he
that is least among you all, the same shall be great* chief, or a Cardinal, as
the word signifies* Your Pope, you say, is Peter's successor, in what respect,
I pray, in lordship and supreme authority? when you prove that Peter ever had
such jurisdiction, then you say something* but till then you say nothing. The
truth is, Peter succeeded our Lord Christ in the love of the truth, and
faithful obedience of his gracious Word, and in denying himself, and taking up
his cross, and suffering for the Gospel, the joyful voice; and so all
faithful and true Christians do succeed Peter, and the rest of the faithful
Apostles: and this law is unrepealable, it cannot be altered, but shall stand
firm to all the Saints for ever; for unto you it is given, says the Apostle,
in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him* but also to suffer for his
sake* Phil. 1. 29. and he makes it a full resolution to Timothy; yea, says he,
and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution, 2 Timothy
3. 12. so then those that truly succeed Peter, are those, and such as succeed
him in spiritual things; as in his repentance and faith, his love to Christ
and his truth, and his faithful suffering for it, even till death, 2 Pet. 1.
14.

And this was it, when our Lord says thus unto him, Mat. 16* 17, 18. and thou
art Peter, that is, thou are a living stone of my spiritual Temple, blessed of
my Father from above to this purpose, and upon this rock will I build my
Church, etc. that is, the truth revealed, and given from heaven by God,
assuredly received and believed by the elect, acknowledged and obeyed by the
believer to salvation; this is the spiritual house or Church* consisting all
of living spiritual stones, Christ Jesus being the foundation or chief corner
stone; and the great Master, workman and builder of it himself, as the
Scriptures testify, 1 Pet. 2. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Heb. 8. 2. of this Assembly
and Congregation, does our Lord say, Ye are the salt of the earth, ye are the
light of the world, Mat. 5. 13. 14. And I say unto you, that if two of you
shall agree on earth, as touching any thing they shall ask, it shall be done,
etc. Matthew. 18. 19. and to these only is the promise made, to receive the
Spirit of God to lead and guide them into all truth, Joh. 16. 13. And again, I
will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may
abide with you for ever, Joh. 14. 16. which Spirit of truth, is the great
Substitute and Advocate that Christ has left with his Church all the while of
his personal absence, through whose grace and wisdom, they are they only that
make use of the keys of the kingdom of heaven, according to Matthew. 18. 18.
Joh. 20. 13.

Therefore Pope, I say unto thee, thy vicardome is blasphemy, thy keys
arrogance, thy chair heresy, thy succession vanity, thy Cardinals and chief
Priests Pharisees, thy imposition impurity, thy washings uncleanness, thy holy
unction extreme pollution, thy crossings Idolizings, thy confessions and
absolutions abominations; you say you are the Church of Christ, and that your
succession is from the Apostles, where has Christ and his Apostles prescribed
to you that trash and trumpery which you call pure and holy divinity, your
breaden god, your unbloody sacrifices, your golden pardons of all rates and
prizes, your pilgrimages, your purgatories, your baptizings, to convey grace,
and wash away all manner of original sin, your idols, your altars, your masses,
your dirges, your execrations by bell book and candle, your Avie mary's, and
your babbling prayers by numbers in an unknown tongue, your silken copes, your
shaven crowns, your vowed chastity and poverty, and a thousand more such
fables and heathenish imitations of the Heathens and wicked men's inventions,
which now Gods Word by the testimony of his faithful regenerated children of
truth have for ever discovered you and your Religion, to be but a filthy heap
or wall of mud and dirt, whited over: a painted Sepulcher, though outward to
the show and appearance of men, beautified, trimmed and adorned with silver,
gold* and all manner of rich and precious things, under the mask of the Spirits
ornaments, yet within, nothing but stinking noisome carrion, rottenness,
filthiness and uncleanness, and all your abominable worship of the Heathens,
that you were to maintain for a day, a month, a year, the whole amounting to
two and forty months, that is, so many years of days, even an 1260. years
which is the antiquity you so much brag of, and yet do not consider the older
you are, the nearer your dissolution, notwithstanding your Religion be made and
woven of all the glorious matter of the gods of the Heathenish Monarchs that
were before you, which were worshipped with such vain pomp, varieties of
voices, and musical Instruments, as Rimmon and Baal, Ashtaroth and Milcom, and
the rest of abominations, that had Priests and Altars, hesaints and she-saints
of their own makings, like unto you; as also your devilish doctrines, just
after the manner and matter of the heathens idols, Oracles; which vain worldly
glory has so lifted thee up with pride, that thou have advanced thy self above
the stars of God; yet let us wait now but a few days, and we shall see thy
glory shame, thy greatness contemptuousnes, thy gorgeous apparel nakedness,
thy life death, thy habitation destruction; and as you have done cruelly to
others, so shall others deal cruelly with you, your name and generation shall
be utterly forgotten, and your judgment shall seize on you, so that your place
shall be no more found, Rev. 17. 46.

And you may as easily keep the Sun from shining, the wind from blowing, the
Sea from motion, and the earth from springing, as to divert this judgment of
God determined against thee; therefore, all you that will escape her
judgments, come out of her, and separate your selves from her, lest you
partake of her sins, and be made partakers of her plagues, 2 Cor. 6. 16. And
what I say unto you, the head of Sects, I say unto all the rest, Come out of
Babylon, and submit to Sion, of which universal mother, Gal. 4. 26. we shall
often have occasion to describe and discover.


Here Is. This man is not for our turn, he is clear contrary to our doings, he
upbraideth us with our offending the Law, and objecteth to our infamy the
transgressings of our education. What will you call the holy Church of Rome to
question, the Pope the holy Father? who, I am sure, is not Antichrist; for the
Antichrist is sin, and not a man: but the Pope of Rome is the Father of the
Church, holy* and good, and teaches the world the Gospel of Jesus Christ now
by Images, as the Prophet Moses taught the Jews in Gods holy Law by Ceremonies
heretofore.


Truth. This man that speaks now, is a Familist, who, as he says Sin is
Antichrist, so he believes, and teaches that righteousness is Christ, and
so turns both Christ and Antichrist from persons to qualities, and the whole
Scripture into Allegories, who by cunning and crafty expressions exceeds all
others in fulfilling that saying of our Lord, Matthew. 24. 24. And there shall
arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, and this is such a false Christ, and
false prophet, as there is not the like in the world; making Christ a
fantasy, a mere fiction, a righteousness of their own invention, and so
they conceive of Antichrist to be Sin, which things of themselves are not
persons, and yet they confess and preach, that Christ is the seed of the
woman, and sin the seed of the Serpent; and to deceive men's understandings,
sometimes they will call Christ the new Man, and sin the old man, or humane
nature of Christ; and so in their preachings, writings, and conferences use the
Scripture terms and phrases; yea, their creed, or confession of their faith
runs word for word with ours, only differing thus: for they make all their
Articles to express the present time, in those things we believe to be past,
and to come; they do acknowledge Jesus of Nazareth, but he to be no more Christ
the Savior of the world, then they are that have taken in the light, as they
use to speak; and upon this ground confess, that every one of their
illuminated ones are conceived of the Holy Ghost, and born of the Virgin Mary,
suffered under Pontius Pilate, are crucified, dead and buried, risen from the
dead the third day, and ascend into heaven, and there sit on the right hand of
God the Father, descend from thence, and now judge the world; and all these
things in a mystery, a Metaphor and Allegory. You read, say they, of these
things in the letter, 1600. years ago, but now they are in the newness of the
Spirit, and according to these principles expound all the Scriptures, both of
the old and new Testament. Now say they, is the wedding of Cana of Galilee
fulfilled in the spirit, where righteousness is the Jesus, the union between
God the Father and the Son, the Bride and the Bridegroom; the mother of Jesus,
they say, is the word of truth that brings to pass this holy marriage, and the
turning of water into wine, is the oldnesse turned to newness, flesh into
spirit; so that thereby the new man becomes co-deifi'd with God, and God again
co-hominifi'd with man; and that now Christ whips out the buyers and sellers
out of the Temple, meaning by Christ, righteousness, and by the buyers and
sellers, sins and corruptions; and by the Temple men's bodies, expounding that
Text, Hebr. 1. 13. Sit on my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy
footstool, to be meant of their holy anointed ones; and when Christ, which is
righteousness, is risen in them by regeneration, then that saying is brought to
pass that is written, Hos. 13. 14. 1 Cor. 15. 54. Death is swallowed up in
victory: they say they are Moses, and the children of Israel, and all natural
men are Egyptians, which by conversion become Israelites; and that now Moses is
contending with Pharaoh the Devil, to bring the chosen of God through the red
Sea, and barren, hard and desolate wilderness into Canaan the land of rest,
the peace of conscience, and favor of God; and that now God calls Abraham out
of Vr of the Chaldees, making it the land of devils, as the Hebrew word
signifies, to set forth to us, every unregenerate man's dark and sinful estate
naturally, and Gods calling of Abraham out of it, to go to a land he would give
him, to signify unto us the conversion of a sinner to God, and David's killing
Vriah, to signify the quenching the Spirit the Apostle dehorts from, and
Reubens going up to his fathers bed, the weaknesses of such as are babes in
Christ, as St. John speaks of, calling them little children, and young men, 1 John 2. 12, 13. And that in this nonage, this youth of theirs, it is with their
anointed ones, as it was with Christ, which signifies anointed, Mat. 3. and 4.
who as soon as God testified to him from heaven, saying, This is my beloved
Son, in whom I am well pleased; and when he had fasted and separated himself
from his natural ways and sinful affections, forty days and forty nights,
as Moses was forty days and forty nights in the holy mount, where he
received the covenant of perfection in a figure. And the Text says, afterward
he was an hungered, that is, this new man hungered and thirsted after
righteousness; and as the Text says, The tempter came to him, the meaning is,
say they, the sinful flesh, the enemy to the Spirit said to him, If thou be
the Son of God, command that these stones be made bread, but the new man
answers, it is written, the man Christ shall live by the truth, the Word of
God; then the tempter uses other means, to have him to be a self-justifier, and
account of himself as the holy City of God, and makes him to be advanced in
his own thoughts, as the highest of all, as a pinnacle is above the rest of the
building; and then to presume in his infancy, as if he had the experience of
old age, and perfection it self, and so the holy child answers, thou oughtst
not to tempt, but to wait patiently on thy Lord thy God. His third and last
temptation, is the proffer of the whole world unto this young man in Christ,
but being now grown in strength, in righteousness, makes a speedy answer, Get
thee behind me Satan, God is only to be worshipped and served, so the tempter
left him, and the Angels ministered unto him in all passages of service, till
they brought the holy One from one degree to another to sit down at the right
hand of the Father, and to come to judge the world. And of this spiritual
estate do they understand all the Scriptures that speak of the resurrection of
the body, understanding it this spiritual body, and this spiritual
resurrection, and that Christ is dead or alive in every man in the world, dead
in the natural or sinful estate, and made alive, and raised in the
illuminated estate; and the terms in Scripture of this present world, to be the
sinful estate, and the world to come the regenerated estate, which they call
perfection, eternal life and the glory of the Father, the world without end,
affirming there shall be no end of the heavens, and of the earth, the whole
creation, but that it shall continue for ever successively, one generation
after another; and as man comes from God, so he goes to God, in matter and time
infinitely. These and a thousand gross and blasphemous doctrines are the
tenants of the Familists, which are the very depths of Satan, from which I wish
thee to repent, if it may be by any means obtained, and learn to leave off your
scorn and contempt of Scripture-learning, and labor to be taught by the Spirit
of truth in the true meaning of Gods Word.


Here Is. These doctrines which you call Familists are the tenants of N. H. that
is, Henry Nichols, who lived in Germany, and writ diverse small books, as The
Gospel of the kingdom, The Prophecy of the spirit of love, The Glass of
righteousness, and diverse others; but although he be a seducer and grossly
deceived, to the overthrow of the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, in affirming
holiness and righteousness to be Christ the Lord; now I am so far from his
opinion, that I think Jesus the Prophet of Nazareth, to be only man, that is,
mere man, and not God and man, and to partake of the Deity no more then any
other natural man does.


Truth. You express your self to be an Arrian; for Arrius that proud Bishop,
whose time was above 200. years after the Apostles, and did then fall from the
truth of the Scriptures, as they clearly set forth our blessed Savior in his
divine nature as well as in his humane, and invented and broacht, divulged and
published this heresy, that Jesus Christ was only man, and not God, which
heresy backed with his authority, proved a great and cruel persecution against
the faithful and true Christians, 150. years together, as Ecclesiastical
Histories, according with the plain and holy Word of God, do declare, as it
appears in the first of John, compared with Genesis 1. and Prove. 8. 22, 23,
24. and John, that beloved of the Lord, Revelations the 9th. chapter, makes a
full and plain description of the person of Arrius his power, authority, and
the complete time of his persecution and false doctrine, where he deciphers his
person, by the appellation and name of a star, verse. 1. thereby* signifying he
was a high and great light in the Church, even in the rank and course of the
Apostles, for so are they compared and called, Rev. 12. and that this star was
great in the outward office of the Church, is farther intimated in these words,
in saying, he fell from heaven, that was, from the purity of the doctrine of
the Saints, preached and planted by Christ's faithful Apostles and Evangelists;
and in that it is said, he fell unto the earth, it shows, that as he fell
from the light of the truth, so he fell into gross corrupt heretical
darkness, apostatizing; and as opposite to the sincerity of the truth he
formerly professed, as the cursed polluted earth is to the pure undefiled
heavens; and as it is said, To him was given the key of the bottomless pit, it
shows the permissive power that should be granted and given to him; that as
he loved lies more then truth, so he that is the God of truth should give him
up to strong delusions to believe lies; and having in himself an adulterous
evil heart, a fit receptacle for an error so abominable, does with as great a
longing desire, preach and publish it to corrupt others like himself, by all
ways* and means whatsoever: as first his own thirsty deceit was not
satisfied, proved in these words, verse. 2. And he opened the bottomless pit,
and there arose a smoke out of the pit, as the smoke of a great furnace,
declaring hereby, the nature of their corrupt doctrines, even such as smoke,
soot and filth, compared to the pure air, and woeful darkness to the glorious
Sun-light*

The truth of God, whose shining purity was obscured and darkened, as it
follows in the next words, by reason of the smoke of the pit; and the Text
says, verse. 3. And there came out of the smoke Locusts upon the earth, which
shows the great success and large increase of false doctrines, which are no
sooner conceived and borne, but presently it brings forth abundantly a viperous
and wicked brood, good for nothing but destruction it self, and their great
power is to hurt as a Scorpion, which is the most cruel and venomous of all
creeping things, verse. 5. And as they are cruel, so they are cunning, crafty,
and unavoidable, by which being once bit or stung, it is incurable; of such
dangerous nature was this heresy of Arrius, see the cruelty, verse. 6. their
power, cunning, and deceit, verse. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.

The Apostle also by divine inspiration, sets down the full and complete time
of this Arrian persecution, saying, It shall be five months, that is, months
of years, accounting as before, in the audit of Antichrist, thirty days to a
month, which multiplied by five, amounts in the total, to one hundred and
fifty years, prophetically reckoning a day for a year, as Ezekiel. 4. 6. which
heresy was grown to such a height of esteem and applause, that the then
Christian Emperor called a general Council of all the Bishops in
Christendom, to confirm and establish this abominable false doctrine by a
canon, or Ecclesiastical decree, to be an unquestionable verity: from which
conclusion, not any one of the learned Doctors did dissent, but only godly
Athanasius, who by his alone wisdom and great knowledge in the Scriptures, did
protest and declare against this dark and smoakie error; and he managed and
maintained the truth so clearly by the authority of holy Writ, that as Christ
was perfect man, so he was truly God, God and man, our alone Savior, through
which his grave and solid arguments raised from the beginning of the
Evangelists, of St. John, and other holy Scriptures, he gained the most of the
general Council to be of his side and judgment, whereupon they prevailed with
him to make and write that famous and excellent Creed, called after his own
name, even the Creed of Athanasius, which then, and ever since, has been
embraced, approved, honored, and confessed of all Christian Churches, although
it is now neglected, as gold in the dust, and pearls by the ignorant Cock in
the dunghill, and fables in comparison, even husks, preferred before the verity
thereof, through the blindness of this present generation.


Here Is. Although the Popes universal supremacy in and over all persons and
causes Ecclesiastical and civil, be an error, and also heresy, to deny the
humane nature of Christ, as does the Familists, and as bad in Arrius, to deny
the divine nature of our Lord and Savior, for I am of Athanasius his mind,
That he was God of the substance of the Father, begotten before the world were
made, and man of the substance of the mother, born in the world, perfect God
and perfect man; for as the reasonable soul and flesh is one man, so God and
man is one Christ.

And also I believe and maintain, that every man naturally, has free will to
do good, as well as free will to do evil; and that a Christian man's standing
in the grace and favor with God, depends upon his obedience in keeping the
commandments, and that there is no more, or other certainty of salvation, then
that man by his own free good will continues obedient to Gods Word; so that a
man may be the child of God to day, and the child of the Devil to morrow.


Truth. You that did last speak, show your self to be an Arminian; for although
you confess many truths, yet indeed you differ no more from a Papist then
Arminius, that wicked heretic did, and in your false doctrines of free will,
and falling from grace, you agree with the ancient Anabaptists also; for you
all three are but one in these two errors.

And, first, for your tenent of Freewill, that all men naturally have as great
freedom and power of will to do good, as to do evil, this is a gross error,
and directly opposite to the clear and plain Scriptures, for the Apostle says,
It is God that works in you, both to will and to do of his good pleasure,
Phil. 2. 13. And the truth speaks thus, 2 Cor. 3. 5. Not that we are sufficient
of our selves to think any thing as of our selves, but our sufficiency is of
God; and this is the faith and confession of the whole Church of God: Isa. 26.
12. Lord, thou will ordain peace for us, for thou also have wrought all our
works in us and for us.

The error of Free will, is a carnal opinion, and naturally men are inclined
to it, and the holy Apostle St. James, reproves it in his days, who writing to
the scattered Tribes, says, you ought to say, if the Lord will, and not to say
as you have affirmed your faith to be, We will go, etc. James 2. 13. 15. So
that it is plain, no man of himself has freedom of will to do good; but there
is no question but every man has freedom of will to do evil, as says the
Prophet, Jerem. 4. 22.

Secondly, your doctrine of the uncertainty of the Elects called and sanctified
estate in Christ by regeneration, shows plainly you do not know what it is to
be a Christian indeed and truly, for if you did, you would know this truth
undoubtedly, that they that trust in the Lord, are as mount Sion, which cannot
be removed, but abides for ever; as testifies the Prophet, Psalm. 135. 1. and
the Apostle gives the reason of it, because the chief corner stone thereof is
Christ, that holy, chosen and precious One; and whosoever he be that believes
on him, shall not be confounded, 1 Pet. 2. 6. And this doctrine is that which
our Lord himself has taught us, Upon this rock, says he, I will build my
Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it, Mat. 16. 18. Mark
what greater contrary power can there be, then the gates of hell, and yet that,
even the strength of all the powers of the Devil shall not be able to do that
which you affirm they shall, and the reason thereof our Lord himself gives,
Joh. 10. 27, 28, 29. My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow
me, and I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither
shall any pluck them out of my hand; my father which gave them me, is greater
then all, and no man is able to pluck them out of my fathers hand: I and my
Father are one.

And that great experienced man of the love of God, even above the rest of his
fellows, speaking of the blessed estate of the regenerated Elect, 1 Pet. 1. 2,
3, 4, 5. says, They were elected according to the foreknowledge of God,
begotten again to a lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the
dead, to a glorious undefiled inheritance, of which it is impossible we should
fail of, who are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation; and
those sweet words of our Lord are of efficacy to gain the most contrary heart
to the belief of this truth, Joh. 17. 11. Holy Father, keep through thy holy
name those that thou have given me, that they may be one as we are one.

Now Arminius see the sure and certain estate of a regenerated Christian so
sure as God is sure, and unchangeable, as Christ, the same yesterday, to day
and for ever, eternal as the Holy Ghost; even so are they that are made one
with God, who truly have fellowship with the Father, and with the Son, Jesus
Christ, 1 John 1. 3. For he that sanctifies and they that are sanctified, are
all of one; as brethren are one, Heb. 2. 11. and as the tree and the branches
are one, Joh. 15. 5. even so is Christ and the regenerated man, Oh happy are
the people that are in such a case!


Here Is. At the first I thought what we should find of you, but now I have ready
a multitude of Scriptures to show to you, that which I maintain to be truth,
and by them I shall discover you, I hope, to be untruth: The first place is,
Ezekiel. 18. 24. When the righteous man turns away from his righteousness, and
commits iniquity, and dies in them, he shall die for the iniquity he has
done; again, our Lord himself says, Every branch in me that bears not fruit,
He (that is, God) takes away, that is, cutteth off from the Vine, Joh. 15. 2.
And many of Christ's Disciples were offended at the truth of his doctrine, and
turned away, or went back, that is, left him for ever, Joh. 6. 66. others
received the Word gladly, and endured for a while believers, but when
tribulation and persecution did arise, because of the Word, they were offended,
and fell away, Mat. 13. 21. Lake 8. 13. yea, the Apostle is more particular,
Hebr. 6. 4, 5, 6. for he speaks of such as were made partakers of the Holy
Ghost, and had tasted of the good Word of God, and the powers of the world to
come; and yet notwithstanding all this, to fall away, as not to be renewed
again by repentance; yea, the same Apostle shows farther, Heb. 10. 29. that a
man may be sanctified by the blood of the Testament, and afterward tread under
foot the Son of God, and count the same blood as an unholy thing, and despite
the Spirit of Grace. And St. Peter, 2 Pet. 18. 19, 20. speaks of some that were
clean escaped from the corruptions of the world, through the knowledge of the
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and yet after this to be entangled and overcome
again, whose latter end is worse then their beginning; these, and many more are
the ground of my doctrine.


Truth. And secondly, I answer, these Scriptures rightly understood, make
nothing at all for the maintenance of your error, but in truth it teaches us,
that we ought heedfully to observe the distinction in one and the same term,
which must be generally and really observed throughout the Scriptures, which
hereafter I shall more fully discover, when any of the Anabaptists shall speak;
and in the mean while, I pray consider of the terms in those Scriptures you
have alleged, as the term faith to believe the Word, the affection of joy and
gladness in the knowledge of it, a relish and taste of the sweetness and
goodness in it for the present, with some apprehension of the glorious things
of the world to come, and through the operations of its working in those that
received it, as that it is said, they were washed and sanctified, and yet
afterward never the better for all this, nay, worse at last then at first; for
it shall aggravate their condemnation: this shows plainly, that the new and
living way of life is set open unto all, by the general and particular
administration of the Gospel, and that men by the common gifts of the Spirit,
may attain to many excellent graces, even beginnings to the peculiar and
special gifts, to which whosoever attaineth, shall never fall and perish,
which differing effect of the Gospel is clearly set forth unto us in the four
grounds mentioned by our Lord; the Seeds-man was one and the same, and the seed
it self was so also, and yet took not the same effect in all, although it was
sown and cast into them all.

The highway side were hard hearted, ignorant men, whose hearts had not earth
to cover the seed, and the wicked one came and stole it away; in the thorny and
stony ground it sprung up into a blade, in the one it failed, because it could
not take root for stones; in the other, because the thorns choakt it; the good
ground never failed, because the seed took deep root, the hard way was broken
up and ploughed, so that the seed was covered, that the fowls of the air could
not find it, to steel it, the stones could not hinder the taking root
downwards, for they were cast out by repentance: nor the thorns choke it in
springing upwards, for the pleasures of this world, and the cares of
unrighteous riches are both forsaken, so that the happy success and prosperity
of it was not hindered nor prevented, but the broken penitent heart understands,
retains and keeps the Word, and brings forth fruit with patience, Luke. 8.
15. when as the other three sorts of grounds brought nothing to perfection,
verse. 14. Now these several grounds, briefly show us how all your mentioned
Scriptures are to be understood, even as the Parable sets forth unto us the
differing estate of men under the means of the Gospel; and so also does the
branch in Christ that is fruitful, which God purges, that it may bring forth
more fruit, and the fruitless branch in the Vine Christ, which God cutteth off
to be burned; in this distinction does the Prophet Ezekiel speak, calling that
man righteous in the Scripture you first mentioned, who was so made righteous
by the common gifts of the Spirit, as the three bad grounds; and in this
distinction we are to understand, that a man may become sanctified by the blood
of Christ, and yet afterward tread it under foot, as Judas, when he was a
preacher, and yet afterward fell to be a Traitor, to kill the Lord, that
formerly in some respect he served, and differenced from other men by his holy
imploiment of his Apostolical office, as he was that took the Plough by the
hand, and afterward looked back, thereby making himself incapable of that
estate in which before he stood in, Luke 9. 62. and the Apostle makes this
clear to the Corinthians, speaking, that the Gospel to some is the savor of
life unto life, and to others, the savor of death unto death, 2 Cor. 2. 15,
16. not that it is so of it self, but occasionally: as the Sun in the
Firmament, that is one and the same in it self, yet through accidents in the
subject, it softens ice, and hardens clay; so likewise is the administration of
the Gospel salvation to them that receive and obey it, and damnation to those
that neglect and contemn it, as in profane Esaus case, and the blessedness of
Jacob, both sons of Isaac, the one selling his birthright for a mess of
pottage, the other seeking and striving for it with prayers and tears: so that
it appears plainly, that the Scriptures rightly understood are against your
erroneous opinion, and all of them affirm, that truth of God which before I
have proved to you, that whosoever believes, and is baptized shall be saved,
as hereafter I shall open more at large; for he is the wise Christian that
hears, and does build on a rock of a deep foundation; so that it stood still,
notwithstanding the great billows of the floods, the huge storms of the winds
and showers, when the foolish Christian, the fine built house was overthrown
thereby, having no foundation, and great was the fall of it, Mat. 7. 25, 27.


Here Is. Of late, through the knowledge of the Scriptures, men have come to see
and understand the superstition of Popery, the blasphemy of Familists, the
gross errors and absurdities of Arrius and Arminius, and that they are all
seduced and deceived.

But we have found a rule of truth in Gods Word, plainly directing us to the
making matter of the Church of Christ, and none but such as are quallified by
faith, are fit subjects for baptism, which faith is wrought by teaching, and
then baptism or dipping admits and gives entrance unto such believers, to have
communion in Church Fellowship with us in all the other holy ordinances of God,
which Church and ordinances are not understood, but neglected and contemned of
all the Heretics you have named and conferred with before, therefore we are
the true Church, for we profess but one Lord, one Faith, and one baptism,
Ephesians. 4. 5.


Truth. Sir, I perceive you are an Anabaptist, and therefore I shall speedily
make good my late promise, and indeed, some thirty years since, Mr. Morton, a
Teacher of a Church of the Anabaptists in Newgate, then his confession
comprehended all the errors of the Arminians which now of late, many that go
under your name, in and about London dissent from, as it seems you do.

And therefore in Answer to you I say, that the term baptism in Scriptures
(as well as faith and Lord) has diverse significations, sometimes to signify
sufferings, as Matthew. 22. at other times outward baptism, as John baptizing
our Savior, a holy subject, Mat. 3. 16. and Simon also believed, and was
baptized, Acts 8. 13. which was an evil unregenerate man, and yet admitted,
and continued in the common fellowship of the Church with Philip; so also by
baptism we are to understand inward baptism; sometimes repentance, and
sometimes remission of sins, for so faith the Baptist himself, Matthew. 3. 11. I
baptize you with water unto repentance, by which indeed he wrought repentance
in them, but he that comes after me, etc. he shall baptize you with the Holy
Ghost, and with fire, that is, he should pardon the penitent; which two
special administrations are the two parts of regeneration, according to that
in Luke 24. 47. That repentance and remission of sins should be preached in the
name of Christ; so likewise by baptism we are to understand both the parts of
regeneration together, where the Apostle says, as many of you as have been
baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, Gal. 3. 27. and in this sense it is
called the laver of regeneration, or the washing of regeneration, Tit. 2. 5.
These differing significations, being plain, I marvelled to find some of your
company to maintain the contrary, of purpose, I suppose, to avoid the
distinction, that so clearly discovers your error.

You affirm you have found a rule in the Scriptures, plainly directing how the
matter of the Church is made, and that is, say you, by teaching and baptizing,
and yet you, not distinguishing of either, say nothing truly in neither or
both; for a man may be taught and baptized, and thereby be made a Disciple in
the outward profession of the truth, as the highway, stony and thorny ground,
as Simon Magus, Demas, Hymineus, Philetus, Ananias and Saphira, the incestuous
person in the Church of Corinth, and such, whose belly was their God, in the
Church of Philippi, who notwithstanding, they were all taught and baptized, yet
not any one of them any part or portion of the Church of Christ, against which
the gates of Hell shall not prevail, therefore the ground and foundation of
your Church is sand, and that will fail you, and it is very false and contrary
to the matter of the true Church: for the Scripture says, Though Israel be as
numerous as the sand of the sea, yet but a remnant shall repent and be saved,
Romans 9. 27. and yet they are called the people of God, Isa. 10. 22, 23. and so
all taught, and all circumcised; and the same distinction the Scriptures make
of baptism, the very same is said of circumcision, for the self-same operation
that circumcision had in the Church of the Jews, outward carnally in the
flesh, and inward spiritually in the heart, of the same distinction and
operation is baptism in the Christian Church, the washing with water, or
dipping in water, is the doing away the filth of the flesh, which saves not;
for this a man may have and perish, as those Disciples that fell away from
Christ, and walked no more with him, Joh. 6. 66. but the washing or baptism
that saves, 1 Pet. 3. 21. is the answer of a good conscience unto God by the
resurrection of Jesus Christ, not the washing of the flesh, but the purifying
of the heart by faith; and this spiritual baptism or washing it is that works
that full assurance of faith; having our hearts strinkled from an evil
conscience by the blood of Christ, and our bodies washed with pure water, Heb.
10. 22. that water that Christ gives his Disciples, Joh. 4. 14. and washes
his Apostles with, John 13. and this is that which makes the truly faithful
Jew by virtue of the circumcision of the heart, and the truly faithful
Christian by virtue of the baptism of the heart all one, as the holy Apostle
says, and that God did bear witness with him also to the truth of it, that
there is no difference between us and them, that is, us Jews, and them
Gentiles, purifying their hearts by faith, Acts 15. 8, 9. and the Scriptures
show, that the Jews did well know, that when the Messiah should come, that
then baptism or washing should be the distinction of Christians from others;
as circumcision by Gods own ordinance was the distinction the Jews had from
all the people of the whole world: and therefore it is written, that when the
Jews sent Priests and Levites of the Pharisees from Jerusalem to John the
Baptist, to Bethabara beyond Jordan, where John was baptizing, the messengers
asked him whether he were the Christ, or Elias, or the Prophet, and upon his
answer, no, that he was not, they then asked him why he did baptize then,
hereby clearly showing, that they understood by the Scriptures, that when
Elias, Messiah, and the Prophet foretold of should come, that then baptism
should be in use in the Church, and accordingly it was so practiced by John the
Baptist, Christ and his Apostles, and ever since continued, and of the very
same use to Christians, both outwardly and inwardly, as circumcision was to the
Jews. And the Apostle to the Church of Colosse, uses both the terms, baptism
and circumcision, to set forth and teach unto us, one and the same thing in
Jesus Christ, Col. 2. 10, 11, 12. You are complete, says he, in Christ, which
is the head of all principalities and power, in whom also you are circumcised
with the circumcision made without hands, in putting off the body of the sins
of the flesh, by the circumcision of Christ, buried with him in baptism,
wherein also you are risen with him through the faith of the operation of God,
etc.

Mark now friend, Anabaptist, the truth of this doctrine of the clear
distinction the Holy Ghost makes of baptism and circumcision, and in both
double and twofold; as in circumcision, the one outward, the other inward; so
in baptism, both in the flesh, and both in the heart, both made by hands, and
both without hands; a man may partake of both in one distinction, and perish,
but whosoever does receive one or both, in the special sense, he shall be
saved: and as the terms in the meaning do agree, so they do both agree in their
administration; for as Abraham received the sign of circumcision, a seal or
sign of the righteousness of the faith which he had before be was circumcised
in the flesh, Romans 4. 11. so the regenerate and faithful servants of God,
Nathaniel, in whom was no guile, the Eunuch, Lydia, and Cornelius, of whom the
Holy Ghost bears witness that they were true worshipers of God, these all, as
Abraham, had the inward baptism of the blood of Christ through faith, in the
promise, before they received the outward baptism, the washing their bodies
with water, a lively representation of the washing their hearts by the blood of
the Lamb Christ.

And for the general use of Baptism, as in the Jews Church, all that
believed the Law of God were to be circumcised, and so admitted into the
Congregation and communion of all the holy ordinances of Gods worship and
service: so now, who ever believes that Christ is come in the flesh, and
acknowledges the glad tidings of the Gospel, the Ministry and Doctrine of
Christ and his Apostles to be the truth, they upon this general or historical
faith, ought to be baptized, and to be admitted to communion in the Word and
Sacraments, as Simon Magus, Demas, the faulty Christians in the Church of
Corinth, and a thousand more had, as the Scriptures show; so that now you see
Gods Word forces you to distinguish of baptism, and so also of the term
Faith, and the name Lord, and yet but one baptism, one faith, and one Lord to
salvation.

Now the Scriptures plainly set forth unto us a threefold faith, which may be
truly distinguished by these terms, historical, miraculous, or justifying
faith, and all these a full assurance, and are to be believed with all the
heart; of the two first sorts, wicked men, devils, may partake of them as well
as the Saints, yea, sometimes exceed therein: for Judas wrought miracles among
the twelve, but John the Baptist did no miracle, says the Text; so many are
called to believe the truth, to work in the Vineyard, but few are chosen unto
salvation and rewarded with eternal life, that is the special peculiar faith,
Joh. 7. 38. that whosoever believes shall not perish, but have eternal life.
And there is a great deal of difference between him that by faith eats
Christ's flesh, and drinks his blood to eternal life, Joh. 6. 54. and their
faith by which they are baptized, preach and communicate in the other
ordinances, and boldly pray and call upon the name of Christ, and yet
notwithstanding are not acknowledged by him, but shut out and excluded from
eternal life, and assigned and sentenced to everlasting destruction, and to be
rewarded as the workers of iniquity, Mat. 7. 22, 23.

Now, considering how clear the Scriptures are in distinguishing between faith
and faith, I did admire (when I was in company with you) to see you all so
earnest, as in baptism, so in faith, to maintain but one sort under either
term, wherefore I would here make the several definitions of faith, thereby to
make the distinctions the more clear, but that I shall do hereafter, when I
come to speak of the Antinomians mistakes in these things also; and I much
marvel at your ignorance in Scripture distinctions, for as much as you all
profess you read them much, in which, except you distinguish rightly, you can
understand no truth clearly nor fully; for the letter of the Scriptures are but
the body or corpse, but it is the intention and meaning of the Holy Ghost, by
the words of the Text, which is the spirit and life of them, therefore it does
behove us, and stands us in hand to take heed we do not mistake the meaning of
Gods Word, nor to give any other sense or exposition then that which is its
own, lest we be found such as fight against the Scriptures, and by false and
lying interpretations, violate Gods Law, and wage war to kill and slay the two
witnesses, the old and new Testaments, the lamps and light of truth, Rev. 11.
7, 8. let us take heed of this, brethren, for the judgment against this sin is
written and revealed already (to add or diminish from the Word of God) to be a
heavy, inevitable, dismal, cursed sentence, Deuteronomy. 4. 2. Prove. 30. 6. Rev. 22.
18.

And if you had considered the Scriptures concerning the name of God, and Lord,
you should have found even the Apostle himself to expound to the Church of
Corinth, what he meant by his speaking or writing to the Church of Ephesus, One
Lord, etc. for he says, there be many Lords and many gods, so called, both in
heaven and earth, but to us, says he, there is but one God the Father, of whom
are all things, and we in him, and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all
things, and we by him, 1 Cor. 8. 5, 6. there is but one such a Father, and
Lord, and holy Spirit, who is the giver, the purchaser and worker of the grace
by which we are called, in the same one hope of our holy calling, Ephesians. 4. 4.
but in other respects, the Heathens Idols, and the Gentiles gracious Lords are
called God and Lord, for so did the Gentiles speak of Herod, deifying him with
a shout, saying, The voice of God, and not of man; and Christian Emperors,
Kings, States, and Potentates, in regard of authority and jurisdiction, are
called Lords, and Gods, in which they do represent God; I have said you are
gods, says the Scripture, but you shall die like men.


Here Is. But we have a plain word for our teaching and baptizing, Matthew. 28.
19. but you baptize infants, for which you have no word for, and therefore it
will be said at last, Who has required these things at your hands? for indeed
you do but continue the mark of the beast in all your babies baptizings.


Truth. Whereas you say Christ's words in the last of Matthew, proves your
preaching and baptizing, you say more then you can make good, or that I can
believe from that Scripture; and although there be no express words in the
Scripture for the baptizing of Infants, yet there is as sufficient warrant for
it as for most things you practice your selves; for what plain word have you
for the time of public assembling, or general meetings? what word have you
for your people to ordain their Minister? what command does authorize you your
self to baptize? what word have you when to receive the Lords Supper, when to
administer it, and where* who to provide the bread and wine, and what bread,
and of what grain; and the wine of what grape? you have not a word for women to
receive the Sacrament, and abundance other particulars practiced by you?

Will you therefore say, you do that which you sin in doing; so as you say we
do, I think not. The truth is, we need not a word, for there are general rules
in the Scriptures, that include particular practices, and diverse things under
the Gospel, being of the same nature under the Law, the rules given under the
Law, serve under the Gospel; so the Apostle proves to the Church of Corinth
from the Law of Moses, Deuteronomy. 25. 4. That Ministers of the Gospel should have
maintenance, that as they which minister about holy things, live of the things
of the Temple, and they which wait at the Altar, are partakers of the Altar,
even so has the Lord ordained, that they that preach the Gospel, should live
of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9. 13, 14. compared with Deuteronomy. 18. 1. So we may truly
say, it is ordained, that as the children of believers before Christ, both
Jews and Proselytes, were to be circumcised, Genesis 17. 11, 12. Exodus 12. 48,
49. so believers and their children, since Christ, are to be Baptized, as St.
Peter speaks, the promise is to you and to your children, and to all that are
a far of, even as many as the Lord our God shall call.

I beseech you observe this place, St. Peter here spoke to the Jews, the men of
Judah and Jerusalem, verse. 14. Ye men of Israel, hear these words, says he,
verse. 22. so preaches to them, that Jesus was the Savior of the world, whom
ye have taken by wicked hands, and have killed, and being dead, was buried,
who was raised again, and now sits at the right hand of the Father, and is made
the Lord and Christ, the alone Savior of the world, and they that gladly
receive this doctrine of salvation by Christ were baptized, verse. 41. who
before had been circumcised. Now, as the promise did only belong to Abraham,
and his Spiritual Seed, and yet all his natural children, and the children of
believing strangers, were to communicate of circumcision, which was the outward
sign of the Covenant of the righteousness by faith, as before is proved: So
likewise under the Gospel, the same covenant of life and salvation is made only
to Gods chosen faithful regenerated servants, and their spiritual seed; yet
the natural children of these faithful Christians, may partake of the outward
baptism, which is the outward signification of the baptism of the heart, as
circumcision in the flesh was a sign of the circumcision of the heart, and
according to this rule, the place before mentioned, and diverse other Scriptures
speak, as Acts 16. 15. that Lydia and her household was baptized; so the Jailor
was baptized, and all his, that is, his household; and the Apostle Paul baptized
the household of Stephanus, 1 Cor. 1. 16. And our Lord Jesus laid his hands on
little children, and blessed them, and rebuked his Disciples for forbidding
them to come, Luke 18. 16. and the Apostle is clear in the resolution of this
question to the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 7. 14. says he, the unbelieving
husband is sanctified by the believing wife, and the unbelieving wife by the
believing husband, else were your children unclean, but now are they holy, that
is, in respect they have right unto the outward covenant, being born of one
that believes. But some of you Anabaptists would have these words, holy and
unclean, to mean bastards, or unlawfully born, which is such an exposition, as
was never heard nor read of before; and this exposition admits of much
absurdity, for it nullifies the law of marriage amongst the Heathens, who have
as certain rules for marriage, according to their manner and custom, as
Christians have, for the Scripture prescribes no form. Secondly, this
exposition makes Abraham himself, and most of the Patriarchs wives to be
bastards; for they were the children of Heathens by father and mother, as holy
Sarah, Rebecca, Rachel, and Joseph's wife the mother of Ephraim and Manasses a
bastard, and that holy and great Prophet, Moses, took a bastard to his wife;
for Zipporah was an Idolaters daughter, her father being a Priest of Midian,
Exodus 2. 16. but this conceit is so ridiculous, that it strangles it self in
the birth.

And to return to our argument, the Apostle does understand these terms not of
bastardy, but of fellowship and communion in the Ordinances of Gods worship,
Act. 10. 28. Wherefore I demand upon these premises, what ground you have to
deny believers children baptism under the Gospel, seeing it is proved to be
the same thing, that by Gods command believers children were to partake of
under the law. Take heed you do not deny them that which Gods Word allows. And
for the mark of the beast, when you can show me by Scripture what it is, then
I will prove to you, that it is not the baptizing of the Infants of believing
parents. And for you to make outward baptism and common or historical faith
to be the matter of your Church, you do no less then tell me plainly, you do
not know what the Church of Christ is; wherefore repent and turn from your
errors.


Here Is. All these that you have made answer to already, are either Idolatrous,
blasphemous, superstitious, ridiculous, or erroneous, but we are such as have
separated our selves from the wicked in the world, and we have joined our
selves in Church Covenant, and Church Fellowship, and have set up the
Ordinances of Christ, in the purity of them, we have cast off all the
abominations of Antichrist, in his superstitious ordinations, ceremonies and
false doctrines of all sorts; our congregations call and ordain our Pastors and
Elders, and so we walk according to the rule that Christ has left in his
Church, until his coming; and we admit none to have communion with us, but
such as are visible Saints, and can give an account of their conversion.


Truth. Your position is framed like theirs that are commonly known by the name
of Brownists, or Separatists; and it consists of two parts: first, that you are
in Church Covenant, and walk in Church Fellowship, in the enjoyment of Christ's
Ordinances, as you say; and secondly, that you separate your selves from all
other congregations: this is the sum of your speech, by which you do manifest
to me such a strange voice, as does not agree with the expression of Gods
Word; for your words are in terms of your own acts and doings, favoring
carnally of humanity, whereas holy Writ speaks of the Church of Christ in a
spiritual sense, that is, a spiritual building, a house, a Temple not
gathered, joined and builded by men, but by God himself, the whole matter of
his Church, every stone thereof being made living stones by regeneration; as
St. Peter speaks, 1 Pet. 2. 2, 4. Which are built up together, says he, a
spiritual house, a holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices; so that
as themselves are spiritual, so is their worship and sacrifice, offered up
unto God; and this was the matter of Gods Church always: for when the Prophets
came to build and plant Gods Church, they call to the people, to repent and
turn to God, Jer. 1. to Chap. 4. 1. which is the first part of our
regeneration; And thus they cry for it, Break up the fallow ground of your
hearts, circumcise your selves to the Lord, wash you, make you clean, etc. Isa.
1. 16. Jer. 4. 4. The place of Gods rest and habitation, is a poor and
contrite spirit; in vain are all the houses that are built for God, but this
that he builds himself, Isa. 66. 1, 2. And as this was the Prophets way to
build Gods Church, so even after the same manner did John the Baptist, He came
in the power and spirit of Elias, to turn men to God, the disobedient to the
wisdom of the just, Luke 1. 17. so prepared he the Lords way by the ministry
of water or repentance, the preparation or first principle humbling the lofty,
bending the crooked straight, and breaking the hard hearted; and our Lord
himself, he works and builds his Church after the same manner, and with the
same matter, Repent, says he, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand, Mat. 4.
17. And except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God, Joh. 3.
3. and except ye repent, ye shall all perish; and accordingly is his command
to all that he sends into this work, that they should preach in his Name,
repentance, and remission of sins, Luke 24. 47. the one ministration bruises
and breaks, the other binds up and heals; the one baptism prepares, the other
sanctifies; the one makes poor, the other enriches; the one makes naked, the
other clothes; the one discovers our folly, the other indues us with wisdom;
through the one we are made mourners, through the other we are comforted and
made to rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of glory; and by this laver of
regeneration and renewing of the Holy Ghost, Tit. 3. 5. we are washed clean,
and made of sinners Saints; of natural dead men, living men; and this is Gods
building, whose matter is gold, and silver, and precious stones.

Now as the true builders build Gods Church, so there are false builders
likewise, which build too, and they call their workmanship a Church also, but
the materials of their building is but hay, wood and stubble, the mortar they
daub withal is untempered mortar, They seduce my people, says the Lord, Ezekiel.
13, 10, 11, etc. the false Prophets matter with which they build, is compounded
of vanity, and lying visions, Chap. 22. 28. they have brick made of earth and
straw in stead of stone, and slime in stead of mortar, and so they build the
tower of Babell, the Synagogue of confusion, Genesis 11. 3. These builders take
upon them to heal the wounds and breaches like Gods builders, but it is to no
purpose; for they heal the bruise or breach of my people, says the Lord,
slightly, saying, Peace when there is no peace, Jer. 6. 14. and yet such a
high esteem and opinion have they of their spiritual building, as they call
it, that they contemn the truly spiritual matter, that Christ and the Apostles
build with; and therefore it is said, The builders refused Jesus Christ, which
is the very foundation that the true builders work with, and build upon, yea,
the false builders reject him, Psalm. 118. 22. they set him at naught, and
disallow of him, Mat. 21. 24* Acts 4. 11. 1 Pet. 2. 7. and if they do thus
despise and so basely account of Jesus Christ, which is the chief corner stone
of his own Church, what a kind or manner of Church is that which these
builders build of themselves, as they say? And notwithstanding my Lord and
foundation, my rock and preservation be not regarded of such carnal builders,
yet he is chosen of God and precious; and he himself makes all his faithful
Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers, wise master-workmen,
or builders for the gathering and perfecting his Saints for the work of the
Ministry, for the building or edifying the body of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. 1
Cor. 3. 10. for as the Spirit of God by the ministry of his servants prepares
and sanctifies them, so he unites and cements them to have communion one with
another in spiritual fellowship: and this workmanship in the Lord, is called
in Gods Word, the Church of Christ, his House, his Tabernacle, his Body, his
Spouse, his Temple, the pillar and ground of truth, the place of his dwelling,
purchased, cleansed, purified and sanctified by his own precious blood, called
and gathered by the power of his Word, made to live by the spirit of his mouth,
having communion and fellowship by the Holy Ghost, growing up together in
holiness, as branches in one stock or root, being members of one and the same
body, of which Christ is head, as truly and really in a spiritual sense, as
the head of a man is naturally the head of the whole body, confisting of many
members.

Now notwithstanding all this that has been said of the true Church, and ten
times more that might be spoke, yet these false-ignorant, carnal and fleshly
builders, those dirt-daubers, have at all times taken upon them with all
boldness, without any blushing, to affirm their wooden, dirty, filthy
building, to be Gods House, and their rotten straw and stubble to be the work
and building of Christ, boasting and crying out of themselves, by way of
self-justifying, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, Jer. 7. 4.
where, to their eternal reproof, the Prophet to their very faces, says
plainly, notwithstanding all their vain confidence, The Temple of the Lord, Are
these such as truly amend their ways and their doings; such as truly and
thoroughly execute judgment between man and his neighbor; such as oppress not
strangers, nor the fatherless, nor widow, nor shed innocent blood, nor walk
after other gods? verse. 5. and 6. And as these false Christians, robbers and
oppressors take upon them my Names and Titles; so also, they assume my
authority and peculiar privileges, to excommunicate me, and cast me out with
these holy words in their mouths, Let the Lord be glorified, Isa. 56. 5. but he
shall appear to my joy, and then they shall be ashamed, this has been always
the bitter cup they have made me and mine to drink in anger and great cruelty,
but patience has ever assisted us, and enabled us to endure a thousand such
injuries: They say I am a widow, desolate and forsaken, and lay the contempt of
barrenness upon me, but that word of life supports us, In patience possess
your souls; and again, Rejoice thou barren that bear not, break forth into
singing thou that travellest not, for the desolate has many more children then
she that has an husband, Gal. 4. 27. Isa. 54. 1.

Now what have you said more for your Church and members thereof, then the
Papists can say for themselves, or any other Antichristian Congregation, you
call your members to an account of their conversion, as you call it; so much
the Scribes and Pharisees can say, which compassed Sea and land to make a
Proselyte, and in so doing, made him more the child of the Devil then he was
before, Mat. 23. 15. even worse by two degrees, a woeful act to return, and not
to return to me, says the Lord, Hos. 7. 16. Jer. 4. 1.

Again, you say of your selves, you have joined your selves in Church Covenant
and you have set up Christ's ordinances, and you have cast away all superstition
and abomination, whereas the Saints and Church of God ascribe all to him, thou
have washed us, thou have called us, thou have sanctified us, thou have made us
unto our God Kings and Priests, etc. And for your covenant it is a mere humane
invention, and your people ordaining their Ministers both of the same nature of
Popish unwritten verities, which as they are not to be found in the Scriptures,
so labor to forget to practice, preach, or think of them any more for ever.


Here Is. You esteem too meanly of us and our doctrine; what? will you dare to
speak against the Church of Christ? take heed what you do; for we walk in a
Church Way, and communicate in the purity of all Gods ordinances, as preaching,
praying, fasting, baptism, breaking bread, and the like; and we have separated
our selves from all men's inventions, and unlawful Antichristian Assemblies.


Truth. You know there are such as say, and do not; the Whore of Rome does make
greater brags, then the virgin Spouse, and so did their predecessors before
them, the Pharisees, yet all of both their bostings are but false and
counterfeit, compared with the prayers, tears, fastings, communicatings,
sacrifices, oblations, and worships of the Saints.

And for your separation from other Christians, look to it, for except it be
with such caution, which I perceive you know not of, it may prove as Achans
forbidden wedge of gold and Babylonish garment, destruction to your selves; for
the Pharisees who justified themselves, and condemned others, were your
fore-teachers in this manner of separation; for they separated from Christ, and
John the Baptist, calling our Lord a sinner, and his servant a devil,
accounting them, nor any one of those penitent humble little ones, whom they
had converted to the truth, worthy their company: witness the Pharisees
exception against that holy woman, whose tears and love testifies to the truth,
where, and in what nation the Gospel is preached to the worlds end, for a
memorial of her, Mark. 14. 9. compared with Luke 7. 39. and this way of
separation, the Prophet from Gods own mouth, calls an evil and wicked way to
walk in, Isa. 65. 25. which people say, Stand by thy self, come not near to me,
for I am holier then thou, these, says the Lord, are a smoke in my nose, a
fire that burns all the day; for the truth is, in no case are trut believers
to separate from other Christians in communion, but in such cases that they
cannot communicate with them but they must sin with them, as it was with that
Apostate and Idolatrous Church of Rome, who made such wicked and opposite laws
to the truth, that a true Christian could not partake with them in any of the
ordinances of God, but he must be defiled with their abominations, one way or
other; for, they caused the earth, and them that dwell therein, to worship the
beast, Rev. 13. 12. whom whosoever does worship, shall never have rest, but
shall be tormented with the wrath of God day and night for evermore, Rev. 14.
10. 11. in such cases as these the Scripture is clear, Come out of her my
people, lest you partake of her sins, and be made partakers of her plagues, 2
Cor. 6. 17. Rev. 18. 4. And in this case did the Church of England separate
from the Church of Rome, in which Church of England you now are in, whose
laws, decrees, and ordinances are all against the abominations, errors and
superstitions of Babylon, and all ordered and directed according to the rule of
Gods Word, by express words, or necessary consequence; and therefore your
separation from us is groundless, and not warranted in the Scriptures: for
consider how the rule of truth would direct you, and observe how it was with
those that were effectually called by the ministry of John Baptist, and our
Lord himself, and truly converted unto God from amongst the Jews, in such
times, when those in the outward state of the Church were most corrupt; for,
they preached for doctrine the commandments of men, nor would not receive the
truth themselves, nor suffer such as would receive it, against which doctrine
our Lord exhorts his hearers to take heed, and beware of the leven of the
Pharisees, but never taught the Disciples to separate from the Church of the
Jews, nor to enter into a formed covenant among themselves, as you do, but on
the contrarary, he commanded them to continue hearers and doers; The Scribes
and Pharisees sit in Moses chair or seat, whatsoever they bid you observe, that
observe and do, etc. Mat. 23. 2, 3. And himself, as his Disciples, continued
still repairing to the Temple and Synagogue, and participated in the service
and public worship of God, making no separation; for when our Lord gave his
account to the high Priest of his Disciples and doctrine, Joh. 18. 19, 20. he
says, I ever taught in the Synagogue, and in the Temple, whither the Jews
always resort, and in secret have I said nothing. And for the Apostles
practice in many Churches mentioned in the Acts, both in Judea, and among the
Gentiles, therein is no separation in your sense spoken of, although many
things were reprovable, and admonished against, both in doctrine and practice;
the truth is, the good seed in the field, are the Saints, the Church of Christ,
the tares the wicked, but both must grow together in the same field, till the
harvest, Matthew. 13. 30. As the lilly grows amongst the thorns, so the chafe
lies in the same floor with the wheat, the Goats feed in the same pasture with
the sheep, and the crafty Wolves among the harmless lambs, and cannot be
separated till our Lord comes to judge and part them, never again to
participate afterward together.


Here Is. I pray hear me, all those that have already spoke are old, like their
doctrine; and it is high time their errors should be thus discovered: but I
pray take notice of me, for I have received a new clear light of heavenly
doctrine, a light of free grace and justification in and by Christ from all
eternity; so that the elect cannot properly be said at any time to be
unrighteous, ungodly, or unholy: for they are justified before they believe,
even before the foundations of the world, even then when God elected them.


Truth. Free grace rightly understood, as the Scriptures declare it, is a
heavenly and comfortable Doctrine; but me thinks by your confession you should
be an Antinomian, who speak very much of free grace, but do not at all
understand it: for they say, the free grace of God toward his elect that are
justified before the world was, is like unto the Sunbeams in the morning when
she rises, that enlightens the dark earth, in which there is no preparation to
the enlightening; so the Lord shines into the hearts of his elected justified
ones in the very time of their wickedest works of darkness: And then in the
midst of their sins, as in the very acts of adultery and murder, even then
God lifts up the light of his countenance upon them, and gives them peace, the
effect of their justification with God from all eternity: These slight and
contemn repentance, and call it a work of the Law; and the preparation to
justifying faith, they call a munkish Popish doctrine: and their own fancy, or
presumptuous conceit they call that justifying faith, or free grace, by which,
say they, the justified before God, come to understand and know their
justification from all eternity.

Oh what a gross seducement and delusion is this, even a general mistake of
the whole Gospel in every part of it! Therefore now I will first show you what
free grace is, which the Scripture sets forth to us; And then show you how
clearly and fully Gods word declares the justifying the elect by faith in Jesus
Christ.

Now this is a written and a certain truth, that God loves his Israel, his
chosen, freely, Hosea 14. 4, 5, 6. I will heal their backslidings, says the
Lord, I will love them freely, for mine anger is turned away from him. I will
be as the dew unto Israel, he shall grow as the Lilly, and cast forth his root
as Lebanon. Also it is written, Ezekiel. 16. 6. When I saw thee polluted in thy
own blood, I said unto thee, Live; when thou wast in thy blood, Live: yea, I
said unto thee when thou wast in thy blood, Live, and have caused thee to
multiply as the bud of the field. Observe how abundantly the free grace of God
is manifested to his elect, that of themselves are quite contrary to deserving:
for they are polluted with the most abominable pollution, and that is with
blood, and not a little, but extremely in the third degree, blood three times
repeated by the holy Ghost. And that this threefold uncleanness should be
washed and made pure, and that this exceeding deadness should be made to live,
and so to live as the bud of the field, to multiply and increase, and bring
forth fruit unto God and man, even holy grapes to refresh the hearts of both;
this shows the wonderful freeness of Gods grace, so to love as there is none
like it, nor to be compared to it.

Now because you have spoken of this free grace in a fancy, I shall endeavor to
show it you in reality. And that we may know the things that are freely given
us of God, 1 Cor. 2. 12. that is, of his own will, free grace, and goodness,
and eternal love; Let us consider it in these four particulars, which only
and alone are peculiar to the Saints and Church of God, that is, their election
and predestination before all times, their effectual calling and justification
in time, and their eternal glorification for ever in the world to come; which
world shall be endless, deathlesse, and sinlesse for evermore. And all these
in all the causes, the free grace of God: And therefore it is said by S. Peter,
that the Saints and Church of God, are elect according to the foreknowledg of
God the Father, 1 Pet. 1. 2. And S. Paul says, According as he has chosen us
in him before the foundation of the world, Ephesians. 1. 4. And the Apostle to the
Church of Thessalonica testifies, that God had from the beginning chosen them
to salvation, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. so then it is clear, that the electare chosen in
Christ to salvation: Which secret purpose and foreknowledge of God toward his
elect before all time, is made good and effected in and upon his elect in all
times, being called thereunto by the Gospel, verse. 15. Now the Gospel, as I
touched before, consists of two parts, repentance and remission of sins, Luke
24. 47. which comprehends the two next particulars, our effectual calling by
the work of repentance, and whose sins whosoever is remitted, that soul is
justified in the Apostles meaning, and both these effected by the Gospel and
covenant of life, and therefore called in Scripture, the grace of God, the
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Gospel of the grace of God, Acts 20. 24.
the word of his grace, verse 32. the word speaking peace by Jesus Christ, Acts
1. the word of the Gospel, Acts 15. 7. And these two effects which the Spirit
of God works by his word in his elect to life and salvation, are called in
Scripture, regeneration, conversion, a renewing, a birth from above, a new
making, and such like, not in a natural but a spiritual sense; not as the
first birth of our parents, which procreated and produced us out of their
bowels, but by way of similitude and likeness, that as by nature we are born
carnal, unclean, and children of wrath; so by this spiritual birth we are
born of God from above, holy, spiritual, free, even the sons of God, as the
Scripture says; for, as that which is of the flesh is flesh, so that which is
of the spirit is spirit.

Now, as by Adam came the offense, and by Moses came the Law, through which the
offense abounded, Romans 5. 19, 20. to man's greater misery; so grace and truth
came by Jesus Christ, Joh. 1. 17. Adam was the author of sin to his
posterity; Moses was the Minister of the Law that condemned that sin; but the
grace and mercy of God, the means of salvation, both from sin and death, that
is only by Jesus Christ, blessed for ever. Now the manner and order the Holy
Ghost takes in working this grace in the hearts of Gods elect, is plainly laid
down in Scripture, for him, that is, Christ, says St. Peter, with the rest of
the Apostles, has God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince, and a
Savior, to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins, Act. 5. 31.
And these two parts of the Gospel, which is the free grace of God to mankind,
are plainly and generally observed and preached by all the Prophets and
Apostles, and our Lord himself; I will take from you, says the Lord, your
stony heart, and give you a heart of flesh; there is the first part, and in that
new heart that I shall give you, says the Lord, I will write my Law, that is,
his Statute, and love, mercy, and forgiveness, even a new and holy Spirit, and
that is the second part of the Gospel, Ezekiel. 11. 19. Chap. 26. 36. The baptism
of John, that is the first, and the baptism of Christ, that is the second part,
and both parts our Lord joins together, Joh. 3. 3. Except a man be born again
of water and the Spirit, he cannot see the Kingdom of God, neither to mourn
with the Bridegrooms friends, nor rejoice with the Bridegroom himself; and for
as much as these making parts of a Christian are not of our selves, but both
the gifts of God, it does abundantly set forth unto us this excellent doctrine
of Gods free Grace, as the Apostle St. James says, who of his own will begat
us with the word of trub, Jam. 1. 18. And the grace of God, says holy Titus,
that brings salvation, has appeared unto all men, and teaches us to deny
ungodliness and worldly lnsts, etc. Tit. 2. 11, 12. Yea, it is Gods free Grace
and abundant compassionate goodness, to find out this new and living way to
happiness through Christ Jesus; for he himself is the way, the truth and the
life, and God so loved the world, that he gave his Son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have eternal life, Joh. 3. 16. and
none can so believe, but he that is regenerate, John 1. 12, 13. And the Lord
is the spiritual bread, that every one must eat of that shall be saved, but
none can so eat his flesh, and drink his blood, but by faith; and none can
believe, but to whom it is given, and it is given to comfort none, but to the
broken hearted, and none are made penitent and humble, thirsting and desiring
Christians, but to such as God gives repentance; for this is the nature and
method of this free Grace of God, which the Scriptures set forth to us, even
that free Grace that Christ gives to him that is athirst, freely to drink of,
Rev. 21. 7. he gives the thirst, and he freely gives the water of life, that
so quenches, that whosoever drinks, shall never thirst again, Joh. 7. 37, 38.
And the Lord says, Come and drink; but this coming is by repentance, and this
drinking is by faith, Whosoever (says the Lord) believes in me, as the
Scripture says, out of his belly shall flow rivers of the water of life; yea,
to set forth the excellency of this doctrine of free Grace, the Spirit of God
takes upon him the office of a crier in a court of Records, Ho, every one that
thirsts, come ye to the waters, come ye, buy and eat, yea, the third time
he cries, come, buy wine and milk without money, and without price, Isa. 55. 1.
Hear now you Antinomians, if any of you have an ear to hear the wisdom of
God in the truth of the free Grace purchased and preached by Jesus Christ, that
it is not fantastical, as you have expressed it, but that real and
substantial grace that gives being to the new and spiritual man, the very
regeneration of the elect of God; and as they are born of the Spirit, so they
are taught, led and guided, anointed and sanctified by the Holy Ghost, who
dwells in none of the bodies of the elected ones, but where he has wrought
this heavenly work of grace there he dwells, there he witnesses; there is but
three that bear witness for God to the truth in the whole world; and the
Apostle tells us, 1 John 5. 8. it is the Spirit, that is the Spirit of God;
water, that is his first work and beginning of regeneration; and blood, that is
the finishing and accomplishing the new birth; the sanctifying, the binding up
the broken heart by faith: wherefore blush and be ashamed of your blasphemy
against the truth, in calling repentance a work of the Law, and the preparation
to faith a Popish doctrine, and for ever hereafter take notice, that the way of
Christ's free Grace is by water and blood, 1 John 5. 6. And that repentance is
the beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, Mark. 1. 1, 2.

Now I should have spoke of the fourth particular of free Grace which is
glorification, but of that hereafter.


Heresy. I bear you witness you have a zeal, but it is not according to
knowledge: for if you did understand that excellent doctrine of justification
before believing, you would not speak so much of any preparation to justifying
faith: for by Christ's stripes we are healed from the beginning of the world:
And to prove this truth, I argue thus:

First, all the elect of God are justified before God: but some of the elect of
God do not yet believe: therefore some that do not believe, are justified
before God.

Secondly, he that is in Christ, is justified: But we must be in Christ before
we can believe, therefore we must be justified before we can believe.


Truth. I answer, the due observation of terms is the true preservation of
proprieties; and except you justly distinguish of the terms before God
himself, and Gods grace by which he does justify his elect, you cannot
understand truly, but you must confound heaven and earth together, and make God
Man, and Man God, concluding such blasphemies as the Familists do, to whom
hundreds of you are fallen within this two years; who affirm of the Trinity,
that God the Father is the Mind, the Son is the Word, and the Spirit is the
Word made known: And under these terms, mistaking the verity of the mystery
of the Trinity, conclude such gross blasphemies as these conclusions hereafter
specified, making God the Father the Mind, God the Son the Word of that Mind,
God the holy Spirit the effect or revelation of the Word. And as these are
three, so they are one, as you say, so it is and was at first in the creation,
God the Father was the Mind of God, God the Son was the Word of that Mind, and
God the Spirit was the working, meaning, or manifestation of that Word; so that
in that which God said, Let us make man; and, he spoke and the Heavens and the
Earth was made, the Firmament, the Sun, Moon, and Stars, the Sea and the Fish
therein, the Air and the Fowls therein, the Earth and the Beasts, Herbs, and
Trees therein, as God spoke the word, and all these were created; so that as
they were made by the Word, so they are the Word, and as the Word and the
Father are one, and as the Father, the Word, and the revelation of it are one,
so whatsoever the Word made, is one with the Father, the Son, and the Spirit.
And then the conclusion must be this, The whole creation is God himself. Now
to avoid such blasphemous consequences, we will distinguish of the terms, and
therein show the fallacy of your Arguments, and then I will discover and
establish the truth against your doctrine, which by this means will easily
appear to be false. First, for the term that concerns God, (justified before
God, you say) which if you mean as it concerns God in his infiniteness, it
is so far above our line, or the capacity of the elect in point of
reconciliation with God, as the highest heavens are above the center of the
earth: for with God himself there is nothing before nor after: For the
Scripture speaks thus of God in this respect, that he calls those things that
be not, as though they were, Romans 4. 17. And again, one day is with the Lord as
a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day, 2 Pet. 3. 8. Thus you see,
Gods thoughts are not our thoughts, nor his ways as our ways, says the Lord;
but as the heavens are higher then the earth, so are his ways and his thoughts
higher then ours, Isai. 55. 8, 9. But when the Prophet comes to speak of Gods
work in the creature to salvation, then he speaks in the creatures language
and capacity; so that except man obey the voice of God, he is left without
excuse in these words: Seek the Lord while he may be found, call ye upon him
while he is near, let the wicked forsake his was, and the unrighteous man his
thoughts, and let him return to the Lord God, and he will have mercy upon him,
and abundantly pardon, verse 6, 7. Thus as the Prophet, we must distinguish
between Gods eternal purpose and decree, which is a secret, and known to
himself only toward his elect before all times, and his calling and justifying
of them in time, which is the effect of his foreknowledge and predestination,
and that which makes known to the elect, Gods secret purpose. And although it
be said, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? the Apostle there
does not understand the justification of the elect before time, as you do, but
the justification of his elect in time called and justified. And although there
can be nothing laid (to such an elect justified) to his condemnation, yet many
things may be laid to his charge in regard of his weakness and frailty, If any
brother be fallen through weakness, you that are spiritual, restore such a
one by the spirit of meekness. Thus Nathan charged David, and David charge
himself, Against thee only have I sinned. So our Lord charge his faithful
servant Peter; and Paul withstood him to his face, and says, He was to be
blamed. And so that holy Apostle blames himself also: Oh wretched man that I
am, says he. And the Scripture says, There is not a righteous man that
lives, and does good, and sins not. And again* If any man say he has no
sin, he deceives himself, and the truth is not in him. And the elect of God
are renewed again (after sinning) by repentance, as the Church of Ephesus is
admonished by Christ to repent and do her first works, Rev. 2. 5.

And however the Saints do daily sin after justification, yet through Gods
grace they are recovered again daily by repentance, and maugre the malice and
temptation of Satan, the snares of the world, and the concupiscence of their
own natures; yet the Lord that loved them once, does still love them for ever,
and does wash off their filthiness, and ownes them so for his own, that
neither their sins, nor any power, or any creature whatsoever, shall, or can
condemn them.

Secondly, you say, some of the elect of God do not believe, and therefore they
are justified before they believe. I pray where did you find or learn this
Logic, which is so contrary to the wisdom of God, which teaches thus, by
Christ all that believe are justified from all things, Act. 13. 39. And again,
those that he calls he justifies; but your doctrine says they are
justified before they are called; see in a word, how directly your preaching is
against truths doctrine. And of the same nature with your former is your second
Argument, which runs thus: he that is in Christ is justified, but we must be
in Christ before we can believe, therefore we must be justified before we
believe: which in the very terms is another doctrine then St. Paul teaches us,
who says plainly, we are justified by faith, Romans 3. 28. And he justifies
the ungodly; but I question your knowledge of justifying faith, which if you
did truly know, you durst not teach, that men are justified before they
believe; it is true, he that is ingraffed into Christ, is justified, but it
does not follow therefore a man is justified before he believes: I will
assuage the hardness of the question by the mildness of a comparison; that
which acquits and frees a malefactor, is the sealed pardon of the King; so
likewise that which comforts and assures the penitent heart of mercy and
forgiveness, is the sealing witness which Gods Spirit bears to, or assures
the humble heart of the free Grace and love of God through Jesus Christ; so
that justifying faith to the sorrowful sinner, is as the sealed pardon to the
malefactor: and to this agrees the Scriptures, Acts 10. 43. To him (that is, to
Jesus Christ) give all the Prophets witness, that through his Name, whosoever
believes in him, shall receive remission of sins; thus speaks Gods Word, and
not as you speak; so that it cannot truly be said, neither ought any dare so to
preach that a man is justified before he believes, nor that he believes before
he be justified, but that it is the same gift of Gods Spirit at one and the
same time, even then to believe our justification when he accepts us just in
him that justifies the ungodly; and as it is given by the Holy Ghost to
believe, so it is continued, maintained and increased by the same Spirit as the
other spiritual gifts, as hope, love, joy and patience are; and whosoever does
receive the Spirit of adoption, he has with it the testimony of it, which is
justifying faith; let us take heed we do not separate that which God has
joined together, for that is directly against the commandment, Matthew. 9. 6. Let
no man put asunder that which God has joined together: and in vain does that
man argue to prove which is first in the Sun, the heat or the light, so vain it
is in you to argue, whether justification or faith be first; for when, or to
whomsover God gives one, he gives them both, Romans 3. 26. wherefore I retort
your arguments thus:

If God give remission of sins to the penitent elect, then the impenitent elect
are not justified; but he gives remission of sins to the penitent elect, Acts
2. 38. therefore none of Gods elect are justified before they are called, and
their sins remitted; wherefore never hereafter teach your disciples that the
elect of God are justified before they believe, but learn to teach them to
repent, that their sins may be done away, as the Apostle teaches, to life and
salvation, Act. 3. 19. and so St. John says of the Jews, they did not repent
that they might believe; and consider our Lords doctrine to Nicodemus, he
tells him not of his election, although our Lord knew well that secret, but he
preaches to him conversion; Except a man be borne again, he cannot see the
kingdom of God, Joh. 3. Regeneration must be sought for by the elect, and by
these effects and operations of the Holy Ghost, to make sure to themselves
their election; this is Gods way prescribed in his Word: And lest I fall into
your error, as I have briefly disproved your doctrine, and discoverered the
falsehood and mistie sophistry of your arguments; so now, by the help of God, I
will lay down and confirm the truth it self, how the Scriptures do speak of
justifying and believing, that so you may come to know that which hitherto I
perceive you are very ignorant of. Wherefore thus says the Scriptures
concerning justification, We are justified freely by his grace, says the
Apostle, Romans 3* 24. Titus 3. 11. likewise, that we are justified by his
blood, that is, by the blood of Christ, Romans 5. 9. and also, that we are
justified by says, Romans 3. 28. so then these three terms are to be considered
in our justification, the blood of Christ purchasing the grace and favor of
God, and an assurance of it given to the lost, the dead, the broken, penitent,
mourning heart, whereby, though it be dead, yet it is made to live, the broken
is healed, the emptiness is filled, the thirstinesse is quenched, comforted
and refreshed with the favor and love of God, in and through Jesus Christ;
justification then is the imputed righteousness of Christ, assured and made
known to the elect by faith; and this doctrine is cleared by the Apostle beyond
the least exception, speaking of holy Abraham's justification, and being fully
assured, says he, Romans 4. 21, 24. that what God had promised, he was able to
perform, therefore it was imputed to him for righteousness; Now it was not
imputed for his sake alone, that it was imputed to him, but for us also, to
whom it shall be imputed, if we believe. Observe, first, that the Apostle
affirms justifying faith a full assurance, for we shall have occasion by and
by to make use of this: and secondly, that the righteousness of Christ, which
is our justification, is not given to us but by faith, in these words, to whom
it shall be imputed, if we believe, so that justification and justifying
faith, can no more be severed, parted or divided, then the light and the heat
from the fire; and to this purpose St. Paul calls Christ the just one, and the
justifier of him that believes in Jesus, Romans 3. 26. so that it is proved
against all the Antinomians in the world, that then, and not before, when God
justifies his elect, then, and at that time he gives justifying faith, Act. 13.
38, 39. And as I promised before, so I will here briefly show the diverse
acceptations and distinctions of faith, and three particulars do comprehend all
other sorts and distinctions whatsoever; Historical faith, to believe Gods
Word; the faith of miracles, by which it is given to a Saint, or a sinner to
work this or that miracle; so also in the third place, the Scriptures speak of
justifying faith, of which it is said we live by, we are comforted by,
through which we are purified and justified, and this sort of faith is called
in Scriptures, the faith of God, the faith of Jesus, the faith of Abraham, the
faith of Gods elect, the faith that works by love, the faith in the blood of
Christ, the faith accounted for righteousness, the faith of the operation of
God the most holy faith, and may be thus defined, that it is a full, firm, and
certain trust or confidence, written by the power and Spirit of God in the low,
humble, penitent, and broken-heart, whereby it is given assuredly to believe,
that all his sins are forgiven; and thus he is made one with God by
reconciliation and atonement in and through the eternal and everlasting love
of Jesus Christ; the material cause of this justifying faith thus defined is a
full, sure, and undoubted trust or confidence; the formal cause is the free
grace and favor of God the Father, and of his Son Jesus Christ; the
efficient cause is the alone work of the holy Ghost; thereby imprinting in and
assuring of the hearts of the elect of this confidence of this grace and
mercy; the principal and final cause is the glory of God, and our Lord Jesus
Christ; and the end subordinate is the salvation of the Saints, the chosen ones
of God from the beginning of the world: And this is the faith that justifies,
that comfort, that overcommeth, that excels, whose dignity and
excellency every where shines throughout the Scriptures; the ignorance of
which this very age, yea, I say it again, this very age of ours deserves all
these present judgments, and more also then lie upon us at this time; we
having had from God afforded us so great means to come to the knowledge of it:
which sort of faith whosoever has, shall never perish, but men may partake of
both the other sorts to their condemnation.

Other acceptations the term Faith has in the Scriptures also, having
reference sometimes to God himself, and therein importing the steadfastness
and unchangeable truth of his decree and promise. And in other places it is to
be understood of the doctrine of the Gospel; and so also of their faithful
discharge of their office that are gifted to declare and preach the glad
tidings of peace and salvation: Of which office it is hard for an Antinomian,
holding such principles as he does, to come to understand; wherefore repent in
time, lest at last you turn all Familists, which you cannot avoid, if you
continue in your principles.


Her. We have had the experience of this new found conceited light, that such
as have been dazzled with it, have been staggred in the truth, and some have
been so blinded therewithal, that they have fallen from the faith.

But what say you to us? We have the doctrine of the Gospel pure and clear, we
hold faith and repentance to be the first works to life and salvation; and that
the Church of God are a company of holy believers, and that now the time is
come, that the Church shall be delivered from all her sufferings, according to
the testimony of the Prophets and Apostles; the purity of Christ's Ordinances
shall be established, Christ shall be set up upon his Throne, and his Church
shall have the rule and pre-eminence in the world in greater power, dignity,
and external authority, then all the Monarchs that ever have been in the world
before. And in this outward glory shall she continue till her Lord come to
translate her.


Truth. You speak like those that maintain that the Church of Christ shall now
so flourish and prosper, as that it shall extend its bounds and borders all
Christendom over, and most part of the world besides, into a Monarchy; and as
formerly the temporal power in Christianity has had the rule and greatness,
so now the Ecclesiastical power shall take place, and the Scepter of Christ in
the censure of the Church, shall be advanced and bear rule above all other
government. And that now already it is begun that God makes the kingdoms of
this world our Lords, and his Christ's, and that now it is come to pass, that
the godly shall rule over the wicked: for now they are given to be captives to
Gods people, whose captives Gods people were before this time. Wherefore I
answer, Great are the privileges and prerogatives that the Scriptures speak of
Gods Church and people in the world to come after the resurrection, is plain
and evident in holy Writ; but to apply those prophesies and promises to the
Church in this present evil world, it is not well considered of you: for the
Lord by his servants, speaks of his Church in a double consideration, as
oppressed, afflected, and suffering here in this life, and as delivered,
perfected and saved in the life to come; then to rule, but here to suffer; then
to be advanced into Christ's Throne, but now, and here, to submit to the
Cross; now his house is a house of mourning, but then it shall be a palace of
glory, Jerusalem the City of the great King shall be set up the praise of the
whole earth. And in regard of his Churches present suffering, her Lord himself
thus speaks to her, Fear not little flock; and comforts her with the grace
and favor of God for the time to come in these words: For it is your Fathers
pleasure to give you a Kingdom. And it is a truth concluded of by all, if we
follow Christ in the estate of regeneration, we shall be made partakers of his
glorification; if we suffer with him, we shall reign with him; the one
condition is here, the other hereafter; the one in this world, the other in the
world to come. This is the testimony of our Lord and all his servants, Matthew.
19. 28. 2 Timothy 2. 12. And that short time, or while of suffering Saint Peter
speaks of, is this present life; and the time of making such sufferers perfect,
is the life to come, 1 Pet. 5. 10. agreeing with his brother Paul, who
according to the wisdom of God given to him, had cast up his accounts in these
words, I reckon, says he, that the sufferings of this present time are not
worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be revealed in us. Even then,
says S. John, when Christ which is our life shall appear, then shall we appear
with him; then shall we be like him in his dignity, as in this life we are like
him in his ignominy, 1 John 3. 2. And (friend) look into the Scriptures, and
you shall find the Church, the blessed assembly described now to suffer, to
mourn, to be hated, to weep, to be persecuted for righteousness sake, and the
contrary estate to be none of Gods Church or inheritance; Woe be to ye that
laugh and rejoice, that are full, and enjoy greatness and prosperity; those
that are rich here, have received their consolation; those that are full in
this life, shall hunger in the life to come; those that are merry, laugh and
want not here, shall weep and wail when the day of redemption comes: then
shall be fulfilled to him that suffers not here, these words, Thou in thy life
time receivedst thy good things: and to him that suffered here, these words, He
his evil things; therefore thou that sufferedst not, art tormented: but thou
that did suffer, thou art comforted, Matthew. 5. Luke 6. and Luke 16. When Gods
suffering people shall be rewarded, then such as have enjoyed their prosperity
here, shall be condemned. I beseech you, as you love the truth, decline this
doctrine of yours: for by it you do revive again that old tenent of Popery.
For what ever you affirm in your confession, they have maintained it with fire
and sword, execration and excommunication: for they would prove, that their
Church by Christ's appointment, was to have supreme authority, power, and
jurisdiction over all, they place themselves above the stars of God. And as
in power, so in title, he must be called and styled, the Lord God the Pope. And
so he challenged worship also, that Kings and Emperors must kiss his stinking
feet and toes, in token of their slavish subjection in honoring him with the
power of heaven and earth, to kill and make alive, to pardon and retain sins,
falsely proving this his abomination and whorish power, from Gods divine Oracles
in these words, To execute vengeance upon the heathen, and punishment upon the
people, to bind their Kings with chains, and their Nobles with fetters of iron.
This honor have all the Saints, Psa. 149, 8, 9. avouching this Scripture to be
fulfilled in the holy Church of Rome, and that they were the Saints which by
this prophecy were foretold of to depose and disthrone Kings: and to cloak and
color their covetousness, which set all their tricks awork, as Bulls and
Pardons, at all rates and prices, whereby their coffers were filled with gold
and silver from all countries and people. And this he affirmed was prophesied
for his filthy holiness, maintenance and ungodly revenue in these words, The
Kings of Tarshish and of the Isles, shall bring presents, the Kings of Sheba
and Seba shall offer gifts, yea all Kings shall fall down before him, all
nations shall serve him, Psalm. 72. 10. And notwithstanding their gross abusing
the Scriptures, and false claims to Titles, as Holy Father, and holy Mother the
Church, time has now proved him to be Antichrist, the Man of sin, and
capital enemy to the truth of God. And indeed this conceit that the Church of
God should enjoy temporal peace, and outward glory and authority, has been
always the opinion of carnal Christians, and the Jews to this day cannot see
otherwise then when their still lookt-for Messiah should come, that then they
shall be gathered to be a great people again, and made a worldly Monarchy to
rule over all Nations, as now all Nations rule over them: But their groundless
hope will prove but as the Spiders web, and so it will be with all others of
their mind: for see how the Scripture resolves the question, that the Saints*
the Church of God, shall still suffer to the worlds end, the question is made
with a loud voice, saying, How long, O Lord, holy and true, do thou not
avenge our blood on them that dwell upon the earth? And the answer from heaven
says, that they should rest yet a little season, until their fellow servants
also, and their brethren that should be killed as they were, should be
fulfilled, Rev. 6. 10. And the clad and washed with the righteousness of
Christ, and the blood of the Lamb, are those that go through great
tribulations, Rev. 7. 13, 14. Finally, of this doctrine we have a double
witness, two brethren and Apostles, whose praise is in all the Churches, Acts
14. 22. who both as one man conclude this truth as a Decree for ever, That such
as continue in the faith, must through many tribulations enter into the
Kingdom of God: which Kingdom is that which all the Prophets and Apostles in
all times have spoken of, which in its due place I shall briefly unfold.


Heresy. I pray you give us leave to speak: Have we not clear Scripture for
the glorious reign of Christ upon the earth; and that all the Martyrs and holy
Prophets shall rise from the dead, and reign with Christ a thousand years in
all prosperity, peace, riches, plenty, wealth, and glory, with such supreme
power and Majesty, as never any Monarch in this world had before, nor ever
shall have after? for when the thousand years are expired, then comes the
general resurrection, Rev. 20.


Truth. Your confession shows you to be a Millenarian, which error as it has
been ancient, so of late, as of many other errors, there is a reviving of this
amongst the rest. And as you say, the sum of it is, that now, or they know
not when, Christ shall descend personally from heaven, and then cause all the
bodies of the Saints that have suffered martyrdom from the beginning of the
world, to be raised, and Christ and his Saints to live in this cursed earth,
and corruptible world, in the enioyment of riches, wealth, power and authority,
majesty and Emporality, as no heathen nor Christian Monarchy ever had in this
world before; and you ground your mistake on Rev. 20. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.

Now I answer, that the whole position is directly against the Scripture you
allege, rightly understood: for the Apostle Peter affirms it plainly, that
the heavens must contain and receive Christ personally, until the time of the
restitution of all things, which God has spoken by the mouth of all his holy
Prophets since the world began, Acts 2. 21. Here are such witnesses as cannot
be excepted against, even all his holy Prophets, and then, and not sooner,
shall the Lord Jesus come, which before was preached unto you, verse 20.

And the place you instance, Rev. 20. proves no more the Millenary fancy, as
you describe it, then it proves a new world in the Moon; or that men may plow
the floods of the Sea to sow and plant on them. And because the true
understanding of that Scripture will overthrow this error at once, we will
show you that the resurrection there spoken of, is the spiritual and first
resurrection which our Savior Christ clearly lays down both in nature and
order, John 5. 25. And because it is a mystery, therefore his expression is
more then ordinary, Verily, verily, (twice affirming it) I say unto you, the
hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son
of God, and they that hear it shall live. This is the spiritual resurrection
from sin, through the grace of regeneration: and these are they only that live
and reign with Christ, having sought and gained the Kingdom of heaven, and
the righteousness thereof, Matthew. 6. 33. And those only that are risen with
Christ through regeneration, are born of God, and those that are born of God
through faith, are victors, and overcome all opposition, even the whole world,
and the Prince and King thereof, 1 John 5. 4. and in this sense they reign
with Christ in their estate of temptation and regeneration, who in their tears
and sorrow are happy in the enjoyment of their Comforter, who anointeth them
with the unction of truth, and teaches and instructs them so sufficiently,
that all the powers and thrones of Antichrist, the subtilties, crafts and
deceits of him and all his learned Clerks, who have endeavored and used all
means possible to cousen and cheat the people of God, for almost the space of
this thousand two hundred and forty years here expressed by the Millenary
number only, because it shall not exceed more thousands then one; in which
cloudy and dark day the holy Ghost has so led and guided the sons of truth,
that all the Jugglers at Rome and Babylon, could not make them to mistake the
mark of the Beast for the mark of the Lamb, nor to worship the Beast and his
image in stead of the Lord and his Christ; yea, rather then they would defile
themselves with the adultery of the Whore, they would die a thousand deaths:
for so says the Text, they lost their lives and their heads for the witness
of Jesus, and for the pure worship of God contained in his word, Rev. 20. 4.
and in this spiritual sense they lived and reigned with Christ the whole time
meant by the thousand years.

And lest the inconsiderate Reader should mistake this spiritual resurrection
for a corporal, as the Millenarians do, the holy Ghost gives marks and bounds
to his Disciples, as evident distinctions between the one and the other, in
these words, Marvel not at this, John 5. 28. for the hour is coming, (he
does not say as before, and now is) in which all that are in the graves, shall
hear his voice; which all contains every one good and bad at the general
resurrection: and therefore your doctrine is contrary to the truth the
Scriptures hold out to us: for the Thrones, and they that sat upon them, which
you expound to be Christ and his Saints, the holy Ghost discovers the quite
contrary, even to be the power and authority of Antichrist himself, who had a
Charter granted him of God, and under his own hand, for the whole time limited
to desolate and consume the Saints, who for their sins sake the Lord does
often give them up to the pleasure and rage of such heathenish murderers and
persecuters for a season, to enter into the Sanctuary, and spoil the heritage
of the Lord, Jerem. 9. 16. Lam. 1. 10. And if you had but looked upon the Text
with clean eyes, washed ^ith the water of repentance, and had learnd the song
of sorrow of the mourner, you would not have been so blear-eyed as to have
taken the abomination forespoken of by Daniel the Prophet, to be the Kingdom
of Christ, that all Gods servants witness to, and give testimony of: And that
if it may be possible for you to apprehend the meaning of this Scripture, wash
your eyes with tears, and wipe them with the love of the truth, and look upon
the Text once again, and compare the 20* chapter verse 2. with the 12. chapter
verse 3. and you shall see the same Dragon in the one place in the Ethnic
Heathenish power of the Roman Emperor, with all fierceness and unbridled
cruelty, to havoc, destroy, and kill the Saints and children of God exercised
in a tenfold persecution, to obliterate and wipe out of the earth the name of
Christ, the woman his Spouse, and her first and primitive fruit, which was born
to reign with Christ for ever; which power and authority the Devil instigated,
and stirred up with all their malice and hatred, as with a flood, caused as it
were by the breach of the Sea, so that the wife of the Lord had no way to
escape drowning and devouring, but to fly into the wilderness, there to
preserve her self, and so many of her children as she had preserved from
death, where she was assigned to stay an hour, a month, a day, and a year,
Rev. 9. 15.

The same Dragon in the 20. Chapter you find to be bound; and yet in all and
every day of his religation, to kill and destroy the Saints just as he did
before, only differing in the manner: for now it is with a restraint, secretly
and cunningly, by guile and craft, pretending Christianity, and taking on him
the name of a Christian, and never the less Devil then he was before, only
a pretense makes the difference: for ever since the great battle that he
fought, and lost the field; for Michael and his Angels prevailed then against
the Dragon and his Angels; so that ever since all along Popery, the Devil has
turned Christian; and herein by a bounded and restrained way, effected his
enmity to the full, as he did before in the Heathens, in an open professed
opposition to Christ and Christianity. And it is to be observed, that when the
Devil turned to be a Christian, then he put on Jupiters coat upon Christ's
back, and made the model and platform of Christian Religion, just after the
fashion of the Idol Gods of the Heathen; and like a Juggler and deceiver,
plays the same game diverse and several ways, sometimes amongst men, sometimes
amongst the Angels of light, sometimes on horseback, sometimes on foot; he
rides on a red horse with a great sword among the Heathens in the Imperial
persecution, and took outward peace from the primitive Christians, as well as
from the earth it self. In the time of Papacy, among carnal Christians, he
rides on a pale horse; where the Devilish Dragon his rider, is called death it
self, and hell followed with him, Rev. 6. 4. 8. So then, let him have liberty
and freedom, or bind and restrain him, in all conditions he effects his
work of envy, hatred and malice against the Church of God. Now there is one
thing more in the Text, and when I have spoke a word or two of the meaning
thereof, I hope then you will see this Scripture proves not your error. And
thus it follows, After that he must be loosed a little season. And in the
seventh verse, And when the thousand years are expired, Satan shall be loosed
out of his prison; which words sound as if the Devil should become the great
red Dragon again after the reign of Antichrist, and fall to act his first part
the second time, to deny the Lord Jesus whom all this while he has confessed,
and to set himself to do the utmost he can to oppose the very name of Christ
and Christians; and in this sense does the holy Ghost clearly expound these
words in other Scriptures, as our Lord himself, Matthew. 24. does clearly
describe and discover the whole time of Antichrists abomination and
persecution, as Daniel did prophecy of it, which is the whole and every part
and season of the bound and restrained condition of the Dragon before
mentioned. And immediately, says our Lord, after the tribulation of those days
shall the Sun be darkened, the Moon shall not give her light, and the Stars
shall fall from heaven, and the powers of heaven shall be shaken, verse. 29* In
all which terms our Lord speaks figuratively, and that another power after
the end of Antichrists tyranny, shall arise and fulfill these sayings of his,
which things were prophesied of before, by the Prophet Ezekiel, chap. 38. 2.
and 39. 1. and afterward so understood by the Apostle John, Rev. 20. 8, 9, 10.
which Gog and Magog Saint John understands to be the Kings of the East, and
the whole world. Rev. 16. 12, 13, 14. where in a vision he saw the Devil come
out of the mouth of the Dragon, that is, he left the Ethnic Imperial power,
and also the power of the Beast, and beastly Clergy, he will deceive by that
false Prophet no longer; but as he left all his old instruments, so he goes on
to make use of a new one, these spirits of Devils go forth unto the Kings of
the earth, that is, they go unto them that are of the greatest power at this
time, even the Kings of the whole world, to gather them to the battle of the
great day of God Almighty; which Kings of the East, and of the Earth, and of
the whole World, cannot be understood of any but of him that writes himself
God of Gods, and King of Kings, and Emperor of the Universe, the whole world,
who gives for his Ensign the Moon, the very Emblem of the world. Observe how
the Holy Ghost has deciphered him for his reign and residence, the East; for
his religion, the earth earthly and sensual, even the idle fancy and corrupt
deceit of Mahomet himself, mingled and composed of the parings, outside and
offall of the profession of Christians, Jews and Heathens; and lastly, his
unparalleld power and jurisdiction to be no less then the force and strength
of the whole world. Now me thinks the meaning of our Lords words, does agree
with his servant John's; for by the term Sun, our Lord does mean himself, the
Sun of righteousness, the truth of the Gospel; and it must be a great power
that must so oppose the doctrine of the Gospel in Christendom, as to turn our
light, that is, the light of men into the darkness of Mahometisme, and that
that Egyptian darkness that has overspread the greatest part of the world
where the Turk has dominion, should darken Christendom also, that is, the
Land of Goshen, if the true light should thus be made dark, then the Moon that
has no light but from the Sun, shall not give her light in our Saviors words;
and in his meaning also, men that are enlightened by him, as the Moon is by the
Sun, shall not give their light; for how can they possibly, when Christ which
is their light is darkened? and when the Sun and Moon thus fail, then must
needs the Stars, whether Ministers or Professors, all such as are not the
faithful indeed, shall fall from heaven to the earth, that is, from the truth
to Mahometisme; and in this great storm, the powers of Heaven, elect and
faithful, from which condition it is impossible they should fall; yet says
the Text, these shall be shaken with the terrible storm, which compared with
Rev. 6. 12. makes it more clear; for the Sun became as sackcloth of hair,
says the Apostle, and the Moon became as blood, and the Stars of heaven fell
unto the earth; even as a Fig Tree casts her untimely figs when she is
shaken with a mighty wind; here the Apostle is clear in understanding the
Stars to be not true born Christians, but untimely: and as St. Jude speaks and
calls them, wandering stars, to whom is reserved the blackness of darkness
for ever, verse. 13. But blessed be God for ever, that has bounded and limited
this last and great storm (that shall fall upon his Church, so as the very
powers thereof shall be shaken) with these comfortable words, immediately,
quickly, it shall be over, it shall continue but a little season.


Here Is. For the opinion of the Millenaries, the truth is, there is no show of
ground for it in the Scriptures, but we have of late gathered our selves into
a Church communion and fellowship, and walk together in that order that Christ's
Word holds out to us, finding in our practice the Scriptures true, that as
Moses was faithful in all his house as a servant, so Christ as a son is
faithful in his house, so that we order all things according to the Word, and
advance Christ's Kingdom, his Scepter and Law in the purity, as the Scriptures
do declare; believing also, that every congregation is independent, and that
none but Christ has power to command each congregation; and that none ought to
be constrained, or in the least measure opposed or punished, as touching their
consciences, but every man ought, and should live as the light of his
conscience leads him.


Truth. By what you express, you should be an Independent, as some call you,
and as some of your judgment call or term themselves, wherefore I demand of
you all, that would have general liberty for every man's opinion, whom I mean
by Independent, where you find it written in Gods Word, that you should gather*
or congregate your selves in that manner as you do; you that have been
Ministers, to leave your pastoral charges, and others, to forsake their
fellow-member-ship in each Congregation, for as much as the Law of this
Christian Church, as touching matters for public worship and meeting does
incorporate every Congregation or Parish, and of many members makes them but
one body, and yet you from this body, schism and rent your selves, and so of
diverse torn pieces, remnants and broken members, to patch up a body or
congregation of your own invention, contrary to the public order, the Statute
laws and ordinances of this Christian Church, and against the meaning of the
holy Scriptures also; and when you your selves have made a body of your own
making, then to have peculiar privileges to do what you please with the
consent of your members; and whatsoever you* shall do, to be beyond all power
or magistracy whatsoever, to either question you or punish you, although by the
rule of Gods Word there be cause, and all that all of you have done yet, is but
outward and external.

Now, I demand if there be precept or president for any or all these things you
do, if there be, then show it; if you can show none, for so I am sure you
cannot, then how can you clear your selves, but that your practice is of your
own inventions? For, this is your doctrine, that those rules and orders which
are prescribed by men, for the public worship and service of God, being not
plainly expressed in Gods Word, such laws and directions are Idolatry; and yet
will you devise rules and order (...) practice them your selves of your own
ordaining, for which you can bring no express word, nor true consequence. I
pray see the conclusion; therefore your way of Religion is a will worship, and
therefore Idolatrous, and aggravated, because it is against the lawful demands
of Christian authority. Here I would not be mistaken, by what I have said, to
oppose the private spiritual communion of the Saints, according to the
Apostles practice, and the Holy Ghosts direction, Hebr. 10. 25. But you say,
this Text proves your Church Way, Hebrews Chap. 3. Verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. the
substance of which Scripture is this, that as Moses was faithful in all his
house, as a servant, so Christ as a son, is faithful over his house; you
making Moses his faithfulness to consist in those prescripts and rules he gave
for the Temple* or Tabernacle in the form and structure, for Priests and their
habits, for the time of incense, sacrifices, divine services in the Oracles and
Ordinances of God, even all the external form and manner of Gods public
worship: and you say, that Christ's faithfulness in his house under the Gospel
is not inferior to Moses under the Law in all external laws, rules and
directions in every particular, for as much as Christ is the Son of his own
house, and as Moses had a word for every thing, so Christ has left a word for
every thing.

It is true, Moses is said to be faithful to make and do every thing according
to the platform and pattern which he saw that was showed him in the Mount, and
his work was to make a temporal resemblance of the eternal Tabernacle, which
in a vision was showed him, and therefore he made the Tabernacle or moving
Temple, and every particular that concerned the material things, both for
substance and circumstance, which were all figures and shadows of that to
come; and will you make that to come the Apostle speaks of outward material
external things and circumstances, and the Church of Christ under the Gospel,
answerable in outward material external things and circumstances prescribed
to the Jews by the Law of Moses? then you must have a word for the form and
matter of Churches or houses of meeting, a word to direct us, who, and how
shall be Ministers, who for what sort of men, and how they shall be ordained, and
a word for the bells for calling the congregation together; a word for the
Ministers actions in the administration of all holy services; a rule for
dismissing the assembly with a blessing; a word for childrens baptism, as for
circumcision; a word for the time and matter of the Lords Supper, as which of
all grapes for wine, and which of all grains for bread; and for the manner and
gesture for communication, as for the Passover, and the several other
circumstances about Gods public worship, which Moses by a plain word
prescribed to the people. Now, if Christ by himself, or his Apostles, have left
no such particular word or direction for the external manner of his Churches,
public services and order, as before are expressed, then by your argument,
Christ the Lord is not so faithful as Moses the servant, which is blasphemy in
any one so to speak. Wherefore it appears plainly you do not understand the
Apostles meaning; And that you may consider the Text, look again, and it will
teach you, which says, this man was counted worthy of more glory then Moses,
in as much as he who has builded the house, has more honor then the house;
and again, Christ is faithful, as a son over his own house, to purchase and
redeem, to call, to make, to bless, to sanctify and save it eternally; and
this spiritual house, this heavenly Tabernacle is that which the Apostle
proves Christ to exceed Moses in even in the substance it self, which all Moses
work did but witness to, and figure forth, and therefore the Apostle makes the
Sons house to be the Saints, the called and justified of God, whose house are
we, etc. that is, all Gods elect regenerated ones; wherefore, as the Holy
Ghost says, To day, says he, if you will hear his voice, harden not your
hearts, that is, repent, that your sins may be done away, this is Christ's way
and method to build his House, his Church, to make them spiritual by
regeneration, and of these spiritual sons to build his everlasting Tabernacle;
and thus Christ the Lord, the Son, the great Master Builder, is the high Priest
and Minister of the holy sanctuary, the true Tabernacle which God does build or
pitch, and not man, Heb. 8. 2. and in this sense every where does the Holy
Ghost understand the Sons House, or Church of Christ; the Temple of God is
holy, says the Apostle, which Temple ye are, 1 Cor. 3. 17. and again, Ye are
the Temple of the Holy Ghost, which is in you, which you have of God and not of
man, 1 Cor. 6. 19. and in the 20th verse, that it is the purchase of Christ's
blood, and the faithfulness of the son of the House; and again, says he,
Christ loves the Church, and gave himself for it, that he might wash it and
cleanse it with the washing of water by the word, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26. this is the
body, that is of Christ, which the whole ceremonial law of Moses were but
shadows of; and the faithfulness of Christ in his house consisting of such
spiritual substances, as has been before described, take heed how you affect
outward external forms, rules and order; for we find in Scripture, that such
as have been of your mind, to promote and advance, resting and glorying in the
outward observation and common things of the Church, that they have been the
worst of Christians and the persecutors of the Saints* wherefore take heed of
popularity and external dignity, for the outward state of the Church of the
Jews killed the prophets, and stoned them that were sent unto them, and yet
their outward state was of Gods ordinance, and yours of your own inventions,
like the case of the Scribes and Pharisees in our Savior Christ's time, whose
fair speeches, pretenses and colorable shows, were high in esteem amongst
men, yet an abomination before the Lord, Luke 16. 15. And the Prophet Jeremiah
says, the Pastors that should have gathered and fed Christ's sheep, did destroy
and scatter the sheep of Gods pasture, and tread down the faithful like the
dirt of the street, Isa. 51. 23. Prophecy against the Shepherds, says the
Lord to the Prophet, Son of man, prophecy against the Shepherds of Israel, and
say unto them, Woe be to the Shepherds of Israel, who feed themselves, and not
the flock, etc. the diseased have they not strengthened, neither have they
healed that which was sick, neither have they bound up that which was broken,
nor brought that which was driven away, nor sought that which was lost, but
with force and with cruelty have you ruled them, Ezekiel. 34. 2, 3, 4. How many of
you Independents is there, that deny the food of life to the Lambs of Christ?
and will neither preach to them the Word, nor deliver to them the Sacraments,
except they submit to your devised fancied covenant, and yield to such a
confession of your own devising, or else to be excluded your Church and
communion in Gods ordinances, which God himself freely offers to all that
receive the common faith? this new Independency is but old Popery, who laid as
fair claims to the name Riches and Treasury of Christ's Church as you can do,
by what ever I have found published by any of your leaders, and your humane
church constitution, no better then that of Babylon: wherefore omit not to
procure oil for your Lamps while the market lasts, lest your endeavor be too
late, when you cannot purchase it.

You that talk so much of Gods Word, and understand so little of it, I pray you
tell me where the name that most of you call your selves by is to be found in
the Scriptures; I am sure the term Independency is not once mentioned in all
the Churches of the Saints; yea, of and by them the quite contrary is affirmed:
For, says the Apostle, the eye cannot say to the hand, I have no need of thee,
nor again, the head to the feet, I have no need of you: for as the body is one,
and has in my members, and all the members of that one body, being many, are
one body* so is Christ, 1 Cor. 12. 21. and again, by one Spirit we are
baptized into one body, verse. 12, 13. that is, the whole Church, whether we be
Jews or Gentiles; So then to follow the Apostles argument, if there can be no
Independency of the members of, or in one body, then no particular Congregation
or Church can be independent from the rest; and the reason is beyond answering,
because all particular Churches make but one, which is the body of Christ; and
this is the Apostles inference, and so also is Christ, verse. 5. so we being
many are one body in Christ, and every one members one of another; so then see
the membership and Church Way of Gods Church in a spiritual and supernatural
respect, and not in a humane voluntary covenant, of which the Scripture says,
they confederate, but not by me, says the Lord, therefore acknowledge not a
confederacy to all them, to whom this people (says the Lord) shall say a
confederacy, Isa. 8. 12. For the confederacy or people convenanted together by
God, the Apostle calls all the suffering Saints, these are the body of Christ
(in these words) for his body sake which is his Church, Col. 1 24. Wherefore
now see in a word, how by mistaking Gods Word, you mistake the Scriptures, and
the meaning of Christ's faithfulness in his house as a son, in comparison of
Moses faithfulness as a servant.


Heresy. In this his saying, he reproaches us all, for his speech against the
external and outward gathering of Churches, whether Authority allow of it or
no, is against us all in particular; for we all agree in that, and in the
freedom and liberty of our consciences without question, or any control of
any power, authority or magistracy whatsoever.


Truth. Indeed this is the doctrine you all teach and cry out for with one
voice or consent, for which cause I termed you all at first, all one enemy
bound together which the newfound common With of Independency, which under a
fair pretense, as under the pleasant object of green grass lies the Snake or
Serpent, to destroy the very truth of God; and how ever you endeavor to bind
Sampson, the holy child of God, as Dalilah the Harlot did, yet the With of
your own invention, which you call Independency, can the child and mother of
Truth break in sunder like a straw of Rye, and grass of the field, to be
burned with fire, never again to be reckoned amongst the matter of Gods
building; and that we may discover this straw and stubble more clearly, let us
consider what you say, in that you all agree in the freedom and liberty of
conscience, etc. whereby the term Conscience without due distinction, you put
upon us most gross and absurd conclusions: For what do you say? in the
general you all say as much for Popery, Familisme, Arrianisme, Arminianisme,
and all the rest of the Heresies in particular as for your selves; Wherefore to
clear the question by the rule of truth, note and observe, that the Scripture
speaks of the term conscience in a manifold distinction: first, generally of
two sorts, good and bad: secondly, apart, and of both particularly; and

First, for the good, which is to be considered in a double respect; a strong
conscience and a weak conscience, so distinguished, because some are strong
through experience of the truth, and a great measure of knowledge, others
through want thereof are weak, which weak conscience ought not to be forced,
but born withal and supported, as 1 These. 5. 14. 1 Cor. 8. 7, 9, 10. 11. and
chap. 9. 22. both which consciences the Scripture calls good, pure, washed and
purged, 1 Timothy 1. 5. 1 Pet. 3. 21. 2 Timothy 1. 3. Heb. 9. 14. and 13. 18. Again,
in the general sense, the bad or evil conscience, that ought not to be born
with and supported, in no respect whatsoever, which conscience has a twofold
distinction also: for every man by nature, the elect as well as the reprobate,
has an evil conscience; and therefore the Apostle speaking in the person of
the regenerate elect, Heb. 10. 22. says thus; Having our hearts sprinkled
from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water, clearly
showing hereby, that the consciences of the elect themselves are wicked and
evil by nature, before regeneration.

And in the second place, the Apostle to Timothy, and to the Church of
Thessalonica, speaks of a higher degree of an evil conscience, even of such as
had known the truth, and yet had not received the love of the truth; for which
cause God sends such strong delusions, that they should believe lies, 2 These.
2. And as such do not love the truth, so they depart from the true faith, and
in stead thereof, give heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of Devils,
speaking and preaching lies in hypocrisy; having their consciences seared with
a hot iron, 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2. And the Spirit of God speaks expressly of the latter
times, in which last days of the world we now live in, which days and times
we by experience find to be perilous and dangerous, and by reason of the
crafty, cunning, devilish doctrines that are invented and sown amongst us,
that we find our Lords words true, If it were possible they should deceive the
very elect; for under fair speeches and religious pretenses, they broach and
sow dangerous doctrines: one cries out for Popery, and all the abominations
thereof; another with his pretended new light, does even darken the true light
of men; others say the Spirit of adoption is in all men, a shining and burning
light in the regenerate, and in the natural obscured and covered over with
corruptions, as the fire is raked up in ashes; others say, a man has no more
soul then a horse, and that the resurrection shall be alike between men and
beasts; others say there is neither Angel nor Spirit, neither heaven nor hell,
neither resurrection nor perfection; others say they are Christ, the prophesied
Messiah; others affirm of themselves they are the two Witnesses, the two
Olive Trees, the two Prophets, and the two Candlesticks; others blasphemously
say, that our Lord Jesus Christ was a deceiver, and so was the Apostles; they
also speak sleighly of the Scriptures, and say of themselves, that they can
write as good scripture as any of those we have; others are mere Atheists,
and say all things come by nature, and that they know not, nor hope for any
better condition then the present, and will say these words, and such like; Let
us eat and drink, and be merry, for to morrow we shall die: these, and a
thousand such blasphemies are maintained amongst us, and will every one of them
plead, it is their conscience so to believe, which by your doctrine, should all
be suffered without opposition and punishment; for shame never plead any longer
for Baal, but search the Scriptures, the Word of God, and it will teach you,
that the mouths of such Heretics and blasphemers must be stopped, 1 Timothy 1.
11. and St. Paul is as express in this point, I would they were cut off that
trouble you, Gal. 5. 12. I pray do not the forenamed false and lying spirits
preach another Gospel, another God, another Christ, and so fall within that
rule of Moses, Deuteronomy. 13. 5. that Prophet and that dreamer of dreams, that
persuades from our true God to a false, shall be put to death, according to
that holy Prophets commission, Ezra 7. 26. that whosoever would not do the Law
of God, and the King, execution shall be made upon them, whether unto death, or
unto banishment, or confiscation of goods, or imprisonment. Oh remember Gods
own hand against such blasphemous gainsayers, and withstanders of God and man,
Numb. 6. the earth opened its mouth and buried them alive, their tents, wives,
children, cattle, and all that pertained to them, Wherefore give unto God the
things that are Gods, and to Caesar the things that are Cesars, do not build
Babel again, under pretense of conscience; and learn this truth, that you must
needs be subject to all lawful rules, laws and orders, not only for wrath,
but also for conscience sake, Romans 13. 5.

Now for as much as upon true trial all of you of all sorts that are not born
of God, are plainly proved to be none of Gods house, none of Christ's Church,
nor the Temple of the Holy Ghost; therefore, that she may more apparently
appear to your understanding, I shall endeavor to make a brief description of
her and her children. The Scripture speaks of her sometimes by the name of a
man, and sometimes under the name and appellation of a woman: and at other
times, in the Neuter gender, either he or she, in these words, They overcame
him with the blood of the Lamb, etc. They loved not their lives unto the death;
he said unto them on his right hand, Come ye blessed of my Father, etc. and
abundance the like Scriptures, by which terms, either sex is to be understood:
now where the Scriptures set forth unto us the Saints and Church of Christ in
the Feminine gender, under the name and title of a woman, then it notes unto us
her fruitfulness, in bringing forth unto God, as well as unto men. Jerusalem
from above is the mother of us all, Gal. 4. 26. Of us all, that is, of all
those that are born of God, which birth is spiritual and heavenly, as before
has been showed; and in this sense she brings forth fruit unto God also, Romans
7. 4. And to men, Gods elected servants, she is a nursing mother, with bowels
of compassion, she has two breasts full of sincere milk for her little ones
that are young; and for her strong and elder children, she has stronger meat,
she kills for them her beasts; she has wine and bread, she furnishes her
table, Prove. 9. with a feast of fat things, a feast of wines on the lees, of
fat things full of marrow, Isa. 25. 6. The fruit of the rightous is a tree of
life, and they that turn souls unto God are wise, Prove. 11. 30. The children of
this woman are the children of Wisdom our Lord speaks of, who only are they
that can testify to the truth, These are the wise that shall shine as the
brightness of the firmament; and these are they that turn many unto
righteousness, who shall be hereafter as glorious as the stars for ever and
ever; this is she whom God calls Sion and Jerusalem, that brings glad
tidings, even the joyful voice, the people in whose heart is Gods Law, and
covenant of life for ever, in and by them preserved; for they are the keepers
of his truth, and as they know the truth, so they preach it and declare it; it
is a fountain in them, Out of their bellies do flow rivers of water of life: so
also it is a storehouse, a magazine of the Lords provision, abundance, a
plenty of things, old and new; this good man, out of the treasury of his good
heart, brings forth that which is good; this householder is the Scribe
instructed unto the kingdom of heaven, who brings forth of his treasury
things new and old; their fountain is their own and not another; it is only
this spiritual and heavenly woman, the Church of Christ, who unfoldeth and
makes known to the world the manifold wisdom of God, Ephesians. 3. 10. which woman
sometimes, according to the grace given her, is called a holy woman, a pure,
undefiled, chaste virgin; behold, these are my mother, says the Lord himself:
and sometimes gloriously described; there appeared in heaven, says St. John, a
great wonder, a woman clothed with the Sun, and the Moon under her feet, and
upon her head a crown of twelve stars, great with child, traveling in birth
with pain ready to be delivered, Rev. 12. 1, 2. Observe, this woman is
continually fruitful, still increasing, still big, traveling and bringing
forth unto God; and as she is thus glorious in regard of her graces, so in
regard of her sorrows and sufferings, she is called a barren woman, by such
harlots as call themselves the wife of Christ, who not knowing the low, the
spiritual, the humble penitent poor condition of the true Spouse, despise her,
hate and contemn her, as Hagar the bond-ma^id did her Mistress Sarah, the
freewoman, and report of her that is the Lords love and delight, as desolate
and forsaken of her husband, even a despicable and forlorn widow, and shall so
be accounted of all that are filthy, till her sufferings are ended, even as the
offscouring of the earth. This holy Church of Christ, is also described unto
us in the Scripture, under the Masculine appellation, a man, the firstborn, a
man-child; Israel, says the Lord by the Prophet, is my firstborn, Deuteronomy. 4.
23. Let my son go, says the Lord; for Israel is my son, my firstborn, verse.
22. I am a father to Israel, says the Lord, and Ephraim is my firstborn, Jer.
31. 9. where by Israel and Ephraim, God means his faithful chosen people, his
Church: so the first and primitive fruit of the Church, under the Gospel, is
called a man-child, Rev. 12. 5. And she brought forth a manchild, who was to
rule all nations with a rod of iron. Now this name or appellation of the
Church, notes out unto us two things: First, the honor and dignity of the
Church, that although now in this life they suffer, and go by the worst of all
carnal and outward Christians, yet in the time to come, they shall receive the
self-same honor which to their Lord alone, and in chief belongs: And as they
shall have the same honor with their Lord, Mat. 19. Rev. 2. so the Lord is
pleased to be called by their title also, Psalm. 89. 27. I will make him my
firstborn, higher then the Kings of the earth; and then he speaks of his
Church, verse. 29. His seed also will I make to endure for ever, and his throne
as the days of heaven, where he will place his Church with himself for
evermore, Mat. 9. 28. Rev. 2. 27. with him in his throne; yea, in his own
throne. In the second place, this Masculine title notes out unto us the
birthright and inheritance that by right belongs unto the Church of God; that
as the firstborn man-child is the heir apparent, both by Scripture and nature,
so the Lords firstborn is the apparent heir of the purchased inheritance: and
to this truth does the Apostle witness in these words, Romans 8. 17. If
children, then heirs, heirs with God, and joint heirs with Christ, heirs of
salvation, Heb. 1. 14. Heirs according to the promise, Gal. 3. 29. Heirs
according to the hope of eternal life, Tit. 3. 7. Heirs of the kingdom which
he has promised to them that love him, James 2. 5. Oh how sweet and
comfortable are the words! I could always be mindful of them; yea, of this
word, heirs of the kingdom which he has promised, etc. which now calls me to
mind of my promise at first, to describe in its due place, the stone that was
cut out without hands, which smote the Image upon his feet, which became a
great mountain, and filled the whole earth, etc.

This term Mountain, in the Scriptures, sets forth unto us, often literally,
the hills, or highest parts of the earth, but figuratively the greatest powers
that are in this world, or that to come; and sometimes by mountain we are to
understand, such carnal and natural men as have high thoughts, and great
esteem of themselves; and therefore as it is prophesied of John the Baptist,
Isa. 40. 3, 4. so it was fulfilled by him, Luke 3. 4. who by the great gifts
given him of God to work repentance, whereby he prepared the Lords way, and
turned the disobedient to the wisdom of the just; and of the operation of his
Ministry, it is said, Every mountain and hill was brought low, etc. meaning,
that the hearts of disobedient natural men were made penitent, and their high
thoughts humbled. Also by the term mountain we are to understand, all those
great powers, dignities and authorities that have risen up, and born sway in
this world, ever since the creation thereof, and amongst the rest, those
Monarchies, especially at the beginning of our Discourse, particularly named,
and with them, all nations and Religions, Papists, and others, as well
Christians as Pagans, that have at all times hated, persecuted and destroyed
the Saints, the Church of Christ; and with this truth, the Prophet Jeremiah was
well acquainted, in saying, in the name of the Lord, that he would render unto
Babylon, and all the inhabitants of Chaldea, all their evil that they had done
to Sion; Behold, I am against thee, O destroying mountain, says the Lord,
which destroyedst all the earth, etc. Jer. 51. 24, 25. and again, Who art thou,
O great mountain, thou shall be made a plain, Zac. 4* 7. And for this cause,
even for the great oppression of his servants and people, will the Lord shortly
go forth as a mighty man, he shall stir up jealousy like a man of war, he
shall cry, yea roar; he shall prevail against his enemies mightily; and
although he have been long silent and held his peace, and restrained himself
all this world long, and has suffered his own wife and little children to be
afflicted with judgment from all the powers and authorities that have ruled in
the earth, yet now it is near at hand, that he that shall come will come, and
will not tarry, but will destroy and devour at once all the mountains and hills
that have desolated his own little holy hill of Sion, Isa. 42. 13, 14, 15.
Psalm. 2. 6. And this holy hill of Sion, which David speaks of, is the small
stone, cut out of the mountain without hands, that Daniel so long before saw in
a Vision, which became so great a mountain, that it brake to pieces the gold,
the silver, the brass, the iron, the clay, that no place was found for them
for ever hereafter. Now the holy Scribe Ezra, is showed what the mountain cut
out without hands is, 2 Ezr. 13. 35. that it is Sion, the Church of God, and
her King, the Son of God, standing on the top of this mount Sion (a posture of
Majesty, belonging only to a King,) and that this King should without sword, or
lifting up his hand, or any instrument of war, destroy the multitudes that came
out to fight against him with a blast of fire, sent out of his mouth, and out
of his lips a flaming breath and sparkles, and tempest cast out with his
tongue, verse. 10. and the torments are like to a flame, and their destruction
shall be with the law, that is, like unto fire, v. 38. And the peaceable
multitude are the ten Tribes, carried away by Salmaneser, king of Assyria; now
both their carrying into captivity past long ago, and their return, which is
not yet brought to pass, are a lively type of the Saints captivity, both of
Jews and Gentiles, in the Churches pressures and sufferings, and of their
deliverance and salvation also; as likewise the set-time to be in the day of
the Lord Jesus his coming and revealing, v. 28. to the 50. compared with 2
King. 17. And farther, it filled the whole earth, says the Text, Dan. 2. 34.
Observe the Prophets expression, that the holy mountain of the Lord at the
first was seen to be a stone cut out without hands, which clearly deciphereth
unto us, the true nature of the Church of Christ in her first and suffering
condition, the ten Tribes captivity in their estate of regeneration, by which
she is made a holy, living, spiritual stonehouse, and so made or fashioned,
not by man's hands, or any humane power, as all the fleshly Synagogues of this
world are, but cut out and made without hands, as that Tabernacle which God
does build, and not man, which is the true Church or Tabernacle, Heb. 8. 2. And
as I have often touched before, continually all this life long suffers under
those that are evil and malignant, truly so called: wherefore the Lord by the
Prophet comforts this holy Church and mother of truth; for a moment have I
forsaken thee, but with great mercies will I gather thee; in a little wrath
have I hid my face from thee, for a moment, but with everlasting kindness will
I have mercy on thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer; And again, Oh thou afflicted
and tossed with tempest; I will speak it again, ^ossed with tempest; here is a
word that sets out the suffering of truth with her children to the full, even
so tossed with the storm and tempest of affliction, as a ship is tossed with
the roaring and raging waves of the seas; or as a ball is tossed and beaten up
and down, both by hand and foot, Isa. 54. Now as the Prophet Daniel by the
dream of the King did understand the day of small things concerning the
Churches condition in her estate of regeneration; so also he saw the great and
glorious power and sovereignty, its dominion and magnitude, in its deliverance
and perfection: and the stone that smote the Image became a great mountain, and
filled the whole earth; this is the mountain of Gods holiness, even the
greatest power and sovereign authority that ever was in the world before it.
And the Text notes out unto us three things, the time when it shall be, the
place where it shall be, and the manner how it shall be; the manner has a
double consideration, first, the beginning and weakness of this powerful
kingdom, expressed as before I have declared in her spiritual estate of
renovation or regeneration, in these words, a stone was cut out without hands;
and in this first estate and condition of the Church, it is said to live and
reign, to attain victory, and overcome, Rev. chap. 20. and 12. but this victory
is by faith, this overcoming is by suffering, they overcame him, that is, the
Dragons pagancy, by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their testimony,
and they loved not their lives unto death, and at this battle the armies were
great on both sides, and the victory glorious on the Saints side, Rev. 12. 7.
11. In the second consideration, we are to understand the Church in her glory
and perfection, and to as far exceed all the Monarchies, Kingdoms and Powers
that were before it, as the body exceeds the shadow, the person the picture,
the circumference the center. The Babylonian Monarchy, the head of gold, was a
great power, Thou, O King, says the Prophet, art a King of kings, for the God
of heaven has given thee a kingdom, strength, power and glory, and
wheresoever the children of men dwell, beasts of the field, and fowls of the
heaven has he given into thy hand, and has made thee ruler over them all,
yet all these bounds and dominations are but by way of comparison, to the
universe, the heavens, earth and sea, which are the bounds of Christ's and his
Church, rule and Lordship: Secondly, the nature and condition of the kingdoms
of this world, and the power and greatness of Majesty that Christ's Kingdom
shall have in the world to come, differs beyond all comparison: For the
kingdoms of this world are finfull kingdoms, powers and authorities; yea,
this present evil world is corrupted, and lies under the cursed condition by
reason of sin, and as long as this face of the covering is cast over all
people, and this evil is spread over all nations, Isa. 25. 7. even so long
death the King of fears the wages of that sin shall reign in it, according to
the Scriptures, Genesis 3. 17. Romans 5. 17, 21. 1 Cor. 15. but when the Lord shall
set up his Kingdom, he will create new heavens, and a new earth: Behold,
says he, I will do it, and the former shall not be remembered, nor come into
mind: but be you glad and rejoice for ever in that which I create; For, behold,
I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people a joy, Isa. 65. 17, 18. And the
Apostle by the same Spirit of Prophecy, says, that the heavens and the earth
that are now, with all these things, shall be dissolved: And according to Gods
promise, we look (that is, all Gods Saints) for new heavens, and a new earth,
wherein dwells righteousness, 2 Pet. 3. And the Apostle John tells us, Rev.
21. what this new heaven, and new earth is, even the holy Church of God, the
new Jerusalem coming down from God out of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned
for her husband; and a voice out of heaven expounds it to him, Behold, the
Tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be
his people, and God himself shall be with them, and be their God, and God shall
wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more death, neither
sorrow nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain; for the former things
are passed away: And again, says the Lord, Behold, I make all things new,
write, for these things are true and faithful.

Once again observe the Prophet Daniel, in these words, and it became a great
mountain, of which our Savior gives the meaning in these words, The kingdom
of heaven is like unto a grain of mustard seed, which is the least of all
seeds, but when it is grown (just as the Prophet [ it became] so our Lord) it
is the greatest among herbs, and became a tree, etc. both which places as one
shows, that although the Church be now so little, that no man heeds or regards
her, yet her increase shall be from the least of all seeds to a tree with
branches, and from a small stone to a huge great mountain, even so big, as to
fill the whole earth.

Which magnitude, excellent glory, greatness, and sovereignty of the Church
and Kingdom of God, I shall in part discover, by considering these eight
particulars: the King, the Kingdom, the Throne, the Scepter, the Laws, the
Privileges, the Officers, and the Subjects: And for the King thereof, thus
says the Prophet, notwithstanding all the rage and opposition of the Heathens,
and the vain imaginations of the people, Yet have I set my King upon my holy
hill of Sion, says the Lord, Psalm. 2. 1. 5. and the title of his Crown is the
title of his Cross, This is the King of the Jews, Luke 23. 38. and himself
testifying a good confession before Pilate, says, Thou say I am a King: to
this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world, Joh. 18. 37.
Secondly, the Scriptures speak of the Kingdom of Christ above all comparison,
and calls it, the kingdom of the Son of God, and, that there was given him
dominion, and glory, and a Kingdom, etc. Dan. 7. 13, 14. Now the consideration
of these four things will briefly discover to us, how this Church and Kingdom
of Christ exceeds all other powers or kingdoms whatsoever: First, in the
Majesty of it: Secondly, in its excellency: Thirdly, in its universality; and
Fourthly, in its eternity: The Majesty sets forth the magnitude and greatness
of this kingdom, the King is great, and the Kingdom is great, Behold, says the
Angel to the Virgin, he shall be great, and he shall reign over the house of
Jacob for ever, Luke 1. 32. 33. And the Prophet Daniel describes this
greatness, and what this house of Jacob is, in these words, and the kingdom,
and dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven, shall
be given to the people of the Saints of the most High, whose kingdom is an
everlasting kingdom, and all dominions, rulers and powers, shall serve and
obey him, Dan. 7. 27. The excellency is set forth by the glory, splendour and
purity of it; and in this respect it is in Scripture called the kingdom of
God, the kingdom of Christ, a kingdom of Priests, a kingdom of Saints, the
kingdom of our God, the kingdom of glory, heavenly country, city,
inheritance, possession, reward, all heavenly, all glorious, all holy, there
shall be nothing to hurt nor destroy in my holy mountain, says the Lord: the
glory is expressed beyond the light of Sun and Moon in the firmament, or gold or
precious jewels in the earth, there shall in no wise be any thing there that
defiles, Rev. 21. 27. Thirdly, its universality sets forth the largeness of
the dominion and unbounded limits of it; the Prophet David says, Its dominion
is from sea to sea, from the river to the ends of the earth, I will give thee
the heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy
possession, there is the dominion; and in the next words, see the greatness of
the power and authority, Thou shall break them with a rod of iron, and dash
them to pieces like a Potters vessel, Psalm. 2. 8, 9. They that dwell in the
wilderness shall how before him, and his enemies shall lick the dust; yea, all
kings shall fall down before him, all nations shall serve him, Psalm. 72. 8, 9,
10. And therefore he is called the King of nations, for his universal
jurisdiction; Who would not fear thee, O King of nations? for greatness and
power pertain to thee, Jer. 10. 6, 7. And Daniels witness is, that all people,
nations and languages shall fear him, his dominion is an everlasting dominion,
which shall not pass away, and his Kingdom that which shall not be destroyed,
Dan. 7. 14. which in the last place shows the eternity or perpetuity of the
Kingdom; and therefore the Apostle calls it, The everlasting Kingdom of our
Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1. 11. He shall reign, says the Angel, over the
house of Jacob for ever, and of his Kingdom there shall be no end, Luke 1. 33.
And this glorious kingdom of Christ is often in Scripture termed a world
without end: under these terms, everlasting life, everlasting kingdom, etc.
The people of God, that formerly were, and now are refused, contemned, and cast
off from the thoughts and estimations of others, shall then in that day be made
a strong nation, and the Lord himself shall reign over them in mount Sion, from
henceforth even for ever, says the Prophet, Mic. 4. 7.

The next and third particular to be considered, is the throne of the Kingdom
of Christ; And for that we have the Angels testimony also; And the Lord God
shall give unto him the throne of his father David, Luke 1. 32. And again, Thy
throne, O God, is a throne of righteousness, established for ever and ever,
Psalm. 45. 6. And again, Thy seed will I establish for ever, and build up thy
throne to all generations. And again, His seed will I make to endure for
ever, and his throne as the days of heaven, Psalm. 89. 4. ver. 29. And again
the third time, His seed shall endure for ever, and his throne as the Sun
before me, ver. 36.

What moves the holy Prophet thus three times to make mention of the King, the
throne, and thy seed, that is, Gods children by regeneration, thus to sing and
rejoice in the remembrance of them together, but for to show us this holy
truth, that the Saints shall reign with their King, that the Saints shall
judge the world? for this blessed comfort the Lord preaches to his children
himself by his own mouth, Rev. 2. 26, 27. He that evercometh and keeps my
words unto the end, to him will I give power over the Nations, and he shall
rule them with a rod of iron, etc. And I will grant to him to sit with me in my
throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with my father in his Throne,
Chap. 3. 21. And thus taught he his blessed Apostles that followed him, in the
regeneration, as St. Matthew says, and had participated and continued with him
in his sufferings and temptations, as Luke has it, I appoint unto you a
kingdom, says our Lord, as my Father has appointed unto me, that ye may eat
and drink at my table, in my Kingdom, and sit on thrones judging the twelve
Tribes of Israel, Mat. 19. 28. Luke 22. 29, 30. yea, this honor have all the
Saints, with the King in the Kings Throne; Oh ye Saints, praise ye the Lord,
Psalm. 149. 9.

The fourth particular is the Scepter of this kingdom, and that the Holy Ghost
calls a Scepter of righteousness, Heb. 1. 8. a Scepter of righteousness, or
righteousnesses, that is, righteous in the purity and excellency of it, is the
Scepter of thy Kingdom; this is properly Shilohs, the Saviors Scepter, Genesis
49. 10. Yet such is the Kings grace to his servants, his seed, Church and
people, that of this which in particular belongs to himself alone, even of this
also does he communicate to his little ones, his firstborn, the heirs of
salvation, not only to sit with him in his Throne, but also to rule with his
Scepter: The woman's child which are the Saints, says the Text, are to rule
even as their Lord himself does, all nations with a rod of iron, that is, with
the Scepter of righteousness, Rev. 12. 5. And the Lord has decreed for ever,
that it shall be so, whosoever he be that overcomes, he will give him power
and authority to sit with him in his Throne, to rule over all nations, with a
rod of iron, and to break them as an earthen vessel is dashed to pieces with a
bar of iron, Rev. 2. 26, 27. And as the King of glory does place the Saints in
his own throne, and gives them in particular the sway and rule of his own
Scepter, so he honors them with his own crown also, called a Crown of life, a
Crown of glory, a Crown of righteousness, and the like, they are all crowned,
Rev. 4. 10. The crown is laid up for all that love the appearing of our Lord
Jesus Christ the King of Saints, 2 Timothy 4. 8.

The fifth particular in discovering the greatness of Christ's glorious
kingdom, are the laws and rules of this kingdom, for as the kingdom it self is
new, and all things new in it, so are the laws also, A new commandment give I
unto you, says the King himself, that you love one another, as I have loved
you, that you love one another, Joh. 13. 34. Here Is both the Precept and the
President; this holy commandment was given unto them in their estate of
regeneration, 2 Pet. 2. 21. and continues in them world without end, in glory
and perfection, it is the law of the endless life; this law of love, it abides
for ever, charity never fails, 1 Cor. 13. 8. most or all things else shall
fail, Prophecy shall fail, tongues shall cease, knowledge it shall vanish away;
all imperfect things shall terminate and come to an end, but this new
commandment Love, endures for ever; Death is strong, for it has and will kill
all men made and created; and the grave, the issue of death is mighty, but
love surmounts them all in the better sense, Cant. 8. 6. The sea of waters
cannot quench it, nor all the floods, or overflowings of the Ocean cannot
drown it; for the coals thereof are coals of fire, which has a most vehement
flame, and it contemns all manner of substance to purchase it, it is no way to
be attained, but by the gift of God. I will put my laws in their inward parts,
and write them in their hearts, says the Lord, Jer. 31. 33. This glorious
kingdom are all such as are made of God Kings and Priests; these are the
Levits to whom God has given the Law and Covenant of life to, this
commandment of peace and salvation, Mal. 2. 4, 5, 6. which has comforted his
people here, and for ever does guide and regulate them in the perfection, the
glorious and everlasting kingdom of Christ hereafter. Which Law of Gods
kingdom is called in Scriptures, a holy law, a royal law, a law of life, a
law of liberty, a perfect law, and such like, James 1. 25. Chap. 2. 8. 12.

The sixth thing considerable, is the privileges of this kingdom of glory,
which are so great and many, that I shall rather obscure then discover them,
their privilege of power and Authority is exceeding much, and abundantly set
forth in the Scriptures; for when the Lord shall exalt Jerusalem, this his own
kingdom, then shall the Lord break the staff of the wicked, and the scepter
of the rulers, Isa. 14. 5. Behold, says the Lord, I will make them of the
Synagogue of Satan, which say they are Jews and are not, but do lie. Behold,
(says he the second time again to his Church) I will make them come to
worship before thy feet, and to know that I have loved thee, Rev. 3. 9. This
is such a dignity and privilege as the Lord himself with a twofold word of
audience affirms to take them captives, whose captives they were, and to rule
over their oppressors, Isa. 14. 2. with the praises of God in their mouths, and
a twoedged sword in their hands, to execute vengeance and punishment upon
heathenish people, to bind their Kings with chains, and their Nobles with
fetters of iron; this honor or privilege have all the Saints, Psalm. 149. And
so says the Prophet, The sons of them that afflicted thee, shall come
bending unto thee, and all that despised thee, shall how themselves down at
the soles of thy feet, and they shall call thee the City of the Lord, the
Sion of the holy One of Israel; whereas thou have been forsaken and hated, so
that no man went through thee, or delighted in thy company; I will make thee an
eternal excellency, a joy of many generations, Isa. 60. 14, 15. So also their
privilege of freedom and liberty, does set forth their glory; Jerusalem
which is above, is free, which is the mother of us all, Gal. 4. 26. They are
all freeborn, so begotten and born by the Word it self; for all the whole
Kingdom are children of the truth, and the truth it was that which made them
free, Joh. 8. 32. Now the Word and the truth are the Son, and those that the
Son makes free, are free indeed, ver. 36. and from all manner of bondage;
free from sin, free from death, free from sorrow, free from the grave, free
from corruption, free from oppression, free from suffering, enlarged and set at
liberty for ever to enjoy immortality, these are the people that possess and
enjoy the glorious liberty or freedom of the sons or children of God, Romans
8. 21.

Also the company and associates that are in this heavenly kingdom do
exceedingly declare the glory of it, to have and enjoy the presence of God, of
Christ, and the holy Ghost, the company of all the holy Angels, the company and
society of all the holy Patriarks, Prophets, and Saints, with the comfortable
delight and excellency of the restitution and perfection of all creatures, both
in the heavens, the earth, and the sea, and all that is within them, as shall
be showed hereafter, in the point of universal subjection. In Gods presence,
says the Prophet, is fullness of joy, and at thy right hand are pleasures for
evermore, Psalm. 16. 11. You, says the Lord, speaking to his Saints, I appoint
unto you a kingdom, and ye shall eat and drink with me at my table in my
kingdom, Luke 22. 30. And as the Angels are ministering spirits here in the
Saints sufferings, Heb. 1. 7. so in the world to come with the presence of God
we shall have the company and presence of the Angels about the throne, says
the text, Rev. 7. 11. And there shall we see Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and
all the holy Prophets in the kingdom of God, and have heavenly sweet society
and company with them, Luke 13. 28. Now as the privileges of the kingdom
excel, so also its Officers exceed all others; I will, says the Lord, make
thy Officers peace, and thine exactors righteousness; violence shall no more
be heard in thy land, wasting and destruction within thy borders; but thou
shall call thy walls salvation, and thy gates praise, Isa. 60. 18, 19. Then
shall mercy and truth meet together, righteousness and peace shall kiss each
other, Psalm. 85. 10. And this is the seventh consideration; the eight
follows, which are the subjects of this great King and Kingdom.

And the Apostle is so general and universal in these, that he excepts none,
neither in heaven, nor in earth, not sea, nor under the earth, even none that
can be named, but God the Father only, that subdued all under his Sons feet,
which is the King of this Kingdom; for so says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. 27. For
he has put all things under his feet; for when he says, all things are put
under him, it is manifest that he is excepted who did put all things under him:
so then it is clear, that Angels and men, and all other creatures, are the
subjects of this great Kingdom; He has put all things in subjection under his
feet, says the Apostle, Heb. 2. 8. And this is the Prophets witness; I have
sworn by my self, says the Lord, the word is gone out of my mouth in
righteousness, and shall not return, that unto me every knee shall how, every
tongue shall swear, Isa. 45. 23. And again, The nations and kingdoms that
will not serve thee shall perish, yea those nations shall be utterly wasted,
Chap. 60. 12. And of the Angels says the Apostle, Let all the Angels of God
worship him, Heb. 1. 6. And the Apostle expounds the Oath of the Lord for this
universal subjection, and says, It is written, as I live says the Lord,
every knee shall how to me, and every tongue shall confess to God, Romans 14.
11. And again he says, At the name of Jesus every knee shall how, of things
in heaven and things in earth, and things under the earth, and every tongue
shall confess that Jesus is Lord and King, to the glory of God the Father,
Phil. 2. 10, 11. And yet the holy Ghost is more particular, to prove that all
things in all places are subject to Christ, Rev. 5. 13. And every creature,
says he, which is in heaven, and on the earth, and under the earth, and such
as are in the sea, and all that are in them, says John, heard I saying,
Blessing, honor, glory and power, be unto him that sits upon the throne,
and unto the Lamb for ever and ever. And the Prophet David, he foretold of
this universal subjection of all creatures in the kingdom of Christ in the
world to come, says the Author to the Hebrews, and understood it in these
words, admiring at it, What is man that thou art so mindful of him, or the
son of man that thou visitest him? thou have made him a little lower then
Angels; and the Apostle gives the reason of that, Thou have crowned him with
glory and honor, thou have made him to have dominion over the work of thy
hands, thou have put all things under his feet, all sheep and oxen, yea and
the beasts of the field; the fowls of the air, and the fishes of the sea:
which makes the Prophet fall into a wonderment; Oh God our Lord, how excellent
is thy name in all the earth! Psalm. 8. 4. Heb. 2. 6.

Now I am come to the two last particulars, the time when this glorious
kingdom of Christ shall be set up, and the place where it shall be continued
for ever: the time was thus foreshewed to the Prophet David, that the time of
Christ's Churches persecution, should not be till his second Appearing, in these
words, When the Lord shall build up Sion, he shall appear in his glory, Psalm.
102. 16. And this time our Lord himself plainly teaches us to be at the end
of this world, and not before; which truth the Saints and people of God do
fully and certainly believe, although a thousand false Prophets should arise
and preach the contrary, under what show or pretense of learning and religion
soever they make.

The clear and plain Doctrine of our Lord is this, Mat. 13. 39, 40, 41. The
harvest is the end of the world, and the reapers are the Angels, as therefore
the tares are gathered and burnt in the fire, so shall it be in the end of this
world, the Son of man shall send forth his Angels, and they shall gather out
of his kingdom, all scandalous things, and all such as do offend them, or
which do or work iniquity. And when the question is made by the servants to
the householder, Whether the tares the envious man sowed among the good seed
should be plucked up? The Master answers, Nay, let them both grow together till
the harvest; and also gives the reason, and shows farther what shall be done
then, and not before, both with the tares and wheat also, although many
unwarily do affirm at this time amongst us the contrary, yet thus says the
Lord, (and therefore I would wish all the contrary minded to take notice of it)
that at his glorious coming shall be the Kingdoms deliverance, reign, and
perfection, and not before; therefore says her Lord and King, When the Son
of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy Angels with him, then shall be
sit upon the throne of his glory, and before him shall be gathered all nations,
and he shall separate them one from another, is a shepherd divides his sheep
from the goats, and then he shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the
goats on the left, and assign and put in possession the one to eternal
bliss, but the other to a perditious eternal woeful cursed condition, even
binding them into bundles to be burned; but the blessed to possess the Lords
own house and habitation for ever, Mat. 25. 31, 32. Chap. 13. 30.

And because this truth has exceedingly suffered of late, by the literal
learned of this generation, who have befoul'd the beauty and purity of it, with
their dark smokie and misty mistakes, under pretense of pleading for the Lamb
and his wife; I shall therefore briefly discover the spiritual learning of the
Apostles and Prophets mysterious expressions of this holy truth: the holy
Apostle John in the Revelations speaks with the same wisdom, aid and guidance
of the Spirit, as the Angel taught Daniel in the same mysteries, and their very
expressions in many things are alike, but more opened and revealed by the
Apostle, then by the Prophet; they both agree in the computation of the time,
though one writ long before the other, and each differing in the rule of
reckoning, as the manners of the countries in which they lived; the one living
among the Chaldeans, the other among the Hebrews; the one computing their times
and years according to the course of the Sun, the other by the course of the
Moon: the Hebrews, their reckoning is certain thirty days to a month, and
twelve months to a year; the Chaldeans they reckon and compute according to
the course and rule of the Moon, which causes this seeming difference: for
John's whole time for Antichrists reign is twelve hundred and sixty years, in
which the two witnesses shall prophecy in sackcloth, which as it notes out
unto us their spiritual low and humble condition, so also their persecuted and
suffering estate and condition, Rev: 11. 3. Now Daniel makes the same very time
of the abomination of desolation, to be twelve hundred and ninety years, Dan.
12. 11. reckoning both of them days for years, according as the Prophets did
reckon and account, as I have proved before: now I shall make it appear unto
you, that these two holy men of God, that were moved and led by the same
Spirit, both spoke one and the same thing, both for the power and mystery of
Iniquity, and for the full and complete time of one and the self-same number of
years, for the continuance of it. And I prove it thus: as thirteen moons are
thirteen months, and these thirteen months make but one year of twelve
months, reckoning thirty days to a month, and twelve months to a year, by
the same rule, one thousand two hundred and ninety years by the Chaldee
reckoning, amount but to one thousand two hundred and threescore years,
according to the reckoning of the Hebrews. And as they agree in this seeming
difference, so they do most sweetly consent and agree in the point in hand,
concerning the time of the beginning of the glorious kingdom of Jesus Christ,
one and the same Angel teaches them one and the same truth; and although there
were near 500. years distance between the times of their prophesying, yet the
Angels majesty both of doctrine and gesture is one and the same to both, all
which shows this doctrine of the time of the Lords coming to restore all
things, to exalt his Church and Saints, to be a most admirable and singular
secret and mystery, for the continual comfort and supportation of all his
suffering members in all their afflictions; and this made the Apostle, speaking
to the Saints of Thessalonica, of the day of the Lords coming, his descending
from heaven at the last trump, and the resurrection of such as are dead in
Christ; wherefore says he, comfort one another with these words, 1 These. 4.
18. Blessed and holy is he, says St. John, that has part in the first
resurrection, for he alone is the man that looks for his coming, and has
comfort in his appearing; the very same says Daniel, Blessed is he that
waits and comes to the 1335. days, but go thou thy way till the end be, for
thou shall rest and stand in the Lot at the end of the days, Dan. 12. 12, 13.
which number exceeds the former, which comprehended the whole time of
Antichrists reign and persecution, 45. years, thereby discovering a deep
mystery of high understanding, which none but the wise can possibly apprehend,
as the Prophet declares, verse. 10. which additionall number notes out unto us,
that little season that shall be between the total destruction of Antichrist
and the final consummation of this world, which our Lord himself signifies by
the word immediately, thereby to set forth all the time between the days of
tribulation, and his own glorious appearing; and St. John uses the word
quickly, to set forth all the time likewise between the woeful reign of
Antichrist, and the woeful ruin of all ungodly men in these words, Rev. 11.
The second woe is past, and behold the third woe comes quickly; and as it is
showed to John, that after the thousand years should be finished, expired, and
fulfilled, which is the whole time of Poperies cruelty and mystery of
Iniquity; and the Dragon, the Devils liberty, which is expressed for the time to
be a little season, in which Satan shall move and stir up the nations of the
four quarters of the earth, even Gog and Magog, those great and innumerable
multitudes to desolate the Saints, the Church, even the beloved city of God, as
before I have touched, till the very instant of time of the Son of man's
coming in his white and glorious throne to judgment, before whose face the
earth and the heavens fled away, and there was found no place for them, Rev.
20. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. and likewise the 45. additionall years of Daniels Chaldee
reckoning, to be the whole time in which God will accomplish the scattering of
the powers of his holy people, and between the ending of the time, times and
half a time, and the general resurrection to have all these things fulfilled;
and this is clearly, though briefly intimated, wherefore I demand of all you
learned Monarchists, Judaists and Millenarists, where in Gods Word you will
find any time for the glory of the Churches prosperity in this world? Well, let
a word be enough to the wise, and therefore never preach nor print such
doctrines hereafter.

The last thing is the place, where the Scriptures speak that Christ and his
kingdom shall be in for evermore, and that is the earth, says the truth,
Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth, Mat. 5. 5. The
kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord and his Christ,
and he shall reign for ever and ever, Rev. 11. 15. even then, when the Lord
himself shall descend f^rom heaven with a shout, with the voice of the
Archangel, with the trump of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise first, and
the Saints living changed, before the kingdom be established, 2 These. 4. 16.
which St. John makes to be the voice of the seventh and last Angel, Rev. 10. 7.
saying, When he shall begin to sound, the mystery of God shall be finished; and
that the earth at that time shall be made the place of Christ and his Churches
habitation eternally glorified; observe the clear and unanimous consent of all
Scriptures; this is the new song of the 24. Elders, Rev. 5. 9, 10. which sung
to the praise of the Lamb of God, Thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God
by thy blood, out of every tongue, and people, and nation, and have made us
unto our God Kings and Priests, and we shall reign on the earth: And David
makes it the song of his delight, in the often repetition of it, Psalm. 37. 9.
Evil doers, says he, shall be cut off, but those that wait upon the Lord
shall inherit the earth. For yet a little while, and the wicked shall not be.
But the meek shall inherit the earth, v. 10. 11. And again, Such as are
blessed of God shall inherit the earth, and they that be cursed of him shall
be cut off, v. 22. yea, the earth has the Lord given to the children of men,
Psalm. 115. 16. And again, The spiritual sons of him that fears the Lord
shall inheritthe earth, Psalm. 25. 13. Wherefore great is the Lord, and greatly
to be praised in the city of our God, in the mountain of his holiness,
beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole earth is mount Sion, Psalm. 48.
1, 2. then shall it be that the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of
God, as the waters cover the Sea, Isa. 11. 9. which cannot be understood here
in this world, but of the world to come, not in this old corruptible heaven and
earth, but when the whole creation, even every creature, shall be delivered
from the bondage of corruption, Romans 8. 19, 20, 21, 22. in that time, when none
shall hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain, says the Lord, even then, when
these heavens and earth that now are corruptible, shall be dissolved, and new
heavens and new earth created, in which dwells righteousness, then, even in
the day of the Lords coming, 2 Pet. 3. 11, 12, 13. Isa. 65. 17. and as the
glorious Church of Christ shall remain for ever, so shall the restitution of
all things also, Isa. 66. 22. Finally, John was showed the new heavens, and the
new earth, and the renovation of all things, Rev. 21. 1. when he saw new
Jerusalem, the Church of God, even the Lambs wife, come down from heaven to the
earth; so that the Tabernacle of God was with men, with whom he will dwell for
ever. And this is the heavenly Country, Church and City with foundations,
which Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and all the faithful people of God, have ever
expected and looked after, that better resurrection, which as yet they possess
not; for all these died in the faith, and received not the promise, meaning the
hope that was set before them, God providing some better things for us, that
they without us might not be perfect, Heb. 11. 13, 14. yet seeing the
perfection afar off, and embraced it through faith, and confessed they were
strangers and pilgrims on the earth; for they that say such things, declare
plainly, that they seek a Country, a heavenly Canaan, and Paradise of rest:
And as Gods children have chosen God and his promises for their portion and
inheritance, so the Lord himself has chosen Sion for his habitation; This is
my rest for ever, says he, here will I dwell, for I have desired it, Psalm.
132. 13, 14.

Great and mavelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty; just and true are thy
ways, thou King of Saints, Rev. 15. 3.

The Lord loves the gates of Sion; Glorious things are spoken of thee, O thou
City of God, Psalm. 87. 3.

The Lord himself shall arise, and have mercy upon Sion; for the time to
favor her, yea, the set time is come, Psalm. 102. 13.


Errata.
PAge 6. line 17. for same blood, read Sons blood. p. 9. l. 7. for a year, r.
and a year, p. 12. l. 25. for N. H. 1. H. N. p. 49. l. 22. for elect. r. the
elect.

FINIS.

