A GREAT AND Bloody Fight at Sea ON Monday 16 August, near Plymouth: Between
Sir GEORGE AYSCUE and the Holland FLEET.

From one a Clock in the afternoon, until eight a clock at night.

WITH A List of the particulars of the loss on both SIDES.

LONDON, August.20. Printed for Robert Ibbitson dwelling in Smithfield near
Hosier Lane. 1652.

A Great and bloody Fight at Sea on Monday 16 August 1652. near Plymouth.
A Letter from Plymouth.
SIR,
ON Sunday Morning last, being the 15 of this present August, Sir George Ayscue
set sail to Sea.

Yesterday being Monday the 16 of August, he discovered the Hollanders, and
about one of the clock that day he met with a fleet of theirs, consisting of 60
sail of men of war, and 25 Merchants men.

Sir George Ayscues fleet consisted of 41 with which he charged the Hollanders
whole fleet and made a stout fight.

Sir Geor. Ayscue charged them quite through, And not being able to go to the
windward of all, received 40 broad sides, and after go away. Then Sir George
Ayscue charged them again, and made another furious assault.

It is supposed that we have sunk their Rear Admiral; they (if not) will have
much ado to save her.

The fight was extreme hot, but no boarding either of other. We suppose the
Hollanders loss must needs be very great, for they were extremely torn with
our bullets, and we have great loss also.

Capt Lisle, a precious sweet commander, is sore wounded and almost dead. Cap
Pack that excellent stout Seaman, has his leg shot off. Night approaching the
fight ceased, and in the night both the fleets lay still, having both of them
their lights out.

On this morning being the 17 instant, we discovered the Enemy about 4 leagues
off.

Hereupon a Council of War was to consult what to do, in further proceedings
against the enemy, and it was unanimously resolved by the Council of war to
engage them again. Hereupon preparation was made, our fleet presently sailed,
and stood up toward them.

About 12 a clock this present Tuesday, 17 August it is believed there might be
an engagement.

The Lord direct them and stand by them, to deliver and support our friends,
and I doubt not but the Lord will perfect that work he has thus far hitherto
triumphantly carried on.

Our men called upon God before they engaged, the Dutch drunk soundly to make
them fight, strong drink was given to their men as their custom is, to raise
up a courage in them to fight the most desperately.

The East India Fleet with those other ships stay until these combustions be a
little over, or that they can have a sure convoy, for without doubt the mouths
of the Dutch water at them. I believe by the next you will hear of a greater
engagement then this.

Plymouth 17. Augst, 1652.
Another Letter from Plymouth.
SIR,
UPon discovery of the Dutch Fleet yesterday about one a clock, a Council of
War was presently called, and it was resolved to fight them presently if they
would stand, and accordingly, Sir George Ayscue sailed and put up toward them.

About 4 a clock last night, Sir George Ayscue came up close to them and
engaged, and the fight was very hot. Our men fought all stoutly, as ever was
known, we had loss of some precious men, but without doubt the Dutch
sustained a very considerable loss. The fight continued about 4 hours, so
that about 8 a clock it growing dark, they were forced to leave off.

The George and the Bonaventure being much shattered, and ready to sink came
in hither, and are mending.

Cap. Packs Leg is shot off in the fight, and Cap. Lisle has a wound in his
shoulder, that we fear will prove mortal.

The Admiral and the rest fought with great valor and gallantry, but we have
sustained loss, though I believe not so much as the Dutch.

The Admiral lost in her 12 men in this fight and received 60 shot in her
Hull, And so diverse others have received loss, and we have many wounded men.

Sir George Ayscue kept as much as he could in ken of them all night, and is
resolved, if possible, to engage them this day.

And accordingly 500 men, big with courage and stoutnesse, are gone in small
ships to recruit our fleet with men. And so they are gone toward the Enemy.

It being now about noon is the time we expect about which they may be
engaged.

The number of the Dutch that engaged yesterday with Sir George Ayscue, were 55
men of War, we were but 41.

Our Admiral, Vice Admiral and Rear Admiral, with about five or six others,
broke through their whole fleet, so as the 25 Merchants men ran away to the
coasts of France.

What the event of this day will be the Lord alone knows, but our trust is in
the Lord of Hoasts, whom we hope is with us.

But the next opportunity, I shall (which I believe will be within few hours)
certify you what I shall further hear of the success or event.

Plymouth 17 Aug. 1652.
A List of the particulars of the great Fight between Sir George Ayscue and the
Hollanders on Monday 16 Aug. 1652.
41. English ships fought with 55. of the Hollanders, The Dutch Rear Admiral
sunk. 25 ships fled to the coasts of France. Many of the Dutch killed, and
great loss on their part.
Loss on the Parliaments Fleet.
The George near sinking, but recovered to Plymouth. The Bonaventure near
sinking, but recovered to Plymouth. Cap. Lisle wounded in the shoulder. Cap.
Packs leg shot off. 60 shot in the Admirals Hull. 12. men stain in the Admiral.
FINIS.

