The Grand CASE OF CONSCIENCE STATED, about Submission to the new and present
Power. OR, An impassionate ANSWER to a modest BOOK concerning the lawfullnesse
of submitting to the present Government. By one that professes himself a
friend to Presbytery, a lover and embracer of Truth wheresoever he find's it.
ALthough I love not contention, yet I desire satisfaction: that whilst I live
amidst a tumultuous generation, and unquiet times, I may be delivered from a
troubled spirit and discalm'd mind; A wounded spirit who can bear? I was
willing to have sat down in silence, resolving to have kept my conscience, as
void of offense to others, so free from disturbance in it self, choosing rather
quietly to suffer for not doing what was commanded, than knowingly to act what
is (at least to me) unlawful: such a Liberty of Conscience I conceive none
will deny me. But since that Book came to mine hands, I (although unwillingly)
undertook this task, not only out of an earnest desire I had to find out
truth, but for the unusual modesty of the Tract it self, knowing that the
fowlest corn is best winnowed in a gentle gale; a tempestuous wind blows away
chafe and corn too.

I shall take a brief view of the book, Page 1.
and submit what I shall speak to the Authors judgment, A Declaration has
been lately published, etc. Indeed there was such a Declaration published,
which I desired with much earnestness, and read with some deliberation,
expecting to have found the very quintessence of reason, and strength of
argument, whereby judicious men might have been wholly convinced, and
abundantly satisfied; but my scruples were not answered by it. For suppose that
had been proved, which was there much argued, That the government of a free
State were in some respects more convenient than that of Monarchy; that might
have been a prevalent argument to an irregulated people, who were (de novo) to
constitute a Government, not to those, who had before an ancient form suited to
the people, established by Law, confirmed by Oath, and engaged to by the
several Declarations of them who are so sollicitous for the altering of it.
Surely if convenience or inconvenience only can break a promise, and disingage
an Oath, David was much mistaken in the 15th Psalm, and others may be easily
cheated, who expect ready performance of, not needless disputing about Oaths,
in which men stand bound to them, Page 21. Of the Declaration.
What is there said concerning Declararions [That the Lords and Commons were of
that mind when they made them] may serve their turns for the present, but
would equally serve others turns for the future; For by the same reason; when
those that penned and published that Declaration, shall borrow money of men,
and declare to pay them, employ Soldiers with an engagement to satisfy them,
people may suspect that their minds may alter, and then (by this rule) their
former Declarations will be of no strength.

What is further spoken in the Preface for a lawful obedience to an unlawful
change of Government, will be touched on in the further prosecution of this
discourse. It is said [ The Apostle commands obedience to higher powers, Romans
13. and thence it is inferred, that he speaks not in that place merely of power
or authority abstracted from persons, Page 1, 2.
but of persons clothed with that authority.] The Apostle speaks there
directly of Authority, of men only in subordination to that Authority; no
further than as the executioners of that power, because it is impossible
Authority should be exercised, but where men are to manage it. The Apostle in
that place requires submission to legal Authority, It is not (...) but (...).
by whomsoever executed, not to any men commanding by an illegal power.

Higher powers are there expressed indefinitely, not pointing at any particular
government: In a Monarchy, an Aristocracy, a Democracy, the people under the
several constitutions may, yea must, by the Apostles command obey the higher
powers, those who by their legal constitution are in Authority, not in power,
over them: there is a law of nature, that will make man obey a power if he
cannot resist, but the injunction of the Apostle (there) is only to lawful
Authority. I believe the Author of that Book knows, that those only can be the
higher powers, or legal Authority of any Kingdom, which the constitution of
that Kingdom makes such, and that only can exact obedience according to the
Scripture rule. Now what the Higher powers of England are, by the constitution
of this Kingdom, is sufficiently known.

The Apostle commands wives to submit to their husbands, Ephesians. 5.22. surely
the injunction is for obedience to husbands, qua husbands, not qua men, indeed
not abstracted from their persons, Ephesians. 5.22.
because it is impossible the authority of an husband should be submitted to,
where a man is not to exercise it: But should a stranger come to another wife,
and call himself husband (having before either imprisoned or slain the
rightful husband) and require submission, I scarce think the Author himself
(especially if he be married) would press for obedience to such an usurped
power: such a woman may be forced, and overpowr'd, but to submit to him as an
husband, were a sin.

What is there urged as the great argument to prove the lawfullnesse of
obedience to the present Government, has been my main deswasive (viz.) the
Apostles command to obey higher powers for conscience sake: Had I been
convinced that the King in his person had been the higher powers of England,
and that his personal command had by the Apostles rule exacted undeniable
obedience, although he had been visibly acting what we suspected, and palpably
introducing what we feared, I should have submitted for conscience sake. The
great inducement I had to adhere to the Parliament, was (besides the hopes of
better reformation) that through conviction that lay upon me, both by mine own
reason, and Parliamentary practices, that the two Houses of Parliament, in case
of the Kings absence, weakness or refusal, had in them such a part of the
higher powers, and supreme authority, as to defend, and preserve the people
without, yea against the King, doing, commanding or exacting any thing besides
or against the law. And this is that main block, at which I stumble in yielding
obedience to this new power, because I am yet convinced, that they are not the
higher powers of our Kingdom, to which the Apostle requires obedience.

I acknowledge a government may be altered (although I think it not safe, but
upon urgent and evident necessity) to which being altered obedience is
required, but it must be done by the higher powers still, whom we ought equally
to obey in submitting to an altered, as a continued form; but for any party by
force to lay low the higher powers, and to exact obedience as to the legal
Authority, is to me a sin.

I am not ignorant what pleas there may be from inconvenience in such a
doctrine, but according to the light I have, where lawful or unlawful are in
question, Romans 13.1. Page 2. Discernendum est inter potestate^ quoe semper est
a Deo, inter acquisitionem and usurpationem. Paraeus in Ro^ 13. Hos. 8 4.
Subditis mere privatis, si Tyrannus tanqu^ latro in ipso faciat impetum and
ipsi nec potestatem ordinariam implorare, nec alia ratione effug^re periculum
possint in pra^senti periculo ^ and suos contr^ Tyrannum sic^ contra privat^
grassatorem d^fendere licet. Paraeus in R^ 1^
their convenience and inconvenience must keep silence.

It is to be observed what is spoken by the Apostle in the same place, the
powers that are, are ordained by God: to which in the second page of the book
is a little addition, viz. Rulers and those that were in authority were
ordained of God: the Scripture enjoins obedience to powers, to men only as
entitled to those powers: the authorithy was ordained by God, not the Rulers,
they were constituted by men, the power may be Gods Ordinance, when the
deputing of persons to the exercise of that power may be (at most) but Gods
permission: nay, that men in Authority (Rulers in the Apostles expression) are
to be obeyed no further then as acting according to that Authority, is the
judgment of one much used by the composer of that book. When a Tyrant shall
offer violence to his private Subjects* which they can by no other means avoid,
they may defend themselves and theirs against that Tyrant as against a thief;
when are men properly called tyrants, but when they either usurp or exercise a
power contrary to the law and usage of those places where they rule? when a
conscientious obedience is required to the Authority, but not to those, who by
their own will, or procured force, either usurp or exercise a power besides
that Authority.

Should we grant that men assuming to themselves the place and power of
Magistrates, by what right or means soever they came by it, must be obeyed,
surely it would be the greatest inlet to tyranny in the world, and the
speediest means of destroying states that could be invented: for then should
none govern in any Kingdom any longer, then their swords and their strength
could bear them up.

Thus much I shall yield, That when any shall usurp Authority, by whatsoever
title or force he procures it, such may be obeyed in reference to their power,
while they command lawful things, but not in reference to Authority: A man
being overpowered may yield for his own safety, but to submit to that usurped
power, as to the legal Authority of that Kingdom where it is, Rev. 22.15.
is to assert that as lawful, which is but usurped, and in the Scripture
language to make a lie.

From this I shall take a just occasion to speak to those instances there
urged, from obedience to whom, the argument is drawn to prove the lawfullnesse
of our submission now.

Page 2, 3.
Concerning Claudius Caesar and Nero which are mentioned, page 2, 3. how they
came in by force, yet were obeyed by the people, I shall not trouble my self
nor the Reader with any taedious search into, or large recital of the story,
but take it as there laid down, and give a brief answer to it.

But before I fall upon a plain answer to what is there fallaciously urged, and
show the insufficiency thereof to prove that for which it is asserted: I
conceive there will appear such a disproportion between the quoted instances
and our present case, that should we grant all the premises, yet the conclusion
would not directly follow to prove the question. The most that can be asserted
from those examples is, That people did obey a supreme power as exercised by
those who had no true (at least but a dubitable) title, when the same form of
government was still continued, for so it had been for many years before,
during the reign of Julius Caesar. Augustus. Tiberius Caius Caligula
4 Emperors, yea, such a government which was the pristine constitution of
that place, it being Monarchical for above Principio Re^es ibi septem
^mperarunt, a^^i^ ducenti^ ^ua^ra^inta ^uatuor. Sl^i. ^an. de 4. Mo^arch.
440. years, till Tarquinius, about the business of his son with Lucretia, was
rejected. Whether party had or pretended most right, and the best ends in their
changing of the government, either J. Brutus from, or Julius Casar to Monarchy,
I shall not dispute: nor shall I decide, whether God might not justly give them
to see the evil of a change, who (it may be) chiefly out of a desire of
change, would wholly alter a constituted form. But this is not our case: The
insubmission of people now, is not grounded upon a suggested scruple of a
dubious title to the same, but upon an apprehended illegality of the new and
needless establishment of another government: It is one thing, and as in it
self more lawful, so to people less scrupulous, upon a pretended title to
usurp the exercise of an established Authority: another, and as in it self
less just, so to people more doubtful upon pretended apprehensions to
eradicate a lawful Authority, and illegally to lay low those which legally are
the higher powers of a Kingdom: In the one, people less able to examine
titles, submit to the established government of that Kingdom where they are,
and this is sufficient to yield obedience, that they know not who has the
right: In the other, they must give themseves up to a new-fashioned model
illegal to them, because not the constituted powers of that place, and this is
enough to withold Allegiance, that they know such have not (nor pretend) a
Title.

Page 1.
Now to the instances themselves, to see how far they prove the lawfullnesse
of our submission to a change of government, although the change be believed
unlawful.

^ag. 2, 3.
After the death of Caius Caligula, the Consuls and Senate of Rome entered into
to a consultation, how they might restore the Commonwealth to her ancint
freedom, I think this argument will take in all that is therein spoken: if the
people of the Roman Empire did submit to the power of Claudius and Nero, who by
force were put upon them, then the people of England may lawfully submit to a
change of government, though believed unlawful: but they did submit, therefore
these may, I will find no fault with the Syllogism, because it is of mine own
making, although it be the very sum of what is urged: what aequivocall terms
there are whereby a spiritual eye would quickly see four terms (at least) in
it I shall discover in mine answer to the several propositions.

In the first Proposition, it being hypotheticall, I shall deny the
consequence: For 1. A People may possibly do what is not in it self lawful
either for themselves or others to do, a facto ad jus non valet argumentum, had
the author proved their submission legal, it had been more urgent. Indeed it
is said at the end of that paragraph, Page 4.
We see Rulers put by soldiers into that power which is said by the Scripture
to be ordained of God, and even to these Rulers men must be subject for
conscience sake. But the Apostle does not command obedience to these men, but
to the powers, nay not to any men, but as commanding according to those powers
(as was said before) nor is it material who put men in, nor what men are put
into powers, if they are the powers that are ordained of God: those that
command according to that Authority, must be obeyed: and whatsoever the
soldiery of Rome did, had the soldiery of England (in this tacitly pleaded
for) observed that doctrine before, we had not been (I think) disputing this
question now. But 2. What might be lawful for the people in the Roman Empire,
may not be lawful for the people of this Kingdom: I find not in any History
that ever they were sworn to a particular government as we have been: Things in
themselves indifferent are made necessary, when by an oath engaged to. But of
that more afterward.

To the Minor proposition, I shall say 1. That those mentioned had (at least
seeming) titles to the Empire. Indeed it is agreed by all Historiars I have met
withal, that they were first encouraged by soldiers: but what iniquity is in
that, if they might pretend a Title? The very end of power and strength is or
should be to conserve and recover just right, we have always acknowledged it
lawful and expedient by force of Arms to acquire a rightful possession
illegally detained; But I could wish that this story had been printed and read
by the swordmen in this kingdom five months ago, that they might but have
thought whether it had been greater honor to be recorded as men, that should
guard a King of a doubtful title to the Crown, or to be storied as men that
should bring a King of an indubitable right to the Scaffold.

I will not here dispute by what title, or according to what law Julius Caesar,
nor yet his successor Octavius assumed the Empire, but when that government
and those governors were received, and acknowledged by the Senate, it became
lawful to that people. Although Conquest be no true Title, nor durable tenure
any longer then strength can keep it, yet compact upon that Conquest, gives a
title to the Conqueror, and engages submission from the other party to those
rules resolved on at, or given out according to that agreement.

Tiberius from whom indeed both Claudius and Nero had their government, Tacitus
Anna. lib. 1.
did not only for a great part of his time, do all he did by the advice of the
Senate, but would (at least seemingly) be chosen by the Senate, as not
contented secretly to step into a government either by the earnest engagement
of his mother, Tiberius Augusti Octaviij privignus and gener, and filius
adoptivus admodum invitus, ut prae se ferebat, and vix tandem exoratus a
supplice Sena^u principatum accepit. Slerdam. de 4. Monarch. Tiberius maximos
dolores and gemitus simula vit principatu^ tanquam onerosam servitutem
recusans. Pezel. Mel. Histor. par. 2^. Pezel, Mel. Hist. part. 2^. Tacitus
Annal. lib. 12. Page 3.
or by the fond adoption of Augustus, but would have the call and election of
the Commonwealth too: now here surely was a lawful title, if the consent of
the people could make it lawful, although (it may be) not in it is first
acquisition, yet in it is after establishment: and Claudius deriving his title
from him, why should not people obey it? yea, me thinks the Author of that
book intimates a title that Claudius had, where he says, page 3. Claudius
being frighted with the news of Caligula's death, and fearing himself might be
enquired for, upon suspicion withdrew: had not he been the heir apparent to the
Empire, what ground of fear, or what cause of withdrawing? nay, if he had not
been looked on as the rightful successor, why should the soldier primo
intuitu salute him by the name of Emperor?

For Nero he descended in a direct line on the mothers side, from Livia
Augustus his wife, and although Brittanicus was the natural son of Claudius,
yet Nero (by Agrippina's means) was his adopted son for the Empire, and brought
to the Senate, where it was consented unto, that he should have his togam
virilem, and he called Prince of youth: it being their usage, as far as I have
observed in the story, that an Adoptive title assented to by the Senate, has
commonly been acknowledged, when a lineall succession has been rejected: yea,
the Author seems to grant a kind of title to Nero too, where it is said, page
3. that the sentence of the soldiers was followed by the consent of the
Senate: if the Senate had any share in either constituting or declaring a King,
Nero's title was hereby established.

But what is this to our case? A rightful or doubtful heir was brought by
soldiers to the Senate, who among themselves were contriving to alter their
government: This heir was received by the Senate, and upon that submitted unto
by the people: But does the Author think that if the Senate had declared and
acknowledged, yea, promised to preserve the Title of a rightful Prince, and
the soldiers by the advice, counsel, or assistance of some party in this
Senate, should imprison or slay their Prince, and take away the Major part of
the Senate, only because against their actings, and this minor part relict
should alter their government, yea, make themselves without the consent of the
people their Rulers, that then the people would or lawfully could have
submitted to them as their legal and rightful governors, nay, would not
rather have resisted them, as not being those higher powers, whom they ought
for conscience sake to obey?

Indeed had the King for some reason hid himself (as Claudius) or for other
reasons absented himself, and the two Houses of Parliament legally elected, and
freely sitting (at such a time esteemed) the higher powers, contrived a way for
the altering the government, although I should not have proclaimed their
wisdom, yea, should have bewailed their sin, in respect of the many ties and
bonds of Declarations and Oaths upon them, I think I should have submitted to
their power, yet I would not for my Oath's sake (had I liked the thing) have
acted in it. In which I think I yield more then many Anti-Malignant men in
England will do: yet how far from our case this is, what has been spoken will
testify.

But 2. Had the instance been of Julius Casar, who by mere force and violence,
without the least pretense of Title acquired the government, which had better
suited our business, yet I should say, that what submission the people
yielded, and what commands he gave, were in relation to a power which he by
force had gotten, and did exercise without any pretense to a legal constituted
power, till received and acknowledged by the Senate.

I confess should these Rulers now in our Kingdom command submission to them,
as to a conquering party, and acknowledge they did by power exercise, what by
force they had gotten, I should in that sense submit to them, because not able
to defend my self against them: but they call themselves the legal Authority,
and higher powers of England, under which notion I cannot submit, because
positively to obey what is thus commanded, whatsoever secret reservation I may
have, I do and must assert their power as lawful, and their Authority as the
legal Authority.

By this I shall fitly descend to those instances of our Nation, Page 4, 5.
to which what has been already spoken, will give (me judice) sufficient
answer: For

1. What submission was given to the Conqueror, was yielded as to a forced
power, until by after-compact it was acknowledged and made legal.

2. What was practiced by the successors mentioned (besides the acknowledged
force in their unrightfull acquisitions, and violent exercise of power) it was
only upon difference of Title, which people may not be able to judge of, as the
Author says, Page 9.
page 9. but amongst us, here is an alteration of government, where a change
only seems to be asserted, no Title at all pretended.

3. What is spoken of Hen. 7. Page 5.
may be enough to answer the argument drawn from him and the rest too. Although
the Title might be unjust, and the power illegally gotten, yet when the Title
was acknowledged, at least, confirmed by Parliament, and the Laws whereby he
(or they) should rule, were enacted in a Parliament, that did engage the people
to an unquestionable obedience, the constituted higher powers then commanding,
to whom the Apostle requires obedience: for although a Parliament (such I mean,
which by the known law and continued usage of the Kingdom as a Parliament)
should acknowledge or do any thing civilly evil (I mean in reference to the
State) it is lawful and just in respect of the people, and engages obedience,
which I think will be a sufficient excuse for peoples yielding obedience to
their laws, not only because then enacted, but since confirmed by the higher
powers of our Nation: Page 6.
although in the mean time upon the same ground they rest unsatisfied in the
lawfullnesse of submission to the present power. Page 6. Page 6.


I might add, that what the whole body of a Nation did, if illegal, does not
engage our practice: for we know Papists (and such they were all who submitted
to the forementioned Rulers) make no conscience of denying a rightful Title,
nor yielding to an illegal power, when they may but probably carry on their
own design: but what is spoken already will satisfy, and I had rather give a
rational answer, then question the wisdom or honesty of Ancestors, where it
may be avoided.

What is urged from the Casuists and Paraeus (although I am not bound jurare in
verba, being of Dr Moulins his mind, Page 6, 7.
rather to like one argument then ten Authors) I shall agree to in that sense,
in which I conceive they delivered it, to submit to such power as forced, not
to their Authority as legal, unless it be such an Authority which by
constitution and usage are the higher powers of our Kingdom.

The Author after the example of others, proceeds now to give some reason of
his own, which I shall also endeavor to examine, and so far as they carry
strength and truth (as least to me) shall submit: where otherwise, I shall give
mine on the contrary.

Page 7.
Indeed how can it be otherwise? For when a person or persons have gotten
supreme power, and by the same excluded all other from Authority, either that
Authority which is thus taken by power must be obeyed, or else all Authority
must fall to the ground. Persons may indeed get themselves the greatest
strength, and in that sense may be submitted to, but they cannot illegally get
themselves the legal power, nor can they exclude others from their Authority,
although by force they may keep them from the exercise of it, A man may be a
man, yea a living man, although by the violence of disease, he may be kept from
outward actings. An husband may be a husband still although imprisoned and
thereby kept from the exercise of his duty to his wife. A Parliament may be a
Parliament still, although by violence kept from sitting and executing their
Authority. I am so far from thinking that disobedience to such power will make
all Authority and government fall to the ground, that I believe submission to
such will quickly lay all Authority waste: for by the same reason that we obey
this altered government and usurped authority now, we must obey any other
suddenly, if another party get more strength, and what an unsettled state and
unknown Authority we should then have may easily be judged: nor do I think the
Author himself would be of the same mind, should the Prince with a potent
army get the power into their hands. Surely were this doctrine true, those
renowned men shall be rased out of the Calendar for Saints, that opposed the
Kings power in Shipmoney: nor must such be sequestered who under the Kings power
formerly did lend or give whatsoever he required, whether men, money, horse or
arms: nor these put out of the Parliament, who obeyed him in sitting at Oxon:
nay, nor himself neither put to death for doing what was urged against him, if
men in power howsoever they come by it are Rulers ordained by God, and to be
obeyed for conscience sake.

Page 7.
If Confusion be worse then titular Tyranny, I wish that seeing we had no
titular tyranny, we had had no confusion neither: and I should be glad that
confusion may befall (if any) only such, who in this Kingdom have been the
greater introducers of it, either those who acquire and assert, or those who
cannot receive or submit to an usurped government: Page 8.
for although the end must not be destroyed for the means, yet he that
destroies the means in it is tendency to the end, will scarcely preserve the end
at last.

Page 8.
If a Masters mate had thrown the Master overboard, and by power would suffer
no other to guide the ship but himself, if the mariners will not obey him
commanding aright for the safe guiding of the ship, the ship must needs perish,
and themselves with it. I doubt here is a fallacy, and this case will not
concern our question, for I suppose, although I am not so well skilled in the
discipline of mariners, as to know that a Masters mate has a kind of Title
to the government of the ship in case of the Masters miscarriage, which suits
not our condition: But suppose him to have no title, or state the question
somewhat nearer our case, That if a party of the Seamen should throw the
Master overboard, and assume to themselves the government of the Ship: I shall
then answer, That if that Mate or this party having the greater strength,
should by power enforce and exact obedience of the rest, the^e ought for the
safety of their own lives, although not to obey the Authority, yet to do the
commands of the enforcing party, and if ever they come asho^r, to do what they
can to bring such unworthy persons to condign punishment, who, besides the
murder of the Master, would so basely hazard the ship too; But if th^^ (...) or
party should command the Seamen to obey them as the rightful Master, I think
(although with submission to better judgments) they ought nor, although for
the safety of their lives thus to obey them. It is better to lose a natural
life, then a quiet conscience, and a spiritual soul: The greatest advantage
will not warrant the least evil. In such a case it would easily be judged both
by God and men, to whose fault the loss of the ship should be imputed, either
to them that did unjustly require, or those who dared not unwarrantably to do
an unlawful thing. I know not what the sudden fear of unavoidable death might
make such men (de facto) do, and I can easily think what harsh censures their
hazarding or ^^sing their lives upon such refusal, may bear from rash and
less considerate men, as an empty product of mere peevishness: but I am
confident that a Synod of religious and intelligent Divines would conclude,
that (de jure) they ought rather to adventure the loss of all, than call him a
lawful, who is but an usurped master, which they must by yielding to his or
their commands under that notion.

Whereas some speak of a time for settlement, Page ^.
they indeed do rather speak for a time of unsettlement, for they will have an
unsettlement first and a settlement after. If I mistake not the desires of
those who withhold submission to the present power. the Author of that Book is
mistaken in his apprehensions of them: That they desire a settlement (I think)
is true, but that they desire an unsettlement first, is besides my thoughts of
them; I know it is the grief of their souls, and causes sad searchings of
heart, that ever they were brought into such unsettlements, and thereby put
upon such racks of conscience as these are. It is not unsettlement but a
deliverance from unsettlement they long for: I scarce see how we can be more
unsettled then now we are: Indeed being unsettled, we would use my means for a
settlement, although for it is procurement our unsettlednesse were more
unsettled; If a man be at the rivers brink, I would advise him to keep out of
the water, but if at once he leap into the middle of the river, I should
persuade him to come to the bank, although he wade through much water to come
thither: I would counsel a man to prevent distempers, but when the disease is
already contracted I should prescribe some Physic for the safety of his life,
although for the present it should more disease him.

What is spoken of the former Scriptures and Casuists in the same Page, I shall
refer to what was before answered.

But it is asked: Whether that may not be called a settlement, Page ^^
how soon (...) it is, when there is such a way settled, that men may have
justice if they will, and may ^^joy that main end of Magistracy, to live a
peaceable life in godliness and (...)? To speak of what justice some have had
at Westminster, since the unsettlement of our times, or what to be expected,
when Colonels appear as parties with their arguments by their sides before
Committees, (an argument too often used in the House too, as I believe the
Gentleman knows,) where to engage a bustling daring Colonel is to carry a
cause: as also what peaceable lives men live, when the soldiers having put
other men in power in the State, put themselves in command in men's houses: and
what godliness and honesty may be looked for, when blasphemy must be
tolerated, Vt judicium sit actus justitiae, requiritur ut procedat ex
authoritate praesidentis: quando homo judicet de his de quibus non habet
authoritate^ dicitur judiciu^ usurpatum. Aquin. 22. Q. 60 cap. 2. (...)
wickedness must not be punished, when in the mean time godly men (if but of a
contrary judgment, a liberty of conscience formerly pleaded for) are made
offenders for a word, would be too large a field to walk in, and besides the
swelling of this tract, but give too wide an occasion to further contests. But
this shall suffice, that the gentleman a little begs the question in calling it
justice, for although men may have, or might expect, what he calls justice, viz.
things in themselves just, yet if he grant, as I have proved, that Authority
illegal by which they act, what they do or is done by any under that
Authority, although in it self just, yet is not properly justice: Judgment
(for I conceive the Author means justitiam distributivam) is then only just,
where it is exercised by the higher powers, the legal Magistracy of that
Kingdom where it is acted. The Hebrews express justice by that word, which
they likewise use for the usage and custom of that people, that are concerned
in it.

Exodus 21.9. and Josh. 6.^^.
Another argument the Author uses is, because People cannot judge of Titles:
when they cannot judge, then an usurped Title is true to them, and will exact
obedience: but if this be an Argument, then (for contrariorum eadem est rati^)
when Titles are visibly unlawful, people are disingaged from obedience. This
is our case, where there is not any pretense of Title.

Page 9.
But some say, There are Oaths that justify disobedience to the present
government: There are indeed several Oaths that engage us to the continued
observance of our formerly established government, and then how far they
justify disobedience to this, let the Author judge. That Oaths are sacred
bonds and reverend obligements, and where they do not themselves leave or make
us free, we are not to cut or break them in pieces: I shall equally assert, and
could heartily wish it had been as truly practiced in the Kingdom as plainly
spoken in the book: But seeing there are indeed (as the Author affirms)
concerning these, Page 9.
faults on both hands, let us a little examine the faults he mentions, and see
whether there are not other faults too, that he speaks not of.

On the one side the slieghting of an Oath, etc. This is a fault indeed: Oaths
and Covenants are the strongest engagements, whereby we can bind our selves
either to God or man, if these come once to be slighted and no longer
observed, then they may conduce to the palpable advantage of those that made
them, I am afraid that may justly be written upon the door-posts of England,
Isa. 11.1, 2.
what was set in the front of David's song, Psa. 12.1, 2.

I am loath to misjudge any person, whom I find so modest, else I should fear
that this fault was purposely argued, the more secretly to insinuate another,
though not under the name of a fault: Page 10.
It is said, We find some part of the Covenant to speak of all the days of
our lives: as if some part had been but of a temporary engagement: but if I
mistake not, the Covenant did in every part of it oblige us to a continued
observance of it: we did not swear constantly to keep this part, or that
clause, but all our lives to keep this Covenant, which is known to comprehend
every part of it.

True it is, that the obligation of some things end, because they can no longer
be kept, Page 10.
as that of the Kings person, etc. I grant that the obligation of a people to
any thing ends, when that thing obliged to, necessarily, and in its own nature
ends; but if men shall by violence put an end to the thing, that thereby the
obligation may end too, I doubt such will be esteemed by God as Covenant
breakers; I do not think, that he breaks his Covenant, that does not preserve
the Kings person, when he is dead; but I think he is guilty, that did not
endeavor to preserve it while he was living; had the Covenant, in that part,
been observed then, for all that I know, it might have obliged now. A woman
promises to be faithful to her husband so long as he lives, but if she, out
of love to another man, shall lay violent hands on her husband to end his life,
that thereby she might marry another, I believe she would scarcely be thought
to have performed her promise. A Tenant bargains with his Landlord to pay him
rent for his house, so long as he lives in it: but if he through malice shall
pull down the house, that he cannot live in it, and thereby to extinguish his
bargain, it may be easily thought what determination the Law would make in such
a case.

What is spoken here of the Kings person, might as well have been spoken of any
other part of the Covenant: It is Covenanted to preserve Religion, but if those
that made the Covenant should by force extirpate, or by deceit undermine
Religion: would the Author think himself or others disingaged from that part
of the Covenant, or rather look upon himself as bound to preserve it, while it
has a being? If this liberty should be given, no man would keep any Oath any
longer, than he saw good, if it were in his power to put an end to that thing
to which he is obliged. But let us see what faults are found on the other hand.

But on the other side there are other faults: such are the urging of an Oath
or Covenant against enemies, and not against friends in one and the same
action. In this I am wholly of his judgment, and could wish that he had
instanced in some things, whereby I might have guessed what aim he had taken,
and against what he had levelled it. As I would not have any unequally excused,
who are equally guilty, so I would not have him free from blame, who imputes
guilt to one, when another shall be connived at, or encouraged in the same
thing.

In that clause of bringing Delinquents to condign punishment: If the Covenant
engage to bring one to punishment, that raised arms against the Parliament in
Kent and Essex, why not another that raised arms against the Parliament in Oxon
shiere and Berks shiere? If according to our Covenant we should preserve the
privileges of Parliament against a malignant party, that would have taken away
but Five Members; why not against an Haereticall party that took away above two
Hundred? If one party be charged as guilty in not obeying Orders of, but
offering violence to the Parliament; why should another be excused as
faultlesse, whose disobedience was more manifest, and whose violence was more
palpable? or if not altogether so, Page 11.
yet (as the Author) a slight and diminishing charge of it upon one, and a
vehement and aggravating charge of it upon the other.

Page 11.
Another her fault may be, a stiff insisting on one part, and a neglect or at
least silence in another part. This is not always a fault, for when there is
no occasion given to speak, silence is no evil; One part may be in more danger
to be broken than another, when a more violent asserting, and stiff contending
for that part is more necessary. If I h^d two children, the one at home in
safety, the other in imminent danger, that I were more earnest and industrious
for the saving and preserving of this, does not at all argue less love or care
to the other. But to take it in the best sense, to pretend much care in the
keeping of one part, and in the mean time, to neglect another, I think a fault.
As when men are seemingly violent against Popery and Prelacy, yet very
indulgent to Heresy and profanesse. When men shall plead Covenant in the
preservation of subjects liberties, yet forget their Oath for the safety of the
Kings person in the preservation of Religion; which in respect of the Covenant
are or equal concernment; for although it be pleaded by some, and granted by
all that Religion, yea asserted by others, that the subjects liberties are of
greater concernment than the Kings person, it must be ratione materia, not
ratione juram^nti, for in that regard, we are equally obliged to one as the
other.

Page 11.
As also when by event two parts of it came to be inconsistent, to choose and
enforce the keeping of the higher and less necessary part, and to give way to
the loss and not keeping of the greater. Here is to me a falsum suppositum; I
think it a sin in any to enjoin, and wickedness in any to take a Covenant
for the doing of two things that are or may be inconsistent; nor do I know what
parts of our Covenant are such; when the Author makes such appear, I shall
bewail my sin in taking it. If it be by him meant, what is talked by others,
(viz.) That the safety of the Kings person, and the preservation of Religion
are inconsistent, I must declare my dissent in this; for I am yet convinced,
that both the truth and honor of Religion might have better been preserved by
the safety of his person, and the continuance of our Government, than hitherto
it has been, or for all I see, like to be, by the altering of the one, or
taking away of the other.

Page 11,
There is another, in racking an Oath or Covenant, to make it speak that which
it meant not. I will add, there is another fault to stop the mouth of a
Covenant, and denying it to speak what it would. Nay, there is yet one more,
when men shall put what interpretation upon Covenants they please, or reserve
to themselves a power to make any other interpretation upon them, than what the
common and natural sense of the words in which they are taken do afford.
Oaths ought to be their own interpreters; we may deceive men, but God is not
mocked.

Page 1, 1.
But to come to what I conceive is the main end of what has been hitherto
asserted about Oaths; To consider whether there be any clause in any Oath or
Covenant, which in a fair and common sense forbids obedience to the commands of
the present Government and Authority. There is in the solemn League and
Covenant, that which engages to another Government, and then what forbids
obedience to this? In one clause we solemnly Covenant to preserve the Person,
and not to diminish the just Rights of the King; had his Person and just Rights
been preserved, this Government could never have been attempted; but seeing
that card is broken (unhappy blow that struck it asunder!) is there yet no bond
will hold us? yea; we do in the same clause faithfully promise to preserve the
Law of the Kingdom, and surely to change the Government is to alter the
fundamental Laws of the Kingdom; if we are bound to preserve our Law, then
that Government that is established by Law; nay yet further, In the same place,
we do swear, yea and call the world to witness it, that we will not diminish
the just Rights and greatness of the King: Is not a man's right as much
concerned in his Heirs inheriting, as in his own enjoying what legally belonged
to him? Is it not a man's undoubted right to have his lawful Heirs succeed him
in his lawful enjoyments? But now by this Government the Kings Heirs are
wholly divested of any possession, and absolutely debarred of that right, which
by the usage of the Kingdom belongs to them.

Much less when no other can be had (as the Author) I do not yet see
impossibility in having another, truly I think, if the Covenant had been
strictly observed, Page 11.
we had never had this, and if it were yet carefully performed, we might
quietly have another Government, such under which godly people might live with
more comfort, and loss scruple.

If it be said that in the Oath of Allegiance, Allegiance is sworn to the King,
Page 12.
his Heirs and Successors. If his Heirs be not his Successors, how does that
Oath bind? either the word Successors must be superfluous, or else it must
bind Successors as well as Heirs, etc. If I should grant that the word
Successors were superfluous, it would not be the only superfluous word in
things of that nature; or that it is an ^^^geticall expression which is not
unusual in all writings both Divine and profane, the more fully to express
the same thing by two words: His Heirs and Successors are conjunctive, which
must necessarily imply, that his Heirs according to the usage of this Kingdom
ought to be his Successors: so that it can bind to no Successors besides the
Heir: Indeed should the Line extinguish, then the legal Successor were to be
obeyed by that Oath, and yet that too in the continuance of the Government, for
he is not properly a Successor, unless in the same form of Government; for
without asking Lawyers and Learned men, Page 12.
he is properly a Successor, that succeed any man in the place where he was.
If the Agitators in the Army should depose the General, and order the Army
according to their wills, would they be justly called his Successors, when the
frame of their Discipline were altered? This seems partly to be acknowledged by
the Author in the same page, where he instanceth only in those for
Successors, which succeeded in the same Government, and says that the word
Successor is taken for him that actually succeeds in Government, I conceive it
must be meant, when the same form still is continued, else what he asserts, and
the instances he names, would hold no proportion.

But there is one engagement to the former Government yet lies upon us in
reference to our Oaths, which is mentioned either in that (before named) or in
the Oath of Supremacy, That no power on earth shall deter or absolve us from
the keeping of it, If so, I would but humbly beg the Author conscienciously
to judge, whether the force or fear of any party, were they stronger than they
are, should affright a people into a submission to any other Government, then
that to which they have thus sworn.

I may take the same liberty to propose a few short, yet considerable Quaeres;
While the Son is in the same posture in which the Father was, how comes this
Oath at this time to stand up, Page 12.
and plead for disobedience in regard of the Son, that was asleep and silent in
regard of the Father? I do not know in what one title this Oath is more urged
for the Son, then it might have been, and was for the Father; unless that now
there is more need of pressing it, because in the Sons days the Government is
altered; in the Fathers, it was (at least) promised to be continued. Those, who
were against the irregular actings, the Court-faults, the wicked Counsels of
the Father, were for the safety of his person, the preservation of his Rights,
and the continuance of his Government: And now the same persons that are for
the Rights of the Son, and the continuance of the Government, are as much
against the vices and counsels in and about him, as about the Father. Besides
it might be said, that the Father was not opposed, until there was a
Parliament, that being the legal means in our Kingdom of resisting Arbitrary
and extra-legall power; the King in the intervalls of Parliaments being the
chief officer, not to be resisted by private subjects: And certainly I think,
were there now a Parliament sitting according to the constitution of England,
and the Received to the Crown, should act any thing against the known Law, and
the kingdoms safety, those who are now for the reception of the Son, and for
the performance of their Oaths, would as truly and conscienciously (according
to their Covenant) join with them against the exorbitancies of the Son, as they
did against the evil of the Father: only I believe they would expect some
security, that his Person and rights (parts of the Covenant) should be better
preserved and less diminished then his Fathers were.

Besides what has been spoken to the book, I might add also one small Quaere
about altering the government: Whether in such an alteration there is not
necessarily required, either the general consent of the major part of the
people, or at least the major part of their trustees? if so, what right have
these men to do, who now act in it, some of them being the Trustees of no
people, having no election, others who were legally chosen denied their
liberty? May not any number of people (there being no known Law nor constituted
rule for this transaction) by the like reason conceive, and (if they have
strength) alter it again to morrow? But if they will (which is but equal) give
them liberty of dissenting from their government, whom they deny the liberty of
delating or consenting to it, I shall be free.

Whether there be any Scripture example or prudentiall rule unnecessarily to
oppress, and, where it may be avoided, to rack the tender consciences of
unquestionably godly men, not only when they are the major part, and most
judicious Christians (both of Ministers and People) and most likely to know the
truth, but when they are the least strong, and most discountenanced, and
therefore unlikely to be biased by any private Interests? Indeed those who
side with the strongest party, lie under grounded suspicion of having
particular ends, who can turn any way, to any party, where they may get the
best places, the greatest preferments, and the largest rewards: such many have
received, and I believe more expect; for it is observable, that for the most
part, your only Parliament converts before, are your greatest Parliament
Assertors now: But how a poor people despised and opposed by power, who can
expect the conferment of nothing but punishment, should design an interest in
standing to their principles, when they know (some of them at least being very
able and prevalent) they might upon their least turning have as large a share
in the rewards of the Kingdom as those who now enjoy the greatest, is to me
irrational and improbable. The Apostle Paul would avoid a lawful thing rather
then offend the scrupling consciences of weak brethrens what then is their
fault, who do unlawful things, and thereto engage the dijudicating consciences
of weak Christians?

Whether both in humane probability, and religious reason, it were not more
likely to conduce to Gods glory, to Religions settlement and honor, to
Christians union and satisfaction, to the Kingdoms peace, to the prevention of
danger, and the safety of all (who have not wickedly out-acted all hopes of
safety, and are conscious to themselves that their bucket must sink, whenever
Authorities bucket shall arise) to endeavor ere it be too late, to join
Authority and Power, Title and Strength together; that as Power may arm
Authority, and render it formidable, so Authority might justify Power, and
make that lawful? Least when the Title shall be claimed, those who may dislike
the vices, and oppose any Tyranny (were they legally authorized) of the
claimer, yet should not for conscience sake deny his Right; and those who could
like well the pretensions of our new Governors (were they justifiably managed)
should not adventure for Religions sake to assist their usurpation: Whereby, as
by our unwise actions, we have too much justified Malignants actions, and made
them our deriders: we may strengthen their hands, and make them our Masters.

I am confident that if the great managers of our new-work, and the violent
assertors of this changed Government would but seriously lay these things to
heart, it might make them seasonably retract, what they untimely attempted, and
rather find out ways to settle, then further unsettle the Kingdom, rather to
satisfy then disturb the peaceable consciences of religious and unbyassed men
(The Lord prevail upon their spirits.)

Thus have I endeavored to answer that with a meek, Page 13.
which was written with a peaceable spirit, where I shall profess (if I
mistake not my self) to side rather with truth then with any party. What I have
hastily spoken I shall submit to the deliberate judgments of more intelligent
men: I shall be willing to receive a rebuke wherein I have erred, and ready to
yield wherein I may receive satisfaction: I hope I have not discovered any
turbulency of spirit, but a willingness to examine truth: As I would keep my
conscience from being wounded by doubtful pressures, so I would keep my tongue
and pen from wounding others by imbittered expressions: I would not willingly
give offense, I hope none will be taken. If it be lawful for one man to
propose, it must be lawful for other to answer arguments, in reference to
satisfaction. It would be too great a burden to true English spirits, to see
one man permitted to stand with a drawn weapon daring all that pass by, and he
only faulty that takes up the weapons to answer him: either prevent such
darings, or else excuse the provoked. It will be my comfort to give, it will be
my advantage to receive satisfaction: howsoever, I shall commit my self, the
safety of our Kingdom, the establishment of such a government that is (...)
conducible to Gods honor, to that God, who is able to answer scruples, (...)
preserve a people, and to command settlement according to his own will and way.

ROMANS 3.8. And not rather as we be slanderously reported, and as some
affirm, that we say, Let (...) do evil that good may come: whose damnation is
just. ROMANS 13.23. Whatsoever is not of faith is sin.

