A Holy Lamp of Light: Discovering the falacious allegorizing of Scriptures, to
destroy not only the reallity of the person of Christ, but all other truths,
from his Conception to his Exaltation; The generalll Resurrection, and the
general Judgment-day, falsely avowing all to be fulfilled here in this present
life. Or a defense against Mr. Royle his Reply. By JOHN GRAVNT.
SIR,
YOUR own Answer to all that are single-eyed, is a plain evidence and
manifestation against your self, for denying the reality, and making an
Allegory of the Divine and Humane nature of the Messiah, the Savior of all
men, the Lord Jesus Christ, the King of glory, and Lord of his people; and also
in every other particular concerning his humiliation and exaltation, thereby
destroying the truth both of the Doctrine of Regeneration and Perfection, and
the assured hope of his Saints at his appearance and Kingdom, under your dark
and obscure Expressions, never meant nor sent from God, but formed and framed
by the spirit of delusion, so that the children of wisdom may condemn you by
your own words: Yet lest the purity of the Doctrine of salvation, wisdom, and
counsel of God should any way suffer through your sophismes, or receive
dishonor by your cunning subtleties in behalf of it, and the Lord thereof, I
that am the meanest of all his servants, thus make my defense against you as
follows.

And first for your censuring me for passionate reproaches, and bitter
expressions under the terms of fancies, conceits, false allegories, delusions
and old Germane Errors, This you say is my language, which in saying so, if I
speak truly, then I am not to be blamed, but rather justified, being therein
warranted both by precept and president in holy Scripture, which commands to
reprove such sharply. And also says, Thou shall not suffer sin upon thy
brother, but thou shall in any wise rebuke him, Luke 19. 17. And all to this
end, that they may be kept and found in the faith, Tit. 1. 13. And woe be to
them that justify the wicked, and condemn the righteous, that put darkness
for light, and light for darkness, that call bitter sweet, and sweet bitter:

So that we ought to say (that those that speak not Gods Word unto the people)
they speak their own fancies: And such as are given up to strong delusions,
ought to be called deluders, or liars; and the bad, or evil Tree ought not to
be called a good Tree, nor the Bramble the Vine; but the truth ought to be
spoken of all: And the expressions thereof ought not to be termed passion or
bitterness. And that I have spoke truly in what I have spoke against you, a
brief examination of the particulars will manifestly declare: And it will not
serve your turn in the Trial, to say, I am in a low Dispensation; but when I
come higher, in the which you are in, then I shall be of your mind, wherefore I
proceed not in the Letter alone, which is the corpse of the Scriptures, but
therewithal the meaning, the solue, the life, the light of truth, and power of
the Spirit of God that does accompany the Letter.

And first, for those fair words, and smooth expressions from your self, it
is the way that Satan has, and will use to deceive with from the first that
was made, to the last that shall be born. And the Apostles jealousy of the
faithful makes him to say, I fear, lest by any means, as the Serpent
beguiled Eve through his subtlety, so your minds should be corrupted from the
simplicity that is in Christ, 2 Cor. 11. 3. And this I say (says he) lest any
man should beguile you with enticing words, Col. 2. 4. For the presumptuous and
selfe-willed beguile unstable souls, 2 Pet. 2. 14. And there are some, that by
good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple, Romans 16. 19.

In the second Page of your Paper you speak of John's Baptism, and Christ's
Baptism, and of the offices and gifts which Paul and the rest had received;
and that you apprehend them all to be types and figures of that glory revealed
in us, which glory in us you make the estate of the Just and perfect man
glorified here before the dissolution of the body.

Sir, I pray take notice how you express and declare your self ignorant of
the Principles and Beginnings of Jesus Christ; as also of the accomplishment
and perfection of a true Christian indeed. Therefore be it known unto you, that
John's baptism was not water in a literal, but in a spiritual sense, the work
of repentance unto life was his baptism, and external washing with material
water was a sign of his administration of that heavenly grace of repentance.
He shall come (says the Prophet) in the spirit and power of Elias, Mal. 3. And
he shall turn the hearts of the children to their Fathers, etc. The disobedient
to the wisdom of the just. His baptism says St. Luke, Chap. 3. is the
baptism of repentance, as it is written in the Book of the words of Isaias the
Prophet; The voice of one crying in the Wilderness, prepare ye the way of the
Lord, make his paths straight; which Scriptures declare not only the name* of
his Baptism, but the heavenly nature, operation, and virtue thereof, even to
turn, prepare, bruise, soften and break the hearts of sinners.

So likewise as our Lords Baptism is of a more higher and excellent degree of
the work of Gods Spirit; the Scriptures also sets it sorth in such terms as
expresses the more excellent nature and operation thereof, as comforting
exceeds mourning, healing brokennesse, liberty captivity, satisfaction want,
and the truth of purity and holiness the preparation thereunto, and spiritual
riches that of spiritual poverty, and therefore it is that our Lord himself
says, The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, And he has anointed me to preach the
Gospel to the poor, which is, to heal the brokenhearted, to deliver the
captivated, and to give sight to them that are spiritually blind. And this
word speaking peace by Jesus Christ began after the Baptism that John
preached, and there is great reason for it; for freedom and deliverance
follows bondage and thraldom, as curing and healing does the member that is
wounded and broken.

And by these two heavenly Baptismes and spiritual Operations, a sinner is
begotten to God, and made a Saint: And as by our fleshly birth we came to have
a natural being and subsistence; so by this heavenly birth of repentance and
remission of sins, Gods children come to have a holy and spiritual being and
subsistence, in which holy righteous children and Saints God dwells by his
Spirit, and endows them with gifts and graces of the holy Ghost, which are not
figures and shadows (as you term them) nor things to be done away, but are
real for substance, and durable for continuance: And as Christ and
Melchisedech, so are all these regenerate Priests of an endless life, and the
gifts and graces of Gods Spirit in them remain and continue to be Gods
Witnesses, testifying for God in the earth, as it is written, There are three
that bear record in earth, the Spirit, the Water, and the Blood, Joh. 5. 8.
And those that by these are spiritually born, begotten, and brought forth of
God, are the little ones that Christ blesses, the humble ones that Christ
teaches, the wise ones that only and truly understand; for unto those only it
is given to know the secrets and mysteries of God.

This new born man is the righteous and just man, the blessed and holy man and
becomes thus righteous and just, not by any inherent righteousness which is
originally within him as you say, and is to be raised, for you affirm it dead
in every man; And when risen, then the flesh is destroyed, and the new man
quickened.

But the righteousness of the truly righteous is by imputation of another
righteousness from without him; For as by one man's disobedience many were made
sinners, so by the obedience of one (mark what the truth says, not of our
selves) shall many be made righteous. And as Abraham the Father of the
Faithful was not made righteous by his own righteousness, but by the
imputation of another righteousness: Now it was not written for his sake
alone, that it was imputed to him; but for us also, to whom it shall be imputed
if we believe on him, that is, on Jesus Christ, Romans 4. 23. 24. And of the
justified ones it is said, their righteousness is of me says the Lord, Isa.
54. 17.

Now observe, it is a mere tale or fable for any to say, that a man becomes a
righteous man by having the righteousness within him as he is borne into the
world: And so although he lives, yet that is dead, and to be quickened, asleep,
and to be awakened, and that Christ the anointing is in all men, either
concealed under the ashes of corruption, or kindled into a flame of
illumina^ion; this Doctrine is sottishness to heavenly wisdom, and nonsense
to true Divinity.

For thus says the Truth, That which is borne of the flesh is flesh, and that
which is born of the Syirit is Spirit: The ode birth is from below of the
earth, earthly, the other is through the Lord from above, spiritually and
heavenly, as it is written, Except a man be born again from above, he cannot
see the kingdom of God. Now such spiritual men were Peter and Nathanael, and
all the faithful Apostles and Saints, to whom flesh and blood was not their
Teacher and Revealer, but Almighty God himself, and these heavenly perls of
regeneration and the gifts of the holy Ghost; their spiritual anointings were
not figures and shadows to cease and pass away, but the very immortal Word,
Council, Spirit, and Covenant of God that abides and continues for ever,
against which the gates of Hell shall not prevail; contrary to which in Page
5. you affirm in these words, I do not mean that outward Ceremony of water, but
also the baptism of the holy Ghost and gifts to be figurative and typical.
Yet in another place, Page the 2. you are pleased to say thus to me; but if you
say that those Offices and gifts which were given to the Apostles, continue
still, and were not figurative; Then show me say you that power of visible
glory held forth in these that now do dispense, as in them heretofore.

To which I answer, If I have manifestly declared and described the righteous
plant, the good Tree and the holy Temple, then they that are spiritual may
discern the fruits, with the power, the light, and glory thereof; for this good
Tree is not barren, but exceeding fruitful, and this spiritual House, Temple,
and Spouse all glorious within: Now in the time of her Lords personal absence,
who, when he comes to be personally present, she with him, and he with her,
shall be wonderfully revealed and manifested with power and great glory,
clothed visibly with it, even before all their enemies that will not now
acknowledge it, but declare against it, as your self has done, and many
others, that have thanks for it of them that should have reproved them, for was
there ever such blasphemy witnessed and testified too, as is under your own
hand, in denying the Lord that bought you; For you boldly affirm in Page 6.
though woefully and impudently, That the Incarnation of Christ, his death,
resurrection, and intercession, and what ever else is spoken of him* as that he
was circumcised, baptized, crucified, dead, and bured, risen, and ascended; All
these expressions and removes say you, I look upon to be no more but as types
and figures, holding forth that whole mystery of Truth which shall be made out
and finished in us by times and degrees, and in several measures; which when
it is accomplished in us, will be the end of all things. And further you say,
this is that general Resurrection and great day of the Lord, and the world to
come, and this is all fulfi^led in us before this veil of flesh be laid down.

These are your own words, wherein you affirm nere as many blasphemies as you
have written words; for here you make Christ himself to be a Type and Figure,
as before you made the gifts of the Spirit which he gave to his Apostles, for
you deny Christ to be real and personal, and affirm him to be a Quality, an
Unction of your own devising; And that there is no resurrection of the body out
of the earth; nor no day of judgment, nor no world to come, then what you have
imagined and fancied in your own conceit; besides, and contrary to Gods word.
And because you will not be tried by that rule of Truth, you blush not to say
in page 5. That the fountain of truth does not fix or confine you so to any
expressions, as that you should not express or declare any thing but what is
according to Scriptures tying you to those written words; no say you.

Oh Sir, look and consider how you exalt your self above all that are called
God, above Christ, above his Word, as I told you before in my Answ. Your Doctor
H. N. had done in page 2. above his Church, above all the holy Prophets and
Apostles; yea all the lights and stars of God from the beginning of the world
to this day; but it cannot be otherwise, because you refuse the counsel that
teaches the truth to the Law and to the Testimony: If this be not in you, it
is because there is no light in you; And that it may be manifested there is no
light in you, do but take a short and brief view of your own darkness,
ignorance, and gross contradictions in your Reply, as you call it. For in page
5. You affirm that I mistake you in saying you make Elias and the Messenger of
the Covenant one and the same: And yet as with the same breath you presently
affirm, that the Messenger of the Covenant which was Christ, is that Elias the
Prophet, even Christ that unction of Truth in us; see from your own mouth the
effect of your own darkness in leaving and slighting of Gods Word, and the
light thereof, which says, Mat. 11. That John Baptist was Elias that was to
come. And the Prophet Malachi makes the Lord Christ to be the Messenger of the
Covenant, and the Baptist to be the Lords Messenger, to prepare his way before
him, by preaching repentance, as before is touched: And he tells you plainly
himself you speak falsely of him, Io^. 1. 20. I am not the Christ, says he,
meaning Christ Jesus the Lord, the Messenger of the Covenant; and the Apostle
John his witness is against you also, John 1. 8. He was not that light, but
was sent to bear witness of that light (says he) Is it not now clear that
that higher dispensation you speak of is very gross dark ignorance and
contradiction that you are fallen into.

Mr. Royle, as in this you have no weapon left for your defense, so your
nakedness will also appear in the rest that is to follow. I pray Sir why did
you not reply particularly to the Scriptures I brought to prove the
Resurrection of the body; wherefore I entreat you again to consider of one or
two Texts more, in John 5. 28, 29. Our Lord affirms plainly, using no parrable
or allegory, That all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall
come forth. Mark this expression; It is not said they shall be raised in us,
but they shall come forth of their graves, they that have done good to the
resurrection of life, and they that have done evil, to the resurrection of
condemnation. Now but that you say that in your dispensation you are not bound
to accord with the Scripture, this testimony would confute your Error, for all
the general Resurrection you speak of in your Reply is this; Christ being
raised in us, the mystery of Truth finished in us, page 6. before the putting
off of this veil of flesh, when Gods word plainly makes the general
resurrection to be the raising of all men's bodies out of their graves where
they are buried, the good to salvation, the evil to damnation. Consider, Mr.
Royle, how you have declared and proved your self a faithless and hopeful
man; for all that have hope toward God believe, and allow that there shall be
a resurrection from the dead both of the just and unjust, Acts 24. 15. And here
see and observe what a discord there is between your spirit and the Spirit of
God in the Scriptures, even by your own words, testifying against you. And look
again on your Paper how you reply to my Answer against your ignorant position,
that the coming of Christ to judgment is his spiritual appearance in men.

For this you affirm in Page 4. That it is clear that Christ's coming again
is fulfilled in sending, giving, or pouring out his Spirit into men. See again
how you in your high Dispensation are directly opposite to Christ and the
Apostles holy Doctrine; for all Scriptures are not spoken to the weakness of
Creatures as you say, but to the comfort and joy of the Saints, that they
through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope, Romans 15. 4. And
the Scriptures do not say he shall come in us as you say, but to us; I will
come again says our Lord, that is, to be with his in bodily presence, as he
was with them before he went from them when he ascended from his Apostles, he
went not out from within them, but ascended from their company, so does the two
men clothed in white Apparel assure the Apostles, this same Jesus (say they)
which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as you
have seen him go into heaven. Now was not the manner a personal ascension
from amongst them, and so shall the manner of his coming in the Clouds be
again personally into their company, so that it cannot be as you say in a
figure of fleshly appearance, but really in his glorified body. Behold he
comes with clouds (says the Spirit) and every eye shall see him: That is,
all men shall see the person of the Son of Man coming in the clouds of heaven
with power and great glory. Observe again, it is not said he comes into men,
but he comes from heaven unto men, in such great eminent and personal glory
that every eye shall behold: And his appearance shall be to to the looked for,
and much desired joy of his Saints, but to the shame and confusion of his
Enemies, and such as be lie him: And take heed now you do not smother this
clear light of Christ's personal appearance with the smoke of your expression;
You are skillful in the letter, for let me tell you plainly, that whosoever
makes his spiritual sense wholly contradictory to the letter of the
Scriptures, renders himself both truthlesse and senseless for such an one
has none to bear witness with him: and whosoever bears witness of himself,
his witness is not true.

Wherefore once again I beeseech you consider further seriously what is
written of this great and glorious truth in these 7. particulars. 1. The person
that comes. 2. The time of his coming. 3. The manner of his coming. 4. The
parties that pray for, and desire his coming. 5. The company that attends him
in his coming. 6. The end and effect of his coming: and 7. The place to which
he comes; In every which particular, your conceit of his coming into men by
spiritual appearances, will be utterly confuted and overthrown. And first for
the person that comes: And mark this, it is a person, and not a quality, and
such a humane person as there was never the like, for he is the son of a
Virgin; And although she his mother, a sinful woman of her self; yet he that
took flesh of her without sin, the son of sinful man, and yet be no sinner:
Behold a wonder, yea a wonderful person, yea such a person as is the Captain
of our salvation, the Bishop of our souls, the Apostle of our profession: He
is called the High Priest, the Messiah, the Mediator, yea the only Mediator
between God and man; the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, the greatest
personage for Majesty that ever was, or shall be: And yet the same person in
his power, glory, and reign, as in his contempt and suffering only now
glorified, and not before.

2. His coming again shall not be till the end of this World, when there shall
be an end of sinning, an end of dying, an end of laboring, and an end of the
Curse: an end of sorrowing, suffering, weeping, and of hungring and thirsting,
not in a feigned conceit, but really, as it was in the estate of innocence
before any of these things had their being and beginning.

3* The manner of his coming shall be glorious in a two fold respect, Amiable
to his Saints and servants, but terrible to his Adversaries and Enemies, as it
is written; The Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the
voice of the Arch-Angell, and with the Trump of God, to the joy, admiration,
and salvation of his Saints: And on the contrary, his coming shall be terrible
to the wicked and disobedient; A day of wrath, indignation, misery and
calamity, darkness and confusion; his coming to such shall be in flaming
fire, rendering vengeance; Yet at the same time to his Saints a heeler, a
deliverer, a restorer, yea amiable and glorious as the light, shining as the
Sun, and glittering as the perfection of all the precious and excellent
things that can he thought or spoke of.

4. The parties that pray for, and desire his coming, declare it to be visible
and apparent, his own personal presence, and not misterious and invisible: The
earnest desire of the Saints is, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, always prayed
for, hoped for, longed for; to which time they have referred the righting of
all their Wrongs, the clearing of all their Causes, the enjoyment of all their
Comforts, to which time the Lord has referred them. Then says he, Lift up
your heads, for your redemption draws nigh: and in which time the Apostle has
assured them deliverance, For he that shall come, will come, and will not
tarry: And it is their Savior that says, Behold I come quickly, and my reward
is with me.

5. His company that attends him are beyond all comparison for number and
nature, for quantity and quality, all the holy Angels, all the holy Saints,
their virtue and quality is holiness and gloriousness, their number
innumerable, all, all, for Angels and Saints, thousand-thousands minister unto
him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stand before him, even so many, as
they are beyond all, and it is the company that attends this great and mighty
Lord, a multitude says the Spirit, which no man can number, of all Nations,
and Kindreds, and People, add Tongues; all the Israel and chosen of God are
then to attend him personally in their glorified bodies and souls.

The 6 thing considerable is the end of his coming, and that is to affect and
accomplish perfection, to restore all things to be glorified in his Saints, and
with his Saints, to be admired of all that believe, and to be dreaded and
feared of all his Enemies, ruling the one with a Scepter of gold, and the other
with a rod of Iron; then shall he be crowned and enthroned for evermore, his
Kingdom set up that shall have no end; his power so greatly declared, that all
his Enemies shall be subdued: He will then make his, and the Saints Adversaries
to acknowledge and honor him and them for ever; For this Kingdom that the Lord
of Heaven shall set up, shall break to pieces, and subdue all other Kingdoms:
It shall thrash the Nations, and beat down the mountains, advancing the City
and mountain of God over and above all Powers, Authorities, Dignities, and
Estates whatsoever, as it is written; At the name of Jesus shall every knee
how, both of things in heaven, things on earth, and things under te earth; That
is, to the power and authority of this King King and Kingdom, which by name is
signified; then shall all other Kings and Nations in the whole world be
subjected, which will be more cleared in the next.

The 7. and last particular, is the place whether he comes, and that is to the
earth, he shall stand, or have rule and authority the last upon the earth,
which shall be the pla^e of his Royalty and Dominion, even the everlasting
inheritance of the Saints. His dominion (says the Spirit) shall be from Sea to
Sea: And the meek (that is, the children of God, the blessed ones) they shall
inherit the earth with him; For he has redeemed them out of every Tongue,
People, and Nation, and they shall reign on the earth: But the Heavens and
Earth that are now, shall be purged, and made all new and holy, where nothing
shall dwell then but righteousness: And not only the Saints, but the whole
Creation shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious
liberty of the Sons of God: Then shall Christ the Lord give the Inheritance
to the Heirs apparent; for Abraham is not only the heir of the world, but all
the children of the Promise, that are of the faith of Abraham, are joynt-heirs
with him. Now all their excellent honors and privileges as they are in this
life inward, and enjoined by faith and hope, are the earnest penny of the whole
perfection: So then after the Resurrection, the things that are now believed
and hoped for, shall be then present in the enjoyment for ever, and then faith
and hope shall cease and come to an end: And this everlasting salvation shall
not only be within them, in the perfection of them, but externally upon them
also. For all the Righteous shall be clothed with a glorious heavenly
clothing: They shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament, and as the
stars for ever and ever, and the whole wicked world shall be judged by them,
seeing, knowing, and acknowledging them honored of God for ever, whom they in
their lifetime did scorn, persecute, disdain and contemn: And they lifting up
their heads, out of their pains and torments, shall fall down and worship them,
and in honor of them lick the dust of their seet, and shall say one to another
Are not these they that we fools in our lifetime, hated and had in a proverb
of reproach; but now how do we see them honored, and our selves justly
condemned: In which condemnation they shall be for ever chained and tormented
world without end. Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so in your
Writings you have withstood Jesus; but as their folly was manifested to all
men, so shall also yours be: Wherefore Master Royle I pray you to repent, that
you may escape this damnation to come, who am your Friend,

JOHN GRAVNT.

FINIS.
Page 2. l. 7. for solue, r. soul. p. 7. l. 30. for and it, r. awdit. p. 3. l.
46. for pearls r. parts.


