A Great and BLOODY PLOT AGAINST The Protestants, Discovered to have taken the
Castle at Dublin, and murdered the Commissioners of PARLIAMENT.

Diverse taken prisoners, among whom were, The Lord Tath, Sir Edward Varney,
Colonel Vane, Colonel Barrey, Captain Poor, Captain Treswell, Mr. Brent a
Lawyer, Alderman Joanes, Alderman Clerk, And diverse others.


WITH A DECLARATION by the Supreme Council of the Confederate Catholics at
KILKENNY: And their treachery against the ENGLISH Protestants.

Also several great victories obtained by the Lord Inchequin in Munster.

And the Defeat of the Irish Rebels under Owen Roe O Neale.

CErtified by the Commissioners Letters from Dublin, appointed to be printed
and published,

Philip Fernelley, Cleric. Parl. Dom. Com.

Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson. 1647.

A Great and bloody PLOT against the Protestants discovered, to have taken the
Castle at Dublin, and murdered the Commissioners of PARLIAMENT.
Dublin, July 14. 1647. Right Honorable,
UPon Thursday Major Gleg was buried nobly in Christchurch, and Captain Villars
is Major in his place. Upon Friday six Commissioners sat at Cork house, who
are appointed to agree with Delinquents for their estates. That day Sir Richard
Barnwell compounded, Sir Andrew Elmore came with him to Town, likely for the
same purpose: some comes in daily to compound, but that they hope for a new
breaking out in England, most of the Country would come in: That day Captain
Wood, and Cap. Thomas Bartlet went with provision toward Sligo:

Upon Friday night, hearing of this Proclamation some three hundred Troopers
and Soldiers went to the Rebels, because, as is suspected, they might not have
their former Officers to serve under, and I fear me for that cause many others
will run unto them. That night Colonel Convey came to town with news of taking
a thousand Cowes, besides three hundred Horse from the Rebels, from Charlemount.

Upon Saturday it was concluded, but not fully known until Monday what
Commanders of Horse should be cashcered, the news stomachs most, if not all of
them, that day the Rebels took Codington, and four or five more twelve miles
from Dublin, in their way to Droghedah.

Upon Tuesday our Army went forth with about three thousand Horse and foot, God
send them a happy Victory and safe return.

The same day Captain Otley was buried in St. Patricks Church, and his Troop
bestowed on Captain King, That night Sir Maurice Eustace his Cows were taken
away from Irish Towns three miles from Dublin: We heard that Preston summoned
the Naas, and is upon his journey thither, our Army is there by this time, if
not further. It is reported that Owen Roe is on his march from Connought, and
it is variously reported that he had an overthrow, but it is uncertain, the
contrary party reports the contrary, but I believe had he had any good
success, he had not returned so soon from thence. The Churches are unprovided
as yet of Ministers, the Commissioners offers (as I hear) the old may
continue, and use the Lords prayer, two Chapters, the Psalms, the Belief, and
ten Commandments, but they will not Preach without they may use the same form
as they formerly have done. This day some of the Papists and Cavaliers party,
had an intention to work some plot against the Commissioners and Protestants,
and as it is thought, to surprise the Castle of Dublin likewise, which
conspiracy as God would have it, the Commissioners had private notice of,
presently strong Guards were set about Mistress Courtesies house, wherein were
the Lord Tath, Col. Vane, Sir Edmond Varney, Col. Barry, Cap. Poor, Cap.
Treswell and Brent the Lawyer who are kept there. Alderman Joanes, and Alderman
Clearke, be committed upon examination, Varney and Treswell were enlarged,
what will become of the rest, by the next you shall hear. God send us good
news from England or else we be but in a bad condition.

Your humble Servants.

We have sent you here enclosed the Copy of a Letter from Munster, and also a
Declaration from the Supreme Council of the Confederate Catholics at
Kilkenny.
Right Honorable,
WE had a party sent out the 24 of May, which returned the 25, with 600. head
of Cattle, Sheep and Garrons. The 28. of May, we sent out another party, which
returned the 31. with 2000. and odd Cowes and Oxen, and in Sheep and Garrons
so many that made them up 6000. and odd. The third of June we sent out another
party, which returned the fifth, with about 600. head of cattle besides 1500
sheep which the Soldiers killed ate in their return. They also took in a place
called Castle Thomas. While the last party was abroad, we had 100. horse at a
place, to make good a passage, which being careless, the enemy drew some
Musketeers through a wood, between them and hom: So their horse fell upon them
in the Front, and the Musketteers in the Rear, and killed betwixt 30 and 40 of
them. All our moneys is gone, and our provision will not last past 6. or 8.
days, so that except there come a fresh supply out of England in the mean
time, I know not what the Soldiers will do for bread: for wheat is far
dearer here then it is in England, and in many places not to be bought for
money, and without wheat to make Biscuit, the Army will never be able to
continue in the field. It is true the Lord Inchiquin does what lies in him,
but he wants assistance. We are now forced to leave the field, and go to
Garrison for want of wheat and money.

Your Honors humble servant, Francis Roe.
Youghall, July 1. 1647.
By the Supreme Council of the Confederate Catholics of IRELAND.
Whereas many persons of Honor and Gallantry, and others his Majesty's loyal
Subjects, who faithfully served against the Rebels of the Parliament of
England, were by the power and malice of the said Rebels, forcibly, and
violently, transported into this Kingdom, or detained therein, to fight
against his Majesty's loyal and dutiful Subjects the Confederate Catholics
of Ireland: Thereby to weaken his Majesty's party; and as much as in the said
Rebels lies, to extinguish this nation. We therefore in discharg of the duty,
we owe to our Sovereign Lord the King, the trust reposed in us by this
Kingdom and our desire to preserve them and us in loyalty, do hereby publish
and declare that all and every the said persons of Honor, Commanders,
Officers, Troopers and Soldiers 'who will depart from the service of the said
Rebels in any Province of this Kingdom, and repair either unto us, or any
his Majesty's Armies in any of the said Provinces under our commands, and serve
against the said Rebels, shall have and enjoy safety and protection in their
persons, arms, and goods, and also shall be employed in any of the said Armies
they will make choice of respectively, in equivalent command with those they
held or shall hold in the service of the said Rebels at the time of their
respective departure from them, and shall possess and enjoy equal
entertainment, privileges, and advantages, with those of their respective
degrees in the service of the said Confederate Catholics, without distinction
of nation or Religion, so that every person departing as aforesaid, do take an
Oath, to bear true faith and loyalty to our sovereign Lord King Charles his
Heirs and Successors, and be true and faithful unto the said Confederate
Catholics, and not to advise, contrive, conceal, or act any thing that may
be, or tend to their damage, or prejudice, and obey the commands, and orders of
the supreme council, against his Majesty's enemies, and we do command all
Generals, Governors, Commanders, Officers and others his Majesty's Subjects,
within our quarters, to take notice of, and render due obedience to this our
public Act, and Declaration, and likewise not to molest hinder or trouble any
person or persons of honor command or otherwise coming or repairing hither
from the said enemies quarters in pursuance of this our Act and Declaration out
to protect, guard, and defend them; either and every of them in their way and
journey unto us.

Given at Kelkenny the first day of July 1647. Antrim, Johannes Clonfertensis,
Nich. Fernensis, Athenry, Louth, Nich. Plunket, Rich. Everard, Patrick, Darcy,
etc.

Die Lunae 14. Iulii, 1647.
THe House understanding, that there is a resolution to prorogue the
Parliament, for some long time, and not knowing when they shall meet again did
take into their consideration the many good services performed by Sir Maurice
Eustace, Knight, their Speaker, unto the House, his singular affection to the
English Nation, and public Service, his earnest endev^ur for the advancement
of the Protestant Religion, the inveterate hatred and malice of the detestable
Rebels, many ways declared and acted against him, and the great expenses which
he has been formerly at for the honor and service of the House. And having at
present no better way of requital, then to convey the memory thereof to
posterity, do think fit in manifestation of their high esteem thereof, to
declare, and do hereby declare the same to be such, as in all times ought to
be remembered for his advantage. And do therefore order, that this be entered
amongst the Act, and Orders of this House.

Finis.
Philip Ferneley, Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.


