THE VINDICATION OF THE Vicar of Istleworth, in the County of Middlesex.

From a scandalous Pamphlet, containing one and twenty Articles; invented by
some, closely; subscribed unto but by six, publicly; presented but by one,
openly; and now vented in print surreptitiously (in the name of the whole
Parish) by a Nobody.

Whereunto are likewise added certain notorious Impieties and Misdemeanors of
Gilbert Barrel Attorney, the Promoter: which shall be fairly and fully
proved, upon just occasion.

By William Grant Vicar of Istleworth aforesaid.

One Bow, six Strings, Shafts one and twenty shot,
Discover plain a most malicious Plot:
Yet in this malice, thus it does befall,
Or short, or wide, or over, they are all,
But only one, article 11
As good luck was, that hit him;
His use of Scripture Phrase, will surely split him.
Printed in the year 1641.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
MY hope is, that innocence shall have thy free leave to speak in a still
voice; when envy, and malice, and uncharitableness shall cry so loud, and
spare not: when it shall be told in Gath, and published in the streets of
Ascalon, which was never so much as whispered in the bedchamber; or once so
much as thought upon in the hidden closet of the heart. Lend also one glance to
a modest Vindication, as thou have done, formerly, to a shameless
Calumniation; and suspend thy censure, till the truth it self shall have time
to break forth through such malignant clouds; and appear in its own native
luster.

W. G.

THE PETITION.
THat the Parish of Istleworth is very populous, and full of Gentry and
Citizens, and has for these forty years last past, had several Lecturers
there maintained at their own charge: and of late, one Mr. William Iemmet,
Chaplain to the Right Honorable, the Earl of Northumberland, a learned
Divine, and of approved life, and conversation; who has been for these
fourteen years licensed by the Chancellor for our Lecturer, and accepted for
such by Reverend Learned Doctors, Prebends of Windsor, successively Vicars of
Istleworth aforesaid; until of late* one Mr. William Grant, Chaplain to the
Bishop of Gloucester, by the procurement of the Archbishop of Canterbury, is
become the Vicar there; who has put out the said Mr. Iemmet, and in his place,
employed one Mr. Bifeld, a man of a very scandalous life, to be Lecturer
there, until the Parishoners were preferring a Petition to the Parliament
against them both: the said Mr. Grant being a man also erroneous in opinion,
scandalous in life, an exactour of undue fees, wholly unfit for that Sacred
Function, as will appear in the following particulars, here humbly offered
unto your grave consideration.

The Answer.
1 That the Parish is indeed very populous, having in it no less than a
thousand communicants at the least; and yet, of all these, there were but six
hands against me in the petition; to wit, Richard Dawnton, William Smith,
Gilbert Barrel* George Rushly, Gera Strong, John Vincent: and I think I may
boldly say it, that there is never a Parish in the whole Kingdom again, where
there are so many communicants, but that there are six men in it, that doestand
disaffected to their Minister.

2 That it is also full of Gentry and Citizens; but, for Citizens, there is not
so much as one hand against me; and, for Gentry, for ought I know, there is
but one, if one: two of them are Carpenters, a third, a Miller; a fourth, a
Baker; a fifth, an Attorney; the sixth, whether a gentleman or no, I know not.

3 That I am no Chaplain to the Bishop of Gloucester, neither ever was; and,
that the only motive, which induced him to confer his right in this Vicaridge
of Istleworth upon me, was merely his respects unto my Father, John Grant,
Doctor of Divinity, who had formerly been his Tutor in Trinity College, in the
University of Cambridge.

4 That all that the Archbishop of Canterbury did in it, was only in writing
unto the Deane and Chapter of Windsor, that, if the right of presentation were
in the Bishop of Gloucester (as it was, by a Chapter Act) I might not be
deprived of it; he having under his hand, conferred it upon me.

5 That the Vicaridge, being a very poor thing of it self, I was ready, and
willing for to supply the place wholly my self, that so I might add to my
means, and make them a competency: whereupon I gave Mr. Iemmet the Lecturer, a
sufficient time to provide himself in; in which, he did provide, and is now
settled elsewhere, and that, in a better condition than he was before, as I
shall bring very good proof, from his own mouth; withal declaring himself
to be well enough, if they would let him alone; and so, for his part, he
suffered no damage by it.

6 That I found Mr. Bifield Curate of the place, when I came unto it; and all
that I have done, is to retain him so still. Concerning the scandalousness of
his life, alleged, as the Courts of Justice stand open for them against him;
so, for my part, I am persuaded, he is able of himself, to answer for himself.

7 For the erroniousness of my opinions, and scandalousness of my life, and
exaction of undue fees, I shall give answer to them, in their due place and
time.

Article. 1.
1 THat Mr Grant has, ever since the Fast day in July last, put out the said
Mr. Iemmet from being Lecturer, though himself confesses, that he has
nothing against his life and conversation, but that he did it, that he might
root out the puritanes there; and notwithstanding that the same Mr. Iemmet has
many small children* most of them bred in the same parish.

Answer.
For the putting out of Mr. Iemmet, it is already answered: but that I should
use any such phrase, that I did it to root out the Puritans, it is as bold and
as foul a calumny, as malice it self could possibly have invented, or
dishonesty broached. And, had they not both conspired, and strove together in
it, of it self it had died in the Authors brain that forged it. Indeed, I was
once upon occasion, taxed with it openly, before Sir Edward Spencer, and Sir
Francis Darcy, by one Gilbert Barrel Attorney; but, when I demanded of him at
that same time, what witness or proof he had of it, he answered, that one Mr.
Lyster would avouch it; who no sooner heard of it, but did utterly disclaim it
at several times, both unto me and others; and will be ready, at any time (as
he has often told me) to witness the contrary to his face.

Article 2.
2 That Mr. Grant did promise Mr. Barrel, being Churchwarden (in the word of a
Priest) that if the said Mr. Barrel would promise to pay him ten pounds a
year (which accordingly was done) then the said Mr. Iemmet should be received
again to be Lecturer, and added this execration; let this wine never pass
through me (taking the glass and drinking it off) if I make not good this
promise: yet nevertheless he put him out, as aforesaid, within six or eight
weeks after that promise and execration.

Answer.
All this I utterly deny; and call God to record upon my soul, that he may as
well say, that I denied the Trinity; or that I blasphemed the Holy Ghost: and
should account it one of the greatest afflictions that ever befell me, should
it have been said by any but him, who is a man so generally known what he is.
But, as for him, he openly professed, before Sir Edward Spencer, and many
more, upon occasion, that he was almost drunk at the same time; and so indeed,
I know not what dreams he might have afterward; for, it is an execration that
I have heard himself often using.

Article. 3.
3 That Mr. Grant patteth holiness in places, and therefore threatened to
present the said Mr. Barrel, being Churchwarden, for coming once within the
rail about the Communion Table, for to receive the money which was collected
at the Sacrament; and to put it into the poores box, according to the Rubric,
saying; none must come there but the Priest, for that it was holy ground.

Answer.
That the said Mr. Barrel, being Churchwarden, not coming himself to the
Communion, not having been so much as once a Communicant with us, for this
twelve-moneth together, came running into the Church, at the end of it; and,
most uncivilly, snatched away all the money that was given to the poor, as I
was in telling it upon the Communion Table; and said, that he would dispose of
it himself alone; and, that I should not know so much as what there was;
whereupon I said, that I would present him for that his rude, and uncivil
action, and intrusion, it having been always the custom of my predecessors in
the place having told the money) to dispose some part of it to such poor
people, as he knew to be necessitous; and to give the rest to the
Churchwardens, to be disposed of as occasion served. But, that I should say,
that it was holy ground, and none should come there but the Priest, is merely
an addition of his own brain to aggravate the Article; and is as false as God
is true.

Article. 4.
That the said Mr. Grant boweth to the Table when he goes to it to say his
second Service; and at all other times, as often as he goes by it, and also,
when the word Jesus is named, though his face be toward the West (when his
Curate names that word) yet he then turns to the Table, or to the East, and
boweth himself.

Answer.
1 That there be many of the parish sitting at the seats about the Communion
Table; and some of them, at my coming in, rising up, or moving themselves* in
their respects unto me, happily I may have bowed or bended toward them (as in
civility I could do no less) but to the Table I never did.

2 That, for my reading of the second Service at the Communion Table, I never
did it, but only on communion days, which we are enjoined by the Rubric,
established by Act of Parliament.

3 That it was no innovation of mine, but was used to be read there before
ever I came into the parish.

4 That this Mr Barrel that now accuses me for reading of it there, was the
sole occasion that ever it was read there, complaining unto Doctor Duck of him,
who was then Curate, as a Puritan, and nonconformist, for not reading of it
there; Whereupon (whether by injunction, or no; I know not) it was read there.

5 That when the word Jesus is named, I do bow my self, it is freely
confessed, as it is alleged; and so does the promoter too, not only at the
word Jesus, but also of the Father too, or of the holy Ghost, which I do not.
But that, though my face be toward the west, I should immediately upon it,
turn it toward the East, let any man but the promoter say it, and I will
acknowledge what I never was guilty of.

Article. 5.
That being desired by the Churchwardens to forbear reading the second
Service at the Communion Table, he answered, he would not do it to please
the Puritans; and, that he dares not do otherwise; For, if it should be told
the Archbishop, all the friends he had should not be able to persuade the said
Archbishop, but that he was afavourer of the Puritans.

Answer.
That I do indeed remember a motion made by Mr. Barrel to this purpose, and
it was in the presence of one Mr. Lyster, who can also testify with me, that
my only answer was this, that, if it had not been used to be read there before,
it should never have been put in use by me; but having been used there before,
I would not meddle with the altering of it, without injunction, or permission,
which afterward when once I had from Doctor Duck, in his visitation, I
presently did.

Article. 6
6 That he has affirmed, that the marrying of the Clergy, is the undoing of
the Clergy.

Answer.
Not unlikely but I have; neither know I, as yet any reason, why I should
recant it: for, for my part, I know not (as yet) any thing that makes more to
the undoing of Clergy men, or other; or, that will bring more misery upon them,
than the estate of wedlock rashly run into, before there be sufficient means
to support it.

Article. 7.
7 That he has said, that it will never be well with the Church of England
until confession be set up in it.

Answer.
This Article I utterly deny.

Article. 8.
That he has spoken against the Doctrines of Predestination.

Answer.
What I have spoken against them sleeping, I am not able to say; but certain I
am, that waking, I never did: as for the Pulpit, I have learned better
obedience to authority than to meddle in it with points forbidden; and, for
other, table or winter fires discourses, to my knowledge, I never spoke so much
as a syllable concerning them to any of my parish, but only once to one
gentleman, who inviting me to supper, in private discourse after it, desired my
opinion in those points: my answer was (as I well remember) that for my part, I
thought it better a great deal for a man to employ his thoughts in the working
out of his own salvation, than curiously to busy them in Gods disposal of
others.

Article. 9.
9 That he has affirmed, that pictures are laymens books; and that it is
lawful to have them in Churches, and Chappells; and has desired the
Churchwarden to set up the picture of a Saint in the Chancell; and that he
carries to Church with him a testament full of crucifixes, and pictures.

Answer.
1 That happily I might say in occasional discourse (at the courteous table,
and hospitable entertainment of Gilbert Barrel Attorney) that pictures are
laymens books, as from the mouth of Gregory the great, whose speech it was, I
do not deny it; but, that I should affirm it, as mine own opinion, I defy it.

2 That I might also (at the same time and place) say some such thing, as that,
for mine own part, I was not scandalized, or offended at the sight of them in
Churches; But that I should absolutely affirm the lawfulness of them in
respect of others, or ever spoke unto him for to set up the picture of a Saint
in the chancell, I utterly deny, and abhor it.

3 That I do carry to Church with me a Testament full of pictures I confess
it, but it was such a one as was printed in Scotland; and I have carried it but
sometimes neither; only, when I have not been to preach my self; and that,
never for the pictures sake, but only in regard of the book of Common Prayer,
which is in it, having it in no book else beside; this promoter himself having
long before my time (witness the whole parish) most commonly and frequently
brought the very same kind of book along with him to the same Church.

Article. 10.
10 That he has affirmed, that he had rather hear an organ (ten to one) in
the Church, than singing of Psalms; which, scoffingly, he calls Hopkins his
Jiggs; and commanded the Clarke, not to read them in the Church, so that the
unlearned could not sing: and further, threatened to present the Churchwarden,
if he would not present one, who on Sunday read the Psalm to one that stood
near him.

Answer.
That I might also say in occasional discourse, at the time and place
aforesaid (for all is but table-talke, with one whose brain runs upon wheels,
and, at that time, ran upon nothing more, than such like discourses, some
Priest, or Jesuit having been the last company he was in, whom he is well
known to have much and often converse with) I say, that I might have also, at
the same time and place, seemed to approve of, for my own particular, the use
of Organs in the Church, and to disapprove some particular expressions in
Master Hopkins; the gross mistakes that often slipped from an old dotard, in his
reading them to the congregation, and the unbeseeming noise that was made in
the Church, when they were read by several men, in several corners, I do not
deny: But that I had rather hear an Organ, ten to one, than singing of
Psalms; that I should call them Hopkins his Jiggs, command the clarke not to
read them, that the unlearned might not sing; and threaten to present the
Churchwarden, if he would not present one that read them, I also utterly deny
and abhor it.

Article. 11.
11 That he uses very unbecomming speeches in his Sermons, as speaking of
some popish tenants, he said, marry, as good luck is, we have the Scripture
against them; and, at another time, of the devils tentations, marry, as good
luck was, God was stronger than the devil.

Answer.
All the unbecomming speeches I have used in my Sermons, so mouthed out against
in the pamphlet, are only one phrase twice used (the phrase of, good luck is)
which if I have (though never as is alleged) for my president and example, I
find it as often used in holy writ: Good luck have thou with thine honor,
says the Psalmist; And again, It fortuned (writes St. John) that there was a
wedding in Cana of Galile; and Jesus was at it: and if Mr. Pamphleter be such a
master of speech as he pretends to, he should do well to translate the Bible
anew, that his ears may not be any more offended with the unbecomming
expressions of the old Translators of it.

Article. 12.
12 That he calls the book of Martyrs, a book of lies.

Answer.
That I am not of such a judgment, neither ever was.

Article. 13.
13 That he said, that all good fellowship was laid aside in the parish, but
he will bring it in again, and maintain it; and would have wine and tobacco
for all that would come to his Vicaridge house on Sundays after Prayers, and
he does make it good, harboring there at such times, the deboist sort tippling.

Answer.
That I ever said such words, I utterly deny and defy it. Indeed when I took
possession of the Church, those gentlemen of the parish, who came along with
me in seeming courtesy to it, came also after along with me into the Vicaridge
house; and, among other words (as I well remember) I told them, if they would
be pleased, to refresh themselves in it I should take it kindly; and, it may
be, I might use the phrase, that a glass of wine, or a pipe of tobacco should
be for them that pleased. But, why this speech of mine, that was spoken to
those gentlemen (merely in courtesy, upon my first acquaintance with them, and
out of an honest desire, to hold and maintain brotherly love, and mutual
charity amongst my neighbors) should be so traduced, as that I desired to make
the same a tipplinghouse for the deboist sort, let the reader judge; or how I
could possibly be so well versed in the parish, where I had never in all my
life time been before, or had ever so much as heard of the place till it was
void; as to say, all good fellowship was laid aside in it, I do not desire to
be mine own judge in it.

2 That I should make it good, as they say, by harboring there at such times
the deboist sort tippling: it must needs be a secret aspersion upon their
betters, who have been there with me at such times in a civil way, and cast a
most foul and unrequitable imputation upon my self, who was never yet found
guilty in that kind, but do challenge all the world to produce, and make good
the least debauchednesse or tippling that was in it, since I came into the
Place.

Article. 14.
That he has said, that the Sabbath Day is no more than another day; and that
Christmas Day is an higher day than the Sabbathday; and that it is a greater
day than all the Sabbaths in the year: and he also maintains the book of
Sports.

Answer.
That which I said, was at Sir John Offlyes table, at dinner in Christmas week
last past; The occasion was, upon the great commendation that one William Smith
a Baker, gave of the Sermon that had bin preached in my Church on
Christmas Day; whereupon, for my own part, I professed much dislike of it, for
that he said plainly in it, that it was superstition to observe that day: and
so in process of words, further added, that it was as great and as high a day
as the Sabbath Day; in respect of its meaning and signification; and my reason
was, That the Sabbath Day was first instituted in memory of the Creation, but
Christmas Day in memory of our Redemption.

Article 15.
15 That he will not suffer any to pray for the sick in the Pulpit; but uses
the Prayer appointed for visiting the sick.

Answer.
That I have used the Prayer appointed for visiting the sick, and also wished
my Curate to do the like, I do not deny; but that I should ever forbid, or not
suffer the praying for them in the Pulpit, it is a most notorious untruth,
having often (as is well known) not only suffered it, but also practiced it my
self.

Article 16.
16 That he is an ordinary Gamester at Cards, sitting up until two or three
in the morning.

Answer.
That I have indeed played at Cards in my Parish, and in Christmasse-time
often, and sometimes, it may be, late; but yet, never near so late as spoken
of; and always with those that were of good fashion and quality, where I was
invited; And only for honest, and civil recreation; never for lucre, or for
any sum that is worth mentioning: And therefore, that I should thereupon, be
thus scandalously reported of as an ordinary Gamester (having, as far as I
yet conceive, the same use of Christian liberty, in a fair way, as others
have) I leave it to the censure of the World.

Article 17.
That when one, preaching there, reproved soule-murdering Ministers, the said
Mr. Grant said, that if he had been as near the Pulpit, as the Bishop of
Lincoln was to Doctor Heylin, he would have pulled him out of the Pulpit.

Answer.
This Article is in part answered already. This Preacher, they speak of, that
reproved so stoutly soule-murdering Ministers, was he that preaching on
Christmasse-Day last past, said in his sermon, that it was superstition to
observe that Day. Whereupon, I, being asked by a Gentleman that sat in the Pew
with me, why I would suffer such a fellow to preach in my Pulpit, my answer to
him, in his care, was this, how can I help it? but, if I were as near unto
him, as the Bishop of Lincoln was to Doctor Heylin, I would also give a knock:
And this was all to a syllable.

Article 18.
18 That we shall have no Lecturer, if we will not take such a man, as he
will put in; And that if we will not be so contented, we shall be contented
with one Sermon in a month, that he will preach.

Answer.
This Article is utterly false: For I can bring very good witness, of some of
the best of the Parish, who will be ready to testify with me, that I
proffered, that if they would bring any man whatsoever, that came recommended
unto me, under the hands of Doctor Holdsworth, Doctor Styles, and Doctor
Gouge, he should be welcome; and have the free-liberty of my Pulpit as
Lecturer; And have also often said it in open Vestry to them all (which will
also be testified, and cannot be denied) that let every man in the Parish that
paid any thing toward a Lecturer, have his free voice also in the choice, that
so the major part of the whole Parish might carry it; And then, in the name of
God, they might choose whom they pleased.

Article 19.
19 That he takes away part of the Clarks wages, and gives it to a Boy that
rubs his horses heels.

Answer.
That, when I came first to the Place, I found one Lawrence Rutter Officiating
the Place of Parish Clark; but yet, not having any right at all unto it, or
legal possession of it, he offered me (upon my coming) a sum of money, for
to continue, and establish him in it; my answer was, that establish him I would
not; but, as long as he should carry himself as befitted, I would continue him
in it; And for his money, bade him only give a neighbors Boy, that looked to
my horse, five shillings a quarter, whiles I could provide my self of a man,
he being himself an old man, and not able to do it for me; and that was all
that I would require of him; which accordingly for two quarters, and no more,
he did. Now, I was so far from taking from his wages, that whereas he had
formerly given eight pounds a year out of the Place, to the maintenance of a
wife and children of the former Clark, by the imposition of some of these
Promoters, who had been the means to bring him in, and to turn the other out,
that I took it off to fifty shillings, and bade him only give the woman twelve
pence a week, and keep the rest to himself: So far was I from diminishing
the wages of the Place.

Article 20.
20 That he exacts money for attendance upon Funerals, and other undue fees,
four or five times as much as have been within these seven years;
challenging, and taking by force, money which is due to the Churchwardens for
the time being, for Burialls in the Church, and Church Porch.

Answer.
1 That, when I had waited at a Funeral, from two of the clock till six before
they went to the Church with the Corpse, I did indeed, put down in my Bill for
Attendance in the general; but, no sum at all concerning it in the
particular; leaving it wholly to themselves.

2 For undue Fees, I never took any, or ever (at any time) more than was
accustomed.

3 For taking by force, money that was due to the Churchwardens, for the
Burialls in the Church, or Church Porch, is a most abominable falsehood: Indeed,
when a child, once, was buried in an Isle at the upper end of the Chancell, I
then conceived, and so do still, that money for the ground belonged to me;
Whereupon* I received the money for it into my own hands*, from the Clark who
had it in his hands, and gave it presently as shall be proved into the hands of
one of the Churchwardens, for to keep by it self* till the right did appear.

Article 21.
21 That he receives the money collected at the Sacrament, and says that it
is money offered; And therefore does belong to him being Priest there.

Answer.
That, when ever I received it, which was seldom, this Promoter, for the most
part coming into the Church on the sudden, and snatching it away, I did
immediately distribute every farthing of it amongst the poor, And, as for my
saying, that it was money offered; and that it did belong to the Minister, I
meant it only of his disposal;* for, that was the Point in controversy.

Thus,

The Bow is broke; Strings cracked; the Shafts all lost:
Assaulting and insulting malice crossed.
The aforesaid notorious impieties, and misdemeanors of Gilbert Barrel
Attorney.
1 THat the said Gilbert Barrel, has been seen coming out of the Queens
Chapel, in time of Mass; and himself has reported, that he sat there in a
Romish Priests habit.

2 That being asked, why he went to Mass, he answered, that therefore he did
it, because he would not go in a crowd, but turn Papist before hand.

3 That he seriously professed, if he were to begin the world again, he
would be a Jesuit, rather than of any other profession.

4 That he plainly affirmed, he had rather hear a Romish Priest preach,
than any one, or all the Ministers of the Church of England: And that, if one
should hear one of them but once, he would hardly hear any of those of our
Religion again.

5 That he commonly brings Pamphlets to the Church, and reads them in time of
Divine Service and Sermon: And, at one time he brought a Ballad, which having
read himself, he gave to a Gentlewoman in the next Pew to read it also.

6 That being overtaken in his way to London, by a Gentleman, who discoursing
concerning the great distraction that was in the Commonwealth, by reason of
delaying of justice upon those two great men, the late Earl of Strafford, and
the Archbishop of Canterbury: Delaying of justice? says Master Barrel; I
speak really and upon my conscience, they are absolutely two of the most pious
and religious men, that are in the Kingdom of England.

7 That when the Railes about the Communion Table, were riotously broken down
by a Tumultuous Company of the said Parish, it being in question before the
Justices at Brainford, he said openly, before the same Justices, that it was
his act and doing; that he himself did command it to be done, and would
justify the doing thereof.

8 That being bound to the Peace, he ran at my servant with a pitchfork, when
he came only to make Tith-Hay upon his ground; and swore with many oaths, to
be his death.

9 That upon occasion he said (before very good witness) there being speech
made of David's murder and adultery; his murder and adultery says Master
Barrel, if he had not committed murder, it had been no matter for his
adultery.

10 That he often said and avouched, that if ever he fall out with any man, he
will never be reconciled; and if ever it lie in his power, he will do him the
greatest mischief he can.

11 That he did most maliciously, and vexatiously (without any just ground or
cause) arrest the foresaid Vicar twice in the Term last past, and threatens
to do the same day by day, to the great interruption of him in his Ministry,
who is Lecturer in the Collegiate Church of Westminster, to preach there twice
a week in the Term time; and was disabled by such vexatious suites to perform
the same.

12 That one Lawrence Rutter, in the Parish of Istleworth, having bin displaced
by the whole parish from officiating the place of Parish-clarke for most
notorious misdemeanors, committed and confessed by him; the said Gilbert
Barrel notwithstanding endeavored to introduce him again, by most unjust and
indirect means, as namely by using the name of the Right Honorable the Earl
of Northumberland in open Court, without any order at all from him; who, upon
notice thereof, disclaimed it openly, and declared himself displeased thereat;
by means whereof the Judges, being falsely possessed by him that it was his
Lordships pleasure to have him restored, made a rule, that unless William
Grant should refer his cause to the determination of the said Earl, that
writ should issue forth to restore him, which accordingly did; and was recalled
again by the aforesaid Judges, upon information of his Lordships disclaiming
such abuse of his name. And notwithstanding, that the same Laurance Rutter was
displaced by the whole parish, and another man chosen by them, and sworn and
licensed for the place by the Civil Law; neither could find any relief upon
his motion at the Common Law, but was also indicted for his misdemeanour at the
sessions in Hicks his Hall; and there bound upon it unto his good behavior for
a twelvemonth; and after all this, was forbidden by the Justices of Peace at
their sessions in Brainford by a warrant under their hands, not to make any
disturbance, in the Church by officiating, but to suffer Henry Bennet quietly
to officiate there, until such time as he was evicted by law, being sworn and
licensed thereunto; notwithstanding all this, I say, the said Gilbert Barrel
does still encourage, and command the aforesaid Rutter, that was thus
displaced; to officiate the place of parish* Clark, to the high affront and
contempt of Justice, and continual disturbance of the whole congregation.

13 May 2* 1641. Gilbert Barrel Attorney, did openly and publicly disturb
William Grant, Vicar of Istleworth, as he was preaching in the pulpit to his
congregation, by most uncivil words and actions, by laughing, and jearing in
his face on the sudden, and immediately after that reading of a pamphlet, and
refusing and denying openly to lay it aside, or to sit out of sight, being
requested thereunto by the said Vicar as he was in preaching; insomuch, that
not being able to proceed in his Sermon (as he himself then professed) he
broke off in his Sermon twice, at the first time called for a Psalm, and the
second time dismissed us. Upon this misdemeanour the said Gilbert Barrel was
indicted at the sessions in Hicks his Hall last past; and it was found Billa
Vera against him by the Jury.

14 July 18. 1641. The said Gilbert Barrel laid violent hands on one Henry
Bennet, Parish-Clark of the foresaid parish, to pluck him out of a pew, where
he was appointed by the Vicar to sit for to officiate; and again, getting
within him, heaved and thrust at him with like violence, in the time of Divine
Service: who being admonished by the Curate beforehand, that he disturbed the
whole Congregation; do I said he? I will disturb it more yet: And presently
thereupon, fell upon the foresaid disturbance. Upon this misdemeanor also, he
was indicted at the forenamed Session, and it was likewise found Billa vera
against him by the foresaid Jury.

15 That the foresaid Gilbert Barrel (for the space of eleven or twelve weeks
together, lately past) did most notoriously disturb the whole Congregation,
almost every Lords day, in some scandalous way, or other; As namely, sometimes
by quarrelling and brawling with this and that man; sometimes by laughing and
jearing; and sometimes clapping his hat on his head on the sudden, and running
out of the Church in a most uncivil manner, both in time of Service, and
Sermon.

One bow, one string, and shafts, though not so many,
Be broke, or cracked, or snap't by him, or any.
Sic clavis simul and pellitur, and infigitur.
FINIS.

