A great and bloody FIGHT AT Penbrook Castle BETWEEN The Parliaments Forces
commanded by Lieutenant General Cromwell; and Col. Horton, and the Kings
Forces commanded by Col. John Poyer, and Major General Laughorn.

With the manner of their storming the Town, the beating of Col. Poyer and his
forces to the Castle walls, the great execution done in the Streets, and how
they were repulsed, and forced to retreat by Laughorns men falling on the Rear.

Likewise the Resolution of Lieut. Genesis Cromwell and his Forces, concerning the
said Castle; And the further proceedings of the Duke of Bucking, and the
Resolution of the Kentish-men.

Printed at London, to prevent misinformation, 1648.

A great and bloody FIGHT AT Pembreke Castle in South Wales, between the
Forces commanded by Lieut. General Cromwell, and col. Horton, and the Forces
commanded by Maj. Genesis Laughorn, and Col. John Poyer.
Honored Sir,
WE cannot yet send you that either Penbrook Town or Castle is taken, yet we
hope within few days to be Masters thereof. We have made several attempts
against the town, and stormed the walls in two or three places, fought with the
enemy in the town, worsted them, and beat them up to the Castle Walls, doing
great execution throughout the town and killing near upon one hundred of the
enemy in the pursuit. But a Major of Lieutenant General Cromwels not following
with the Reserve of Pires and Musketeers, according to order, Major General
Laughorn came in the Rear of them with a party of Horse, and forced them to
quit the town, out of which they were driven, and about 30 of our men killed,
some few wounded, the rest made good their retreat.

Of the enemies side it is supposed their loss were as many more, as appears
by the consession of diverse who have since disserted that service, and come in
to the Lieut. General.

In this conflict Col. Horton behaved himself with much gallantry, and Col.
Okeyes Dragoones did exceeding good service, who pursued the enemy almost to
the very walls, and made good their retreat with very little loss.

Our Batteries are now finished, and our Ordnance planted against the Town and
Castle, and have made several Breach, and the Council of War have resolved
to storm it again.

The reason why the siege continues so long is the want of some great Guns and
Mortar-Pieces, which came not until within these few days down Severne, the
wind having been long opposite to them.

Capt. Flower of Col. Deanes Regiment was lately wounded upon a storm, and
Major G^igs Lieutenant and Ensign slain, Captain Burges is wounded and very
sick.

All the insurrections about you (I believe) will not make usyeeld any other
conditions then mercy to those within, and in case before we have done, they
chance to get never so great and impregnable an Army, they will give us leave to
have one bout with them before we be disbanded, we that are here do not intend
to give all lost.

The Lieutenant General is alive and in health, and willing to fight for the
liberties of England, as ever he did formerly.

Tuesday last we gave the Town another strong allarum, 120. of Poyers men laid
down their Arms, vowing never to take them up again, but by the importunity of
Poyer and Laughorn, telling them, if relief came not within four days, they
would yield, and they should hang them; by which means they engaged again. We
are informed, that they have not provisions for fourteen days: we expect
every day that most of them come to us through want: they only have a little
rain water and Biscuit left: But its still feared, that Poyer and Laughorn, when
they can hold out the Town no longer will betake themselves to the Castle, and
leave the rest to mercy: if we get the Town, we doubt not to carry the Castle
suddenly.

Our Morter-pieces have played hard against the town and done great execution,
and has batterd down many houses, and killed at the least 30. of the Enemy, as
appears by the confession of two of Poyers men who came over the walls to us.

From the Leaguer before Penbroke, July 4. 1648.
The proceedings of the Forces belonging to his Highness the Prince of Wales,
upon the Coast of Kent.
SIR,
Upon Wednesday last, there happened a desperate engagement betwixt the
Parliaments Forces, and a party belonging to his Highness the Prince of Wales,
at Walmer Castle, the manner thus.

The Prince having sent a party from France, under the command of Col.
Fitz-Beal, with Arms and Ammunition for the relief of the two Castles of Deal
and Sandown, and having effected the same, the said Colonel resolved for Walmer
Castle, and thereupon hoysted sail and steered toward Walmer, where they
arrived toward the evening, accompanied with three other ships very well
manned, and when they were within half musket shot of the shore, they let fly a
broad side at the Parliaments forces, who were entrenched upon the Breach near
the Castle; insomuch, that there began a very dangerous and hot dispute, the
fight continuing for the space of an hour and a half; the Cavalry played very
fast with their great and small shot all the time, the Parliamenteers answered
them with the like Volleyes, and at the last beat them off from the shore, and
foroed them to Sea, with the loss of six men, and nine wounded.

The Enemy fought resolutely, but (it is supposed) with a great deal of loss
made their retreat, for it is said that diverse were seen to fall upon the Decks
of the ships.

This is a great dishearming to the besieged, to have relief attempted without
success, though as yet they slight any overture of surrender or treaty. Diverse
Grenades have been shot into the castle, yet are they within not brought
thereby to the least compliance of disposition to yield.

We hear that the Royalists listed under the Duke of Buckingham, and others,
are come into Sussex, and that they intend to randezvouz on the South side of
London very speedily.

Diverse resorts to them out of this County, and many great ones it is thought
will engage with them.

Their numbers increase daily, and unless speedily prevented, will grow to a
great head.

It is reported, that diverse great ones are amongst them, as several Earls
and Lords, viz. the young Duke of Buckingham, the Earl of Holland, and several
other Lords of eminency.

Some report, that if they be not suppressed within 2 or 3 days, their number
will increase to many thoufands.

Others again report, that so soon as they have gained a considerable party,
they are resolved to raise the siege at Colchester.

They seize upon all the Horse that possible they can light of, and many
country Royalists come in unto them, they are gallantly mounted, and exceeding
well armed, and gives out many reproachful speeches against the Parliament.

They expect within 2 or 3 days to be in a Body of 4000. Horse and Foot, and
when they are thus joined, then they are (as it is said) to go to raise the
siege at Colchester.

There is some speeches as if they had a design to attempt the surprising of
the Comittee at Derby-house, before they go to relieve Colchester. They pretend
to rise to fetch the King home to the Parliament, etc. and use many fair
pretenses to draw in others amongst them.

But we hear, that there is a party of horse coming from the Lord General to
suppress them. Yet notwithstanding, many Royalists in this County have
declared for them, and diverse are already gone in to their assistance.

Maidstone, July 7. 1648.
FINIS.

