A GREAT AND BLOODY FIGHT NEAR Droghedah in Ireland, ON Thursday last, being
the 6 of this instant September, 1649. between the Forces commanded by the
Marqesse of Ormond, the Lord Inchiquin, the Lord Governor Cromwell, and Major
General Ireton.

WITH The manner how the Lord Inchiquin engaged in person with fifeeen of his
best Troops, against the Lord Cromwels horse, the number killed and taken on
both sides, the routing of three great Bodies, and the Marq. of Ormonds letter
to Prince Charles, concerning his victory.

ALSO, The Levellers Declaration for a new Parliament, the recovery of Englands
lost freedoms, and for ease of the people from all burdens and oppressions (as
they say) with the sending of a letter to all the Garrisons in England.

London, Printed for Robert Williamson, the 12. of September, 1649.

A bloody FIGHT IN IRELAND Between The Marquess of Ormonds forces, and the
Lord Governor Cromwels, near the strong town of Droghedah, on Thursday last,
being the 5. of this instant September. 1649.
Right Honorable,
Upon the advance of the Lord Governor Cromwell toward Droghedah, great was
the preparation of the Marq. of Ormond, and the Lord Inchiquin to receive him,
and upon his near approach with the Van of his horse, a selected party were
drawn forth of the choicest Regiments, to represent the Royal salutation (as
they called it) and accordingly the Lord Inchiquin had the honor and conduct
of these Marshalling Troops, who no sooner had marched four miles from the
town, but a discovery were made of a great Body of the Parl horse; whereupon he
drew out a Forlorn consisting of two hundred horse, commanded by Lieutenant
Colonel Gerrard, who advanced about Musket shot from the Body, the rest
marching after.

The Parliaments forces seeing this, immediately echoed forth a great deal of
alacrity to dispute an engagement, drawing out a Forlorn likewise, and
advancing toward them; insomuch, that after an hours rallying, and wheeling
for wind and ground, both bodies had embattail'd themselves in a
well-disciplin'd posture for the receiving of each others charge with the most
advantage and safety.

And after some short time spent in consultation by the Officers, the Trumpets
sounded, and both parties joined battle, a most violent and desperate charge
being given to each other at the first onset, during which conflict, sharp and
cruel was the action, each man striving for Conquest, and endeavoring to
become master of the field; but the victory seemed dubious a long time, until
by main force; the enemies left wing were disordered and put to a retreat,
which the right wing, and the Center-body seeing (for they were ^^vided into
three bodies) began to decline further engagement, endeavoring an honorable
retreat, but the L. Governors horse falling in with them, upon their wheeling
off, diverse of them were killed and taken prisoners, the rest received
sanctuary near a spacious bog, where they rallyed, and by the coming in of a
fresh Reserve of three Regiments of horse, commanded by Colonel Steward,
Colonel Cotton, and Collonell Cunningham, the Lord Inchiquia attempted a
second Onset against the Lord Governors forces, who finding themselves to be
both overpowred and unfitting for a second engagement, made an honorable
retreat with the loss of thirty men, the enemy not daring to embrace pursuit
for a mile together, whose loss we hear was exceeding great in the first
engagement, by estimation at least three hundred.

In this conflict the Lord Inchiquin deported himself with great gallantry in
the very heat and midst of the battle; but Collonell Fitz-Williams (who
commanded the left wing) demeaned himself with as much treachery and cowardice.

Since which fight, we likewise further hear, that the Marquess has sent a
letter to the Prince, intimating, that upon the advance of our forces toward
Droghedah, he fell upon them, routed, killed and dispersed many hundreds, etc.
which seems as incredible as his former, and only penned in a false and contrary
style for the present support of his young Sovereigns drooping spirits. The
Lord Governor is within a days march of Drohedah with his whole Army of horse
and foot, where he intends to fight the enemy, if they stay, and to lay siege
to the town; of which more by the next.

Dublin 7. September. 1649.
By Letters further from Ireland thus: Sir, The strength of the Marquess of
Ormond is very great, his Army grows numerous, and resolved men for a field,
being for the most part confident of success, notwithstanding their late
defeat; the conjuction of the Lord Inchiquin, the Lord Ards, the Earl of
Clanrickard, and the Earl of Castlehaven, are said to be at least twenty
thousand horse and foot, our army not above twelve thousand, but resolved to
fight them; that which does most retard conquest, is, by reason of the
Countries coming in to the enemies assistance to oppose our Armies further
march up into the Country; yet many of the English Inhabitants denies to yield
obedience to the Marq. of Ormonds Summons, notwithstanding the rigor of the L.
Moor, (Governor of Tredagh against them, who has declared his resolution to
fight it out to the last man for Charles the II, rather then to yield it to the
power and obedience of the Parliament of England, but many are of opinion, that
upon the Lord Governors approach near him, he will be of another mind. The L.
Inchiquin has purged all Munster Garrisons of such as he suspected might prove
friends to the Lord Lieutenant.

From Scotland they write, That the Letter to be sent to their king is drawn up
without any alteration, and is full both as to the direction of Parl. and to
former instructions proposed: the Solemn League and National Govenant being
both put home: its possible there may be a contracting of the disaffected
party, and that the quitting Montross and a few more may content, taking in
such as will repent, and go handsomely along with the Marq. and his party.

On Sunday last was a day of humiliation, at which the ministers expressed
great good affection to their king. Let him but sign what they desire, and he
instantly becomes a godly man, and well affected; make a covenant contrary to
that, and let him subscribe, he is again godly and well addicted: the
Scriptures, and old rules, being for that use out of date far and wide.

Milford Haven Sep. 1, Col. Abbots Dragoons were shipped hence they went out to
Sea, were wind-bound two days; after which, with a side-wind they went off,
intending for Dublin, but no news yet of their arrival. Col. Hortons, and the
Maj. Genesis foot are shipping away after them.

Many of the Lord Lieu. horse were sick and weak at their landing, especially
those that were carried toward Munster, to seek footing, but found none. The
Mar. of Ormonds horse are accounted 4000 his foot 3000, with whom the L.
Clanrickard is joined with 800, and 4000 foot, they randezvouz near Tredagh on
the other side of a spacious River, and within a mile of a Bog, which is 3
miles long, he has caused all the Bridges to be cut off, drives the Country of
Cattle, and has laid them in as a store at Tredagh, Trim, and other
Garrisons; all men in that kingdom fit to bear arms are gotten into a posture
of war, about 5000 have declared for the Lord Gover. many hundreds lie inwards;
what the event will be, we leave unto him that governs all.

By Letters from Oxford thus: Diverse of Col: Ingoldsbies Regiment, and other
discontented parties of the Garrison, being much unsatisfied with the procedings
of the Parl. and army, have revolted, and agreed on a Declaration to be
published, showing the grounds and reasons of their engagement viz. For a
dissolution of this present Parl. and for eltcting a free Representative. 2 For
signing of the Agreement of the people. 3 For a Council of Agitators,
according to the engagement at Triplo Heath, etc. This being looked upon as a
business of great concernment, it was thought fit to send down a considerable
party against them; and on Sunday night a letter was sent to the Governors of
all the Garrisons of England, to give them intimation of these distempers, and
require their care of their several charges, thereby to avoid the like. And
withal, that a copy of the letter intercepted, should be enclosed therein, to
show the compliance and co-actings of those called Levellers and the Royalists.
Since their revolt, diverse horse and foot come in to them night and day in
great numbers, their Council consisted most of private soldiers at first, but
some head-pieces lately come from London, are added to them, they keep their
guards very strong, and are stricter then ever we knew any, declaring. That
their friends in other Garrisons will join with them, and that they doubt not
but (within one month) to have a potent Army in the field, being assured, that
not four Regiments in the Army will prejudice ahem in this quarrel, for
recovery of Englands lost freedoms, and for ease of the people from all
burdens and oppressions; for obtaining whereof, both they and all the honest
Soldiery of England were resolved to hazard their lives and fortunes.

Imprimatur,

T.J.

FINIS.

