A Great FIGHT IN IRELAND Between the Lord Lievt. Cromwels forces and the Lord
Inchequeens army near Washford, the number killed and taken prisoners, Col
Trevor wounded, and the Lord Inchequeens colors taken General Oneal dead, and
the Lord Lievt. drawing away his forces from besieging Duncanon, ALSO The
taking of Capt. Plunkets ship with 36 pieces of Ordnance with four other ships
of a great value, and the manner of Capt: Plunckets escape for his life in a
Longboat.

Together With a Letter of news concerning Col. King, and Col. Johnston, and
sixty sail of ships with Soldiers, going for Scotland, with the reason and
uncertrinty of that report.

Printed by B. A. and are to be sold near Criplegate, 1649.

Several LEETTERS Of a great fight in IRELAND Near Washford between the Lord
Lieutenant Cromwells forces, and the Lord Inchequeens army.
SIR,
ABout five hundred foot, and three hundred horse, which were left at Dublin,
for recovery of their health, were appointed by the Lord Lieutenant to march
unto Washford, under the command of Major Nelson. The Enemy having intelligence
thereof, sent out a party of about fifteen hundred horse, and two Regiments of
foot of Inchequins men under the command of Sir Thomas Armstrong, but it
pleased God miraculously to deliver, out party out of the hands of the enemy
who had a sharp encounter with them, and after a while put them to the worst,
and had the pursuit of them above a mile in this fight (on the enemies party
was wounded Colonel Trevor, and his brother was slain and about twenty more on
the place, we took about thirty prisoners, amongst which was Inchequeens
Cornet, we also taking his Colors, not one Officer was lost on our side, only
a Captain of horse was shot in the Leg, and about six private Soldiers slain,
This morning we hear, that Owen Roe Oneal is dead, the English Soldiers come
in daily from the enemy, The death of General Oneal, is very much lamented
among his party, and it is probable, that this business will in a short time,
cause a great faction, to arise amongst the Irish, which is all at present from
your assured friend.

R.L.
Dublin November. 14. 1649.

Another Letter from Ireland.
SIR,
I Thank you for your Letter, and am heartily glad to hear of the present
recrvits for Ireland. For news here, take it briefly thus, the Kord Lieutenant
of Ireland did send five hundred foot, and three hundred horse to go to
Wexford, and the Lord Inchiquin hearing of them, sent sir Thomas Armstrong with
eight hundred horse, and two thousand foot, to fall upon them, saying, they
should not need to fight much with them, for they should find them lie dead
under every hedge, but it pleased God, miraculously to deliver these poor men,
for the Enemy falling on, it pleased God to strengthen these poor distressed
creatures, that they routed the Enemy, killed about 30, and took near 60, with
very little loss on our side, thus you see the great mercy of God to us, and J
doubt not, but in a short time, the Lord will finish his great work in that
nation. So J rest,

Your affectionate friend I. M.


A Letter from Chester.
SIR,
Colonel Pride is here, and has three parties of foot coming hither to be
transported for Ireland, and I believe they will be about a thousand men, and
thou these with three companies of Colonel Moors, and three companies of
colonel Fenwicks, will make a considerable body: Captain Clarke, captain of the
swan frigot that went convoy for Derry, is come back and put into Heland, and
writes me thence some relation he has heard from scotland, that eight great
ships should be arrived there, and that colonel King, colonel Johnson. and
many others are landed, and sixty sail of ships with soldiers, of all which I
believe little or no part of it; for I have a Nephew that went over with
captain Clark to Londonderry, who sent me a letter, wherein he writes not one
word of it. This is all I will trouble you at present.

November 24, 1649.

Another Letter from Ireland.
SIR
SInce my last, I received Letters, confirming for certain Cork and youg hall
have declared for the Parliament of England, and they hope the most part of
Munster will be gained without shedding of blood.

I hope your distractions are at a period, and if so, I doubt not but by the
blessing of God, in ear longer the adversaries boasting spirits will be
quieted. We are now treating with Waterford, and in a short time I hope to give
you a good account of it: many of our Officers are dead. That arch sea Pirate,
captain Plunket was taken, with two prizes, but himself escaped in a long boat,
his ship had thirty six piece of Ordnance, and came into our harbor before he
was aware, three prises more were taken in the River near Duncannon, before we
withdrow our Army thence.


Imprimatur,

JOHN RUSHWORTH.

FINIS

