GREAT Britans Vote: OR, God save King Charles.

A TREATISE Seasonably published this 27th. day of March, the happy
Inauguration of His Sacred (though now despised and imprisoned) MAJESTY.

WHEREIN Is proved by many plain Texts of Scripture, That the Resisting,
Imprisoning, or Deposing our King, under what specious pretenses soever
couched, is not only unlawful but damnable.

LONDON, Printed for G. M. and W. H. MDCXLVIII.

Great BRITANS Vote; OR, God save King CHARLES.
CHAP. I.
THE outward expressions of a man declare the inward affections of his soul,
at the first appearance of a thing whether good or bad; if good, our hearts are
affected with joy, which our tongues will soon declare: if bad, they are
possessed with grief, which our dejected countenance will soon discover.

The days of the Inauguration [or crowning] of Kings has (in the purest
times, and by the godliest Christians) been (as a superlative good to a
nation) celebrated with great solemnity, their persons being accounted sacred,
and their Government the joy of each good man's heart, however in these last and
worst times the scorn and contempt of Rebels, Sectaries and Levellers: whose
hatred to our Gracious Sovereign, the more it manifests it self in them,
should the more inflame our souls with love to him, and break forth into as
loud acclamations of all Loyal hearted Subjects acknowledging him their
Sovereign with joy in his Crown, as the Rebels and Schismatics Declarations
against him to depose him from his Throne: and when can we better do this than
on the day of his Coronation: a neglect might justly deserve a sharp
reprehension. That our King is worthy of our love, and his Coronation of our
solemn observation, and joyful acknowledgements, I am confident all (but
Traitors and Levellers) will confess: and shall we pass over so much good
with neglect? silence in this matter is sin, and worthy of reproof; and here
it is, which I beseech God may pierce deep into the souls of all that read or
hear it, as it is in these two Texts of Scripture delivered, This is the day
of our King, Hosea 7.5. We do not well then, this day is a day of good
tidings, and we hold our peace, 2 Kings 7.9.

CHAP. II.
IOash the son of Ahaziah, being hid by Iehosheba the Daughter of King Ioram,
six 2 Kings 11.3.
years in the house of the Lord: because bloody Athaliah, the mother of
Ahaziah, whom 2 Chronicles. 22.9, 10, 11.
Iehu killed, had destroyed all the Kings seed of the house of Judah, excepting
only Ioash, whom Ioh^sheba the wife of Jehoiadah the Priest had preserved. In
the 2 King. 11.4
seventh year Iehoiadah the Priest seeing Athaliah to usurp the Crown, calls
forth the Captains, and gathers the Levites out of all the Cities of Judah,
and the chief Fathers of Israel to 2 Chr. 23.2.
Jerusalem: and, having first bound them with an 2 Kings 11.4.
oath of Allegiance, presents unto them the sacred spectacle of their Regal
Sovereign; 2 Chr. 23.3.
Behold, the Kings Son must reign. He sets a 1 Kin. 11.6.11
watch, and 2 Chr. 23.11.
guard to secure and safeguard him. Loc how dangerous is the chair of State:
all like officious Subjects stand to withstand the treachery of Traitors. Then
in a regal solemnity, they bring forth the Kings Son (the joy and Jubilee of
their hearts) the wished and welcome Progeny of Jehoshaphat, descended of an
ancient line of Princedome: they put the Crown upon his head, they give him
the testimony, they 2 Kin. 11.12.
make him King, Iehoiadah and his sons anoint him, they all clapped their hands
for joy, and with their hands their hearts, and with their hearts their
tongues, till their many, yet united voices even reverberate the air with this
heaven-piercing Echo, this Eucharistique gratulation; God save the King.

So when the days of that admired Queen, Queen B^z^ Epigr. in class. hisp.
Anno 1588.
Elizabeth (of most famous and blessed memory) were on earth concluded, then
the Foxes of Babylon, who had lain in holes forty four years, began to
threaten, as Esau did his Brother, Genesis 27.41.
The days of mourning for my Father will come shortly, then will I slay my
Brother Jacob: the day of her death, the dawning of their desire: for then they
thought, like Bustards in a Fallow field, to raise up themselves by the
violence of the multitude; the Papists hoped then to have raised their Religion
by a whirle-winde of Rebellion, but our blessed Peacemaker frustrated their
bloody hopes: and as Paterculus says of the Roman Empire after Augustus death,
that there was great expectation of much troubles, but there was so great a
Majesty in one man, that there was no use of Arms for good men, or against bad
men. So the great Majesty of our succeeding Sovereign King James, as learned,
virtuous, and religious a Prince as any under the roof of heaven, calmed all
the storms, and imaginory tempests which were feared and expected; so that the
world did see, our Sun did set, and yet no night did follow: the enemies of
England saw it then to their grief, who hoped that when the Sun went down,
some erraticall star should shine; but still the Planet kept its course,
Phoenix-like a new, and yet the same renewed; for the Augustus of this latter
world, James came to the Crown: a King not only virorum, but sacrorum, a
defender of men, and Defender of the Faith. Which indeed he did perform with
such wisdom and discretion that he not only totally silenced the open threats
and conspiracies of his foreign adversaries and discontented Subjects of the
Romish party, but also slumbred the storms threatened from the then beginning
swellings against Monarchy, of those little Foxes of Sectaries and
Schismatics, whom he kept under all his days, dyed, (was not murdered; though
of late falsely and maliciously insinuated) and left a religious and (both in
Church and State) well-governed Kingdom to his Son, our present religious
and Gracious King Charles: A Prince in whom all graces both Divine and Moral
were and are as apparent as the Sun in the Firmament: among all which
glorious Stars none was more p^rspicuous than that of his Clemency even to
the bitterest of his Adversaries, at the luster of which (oh nefandum dici) the
Sectaries and Schismatics lighted there before extinct Tapers of Rebellion,
Licentiousness, and Liberty, which is now heightened to that flame which you
behold it at: at the light whereof the world may behold a most Religious
Conscientious King imprisoned, the heir apparent of the Crown banished with his
Royal Mother (that fruitful Vine of so many fair, now clouded and separated
clusters) and a free born nation slaved unto slaves, ambitious Traitors, and
bloody Rebels, under the notion of that deluding good of our Nation, a
Parliament, who sit and vote and declare they will fight against him, whom at
their first calling together they swore to fight for, as having derived their
being from him, though now like cursed Vipers they endeavor to gnaw out the
way to their resolved upon Democracy through the Bowels of their Father
Monarchy. But what ever we hear or see such Traitors Vote or Act, let the
remembrance of the Blessings both spiritual and temporal which under eighteen
years of his Majesty's good and happy Reign we did enjoy; (and might still
have enjoyed, if we would have been content, and could have known when we
were well) and undoubted hopes of what blessings his future Government may
bring upon this Land, yea all his three Kingdoms; Let (I say) the remembrance
of the one, and hopes of the other, move all Loyal Subjects to lift up their
hearts and hands to the King of Kings to multiply his days as the days of
Heaven, to deliver him out of his present thralcome and restraint, to restore
him to his rightful Crown and Dignity, and us his Subjects thereby to the
right profession of true Religion, and an once more enjoyment of Peace and
Plenty: yea I am confident (...) do move all true hearted Nobility, Gentry and
Commonalty to pray for him, as the Christians prayed in old time for their
Kings though Heathens, God of his infinite mercy grant him Tertul. in Apolog.
c. 30.
a long life, a quiet Kingdom, a safe Court, strong and victorious Armies, a
faithful Counsel: yea with David, Psalm. 132.18.
that God would cloth all his enemies with shame: but set him at Liberty,
restore him his Scepter, and on him and his to cause his Crown hereafter to
flourish; That so as on the day of his re-inauguration into all the hearts of
his Subjects, and re-establishment in his Throne, the united voices of his
Majesty's populous Kingdoms may annually send up to heaven their cordial and
continual acclamations, God save the King; that the echo thereof may resound
in heaven as fervently, as the noise of the Romans did in applause of
Flaminius, generally calling him Savior, Savior; the noise whereof was so
violent and vehement, that (as Plut. in vita Flaminii.
Plutarch writes) it made the Fowls of the air fall down dead: or that as
the 1 King. 1.
people of Israel did to Solomon, when he was created King in Gihon, and
anointed there by Zadock with an horn of Oil taken out of the Sanctuary, the
1 King. 1.40.
people piped with pipes, and rejoiced with great joy, so that the earth rang
with the sound of it, 39.
blowing their Trumpets and saying, God save King Solomon! So may all the
people within his Highness Dominions lift up their hearts and hands, blow
their Trumpets, ring their Bells, frequent their Churches, and pray,

God save the King Corporally, in Body, God save the King Spiritually, in
Spirit, God save the King Politically, in Government;
And excite one another to say, This is the day of our King we do not well
then, this day is a day of good tidings, we do not well to hold our peace: And
indeed we can never have greater cause to speak of and pray for our King then
now, in these Rebellious times upon which we are unhappily fallen; For these
are the times wherein by those that call themselves a Parliament, Rebellion is
countenanced, yea counted Devotion and holy Reformation, and the most desperate
Traitors entitled Saints and Martyrs.

Wherein, not only in the Popes Conclave, but also, in the Sectaries
Conventicles shall I say? nay in the grand Counsel of the best reformed
Protestant Kingdom, nothing is more rife than the slandering, rebelling
against, and Imprisoning shall I say? Yea the Theorick and practicke of
deposing, nay (it is to be feared (which God prevent) it will proceed to)
murdering Princes.

Wherein as Mariana that insolent Jesuit prescribes to Traitors rules and
cautions for poisoning Kings, and highly commends King-killers. So Marten, that
impudent Rebel publishes (with the approbation of a Parliament too) to the
encouragement of Sectaries and Traitors, grounds and reasons to proceed in
Kings resisting and deposing, and highly applauds that cursed crew of King
catchers, eclipped Saints of the Army.

Wherein those Traitorous assertions of Suarez, and other Jesuits, are the
constant Positions of those who would be thought to abhor and beat down
Popery: Subditos posse de privare Reges (a Papa excommunicatos) vita and
Regno: (That is to say, the Sectaries of England) Subjects may deprive Kings
(if Voted against by the Parliament) not only of their Liberty, Crowns, and
Kingdoms, as appears by the present sad condition of King Charles, but also
of life it self, with their Tradatur Satanae, and we know not (though we
fear) what event that may in time produce.

Wherein that horred saying of that foul mouthed Guignard (concerning the
murder of one of the Henry's of France, committed by two Jacobine Friars,
Heroicum factum, and donum spiritus sancti) is become the often incultated
Doctrine out of Protestant Pulpits, and re-resolved Votes of the grand
Committee Chair, to resist, fight against imprison, Depose, yea kill and slay
the King and all his adherents, is a most Heroical act, and the gift of the
Holy Ghost.

Lastly, these are the times, wherein that known bloody practice of the
Spanish Inquisition is, paralleled shall I say? nay out-practized by the action
of the English Parliament. As in the Spanish Inquisition their arguing is this:
whosoever is an Heretic ought to ^ee burnt; but whosoever will not submit to
our Canons and Decretalls is an Heretic: therefore whosoever will not submit
to our Canons and Decretalls ought to be burnt. He that is under the
Inquisition denies, that every one that will not submit to their Canons and
Decretalls are Herereticks, and consequently not to be burnt, and offer to
dispute it. They of the Inquisition prove it thus, They command him to
withdraw, decree his death, dragge him to the stake, bind him to it, put
Faggots about him, set them on fire and burn him: a most invincible argument.
So the Vote of this Parliament is, whosoever will not do the Law of God, and
the Law of the King, ought to have judgment spec^^^y executed upon him either
by death or by banishment, or by confiscation of goods, or by imprisonment. But
whosoever will not obey the Orders or Ordinances of one or both Houses of
Parliament, does not do the Law of God, and the Law of the King: Therefore
whosoever does not obey the Orders or Ordinances (be they never so opposite to
reason and justice) of one or both Houses, ought to have judgment speedily
ex^cuted upon him either by death, or banishment, or confiscation of goods, or
imprisonment. Those men that are brought before them as guilty in this point,
Deny, that whosoever will not obey the Orders or Ordinances of one or both
Houses of Parliament therefore do not do the Law of God and of the King, and
consequently ought not to have judgment executed upon them without a legal
Trial: Hereupon they command them to retire, resolve upon the Question that
judgment be executed upon them; and then either behead or hang them, or
banish them, or plunder them, or at least imprison them (oh unpar^lleld
disputants!) This is most certainly true, witness the case of Corew, Lilborne,
J^nkins, Mainard, yea (which ought to make a deep Impression in all good men's
hearts) of the Kings Majesty himself, whom they unjustly keep a Prisoner,
because he will not (contrary to his Conscience and Honor) say as they say,
and enact that for Law which contrary to Law they Vote, and accuse him of his
Fathers Murder, and other crimes of a high nature, and yet not admit him to
answer for himself, or permit others to write in his Vindication: So that th
se things considered (hear oh heavens! and judge oh eart^!) have not all the
people of great Britan just cause to join (as their loyal obedience binds
them to their necessary service) both in hearts and voices to Almighty God,
(the protector of Kings) to Psalm. 2^.8 9.
find out all his enemies and make them like a fiery Oven in the time of his
anger, to confound all their Conspiraci^s, making them like the grass Psalm.
119.6
on the house tops, which withers before it come forth? And when more
seasonable than upon this day; for this is the day of our King, etc.

CHAP. III.
But besides these Reasons, I shall here produce other causes and motives to
induce all good Subjects to this Christian service and loyal duty (to pray
continually for the preservation of the King) which because many and manifold;
I will but touch some of them, and omit the re^^: for we must be short.

^ ^ ^im. 2.2.
The first is the Apostle Paul's Precept, ante omnia, before al, that
Supplications, Prayers, and Intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for
Kings, etc. and renders a powerful motive to persuade all, consi^ting of three
benefits P^s^. in ^^^um.
arising from it: 1. a quiet and peaceable life: 2. in all godliness and
honesty: 3. this is good and acceptable in the sight of God; The Kings
preservation is our preservation, his welfare is the weal of our Commonwealth.
Pliny says, Plin. 2 Pan^g ad Pra^^ (...).
A Country is unhappy under an unhappy King; so that if people desire to live
a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty, let them like
dutiful members pray for the prosperity of the supreme head, for if he fall
upon the rocks, they are like to come to ruin. As a Ship whose Pilot
perishes, is driven upon the rocks, and so is cast away, even so, how can the
ship of State sail with a prosperous wind, whose Regal Pilot suffers
shipwreck? Regal adversity is the Harbenger of popular calamity; and a Kings
imprisonment of his peoples perpetual slavery: Wherefore if Subjects desire to
be happy themselves, let them continually pray for the happiness of their
Sovereign, whose prosperity is the Axis or Cardo, the very foundation of their
temporal felicity.

2 Motive is the great difficulty in the right managing of the Regal Office,
and therefore had need to be assisted with the frequent and fervent prayers of
the people, imploring divine wisdom, to direct the heart of their Sovereign,
for it is the Art of Arts, rightly to rule and govern Commonwealths; this
many-headed multitude so divided in faction and action, scarce two of one mind
or mould; Peace pleases Cato, War Pompey: the Soldier cries Arma virumque
Cano, War, war that makes us merry: the Merchant prays, give peace in our
time, oh Lord: Brutus desires a Commonwealth, Caesar a Monarchy; Cicero's
Counsel is, Let us be Time-servers; but Lentulus thinks that, the voice of a
flatterer; in the f popular sort, as many heads as hearts; and let every one
do what seems good in his own eyes, we will not have Charles King in our
Israel.

So that to reconcile, and to reclaim to unity and unanimity this Babell of
men, and these men of Babell, it is requisite that the King be for the people
to Godward, Exodus 18.19.
bring their causes unto God, teach them Ordinances and Laws, show them the
way wherein they must walk, V. 20.
and the work that they must do: and then provide out of all the people able
men, V. 2^.
such as fear God, men of truth, who may judge the people in every small
matter, though every great matter be brought to him; V. 22.
so that each star moving in its proper Orb, about the Sun, (who by this
influence of his power unto others, is not thereby accounted fallen from his
Sphere himself, no more than to be conceited to be placed therein at first by
their appointment, though such preposterous opinions have been vented of late,
to the distraction of this poor Kingdom, and without a timely retraction,
will produce its utter ruin and destruction; (which God of his mercy prevent)
I say, that so each one in the Kingdom acting in his own place, the Commons
under the Judges or Peers, the Peers or Judges under the King, and the King
under God alone; then shall the King be able to judge and rule this people wish
ease and comfortably, and all this people shall also go to their place in
peace. ^ ^od. ^8.23.
Now it is the God of Heaven only that can qualify Kings with wisdom and
knowledge fit for an employment of such difficulty; and he alone it is that
will and must appoint the person whom he will thus qualify: For the Israel of
God must accept of, acknowledge, and obey him for their King wh m the Lord
their God shall chose, not then whom themselves shall elect: Deuteronomy. 17 15. Unto
God then it is the duty of all good subjects to pray always with all manner of
prayer and Supplication in the Spirit, that God would enlarge with heavenly
wisdom the heart of our Sovereign, (and the Kings Prove. 21.2
heart is in the hand of the Lord) and furnish him with all blessed gifts,
suitable to perform his Royal Task, making him as wise as 2 Chr. 1.21.
Solomon, as religious as Psalm. 27.4.
Davia, as zealous as the good King 2 Kin. 2^.1^.
Josias, and (in respect of his present condition) as patient as Job: defending
him against all foreign Invasions, delivering him from all domestic
Conspiracies, and giving him Liberty from his present Captivity, that so being
by the power of our God restored to his Throne and Dignity, full of the
knowledge and experience of the great goodness of God toward him, and endued
with the wisdom which is ahout the Throne of the King of Kings, with an
understanding heart may judge this great people, and awe and order this
stiff-necked and Rebellious nation; then shall all this people also go to
their own place in peace, and sit under their own Vines and Fig Trees, (being
for the future godly and governed quietly under him) saying this is the day of
our King, this is a day of good tidings, we should not do well should we
hold our peace, the very stones in the streets will reprove, us and the timber
out of the wall upbraid our silence; by their acclamations exciting our dull
affections to shoute for joy and pray, God save King Charles.

CHAP. IV.
ANd truly there are five things (to name no more) which all good subjects owe
unto their Sovereign: ^^is Prayer. 2 Obedience. 3. Honor. 4. Service. 5.
Tribute. And if any Subject deny any one of these, the King may take him by the
throat and say Matthew. 18.28.
Solve quod debes, Pay that thou owe.

1. First is Prayer; to pray for the Kings preservation on earth, and salvation
in Heaven. The heathen Chaldeans may learn Christians this lesson, who cried to
their King Dan. 3.9.
Nebuchadrezar, O King live for ever. As King 1 Kin. 8.34.36
Solomon prayed for his people, so ought his people to pray for him, s ying of
their Lord the King, as King David speaks of the Lord of Israel, Blessed Psalm.
106.48.
be the Lord God of Jsrael for ever and ever; and let all the people say Amen:
saying to the King as Amasa and his company said to David 1 Chronicles. 12.18
Thine are we O David, and with thee O son of Ishai; peace peace, be unto thee,
and peace be unto thy helpers, and the Lord thy God in his good time be thy
helper. That tongue that will not pray for his Majesty's present liberty from
prison, and honorable re-establishment in his lawful Throne and Kingdom, and
for the future Peace, Prosperity, and preservation of so virtuous a Prince, and
their anointed Sovereign, is such a tongue as the Apostle James Iam. 3.6.
speaks of, fire, and a world of wickedness, and is set on fire of hell: for,
says Austin, the just man never ceases to pray, unless he cease to be just:
much less should he cease to pour forth fervent and faithful supplications
for the King, that under him we may lead a peaceable life in all godliness
and honesty. Such ungodly and undutifull subjects as will not unloose the
strings of their tongues to pray for the safety and felicity of the King, we
wish that they were like the men at the river Ganges, who (it we credit the
report of Strabe) have no tongues: M^^^ ^ 2^.
better is it to enter into the kingdom of Heaven losing a member, then having
such an ungodly member to be cast into hell fi^^. But herein many times the
tongue is m^re offici^us then the heart; with tongue they cry Hosanna ^
, but in heart, like Jews wish crucifige; with a verb^^ service many abound
crying and ^ringing vivat Rex; but withal, store it hoc Parliamentum, and that
will never make a good prayer. A King had need call to his subjects, as God to
his servants (...). 2^.^^
give me thy heart; the world is full of fair tongues, but false hearts: none
but the great searcher of the heart, has a window in the heart to see who
honor with lips, and their hearts far from him. So that Kings had need
examine their subjects as (...) 2^.^5.
Christ did Peter thrice, do thou love me? The world has bred so many
protestors of the Romish, and so many professors of the Sectaries doctrine of
devilish equivocation, and Parliamentiz'd creatures profound in the art of
diss^mulation, that many men are like God^ in Sands, in dubio pelagi ter^^ve,
doubtful whether to belong to sea or land; tempo^^^ers or neuters, like the
R^^. 3.15.
Church of Laodicea, neither hot ^^r cold; either Prince, or Pope, Parliament
or Levellers, please them. Monarchy, Aristocracy, Democracy, yea An^^chy, all
alike to them: As for Religion; Protestanisme, ^op^ry, Put i^a^^sme,
Anabaptisme, Turkisme, Heathenisme, Atheism, o^ wh^tever the grand Council
shall countenance, is equally received by them. These, like the Camel^on,
assume any shape fashionable to the time: to whom yet I doubt not but God will
one day say, Because ye are lukewarm profess^^s, neither hot nor cold, I will
spue ye out of my mo^th. Rev 3.16. Such as these study Machiavell more then the
Gospel, M^^^ (...) c. 3.
^ashion themselves to the favour^ble fortune of the time, and think
themselves happy (as Ma^^ (...).
he counts those Princes happy, whose counsels are successively correspondent
to the condition of the times.) The prayers of such temporizers (whose tongues
may flame, but their hearts are as cold as a stone) are abominable in the
sight of God: Esto religiosu in Deum, qui^ ^ir il^um Imperatori^sse propitium,
says Tertullian. T^^t A^oc c. 34.
The Lord is far off the wicked, but he neareth the prayers of the righteous,
says (...) v. 15.^^.
Sal^m^n; God will not be^^e the prayers of these Church-nea^ers, yea
Chu^^h-haters, n^ more then the idolatr^^us I^wes Ezech. 8.18.
Th^ugh they cry in any ears with a loud voice yet will not I hear them. And
therefore that we may perform our first bounden duty unto the King, acceptable
to the King of Kings, in making hearty and humble prayers for the freedom,
restoration, protection and preservati^n of his Majesty, let all the people in
his Realm, from ^igh to low, from great to small, do this comfortable and
Christian service, fervently, feelingly, and ^aithfully unto the Lord night and
day crying and craving, God save the King.

The Lord has commanded this duty to pray not on^^r good Kings, but even for
bad Kings. When Paul gave that Apostolical counsel, 1 Timothy, 2.1, 2. to
pray for for Kings, Caligula, Claudius, or Nero, most bloody Pagan Emperors
then reigned. Baruc. 1.^^ ^ Ier. 29.7. So Abraham prayed for K. Ab^m^lech. Genesis
20.27. So ^^ob H^ss^d Kin^ Pharaoh. Genesis 47.10.
Pray for the life of Nebuchadnezar King of Babylon, and for the life of
Balthazar his son, that their days might be on earth as the days of
heaven: So the Lord commanded the Jews to pray for the peace of the City of
Babylon, where Nebuchadnezar reigned. If then the Lord charg and command to
pray for such Governors as were Pagans, Persecutors, Idolaters Infidels: how
devoutely and deeply are all loyal subjects ^ound to pray and to praise God
for the blessed government of Zealous and Christian Kings? Especially how more
ought we to pray for so religious and gracious a King and to beseech God with
prostrate souls, to visit and set him at liberty, now after the time he has
afflicted him, and permitted his restraint, and comfort him with joy and
gladness for the years wherein he has suffered adversity, and for the
future to defend him and his from all the treacherous trains, and rebellious
plots, whether of foreign foes, or home hatched parricides, whether corner
creeping Jesuits of the Romish party, or house-preaching Iudasses of
Schismatic faction: To deliver from and strengthen him against whom, let us,
we do, implore the hand of heaven to Sentinel ov^^ him; and to endue him from
above, with the gifts of Knowledge, Prudence, Justice, Temp^rance, Patience,
Fortitude, Clemency: with fervent zeal of Gods glo y, love to the Gospel, and
never-ceasing car^ f r the general welfare of his public charge. Let as
spend our spirits day and night in these Prayers, that a gracious blessing may
be evermore upon our Sovereign and his Seed, to prolong his days with Health
and Honor on earth, and with immortal Happiness in Heaven. Amen. Amen.

CHAP. V.
THe second general duty of all subjects, is Obedience, and that before God
S^^ 15.22.
is better than Sacrifice C^^g^^. ^5. (...)
: The Enemy opposite to Obedience is Rebellion, compared by 1 Samuel 15.23.
Samuel to the sin of Witchcraft, the very Chaos of Confusion, containing
nothing else but mischief and murder, discord and desolation.

As Rebellion is most odious and detestable, so is Obedience commendable and
acceptable, and this is of three sorts:

First, obey God by man. Secondly, Obey God and man. Thirdly, Obey God rather
than man. We need not write how God is to be obeyed before all, and ^bove all;
Gods Precepts may not be countermanded by man's Ordinances, nor Gods Ordinances
prejudiced by man's Precepts: God is to be obe^e^ in every thing simpliciter;
man is to be ob yed secundum qu^d, respectively, so far as his commands be
consonant to Gods Laws. Saint Austin gives all a good rule for obedience:
willingly and wittingly obey not good men in the performance of ill, nor
disobey il^men commanding things good; but God himself commands obedience to
his ^
breathing Images, whom he himself styles ^
Gods; the mortal Pictures of the immortal God; the right fingers of that be
ve^^ly ^and which ru^^ (...), ^^ctantius says, Kings (...) men before G^^, a^^
Gods (...) m^^.

(...) gl^r^ of that God, who makes these G^^^, A^s^^^ T^^t^^^^ian ^aith, The
Emperor is greater in dign^^^ th^^ ^^ll ^^rtall m^n, only inter^^^ to the
i^m^rtall God; a (...) Cyrillus w^^^es to Theo^o^us the y^unger, N^n e^^e^^^
st^te equal to your Excellence; or as ^ (...) 2 (...) A (...) Ba^^^^^ o^^^
T^^^. lib. ad Scapulum. ^ Epist. ad ^h^^ p^^^^na lib. a^ verse. ^u^^an. 1
Paraenet. number. 21. ^ ^^b. 3. contra ^^rmen.
Agapitus to (...) Iusti^^^. None on the earth higher than he: (...) ^ptatus,
^^ove the Em^eror is none, bu^ only G^^ (...) ^^^e Emperor: or as St
Chrysostom Him 3. ad po^ An^^^.
speaki^g o^ the Emperor Theo^^sius; He has no eq^a^^ upon earth, the
supre^me ^ead over al^m^^ o^e^^th. ^o, now you P^p^^ a (...) Cardinals of
Rome, and Lords and Commons ass^nding at Westminster, what can you answer to
t^e^e clouds of witnesses? But if these may be objected against: what say you
to a rule of Scripture? is not the Word of God of more truth, and therefore to
be obeyed rather than your Decretalls or Ordinances? What! is St Paul's Precept
out of Date with you: Romans 13.1. Let every Soul be subject unto the higher
Powers? Which is not meant of you ye Usurpers of the Regal Throne; but of a
King, of our King, in whom God has ordained and placed power both in Church
and Commonwealth: and in testimony that that is the meaning of the Holy Ghost:
in the fourth verse those higher Powers are thrice mentioned in the singular
number, as intimating that Precept commanded subjection unto one, the King:
P^^. 13 ^1. 1 Greg (...). 33 ^^.
and forbade all resisting that one: He is Gods Minister: He bears not the
sw^ra in vain: he is the Minister of God to thee for thy good: if thou resist
not, but obey: But a revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil.

Oh ye Lords and specially proud C mmons, surely ye have rejected this
Scripture, or do^ (...) it as Apochryphall: other wis^ ye would (...) thrust
your Sickl^ (...) ^mon (...) Religion and Law, usurp a pre-eminence above your
King.

Have you forgot Saint Peter's Rule? I will put you in mind of it: 1 Pet. 2.13.
Submit your selves to all manner of Ordinance of man for the Lord sake, unto
the King, as unto the Superior, etc. Submit your selves unto temporal Lords,
for the eternal Lords sake, unto your King on earth, for the King of Kings
sake in heaven, as Augustine very excellently, Aug. in Psalm. 124. Which that ye
may see ye are all bound to do, look but upon that Scripture seriously
without prejudice or partiality, and you shall plainly discover it propounding
and holding forth these certain and undeniable arguments to enforce so much:
First, Vide Pisc. anal. in locum.
for the Lords sake; that so we may honor God who has commanded this
obedience. Secondly, that we may avoid the punishments of disobedience to the
Magistrate, sent for the punishment of ill-doers, v. 14. Thirdly, that we may
get praise and protection against the wicked by our obedience, v. 14. to the
praise of them Rom 13.3.
that do well. To the same purpose also look with the same candid judgment
upon that general and substantial foundation for obedience laid down by the
great Apostle of the Gentiles, Romans 13. and the first, and I am confident that
you will with me conclude, that that excludes or exempts, as neither Pope nor
Priest, so neither Lords nor Commons from obedience, but absolutely damns
indefinitely all in general, and every one in particular that resist the King:
Let every soul, etc. Saint Chrysostom upon that place says; though an
Apostle, an Evangelist or a Prophet, yet let him be subject to the higher
Powers, which Augustine, Chrysostom, and the best Ancients confess and
affirm to be the King, and so acknowledged by the Jesuit Disp. 10. in Rom
13. v. 1. Goran in locu.
Pererius; and the Apostle enforces all to this obedience by three Reasons:

First drawn from the efficient or procreant cause of government; For there is
no power but of God, and the powers that be are ordained of God, verse 1.

Secondly drawn from the pernicious effect of disobedience, Whosoever
resists power, resists the ordinance of God, and they that resist shall
receive to themselves condemnation, or judgment, v. 2.

Third taken A beneficio, from the benefit or profitable effect of obedience,
For he is the Minister of God for thy wealth, v. 4. Concluding that obedience
is necessary, v 5. Not only for fear, but for Conscience sake. So again the
Apostle Tit. 3.1.
Paul lays down his Apostolical lesson to his s^nne Titus; Put them in
remembrance, or admonish them, that they be subject to Princes or
Principalities and powers, and that they be obedient, etc. Nay indeed it is The
Beasts obey the Lion, the birds the Eagle, the fishes the Whale. etc. Cyprian
de vanit. Idol: The Cranes have their Captain.
Natures theme to obey Princes, and of this theme Grace is the Hypothesis.

Look upon the silly Bees, the best emblemes of obedient Cr^atures, painful in
their labor, dutiful in their life, their King being safe, they are all at
unity; So long as their King is well, they follow their work; but being lost,
they leave and loath their Honey-combes, and when their King waxes old and
cannot fly, they carry him on their wings, and if he dye, they dye with him,
as some write. Hieron. ep^st. ad Rusticam.
Behold how nature has stamped obedience by instinct to Bees, to be subject to
a superior in their kind; Pet. Chry. in Policrat. lib. 7.
how much more should Nature, Reason, and Grace, stamp obedience in the heart
of Christians, knowing that without a Kingly Government, Kingdoms are
thraldomes: Aug de civit dei. lib. 4 c. 4.
Take away Justice, and what are Kingdoms but Dens of Thieves? Take away
obedience to Government, and that were to make earth and hell all one, but
only in name. There is not wanting divine Precepts, or divine Patterns, to
allure loyal obedience: take two in stead of many; the first and best of all,
our Savior Christ, Matthew. 3.17.
in whom God is well pleased: and the second David, 1 Samuel 13.14.
a man after Gods own heart: Our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ (yet God and
man) in the days of his flesh disdained not to obey such as were in authority,
Matthew. 22.21.
commanding to give unto Caesar that which is Caesar's, and paying Matthew. 17.27.
tribute to Caesar for himself and and Peter, by the hands of Peter; though
Peter's supposed Successors, and they that pretend to Peter's inspiration, will
pay none. And though our Savior Christ received manifold injuries and
indignities from unjust and faithless Governors, yet he never moved rebellion
or resistance, but digested all with patience and obedience, knowing that the
powers that be, are ordained of God: telling Pilate, that unjust Judge, that
his power was given him from above; for the rule is given of the Lord, and the
power of the most high. And by me Kings reign says he that had the wisdom
of God given unto him. Prove. 8 15. And says another Pis^^t. anal. in M^^ 22 2^*
God is to be obeyed for himself, being chief Lord: the Magistrate is to be
obeyed for God, as being Gods Minister or deputy. So that the pattern of
Christ's obedience to temporal powers, must be the platform of instruction in
the duty of obedience.

2. David's obedience to King Saul is very commendable and remarkable: Saul was
a A Tyrant by abuse of power not by usurpation.
Tyrant, and sought without cause or color to kill David; yet David often
hazarded his life and limbs against Saul's enemies the Philistines, evermore
testifying his prompt obedience and service to his Sovereign; and when this K.
Saul (like that other Acts 9.1.
Saul) breathing out threatenings and slaughter against David, followed him to
the wilderness of Engedi (where David used pia fallacia, hid himself in a 1 Samuel 24.4.
Cave) and had opportunity to cut off Saul's head, as well as the lap 5
of his garment; or if he were timorous to dip his hand in blood, as once
Gregory Greg. lib 7. epist. 1.
willed Sabinian to tell the Empe^or exciting him against the Lombards, I fear
God and am afraid to have any hand in blood: if David I say had such a qualm of
fear come over his heart, lo, the 1 Samuel 24 8.
hands of his servants ready to have done it, and scarce could be kept from it,
only David does terrify them from doing it: 7
The Lord keep me from doing that thing unto my Master the Lords Anointed. Dum
timuit ol^um servavit inimicum, as excellently Lib 2. advers. parmenianum.
Optatus, in fearing the anointing, he preserved his enemy. In a word, David
might have killed Saul sleeping, or if he would not himself do it, 8
Abishai, offered his service, I pray thee let me smite him once with a spear
to the earth, and I will smite him no more; but still see how obedience holds
his hands and moves his tongue, Destroy 9
him not, f^r who can lay his hand on the Lords anointed and be guiltless? And
afterward Saul being slain, and a certain Amalekite hoping to have bin a
happy Post in telling 2 Samuel 1.4.
David Saul is dead, and showing David that he hasted 10
Saul's death, (though 1 Samuel 31.4.
Saul himself had acted the Prologue of his own death, this made the Epilogue
of his life) and brought the Crown in his hand, (a tempting bait to get praise
or pardon) yet all in vain: how wast thou not afraid to put forth thy hand to
destroy the anointed of the Lord? s^i^h 2 Samuel 1 14 15.
David; and commands his servant to give him legem talionis, to kill this
King-killer, though by consent and entreaty.

Sic pereant, and qui moliri talia pergunt.
Good God, thou King of Kings, so let them perish,
Who against thy Charles such bloody deeds do cherish.
And now what do all these particulars summed up together infer, but this
Ecce? John 1.47.
Behold a true Israelite in whom is no guile; behold a good subject indeed, in
whom is no treason: behold a man after Gods own heart, who from his soul
hates and abhors the very name and thought of Rebellion, his heart 1 Samuel
24, 6.
smiting of him but for cutting of the lap of Saules garment: after whose heart
then those men are, who now a days cut off from a David all Regal ornaments,
divest him of all ensigns of Royal Majesty, and cloth him with nothing but
the foul garments of reproach and slander; I leave to all the world to judge.
How unlike are the ways of this son of God, to those who would be thought
the sons of God in these days, Popish Jesuits of the Sea of Rome, and (oh
wonder!) those Lord and Commons who call themselves the Parliament of England?
David labors to speak his mind to Saul, these labor to hinder David to
speak his mind to them; David manifested himself upon all occasions obedient
and loyal to his Sovereign, though wicked, that so, evinced thereby he might
become good; these upon all opportunities declare their disobedience and
disloyalty to their Sovereign though good, and to color their Rebellions
would fame make the people believe that he is wicked; and should be, if they
could make him so either by flattery or force: David desired nothing more than
to come to a 1 S^^. 24 9. and 26.14
Personal Treaty, that so the truth might appear, and the innocent be
acquitted: These abhor the thought of a Personal Treaty, and Vote it treason
for any man to speak from or to him, least their ambitious villainies should be
detected, and our poor oppressed Kings wronged innocence manifested, and
honor vindicated. Lastly David in all his consultations and actions, did
endeavor to evidence himself faithful in his obedience, and a pattern of
Loyalty to all generations, adventuring his body and blood for the service of
Saul, in defense against his enemies, the Muster-roll of whose battles for
Saul's welfare is recordded in holy Scripture* from the xvii. Chapter of the
first of Samuel almost to the end of that Book, the glorious Trophy of the
fidelity of an obedient Subject. But all the counsels and practices of the
Lords and Commons now sitting at Westminster have wholly tended to advance
disobedience, and manifest themselves the Presidents of disloyalty and
rebellion to all other nations and future ages, engaging, not many of their own
bodies, I confess, or much of their own blood; but many thousand of bodies,
and an ocean of the blood of poor seduced and deluded Christians their fellow
subjects, for the pulling down their religious King, a David, and utter ruin
and destruction of all his faithful friends and loyal subjects, the
Muster-roll of whose battails for King Charles his subversion and deposing is
hung out at most Pamphlet-sellers stalles, the glaring Trophy of the
disloyalty, of such impudent unmatchable Rebels: So that I well say with
Toxaris to Anacharses Lucianus in S^^tina.
viso Solone vidisti omnia, here I can show you the two wonders of the world at
once. Look upon David and you shall see the wonder and pattern of Loyalty and
Obedience; Look upon that thing at Westminster, which calls it self a
Parliament, compassed round with their Army of Sts. as they term them, and
there behold the wonder and president of Disloyalty and Rebellion. In their
Declarations and Remonstrances read principles fit to direct Traitors: in his
Precepts and Practice read Doctrines sufficient to instruct faithful subjects:
and if that be not sufficient nothing will suffice.

Charles reply and say; We ought to be obedient and subject to good Kings, but
if they be bad we may resist and deny our obedience to him, yea good men may
send him to his grave: and indeed this Doctrine, to depose a King, dispose of
his Kingdom, and deprive him of his life, if he be not (as the Jesuits count)
Catholic, (as this Parliament counts) Protestant, the treacherous Jesuits at
Rome, and our Rebellious new-lighted Saints at Westminster, do with an equal
heightened fury of blind zeal, labor to maintain by their published seditious
Papers; and where their Pens fail, their Pikes, prisons, yea poisons make
good: as you may read Page the seventh both their ways of proving their
Arguments are.

Answer. It is an easy task to show that loyal obedience is to be performed
to wicked Kings: as our former Instances of the best note, Christ's obedience,
and David's obedience to Saul, make it manifest; it is due to them, omni jure
naturali, civili, morali, municipali, divino; By the Law of nature, civil,
moral, municipall, divine: we will only prove it due by the last, by divine
Law; if that prove it, who dare deny it? The Apostle Romans 13.1. makes the
matter plain. Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers, for there is no
power but of God, etc. From which place I argue thus; A^l Powers that are
ordained of God, must be obeyed: The higher Powers (be they good or bad) are
ordained of God.

Ergo -- to be obeyed.
We may corroborate these two propositions by manifold places, as Proverbs
8.15: By me Kings Reign, etc. Job 36.7. He places them as Kings in their
Thrones for ever. Sometimes God suffers the hypocrite to reign, Job 34.30. I
gave thee a King in my anger, and took him away in my wrath, faith the Lord to
Israel, Hosea 13.11. Thou could have no power except it were given thee from
above, said Christ to ^il te, John 19 11. Give care all you that rule the
people, all your power is given of the most High, Wisd 6.3 Touch not ^ine
anointed, 1 Chr. 16.22. be they good, be they bad touch them not; (...) 12.19
vengeance is the Lords, not man's. M^n must not meddle in Gods matters; W^. ^
can lay hi hands on the Lords Anointed, and be guiltless? Though they grow
defective in their high office, yet still remain King^, because e^throned by
God: By whose command men are borne, by his command do Princes reign Irae^^
(...)
, says Iraeneus. Thence have Princes their power whence they have their breath
T^^^ul (...)
, says Tertullian: The Kings Commission is sealed ^y the hand of God, and
though it run, During the good will and pleasure of God, yet man, yea a 2
(...) 4.
Parliament cannot, nay must not cancel it, for that were to war with God.

The wise B^ac^o^. sive (...) sine^te deo. Aug conte Faust Manich (...) 22. c.
7.
Heathen says, the power of good Kings is by the special ordinance of God, of
evil by his permission; the first are badges and pledges of his mercy; the
second are the scourges of his fury. So Esaias 10.5
God called Ashur the rod of his wrath; and Attyla called himself the scourge
of God: and Tamberlaine in his time termed, the revenge of God, and terror of
the World. Saul was a Tyrant King, yet David 1 Samuel 24 6
trembled to touch the skirts of his garment: What greater Tyrant than King
Pharaoh? yet Moses neither had, nor gave any Commission to the Israelites to
rebel; he makes no Law, or Book, either to dispose or depose him from his
Kingdom. Nebuchaanezzar a wicked and Idolatrous King, yet God Jerem. 25.9.
calls him his Servant; and though he commands the three children to be put
into the fiery D^^^ 3.21 A^^ud es^ ^erva^^^ (...) me, aliud (...)
Ove^, they offer no violence or resistance, but commend their souls to God,
and commit their bodies to the King.

Saint (...)
Peter who wrote his Epistle in the time of the reign of that wicked Emperor
Clandius, as (...)
Baronius conjectured, exhorts all people to fear God, and (...) the King 1
Pet. 2 17. and that for (...) v. 13. yet this Claudius was a most wicked
Emperor maintaining many Ethnic superstitions and the worship of Idols, he
was (as Suetonius Sueton. c. 34.
writes of him) by nature cruel, bloody, and libidinous, yet to this Emperor a
tyrant and an infidel, S. Peter exhorts the faithful Jews to obedience: S.
Paul who lived under the same Emperor, (as Rhemist. in tab. Paul.
some do think) writes to the Romans the Emperors subjects, exhorts all to
submit themselves, not in any colorable or dissembled obedience, but ver. 4.
for conscience sake. Let us here a voice or two of the ancient Fathers that
lived in old time: Tertullian (who as In Catal scriptor. Eccles.
Jerome says) flourished under the reign of Severus the Emperor, who was a
great Tyrant, an Infidel, and an enemy to Christianity, who in the fifth
persecution after Nero, troubled the Christian world with most cruel
persecution (as Baron, An. Christ^ 205.
some write) yet teaches that all subjects should both Been velle, been
dicere, and been facere, wish well, speak well, and do well for the Emperor,
the which threefold Been comprehends all loyal duties: The first Ad Co^. 2. Ad
Linguam. 3 Ad opus; as the Iansen. c. 40. Concord.
Jesuit rightly (...), in thought, word, and deed, to be obedient. So Justin
Apolo 2 ad Anton: Imperat.
Martyr, in the name of all Christians speaks to the Emperor Antoninus. an
infidel and a persecutor Bellar. in Chronol.
in these words. We worship only God, and in other matters are joyful to
serve you. So Saint Ambros Epist. lib. 5. Epist. 33.
Ambrose would not wish the people of Millan to disobey the Emperor
Valentinian, yet a favourer and a follower of the Arrian Heresy: If the Emperor
(says he) abuse his imperial authority, to tyrannize thereby, here I am ready
to suffer death; we as humble suppliants, fly to supplication: if my patrimony
be your mark, enter upon it; if my body, I will meet my torments: shall I be
dragged to prison or death? I will take delight in both: Oh Theological voice,
Oh Episcopal obedience. These were the voices of the holy Fathers in the
ancient times: I but will the Adversaryes to the regal supremacy reply, the
times must be considered, the people wanted power to resist. No, no, that was
not the matter: when Julian did dominere, who was an Apostate and an Idolater,
as August in Ps. 124.
Austine; yet his soldiers, who were for the most part Christians, did obey
him without resistance in all military matters and public services, yet they
then had power to have resisted him; for most of Julian: Army did consi t of
Christians, as their voices to Io^inian his Successor declare; R^ff. lib hist.
c. 1.
Ruffinus records that with a general voice they all confessed themselv^s
Christians: So C^ustantius and Valens wicked Emperors, and favorers of the
Arrian Heresy, yet we do not read of any of the Orthodox Christians that
disobeyed them by rebellion or resistance. Then Bellarmines Bellar. lib. 5 de
Romans Pon. c. 7.
doctrine was not in date. It is not lawful for Christians to tolerate an
heretical King: Nor were those reasons, for the Commons deposing their King at
their pleasure, so much as thought on then, though of late published by the
scribbling creatures of this Parliament, and borrowed from that their fellow
rebellion fomenting Cardinal, the people may at their pleasure depose their K.
b^cau e Reges coronas and sceptra ab hominibus recipient, and ad little placita
tenent, Kings do receive their Crowns and Scepters from men, Ego unxite in
regem super Israel.
and hold them at their pleasures. Strange stuff: for Kings receive their
Crowns from God, as Psalm. ^0.3. And are enthroned by God, By me Kings reign,
Pro, 8.15. They receive their throne from God, as Queen 2 Samuel 12.7.
Sheba tells Solomon; Diadema regis in manu Dei, ^ 2 Chro 9.8
Esaias 62 3. Sedebat Solomon in throno Dei. 1 Chronicles 29 23. Reges in s^lio
c^llocat in perpetuum, Job 36, 7. the anointing is Gods, With my holy oil have
I anointed him, Psalm. 89.20. The Crown, the Scepter, the Throne, their
anointing, all from God; styled by God, Vncti Dei, Gods anointed. Where is
the Popes or peoples claim? what interest have any (except God) in Kings
Crowns? who can remove whom God appoints? who can deprive whom God approves?
yet these absurd errors, the corrupt leaven of Romes Pharisees and Westminsters
Parasites, are molded out by the mouths of Cardinals and Jesuits, and tasted
by the Sectaries and Levellers of this Island by their pens republished, both
being indeed agreed in this, to become Trumpeters to the world, and sound forth
false alarms of disobedience to encourage peoples rebellion. But leaving them,
let us listen to Solomon (who was wis^r then them both) whose rule is, Pro.
24.21.22
My son fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them that are
seditious, f^r their destruction shall rise suddenly, and who knows the rui^e
^f them both? Le^ us learn this lesson from our M^tth. 22.21.
Sav our, to give unto Caesar that which is Caesar's: to give loyal obedience,
for it is Caesar's royal due. So our Savior Mat. 23 2, 3.
again commands the multitude that they should obey the Scri^es and Pharisees,
who did sit in Moses c air, to observe and do what they did command. In all
things (not repugnant to Gods Laws) we must and ought to obey Kings; yet if
they command contrary to Gods commands, then we must follow the Acts 4.1^.
Apostles rule and practice, rather to obey God then man; and to remember St.
Aug. 11. quae. c. 3.
Austin^ counse^l, It God command one thing, and the Emperor another thing;
what judge thou to be done? Gods power is greater, give leave O Emperor, thou
do threaten prison, but God hell. God that made these Gods ought to be
obeyed before them, and duty binds, that God who is the King of Kings, the
maker and master of all Kings ( omnes Reges ejus pedibus subjecti, all Kings
subject, and subjects of that great King) should be obeyed by them all, an^
before them all.

Yet for all this we must not rebel against a King, Regis voluntas fiat aut a
nobis, aut de nobis.
if he command contrary to Gods Laws, but imitate the three children, Theoph.
in Luc. cap 20.
obey in body, and resist in spirit. Theophylact says, we must prostrate our
selve^ to the King, who has power over our bodies, be he a King or a Tyrant,
for this nothing hinders us spiritually to please the God of our souls: nay we
cannot be truly said to obey and please God; if we resist and contemn the
supreme Ruler, the King: the contempt that is off^red to them being offered to
God himself, as the Lord said to Samuel; They have not cast thee away, but
they have rejected me that I should not reign over them. 1 Samuel 8.7. and the
Apostle says whosoever resists the power, resists the Ordinances of GOD,
and shall receive to himself damnation.

How long then! how long (oh my dear, but stupefied Contrymen) will you
permit your selves to be deluded by a crew of ambitious, covetous, and yet
blind guides? How long will you suffer your selves to be gui'd out of your
propriety and true liberty, and lead tamely into so dangerous a sin as King
resisting? How long will you flatter your selves with the hope of Liberty,
under the Anarchy of a pack of such matchless Tyrants, who intend nothing more
than your Vassallage and des rved slavery? Will ye not yet see your own
misery? Will you be fooled out of your Religion, the pure Gospel of Jesus
Christ, by a company of wild headed Sectaries and factio^s Beggars, under that
venerable name, and great good of our Nation, if not abused, (as it is now) a
Parliament? Do you ever hope to enjoy the joy and desire of each good
Christians heart, Truth and Peace, under those who are enemies to both? For if
they were not enemies to the first, they would not countenance such lying, at
best but equivocating, double-sence bearing Treatises and Pamphlets, to be
published: and stifle all other the writings of such honest men as would answer
such false Propositions, overthrow such principles, and make the truth in Jesus
Christ appear; to the satisfaction of the whole world, how your judgments are
abused by these Imposters juglings. If they were not enemies to Peace also
would they hold up the sword still merely to support thereby
Rebellion-acquired Power over you their fellow subjects, and to hold the King
in his present Captivity contrary to the Law of Nature, of Nations, of this
Kingdom yea of God himself, who forbids resisting (as you have heard proved)
much more restraining or imprisoning Kings.

Object. Ah but you will say we have seen their late Declaration in which they
satisfy us with the Reasons of their proceedings with the King, and labor to
possess us with a belief that they are able to prove against him many soul
Crimes before his coming to the Crown, and many tyrannous practices and
oppressive enormities during his reign?

Answ. It is true indeed that they have been very careful that their
Declarations should come to your hands, for so they know they shall blind you
so that you shall not see their blasphemous Forgeries against a virtuous
Prince, and one as free from those crimes with which they seem to charge him
as the Sun^e is from darkness, or their own s ules from hellish darkness.
Were their accusations not, false and malicious, they would never suppress,
imprison and declare those faithful dispensers of the truth, Traitors, who
desire to write in his vindication, and take such special care that as few of
such Books as discover their falsities shall come to sight, but never to answer
any of them, for indeed they are unanswerable; but by those their common
Arguments the Axe, the Halter, the Goal, or banishment.

If they would satisfy the world of the lawfulness of their proceedings, let
them, if they can, answer Dr. Fern his Summary answer concerning Conscience
satisfied of the unlawfulness and damnablenesse of their resisting, and since
imprisoning, and deposing the King, and disposing his Kingdom without yea
against him: Judge Ienkins his Remonstrance, the Plea for the Lords; and Dr
Huttons Divine Right of Government: and if you (my deluded Contrymen) desire
rightly to satisfy your Consciences buy and read those Books, and I beseech
you as you desire not to be more seduced and deceived, read none of their
licenced Books, unless you are first satisfied that a free liberty is granted
to any man that will, to answer them, for they are spells cast abroad to
bewitch you into Rebellion, and venomous principles prescribed by the State
Mountebanks Walker, Martin, and others; to poison your obedience and Loyalty,

If they would be believed to have any real charge against his Majesty, Let
them answer Master Simons his Vindication of the King, or permit his Majesty to
answer for himself, (by the assistance of such Secretaries and others that
shall be needful to help his memory, and to do him such other service as
shall be requisite therein) and let the writings and answers of the one side
be as freely published and perused, as the Declarations and Papers or
Pamphlets of the other side: in a word, let the plain letter of the Law decide
the Controversy, not the swo d and their wilful Votes; for what just sentence
can be expected when they will be Iu^ges, and yet are parties in the same
matter? If they shall deny this, I have just cause to conclude, that that
Declaration of theirs, and all other B^oks licenced by them have more venom in
them to poison the yet Loyal hearted, and dis-unite the hearts of the Kingdom
from his Majesty, than virtue to salve up the breaches of this distracted
Nation. And (my discreet Contrymen) will you betray so much levity and
easiness of belief as to receive that for solid matter which dares not endure
the examination and trial of a just reply? No: let it b^^sh all other
impressions thereof from y^u, but of hatred unto such unrighteous practices;
and look upon it as the bone and poison of Aspes spot abroad to envenome your
souls, resolving never to believe more therein, than themselves dare speak or
utter^ ((...) mean concerning the death of the King his Father) and yet speak
much more tha^ they are able to prove, Now if you desire to be armed with
unmovable resolutions, and sufficiently fortified against the dangerous poison
and deadly venom of that their Declaration and all other their Pamphlets: take
next your heart the Antidote prescribed against the infectious Air thereof, or
a short Reply unto the Declaration of the 11th of Febr. 1647. But least you
should not know how to furnish your selves with so Soverai^ne a Cordial (it
being very hard to be got) and yet not wholly un^urn^sh'd thereof, I have made
bold (for which I crave that worthy Authors, and the welwishers pardon) to
transcribe so much of that Epitome of true hearted Loyalty as shall serve to
our present purpose, set forth in our Title Page.

A Brief of the brief Reply to the Declaration of the House of Commons.
We have read your Declaration, and have thought good to give you this short
account of those impressions that it has left with us. The death of the late
King, is (we con^ess) a matter indeed of a very high nature; and though you are
loath to express your selves therein, yet it is not hard to discern what
thoughts you would thereby commend unto us. But if you can clearly make good
what you intend, ^hy did you not speak it plainly? If you cannot, why do ^ou go
about by malicious art to insinuate that which you ^e not able to make good?
Men that are under the power of others, use indeed sometimes to speak timorous
verities: But where men armed with greatness and strength, speak fearfully,
there the truth is in danger.

Can you think to persuade us, that the honor of so great a King, or his just
power and Rights, are to be laid u^derfoot upon surmises, and uncertain
conjectures, whose grounds and foundations are rather in the apprehensions of
men variable according to the va^iety of their affections, then in the reallity
of things or actions? When events are liable to diverse causes, and those that
have their residence within the breasts of men, to fix them upon one without
any sound reason for the choice, but because it appears mo t serviceable to our
purposes, is a fallacy of too open a collusion; That we should trust our
judgments with it in so great a matter, and therefore since you have proved
nothing against his Majesty, in that particular, we cannot but infer, that
all that you want of evidence against him lies against your selves, and does
convince you to have committed as high an offense against the duty of Subjects,
as against the candor of Christians.

But secondly, in case it could be proved, and so fully, so demonstratively
proved, as is requisite to overcome that larg portion of Charity which is due
unto a King above all other sorts of men, and to him for ought we know above
all other Kings (much the more for the sad condition wherein you keep him)
proved so clearly as to be victorious over so many and so disswasive
improbabilities that present themselves in array against it: we should indeed
even then admit it with great reluctance as a truth, that it might be thought
a kind of impiety to understand; we should then (when we must needs) look
upon it as a sad and great affliction unto our Nation, and as a great cause of
humiliation (not of triumph or insulting) unto us, That God should suffer our
King to fall into such a depth of impiety, for the sins of the Magistrate as of
the Minister, are usually the judgments of a people for their sins: But yet
nevertheless, we should hold it our duty even in that case to cry out with the
holy Prophet, Micha 7.9. We will bear the indignation of the Lord, because we
ha e sinned against him, etc. And to set our selves to the duties of Fasting,
and Prayers, and Fears, for the lamentation and expiation of so horrid an
iniquity from his Majesty and the Kingdom.

But we could not be persuaded that it were a Christian course for us to make
his iniquity the countenance or excuse of ours: or admit it as a supersedeas or
discharge of the bond of our allegiance, though it should render it indeed much
discomfortable unto us; for as a child owes his filial honor and obedience
not to a good father, but to a father, be he good or bad; as servants owe
subjection with all fear, not to a good master but to a master be he good or
froward. 1 Pet, 2.18. (if that be scriptu e with them) and wives subjection not
to a believing husband, but to a husband he be a believer or an unbeleever. 1
Pet 3.1. compared with 1 Cor 7 13. So subjects owe their allegiance not to a
good King, but to a King.

And though we deny not but Potentates may forfeit their Crowns by their
impieties, yet the holy Word of God leads us to believe that none is thereby
enabled to take that forfeiture but God; Saul forf^ited his Crown by his
Sacrilegious intrusion into the Office and Function of the Priesthood, 1 Samuel
13.8, etc. and doubled that forfeiture by his disobedience unto the command of
God concerning Agag and the spoil, 1 Samuel 15.9, etc. And God both times
proceeds to sentence against him: but yet none must take the forfeiture, nor
put the sentence in execution, till God himself was pleased to do it: And
therefore notwithstanding all that David durst not lift up his hand against
him, 1 Samuel 24 and 26. David himself afterward, though an holy man, yet was
so far left unto himself for a time by God, that he fell into two horrid and
unworthy sins: base in the eyes of men, as well as heinous in the sight of
God: First committing adultery with Bathsheba, at such a time when her husband,
whom he so vilely wronged therein, was employed in the hazarding of his life
to do his service: and then to cover that, treacherously contriving and
procuring his murder: and yet this was no good plea to justify Absalom, or
the son of Bichr^ in their rebellions, no nor yet Shimei in his foule-mouthed
railing against him for it: But all of them in their times were overtaken with
their rewards; and David yet ended his days in peace, being reconciled to God
by his repentance. Nero was as it were a Devil incarnate, so bad that his
wickedness added glory to the persecutions of those that suffered by him: And
Tertullian uses it as an argument to prove Christianity to be good, because
Nero opposed it; He made it his sport to see his own Imperial City set on
fire before his face; and when he had done, caused it most falsely and wickedly
to be laid upon the Christians. And embrued his hands in the blood of his own
Mother; and yet it is observed this very Nero was then Emperor and Governor
of the Romans at that very time when Saint Paul wrote unto them to be subject
unto the higher powers, and tells them withal, that whoever resists shall
receive to himself damnation. Let not any think that in this we plead for the
wickedness of Kings, but for their impunity from men; for the preservation of
Government, the good of the people.

Nor would we wish any to imagine that we think these patterns of wickedness
have any such paralells in his sacred Majestyes story, if it may be truly set
down as some would persuade: but only to show the unforciblenesse of such kind
of deductions as our days have produced: and if it may be, to prevent the like
hereafter. And to satisfy all men, who will be satisfied, that for all your
conclusions that you draw so hard for, that you have even broken your Geeres:
we are yet to seek for a sound reason why the King should be secluded from his
Government, or from the address of a Parliament unto him, but only upon your
bare averrements; Si satis est accusasse, quis tandem innocens? God himself
should not be innocnt, if to be accused were to be convicted: we hold it
therefore most unjust and unreasonable for us to admit any of those aspersions
which you have laid upon his Majesty into our belief, or to make any results
at all upon them in the least degree prejudicial to his Majesty in our
opinions, until we shall see as well what his Majesty can answer as what you
have objected against him: for since it is a justice not to be denied to the
meanest of Subjects, nay, to the greatest slaves, that they have liberty to
speak for themselves, before judgment be given upon their accusation: we must
tell you that we hold it a thing against all equity and right, for you to take
the freedom to say what you please against his Majesty, and in the mean time
to keep him in that restraint, that he can neither know what you have
objected, nor has liberty to make his answer thereunto.

All which and much more that might be said, proves substantially that the
resisting, not a good King, but a King be he good or bad (though by the
Ordinance of them who call themselves a Parliament) is a resisting the
Ordinance of God, that the imprisoning of King, under what specious pretenses
soever couched, is unlawful, and the deposing him, and disposing his kingdom
without him, damnable according to the law of God: what they are according to
the law of this land. Judge Ienkins clearly holds forth unto us in his last
Remonstrance at the bar of the House of Commons.

To conclude this point, this second duty of Obedience to Kings, is by all true
subjects faithfully and loyally to be performed, being a duty necessary for two
respects: 1. Necessitate praecepti: 2. Necessitate finis: First God by manifold
precepts commanded Obedience to be given to Rulers and Kings. Secondly, by the
benefit Government affords, without which all Commonwealths were mothers of
common woes, and would become the very shambles and slaughter-houses of
Christian blood, if that obedience were not given to Rulers that bear the
sword. The kingdom of hell (which is the kingdom of confusion) cannot stand,
Mar. 3.22, 26.
being divided (wanting Beelzebub their Prince) but should presently, as one day
it shall most certainly come to desolation. Seeing therefore obedience to Kings
is a duty so necessary for all subjects, and acceptable unto God, profitable
unto our selves, without which Kings or Kingdoms cannot stand, Church or
Commonweal cannot long continue: Let us perform and practice this duty of
obedience with a pure conscience, which for conscience sake must be performed,
evermore honoring and obeying our, dread Sovereign, (the golden head of great
Britane) beseeching God to restore him to his glory, and to pierce with sharp
arrows, the hearts of his enemies, as the Psalmist of Solomon's Psalm. 45.5.
evermore obeying and praying, God save King Charles.

CHAP. VI.
THere are three other duties which are to be performed by subjects to the
King; honor, faithful service, tribute; three as essential flowers of the
crown as the former two, as I could easily prove, and shall if any be so bold
as to deny it, but at this time I respite to speak so largly of them as I
might, because I do not affect prolixity, nor would be tedious to my Reader;
of each of them then a word or two only.

The first is Honor; Saint 1 Pet. 2.17.
Peter commands all Subjects; Fear, God, Honor the King. Saint Romans 13.7.
Paul exhorting all to submit themselves to the higher powers, concludes, Give
honor to whom ye owe honor: so the Lord himself in the fifth Commandment
charge all to honor Father and Mother; in which precept as most old and new
writers well observe, Kings and Magistrates are understood, being political
Fathers, Fathers of the Commonwealth, Esaias 49.23.
Nursing Fathers of Gods Church and people. And this duty (to honor the King)
obliges all by a three fold bond.

Ex Praecepto By Commandment, Ex Maledicto By Punishment, Ex Praxi. By
Practice.

Math. 21.21. d
First by Precept, God in his law has commanded it. Secondly by Punishment, for
God has put a sword in their hands to cut off such as dishonor them. Thirdly
by Practice, our Lord and Savior with his Disciples did preach and practice
obedience, honor, and reverence, evermore to be given to Kings and Potentates.
And this word honor, signifies all that duty whereby the renown, dignity,
reverence, and high estimation of the King may be preserved and unblemished,
and it reaches unto our thoughts, words and works.

1 To honor him in our hearts and thoughts: curse not the King, no not in thy
thought, for the fowls of the heaven shall carry thy voice, and that which
has wings shall discover the matter, says Eccle. 10.20.
Solomon.

2 Honor him in thy words, seek not by bad and wicked speeches to disesteeme
the dignity of their sacred persons, for they are Gods Deputies, and he that
despises the Deputy, despises him that appointed the Deputy: wherefore God
made an express Precept, Exodus 22.28.
Thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy people. And St. Jude 8
Jude has marked those for filthy dreamers, who despise Government, and speak
evil of them that are in authority.

3 Honor the King in all thy actions, to be ready to defend the honor and
renown of our gracious Sovereign, both by word and sword.

And indeed all good people did ever honor their anointed Sovereigns: David,
Solomon, N^xt God, we must honor those who are in the place of God.
with the rest of the Kings of Israel, how honorable and glorious ever
accounted in the eyes of their Subjects. Jerome says, where honor is absent,
there contempt is present, and to contemn these regal children Psalm 81.6.
of the most High, is to contemn the most High himself.

Think then of this ye flattering Pseudoli of the Papal Myter, and ye
Parasiticall Sycophants of the two Houses at Westminster; you that would have
the Regal Scepter stoop to the Popes Myter or Parliaments Mace; you that every
way both by your pen and your prate labor to disparage the Sacred persons of
Kings, diminish their Regal Rights, and encroach upon their Prerogatives,
substituting all to a Papal Supremacy, or a Parliament Privilege, and make
all good by arms, not arts, by blood, not the Bible; ye Machiavells of the
Conclave and worse of the close Committee; learn of God himself; with what
Honorable Titles and High Prerogatives in his Sacred word Kings stand
possessed: there they are called Ps. 82.6.
Gods, and Children of the most High, the 1 Chr. 4.18.
Lords Anointed, the Angels ^ S^^ 1.20.
of God, the ^ S^^ 2^.17.
Light of Israel (...). 3.1.
sitting in Gods Throne, R^m. 1^.^, 4.
the Higher Powers, the Ministers of God, ^^k^ 2^.25.
the Kings of N^tions that bear rule; every where with variety of such high
and stately Titles, great Prerogatives, commanding every Romans 13.1.
Soul to be subject to them, that he who should go about to empaire their
honor, must first infringe the Book of God.

Unworthy is that Creature to breath the Air, which denies honor to the
breathing Image of God, his anointed Sovereign; or with unreverent Action, or
Elocution, enterprise to debase their Soveraignety: Such tongues are worthy
with Dives to be tormented, or with Progne to be cut out, or w th Nicaenors to
be divided in crummes for Birds that will not honor with tongues, and
reverence with hearts their anointed and appointed Kings, the earthly Pictures
of the King of Kings. And not to travel so far as foreign climates to teach
them (to honor Kings) let our speech be bounded within the circumference of
his Highness Countries. People (above all other Nations) bound to honor and
obey our gracious Sovereign. We are blessed with a King of incomparable virtues,
Rex natus and ad regna natus, descended of blood royal: Eccles. 10.17.
A blessedness to a K ngdome, when a King is the Son of Nobles, and much
more of noble virtues, A trusty defender of the true faith, by pen, pike, and
prison, ready to defend Religion against both superstition, and this Ages
profaneness.

I am unable and unfit to draw the map of our Kings perfections, De ipso ipsi
loquuntur Antipodes; not any Zone hab^table wherein his glory has not
habitation: and they say we must praise a King as we honor God, and herein
such plenty of praise is offered, that -- Inopem me copia fecit.

Xenophon might see that in our virtuous King Charles which he wished in his
King Cyrus: O fortunates Anglos bona si sua norint; Oh happy had we been, had
we been but sensible of, and thankful for our happiness: and nothing can
restore happiness to us, but his being restored to his former Honor and
Glory, that he and his for the future may shine in their pristine luster. And
lot all faithful Subjects pray, long may CHARLES the glorious Candle of this
our Israel last, who as upon this day was proclaimed with infinite joy,
received with peaceable entry, enthroned with glorious investure. But converted
or confounded be all those his Subjects, that refuse to pray for him, obey him,
and honor him, as well in deeds as words, hearts as tongues, saying and
praying, God save the King.

CHAP. VII.
THe fourth duty of Subjects, to be duly rendered and tendered to their anointed
Sovereigns, is Loyal and faithful service, thinking themselves (as Tiberius
said of his people) Homines ad sorvitutem nati, Men borne to do them service;
All true Subjects are bound by the Laws of God and men, to be faithful
servants to their Sovereigns; and if they neglect or reject this duty, I may
say to them as 1 Samuel 26.15, 16.
Da^id did to Abner, Ye be worthy to die, because ye have not kept your Master
the Lords Anointed, because you have not been faithful Servants to your
Anointed Sovereigns.

If any Est. 2.21.22.
Bigchan or Teresh seek to lay hands on our gracious Sov^raigne, with faithful
Mordecai and Ester, speedily prevent it by revealing it: if any King of 2 Kin.
6.12.
Aram takes counsel with his Servants against the King of Israel, with
faithful Elisha reveal it to your Caesar, even the words he speaks in his
Privy Chamber; nay, not only reveal it, but revenge it; Jn reos Majestates and
publicos Hosts omnis homo miles est (says Ter. Apo. c. 2.
Tertullian) against traitors and public enemies every man is a Soldier; yea,
in this kind and sense, we may and must with 1 Kin. 22.11.
Zedekiah make horns of iron, to push these treacherous Aramites until we
have consumed them, give courageous resistance to treacherous violence, until
they have received deserved doom by Justice. And for the performance of this
Loyal service to their appointed Sovereigns, no conditions of men under the
Sun can plead immunity: neither Popes, Priests, nor people; yea, a Parliament
much less a part of a part of a Parliament, cannot pretend to this Privilege,
how ever that Claw-backe Sycophant, the Author of the Vindicia contra^^ty
cannot, by those his specious pretenses, but most false and
Rebellion-countenancing principles, would seem to insinuate such a privilege
their propriety, like a right Machievell preparing the people by those gilded
Pills to swallow those poisonous principles of treason and rebellion, according
to w his Masters have, and (if God prevent them not) intend to act. No, no, say
he and others what they will, none, upon what pretenses soever, can plead an
exemption from performance of this duty. Lords or Commons, Popes, or
Cardinals, Priests or People; their freedom from faithful service to the
King has no warrant except from the Prince of the Air, to whom they may be
justly said to dedicate their Scepter and service, who deny their service to
the King, and therefore to him I leave such to receive their deserved wages.
But the servants of the King of Kings know they owe their service and
allegiance to his Vicegerents, Kings on earth, and that this loyal service of
the members unto the royal and Princely Head, ought to be dutiful, faithful
and perpetual; that is the happy service, which comes from an hearty
obedience; for many things may seem so in appearance, which are not so in
essence: it is the practice and very prayers of the wicked to cry thus: Hor. 1.
Epist. 16.

Da mihi fallere, da justum, sanctumque videri,
Noctem peccatis, and fraudibus objice nubem.
If they seem trusty in show, though treasonable in heart, they care not, like
bad servants, not in singleness of heart, but with service to the eye, as
men-pleasers, obey they their regal Masters. This Age is full of such
treacherous hearts, as deceitefull 2 Samuel 3.27.
as Ioab to Amasa, who took him aside to speak with him peaceably, and smote
him under the fifth rib that he dyed; or like Macchab: 16.
Dalilah to Sampson, with fair words, and weeping to betray him to the
Philistines: No treason but in trust: The feigned voice of Fowlers catch the
Partridges and Plovers: The Mother of Error puts on her mask, to be taken for
the daughter of Time, truth: The Wolf in sheeps clothing, scarce known from
the sheepheards dog. Judges 16.18.
Ptolomie the son of Abusus, under a fair vizzard of love and kindness
feasting Simeon and his two sons, kills them in his banqueting house. M^^ h.
2 8.
Herod when he would play the Wolf, he counterfeited a a Fox: Man h. 2 8.
Go and search diligently for the Babe, and when ye have found him, bring me
word, that I may worship him; his meaning was to worry him: So Man. 26.4^.
Judas comes with his Ave Rabbi, Hail Master, betraying him with a kiss: So
many a perfidious Traitor will cry, Ave Caesar, God save the King; but it is
with such an affection as Autoninus Caracalla said of his brother Geta, Sit
divus, modo non vivus, Let him be a Saint or a King in heaven so he be not a
King on earth.

Many such Iudases and Caracallaes there are in these days two Houses cannot
scarce contain them; yet there they sit, and having first put out Sampsons
eyes, blinded the peoples understanding with glorious terms, (as, We your
Majesty's faithful Servants and Loyal Subjects: and, will make you the most
glorious King in Christendom) make the misery of both King and people their
sport and past time. He that four year ago should have said they had
intended to set forth such a Declaration as their last is, had run the hazard
of a Prison, if he had escaped the Halter, as a false accuser and foul abuser
of the Simeon and Levi of these days, those two holy Brethren, the Loyal
Lords and Commons dissembling at Westminster.

Do you not remember what was urged unto his Majesty at the beginning of this
Parliament, as an Argument to induce him to pass the Bill against the Bishops,
that their saucy (as they termed it) inference, No Bishops no King? and pray
(most Loyal Subjects as you are) what is it come to now? Oh my dear
Contrymen! will you still be guld by such gross and palpable Dissemblers,
Parasites, and Equivocaters? Beware (I beseech you) in time of those who are
full of such fraud, believe them as the People of Rome believed Carbon, make a
Covenant never to believe them hereafter. They are like to Polypus have various
shapes, changing themselves into Angels of Light: but malus ubi se bonum
simulat, tunc est pessimus, a bad man when he counterfetteth to be good, is
worst, August. in Psalm. 63. Simulata sanctitas duplex est iniquitas,
counterfeit holiness being a twofold wickedness: of which, whether they who
call themselves a Parliament be not guilty, I leave it to all who have eyes in
their heads to judge.

But be they what they will: Let every good Christian and Loyal Subject
according to his place perform faithful, hearty, and trusty Service to our
dread Sveraigne; and though the wicked labor to darken, with a Cloud of
slander our fair and faithful Service, yet at last that Eclipse of envy will
vanish of it self, and our own innocence and fidelity will animate us like
that Roman Marius, who being accused by the Senate of Treason, in a passion
tears his Garments, and in sight of them all shows them his wounds received in
the service and defense of the Emperor and his Country, saying; Quid opus est
verbis, ubi vulnera clamant, What need of words, our wounds declare, our blood
was shed for his welfare? Faithful service is laudable before men, and
acceptable before God; it may be by the wicked sometimes blamed, but it cannot
be shamed: though it be not always rewarded on earth, it shall be sure to
find rewards in Heaven; yea virtue is a reward to it self: bonorum laborum
gloriosus fructus, the service of the Ecclus. 35.7.
righteous is accepted, and the remembrance thereof shall never be forgotten.

CHAP. VIII.
THe fifth duty of Subjects to be duly and truly paid and performed to their
sacred and dread Sovereigns, is Tribute, which is (as Vlpian says) Nervus
reip. The strong sinew of the Commonwealth, without which, King, nor Kingdom
cannot stand: And therefore our Savior first by Christ paid Tribute to
Tyberius Caesar. Matthew. 17.27.
president paid Tribute; yea rather than it should be unpaid he wrought a
miracle: and also by precept, resolving the Disciples of the Pharisees,
demanding whether it was lawful to give Tribute unto Caesar, or no? told them
peremptorily, Mat. 22 21.
that they must give unto Caesar that which was Caesar's: Piscator says, upon
that place; Tribute, Honor, and Obedience is to be given to the Magistrate in
all things, not repugnant to the word of GOD: for this cause (says Romans 13 4 6.
Saint Paul) ye pay Tribute, because the King is the Minister of God: Theoph.
in Lucam. c. 20.
The money which thou have thou have from him, and therefore, not give, but
pay; not a gift, but a debt, which all subjects owe to him. Beucer says, We
do not give, but pay that which of duty we owe: Tributes, Subsidies, Taxes,
etc. are not gifts but debts, which of necessity they must, and ought to pay
Verbo redden de, significat dibitum quod inexcusabile subditis im^^situm est:
Theo^^i. in 13 Romans v. 7.
Hiperius says, This do the Scriptures allow of, (writing there of the
payment of Tributes) this do the Civil Laws, with the common consent of all
Nations accept, and approve: The same Hip. in Rom 13
Hiperius says, the law and right of paying Tribute, among all Nations has
ever been accustomed. And therefore In Romans 13 6.
Calvin writes well, that Tributes and Taxes are the lawful revenewes of
Princes. Calv. in instit. lib. 4 c. 20.
This duty of paying Tribute, Subsides, Taxes, etc. by the subjects to the
Sovereign, is by the law of God, and laws of men, and common customs of most
nations commanded and approved, and that for four principal causes.

First to mainetaine that royal estate which God has given to Kings: the
glorious patterns of Kings magnificence, may be fully seen in royal Solomon:
Look but upon his Throne, 2 Chr. 9.17. and you may judge of all the rest of his
royalty,

2dly. to defend the Commonwealth, both from foreign invasions, and homebred
rebellions; which requires a great Treasury. A great Bird had need of a great
neast. That high Head which cares for all the politic body, and night and day
studyes to preserve their welfare, must participate of their wealth, without
which the public peace and security cannot be effected: for it is, Status
insolidus qui caret solidis.

Thirdly, to contestate and acknowledge their homage and subjection to their
Sovereign: for say the Canonists, Extra de exact^ and cens. c. 1. and quaest:
8. can. Tributum.
To pay Tribute is to be subject to the Emperor, and a sign of servitude,
confessing all duty and loyalty to be due to their Sovereign, who has power
to command them, their Nehem. 9.37.
goods, Nehem. 9.37.
lands, and lives, for the service of the Kings and countries preservation.
Look upon the Israelites (when King Saul was dead) coming to elect and anoint
David in Hebron, to be King over Israel, 1 C^ro. 11.1.
Behold we are thy bones and thy flesh, meaning (as take it) that their lives,
and all, were at his service and commandment: for Tribute is not only of
money, but sudor and sanguis populi, The sweat and blood of the people, if such
need require to defend their King and Country, is a Tribute due from them,
willing and ready to adventure their lives and l^mbs, to give repulse and
resistance to foreign or domestical violence.

Fourthly, to testify their grateful affections to their gracious Princes, in
thankefullnesse for the great benefits by their prudent, provident, and
politic Government, reaped and received. So David in lamenting Saul's death,
remembers the benefits his subjects received by him in his life time, 2 Samuel
1.14.
Ye daughters of Israel weep for Saul, which clothed you in scarlet with
pleasures, and hanged ornaments of gold upon your apparel. So Lament. 4.20.
Jeremiah o^ the good King Josiah, lamenting his death, The breath of our
nostrels, the Anointed of the Lord, was taken in their nets, of whom we said,
under his shadow we shall be preserved among the Heathen. A good King, brings
many blessings and benefits unto his people; and therefore when such as are in
authority, be righteous, the people rejoice, says Prove. 29.2.
Solomon. 4.
A King by judgment maintains the country. By a man of understanding and
knowledge, a Realm endures long, says the same Prove. 28.2.
Solomon; yea, (as wise Plato well said) Beatas fore resp. cum ant
Philosophentur reges; aut regnent Philosophi: When as Kings were Philosophers,
or Philosophers Kings, then such Commonwealths should be happy. And indeed all
earthly happiness which is derived to the members, proceeds from the Head,
(next under God, the primary Author of all good things) by whose direction,
discretion, circumspection, care, counsel, and continual vigilance, they are
preserved in peace, and prosper in plenty, and whether we did not enjoy all
blessings which Subjects could hope for under His Majesty's reign, before this
Parliament set themselves to pull him down, I leave all English men (that are
not prepossessed with prejudice to Monarchy and partiality to a side) to judge:
what a condition we have been since in, too sad experience can testify. Oh
then my dear Contrymen, let no Theudas herein deceive you, or any Judas of
Galile (who in the days of the Tribute, drew away much people, as Acts 5.37.
Gamaliel speaks) delude you; for he perished, and all that obeyed him: and as
our Savior said of them, so I may say of this Nation in this matter, except ye
repent of this sin you shall all likewise perish Aug. in lib. i^ Rom
proposit. 7 2
Augustine says, If any one think Imposts, Tribute and Honor ought not to
be paid to the King, he falls into a great error: B Aretii Com. in 13 Romans v
7.
Aretius says, We owe them by right, if we do not pay them we offend against
the rule of Justice: Nay to pay them is necessary for all, (as the same Aretius
there) unless they would be deprived of their Fortunes, Wealth, and Welfare:
Therefore pay it truly, and do it heartily, as to the Lord, and not unto men;
not grudgingly, as if compelled by necessity, but cheerfully and voluntarily
in humble testimony of your hearty fidelity, love, and loyalty. But to them
that challenge immunity from the performance of these public Debts of
Tributary duties to their Liege Lords and Kings, I may say as Dioclesian to the
Philosopher; Thy Profession differs from thy Petition, thy Profession teaches
thee to give Caesar his due, and not to rob him of his right. Bishop Latimer
calls such Thieves that rob the King of his due debt, Subsidies, Tribute, or
Taxes. Rather imitate that Ambros. con. ra Aux^^: (...) quaest. 1. Can: si
tribistum.
Ambrose the famous Bishop of Millan, who teaches thee a better Lesson; If the
Emperor demand Tribute, we do not deny it, the fields of our Church shall
pay Tribute; If the Emperor demand the fields, he has power to challenge
them, let him take them, I neither give them nor deny them in no case, arguing
obedience in ordinary, or extraordinary exactions: agreeing fully with Luther,
Luth. in Matt: 22.21.
If thy substance, body, or life should be taken from thee by the Magistrate,
thou may say thus, I do willingly yield them unto you, and acknowledge you
for ruler over me, I will obey you, but whether you use your Power and
Authority well or ill, see you to that: For Kings must one day give account of
all their works, to the King of Kings; and if they have abused their Power by
Tyranny, Cruelty, or any bad Government, an hard judgment Wisd. 6.5.8.
shall such have that bear such Rule, for then abides the sorer Trial, as the
Son of Wisdom speaks; The power is from God, the abuse of it from
themselves, and they will find it, when God and it calls them to reckon. The
Chain of gold is not made the worse because an Harlot wears it about her neck:
it is Luth. in Mat: 2^.21.
Luthers comparison in this case; so still Kings must be obeyed for Conscience
sake, if not commanding contrary to Gods Commandments, Let us with these
follow the steps of faithful Fabricius, of whose fidelity Pyrrhus boldly
speaks, Difficilius Fabricius a legalitate, quam sol a suo cursu verti possit;
Let the Sun first turn from her Course, than we from the course of Loyal
Obedience, and Allegiance: always remembering that Christian saying of that
martyr Ignarepi^^^: 2. d Magn^sianos. a
Ignatius, No man ever lived unpunished, which lifted up himself against his
betters, superiors, his Princes; disobedience brings Infamy, disgrace, death,
yea hatred after death, that the sorrowful Son may say of his treacherous
Sire, Genesis 3^.30.
Ye have troubled me, and made me stink among the Inhabitants of the Land, as
Jacob said of Simeon and Levi: And whether we of this Kingdom have not too
just cause to say of those two Brothers in iniquity, the factious Party of the
Lords and Commons sitting in Parliament, you have made us (by your proceedings)
stink in the Nostrills of all neighbor Nations, and rendered us the scorn and
contempt of the whole World, I leave it to the experience of Travelers.

To conclude, let us always from the bottom of our hearts, 1 Prayer.
pray so the Kings safety Corporally; for his salvation Spiritually, and
preservation Politically. Let us obey him because he is the Lords Anointed, 2
Obedience.
appointed by God to be his Vicegerent, representing the person on earth, of
the King of Kings in heaven: 3 Honor.
Let us honor him not with lips only, but with hearts truly, because he is
the Father of our Country, the constant Defender of the Faith, and so worthy
of double Honor: 4 Service.
Let us be ready to perform at his Command our best Service, being his native
and natural Subjects, born and bound by Allegiance to all Christian duties of
Subjection.

Let us be willing to pay Tribute: 5 Tribute
a public Purse must help the public Peace, Multorum manibus grande levatur
onus.

Yea let us pay him his duty: Tribute to him, for we owe him Tribute; Custom
to him, for we owe him Custom; Fear, Honor, Obedience, Service, and all
other loyal services and performances of Duties belonging to good Subjects in
their several degrees and places, humbly to tender them, and render them unto
our Gracious and high Sovereign Lord the King, whose Sword, Crown, Scepter,
Throne and Person justly requires all these duties: the Sword exacts obedience,
Crown commands honor, Scepter service, Throne tribute, and Person prayer;
always pouring forth to God this Prayer and Petition, God save King CHARLES:
Let us be in Pace Lepores, but in Praelio Leones, in Peace like Hares timorous
to off^nd his Majesty in any way of disobedience: but like Lions, when
opportunity shall be offered, fight for his freedom and re-establishment in
his Throne and Power, against all the enemies thereof with unwearied courage,
undaunted magnanimity, joining with our fighting hands, our fervent prayers
like faithful Israelites against all rebelling Amalekites, continually let us
pray with David, Psalm 20.9. Domine salvum fac Regem, Lord save the King, send
him an happy Deliverance out of all his troubles, visit him with much comfort
now after the time that thou have afflicted him, and the years wherein he has
suffered such great adversity, Lord keep him as the Apple of thine own eye,
and hide him under the shadow of thy wings: oh turn not thy face away from
thine Anointed, but let him be refreshed with the joy of thy Countenance: Make
his days as the days of heaven before thee, and grant that his Highness and
his Princely Posterity may in these Kingdoms reign so long as the world
endures, maugre all thine and his enemies: Enlarge and enrich his Royal heart
with all Regal gifts and divine graces, suitable for his present sad condition,
and yet high calling: save him from the Treachery and tyranny of foreign
enemies, and deliver him from the Plots and Projects of his Domestical
Adversaries, whom we beseech thee to cloth with shame, and break in pieces
like a Potters Vessel: Let thy hands, oh Lord, find out all that hate him,
make them like a fiery Oven in the time of thine Anger, and destroy them in thy
Wrath: scatter the devices of those crafty ones, and make all their Counsels
like the Council of Achitophell, foolishness: confound those Shebaes that
stir up Israel against our David, those Shimeis that revile and rail upon
our Charles, and those Adoniahs that go about to take the Kingdom from our
King; yea let all like them, perish like them. Then will all Loyal Subjects
rejoice when they see the vengeance, the stone which is cut without hands
breaking all Rebels and Traitors to pieces, Dan. 2.34. and making all his foes
his footstool: but upon him and his grant that his Crown may flourish, that
his seed may possess the gates of their Enemies, and that there may not want
one of his Posterity to sit upon his Throne and sway his Scepter till Shilo
come in judgment. And now let all good Christians and Loyal Subjects say Amen.
Yea let high and low, rich and poor, young and old, professors of the Gospel,
be devoted Suppliants to the King of Kings in our Kings behalf, with tongues
and hearts praying and saying, God save our King, God save King Charles.

Vivat, valeat, Vincat.
Gloria Tri-uni Deo in secula. Amen.
Postscript.
THis Treatise is dedicated to none (the discoverer of these truths being
unwilling to engage any particular Patron) yet desires it may be accepted of
all of what degree or rank soever both in Church and State, if sound members of
our Supreme Head; to such I am confident this short tract will be welcome;
therefore to such it presents it self, and in the discoverers absence begs
their entertainment, though there be danger, to be found in its company: The
cause of his discovery of these dangerous, though faithful truths, and that so
plainly and home, is the desire he has to undeceive his deceived country men,
to discharge his duty, and to render those who are guilty (if they wilfully
persist therein) inexcusable, that when they come before the throne of the King
of Kings, they may have no plea of ignorance, of the greatness and
damnableness of their sin, but that they may know there has been a Prophet
among them.

The cause of his forbearing his name, is his charity to them who are reproved
therein (that they may not be deeper engaged in blood and oppression, for he
too well knows their common way of refuting such truths, imprisonment or
death) and not either in ability to make good all herein contained, or timidity
to stand to his principles: for should their unsatiable thirst after blood, by
the diligence of their blood hounds or subtilty of their spies make them so
unfortunately succesfull as to discover him, you shall find him so resolved as
to seal this truth with his life (if their fury carry them to that height of
tyranny) or by what other oppression and cruelty soever they shall use, to
answer This unanswerable assertion, That the resisting, much more imprisoning
and deposing King CHARLES, and disposing of his kingdom, without and against
him is a sin not only unlawful but damnable, by the word of God.

What kind of sin it is by the law of this land, Judge Ienkins plainly tells
them in his Remonstrance of the 21 of February, 1647. I am confident both that
and this shall have one and the same refutation that common way of answering of
such assertions set forth in the 7th. page of this short tract: And truly I
shall have no other opinion of them till they answer that Remonstrance, and
permit him again to make and publish his Reply: but this I believe they will,
with more safety to their hopeful cause, and blessed Reformation, do, first
hang him, and then answer him: for so they shall save him a labor of a Reply,
and may come off with credit, having (as they may then vaunt) silenced that
good old Judge: And what Ingenuous Intelligent breast can entertain better
thoughts of them, or hope for other proceedings from them, if it seri^usly
consider those daily Reproachful Reviling Aspersions by their saucy
Pamphleters cast upon His Sacred Majesty, to the alienating of the Affections
of His People from him: which they permit, yea countenance, if not themselves
Order to be published; so to slander the footsteps of the Lords Anointed, and
render him odious in the eyes of his Subjects: and yet keep his Majesty in such
a condition as not permitted to vindicate himself, and threaten, yea thunder
out fire and faggot against all others that shall Write or speak in his
Vindication? What truly enobled soul and rightly enlightened Christian can
m^ke any fairer Construction of such unjust practices? If th y would have us
harbor other Cogitations; let them cause (...) Overton to be taken into
Custody, and recei e con^igne ^^nishment; for, for him was Prin^ed tha^ fo^ge^,
mali^^^u^, venomous P^^lis^^^ Ma^c^ the (...). 164^.
Letter pretended to be s^^t from His Majesty to the Queen, but intercepted,
together with those b^tter p^ysonous aspersions fixed upon his Majesty by way of
certain Pr^posalls to the Kingdom: All published in a Pamphlet stuffed with as
much falsehood, forgerie, yea gall and poison of Aspes, as could be spet from
the envenomed mouth of the most reviling Shimei, or railing Rabshakeh of this
Kingdom, to the Reproching, Slandering, and Disgracing of a David and Hezekiah
in one good King Charles: to whom the Lord of his mercy grant the shield of
faith in him and his goodness, to repel the fiery Darts of such incarnate
Devils, from whose tongues, set on fire of Hell; and Pens, dipped in the gall of
bitterness, yea from the present sad Restraint in which he now is, The Lord of
Heaven, and God of His Consolation and Confidence speedily deliver him. Amen,
Amen, do all the Loyal hearted of Great Britane say; and theref re have
desired that th^^ their Vote be speedily Printed and Published, and Coppies
thereof dispersed into all parts of Great Britane, for the begetting a right
understanding b^twixt His Majesty and all His Subjects.

FJNJS.

