October the 22. 1649.

The Three-penny Cooks fat in the fire,

By Thomas Grantham, Master in art of Peter-house in Cambridge, Heretofore
Professor in Bowlane and Mugwell-street near Barbar Chyrurgions Hall: Now over
against Graies Inn Gate in Holborne, at Master Bulls.

Printed for Thomas Pabody, in Queenes-head-Alley, in Paternoster Row. 1650.

Upon a time, walking by my self, I fell into contemplation of my former life,
and of all the miseries that befell me, either by my inconsiderateness and
rashness, or Gods justice upon me for my sins. And although I added weight to
some of those crosses, by taking them more heavily then I ought to have done;
Yet I found nothing crucified me so much as my long and tedious going to the
School; how many showers of tears? how many streams of blood? And I was
cuffed, as if the Messenger of Satan had been sent to buffit me; and after two
seven years spent constantly in this Bride-well, so that I was nineteen or
twenty years of age, I could not understand so much Latin as a sucking Child,
nor speak so much as a spelling Child; Methought it was strange, that a Child
should suck in more with Milk, then I should get with so many drops of Blood,
having so much advantage of years, but some will say, it may be you were very
dull in learning, if I were never so dull, nor never so stupid, nor never so
blockish; was this cruelty a way to quicken me? But some will say, we know the
misery's so great, that many of us had rather have our Children ignorant then
learn with so much torment: Therefore the time will be better spent by me in
showing the remedy, and that is my task at this present.

1. Remedy. One remedy against this Epidemicall disease is, let a Boy learn his
Grammar Aschams way, which way those learned Schools beyond Seas do highly
commend, that is, to understand within Book, and to apply every necessary
Rule: It makes no matter whether he can say his Grammar word by word without
Book or no; if he can give the sense without Book, and turn to the Rule
within Book, it is sufficient; No University man, no great Scholar, can say
his Grammar word by word without Book, no, not the Master himself; and yet he
whips the Scholars for that he cannot do himself; If a man remember there is
such a Rule, or such a sense of the R^l^, it suffices: No Grammar have the same
words, the sense is all we look for; and so soon as we come to the
University we forget to say our Rules word by word without book, may, scorn
and deride him that does it. Thus this many years great labor is lost in a
month or two, and is so far from profiting, that it becomes rediculous.
Consider also, the Grammers which were before Lilly, were some of them almost
as big as a Church-Bible, if you take out the Apocrypha and Common Prayer.
Now to learn these word by word without Book, was a task passing the
patience of an Ass; Upon this Erasmus concludes, that Grammar it self is
enough to make a man spend his whole life in tortures.

Ascham, in his first Book has these words; so as the Grammer-booke be always
in the Scholars hand, and also used of him as a Dictionary for every present
use, this is a lively and perfect way for teaching of Rules, where the common
way used in common Schools, to read the Grammar alone by it self, is tedious
for the Master, hard for the Sholler, cold and uncomfortable fur them both.

Now you see according to Ascham, the Grammar must be used as a Dictionary, and
he that knows any thing, knows that a Dictionary is not to be learned word by
word without Book therefore not a Grammar: He tells you in this place, that it
is tedious to a Scholar; let any man consider who has not the patience of an
Ass, what a tedious thing it is to have all the Grammar or most part of it
lapt up in his head word by word, and presently to apply every Rule word by
word, or else up he goes, if he were as good as George a Green.

Read Ascham in his second Book, these are his words; I remember when I was
young, in the North there went to the Grammer-schoole little Children, they
came from thence great Lubbars, always learning and little profiting, learning
without book every thing, understanding within book little or nothing; their
whole knowledge by learning without the book was tied only to their tongue and
lips, and never ascended up to the brain and head; and therefore was soon
spit out of the mouth again; they were as men always going, but ever out of
the way; and why? For their whole labor, or rather great toil without order,
was even vain idleness without profit; Indeed they took great pains about
learning, but employed small labor in learning; when by this way prescribed in
this Book, being strait, plain and easy, the Scholar is always laboring
with pleasure, and ever going on forward with profit. Here this Scholar famous
all over Christendom, and the glory of his Kingdom for Languages, tells you
learning without book, was vain idleness without profit; He tells you, they
took great pains about learning, but employed small labor in learning.

Erasmus, the restorer of the Fathers Greek and Latin, the greatest Writer in
his time, incomperable for Wit, Learning, and Eloquence, has the same words;
some make it their greatest care to learn the Rules word by word without book,
which thing says he, I allow not of, for it is great pains to no purpose, nor
profit all.

Brinsley, a famous Schoolmasters in his Book called, A Consolation for our
Grammar Schools, writes of one Master Tovey a Schoolmasters equal to the
best, that teaching Aschums way; that is, only the sense of the Rules, brought
a Nobleman to a perfection beyond all expectation.

Comenins, a man admired for his quickness in teaching the Languages, has
writ sharply against this dog-bolt way; Innumerable are the learned men who
have sought to take away the servitude and slavery that Youth has undergone;
some Authors I have quoted in my Animadversions upon Cambdens Greek Grammar,
made for the use of Westminster-Schoole, and I have showed, and I will show
more hereafter;

That it is a false, obscure, imperfect Gammer, abounding with above twelve
gross errors, besides many little ones; and those who are School: masters of
great Schools, and make men believe they know much, when alas it is very
little they know; they might blush if they had any shame, to let so many
errors go uncorrected in a Grammar, which is the foundation of a Language; If
Foundations be false and rotten, what will the building be? I need not spend
much time upon this point, because I have represented in a Comedy often acted
by my Scholars, the Cruelty, Folly, and Nonsense of Common Schoolmasters,
which I intend to Print as soon as I can.

Look upon Aschams success in this way, in his first book he speaks thus of
Queen Elizabeth; It is your shame, I speak to you all (you young Gentlemen of
England) that one Maid should go beyond you all in excellency of Learning and
knowledge of diverse tongues; point forth six of the best given Gentlemen of
this Court, and they altogether show not so much, will not spend so much time,
bestow not so many hours, daily, orderly and constantly, for the increase of
Learning and Knowlidge as does the Queens Majesty here: Yea, I believe that
besides her perfect readiness in Latin, Italian, French and Spanish; she did
read more Geeke every day, then some Prebbendary of this Church does read
Latin in a whole week; And that which is most praiseworthy of all, within
the Walls of her Privy-Chamber, she has obtained that excellency of Learning,
to understand, speak and write, both wittily with head, and fair with hand,
as scarce one or two rare Wits in both the Universities have in many years
reached unto. Among all the Benefits that God has blessed me withal, next the
knowledge of Christ's true Religion, I count this the greatest, that it pleased
God to call me to be one poor Minister in setting forward* these excellent
Gifts of Learning in this most excellent Prince.

Look upon his success in his second Book, amongst many others, one Witney,
a most accomplished Gentleman, these are his words; I gave him a translation to
turn into Latin, which he did so choisely, so orderly, without any great
miss in the hardest points of Grammar, that some in seven years in
Grammer-schooles, yea, and some in the Universities too, cannot do half so
well: and this perfection be obtained from Christmas to Alhallowes-tide, and
this Scholar was altogether ignorant of the Latin Tongue and the Rules before.

Now briefly take some few Reasons against this way of saying word by word
without Book.

All Arts, as Geometree, Arithmetic, Logic, Navigation, men attain too, and
never learn Rule word by word without book, and what offense has Grammar
done that it must be cuft into a Boy word by word without book?

If learning without book word by word be necessary for the understanding of a
thing, then it is before a Boy understands or after he understands. Now for a
Boy to learn without book like a Parret, that he understands not, is very
laborious and rediculous; and to learn without book after he understands,
that is to no purpose; for the Master understanding himself the sense of the
Rule, neglects saying word by word without book, and whips Shollers for that
he cannot do himself: If saying without book word by word be profitable to
the understanding, then he that says best without book understands best, but
this is false; there are many that can say much Scripture without book, but
understand not so well as those that can say none.

Take this instance, Christopher Grecu^, Clerk of a great Parish, a man of
threescore years and ten, he can say all the Psalms without book, and yet I
dare not trust him to apply a Psalm after my Sermon.

I have had Boys come from common Schools, could say all the Grammar word for
word without book, and yet could not make half a Line of true Latin; and
that which is most absurd of all, they teach a Boy to make Latin by the Latin
Rules, when a Boy understands not Latin; just as if a man should teach one an
art in French, when he understands not French; then there are many Boys can
say without book to their Companions or by themselves, but the Master,
strutting with the Rod in his hand, and his imperious look and threatening,
puts a Boy clear out; as for a Master to talk thus to a Boy, Sir I Will smoke
you, I Will make your Buttocks blush, I Will make you fear me; these words confound
a Boy and fright him out of all: If a Boy be to say this Rule, A^ectives that
signify fullness, emptiness, plenty, etc. If he mis-place a word, although
the sense be the same, presently the Master fells him all along, where as some
Grammers have the first words last, and the last words first, the sense being
still the same.

Observe Doctor Webs words, in his appeal to truth, now if Gammer should be
the best course to Languages, and Kings may have their choice of best courses,
I wonder what Grammers were made by Mithridates? and that makes me wonder more,
we that have no business but a Language, spend all our life and are not
perfect in one, and he that had a Kingdoms affairs to look upon, had two and
tw^nty complete Languages.

Now if a Language cannot be got but by learning word for word without book,
then Mithridates, who had a Kingdoms affairs to look to, must learn two and
twenty Grammars, word by word without book; and to learn a Grammar in this
manner, will take up five years, to be complete in a Language as he was will be
at least five years more, which reckoned, make up two hundred and twenty
years. Now Mithridates lived not a quarter of the time. Doctor Web in that
learned work quotes above a hundred learned men, who envey bitterly against
Grammarians, and he undertakes to prove by learned Authors, that a Language may
be learned without a Grammar, which needs no proof at all to men of common
sense. How many are there that can speak French and Latin that never saw a
Grammar? Many young Gentlemen and Gentlewomen have learned to speak French in
half a year, who never knew any Latin.

Doctor Web names many Noblemen who speak Latin excellent well at five
years of age, having nothing but Latin spoken to them before.

And I have known many, who spoke Latin and French admirable well, and
understood Greek very well in a twelvemoneth. And this is easily done, by
joining Doctor Webbes way with Aschams.

I had Boys when I was in London, who had been but one year at most with me,
and in these four points we challenged any School in London.

First, who understands the Greek and Latin Grammers best in Accents, and
Dialects, and all things necessary

Secondly, who understands a Greek and Latin Author best.

Thirdly, who can prove a Greek or Latin Verse best.

Fourthly, who can make a Greek or Latin Oration, or a Greek and Latin
Verse best and soonest; and the highest of my Scholars was but fifteen years
of age, and the second to him but ten.

Some I had I confess, could not do a quarter so much, which was no fault of
mine; For I often told them, if they were careless and would not mind, and
would not learn without cuffling, pulling, lugging and whipping, they must go
to Masters that delight in this way of teaching; They may be taught in many
places very reasonably this way, as for a noble or seven shillings a quarter,
at some Free-Schooles they may have it for nothing. Some Schoolmasters think
they pay me home, when they say I make Scholars unfit for other Schools;
truly I conf^ss^ it, I teach without any correction, and they teach with
correction, and in this we differ.

We teach to understand the Rules first, and they teach to learn without book
first, in this we differ; Our Scholars understanding the Rules, and often
applying them, the Rules come without book, whether they will or no. Then we
differ in severity.

Some keep their Scholars so strictly for four or five hours that they allow
them not so much as a mouthfull of fresh air, not so much as to ease nature: I
have read, and heard many Scholars speak against this severitie. Let a Boy be
tied three or four hours to that Game he likes best, and let him be soundly
cuft and whipped when he does not play his Game well, you shall see this Boy as
weary of his play as his Book, and the reason is, because of great severity.

Socra^es the wisest man of his time, and many who have writ concerning the
instruction of youth, often say, Learning must be taught with Love: and some
Scholars at London being thus taught, seriously profess they had rather come
to School, then go about any pleasure or delight.

Remedies 3. First, there are three things most necessary in a Language, the
Words, the Style, and the Rule; For the words a Boy may easily learn a
thousand* words in ten days, that is, a hundred words in a day. Suppose a man
allow an hour for twenty words, in five hours he learneth a hundred words. I
have taught some that have learned a hundred words in an hour, but I do not
mean after the silly Fustian way of learning in the common Schools, to say
them all by rote like a Parriot; but let him have an hundred English words, and
a hundred Latin words printed or writ, he shall tell you Latin for English,
and this is the Latin I mean; and he that understands a thousand, must
needs understand many thousands more, for many Derivatives, Compounds,
De-compounds, are understood by the help of the Simples, and he that
understands thus much will understand most Authors he reads.

Remedy 2. Secondly, for style take this example; there is a certain Bird
called a Dotterell, this Bird if you see him thrust out his right wing, thrust
you out your right arm, and if he thrust out his left leg, thrust out yours;
and thus* by imitating of him, you will come so near till you take him in your
hands; and so in an Author, where you see him place his Adjective, Adverb or
Conjunction, do you so too, and by this imitation you will catch the strain of
your Author, and come to a great perfection, if you imitate but six leaves in a
translation, which you may do in six days, then you may come near the
strain of your Author.

Remedy 3. For the Rules teach thus, Consider there are eight parts of speech,
for the four that are undeclined, I bid my Scholar take very little care,
because they are not varied nor declined at all; you find them every where
after the same manner. Of the other four, I bid him take care but of two, that
is, a Nowne and a Verb, for a pronoune is much like a noune, know one, know the
other; a Participle that takes part of a Noune and a Verb, both those known,
the Participle is known.

So here is but two chiefly to be cared for, that is, a Noune and a Verb, but
be sure to understand the definition of every part of Speech, not word by word
without Book, but the sense of it.

I cannot follow this point any further, take some Propositions.

Proposition first, My council is to take away all the Revenus that belong to
Free-Schooles, and other Schools, and let it be committed to a Treasurer, and
every one in any part of the Kingdom that makes a Scholar fit for the
University, he shall have ten pounds out of the Common stock, and the Scholar
preferred, and if he make him fit to be an Apprentice to a Chyrurgion or a
Lawyers Clark, he shall have five pounds, by this means none shall have any money
but those that deserve it.

Prop. second, Let any man judge whether they or I teach the best; was it ever
known that any Graduate in the University, or Master of Art, Physician,
Lawyer, ever came to their Schoolmasters to better themselves in the
Languages, whereas all my gains and practice many times in the year, have
been chiefly by these men.

Prop. third, Their Scholars before they go to the University come to me a
Month or two to be oyled over, and profess they profited more in that time
with me, then they did before in four Years.

Prop. fourth, they will make a man believe that a Boy is a Poet, and able to
make Theams and Verses; now these Boys can neither speak Latin, nor
understand an Author; and will any think a man to be a Freench Poet, when he
cannot speak French, or a good Orator when he cannot understand it, these
Verses are only patched up of phrases (a mere delusion) see more of this in
my six quoeries to the Free-Schooles, in and about London, printed three years
ago, and not yet answered: At that time had I followed my blow, the
Free-Schools had been absolutely routed, and never able to rally or recruit
again: and I set up a Challenge in the Exchange, to all the Schools in London
or thereabouts seven to seven, which stood nine days. Our School stood open
to all examination for one whole year, and when the best Scholars of one of
the primest Schools in London contended with ours, there was a Gentleman of
the Innes of Court, that delivered in a Latin Speech, Vobis laudem, ^llis
palman tribuo; I give you praise (says he) to the Scholars of that great
School, but I give Master Granthams Scholars the Victory. All that I shall
say in this great have is; I desire that there may be an act of Oblivion of the
abuses and mistakes of both parties, and that we may all join together, and
study Reformation of the Schools, that Schoolmasters may no longer make
Merchandise of the precious time of Youth, which is of that great height, that
it is many times the destruction of Soul and Body; and if the sin of scandal
shall deserve the weight of a Millstone; what shall he deserve that keeps
Youth many years in teaching, and can show no progress to the purpose:
Employment now cuts me off, but I should be happy in London, before Authority
to have a dispute with these Schoolmasters, and that there may be an account
taken of every Boy that goes to School, what he is when he goes, and how much
he has profited when he comes away.

I Will undertake in two Months, to make him that can read English, to
conster an Author* in Latin and Greek, he shall make Greek and Latin Verses
and Orations, and his progress in Hebrew shall be correspondent; and because
men may think that a man does this for Money, I will desire but two shillings
a day whilst I teach, for the public good, and all the rest shall go for
charitable uses, only I desire that I may make choice of what kind of charity
the Money may be bestowed on.

Now to that God that has commanded love and charity amongst us, be all
Honor, and Glory for ever, etc.

Herculea cecidisse manu tot monsta negamus,
Quot Methodo and Calamo iam perierie tuo.
The hand of Hercules did never kill,
Such Monsters as thy Method and great Skill.

Can thou that art full twenty years and more?
Tremble and shake to hear thy Master roar
Like a storm frighted Seaman, oh ye Fools,
How does all wise men laugh to scorn your Schools?
Thou humbly on a Horse, hangs down thy head,
And a fierce Rod thy Buttocks over-spred,
Or horst upon an Ass, much like to thee,
Horse, Ox, and Ass enjoy more liberty;
At every stroke thy trembling Buttocks quake,
Like two great Custards, that are newly baked,
Tears trickle from thy Buttocks, from thine Eye,
Who can hut laugh to see this Booby cry?
Younger then thee dare on the Cannon go
In spite of fire, and flame confront their Foe,
And when a Bullet flies in full carreere,
They scorn to stir or starte aside for fear,
Then rouse brave Spirits boys and you shall see
A way to learn, with all facility:
The Latin's call a School, a learned Play,
And so is mine, it is always Holiday,
In twenty days I Will fit you for a Gown,
If you will but leave this play of Hose go down.
Man's life is short, but Art is long they say,
O happy's he that goes the nearest way,
Homer discribes his God, flying with speed,
Shooting his Arrows till the Grecians bleed;
The ^^gels good and bad have wings, the Sun
The light of lights, how swiftly does he run;
The Goddesses came down like shooting stars*
When Greece and Troy were at their bloody Wars,
Homer does say the horses of the Sun,
So far as one can see at one step run,
I hate the Snaile, the Crab, the flow pac't ^^sse,
That hums and drums out a foire Houre-Glasse.
The Creatures in the Law had four feet,
God damned because they could not gos* but creep,
And he that creepes and slugs at whipping School,
The flower of his age, I call a Poole.
If on Pernasses-hill one did but sleep,
Or on the Muses-well chance to drink deep,
Then would he sing such Verses and such Rimes,
As made him live for everlasting times;
All this condemns your cuffing, whipping Schools,
That spend so many years to make men Fools.
Thou that do strike where Christ himself does kiss
Let any judge how far thou do amiss,
Thou that do cuffe those whom he did embrace,
How can thou answer't to thy Masters Face.
Raptim.

