THE GRAND CASE OF ENGLAND, So fiercely now disputed by FIRE and SVVORD,
EPITOMIZED.

feb: 8 LONDON, Printed for J. Partridge, 1642.

THE GRAND CASE So bloudily disputed at this present in ENGLAND.
THe Principal, if not the only Question, now debated by the Divine, Lawyer,
Statesman, and Swordman is, whether or no, The Reason and Judgment of the
King, be the supreme Reason and Judgment of the Kingdom in all Cases of great
doubt, and public concernment. If the Law have left all weighty and difficult
matters to the mere understanding of the King, it is all one, as if all things
were left to His mere will; and if so, then the King is absolved of all limits
and conditions. No King can be more absolute; if it be confessed, that the King
is not sole and supreme Judge.

The next Question is, Whether the King may choose His own Councillors and
Judges, at mere pleasure, or no. For if He may in time of Parliament, prefer
the Council of such Courtiers as He likes best, before the Common Council of
the Kingdom; and out of Parliament the judgment of illiterate, ungraded men,
before that of His most learned, studied, sworn Judges; all Law of confining
the King to other Reason and Judgment, then His own, is vain, and of no
effect. But if the King be by intrudement of Law, as well designed and
necessitated to that Council always which is supreme, and most public for
the time being, and restrained from any other inferior, and more private.

The next Question is, Whether the Law have allowed to the King such a latitude
of Negative voice, as to frustrate and annihilate whatsoever is adjudged by
both Houses in Parliament, or by the Judges out of Parliament. For as God and
Nature abhor vacuities, and frustraneous acts; so certainly Law, which flows
from the same Source must needs do the like. Nay, if the Kings right of
Negation be maintained in all Cases, as well such as concern public as private
Affairs, and such as concern the Life, and Fortunes, and Liberties, and
Consciences of such and such particular men, as well as those which concern His
own intradoer, or domestical Affairs, not only all Law is made frustraneous,
but utterly pernicious. For Nature must needs imprint this in us all, That a
State may be more happy by subjecting it self to the boundless Arbitrary Law
of one man's will, then to such a determinate Law as one man may obstruct and
make frustrate at pleasure, but cannot open, and make vigorous. Our present
misery shew^ us this truth too plain, for were either the Kings will admitted,
or the Judgments which the Houses have given concerning the the Militia of the
Kingdom (and other differences at this time) for mere Law, This Nation could
not be so torn, and grinded to dust in such an instant as it is.

Postscript.
LEt the Learned in the Laws now show and declare themselves; And if the Case
be uncertain, Let the Parliament interpret it; And if the Law have been
hitherto defective herein, Let that Community in its representative Court,
joined with the Nobility, which created all Law, as well that by which the
King, as that, by which every Subject holds, supply that defect. If Law be open
in its true Fountain, Let that prevent bloodshed: If Law be obstructed, and
oppressed in its Fountain, Let us open it with our blood No man's blood can be
more thriftily and wisely expended then in defense of that Court, which gave
being both to Kings, and Laws, and preserves, being, both to Kings, Laws, and
Subjects.

(...).
FINIS.

