CHRISTIANS LIBERTY TO The Lords Table, Discovered by eight Arguments, thereby
proving, that the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of our LORD, does as well
teach to Grace, as strengthen and confirm Grace, And so is common, as well to
the outward Christian as to the inward Christian: Occasioned by the contrary
doctrine, taught by a strange Minister in Woolchurch, on the 29th of June last.
By I. G. a Parishioner there.

Matthew 26. verse. 20. Now when the Even was come, Jesus sat down with the
twelve. Gal. 4. verse. 16. Am I therefore become your enemy, because I tell you
the truth? Imprimatur,

JAMES CRANFORD.



LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Robinson, and are to be sold at the three Pigeons
in Paul's Churchyard, 1645.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL JOHN ROWLES Esquire, one of the Honorable House of
COMMONS of the High Court of PARLIAMENT.
SIR,
IT is above thirty years since the Lord has brought me to be an inhabitant
of Woolchurch; And for the greattr part of this time, the providence of God
has so ordered it, that I have enjoyed your acquaintance, which has been
profitable, both to the outward and inward man, although of late, by reason of
your great and high employments for God and man, there has not been that
personal society as heretofore; yet I often see you to participate in the best
and excellent places of sound Doctrine, in the way of truth and salvation,
which with the knowledge I have of you, has often moved my heart and spirit,
to supplicate the God of heaven for you, as for my self, to whom it has
pleased God to make his Truth so known, as to make me a child of it above
twenty years since, which heavenly Principles had I so heeded and improved as
I ought, I might have been by this time a strong man in Christ Jesus. How ever,
Sir, I must confess to you, Gods mercies have been more and abundantly greater
then my own miseries; and notwithstanding mine own natural indisposition and
unaptnesse to the good and straight way of the Lord; yet he has so magnified
his good will and compassion, as thereby to make me one, though the least of
his Disciples, who therefore cannot, nay dare not, but speak the things I have
seen and learned of him, notwithstanding the Cross and persecution that attend
on the obeying and declaring the truth, a part whereof you may see, if you
please to take view of these few ensuing lines, where you may observe, that the
testifying to the abundant mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ manifested in the
Sacrament, as in the Word, even for this, many are offended and rise up against
me, and do as much as in them lies, to make the world believe, that though
they know me, yet they know me not; so as that I am seen, and not discerned:
and yet I fear not for to speak, though I care not to be known, except to you
and the whole household of faith, to whom the Lord continue his love and
goodness, which shall be ever the prayer of him, who is truly yours and theirs,

J. G.

An Introduction to the Arguments, showing the cause of their writing.
HEaring many corrupt doctrines delivered in Wool-Church by a stranger, where I
am a Parishioner, the knowledge of the truth moved me to write these eight
Arguments, below specified, thereby to vindicate Gods great Bounty and free
Grace set forth to mankind by the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of our
Lord, as well as by the Word preached. His Text was these words of the Apostle,
But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat, 1 Cor. 11. 28. affirming,
that the Apostle here by the name man, spoke only of a spiritual man; and that
the Scriptures do in no place call a natural man by the name of a man,
alleging Jer. 5. 1. to prove it, with diverse other Scriptures: and affirmed,
that natural men, all of them always, are denominated by the name of beasts,
as Serpents, 1 Cor. 15. 23.
Vipers, Wolves, Dogs, Swine, beasts after the manner of men, etc. Now to
deliver this without the due distinction the Scriptures make, is very false,
and contrary to our Lords own doctrine, Joh. 3. 5. Except a man be born again,
etc. meaning by the name man, a natural man: as also the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2. 9.
Now see his doctrine as strange to the Scriptures, as the Preacher was to me;
for it is beyond exception, that as our Lord, so his servant means by the name
man, natural men. And as the misunderstanding of the Scripture is the ground
of all error and schism; so from these premises he drew this strange
conclusion, that one in nature, and unregenerated, ought not to be admitted to
the Supper of the Lord: and because he had no plain Scripture that forbids a
natural man, which has received the faith, to believe and to be baptized,
therefore he falsely affirmed, that John the Baptist, Mat. 3. 7. forbad the
Pharisees and Sadduces to come to his baptism; and so argued from the lesser
to the greater, that if Baptism which is the lesser, ought to be denied to
impenitent men, much more the Sacrament, which is the greater, ought to be
denied natural men; and this he shamed not to affirm, although there be not
one word in the Text of John's denying the Pharisees and Sadduces, and so went
on to show many Reasons why natural men ought not to be admitted to the Lords
Table: First, says he, because a natural man cannot discern what the
Sacrament shows forth: Secondly, because all natural men are Serpents,
Vipers, Dogs, Swine, cruel and savage beasts, to whom the holy and precious
things of the Sacrament ought not to be given; for natural men, says he, are
no more capable of them, then the beasts that perish: Thirdly, because all
natural men are forbidden to come, as Christ in another case said, Mat. 5. 23,
24. If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and remembrest thy brother has
ought against thee; go first and be reconciled to thy brother, and then come,
etc. in which Reason this young Minister did not remember that our Lord here
speaks of a brother, not naming him a natural unregenerated man, neither is it
to be understood only of the Sacrament, for there we come rather to receive
then give: Fourthly, because, says he, every natural man that comes to the
Sacrament, is that man, Matthew. 22. 11, 12, 13. that had not on the wedding
garment, who therefore speechless was cast into utter darkness; which if this
be so, then all the unregenerate elect in receiving the Sacrament, are in that
case and condition, so that none of them by his reasoning shall be converted
(if they receive the Sacrament) but condemned, which is blasphemy to affirm,
and all that have heretofore received it, before regeneration, shall perish:
Fifthly, because whosoever gives the Sacrament to a wicked natural man, does
therein cast the childrens bread to Dogs: Sixthly, because the Sacrament was
ordained only to confirm Grace, and not at all for the begetting of grace: as
bread is not given to beget, but to sustain a man: Seventhly, he that comes to
the Lords Table, being unregenerate, is that fathers son, Mat. 21. 30. saying
Go, and went not. His Uses following, did aggravate his Doctrine and Reasons,
as it follows: also he did affirm, that the damned shall cry out of hell, to
such Ministers as have delivered the Sacrament to such natural men here in
their lifetime, and shall say, Thou gave me my damnation in giving me the
Sacrament; for I was blind and saw it not, dead and discerned it not, and
therefore woe be to you that have given me my eternal confusion and
destruction, with many more of these and the like strange and fond expressions
of his own vision, invented by his own brain, contrary to Gods truth; he
concluding these vanities with such a seeming confidence as no man could
contradict or gainsay, but assured himself, that every one that heard him, were
satisfied with the clear truth of this dark light, urging it on the
Congregation again and again with these or the like words.

Now I hope there is none but who are fully satisfied, whose importunities for
mistakings, where no less then an engagement to me which understood their
falsenesse, to make these opposing Grounds, presently turning them into eight
Arguments; proving thereby, that the Sacrament of the body and blood of our
Lord, ought not to be denied to any that receive the common faith and outward
Baptism, except in the case of excommunication, and in that respect the
spiritual as well as the carnal may be excluded:

1. He that preaches that the Sacrament of the Lords Table, does not as well
teach to the begetting of grace as the confirming of grace, he is ignorant of
the nature of the Sacrament, and of the Word of God; but so it was preached at
Woolchurch on the 29th of June, 1645. Ergo.

2. If by the preaching the Word, Christ crucified, be the means to beget
grace, then the visible manifestation to the eye (as well as to the ear) of
the signs if his death, are the means of begetting of grace also; But by the
preaching of the Word to the ear, Christ crucified, is manifested or set forth
for the begetting of grace, Gal. 3. 1. 1 Cor. 1. 23, 24. Therefore the visible
manifestation of the signs of Christ's death are for the bagetting of grace
also, 1 Cor. 11. 26. Matthew. 26. 28.

3. If Gods Word say, So often as you eat this bread and drink this cup, ye do
show the Lords death till he come, then the Sacrament does teach grace to be
received by Christ, as well as confirm the grace already received; but the
Apostle so says, 1 Cor. 11. 26. therefore he that teaches otherwise is
ignorant of the Scripture, and of the nature of the Sacrament, as also it is
proved, Luke 22. 19, 20. Matthew. 26. 28.

4. He that teaches, that whosoever gives the Sacrament of bread and wine to
a natural man, although he believe the Scriptures, and be baptized, does
hereby cast holy things to Dogs and pearls before Swine, such a Preacher does
not understand the command of our Lord in that place, Matthew. 7. 6. But so it
was taught in the place and time above said; Ergo.

5. Whosoever so teaches as aforesaid, does either willingly or ignorantly, or
both, testify that Christ's practice was against his commandment, which is
blasphemy so to affirm; but so it was affirmed in Woolchurch in the time and
place above said; Ergo. For he gave the bread and cup to Judas amongst the
rest of the twelve, Matthew. 26. 20. to the 30th verse, Luke 22. 14. to the 22.
verse, John 13. Mark 14. 17. to the 25. verse, and in so doing he did not cast
holy things to Dogs, nor pearls before Swine.

6. If the Scripture show to us that all that had the common or historical
faith to believe Jesus Christ come in the flesh, had admission after baptism
to the Lords Supper, and so by and through the common gifts of Gods Spirit
might examine themselves, and discern the Lords body, according to the
Apostles meaning, 1 Cor. 11. 28. then he that restrains it to the spiritual
Christian only, presumes above what is written; but at Woolchurch, the place
and time above said, the restraint was affirmed; Ergo.

7. If the Paschall Lamb to the Jews were the same that the Supper of the Lord
is to Christians, then all Christians are to have the same liberty as the
Jews, both outward and inward, carnal and spiritual, Exodus 12. 47. But the
Supper of the Lord is the same in effect as the Passover, 1 Cor. 5. 7. Heb.
11. 28. of the which the carnal Jews were to communicate as well as the
spiritual; Ergo, carnal Christians may communicate as well as spiritual
Christians.

8. He that teaches, that whosoever delivers the Sacrament to a wicked
unregenerated man, delivers to him his damnation, preaches a devilish
doctrine; for therein he condemns the Lord of life, for the Word and
Sacraments are not properly the causes of men's damnations in themselves, but
casually and accidentally; But so it was affirmed in the place and time
abovesaid, that whosoever delivers the Sacrament to a wicked unregenerate
man, delivers to him his damnation; Ergo, he that so teaches, preaches a
damnable and devilish doctrine.

These Arguments were delivered to the Preacher by the Clerk some two days
after his Sermon, and the next Lords day after Prayer in the Pulpit, he did
declare to the Congregation, that he had received diverse Arguments against the
doctrine he had taught them the Lords day before; and that they may the more
clearly be answered, says he, I will make repetition of what I delivered
before unto you verbatim, and accordingly did repeat two thirds of his Sermon,
or thereabouts: some of the said particulars he in repeating, delivered with
more caution then before, other things he wholly omitted; and when he had
finished his repetition, then he drew forth the Arguments with Answers written
to every one, as he affirmed, although indeed and in truth, not any one of them
were answered. And notwithstanding his public notice in the Pulpit, that
whosoever would, might have copies, yet my importunity these nine or ten days
together cannot procure his Answers, that I might make my Replication, thereby
to open the Scriptures that prove my Arguments: As also to show the weakness
and invalidity of his Answers, although I have promised money for the writing
thereof, and as yet he will not avouch them, notwithstanding his public
vaunting at the first; yea, my importunity was such, as that he passed his
faithful promise to me before a friend in private, that within two days after
I should have them; but I understood he was prevented by some parishioners,
that in affection toward me are dissented, wherefore I am forced to call them to
mind by my memory, which he read written to the auditory.

His Answer to my first Argument.
To the first, says he, I answer, that the Sacrament of the Lords Supper does
not teach to the begetting of faith; for that is the proper office of the Word
alone, Romans 10. 17. so then says the Apostle, Faith comes by hearing, and
hearing by the Word of God, and therefore not by the Sacrament, etc.

My Replication to his first Answer.
In my affirming that the bread and wine, the signs of the Lords Body and
Blood, do teach grace where it is not, as well as confirm grace where it is; I
do not therein deny that faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of
God, but I affirm that the same Word is also taught and preached by the
Sacrament. For the Text he alleges, does not say as he affirms, that it is
the office of the Word alone, but these are the Apostles words; so then faith
comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God. Now we must observe, that
the term faith has diverse acceptations in the Scriptures; and for the clearing
this point, I will observe but two distinctions: First, as it is referred to
God the Creator; and secondly, as it has respect to Jesus Christ the Savior;
and in both these respects the heart is as truly taught by the eye, by seeing
Gods works, as by the ear through hearing Gods Word. The first distinction is
fully proved by the Apostle, Romans 1. 19. 20. because that which may be known of
God, is manifest in them, (that is, to mankind) for God says, He has showed
it unto them, for the invisible things of him from the creation of the world,
are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his
eternal power and Godhead; so that they are without excuse: And that holy man
Job, of whom God himself testifies, that he was his servant, he was well
acquainted with this truth: Job 12. 7, 8. But ask now, says he, the beasts,
and they shall teach thee, and the fowls of the air, and they shall tell
thee; or speak unto the earth, and it shall teach thee, and the fishes of the
Sea shall declare unto thee: And again, two Apostles, Paul and Barnabas give in
evidence to this truth at Lystra, saying, Acts 14. 17. Nevertheless, he (that
is, God) left not himself without witness in that he did good, and gave us
rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and
gladness; and again, St Paul, Romans 2. 4. Or despisest thou the riches of his
goodness, and forbearance and long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness
of God leads thee to repentance, (that is) to return to God? And for the
further proof of this, the Prophet David is very ample and large, Psalm. 19. Day
unto day utters speech, and night unto night shows, that is, declares, or
preaches knowledge, there is no speech nor language where their voice is not
heard. And secondly, that faith in Jesus Christ is taught visibly by the eye,
as audibly by the ear, the Scriptures do as clearly and plainly declare also;
for thus did all the shadows under the Law visibly and openly teach and preach
Christ as the Sacraments under the Gospel; and this was the only objection of
the Nonconformists ever since King Edward the sixth his time, that none but God
could put or impose upon his Church teaching signs or ceremonies, and such
teaching signs, Sacraments or shadows was circumcision, the Paschall Lamb, and
all other ceremonies before Christ; And so says the Apostle, Col. 2. 16, 17.
Meats and drinks, Holy days and new Moons, or Sabbath days were a shadow of
things to come, but the body is of Christ; so also the Sanctuary, the gifts and
sacrifices, and the Priesthood under the Law, serve unto the example and shadow
of heavenly things, Heb. 9. And as Jesus Christ was thus visibly taught by the
eye to the heart under the Law, so he is more clearly taught, preached and set
forth by the two Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper, now under the
Gospel, which do as visibly manifest him as the Word does audibly, and as the
Rainbow in the clouds when it appears to the eye, does certainly teach the
heart Gods perpetual faithfulness in his promise, so the visible signs of
Christ's Body and Blood in the Sacrament, and are a lively ample visible Sermon
to us of Christ's death and passion, his giving himself for man's salvation, and
do teach and instruct us to grace and mercy by Jesus Christ, as truly as the
Word preached; so that now it is clear by what has been proved, that if the
visible creatures teach the same truth in their measure that the audible
creatures do, then so does also the bread and wine set apart to be received,
that Christ's death may be commemorated, and they therein declare and preach
also in their measure the word of Grace, and promise the new and living way to
life by the body of Christ: which shall be further opened by my Replication to
his Answer of the third Argument. And by the way take notice, that this my
first Argument is the same in effect that Mr. Perkins lays down in his fifth
Principle, where he makes the means to attain faith to be the Sacrament as
well as the Word and Prayer; and so also in the Directory, page 52. in these
words, And we are to give thanks to God for all means of grace, the Word and
Sacraments.

His Answer to my second Argument.
The second Argument he denied also, and gave no Answer to the first
Scripture, Gal. 3. 1. but to the second Text, 1 Cor. 1. 23, 24. where the
Apostle says, We preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a stumbling block,
and unto the Greeks foolishness, but to them that are called of God, both
Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God; in which
words, says he, the Apostle does not prove that Christ crucified does convert
Jews and Greeks, but that he is to one a stumbling block, and to the other
foolishness, but in the next verse, to them that are called of God, both Jews
and Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God; so that he
affirmed this Scripture is nothing at all to my Argument, thus or to this
effect, as my memory serves me was his Answer.

My Reply to his second Answer.
A man can never preach truly, that does not distinguish of terms that differ
rightly, for in these two verses, the Apostle speaks of Jews and Greeks in a
twofold notion, that is, of both nations, of such as were cast away and
reprobate; as also of such in both nations as were ordained and elected to
eternal life; to the first the preaching of Christ crucified, proved through
their own wickedness and opposing the truth, to the one nation foolishnes, to
the other people a stumbling block, which notwithstanding the same doctrine to
the elected part of both nations through Gods grace working their hearts to
receive it, became to them the power of God, and the wisdom of God to their
salvations: And although the elect are here denominated the called of God, they
are so declared, because the word of grace preaching Christ crucified had
effectually wrought on them and called them: And so also should from time to
time call all others, of all nations, that are of the election of grace; so
that the Scripture is full and pertinent to prove the Argument, as also the
other Scripture, Gal. 3. 1. of which he made no mention at all, as my memory
serves me, although thereby the Apostle proves plainly to the Galatians, that
the truth was effectually taught to them, by having Jesus Christ crucified
evidently set forth before their eyes amongst them, whereby the very strength
of the Argument is proved, that as the Word of Christ crucified spoken to the
ear teaches, or is a means to work grace; so also is the Sacrament of bread
and wine, that does teach, preach or manifest the same Christ crucified to the
eye, by which the heart is informed as by the ear.

His Answer to the third Argument.
To this he answered negatively also; and as I remember, found fault with the
translation of the Scripture alleged by me for the proof of my Argument, and
said, the words ye do show the Lords death, till etc. is not truly translated,
for it should be, show ye, etc.

My Reply to his third Answer.
This man's answer to this Scripture, is like the answer that an Arrian made me
not long ago, to another Scripture I alleged against his blasphemous position
of Arrianisme, he maintaining that Christ was a mere man, and that to affirm a
Trinity in Unity of the Godhead, was nonsense and ridiculous, and contrary to
reason, nature, learning and Scripture: Will you be judged by Scripture? said
I, yes said he: whereupon I demanded what he thought of 1 John 5. 7. There are
three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost,
and these three are one, here said I the Scripture affirms the Trinity in
Unity. Oh, Sir, said he, the Text it not truly translated, for the word in the
original is, they do agree in one: I pray, said I, what other acceptance has
the word, or how can you express it otherwise from the original; it is, said
he, as truly to be translated, they are one, as they agree in one: then said I,
your own mouth is witness, for by your own words you have confirmed the Text;
so I say to this Linguist, that in the Margin, show ye, etc. is the same in
the Text, ye do show, etc. And therefore it is full for the same purpose for
which I brought it, and plainly proves, that so often as the Supper of the Lord
is celebrated, the death of Christ thereby is manifested, preached, declared,
and showed forth to the communicants, the beholders and participaters of the
bread and wine the signs of the Lords Body and Blood; and this the Scriptures
do clearly and apparently teach and set forth to us, if you consider the terms
the Holy Ghost uses for that very end and purpose; as that of our Lord which I
alleged for the proof of my Argument, Luke 22. 19, 20. This is my body which
was given for you, this do in remembrance of me; also this cup is the new
Testament in my blood which is shed for you; where by body, we are to
understand the bread that signifies his Body; And so by cup, signifying his
Blood, and in obeying his command to eat the bread, and to drink of the cup,
the end and intent of eating and drinking, is to commemorate his death and
passion, and so often as we do so eat and drink, we participate of that which
manifests to us the new Covenant, which is the only means that God has
ordained for salvation, proved to us in these words, This cup is the new
Testament in my blood which was shed for you, etc. And by the apt lively
visible signs to the eye of bread and wine is preached to us the new and
living way which he has new made and consecrated for us through the veil,
that is to say, his flesh, Heb. 10. 20. yea, as apparently as it is preached
and made known to the ears by words; and as St. Luke, so St. Matthew has it
thus, This is my body, etc. this is my blood of the new Testament, etc. giving
to the signs the very name of his body and blood, that whosoever reads or
sees the signs, may be thereby taught the benefit of Christ's death, thereby
purchasing for mankind repentance and remission of sins, which as it is in
his name preached to the ears by the word, so manifested to the eyes by broken
bread and powered out wine, for the eye and ear are equal in-lets to the heart;
so that it is clearly proved, that the Sacrament of the Supper of the Lord does
as truly teach grace where it is not, as it does confirm it where it is.

His Answer to my fourth Argument.
To the fourth Argument, he says, the passage in his Sermon concerning Matthew.
7. 5. was but by way of allusion to that Scripture.

My Reply to his fourth Answer.
He did so allude to that Scripture, as that he confidently affirmed that all
wicked and unregenerated men were Dogs and Swine, and whosoever did administer
the Sacrament to such, did therein cast holy things to Dogs, and pearls before
Swine; therefore I say still, that he that so teaches, directly orindirectly,
positively or consequently, such a Preacher does not understand the command of
our Lord in Matthew. 7. 5. neither did the Preacher by his seeming evasion,
answer the Argument, but it stands still in every part of its strength against
him; for in the Scriptures all natural men are not called Dogs and Swine, but
such as have been enlightened, and have been made partakers of the Holy Ghost
in its common gifts, and having thereby received the truth in some measure and
efficacy, to be outwardly cleansed from the pollution of the world, through
the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, and yet turn from the holy commandment
given unto them, and become ensnared, entangled, and overcome again with the
pollution from which they were washed, and again lick up the filth they had
vomited, these, and such as these, are Swine that wallow in the mire again, and
Dogs that return to their vomit, 2 Pet. 2. 22. Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6. who, as they
discover themselves, the way of censure and excommunication is to be used with
them.

His Answer to my fifth Argument.
Against my fifth Argument, be peremptorily affirmed, that Judas was not with
the twelve when the Sacrament was instituted and administered; and first, for
the proof thereof, if my memory fail me not, he told the Congregation, that the
translators of the Bible had not placed the 21. verse of the 22. chapter of
Luke in the right place, but they ought to have brought in those words of that
verse next after the 16. verse. And who affirmed that so it was in the
original, the Greek Testament: secondly, he affirms that our Lords giving
Judas the sop, he gave him part of the Passover, Joh. 13. 30. who, as soon as
he received it he went away, and so parted from the twelve before the
Sacrament was instituted.

My Reply to his fifth Answer.
Now, in stead of answering my Argument, he has wronged the Scriptures, and
abused the translators of the Bible; for such as have good skill in the Greek,
say, that these words, and behold the hand of him that betrayeth me is on the
table with me, in the Greek copy, is the 21. verse, and follows after the
institution and administration of the Sacrament, as it does in our English
translation. And that Judas was amongst the Apostles, and had equal
participation with the rest in the Passover and Supper of our Lord, this is
probable by the testimony of all the Evangelists, beginning with Matthew, and
so proceed according to the order of the Scripture, Matthew. 26. 20. Now when
even was come, he sat down with the twelve, among whom was Judas the traitor,
verse. 21. 23. 25. and 26. who, after Christ had blessed the bread, he gave it
to the Disciples, and verse. 27. After he had given thanks, he gave the cup unto
them, saying, drink ye all of it, excepting none, no not Judas: And St. Marks
testimony is as clear as this, Mark 14. 17. And in the evening, says he, he
came with the twelve, and as they sat and did eat, verse. 18. Jesus said,
Verily I say unto you, one of you that eats with me shall betray me, that
was Judas Iscariot. And as they did eat, verse. 22: that is, Christ and his
twelve Apostles, Jesus took bread and blessed, and brake it, and gave it to
them, that is, to the twelve, and said, Take, eat, etc. And he took the cup,
verse. 23. and wheu he had given thanks, he gave it to them, and they all
drunk of it, says the Text. Now who were they all but the twelve that sat
down with him? and thus clear is St. Lukes witness also, Luke 22. 14. And when
the hour was come, says he, he sat down, and the twelve Apostles with him.
Observe, here is Judas amongst the rest, and the Lord bids them, deliver the
cup amongst themselves, verse. 17. there is Judas still, and in verse. 19. He
took bread, and gave thanks, and brake it, and gave unto them, saying, This is
my body which is given for you, do this in remembrance of me, there was Judas
still: and in the 21. verse. our Lord himself affirms it certainly, Behold,
says he, the hand of him that betrayeth me is with me on the table: so that
you see there cannot possibly be fuller nor plainer words expressed then these
instanced, which prove Judas all this while with the twelve, both at the
Passover and at the Sacrament. And lastly, St. John's witness is as clear as
the rest, if you compare them together, even all the four Evangelists; for
although John does not nominate the institution of the Lords Supper, yet it is
plainly included in the four first verses of the 13. Chapter, in these words,
And supper being ended, which words briefly contain all the particulars that
the other three Evangelists at large set forth, which is, that at the Supper of
the Passover, our Lord instituted the Sacrament, the Supper of his Passion;
yea, both of them before Supper was ended; and therefore it is said in the 4.
verse. he rises from supper, that is, our Lord, and none else, and he laid
aside his garment and took a towell, etc. and with water washed his Disciples
feet, amongst whom he washed Judas with the rest, therefore he said, verse. 10.
ye are clean, but not all, verse. 11. for he knew who should betray him, and
therefore he said, ye are not all clean; so after he had washed their feet,
says the Text, and taken his gorments which he had put off, when he did rise
from them, and was set down again, that is with the twelve that had not risen
from the table, but sat still all the while he washed them, and after he was
sat down again, he exhorted them to humility and brotherly love; and that they
should do one to another as he had done to them; and that his example should
be their pattern, saying, If ye know these things, happy are ye if you do
them, I speak not to you all, I know whom I have chosen; and then tells them of
a Prophecy in the 41. Psalm, that one that did eat bread with him, should
lift up his heel against him, that is, betray him. And the Apostles hearing it
was one of them, (here is Judas amongst them still) Peter beckned to John, to
ask the Lord who, or which of them it should be, Jesus answered, verse. 26. he
it is, to whom I shall give a sop or a morsel, as it is in the margin, and he
gave it to Judas Iscariot, the son of Simon, and after the sop Satan entered
into him. Now that we may see the true nature and consequence of these
premises, and the consent of John with the rest of the Evangelists, we must
remember, that Matthew, Mark and Luke, all of them testify, that before the
Passover, Judas went to the chief Priests, and communed with them how he might
betray the Lord into their hands, and agreed with them for thirty pieces of
silver; so that Judas from that time sought his opportunity, says Matthew,
chap. 26. 16. and how he might conveniently do it, says Mark, chap. 14. 11.
and he promised, says St. Luke chap. 22. 6. to betray him cunningly and
without tumult, in the peoples absence; therefore says S. John, chap. 13. 2.
supper being ended, the Devil now put into the heart of Judas to perform and
make good his wicked bargain for his lamentable and cursed wages, but as yet it
was a little too soon for the opportunity; and therefore our Lord rises from
them, but there is no mention of their rising, and he washes them all, yet Judas
is still unclean, though washed: and our Lord sits down with them again, and
now the time, the convenience, void of multitude, it being night, and
opportunity and all agree, and being troubled in spirit, our Lord reveals the
treason to the twelve, and upon their desire to know which of them it should
be, he declares it by giving him a sop or a morsel, for the fragments were
not as yet taken away; and so soon as Judas had received it, the Devil then
moves him to finish the treason, so long before purposed and agitated, and then
quickly proceeds to execution.

I have been the larger in this Replication, because I know many, of whom I
dare not but judge well of, that are of opinion, that Judas was not with the
twelve at the institution of the Supper of the Lord, and yet they all
acknowledge, that he ate the Passover with them, which makes me the more
wonder at their exception, because the Passover shadowed out the same body and
blood that the bread and wine does show forth, as in my Reply to his seventh
Answer, shall be more clearly manifested; so then notwithstanding all you have
said in your seeming Answer, the Argument stands in force against you in all
its parts, that whosoever affirms that they that give the Sacrament to wicked
unregenerate men, casts holy things to Dogs, and pearls before Swine, does in
so saying, either willingly or ignorantly, or both, testify that Christ's
practice in the case of Judas, was against his commandment in Matthew. 7. 5.
which is blasphemy so to affirm, for our Lord did give the bread and cup to
Judas amongst the rest, as before is more then probable; and in so doing, he
did not cast holy things to Dogs, nor pearls before Swine. Now it is very
true, the ignorant and scandalous are not fit to receive, yet there is no rule
from God or man that forbids them, but the authority given to the Church to
excommunicate them; yet however, they ought daily to be exhorted and admonished
to repentance and faith.

His Answer to my sixth Argument.
I answer, says he, the first part of his Argument is not proved; and
therefore my denying it is my answering it. To the second part of his Argument,
I answer, says he, that I have proved in the beginning of my Sermon, that a
man in Scripture, is always under that name, to be understood a spiritual
man; so that the Scripture he alleges, is not to be understood of a natural
man, but of a regenerated spiritual man: And so as a natural man cannot
discern the things of God, neither can he discern the Lords body, and
therefore ought not to be admited to the Lords Table; and so I have fully
answered his sixth Argument, says he, if my memory fail me not in the
repetition, say I.

My Reply to his sixth Answer.
To the first part of the Answer, I reply that I had thought he had so well
known the Scriptures, that when a man had spoke Scripture, it had been as good
a proof as to have quoted the Text; and because the want of quoting the Text is
the cause, say you, the Argument is not proved, therefore read and examine the
Scriptures, and then tell me if it be not proved: Simon Magus also believed,
and was baptized, Acts 8. 13. who continned with Philip in the communion of all
common ordinances; as the Word, Sacraments, Prayer, and the laying on of hands,
wondering to behold the miracles and signs which were done, verse. 18. whose
impenitent natural estate the Apostle Peter does declare notwithstanding,
verse. 21. And so it was with Demas, Col. 4. 14. and Philemon verse. 24. which
Text shows his like fellowship and communion with Gods people in the common
ordinances, notwithstanding in the 2 Timothy 4. 10. S. Paul shows his carnality
and wickedness: and also S. John unmasks a great man, in high place in the
Church, Diotrephes by name, 3 John verse. 9. and as he loved, so he had
preeminence, who was so wicked, that he would not receive the Apostles of
Christ, nor the brethren, and hindered and forbad them that would, and
excommunicated them through malice; here is a false Christian in great place and
authority in the Church, even a carnal natural man, and a prater against the
Saints, the best of Gods people, and yet for all this, not denied to partake at
the Lords Table; for he was the man that denied others, in such a case and
condition were the false Apostles, 2 Cor. 11. 13. Rev. 2. 2. false Prophets, 1
John 4. 1. false Teachers, 2 Pet. 2. 1. and false brethren, 2 Cor. 11. 26. Gal.
2. 4. and the Apostles, the Prophets, the Teachers, the Brethren, although
false, yet all in common communion and fellowship in the Word, Sacraments and
Prayer, etc. So that now you see the first part of the Argument proved, which
you would not see before. To the second part of his Answer I reply, and as it
consists of two parts, so the Gentleman is mistaken in both. And first for
the name man, he says that in the Scriptures, it is only to be understood of a
spiritual man, which to affirm, is fond and ridiculous, as before in the
Introduction I have showed, and now more largely shall be cleared, as Job 14.
1. A man that is born of a woman is of few days, and full of trouble, where
Job means by the name man, every natural man, as he is born into the world:
and so says Eliphas the Temanite, Job 15. 14. What is man that he should be
clean, and he that is born of a woman, that he should be righteous? And again,
Job 5. 7. Man is born to trouble, or labor, as the sparks fly upwards; as also
Eccles. 7. 29. God has made man upright, but he (that is man) has found many
inventions, th^se and many other Scriptures make it clear, that natural men,
as they are born of their mothers into the world, are called men, and therefore
the ground and foundation of his doctrine is false, as the doctrine is false:
And so likewise I shall prove in the second place, that such a general or
unregenerate believing man, may discern ordinary bread and wine that is
ordained to feed and sustain our natures, from the Sacrament of bread and wine
that are signs of Christ's body and blood the only spiritual food of our
souls, and so communicate of them also in this different respect whereunto
they are appointed; and to this doctrine the Apostle points in these words, 1
Cor. 11. 22. What have ye not houses to eat and drink in? that is, for your
ordinary food, for you shame the Church of God, to come to the Table of the
Lord to eat to gluttony, and to drink to drunkenness, What shall I say to you?
says the Apostle, for this I must reprove ye: for, says he, the Lord in the
same night he was betrayed, instituted the Sacrament of bread and wine, the
bread to signify his body, the wine his blood, which body was broken, and
blood shed, for you, that is, for man's salvation, verse. 22, 24, 25. And our
communicating in these, shows forth the Lords death, and keeps it continually
in our remembrance; and therefore the bread and wine ought to be so known, as
to discern thereby the body of the Lord, to do it in remembrance of Christ, and
thereby to show forth his death, and whosoever does not so communicate, is
condemned in his own conscience; for every man, natural and spiritual, are
capable of this knowledge, of this discerning; and in this respect and
distinction, (the Lords Table differing from ordinary food,) may all natural
believing men receive it, even the elect before regeneration, as others, having
been baptized. And thus to know and distinguish, is to discern the Lords body
in one sense, as to eat Christ's flesh, and drink his blood by justifying faith
is in a more excellent and spiritual sense; so that by this distinction, his
answer is manifested to be no answer, and my Argument not at all disabled, for
this sense is not strained, but true and proper.

His Answer to my seventh Argument.
It was to this purpose, that he made two exceptions against this Argument:
First against the conclusion, that he never heard before of a carnal
Christian; for, says he, the Apostle in Romans 2. 28, 29. speaks of a carnal
Jew under the Law, and of a spiritual Jew under the Gospel, but never, says
he, have I heard before of a carnal Christian. And in the second place he
said, that by his Argument, he would have all men admitted to the Sacrament,
all without exception, fools, idiots, and madmen; nay, little children and
all, for children were admitted to the Passover by the place he alleges,
says he, Exodus 12. 47. therefore I pray behold the weakness and silliness of
this Argument; these, or the like, were his words.

My Reply to his seventh Answer.
First, for your exception against the term carnal Christian, I wonder you
should be so ignorant of the Scripture, and yet take upon you to be a Teacher,
for to be carnal, is to be in the flesh; and does not the Apostle in one word
resolve the question, Gal. 4. 29. But as he that was born after the flesh
persecuted him that was born after the spirit; even so is it now, that is, in
the Apostles time, and ever since also, as in all the seven Churches of Asia,
and in the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 3. 3. Are ye not carnal, says the
Apostle? and also amongst us at this time, for one spiritual Christian, there
is ninety nine carnal, and in the flesh; and for you to expound Romans 2. 28. to
be a carnal Jew under the Law, and verse. 29. to be a spiritual Jew under the
Gospel, you have thereby written a monument of your ignorance; for look back to
the 14, 15, 26. and 27. verses, and they will show you the meaning; but those
truths are beyond your capacity. You also say, I argue weakly and ignorantly,
to argue from the liberty of the Passover to the liberty of the Lords Supper;
for you say, if that be so, then fools and idiots, madmen and children may be
admitted, but this is your simple and weak inference, and not mine; for read
again, and you shall see that mine was this; if carnal men as well as spiritual
men were admitted to the Passover, then carnal men as well as spiritual
might be admitted to the Sacrament, and the reason is, because they are both
signs of the same substance, agreeing with the Apostles doctrine, They did all
eat the same spiritual meat, and drink^ the same spiritual drink, and that
rock was Christ, to them under their shadows, 1 Cor. 10. 3, 4. and so it is
Christ to us under our Sacraments, 1 Cor. 10. 16. 17. and this St. Paul
preaches for truth, 1 Cor. 5. 7. it being the very substance of my argument,
Christ our Passover is crucified, or slain for us, says the Apostle, of whom
bread and wine are signs under the Gospel, as the Paschall Lamb did shadow
forth under the Law the same Christ. And this Argument you have in no sense
answered at all; and therefore it stands still, proving that carnal Christians
as well as spiritual, may communicate in the Supper of the Lord.

His Answer to my eighth Argument.
This Argument he seemed to justify, and he said, he did not intend he
shoud be so understood, that whosoever delivered the Sacrament to an
unregenerated man, delivered unto him thereby his damnation; for the Sacrament
was not so in it self, but by reason of man's sin, casually or accidentally it
might prove so, agreeing and making use of my own expressions in the same
Argument.

My Reply to his eighth Answer.
Let all reasonable men judge, whether my Argument be not a true and just
consequence from his doctrine, he affirming, that the damned shall cry out of
hell to such Ministers that in their lifetime gave them the Sacrament, and
say, in giving them it, you gave me my damnation, etc. wherefore woe be to you
in giving me my confusion and destruction, etc. Wherefore I advise you
hereafter, to consider what you should say before you speak, and let your
tongue be in your heart, and not your heart in your tongue; for, a Scribe
instructed unto the Kingdom of God, is like a good householder, that brings
forth of his treasury things new and old: And the Messengers of the Lord, the
Ministers of Christ, speak not their own minds, but the mind of God, and of
Christ, as they have received it from above, who are, as the Apostle says,
like good workmen, and need not be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth;
for as the Sacraments, if they be not received for the better, but for the
worse, through our own wickedness and disobedience, will aggravate and increase
our judgment and condemnation, so of the like nature is the Word also, which
is the chiefest means to beget or attain to grace; the Word preached it self,
through the disobedience of such as hear it, proves the savor of death, as it
is the savor of life to them that believe and obey it, 2 Cor. 2. 15, 16.

Now, when he had read all my arguments, and his seeming Answers to them, then
he told the people, that he hoped now by this time they had seen, that as
this Sophister had charged him with ignorance and false doctrine, so he did
hope they all saw he had by his answers proved me both ignorant and false in
my Arguments, and told the people, as before I have intimated, if any man
pleased for their further satisfaction, they should have copies of them,
whereupon some dissenting neighbors, not well affected to me, nor well
acquainted with the truth, did cause a note to be put up to him by the Clerk,
to this effect, That some of the Congregation desired him to name the man
publicly, to which he answered at the first sight thereof, I am, said he,
entreated to do that which I would not willingly do, for it is not an evil
thing in any man to make objections but honorable, but presently he audibly
declared my name, saying, he is a man whom I know not, whereupon, many that
wanted both charity and understanding, laughed and whispered together,
manifesting contempt and scorn by nodding their heads, and by many other
dumb-shews, breaking out afterward into words, as these and the like words,
that now he was fully answered, and his folly discovered, some saying, he
deserves to be whipped, others, that I deserved to be set in the stocks, others,
that I meddled with that which I had nothing to do withal, they not knowing
the Apostles commandment, As every man has received the gift, even so minister
the same one to another, as good stewards of the manifold grace of God, 1 Pet.
4. 10. And one of them to a friend of mine, said, Is this your friend that you
have spoken so much and so well of? now you see him discovered to be weak and
simple, and the like: another said, he is a fool, to meddle with that he
understands not; for, says he, he has not the tongues, and without them it is
impossible he should understand the Scriptures: this man, although an Elder,
did not remember, that the Apostle says, To one is given the gift of
Prophecy, to another the gift of Tongues by the same Spirit, 1 Cor. 12. 10,
11. Another said, I was an enemy to all goodness, and threatened me, I should
answer it before Authority; so I heard, and have born the defamings of many,
amongst which some were my familiars. And between the Church and my house, one
told me, Now you are met withal, you are repayd now, to whom I answered,
according to the old Proverb, one tale is good till another is heard; and the
Scripture says, said I, he that is first in his cause seems just: which
opprobrious behaviors and reproachful expressious I have born with patience,
both in the time of the assembly, and ever since, and so will continue, without
opening my mouth against them, and conclude with an exhortation to Ministers
and people, concerning the receiving the Communion.

For, although there be no rule in Scripture, that gives any one particular
Minister order to restrain any from the Lords Table that believe and are
baptized, except the authority given to the Church in case of excommunication,
as at first is signified; yet the Scriptures do plentifully testify, that
faithful Minsters ought to watch over the flock of Christ, to teach, instruct
and admonish the people, to learn, know and understand the meaning of all Gods
ordinances, and instructed in our own estates and conditions, as John the
Baptist exhorted the Parisees and Sadduces, Mat. 3. 7. and that except we be
betterred by them, that which is ordained for our eternal life, will be found
to be to our eternal death; and therefore Ministers ought to be apt to teach
upon all occasions, in season and out of season, to show and open to the
Congregation, what Prayer is in it self, and that the people ought to join
their affections to the plain truth, he should pronounce to God in his own and
the peoples behalf: so likewise that the Scriptures and truths opened and
discovered by them, is no less then the Word of God that shall judge us at the
last day; and therefore, that all attention should be given to it with fear
and trembling, and that the end of our hearing should be to know and obey it:
so also as touching the Sacraments, that of Baptismes to declare the doctrine
of Baptismes, which the Scriptures clearly teach and distinguish of; so also
the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of our Lord, that for as much as it is Gods
great mercy and goodness to give unto us those visible signs of his body and
blood, which are living representations of his death and passion, and that as
he is the propitiation of the sins of the elect of God, called and justified,
whose hearts are purified by faith in his blood, who thereby eat his flesh and
drink his blood spiritually, and so have eternal life in them: So also Gods
Word teaches us, that his blood is the propitiation of the sins of the whole
world, 1 John 2. 2. And therefore as every natural man renders their
salvation, so they are to examine themselves, and prepare their hearts by
repentance, so to come to the Sacrament, as to find Jesus Christ to become
their spiritual life, as he is life and food both, to such as are regenerated;
so that all and every man's coming to Gods Ordinances may be endeavored to be
for the better, and not for the worse: and also Ministers ought to have
compassionate affections toward the people, even as a Nurse toward the Babe
on her breast, and as a tender mother toward the child of her womb, and in
all their ways seek them, and not theirs, so that all bitterness and pride be
avoided, and that the Congregation may see, that they sincerely seek the
salvation of the people; and also the people must know, that holy and faithful
teachers ought to be had in double honor, both by countenance and maintenance,
that the glory of God, and man's salvation be promoted; and thus and so
admonishes he that is the Lords and thine in him.

J. G.

The Prophets prophecy falsely, and the Priests bear rule by their means, and
my people love to have it so, says the Lord, Jer. 5. 31.
FINIS.

