A right Use made by a Stander by at the two DISPUTATIONS at Great Allhollowes;
between Mr. Goodwin and Mr. Symson, the 14. of January and 11. of February
1649. Concerning the points of General Redemption, and inevitable damnation
immediately from God alone.
FOr any man to affirm, as then and there with great boldness it was avowed,
that God from all Eternity has damned Men personally, without having any eye
to their own wicked and ungodly resistance and opposition of his grace, mercy,
and goodness, preached unto them as the means of their salvation. I say,
whosoever it is that does thus assert and maintain, does herein blaspheme God,
and make him the Author of sin, which is impudent impiety; for if God
originally primarily, and merely of himself does destinate a man to damnation,
then he does destinate that man to the cause as well as to the effect, which is
to destinate a man to sin, the wages or reward of which is damnation, the
effect which that cause produces, the means that brings about that end. And
this gross error was afterward again in the same place preached with no
less confidence then before, and undertaken to be proved by Pro. 16. 4. and
Jude ver. 4. Which Scriptures rightly understood, disprove what he affirmed;
for God made man perfect, but man has made himself wicked. And
notwithstanding the means and remedy provided and preached to him on Gods part,
yet this wicked and ungodly man turns this remedy, this grace and mercy of God
into lasciviousness, opposing the light and life offered to him in Gods great
pity and compassion; which contempt and refusal of it proves his
condemnation; An^ this is the condemnation to all that perish, Joh. 3. 19.

Now the Lord to whom all things are present in regard he is omniscient and
omnipresent, and infinite in these, as also in all other his attributes, so
that with him one thing is not so before, nor after one another as it is with
us: So, I say, God of old, or before he made man, saw that although he made him
good, as there is nothing but good that he makes, yet notwithstanding God saw
he would corrupt himself* although by his Creation the most excellentest of
all other creatures, which God pitying in his misery above all the rest of his
creatures, provides a remedy for the cure of his malady, which means of
recovery, should not only enlighten Adam, but all others that should come of
him, which were then in his loins when the promise was made. And as the
receiving thereof should be salvation, so the refusing, denial, and contempt
should be damnation to each one respectively. And Gods foresight of man's wicked
opposition and resistance of the means of his recovery preached unto him, being
so dearly purchased and marvellously brought about by the death of his Son.
Man's contempt thereof, I say, moves and constraines God in his justice to
ordain or appoint him to destruction, as a due reward of his own deserving:
As it is written; Thy destruction is of thy self, Hos. 13. 9.

Now this being the estate and condition of all mankind one or other, and God
foreseeing the spoil of his holy creation of mankind, and the general
opposition of the remedy provided, even his grace, light, life, and salvation;
does also of old of his own good will and pleasure, ordain, elect, and choose
a cert^in number from amongst the rest of mankind, who in their several
life-times he does call effectually to repentance and remission of sins, that
they may be justified and made his children, the heirs of glory and salvation,
according to the Scriptures. And so in his Elect prevents by his abundant
goodness that opposition and resistance of his illuminating grace, which as
before is said, to be the condemnation of all that perish. Now as there was
much ignorance manifested both in the election and reprobation of God in his
decrees and purposes touching all mankind; so there was also declared
exceeding great weakness and ignorance of the way and manner how almighty God
preaches, communicates, and conveyeth this means of mercy and recovery to all
mankind; which rightly discovered might have cleared God, both in his justice
and mercy, both which then and there was exceedingly obscured, which thanks be
to God, the Scriptures have manifestly published; wherefore be it known to the
Disputants, and to all the world, that the Lord has ordained three books or
ways of discovery of the means of Man's salvation: The first and principal is
the Word of God, through the Ministry of Gods faithful servants and
Messengers: and this way and means of discovery is beyond all question or
objection: the second book or means is by the preaching of the creatures; of
which many make question: the third is by secret dictate of conscience, of
which speaking or preaching most are doubtful: in all these three
dispensations, observe two differing Administrations; the one sensible,
natural, or literal; the other, divine, heavenly, and spiritual; hereby
extending and reaching to all sorts and degrees of mankind whatsoever, that
part of mankind that enjoys the incomparable happiness of the light of the
Scriptures; and that part of mankind that has not the Scriptures, yet has
the blessed and happy sound, the voice and the use of the creatures; And
lastly, that part of mankind that are neither capable to be taught by the
Scriptures, nor by the creatures, they wanting the principles of reason and
understanding; and yet in some degree have sense, which are all sorts of
Infants.

And first I will prove by the Scriptures, that all mankind in general are
taught and instructed in the means of salvation: And secondly, I will show the
various manner of the preaching thereof. First, John the Apostle is clear in
his witness, Joh. 1. 9. declaring that Christ is the true light that
inlightens every man that comes into the world, if every one, then all that
have the book of the Scriptures, and all other that have but the book of the
Creatures; and the Children or infants of both these parts of the world or
mankind, because it is said, All that comes, etc. That is, every one whether
by creation or birth, that comes into the world. Also observe the term given
to this grace and truth that comes by Jesus Christ, it is called light, and
expounded in the fourth verse, to be the life and light of men. it is also in
other Scriptures called the promise; the new Covenant; the glad tidings of
salvation; the Gospel; St. Peter calls it the Word speaking peace by Jesus
Christ, Act. 10. and St. Paul; The word of faith, Romans 10. Which is so
home-taught to all and every one. And it is so nigh to each man without
exception, that it is said to be even in the mouth, and in the heart of all;
for there is no difference between the Jew and the Greek; that is, in this
respect of showing mercy or providing a way of recovery for all mankind, for
the same Lord over all, is rich unto all. And although the Apostle in the 16.
verse, does affirm, that all have not obeyed the Gospel, yet in the 18. verse
he demands in the Negative and affirms in the Affirmative, that they have all
heard, even that word of grace, ver. 17. By which, spiritual hearing and
receiving to life is attained to, through which our faith or assurance of
justification is wrought. And in those words of his, But I say, have they not
heard? His meaning is by the word they, all the whole world of disobeyers and
opposers, as well as the receivers and effectual believers; as appears by his
own answer with the testimony of Moses and Isaiah. First proving that all that
had not the Scriptures, that they have heard. And then all those that have had
the Scriptures, that they have heard also. And first with his own testimony he
joins the Prophet David's affirmatively; Yes verily their sound went into all
the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world. And then with Moses he
shows that the effect of the word of grace was as truly wrought in some of
them that had not the Scriptures, which in comparison of the Jews were a
foolish Nation, and not a people; As in some of his people that enjoyed his
Word and O^dinances. And wi^h Isaiah he says* Those that sought him not* and
such people as were not ^^^^d by his Name they found him. And so Luke
^estifies* Act. 17. 28. E^^n they that ^ad so dark a light that the way is
rather f^lt out by the hand ^h^^ seen with the eye, they, even such found the
Lord to be their God; when ^^ many of the Jews that had the Sun shine of his
Word and Ordinances found him, no^ because they blinded their eyes, and
^a^dened their hear^^* as the Apostle affi^me^ the Prophets testimony against
them, v^^. 21. But to Israel he says, mark, he spoke before of the Gentiles
such as had not the Scriptures and Ministry of men, but now to those to whom he
sent his Prophets, and yet one and all of them complain; All the day long have
we^ stretched forth o^r hands to a dis^bedient and gain saying people. And
here see plainly the Apostles and Prophets clear evidence, that God has not
left himself without witness of his grace vouchsafed to all mankind^, so that
all are enlightened, taught, and have heard the ligh^, the way* and means of
salvation the Gospel the word of faith. And as i^ is clearly proved to be
preached to all, that i^, to every one, and all mankind in particular: so also
the dive^^ manners and ways how it is preached in both administrations, shall
be as clearly showed likewise. And first that God^ word is a way and means for
the preaching, conveying, and manifesting the grace of God for man's recovery
and salvation, is without question. Search the Scriptures, says our Lord
himself, for they are they th^^ testify of me; that i^, bear witness of
him. And that this dispensation by God^ word works a differing administration,
one t^xt will p^o^^ plainly, ^ Cor. 2. 15, 16. For ^ee, says the Apostle, that
is the fa^thfull dispencer^ of the Word, are a sweet savor of life to them
that a^e s^ved, and ^^ them that parish, to the one the savor of death unto
death, and to the other the ^avour of life unto life. And this will be confessed
by all; but how the dispensation of the Gospel by the preaching of the
creatures, works the like d^ff^r^nt administration, that i^ the great question.
The truth of this will plainly b^ manifested two waye^. First, by
Scripture-evidence; and secondly, by Scriptur^presidents: And first for the
evidence of Scripture, the Apostle is clear for it, Romans 2. 14. For when the
Gentiles do^ by nature the things contained i^ the Law, these having not the
Law, or Scriptures, are a Law unto themselves* which show the work of the Law
written in their ^^a^^^; ^o^ not the (...) of the Law are justified before God
but the do^rs: all h^r^* all ^r^ taught as before is proved* ye^ only the
obeyet^ are justified; therefore says the Apostle, ver. 2^. I^ the
uncircumcision, that i^* ^^ ^ha^ h^th not the book^ of Scriptures, nor divine
ordinances, if he keep the righteousness of the Law, shall not his
uncircumcision be counted for Circumcision, that is, he shall be so truly, even
the regenerate, chosen, and sanctified child of God in the estate of
salvation, the child of the Covenant; for he is not a Jew, (that is, a child
of God) that is one outwardly, neither is that Circumcision that is outward in
the flesh, but he is a Jew that is one inwardly, he is the true Israelite; for
Circumcision is that of the heart in the Spirit, and not in the Letter, whose
praise is not of men but of God.

The knowledge of this truth that God works effectually to salvation by the
preaching of the creatures, makes the Prophet David and the Apostle Paul cry
out with one voice, Psalm. 19. and Romans 10. Day unto day teaches knowledge, and
night unto night utters wisdom; there is no speech nor language where their
voice is not heard: which voice they both affirm to preach and declare Gods
perfect Law or Covenant, that converteth souls: Now no Covenant of God
converts souls, but the Gospel, the word of promise, none but that gives
wisdom, or makes wise; that pure statute only inlightens the eyes, and
turns the heart from all evil to the fear of the Lord, even the ingrafted
word that endures for ever; for it is the same promise, grace, Gospel, and
means of salvation preached by the creatures, as is preached by the Scriptures;
and the same Spirit of God that works by the one, works by the other: the
Prophets and Apostles they call for repentance; and so does Gods works also,
Romans 2. 4. And this is the first part of the Gospel or promise; and the same
Spirit gives it and works it by the means of both. Again the Spirit of God by
the Ministry of his faithful servants, comforts and binds up the
brokenhearted; and so does the Spirit of God also in the comforting operations
of the voices of his creatures refresh and consolate the spiritual mourner;
the Spirit witnesses with our spirits that are under Gods servants Ministry,
that we are the children of God; even so the same Spirit witnesses to such as
are under Gods works, dispensation, that the God thereof is become their God;
for so it is to be a true Jew or an Israelite indeed. But some may say, the
works of God do not declare Jesus Christ nominally, nor the Ministry of his
incarnation, death, resurrection, ascension, nor his Mediatorship. I answer,
the distinct and particular knowledge of these things is not always, and under
all dispensations of absolute necessity to salvation; for most of the
Patriarcks and Prophets were ignorant of Christ, and these particulars in
nomination; and yet had their virtue and operation to eternal life. Now as the
Spirit of God works effectually in their hearts to receive and obey it by the
book of works and by his book of words on his Elect to salvation; so by both
books it works an illumination of the grace and means of salvation, whereby a
remedy and possibility of deliverance and salvation is preached and presented
to all men through the promise, before which there was no way lest or made of
deliverance, but only the miserable estate of destruction, that followed the
transgression. And therefore thrice blessed is that word of God that says, God
sent not his Son into the world, that is, unto mankind to condemn them, but
that they through him might be saved, Joh. 3. 17. Here is the manifest
possibility without all exception; yet notwithstanding this abundant goodness
and pity of God toward mankind, to give himself to death that they might
have life, and to convey the knowledge of this his goodness and grace, to all
and every one of them, the wilful opposition that is made against it by
themselves, makes that accidentally their condemnation, which in it self was
the means and cause of life and salvation.

And now we come to show what presidents there are in the Scriptures of the
eff^ctuall operation of grace and salvation, by the works of God through his
Spirit: now Scripture example must be of such men as have lived (when testimony
is made of them) amongst such as enjoyed the Scrip^ure-dispensation, and yet
themselves no Proselytes. The first instance shall be in that holy Heathen the
Roman Centurion, that came to our Lord in the behalf of his servant; the
testimony our Lord gives of him with admiration is this, I have not found such
faith, says he, no not in Israel: as if he should say, not amongst my people
that have the book of my words, as in this man that has been taught by the
book of my works; And I say unto you, says he, Mat. 8. 1. that many shall
come from the East, and from the West, that is, from one end of the earth to
the other, from the Sunrising to the Sunsetting, And shall sit down with
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven, but the children of the
kingdom shall be cast out, that is, such as have the book of my Scrip^ures
and Ordinances shall lose the salvation, when such as have only the book of
my creatures shall find it. And such an one was Cornelius, Act. 10. which was
also a Gentile and Heathen by Nation, and no Proselyte, for other Nations that
were Proselytes were to have the same fellowship in the Word and Ordinances
with the Jews, but P^ter denies it him, ver. 28. and yet justifies him as
touching the grace of the Gospel, to be a true worshipper of God, a spiritual
regenerate man, manifested and declared to Peter by the words which he spoke to
him, which makes Peter to open his mouth, ver. 34. and say; I perceive of a
truth that God is no respecter of persons, but in every Nation be that fears
God and works righteousness is accepted with him. Mark, here is the
righteousnese that is of grace, which makes men acceptable to God vouchsafed to
all nations, of which C^r^nlius is a present proof, thereby being made
spiritual worshippers, acceptable through faith in their prayers and alms,
and all other spiritual sacrifices, which is only s^ in and through the
goodness and grace of God, which is the Gospel and Covenant of promise, for
there is not a second or other means of grace besides this. But if this be so,
that God by his works and Spirit, teaches the Gospel and salvation to mankind,
as well as by his word and Spirit, then what advantage have Christians by the
Scriptures? or what profit is there of other Ordinances? The Apostle makes the
same question, and answers it himself, Romans 3. 1, 2. Much every way, says he,
as if he had said, This is the chief and highest dispensation; the principal
and greatest means of conveying the grace of the Gospel to mankind, is by this
most excellent way.

Now the last and most conceald book, by which God reveals the means of
salvation to mankind, is that way by which he makes it known to Infants, who
want the exercise of sense, and the use of reason and understanding, which are
the subject matter of both the two other books preachings; for in them the
Spirit of God works only by the dictate of Conscience, not denying this most
secret help of nature to the two former books also; but the capacity of
Infants is such that they are capable only of this way of preaching. And the
Spirit of the Lord by this means through secret workings inclines the hearts of
the Elect-Infants to receive the mercy preached effectually to life and
salvation; As he did the hearts of the Prophets, Jeremy and John Baptist in the
womb, then and there to be called and sanctified, regenerated and borne
again; for there is no way to life but this, although given and administered by
diverse dispensations. And take this consideration for the further discovery of
this obscure book, that if the Gospel, the word of faith be nigh and in the
mouth and heart of all mankind, then it is also in the mouth and in the hearts
of Infants: and the refusing and disposing this light, as it may be said,
Infants may so do, is the condemnation by this book also.

These truths rightly understood, clear God both in his justice and mercy,
that as salvation is free and only from himself, so the condemnation is only
and alone from wicked men themselves; and so let us acknowledge God to be just
and truly merciful, although we may safely say, all men are liars. Thus much
I thought to signify by writing after I was publicly denied for speaking; and
to wave their pretended excuses, I pray them to take notice from the Lord,
except they deny themselves they cannot be taught of God, and so never able to
teach others truly.

And for the other point in their Disputations of general Redemption, as they
call it, there is no such expression in Scripture; for although it be said,
Christ gave himself a ransom for all, yet it is not said, all are ransomed,
as the term Redemption seems to imply; and although a man have provided a
price or value of a Ransom, yet it cannot be said the Man is ransomed, or
redeemed, except the price or value be received and accepted of; so although
God would have all men to be saved, as touching the sufficient means he has
provided, yet the man not receiving that means, thereby occasions his
condemnation, which if received had been his salvation. And the rejection is
not through the means it self, nor in God that provided it, but altogether in
and from them that make the resistance. As it is written, 2 Pet. ^. 9. The Lord
is long-suffering to usward, not willing that any should perish, but that all
should come to repentance. And this way and means of recovery, which is the
Gospel, he has made known and preached unto all mankind, as before is
showed, yet notwithstanding this means of gathering and saving all, by which
God would. Wicked men will not yield obedience thereunto, but harden their
hearts to resistance, and so perish through their own impenitency.

By John Grant.

London, Printed by M. Simmons for John Hancock 1649.


