A great and famous SEA FIGHT Between the ENGLISH and DUTCH ON Friday last,
between the Coast of Norfolk and Essex; With the particulars thereof, the event
and success; and the great execution done by Key-shot, long Chains, and Bolts
of Iron; diverse having their legs and arms torn and rent asunder.

Also the number of Holland ships sunk and taken, that came forth with Letters
of Mart, together with the number of pris^ners; their examination and
confession; and the strange and wonderful speech of their Admiral upon his
engaging of the English.

Likewise, the Names of the new Generals chosen by the Parliament; the coming
up of the great fleet of Collie^s and Propositions ther-upon to the Lord
Cromwell, in behalf of the poor Citizens of London.

Nou. 30th.. London, Printed for C. Hancock. 1652.

A dangerous sea fight near the Eastern Coast, on Friday last between the
English and the Dutch; with the particulars thereof, and the manner of the
engagement etc.
Right Honorable,
THis morning we received advertisements, of a great engagement (yesterday)
near the Eastern Channel, between the English and Dutch; the manner thus: The
States ships that were in this Harbor, having been supplied with such
necessaries which they wa^ted, on the 23 instant, put forth to sea; but they
had not long rode upon the Neptune Ocean; but they made a discovery of about
eleven sail of Flemmins, who had Letters of Mart from the States of Holland, to
sight any ships whatsoever, belonging to the Republique of England, and to make
prize and enjoy all whom they could take, which Pyratical Act, produced them
the Name of Free-booters; but indeed this Title was at last dear-bought; for,
the English with a prosperous gale, bearing close up to them, gave them such a
Volley, that it made even the wind and waves seem to contest for Victory; yet
the Flemins perceiving that they were odds sufficient, being eleven to two,
chose rather to embrace an honorable dispute, then to yield upon ignoble and
unworthy terms; and truly, to deal plainly, and impartially, give the Devil his
due, they fought very gallantly, till at last, our undanted English Hectors,
seeing nothing would daunt them, and perceiving the Victory somewhat dubious,
resolved to fight it out either to Death or Conquest; and thereupon mutually
resolved to live and die together; in order whereunto, so close and thick did
they ply the enemy with Key-shot, long Chains, and Bolts of Iron, tha^ diverse
of the Dutch were enforced to make the Sea their Tomb; Others, were made lower
by the head, by the matchless force of Powder, and links of Iron; some had
their arms and legs shot off; Amongst the rest, their Captain General Mine Here
Galen (son to Admiral Van-Galen in the Streights) is lamentably dismembered;
for, as he adventured himself in the greatest heat of action, so did he sustain
the greatest share and sorrow in affliction, insomuch, that most of his wounds
are conceived to be mortal. He loss will be much lamented; for it is said he was
a man of singular knowledge and judgment in Martial Affairs, and the Art of
Navigation; yet many of his own men condemn him for that Heathen-like
expression, made use of and seconded by Admiral De-witte, as he was engaging
lately against the English, I (said he) will lead on the fleet against the
English, let the Devil bring them off again.

Now whether it was an English or Dutch Devil I know not: I have better
thoughts, and hope Almighty God, who has delivered us in all our straits and
extremities, will now give us a good issue of this War, and add further links
of his Mercy to those who desire to extol and glorify his name; for indeed
even in this appears his loving kindness, who was pleased to crown the heads of
his servants, with triumphant and prosperous success, by vanquishing the proud
enemy, and taking about 300 prisoners, and 4 ships, with little loss. The rest
got off, being much rent and torn; but we hear since that two of them are sunk.

Harwich 27 November. 1652.
A Letter from Holland.
SIR,
NOthing but fire and sword will serve to allay the burning Choler of the
Princely party, who are grown to such an extreme height of arrogance, That down
with your Parliament now they cry, and say this is the time to set their poor
distressed Lord and Master in his Royal Saddle, and restore him to his
dis-joynted Throne. But alas, it is not their high Rants, nor their quaffing of
full bowls, that can bring to pass such mighty Revolutions, though they give
out, that all Emperors, Kings, and Princes in Europe, will be instrumental for
his Restoration; but indeed by the Eye of Reason, we must conclude this to be
incredible, if we seriously weigh and consider the several I inks of his
infinite mercy, toward your Parliament and Army, and how he has sufficiently
manifested his own will and pleasure, with that loud Declaration from Heaven,
so mightily set forth in the late sudden Revolutions and Actions, before, and
at Worcester; whereby he unquestionably appears to have given a full and final
Decision of the Controversy, and seems as it were with his own finger, to
poiut out to all the World his Resolutions for England.

The Hollander sollicits the French King, for a conjunction between France and
the United Provinces, of which endeavors the issue is like to be fruitless. Yet
that which bears up their drooping spirits, is, the withdrawing the Spanish
forces out of France, the leaving of the Prince of Conde only upon a posture
of defense with ten thousand, and the advance of Gen Thuren with the Kings Army
against him with eighteen thousand horse and foot.

By which means, the Princely party retain some hopes of the advancing of their
interest.

Amsterdam 27 November. stilo novo.
The great fleet from Newcastle is now da^ly expected with Coals; some are come
up as far as Harwidge and Ipswich, and care is taken to abate the intolerable
and high price. Likewise, some provisions are making for the poor in every
Parish, and certain Proposition have been presented to the General, by some
members of the Army, for 4000 bushel of Coals to be distributed to the Poor in
every Parish. An excellent Work of Mercy and Charity.

The Parl. have voted Genesis Blake, Lie. Genesis Monk, and Maj. Gen-Dean, to be
Generals of the Fleets for the year ensuing.


FINIS.

