A MOTION AGAINST Imprisonment, Wherein is proved that Imprisonment for debt is
against the Gospel, against the good of Church, and Commonwealth

MATTHEW 18. 29. Have patience and I will pay thee all. By Thomas Grantham,
Master in Arts; Curate of Eston, near Tocester in Northampton-sheire.

PRINTED at London for Francis Coules 1642.

A Motion against Imprisonment.
AMongst the great abuses of this age, I have taken into Consideration, that
cruel, and inhuman act of imprisoning men for debt: and my hearty wishes are:
that this Tyrany may no longer reign, for these reasons.

First it is against the law of God Deu: 24. 12 if the man be poor thou shall
not sleep with his pledge, in any case thou shall deliver him the pledge
again, when the sun goes down, but imprisonment is a far greater
affliction, or torment, then keeping of a pledge, therefore if I ought not to
do the lesser, I ought not to do the greater, a man was bound by the l^w of
God to lend his brother sufficient for his need, although he was sure to loose
it Deuteronomy: 15. 7. 8. and in the 9 verse, It was sin unto him, if he did it not
then how great sin shall it be: to deprive his Brother of all ways to live
by imprisoning of him?

Then every seventh year was a year of rel^ase a free forgiveness of all
debts Deu. 15. 1. then every fifteth year was a Iubile, every man's posse^si^n
returned to him again Leviticus 25. 10. Gods law was full of mercy to the very
strangers that dwelt amongst them Deu: 24. 19. the lost sheafe was for the
stranger, Fatherless and widow, then verse the 20. of that Chapter the Olive
tree was to be beaten but once, and the remnant to be left for the stranger,
Fatherless and widow, and in the next verse he was to do so when he gathred
the grapes of his vinyard He that takes the nether milston, takes a man's life
to pledge Deuteronomy: 24. 6. but he that imprisons a man takes not only the nether
millstone, but the upper, he takes away all courses of liveing for a man, has
no ways to grind or labor for his living then he was not to take the widows
raiment to pledge much less her body Deuteronomy: 24. 27. Gods law is full of mercy,
Exodus 22. 25. 29 27. and Deuteronomy. 15. 13. 14 15. and many other places.

Then this Tyrany of imprisonment is against the Gospel, our savior tells you
Mat: 8. 32. how he was used that took his fellow servant by the throat and
cast him into prison, and in this last verse he tells you his heavenly father
will do so to those who will not forgive their debtors, the Apostle says
Romans 13. 10. that love is the fulfilling of the law, and he gives there the
reason because it works not ill to his neighbor, now how far is that man
from obeying Gods law that does so great a hurt to his neighbor as to imprison
him, Saint John says, John 1. 3. 17. how can the love of God dwell in that man
who shutts up his bowels of compassion from his needy Brother? but what shall
we say of that man who is not only far from reliveing his brother, but
imprisons him and forces him to all need and affliction, where hunger withers
him, diseases lick up his blood, and swarms of care and trouble sting him and
torment him; Saint Ambrose says of the coveteous rich man, est panis famelici
quem tu ^enes, quem nos parer^s, occidisti: and Cyprian says the like in his
sermon de Elemosin^y if any man starve at thy door, or by thy means that is for
want of thy assistance thou shall answer for it, and the Digddi^n^es Theologi
(as Bishop Davenant calls them in his book de pace ecclesiae) the p^l^mi^^ll
divines say, the altitude of a sin is taken as it does depart or is distant
from Charity, the further a sin is from Charity, the greater it is, and what
greater uncharitablenes can there be then to lay a man in prison, where he is
deprived of wife, Children, Friends, Trade, profession, where he is deprived of
all manner of help or comfort.

Then it is against the good of Church and commonwealth, one man may be worth
ten Thousand men, as the people said to David 2* Samuel 18. 3. such an one as
Joseph may be a Steward for a Kingdom, as Eliah whose fiery spirit, consumes
the false prophets, why should that fiery* spirit be smothered and buried in a
Cave. God himself calls him out twice 1. Kings 19. 10. 14. what do thou
hear Eliah? what should John Baptist to whom all Judea came out and they of
Jerusalem do in a prison? what should M^chaiah do in a prison who opposes all
the false Prophets? Paul spoke many languages, was effectual in his preaching,
he could make Felix tremble and Agrippa become half a Christian, but this man
could beget but one Onesimus in his bonds, Philemon 10. whereas it he had been
at liberty, he might have begot Thousands as Peter did at one sermon.

Then it is against the good of a private family for how are the members
greived, if the head ache.

It is against the nature of man to be imprisoned his soul is actus Corporis,
his mind is continually in action all ways thinking of something never idle,
his thoughts run swifter then the sun in a superior or be ready to overtake
Eternity, some translations read that 5. verse in 8. Psalm thou have made him
little lower then God, not little lower then the Angels, but little lower then
God, and Estius maintains this translation in his second book of his
sentences, the first distinction, the verses following (says he) prove this
translation, thou have made him to have dominion of the works of thy hands,
thou have put all things in subjection under his feet the fowls of the Air,
Fishes of the Sea, for that he is says Estius Microtheos a divine God, a
little God, I have said ye are Gods Psalm. 82. 6* and although man be not the
highest God, yet he is the Image of the highest God and will any man fetter him
that carries such an Image livery.

In some cases the scripture does approve a Prison as for blasphemy Leviticus
24. 12 for Sabath breaking Numbers 15. 14. for David's Concubines that were
defiled by Absalom 2. Samuel 20. 3. and so we grant it for a seditious man for,
a man that will make away him self, for a quarrellar, a prodigal, a Rover but
for debt altogether unlawful.

A good action produces a good effect. Aquinas in prima secundae questione 18.
Articulo 1. in corpore. but this has an ill effect as the starving, pining,
griving of his Neighbor.

And as in nature says he whatsoever is deficient in generation is a fault, so
in morality whatsoever causes thy Neighbor to be deficient is a fault.

Aquinas in his Secund: Secunda questione ^^. Articulo 3. says every
imprisonment must be in Penamuel in Cantelum, either for punishment or to make
a man an example. Now for a man to say he will punish his debt or because he is
not able to pay him and that he will make dice of his bones, is not
Christianity.

Then it cannot be for a warning, or to make a man an example to others from
running into debt, for what tradsman will say I will make this man an example
for running into debt, I will make men take heed how they runn into my debt,
that man would have little custom that should say thus, they rather protest
they never arrested man, they will not do a Gentleman that wrong, and thus
they flatter men into their debts, if any man shall say I neither arrest him to
punish him, nor to make him an example, but for my money I confess that's
allowed of, if he have money to pay, but if he have it not, it is Diabolical,
for divines do hold that whatsoever is a man's own is his neighbors in case
of necessity, quo az proprietatem thine, quo ad usum thy Neighbors, if he
want it it is his as well as thine, but he that imprisons instead of releife adds
affliction.

Who can but greive to see a man's cattle look lean like Pharoahs lean Kine,
his Carts drive heavily like Pharoahs troops, follow fast after him, and he
ready to be drowned in a Sea of misery.

And if the voice of Neighbors, a miserable and beggarly living, the want of
means to put forth his children, proclaim a man insuffitiant I say and have
proved, it is super-Diabolicall to imprison this man.

But will some reply you dispute against the law, the law allows imprisonment.

I answer the law supposes a man is able to pay and upon that ground does admit
an imprisonment, but when a man is not able and has neither able, nor willing
friends, he ought not to be imprisoned, for Ra^io stanima legis says Sir
Francis Bacon reason is the soul of the law, and there is no reason, to
imprison a man because he paid not when he is unable.

Then reason tells us bona Corporis are better then bona fortunae, a man's body
is of more value then his estate, and why should the better suffer for the
worse, there is no Corrispondency.

I conclude all with this. Christ bids some go into everlasting torments
because they did not feed him, when he was hungry, nor visit him in prison, and
if this be the doom of those that would not give releife, what shall be the
doom of those that have been the cause of their brothers hungring, and
starveing, and if he shall becast into everlasting torments, who did not visit,
surely his torments shall be great, who was the cause of casting men into
prison.

And thus will I end this little treatise, which because of my great occasions,
I have writ Currente calamo, for he that knows me, knows, it was as much for
me to spare this little time, as it was for the Widow of Zar^pta, to spare
Elias a Cake out of her little barrel of oil 1. Kings 17. 12. but rather
then Elias should want, I have cast in this little mite.

FINIS

