A TRVE REFORMATION, AND PERFECT RESTITVTION, Argued by Silvanus and Hymeneus;

Where in the true Church of Christ is briefly discovered here in this life in
her estate of regeneration, as also her perfection in the life to come, As it
has been foretold by all the holy Prophets and Apostles, which have been since
the world began.

By J. G. a Friend to the truth and Church of God.

Fear not little Flock, it is your Fathers pleasure to give you the Kingdom,
For now is our Salvation nearer than when we believed.
LONDON, Printed by T. B. and are to be sold by S. B. in Cornhill, 1643.

TO THE CHVRCH OF CHRIST IN ENGLAND.
Faithful and beloved,
I The unworthyest of ten thousand of you have presumed to speak while you all
were silent of this Subject, and have made bold with your honorable and
spiritual conditions to make a brief description of you, the Lords people, who
are all of you the Children of wisdom, and so taught of God, that your own God
terms you the wise that shall understand, the keepers of his truth, his
remembrancers, the people in whose heart is his Law, to whom it is given to
know the mysteryes of the Kingdom of God. I entreat you all fellow sufferers,
truly noble and honorable Christians, that how much the nearer our salvation
approaches, so much the more let our joint prayers and praises be to our God,
the lamb that sits upon the Throne, let us not cease, nor give him no rest
till he establish, and till he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth; and if I
have failed in negotiating your great affairs, let our garment of love cover
it: and your wise and grave reproof, or admonitions shall be as balm to cure
my weakness; so the God of truth, multiply the comforts of it in us all, in
the clear demonstration of the spirit with power, that as we are the Children
of Abraham by Faith, so we may do the works of our Father Abraham, for which
your Brother J. G. shall ever pray with you, and for you to the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and ever,

Amen.
A True Reformation, and perfect Restitution argued by Silvanus and Hymeneus.
Silvanus. OLD Friend Hymeneus, how has it been with you a long time, I hear
seven years a go you were in new England?


Hymeneus: I thank you Sir, that you would acknowledge your long unseen,
although longer known Friend, for I think it is near twice seven years since I
last spoke with you.


Silv. What news in new England? I hear you are there at a hard-ship, both for
soul and body, provision for back and belly, food and clothes very scarce, and
Religion which should be as both to the soul, is so lost, that, that which
seemed unity in the truth, is turned to dissension, the ground of error and
falsehood, which custom the Church of Christ has not, which is the Church of
God.


Him. Friend, you may hear more than is true, yet I say, the superfluity of
this world is not always expedient, and for Religion it is requisite that
there should be difference amongst us that the approved may be manifest.


Silv. I see you have not forgotten your former Custom frequently to allege
Scripture Phrase, but I perceive also you have not learned the Apostles rule
perfectly, which says, if any man speak, let him speak as the Oracles of God,
that is, the true meaning of it, for all that were in the Church of Corinth,
were not of the Church.


Him. I hope I have done the same in what I have said.


Silv. I spoke before of the truth and of the children thereof, which admit of
no dissension, and you speak of the Church of Corinth, in which were some,
which were Sectaries, and not the children of the truth, and though they were
amongst them, yet they were not of them, but were false Apostles and wicked
inordinate persons.


Him. I pray, express your meaning to me more fully.


Silv. My meaning is that Christians should still intend by their speaking the
same meaning which the holy Ghost does, in the terms he uses, for one and the
same term, sometimes is to be understood in a special sense, sometimes in a
general, as by Jew, sometimes the same word intends the inward Jew, sometimes
the outward, so of Religion and of the Church, vain Religion as well as pure
Religion, the Synagogue of Satan as well as the true Church of God.


Him. These distinctions under one, and the same name are very profitable
without doubt in the reading the Scriptures.


Silv. I pray you Friend, tell me what matter, and what manner you have for the
constitution of your Churches in new England.


Him. The matter are a company of believers; the manner or form is this, we
from amongst our selves choose a pastor; the pastor and we being entered into a
mutual Covenant, the one to be faithful in teaching and feeding, the other in
hearing and obeying according to Christ's ordinance; by this reciprocal bond,
we become one Congregation or body, as the head and members are one, and so the
pastor and people together choose other Church Officers, as Elders and Deacons.


Silv. I understand you thus, that this is your first way you take to give your
Church the being or name of a Church, but what way do you take to increase this
Church, or ad unto it, for the Scripture says, there were daily added to the
Church such as should be saved.


Him. Our custom is that we admit none to be Members of our Church, but such
as cannot give an Account of their conversion, and that they do renounce all
other congregations as Members to them; and does make themselves by covenant
that is by a solemn vow, calling God to witness that they join themselves to
us to be our Members only, and so to no other Church but to walk with us
according to Christ's Ordinance; and though some of other congregations may come
in Communion in the Ordinance of the word yet we account them no Members.


Silv. And this is all you believe that the Scripture expresses, tending to the
making and being of a true Church.


Him. I profess unto you, I know no other.


Silv. You now grow old, and therefore it should not be with you as it is with
such as are Novicees in Religion, wherefore take heed of fair speeches and
holy pretenses, for there is nothing so common in the world as that which is
like the truth, and yet not the truth the name of the Church and pure spouse,
and yet upon examination does prove Strumpets and harlots; for Christ's Church
his Sanctuary, his true Tabernacle, is that, which he her Lord pitcheth or
builds and not man: and therefore that we may try the truth of your Church,
pray show me how you prove it by Scripture; and first where it is proved, that
the people of every particular Church are to call and choose their Pastor.


Him. In the sixth chapter of the Acts; it is thus written, wherefore Brethren
look ye out from among your selves, seven men of honest report, full of the
holy Ghost and wisdom, whom we may appoint over this business; where it
appears to us, the Apostles gave the believers for ever power to choose their
own Ministers.


Silv. There is not one word in the Text that proves your conclusion; that the
people of every particular Church are to call their Pastor, but this it proves,
that the Apostles times were wholly taken up in prayer and preaching, in regard
the Disciples were so exceedingly multiplied, that they could not have time
touching the matter of receiving and distribution toward the necessity of the
Saints, by reason of which there arose murmurings of the Graecians against the
Hebrews, because their widows were neglected in the daily Administration. So
that there was a necessity that Deacons should be appointed for that business,
who were commended by the people and confirmed by the Apostles; and this is the
whole scope of that Scripture.


Him. But what say you to that, Act. 1. 23. they appointed two, that is, the
people presented them to the Apostles.


Silv. This place shows that the Apostles and Disciples being together in one
place to the number of 120 persons; Saint Peter took occasion to speak to the
Congregation of the prophecys of Judas treason, and of the Judgment that did
befall him, and also how the Prophet foretold that another should be chosen in
his place to his office of an Apostle; wherefore says he, of these men that
have accompanied with us all the time that the Lord Jesus went in and out
amongst us, must one be ordained to be witness with us of his Resurrection;
and they appointed two, that is the Apostles with the rest thought none so fit
as Barsabas and Matthias, but which of these two they could not determine of,
so they cast lots and it fell on Matthias, and he, by the whole Church, was
reckoned amongst the twelve, this is all that place intends, and not the least
part of your intention proved by it.


Him. Now I will set you a place of Scripture that shall not only prove the
custom and manner of our Church, but the matter also as before I have related
to you, and that is the description of the Church of Antioch, which will prove
all that I have said to you. Act. 14. 22. 23.


Silv. Wheresoever Paul and Barnabas came they confirmed the souls of the
Disciples, and exhorting them to continue in the Faith, and that we must
through much tribulation enter into the Kingdom of God, he does not here by
this confirmation and exhortation enter into a reciprocal covenant with the
believers as you spoke of to stand in a pastoral covenant with them as the
head and Members, for what one Apostle did, they did both, and the words are in
the plural number, they, and indeed they taught them so effectually that they
strengthened them and built them up to a further increase and degree in the
truth.

And as it follows they ordained them Elders in every Church, that is, these
Apostles did ordain, not the Disciples, so that this Text is clear against
your distinction both for the matter and form you spoke of, for as these
Christians had received the truth before Barnabas came to them at the first, so
they did abide in the comfortable profession of it till Barnabas brought Paul
with him, and then they two ordained them Elders in every Church, that is
preachers, and not the people as you affirm.


Him. Good Friend Silvanus I have another Scripture which I pray consider you
of, and then I hope you will be of my mind, that is Act. 11. 19 20. 21. 22. 23.
you shall see there that in the 19. 20. and 21. verses, there is mention made
of believers and that the Gentiles had received the Faith: then in the 22. and
23. verse. Barnabas from amongst these believers gathers a Church after he had
descended from Jerusalem to Antioch by the Apostles Commission, and to me the
words prove both the matter and form of our Church who when he came and had
seen the grace of God was glad and exhorted them all that with purpose of heart
they would cleave unto the Lord; to me it is plain that with purpose of heart
to cleave unto the Lord, is the covenant the people enter into with their
Pastor, and Barnabas his rejoicing to see their grace from God and his
rejoicing in it, his continuing to exhort them, and to this Church much people
was added as in the 24. verse.


Silv. I have often observed old friend, that there is none so easily deceived
as those that would willingly be deceived, for if you would not willingly be
ignorant the reading of the text would better inform you, for there is not one
word in all those verses you have read, proves what you say, the truth is this
that the persecution that arose about Stephen was the occasion that many
disciples were scattered and dispersed amongst the Gentiles, and by the witness
they bare to Christ, many believed, as many Greeks at Antioch; tidings whereof
came to the Church at Jerusalem, who sent Barnabas thither, and when he came
to them found the report so true that it rejoiced his heart, and his doctrine
was of that power and authority that he furthered the grace begun, and begun
it where it it was not, for he was a good man and full of the holy Ghost and of
Faith, that his exhortations wrought so through their hearts that it prevailed
with the thought and purposes thereof to cleave to the Lord so full is the
phrase, as if he had gained the whole heart to the Lord, and besides he added
much people unto the Lord says the text, and then departed to Tarsus to seek
Saul, so there is not the least show for your opinion, for when he had found
him he brought him to Antioch, and doubtless for the love of them that walked
in the truth, it came to pass that a whole year they assembled themselves
with the Church and taught much people, but not all this while made any such
covenant nor membership as you suppose, (that is to say) to become Members to
that Church only, and no other. Therefore now Hymeneus, I must tell you plain,
by that you as yet know not the true Church, and being ignorant of that, I
fear you know not what belongs to a true Christian. And for that which you
fancy to be the Church upon Scripture ground, there is not one Scripture
rightly understood by you. And if your foundation fail you, your whole
building cannot stand.


Him. My good friend Silvanus, I pray let me hear your description of the true
Church.


Silv. By the name of the Church of Christ in Scripture we are to understand,
Gods faithful peculiar, chosen and regenerate people, such and such only as
are born of the holy Ghost; and that I may the better describe and manifest the
true Church, the whole body, building or house, I will first declare the making
parts and true nature of every particular living stone and member, of which,
and which only the whole frame or fabric consists. Now to the making of any
part thereof and so of every part, 3 things are considerable and required; that
is to say, the spirit, water and blood, whereof the first is the worker, the
two last the work, or matter or making parts of every living stone of the
Church it self. Of these three terms the first is literal, by which we are to
understand the finger of God, the spirit which proceeds from the Father and the
Son: the other two are Metaphorical, by which other things are meant, namely
repentance and remission of sins, as it is written, Except a man be borne
again from above of water and the holy Ghost he cannot see the Kingdom of God.


Him. I pray Sir express your self unto me concerning the two Metaphorical
terms.


Silv. That I shall willingly do, and give you their definition in their due
place. For the first, which is repentance, the Lord in the working thereof,
unhardens the heart that naturally by sin is obdurate, hard, flat and quite
contrary and disobedient to God and his will, which graciously God of his meet
and alone goodness by a kind of heavenly power, softens and makes it pliable
and inclinable to God and his will. And the word of God compares this humble
broken bruised contrite heart to plowed ground, to soft and tender flesh, and
to water, and such like, setting forth by all these comparisons the true nature
and condition thereof.

That as flesh differs from a stone; barren, fallow, weedy ground from that
which is broken up and plough'd; and as the plyablenesse and softness of water
differs from the hardness of a Dyamond, so a broader and greater difference is
there between this penitent heart and that it was before, for that which was
pleasant and delightful is now become nothing but grief and sorrow of heart,
that which before was chiefly fought after is now most abhorred. As formerly
its joy and gladness was in such sinful ways as carried him from God, now he
uncessantly seeks, prays, desires and longs after every way and means
whereby he may be brought to God, to be refreshed with his favor, which by his
sins and transgressions he has lost; and never did any hunted and chased ha^t
pant more after the water brooks, than this soul does thirst and desire the
favor and grace of God in Christ.

No undone man, no wounded man, no diseased man, no deadly sick man, no man in
bondage and thraldom so miserable and wretched in a natural sense as this
penitent man in his own apprehension in a spiritual and godly sense.

Therefore it is said of John the Baptist the great and powerful preacher and
worker of repentance, that he should prepare the way of the Lord, that is, make
a people ready for the Lord to heal and cure, and in working the preparation,
he bruised the reed, he caused the flax to smoke, he turned the hearts of the
Fathers to the children, the disobedient to the wisdom of the just, he humbled
and brought low the high and lofty, the rough, ridged, and untoward he made
gentle and smooth, the crooked and perverse hearted, he bent, bowed, and made
straight, he made the rich poor, the well sick, the whole broken, in a word,
all these terms do but set out and declare his great and heavenly work of
repentance which he wrought in the hearts of men.

According as it was prophesied of him, that he should go in the power and
spirit of Elias and as the Angel said to Zacharias his Father, And many of the
children of Israel shall he turn to the Lord his God.

Yea, the whole life of this holy Prophet and every hour thereof preached
repentance, for he chose the desert place in the wilderness to dwell in before
the stately City Jerusalem: And hunger and thirst before dainty fare, wine or
strong drink, and sackcloth rather then soft raiment, his Garment was
hair-cloth and his Girdle a leather skin. Neither boyld nor roast was his food
but what he found unbought or uncared for; his meat was locust and wild honey.
His life and Doctrine being thus one and the same, and both so wonderfully
powerful and effectual, that all Jerusalem, Judea, and the Region about
Jordan went out to see and hear him, the like Prophet being never heard nor
seen before.

And he preached unto them repentance for the remission of sins, for so
powerful was his ministry in working repentance in their hearts, that the
holy Ghost says of them, they were baptized of him in Jordan confessing their
sins. An apt and plain figure or resemblance is the baptism of water, of that
of repentance, for repentance it is the preparation of the way of the Lord, the
sign or badge of it is the baptism with water, and so Saint Mark does
plainly preach, John did baptize in the wilderness, there is the signification;
and preached the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins, there is the
substance, which heavenly gift repentance he calls the beginning of the Gospel
of Jesus Christ, by which he proves clearly, that the beginning of our new
birth or regeneration, is the beginning of the new covenant of life and
salvation; herein agreeing with all the Prophets, who speaking of the new
covenant, still begin with the unhardning the heart, taking away the stony
heart and giving an heart of flesh.


Him. You have been large in the description of repentance, and I desire to
hear your definition of it, as you promised.


Silv. The supernatural grace and first part of unregeneration may be thus
defined, that it is the work and gift of God by which the heart is turned from
all the pleasures and delights in sin, into great grief and unspeakeable sorrow
for them, with humble confession and acknowledgment of all its sins, expressive
an unsatisfied desire of pardon and forgiveness, and to be received into the
love and favor of God through Jesus Christ.


Him. You called to me to prove the description I made of the Church, I pray
therefore prove this to me.


Silv. It is well desired, this definition of repentance and every part of it
is fully set forth in the prodigal Son, who once was so full of affection to
sinful pleasures that he rejoiced in it, but God working repentance in him now
is become forlorn and miserable in his own apprehension, and seeing his rash
rebellion and unadvised sinfulness against God his most bountiful and loving
Father, Creator, and preserver, in utter dislike of himself and all his doings
sorrowfully resolves; And in the second place returns to his Father, by which
is set forth the displeasure and dislike he now takes against all his sins
which have been the cause of all his misery and Gods dishonor, being conscious
thereof dislikes, forsakes, leaves them and goes from them, plainly and clearly
declaring his returning unto God in his heart, Manifested in the third place by
his penitent confession with ardency of affection in these words, I will say
unto my Father. I have sinned against heaven and before thee, and am no more
worthy to be called thy Son, Every word declaring the true and real
sensiblenesse of his own guiltynesse, confessing with detestation in the
strength of his request, like the penitent Publicain smiting his woeful breast
with his guilty hand in a ruefull manner, as a man lost and undone; in the
fourth and last place, see his unsatisfied desire of pardon and forgiveness,
of mercy, peace and reconciliation, Make me as one of thy hired servants, which
words for the matter and manner found of nothing but violence, and admit of no
answer, no satisfaction in the world but of grace and favor, to be admitted
and received, though into the least, the lowest office of all, even into the
office of a servant.

Thus all the Prophets and Apostles, as does their Lord also, describe
repentance, and the penitent, by the poor, the broken hearted, the lost, the
sinners, the unrighteous, because these only are so truly in their own eyes and
in the gift or work of God called repentance, or the preparation of God, happy
man is he that hears and obeys, for God has sworn he shall not perish.


Him I must now confess you have both described and defined repentance; but
yet me thinks you ascribe too much to it, to say whosoever repents shall not
perish.


Silv. I tell you the truth as it is written, Ezechiel 18. 28. because he that
considers and returns away from all his transgressions he shall surely
live, he shall not dye: And so says our Lord, Except you repent you shall all
likewise perish.


Him. I pray let me hear you declare the other Metaphorical term which
sets forth the second part of regeneration as you said.


Silv. The second part of our new birth before called remission of sins has
diverse terms and expressions in Scripture; sometimes it is said to be the
Baptism of fire, the Baptism of the holy Ghost, the blood of Christ shed
abroad in our hearts, sometimes called the blessing, the life, the voice or
promise of God, the ministry of the Lord, of John the Baptist whose shoe
latchet the servant said, he was not worthy to untie; this Lord of the prepared
way in working this ^econd and more special work of the holy Ghost preached;
that is, gives remission of sins to the penitent, sanctifies those which John
had prepared, bound up that which he had broken, healed that which he had
bruised, perfecting the smoke into a light flame, fulfilling what was written
of him, being anointed for that purpose, namely to preach glad tidings unto the
poor, to bind up the broken hearted, to proclaim liberty to the Captives and
to enlarge such as were bounden, to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord,
and to comfort all that mourn, to appoint unto them that mourn in Syon, to
give unto them beauty for ashes, oil of joy for sorrowing, the garment of
praise for the spirit of heavynesse, that they may be called Trees of
righteousness, the planting of the Lord that he might be glorified; and this
was the work of the Lord of the whole world, who as he was greater than this
servant his foregoer, so his ministration exceeded, and good reason, for it was
of a more higher and more excellent nature, Even as healing exceeds breaking,
liberty, captivity, the spirit of Gladness that of heaviness, a rich and
plenteous estate, that which is low and miserable, in the working and effecting
hereof the holy Ghost applies the blood of Christ, to that fore broken and
bruised spirit, which is the only healing plaster unto salvation and blessed
life; for this is the word so much spoken of in the Scripture which cures and
heales the wounded spirit, that neither herb nor plaster can possibly do, the
word speaking peace by Jesus Christ, which began after the baptism which John
preached; thereby ingraving or writing in that Table of flesh the everlasting
love and favor of God, never again to be razed or blotted out, so purging,
purifying and sanctifying the prepared heart by the sprinckling of the blood of
Christ the heavenly fire of l^ve, so refining it, that it exceeds the purest
triedst gold beyond all comparison. And this effect of the holy Ghost, the
Scripture also calls the spirit of his Son, the spirit of adoption by which
we call Abba Father. And this is that new covenant which God made with Adam and
Abraham and all his spiritual seed: that life that Moses had and taught to
others, that everlasting Law and statute of grace and favor for ever, as it is
written, whom he loves once he loves to the end, that is everlastingly; for
his sure mercies and love are written, even written in the prepared heart, that
God will be their God and they his people, for ever more still testifying that
this was he that was once dead but now lives, was lost but now is found, from
which work and testimony of the holy Ghost in the heart, arises such an
assurance to the man so sanctified, that he is so sure, his sins are forgien
him, and that Gods favor and love is given to him, as he is su^e his Lord who
wholly bought and freely gave his mercy to him was once dead, than raised, and
now lives for ever, never to die again; this is the love of God shed abroad
in his heart, the Garment dipped in the blood of the lamb, the answer of a good
conscience to his good and gracious God, that as was his Father Abraham, so is
be fully persuaded, and in truth of Faith, with Saint Paul can say, I am
persuaded that neither death nor life, principalities, nor powers, things
present, nor things to come, nor height nor depth, ^or any other creature
whatsoever shall be able to separate me from the love of God which is in Christ
Jesus my Lord; And this is the birth and Baptism of fire, the blessing and
accomplishment of the birth, the life and generation of Gods children, as that
holy King sings saying, Blessed is the man whose sins are covered, and whose
God is the Lord Jehovah.


Him. Surely this must be the description of true justifying Faith, yet I pray
make a definition of it.


Silv. This is the peculiar Faith, the Faith of Abraham, that which justifies
a sinner, and by which the justified lives, as the Prophet speaks, and may
be thus defined, that it is a gift of Gods spirit, whereby a concrite tender
broken heart is given assuredly to believe that all his sins are forgiven him,
and that he is reconciled to God in everlasting love and favor, through the
precious blood of Jesus Christ that has bought and purchased it for him, Which
Faith is clearly declared and fully proved in every part in the prodigalls
acceptance when he was received from death to life; the compassion of his
Father was the only ground of the penitents forgiveness, and he assured him of
his love and favor by falling on his neck and kissing him, such kisses of love
as there is none to be compared to them as appears by the multiplied following
favors, by clothing him with his own best robe, by putting a ring on his hand,
and shoes on h^s feet; ye^, what is this all? but to be clothed with the
complete and perfect righteousness of Jesus Christ, and what more certain
assurance then to eat Christ's flesh and to drink his blood, this was the
fatted calfe, the lamb without spot, who is the only food to eternal life,
and on whom whosoever eats and believes, cannot but rejoice with joy
unspeakable and full of glory.


Him. But is all justifying Faith an assurance?


Silv. Yes, it is a full assurance for as much as it is witnessed to our
spirits by Gods spirit; and an assurance cannot be so true from any witness as
from the spirit of God that bears witness with our spirits (says the
Apostle) that we are the Sons of God and so to the Hebrews he exhorts in
these words: Let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of Faith,
having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience and our bodies washed
with pure water: That which makes the heart true or good is the breaking it by
repentance, and the purifying it by Faith; which Faith arises from the blood
of Christ shed abroad in the heart expressed by sprinkling, and the same
Apostle bears witness, that Abraham believing the promise, was fully
persuaded, To. 4.


Him. But what say you of the Church of Christ which was our first discourse?


Silv. The regenerated man before declared is the matter of the true Church. Of
these precious living stones is built Gods spiritual house, and of this
heavenly nature is the whole building, being all begotten from above of water
and the holy Ghost. As Saint Peter speaks of these new born babes, and calls
them Stones, and so he calls their Lord also to whom coming as to a living
stone; disallowed indeed of men but chosen of God and precious, use also (says
he) as lively Stones, are built up a spiritual house, a holy Priesthood, to
offer spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ* And this is the
same Apostle which our Lord spoke to, when he said, thou art Peter or a Stone,
and upon this Rock will I build my Church, and the Gates of Hell shall not
prevail against it. In which Scripture our Lord acknowledges himself
confessed by Peter to be but the chief foundation and cornerstone, and the
whole building to consist of such spiritual living stones as Saint Peter was.


Him. I pray express in manner how they do become a Church?


Silv. The power of God as I have showed before, does (by repentance) cut these
stones out of the Quarry of this world, that is out of the estate of nature,
and thereby cuts, squares and fits them for this building; and the power of God
(by justification and acceptance) lays on these stones on the lively
building, the spirit of God which proceeds from the Father and the Son
Cements and soders all together, by ingrafting or joynting them with the blood
of Christ, the love of God poured out on them all, and this is the holy
Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints, as the Creed confesses: Agreeing
with that of Saint Paul to the Corinthians, The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ
and the love of God, and the Communion of the holy Ghost be with you: as also
to the Colossians, The head from which all the body by joints and bands having
nourishment ministered and knit together increases with the increase of God,
this is Christ's body, his spouse, the lambs wife who though they be many
Grains, yet make but one loaf.


Him. What authority and privilege has this Church?


Silv. Great authority and many privileges in this present suffering estate of
hers: for of these our Lord says, if two of you shall agree in earth (as
touching any thing they shall ask) it shall be done for them of my Father
which is in heaven; And also where two or three are gathered together (says
our Lord) in my name, there am I in the midst of them; where (by name) he
means his spirit, so that none can be so congregated but such as are led by
the spirit of God, these have the privilege to be called the Sons of God,
even such as believe in his name, which were borne not of blood nor of the will
of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God, these only are the house of
the living God, the ground and pillar of truth; these are as it were Gods privy
Counsel on earth, the Scripture styles them the keepers of his truth, and his
dwelling place as say the Prophets. Though the heaven of heavens cannot
contain me, yet will I dwell with him that is of a contrite spirit; and God
dwelling with them teaches them, and declares his will, his mind and purposes
to them, as he did to Noah, Abraham, and Moses: to these does the Lord (that
has the key of David that opens and no man shuts, and shuts and no man
opens) give the power and authority of the keys of the Kingdom of heaven, yea
I say again that great power and authority, to bind and to loose, to remit
and to retain sins, by a decree intailed on them till time shall be no more in
these words, whose sins you (...) (...) (...) whose sins you do retain they
are retained, this is the commission of the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings,
who by his own words has bound himself thus to be with them to the end of the
world.


Him. I pray tell me how may a man know this Church?


Silv. None can truly know this Church but they that are of her, for as they
are spiritual themselves, so they are spiritually discerned as the Apostle
says, the spiritual men discern all things, even the deep things of God; Yet
I will briefly declare some of her excellencies and some of her miseries by
which she is manifested, for may a candle burn and not bewray her light? may
the Sun shine and not show his beauty? can a City built upon a hill hide her
face from the passer by? or may a sacrifice salted convey his seasoning from
the mouth of the taster, and if these creatures could forget their natures, yet
cannot the true Saints in whose heart the eternal covenant of love is once
engraven, forget to burn with like affection, first toward God, that first
has loved them with love of God, as the sap puts forth this fruit, as the
Apostle says: We love him because he has loved us first. And none can love
the Lord with all his heart, with all his strength and with all his soul, as
Moses speaks, but such only whose booken heart the love of God has
comforted, refreshed and healed.

So also loves he his neighbor as himself, he sorroweth, rejoices,
lamenteth and is comforted, wants and abounds with him; as the Apostle
says, Who is weak, and I am not weak, who is offended and I burn not?
remember them that are in bounds as bound with them, and them that suffer
adversity as being our selves also in the body; So says Saint James, the
wisdom that is from above that is the children of wisdom, of whom Jerusalem
from above is Mother to all, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle and easy to
be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits; and Saint Paul says, their fruit
is love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, etc. They
are filled with peace and joy in believeing and it is given unto them not only
to believe but to suffer for his sake, that is for the sake of their beloved
Lord and Redeemer. I might be large in all these excellencies, but I know you
can enlarge them in your mind Friend Hymeneus.


Him. How can this excellent Church be miserable?


Silv. The Apostle answers in these words: If in this life only we had hope,
we were of all men the most miserable, so that the misery has only respect to
this life.


Him. How can that be?


Silv. Paul and Barnabas makes it clear, saying, we must through much
tribulation (...) the Kingdom of God* this suffering and tribulation was it
that was the cause why our Lord in these words comforts his Church, Fear not
little flock it is your Fathers pleasure to give you the Kingdom; for none
shall reign with Christ in the world to come, but he that suffers with him in
this life.

Now as it was in Abraham's Family between Ishmael and Isaac, so is it now
between the outward and false Christian, and the inward and true, for then as
he that was borne after the flesh, persecuted him that was borne by promise, so
is it now, says the Apostle, the Christians in name only which are overcast
with a profession of Religion, clean in skin and not in heart, like the
Pharisees, lay claim to be the true Church, and call her that is so indeed
barren, forsaken and desolate, and cast her out with terms, let God be
glorified and such like, when notwithstanding with hatred they beat her; so
the Church cries out in one place, My Mothers Children were angry with me when
they were no more the true Mothers Children then Ishmaels, which was not Sarahs
but the bond-womans, neither were the Pharisees the children of the promise
though Abraham's after the flesh, nor righteous although they justified
themselves.

This Jerusalem that is from below, the common Christians, I call them so
because they are not capable but of common gifts, of which they may partake and
perish, and except they repent so it will be with them, yet notwithstanding
these fi^l the world with voices of the Church of God, the cause of Christ,
brag and boast of their righteousness, duties and performances, when
notwithstanding they never yet knew what it is, that is the true worship of
God, the acceptable sacrifice, they brag of their prayers, their fasts and
their charity, and yet know nothing at all of either as they are the offerings
and sacrifice of the truly faithful, but as the fat cattle the Prophet speaks
of, push, gore and oppress the lean, so do these whole hearted, fair, rich,
fat and full seeming comfortable Christians, contemn and despise, the humble,
the low and emotie, although notwithstanding the Lord fills the empty with
good things, and sends the rich empty away. I could enlarge my self in this
exceedingly, having felt their cruelty and oppression, as being slighted by
them daily, and made as the dirt in the street under their feet by treading
daily upon me, but as they are men for and of this world, so we will leave them
to it, and proceed to show you how miserable the Saints are here in this life
in regard of their own corruptions, the flesh lusts against the spirit, and
many times so captivates it, that they cry out, Oh wretched Men that we are who
shall deliver us from this body of death? what is worse then a dead body
amongst the living? and yet so and worse are the corruptions of Gods people to
their pure minds, vexed and grieved by them daily, as Righteous Lot in Sodom
enclosed by them in a City whose buildings are transgressions, whose streets
are ways of error, whose bull warks are the strength of death, whose gates do
lead to hell, which makes them to dye daily, to be tormented daily, and cry
daily to be delivered from sin and from the body thereof.

Lastly, the misery of Gods people is aggravated by the devil, for, so says
the Apostle, he goth about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour;
And so it is said, The Devil shall cast many of you into prison, The righteous
man Job had miserable experience of this adversary Misery in regard of the
destruction of his wealth, misery in the loss of his health, and misery to his
mind in regard of his wife and his childrens death, besides the many
temptations against his soul, and this the Apostle knew well which moves him to
exhort the Corinthians on this wise, For I am jealous over you with Godly
jealousy, for I have espoused you to one husband, that I may present you as a
choice Virgin to Christ, for I fear lest by any means, as the Serpent
beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so your minds should be corrupted from the
simplicity that is in Christ.


Him. You have clearly proved the miserable sufferings of the Church in all
these particulars you promised, but is your meaning that the Church shall never
be free in this life? I mean from misery and sufferings by men's persecution,
and Satan's, their sworn enemies.


Silv. So long as there is any enemy, that is so long as death and sin reign,
so long shall Gods people suffer and undergo misery.


Him. Then your meaning is to the end of the world.


Silv. You understand me truly.


Him. How answer you this Scripture, And Satan was bound for a thousand years,
and the Saints lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years, this is the
first resurrection?


Silv. This error of the Millenaries is ancient, and as groundless in the text
you allege, as many more new mistakes are, which were all forged in the
Devils workhouse of lies, and that they may all be answered if truth will do
it, by their turns they shall be tried and condemned.


Him. The Millenaries first allege the words of Saint Paul to the
Thessalonians, The dead in Christ shall arise first, (that is say they) there
shall be a general Resurrection of all the Martyrs and righteous people a
thousand years before the general Resurrection, and they shall have great
plenty and riches, abounding in worldly felicilic and greatness, enjoying
Christ's bodily presence in this corruptible earth, grounding their opinion on
the twentyeth chapter of the Revelation, as I said before, where it is said,
Satan shall be bound for a thousand years, and they lived and reigned with
Christ a thousand years; this is the first Resurrection, but the rest of the
dead, that is say, they the wicked, as by the first Resurrection, we are to
understand the righteous, so by the rest of the dead, the wicked, which lived
not again till the thousand years were finished.


Silv. The Scriptures they allege do not prove their conclusion, and we try
it thus, the Apostles words to the Thessalonians do clearly prove the general
Resurrection, both of them that are out of Christ, and of them that are in
Christ in the great day of the Lords coming, and that we, which shall continue
living till that time, shall not prevent t^em that sleep, and this the same
Apostle sneweth to the Corinthians; behold I show you a Mystery, we shall not
all sleep but we shall all be changed, that is though all should not be alike
dead and buried yet their change shall be all alike, that is to say, as our
Lord speaks, they that have done good to the Resurrection of life, and they
that have done evil to the resurrection of damnation, and both shall come
forth or be raised. And whereas the Apostle says, the dead in Christ shall
arrise first, he there shows the order of the Resurrection, as in another
place he says, as in Adam all dye, so in Christ shall all be made alive, but
every man in his own order: Christ the first fruits in that he speaks of our
Lords resurrection that at this time was past; afterward they that are
Christ's, that is, they that are dead in Christ, and the time, when, is at his
coming, and the reason why he does not nominate the wicked by name as well as
the righteous, neither to the Thessalonians nor to the Corinthians, as our
Savior Christ does to the Iows, is because they are to rise to their
condemnation, and therefore not worth the naming, yet to the former the term
of distinction, the dead in Christ shall arise first, strongly proves the dead
out of Christ shall rise next, and in the latter, even so in Christ all shall
be made alive comprehends good and bad.

And for their second ground, they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand
years, and as it follows this is the first Resurrection: The Apostle speaks of
the spiritual Resurrection through regeneration from sin, as Saint Paul speaks
to the Ephesians, Awake thou that sleep and arise from the dead and Christ
shall give thee light, agreeing with that in the Colossians, if ye then be
risen with Christ, etc. And this first and second Resurrection our Savior
proves plainly as this faithful witness testifies in his Evangelists,
Verily, verily I say unto you, he that hears my word and believes on him,
that sent me has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, but
is passed from death unto life; And again verily, verily I say unto you, the
hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son
of God, and they that hear it shall live; here he proves the first
Resurrection by Faith, and be your self judge if in the next words he does not,
p^ove the general Resurrection; Marvel not at this for the hour is coming,
he does not say, and now is, as before but says in which all that are in the
graves shall hear his voice and shall come forth, etc. And by this word, all,
here, as before is plainly proved good and bad.

And for the thousand years of Satan's binding for any man to think it to be a
time of peace, plenty, outward glory and felicity in this world, I think him
to be more blind than Bartimeus who saw men walk like trees, because the text
it self declares such wicked men to sit in seats even in the whole time of his
binding as should persecute the Saints even to death because they would not
receive the mark of the Beast in their hands nor in their foreheads, and though
for their wickedness they are not worthy to be named, as another Apostle
describes the same Antichristian power in the same manner, then shall that
wicked be revealed, not giving him the name of Angel, man, no^ beast, because
exceeding the worst of all sorts; again even him says the Apostle, whose
coming is after the working of Satan with all power and signs and lying
wonders, this evil power and subtle wonderful lies, he gives his person no
name but him, just, as Saint John speaks, as if they spoke by one spirit,
though two voices, as they did indeed, and I saw Thrones and them that sat
upon them, and Judgment was give unto them, the difference is only this, Saint
Paul speaks in the singular, Saint John in the plural number, and both one,
for the succession of wicked ungodly men for a thousand two hundred and sixty
years of domineering over, killing and oppressing the Saints, they all in the
total sum make but one Antichrist, one, that is the man of sin, the son of
perdition.


Him. Good Friend, me thinks this must verily be the meaning of the place, but
that which they much talk of is the binding of Satan thereby affirming that
all wickedness and wicked men shall be restrained by the censure of the true
Church.


Silv. If they rightly did know the condition of Satan in his loosed or his
estate of liberty, both before and after the time of his being bound, then they
would plainly see there is no such thing as they conclude from it. He was loose
and at large before in the Roman Ethnic estate, when the Devil raised the
primitive persecution against Christ and all that professed him, so that it was
present death for any man to profess the Faith of Jesus Christ, as appears by
the woeful sad stories of the ten first persecutions, in which storm and great
persecution, the Devil is the General in the heart of the heathen Emperors,
for which respect the holy Ghost calls him the great red Dragon, thereby
declaring his great cruel and unmercifulness in killing and destroying all
that did acknowledge Christ and profess the Faith, and this appears plainly in
the Scriptures, no sooner was the Lord ascended, but his servants for teaching
in his name, were beaten, whipped and imprisonned, as Peter and John at
Jerusalem, Paul and Barnabas at Lystra, James killed by the sword, and Stephen
martyred without any mercy, and so it continued for many years in all manner of
sufferings as cruel mockings, scourgings, bonds and imprisonments, some
stoned, some sawen asunder with sawes, their flesh torn to pieces, others
slain with the sword, with wild beasts, and burnt to death: so implacable was
the Devil when he was at liberty that no tongue can express his cruelty, and
as the battle was strange and wondrous, so was the victory more strange and
glorious, for verity overcame cruelty, by suffering as it is written, and they
overcame him by the blood of the lamb, and by the words of their testimony,
and they loved not their lives unto the death, and when the Dragon saw that he
was thrown down into the earth, he persecuted the woman which brought forth
the man child, for although in those days, the blood of the Saints was the seed
of the Church, and the more there died, the greater number were brought to
live, yet the Devil still continued his persecution by the hands of the
Christian Emperors, for though they were Friends to the outward State and name
of Christianity, yet they persecuted the inward grace and power of it, and from
the primacy of the Imperial Church of Rome, grew up the abominable supremacy
of the Church thereof, and the Devil then went into the false Prophets and
began to play the Christian, and to distinguish between the Christian Emperors,
and the government and rule of Antichrist the false Prophet; the holy Ghost
says, And I saw another beast coming up from the earth, and he had two horns
like the Lamb, but he spoke like the Dragon, by which the Apostle discovers
the Mystery of iniquity whereby the Devil would turn himself into the shape
of an Angel of light, and as Daniel says by policy or deceit, prosper or
prevail pretending Christ, the Church, the truth, and all the names and titles
which belong to the true Spouse there in putting Christ's coat upon Jupiters
back, cunningly turning the worship of God into Paganism; mark but the
description, the holy Ghost makes o^ his person, that in outward show is the
very cognizance of the Lamb, the Law and the Gospel his own two horns,
wherewith he does save and kill, but the d^scription of his doctrine is the
voice of the Dragon, that when they did open either to teach the Law, or preach
the Gospe^l, they taught like the Priests of Jupiter, teaching and preaching to
the children of the world, that they ought to worship the God of heaven as the
Dragons Priests had taught their Fathers to worship the Gods of the Heathen,
and by Sycophanticall Princely Priests, under color of promoting the Lambs
affairs should cunningly clap Jupiters coat upon the Lambs back, and bestow
all the ceremonies and rituals of Idolatry upon Christ, as in stead of their
idolatrous bloody sacrifices, Antichrist must have their abominable Mass, as
the Heathen had Idolis, so Antichrist has Images, and as their Temples were
dedicated to their Idols, so Antichrist must dedicate Churches to he Saints
and she Saints, so that earthly minded men were so strongly seduced, that they
verily thought the mystery of iniquity fore-spoken by Daniel to be pure and
undefiled Christianity.

In this respect only it is said, the Devil is bound, that is all the time of
Antichrists reign, which shall be 1260 years pretending Christianity and
working by deceiptfull means, and yet all that receive not the mark of the
beast in their hand or in their forehead, are killed, and slain by him.


Him. But it follows in the Text, And after that he must be loosed a little
season.


Silv. That is as our Savior Christ says, Immediately after the tribulation of
those days shall the Sun be darkened, and the Moon shall not give her light,
and the Stars shall fall from Heaven, the powers of the Heaven shall be shaken.

Where by the days of tribulation, he means the time in which the Devil
should work by the false Prophet, and in the expiration of those days he should
come out of him as out of prison: as it is in the Revelation; And I saw three
unclean spirits like Froggs come out the mouth of the Dragon, and out of the
mouth of the Beast, and out of the mouth of the false Prophet, for they are the
spirits of the Devils, working miracles which go forth unto the Kings of the
earth and the whole world, to gather them to the battle of the great day of God
Almighty.

By the Kings of the East and the whole world is meant the Turks, and the
Devil entering into them does thereby enlarge himself again into his former
liberty, as in the heathen in setting himself in open hostility against Christ
and the profession of his name, for so much is intimated, And the Sun shall be
darkened: now if Christ be denied to be the light, that inlightneth every one
that comes into the world, then all man kind, that is resembled by the Moon,
must lose their light, for she has none other light but from the Sun, then the
Stars; that is, all ministers and professing Christians shall fall from their
professing of Christianity that are not faithful indeed to believe in the
false Prophet Mahomet, as the holy Ghost says; Revelations 6, 12, 13. And I
beheld when he had opened the sixth seal and lo there was a great
Earthquake, and the Sun became black as sackcloth of baire, and the Moon
became as blood, and the Stars of Heaven fell unto the Earth: And in the next
words expounds Saint Matthew, saying; Even as a Figg tree casts her untimely
Figgs when she is shaken of a mighty wind; meaning by untimely Figgs untimely
Christians, that is, such as are outward only, and in name amongst ministers
and professors, and not inward, truly and spiritually, even all such as have
not true grace shall fall off from Christ to receive the false-hood and
abomination of Mahoumisme, and that this wicked enlargement of Satan in his
cruel persecution and oppression of the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ
appears in this, that the Elect then shall cry day and night, and more
certainly shall God hear his own Elect to avenge them, then the unjust Judge,
the importunate widow, nevertheless our Lord makes this question by reason of
the great persecution that shall be in those days, When the Son of man comes,
shall he find Faith on the Earth? The consequence of the question is this,
there will at my coming be scarce a faithful man found on the Earth, and that
this last Enemy shall continue till the coming of the Lord to Judgment; we
need no other proof then Saint John's Testimony in Revelation 20. verse 7. and
so to the end; And when the thousand years are expired, Satan shall be loosed
out of his prison; And shall go out to deceive the nations that are in the
four quarters of the Earth, that Gog and Magog fore-prophesied by Ezechiel the
Prophet, and as it follows, to gather them to battle: the number of whom is
as the sand of the Sea; Therein declaring the multitude of the Enemy, the Turk
to whom there is none of the earth like for multitude, nor for power as
follows, And they went on the breadth of the earth, and compassed the camp of
the Saints about, and the beloved City; By the Saints and the beloved City is
meant the Elect of God called and sanctified, which Saint Matthew calls The
shaking of the powers of Heaven.

And when the Devil by his last battle shall think to accomplish his envious
ends, utterly to destroy Christ and all that are his, then shall Christ the
Lord arise and scatter his enemies in these following words: And fire came down
from God out of heaven and devoured them; And the Judgment of the enemy
follows: And the Devil that deceived them was cast into the lake of fire and
Brimston, where the beast and the false Prophets are, and shall be tormented
day and night for ever and ever. And so the holy Ghost goes on in the
description of the general judgment by describing, first the Judge himself in
these words: And I saw a great white Throne, and him that sat on it, from
whose face, the earth and the heavens fled away, and there was found no more
place for them; And so proceeds to describe them that are judged: And I saw the
dead, small and great stand before God, and the books were opened; That is, all
those means were manifested, and those several ways, by which the Gospel and
way of salvation had been preached to them, whether they had the Scriptures or
the Creatures, or only the more secret dictates of conscience, all which
preached the word of grace, and although it prove a Savor of death to some,
yet to others a Savor of life by every of those books as it follows* And
another book was opened which is the book of life: and the dead were judged out
of those things which were written in the books, according to their works etc.
There needs no Paraphrase, the Scripture is so clear to prove the thing
intended.


Him. It does appear to me that the Millenaries opinion has no ground in the
Scriptures they allege, yet I must tell you plainly in my judgment the
Resurrection is past already, and proved by your self in your description of
the first Resurrection.


Silv. That was an old error which S. Paul condemns in his 2 Epistle to
Timothy, where he taxes one of your name, saying; their word does fret as does
a gangrene of whom is Hymeneus and Philetus, who concerning the truth have
erred, saying, the Resurrection is past already, and overthrow the faith of
some.


Him. Show me how that doctrine may be said to overthrow the Faith.


Silv. This doctrine is the Religion of Homo-novus or of the new-man falsely so
called, in plain terms the Familists doctrine, who turn the whole Faith of
our Lord Jesus Christ into an allegory, affirming Christ to be a quality,
saying righteousness is Christ, and sin is Antichrist, teaching that all the
Articles of the Creed are fulfilled in every one of their illuminated ones, and
that now they themselves are dead and buried, raised and ascended, set at the
right hand of the Father, descend, and come, and judge the world the quick and
the dead, that they are the holy Catholic Church, that they only are the
forgiven people and have the Communalty of the Saints, and enjoy life
everlasting, infinitely succeeding one another in this coedified condition,
affirming also that God is cohominified with them, and so this estate and
condition, even this present evil world to continue for ever, saying that as
we come from God, so again we return to God at our death, affirming no other
Resurrection then from that sinful estate to be illuminated, in which
illumination they say, they are conceived of the holy Ghost, born of the Virgin
Mary, etc.


Him. You know the Apostle speaking of two seeds of Abraham, one born of Hagar
the bond woman, the other of Sarah the free woman, and he says that by them
another thing was meant.


Silv. As at the first I told you, that Christians when they speak, they ought
to speak as the word of God, that is according to the meaning of the
Scriptures, for though Saint Paul say the two seeds are an allegory in regard
of the two Covenants that either stood in, the one thereby the child of death,
the other the child of life; Yet he does not, as you do, make them nothing but
an allegory, turning the person of our Lord Jesus Christ into a quality, and
the person of Antichrist into sin, which is no substance but a privation of
good; take heed of this Hymeneus for it calls to my mind the Apostles words,
who says, that such doctrine to the soul is as dangerous and destructive as a
gangrene is to the body, which is inevitably destructive: for nothing can
prevent the saving of the next member but the death, the cutting off of that
which is but infected.


Him. I am sure if I be mistaken in my opinion, yet that which you have
delivered in other respects concerning the short time of this worlds
continuance crosses most Ministers opinions both in new England and here too.


Silv. What is that which they teach, that I have said, does oppose their
Tenants?


Him. They almost all with one consent hold the national calling of the Jews,
and that there shall be a great and glorious estate of the Church both of Jews
and Gentiles, alleging all the Prophets that speak of the deliverance of Syon
from all her Captivities, and bring the Jews into their own Land out of all
Countries whither they have been dispersed and scattered.


Silv. What Scriptures do they bring to prove that the Nation of the Jews shall
be called and brought out of every Country into their own Land.


Him. The 11 Romans in these words: I would not Brethren, that you should be
ignorant of this mystery, lest you should be wise in your own conceits, that
blindness in part is happened to Israel, until the fullness of the Gentiles be
come in. And so all Israel shall be saved, as it is written, etc.


Silv. In these verses there is not one word of the National calling of the
Jews, but shows that the Apostle declared to the believing Romans a Mystery to
take off their vain boasting of themselves, who thought that God had forsaken
the seed of Abraham wholly, and therefore he secretly reproves them and says,
It was but a part of the seed that was hardened or blinded, as in the seventh
verse he clearly distinguishes between the Elect part and the rest: what then?
Israel has not obtained that which he seeks for, but the Election has
obtained it, and the rest were blinded or hardened, and in this verse he says,
They shall be hardened, until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in, that is
for ever; Agreeing with the Prophet, let their eyes be darkened, and bow down
their backs always; thus God putting no diff^rence between the Jews and the
Gentiles extends his free grace to both for the calling of the full number of
his Elect in all the world; and so all Israel shall be saved, that is the whole
house, even every one f^reknown and chosen of God shall be c^lled, sanctified,
and saved both Jews and Gentiles throughout the world, and this word saved, has
respect unto the estate of perfection in the world to come, according to the
Prophet Esays words, Israel shall be saved in the Lord with an everlasting
salvation he shall not be ashamed nor confounded, world without end; That is
all Gods Elect wheresoever, of all kindreds, tongues, nations and people.


Him. In this Scripture it does not appear there is any word as they infer
from the text, but what say you to the words of the Prophet Ezechiel 34. 14.
And I will bring them out from the people, and gather them from the Countries,
and will bring them to their own Land, and seed them upon the mountains of
Israel by the Rivers, and in all the inhabited places of the Country; As also
the Prophet Jeremy 33, and 26. For I will cause their captivity to return, and
have mercy on them.


Silv. It greives me to see the Ignorance, and yet boldness of many Ministers
amongst us, who err for want of reading the Scriptures, for the very literal
expression might teach them better then to tell us that from these two
testimonies is declared the calling of the Jews from their dispersed and
scattered estate to the belief of the Gospel in this last age of the world.

For both these Prophets writ within few years one of another, Jeremy a little
before Ezechiel and both of the Babylonish Captivity, and of their return
again into their own Land, which according to the word of the Lord was
performed above two thousand years ago, for their return was in the days of
Ezra the Scribe some years after the Prophet Daniels death.

And if you read the second chapter you cited with a searching affection you
shall find the Prophets both of them speaks of also the deliverance of Sion,
the whole house of Israel from all their Captivities; Therefore will I save my
flock, they shall be no more a prey, I will judge between cattle and Cattle,
and I will set up one shepherd over them, and he shall feed them even my
servant David he shall feed them, and he shall be their shepherd, and I will
be their God, and my servant David a Prince amongst them. In those days Judah
shall be saved and Jerusalem shall dwell safely, and this is the name wherewith
he shall be called the Lord our righteousness: But this deliverance we will
more largely open hereafter.


Him. Master Cotton in new England does much preach of these things of the
calling of the Jews and of the flourishing estate of the Church of the Gentiles,
and sense I came to London I heard a preacher say, if the two last Chapters of
Esaias were not to be understood of the glorious estate of the Church before the
coming of the Lord to Judgment, I do not know (says he) what is meant by
chose Scriptures.


Silv. By what he says, I believe he does not understand what is meant by
those Script. for the Proph. words are these, Behold I create new Heavens and a
new Earth, and the former shall not be remembered nor come into mind, but be
thou glad and rejoice for ever in that which I creat, for behold I creat
Jerusalem a rejoyceing and her people a joy. And I will rejoice in Jerusalem
and joy in my people, and the voice of weeping shall be no more heard in her,
nor the voice of crying, and there shall be no more thence an infant of days,
etc. In which the Prophet speaks as clearly (to my understanding) as words can
express it of the world to come after the Resurrection, the salvation, that
brings Gods chosen people Jerusalem from above into the same perfection again,
which by sin we lost and fell from, in the day of our transgression* and this
agrees with Saint Peter's and Saint John's exposition, the two most excellent and
beloved Disciples and Apostles; Saint Peter speaks directly of the end of this
world, the dissolution of this present Heaven and Earth, in these words: But
the Heavens and the Earth which are now, that is now present, by the same word
are kept in store, reserved unto fire against the day of Judgment, and
perdition of ungodly men; And so proceeds to other arguments, and proves that
the Earth also, and the works that are therein shall be burnt up, and the
Heavens and the Elements shall be dissolved, concludes with notwithstanding or
nevertheless, we according to his promise look for new Heavens and a new Earth
in which dwells righteousness; First, the time when these things shall be
fulfilled is twice spoken to be in the day of the Lord which throughout the
Scriptures notes unto us the day of Judgment, as the time of his second
coming; Secondly, the manner how it shall be when righteousness shall dwell
in the Earth, which must needs be understood of the world to come, for in this
world righteousness is a Pilgrim, a stranger, and a sojourner; and Saint John
transcends in his expressions of it after the general Judgment, in order
after the Resurrection of just and unjust, saying; And I saw a new Heaven and a
new Earth, for the first Heaven and the first Earth were passed away, and there
was no more sea, and I John saw the holy City new Jerusalem, coming down from
God out of Heaven prepared as a bride adorned for her husband, and I heard a
great voice out of Heaven, saying, behold the Tabernacle of God is with men,
and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself
shall be with them and be their God, and God shall wipe away all tears from
their eyes, and there shall be no more death, nor sorrow, nor crying, nor shall
there be any more pain, for the former things are passed away.

The former things are the corruptible things, and the things that shall take
place are the new created things of God which are all good, for nothing can
proceed from him but what is very good, the words are so plain that they need
no exposition.

The other proof, they do bring to prove their mistaken opinion, are these
words, As one whom his Mother comfort, so will I comfort you, and you shall
be comforted in Jerusalem, and when you see this, your hearts shall rejoice,
and your bones shall flourish like an herb, and the hand of the Lord shall be
known toward his servants, and his indignation toward his enemies, for by
fire and by sword will the Lord plead with all flesh: And the slain of the
Lord shall be many, for any man to think that the Prophet in these words speaks
of any time of the Churchs sufferings in this life, does as much as if he
should tell me, it was his own foolish conceit, and that he did not at all
search the Scriptures, no^ labor in the word and doctrine, for Saint Paul to
the Thessalonians to me does directly comment upon this place of the Prophet
saying, it is a righteous thing with God, to recompense tribulation to them
that trouble you, and to you who are troubled, rest with us when the Lord Jesus
shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming fire, taking
vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who shall be punished with everlasting destruction, from the
presence of the Lord and the glory of his power, when he shall come to be
glorified in his Saints, and to be admired in all them that believe, And
further note, that Prophet names the place where Gods people shall be
comforted, and he says, it shall be in Jerusalem, that is in new Jerusalem.


Him. I confess it appears to me, the Scriptures are not rightly understood by
them for you have answered them fully, but many of them have told me it is
Master Brightmans opinion, and I am sure it is Master Cottons.


Silv. Master Brightman is very corrupt and so is Master Cot^on much to be
blamed as I have read him in a Sermon preached in the West-Countrey, and in an
exposition of his, on the Canticles, I remember the Text of his Sermon was in 1 Chronicles. 17. and 9. And I will ordain a place for my people Israel, and will
plant them and they shall dwell in their place, and shall be moved no more
neither shall the Children of wickedness, waste them any more as at the
beginning.

This Scripture speaks directly of the Resurrection as our Savior says, Let
both grow together until the harvest, etc. Then shall the oppressor and
Children of wickedness be separated and ^ot before, not till then shall
spoiling and wasting cease, the fat cattle and the lean, the sheep and the
goats shall not be separated so long as this world lasts, and the Prophet
David forespake of the Resurrection in this place, and not of any temporal
Translation as Master Co^ton expou^ds it, and for that Treatise upon the
Canticles, he speaks often of the calling the Jews, ^ut proves nothing so, as
uncertain words I give no credit to them.


Him. Is it not true, that many Ministers preach that the Govern^ment of the
Church of England is Popish and Antichristian?


Silv. No, for I have heard Master Callamy say in his prayer, that he thankt
God that the evils in our Church were not a national sin, that is, as I
understood him, that the Statutes and Ordinances of this Nation were free from
those superstitions and corruptions that were brought in by such corrupt men as
were in chief and hi^h places heretofore amongst us.


Him. Then you justify the Church of England ever since the reformation in
King Edwards days.


Silv. I do affirm that those Laws which were then made and since confirmed
did wholly free us, and break asunder the Antichristian yoke and bondage of
their abominable Doctrines, and though England were before one of the ten
horns of the beast: That is a Kingdom that maintained the abomination of
desolation, and supported the whore that sat upon the waters; that is, did
rule over peoples, multitudes, nations, and tongues, yet then it pleased God
that his faithful people, the Martyrs, did prevail against the filthy
fornications of the whore, the lies and false Doctrine of their Kingly Priests,
and the Kingdom might then truly be said to fall off from Rome, and so still
has continued an opposer and hater, and not a mainteiner.


Him. I remember you spoke thus long ago, but within this twenty years, things
have been worse with you than before.


Silv. Corrupt men endeavored to bring in many innovations, but that is no
more to the Christian profession established by Law in the Church of England,
then rust to pure metal, soil to a clean garment, or dust in Gods temple,
which scouring, brushing and sweeping will do away, so that the truth shall
seem more glorious.


Him. But what do you think of the Church of England in comparison of the
Church of Scotland, Low Countries, France, Germany, and other reformed Churches?


Silv. I am sure I have had either conference with, or reading of the most
religious professors in Europe, and truly of all both national or nominall, I
have found none in all respects so free from superstition, nor so sound in
Doctrine as the Church of England, I mean as it stands by acts and ordination
of Parliament, not but that some things may be altered, but I would Christians
had wisdom to pray for, and wait on our King and that great Council which our
good God has guided already to prescribe such a form as I know none extant
like it, that they that have done so much, may in their wisdoms do the rest,
and we to further it by obeying and praying.


Him. I have often heard you speak of the short time that this world shall
last, and that here is to be expected no such reformation nor deliverance as
many have conceived, I pray let us hear your Judgment of the Scriptures in
this particular.


Silv. The Scriptures indeed are plentiful, fluent and large in their
Testimony and witness of the world to come, the glory, felicity, and
perfection of that world without end, a world endless, a world deathles, a world
sinnelesse, a world curselesse, a world harmless, in which there shall be
nothing but holiness, Godliness, thankfulness, and righteousness, and
joyfulnesse with the Saints, their captivity shall be ended, then shall the
great deliverance and salvation come to Sion when God shall put away all her
sins; Therefore thus says the Lord to his dear daughter and her little
children, Refrain thy voice from weeping and thy eyes from tears, for thy
work shall be reward^d, says the Lord, and all that devour thee shall be
devoured and all thy adversaries every one of them shall go into captivity, and
they that spoiled thee shall be a spoil, and all that prey upon thee will I
give for a prey: And I will (says the Lord) undo all that have afflicted thee,
and I will restore health unto thee, and I will hea^e thee of all thy wou^d^,
says the Lord, because they called thee an ^ut cast, saying, this is Sion wh^m
no man seeks, the Sons of them that afflicted thee shall come bending unto
thee and all those that despised thee, shall bow themselves down at the soles
of thy feet and they shall call thee the City of the Lord, the Sion of the holy
one of Israel. Whereas thou have been forsaken and hated so that no man went
through thee* I will make thee (says the Lord) an eternal excellency, then
shall be the time of Sions ^eliverance, which the Devil nor man's wickedness
ca^ no more prevent, then they can prevent the spring when the Sun by its
operation causes the ^arth to put it forth.


Him. This is the thing I have a great desire to hear, having had formerly
some speech with you about it.


Silv. That I may the morefully describe the unspeakable glory of Christ the
Lord, and the Church his spouse, I will observe this Order, the time, when this
Kingdom, heavenly Country, City with foundations, the inheritance of the
Saints, the purchased possession, the glory, the eternal life, the masters
joy, the promised Land, the perfection, the resurrection, the deliverance, the
restoration, and abundance more of such names the holy Ghost gives to the
Church, the new Jerusalem, the lambs wife, the time when I say the Scriptures
that foretell of, shall be fulfilled.

Secondly, the place where it shall be inj^yed; Thirdly, who shall be the King
in this glorious Kingdom; And lastly, what are the subjects and inheritors
thereof.


Him. The names that the Scriptures give unto the eternal estate are very many
and excellent, and your method very good, therefore I pray proceed.


Silv. The time of the Churches deliverance to the estate of perfection is at
the end of this world, when he that ascended, shall descend, as says the
Scripture, whom the heavens must contain and receive until the restitution of
all things forespoken by all the holy Prophets, has been since the world
began, which things therefore the world might not be ignorant of, which are
testified by so many witnesses; for so says the spirit, every one that have
spoke, have spoke of these things, but the cause of men's ignorance in this as
in many other truths of God, is in regard people do not labor with God to
understand and know the Scriptures, for although every one (for the most part)
has a Bible, yet generally they are as ignorant of the intent and meaning of
the Scriptures as he that never saw the written word of God at all, but no more
by way of digression. And that the time of the Lords glorious Kingdom and the
Churches deliverance shall be at the end of this world is clear by our Saviors
own words in parable, The harvest is the end of the world, and the reapers are
the Angels. As therefore the tares are gathered and burnt in the fire, so shall
it be in the end of this world, the son of man shall send forth his Angels
and they shall gather out of his Kingdom all things that do offend and them
which do i^iquity, as also in that Scripture where the question is made by the
servants to the house-holder, whether the tares the envious man sowed amongst
the good seed should be plucked up, the Master answers, nay, let them both grow
together until harvest, and shows what shall be done then both with the
wheat and with the tares, saying at his glorious coming shall be gathered
before him all nations, and he shall sever the Sheep from the Goats etc. Then
the King shall say to them on his right hand comeye ^lessed inherit the kingdom
prepared for you from the beginning of the wo^ld, and to this agrees the
Angels words to Daniel; Go thou thy ways Daniel, at the end of the days shall
the end be, and thou shall stand up in t^y lot; meaning thou shall then be
raised to shine as the brightness of the Fi^mament amongst them that have
turned many to God, even to shine as the Stars for ever and ever; There is none
in all the world but the Child of God, the heirs of salvation have the benefit
of the Prophet Ieremies exhortation in these words, Ier. 31. Refrain thy voice
from weeping and thine eyes from tears for thy work shall be rewarded, says
the Lord, and they shall come again from the Land of the Enemy; there is the
return from captivity of the natural Israel, and there is hope in thy end
(says the Lord) that thy Children shall come again to their own border, there
is the deliverance of the s^irituall Is^ael at their Resurrection, as the
Patriarks have expressed their hope, as is more clearly proved in the next
particular, the place where the bride shall for ever enjoy her bridegroom, the
King of glory his gloriou^ Kingdom, which the holy Ghost calls ^he earth in
these wor^s, Behold the righteous shall be recompensed in the earth: And so
says our Lord, Blessed are ^he meek for they shall inherit the earth; Their
inheritance is their recompense, then and not before shall the earth be filled
with the knowledge of God, as the waters cover the Seas, which must needs be
understood of the new earth promised and to come, such an earth as the Lord
shall make when he will make all things new, for the contrary is most true now,
here in this old cursed earth, that ignorance fills this earth as the waters
cover the Seas.


Him. This is not understood in these days; for I never heard these Scriptures
so applied before.


Silv. To make it more plain, we will first cite the Testimonies of the
Prophets, our Lords and his Apostles, and then I will show you how plainly and
clearly the heirs of the promise have particularly declared her hope and
confidence in it. Job had the true knowledge and comfort of it which ravished
him, and made him thus to cry out as if he were out of himself: Oh, that my
words were now written! Oh that they were printed in a book, that they were
graven with an Iron Pen in a Rock for ever, for I know that my Redeemer lives,
and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth, and though after my
skin worms destroy this body yet in my flesh I shall see God, whom I shall
see, for my self and my eyes shall behold, and not another. In which he clearly
expresses that the place of his blessedness after the resurrection shall be in
the earth where his Savior shall stand, that is, shall rule and reign for
ever.

David a man after Gods own heart excells in this Faith and hope, what man is
he that fears the Lord? (says he) him shall he teach in the way that he
shall choose, his soul shall lodge in goodness, and his seed shall inherit
the earth: And again, Let all the earth fear the Lord, let all the
inhabitants of the world stand in aw of him, for evil doers shall be cut off,
but those that wait upon the Lord, they shall inherit the earth, and though it
be but a little while, and the wicked shall not be, says he, and his place
shall not be found, yet the meek shall inherit the earth, and delight
themselves in the abundance of peace, for such as be blessed of him shall
inherit the earth, and they that be cursed of him shall be cut off; And so he
sings Psa. 48. Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised in the City of
our God, in the mountain of his holiness, beautiful for situation, the joy
of the whole earth is mount Sion: And also in another place, The Heaven, even
the Heavens are the Lords, but the earth has he given to the Children of men;
So testifies the Prophet Esaias, saying, Thus says the Lord, that created the
Heavens, God himself that formed the earth and made it, he has established it,
he created it not in vain, he formed it to be inhabited, I said not, says the
Lord, to the seed of Jacob seek you me in vain, I the Lord speak
righteousness, I declare things that are right, And the same Prophet makes
proclamation; Behold (says he) I create new Heavens, and a new earth, and the
former shall not be remembered nor come into mind, and as the new Heavens and
new earth, (which I shall make) shall remain before me, says the Lord, so
shall your seed and your name remain; Which clearly shows the intent of the
promise to the Patriarks, and so accordingly they understood it, as shall be
proved hereafter; The Apostles Peter and John both testify to this truth
without question, as before I have briefly showed, and that it may be out of
question here, what Saint John says of the Testimony of the four and twenty
Elders, praising and lauding the lamb their Lord, and they sang a new song,
saying, that art worthy to take the book and to open the seals thereof, for
thou wast slain and have redeemed us unto God by thy blood out of every
k^ndred, and tongue, and people, and ^ati^n, and have made us unto our God
Kings and Priests* and we shall reign on the earth, Which Scripture without
explanation is a full answer unto all such thoughts that concern this
inheriting the earth, may be in ^his life in a Mystery; all which agrees with
^ur Lords words to the Apostles at his parting from them, let not your hearts
be troubled etc. In my Fath^rs house are many mansions, and I go to prepare a
place for you, and if I go an prepare a place for you I will come again and
receive you unto my self, that where I am there you may be also. Now our Lord
is gone into Heaven, and sits at the right hand of the Father, where he is
preparing the blessed and glorious estate for us, as the Apostle Peter says,
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his
abundant mercy has begotten us again unto a lively hope by the Resurrection
of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an inheritance incorruptible and und^filed;
and that fades not away, reserved in the heaven for us who are kept by the
power of God through Faith unto salvation ready to be revealed in the last
time, of which last time and revelation of the glory, S. John speaks, where ^e
says, and I saw a new heaven and a new earth, for the first heaven and the
first earth were passed away, and there was no more sea; In that he saw no more
sea, he declares that the great oppressors of Gods Church consisting of
heathen as open enemies, or Christians, as secret and cunning enemies shall all
cease, there shall be none to hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain says
the Lord.

And S. John goes on and declares the place where the Lord shall be with his at
his return, and I John saw the holy City new Jerusalem coming down from God
out of heaven prepa^ed as a bride adorned for her husban^, And I heard a great
voice ^ur of heaven saying, the Tabernacle of God is with men, and he will
dwell with them* and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be with
them and be their God; and so goes on in describing the perfection of that
condition, tha^ there shall be no more death* sorrow, crying, and pain* and as
it follows after, no more curse; This is the glorious condition of Christ
coming again to his own people according to his promise, and that he will
abide with them forever in the new things which he shall create, and that it
may appear unquestionable that the Saints shall inherit the earth after the
Resurrection, hear Gods promises to the Patriarks and their understanding of,
and ho^^ and expectation in them; and first we will begin with Abraham, where
it is said and the Lord appeared unto Abraham, and said, unto thy seed will ^
give this Land; and again, I will give unto thee and thy seed after thee, the
Land wherein thou art a stranger, all the Land of Canaan for an everlasting
possession, and I will be their God. No^e here that the Lord promises the
possession of the Land to Abraham himself, to his own person, as well as to
all, and every one of his spiritual seed, and so witnesses the Author to the
Hebrews, saying, That Abraham was called to go into a place which he should
afterward receive for an inheritance, Mark it is, said he, that is himself
not others for him as some unwarily have affirmed in these last times, and
(...) this sense ^nly Saint Paul calls Abraham the heir of the w^rld, by
promise and grace included in Gods promise above, and I will give unto thee etc.

So the the Lord Almighty engages himself to Isaac that he would perform the
oath that he swear unto his Father Abraham, saying unto thee and thy seed will
I give all these Countries, and God appeared to Jacob his chosen at Lusse in
the Land of Canaan, says to him, the Land whereon thou lie to thee will I
giv^ it, and to thy seed; and their seed shall be as the dust of the earth, and
thou shall spread abroad to the West, and to the East, and to the North, and to
the South, and in thee and thy seed shall all the families of the earth be
^essed.


Him. Most Christians understand that ^h^se promises were fulfilled by Joshua
when he divided the Land of Cannan by lot ^or a possession to the Tribe of
Israel.


Silv. But had our Ministers and Christians read and labored to understand the
Scriptures they would have been of the Apostles mind who affirms and clearly
shows that Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the faithful and holy servants
of God, ever understood thereby the everlasting inheritance and possession to
them and their seed for ever, when they in their own persons that never enjoyed
it, yet shall inherit it, for the holy Ghost says by the testimony of
faithful Stephen the Martyr; That Abraham had no inheritance in Canaan, no,
not so much as to set his foot on, yet he (that is God) promised that he would
give it him for a possession and to all his spiritual seed, which the
aforesaid Apostle to the Hebrews in the eleventh Chapter, proves beyond all
exception to be the heavenly Country: and the temporal Canaan no other or
further, neither in promise nor possession of the following seeds, nor
otherwise (I say) then that it was a special representation, a tipe figure and
shadow, preaching and teaching unto them, the spiritual, heavenly, holy, new
and everlasting Land, wherefore thus says the Apostle* These all dyed in Faith
not having received the promises, but having seen them a far of: and were
pe^swaded of them and embraced them: and confessed that they were strangers and
Pilgrims on the earth, for they which say such things declare plai^ly that they
seek a Country, and truly had they been mindful of that Country from whence
they came out, they might have had opportunity to have returned but now they
desire a better Country, that is a heavenly, wherefore God is not ashamed to
be called their God, for he has prepared for them a City, which City new
Jerusalem is that before spoken of, even that new and heavenly City that comes
with our Lord at his descension to the earth, where, and in which he will dwell
for ever.


Him. I did not think the Scriptures had been so plain for this matter as now I
see them: I pray now proceed to the third particular, the King of this new and
heavenly world.


Silv. The King of Sion is her Savior, and the Scriptures call him the King of
Glory, and that title that was written on his Cross in his humiliation, in
Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, that is the title of his Crown and Dignity in his
Exaltation, This is the King of the Jews; And as himself says, for this end
was I born* and for this end came I into the world; and so testifies the Angel
unto the Virgin Mary, and tells her that her Son Jesus should be great, and
called of all, the Son of the Highest, and the Lord shall give unto him the
Throne of his Father David, and he shall reign over the house of Israel for
ever, and of his Kingdom there shall be no end.

Thus that great favourer and much beloved of God, the Prophet Daniel, speaking
by the holy Ghost of Jesus the Lord, he calls him the Son of God, and in
the spirit of prophesy says, that there was given him Dominion and Glory, and
a Kingdom, that all people, nations, and languages, should fear him, his
Dominion is an everlasting Dominion which shall not pass away, and his Kingdom
that which shall not be destroyed. The same Prophet in another place says, In
the days of these Kings (meaning the great oppressors of the earth) from the
beginning of the world to the end: In their days, as before I told you of the
Kings of the East and the whole world. For although there be many differing
powers, as of gold and silver, etc. yet they all make but one enemy, one
adversary, as it is said of Rome, in her shall be found the blood of all the
Saints and Prophets, and of all that were slain upon the earth. It is so said,
because all persecutors make but one generation; and it follows, and in the
days of these Kings shall the God of heaven set up a Kingdom, which shall never
be destroyed, and the Kingdom shall not be left to other people, but it shall
break in pieces and consume all these Kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever.

For David says, though the heathen rage, and the wicked people imagine vain
things, yet says the Lord, I have set my King upon my holy hill of Sion, who
shall speak to them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore disp^easure, his
Dominions is from Sea to Sea* from the River to the ends of the earth, they
that dwell in the wilderness shall bow before him says the Prophet, and his
enemies shall lick the dust.

How full does Almighty God prove this himself, its more clear than the Sun in
its full light, In these words thou art my Son, this day have I begotten
thee, ask of me and I will give thee the Heathen for thy inheritance, the
utmost parts of the earth for thy possession, thou shall rule them with a rod
of Iron, and break them to pieces like a potters vessel; Thus reasons the
Apostle for unto the Angels he has not put into subjection the world to come
whereof we speak, but unto the Son he says, Thy Throne, oh God is for ever
and ever, a Scepter of righteousness is the Scepte^ of thy Kingdom, thou have
put all things in subjection under his feet, and of that subjection more
hereafter. And thus speaks another of the Prophets, the Lord is King for ever
and ever, and again the Lord sits King for ever, for the Lord most high is
terrible, and he is a great King over all the earth.

And again, sing praises with understanding, for God is the King of all the
earth, f^r all Kings shall fall down before him, all nations shall serve him,
so long as the Sun and Moon endures, Oh worship the Lord in the beauty of
holiness fear before him, all the earth say amongst the heathen that the Lord
reigns, the world also shall be established that it shall not be moved, he
shall judge the people righteously, and govern the nations on the earth. These
Scriptures are so plain, they need no exposition, therefore let the Heavens
rejoice and let the earth be glad, ^et the sea roar and the fullness thereof,
let the field be joyful and all that therein is, then shall the trees of the
wood rejoice before the Lord, and the reason the holy Ghost gives in these
words following, for he comes, for he comes, that is the Lord comes to judge
the earth, he shall judge the world with righteousness, and the people with
his truth, Oh sing unto the Lord a new song for he has done marveilous things,
his right hand and his holy arm has gotten him the victory* for its the Lord
that sits upon the throne of his holiness, it is the Lord that raigne^h
over the heathen; And another (says the Lord) shall be King over all the
earth, and in that day shall there be one Lord and his name one: And the
Apostle calls him the everlasting King Jesus, who is the faithful witness and
first begotten of the dead, and the Prince of the Kings of the earth, who alone
is the Lord of Lords and King of Kings thus one and all the messengers of
salvation say unto Sion, thy God reigns, and the same language the Lord
himself speaks; Thus says the King of Ia^ob, the Lord, the King of Israel,
who is thy redeemer, even the Lord of hosts, I am the first and I am the last,
and besides me there is no God; and a^ another time he says, all power is
given unto me of my Father both in Heaven and earth; great and special things
do the Scriptures declare of this Kingdom, of its power and glory of which our
Savior acquainted his servants. Within these forty days, speaking to them of
the things pertaining to the Kingdom of God, which made them so desirous of the
enjoyment and possession of it, that before his descending from them, their
general request was unto him in these words, will thou at this time restore
the Kingdom to Israel, just like the Mother of the two Sons of Zebedee in the
behalf of her Children, Lord, says she out of a true affection of that
perfection she desired; that her two Sons might sit, the one at his right
hand, the other at his left in his Kingdom, and truly now may we say, for thine
is the Kingdom power and glory, for now we see it is the Lords only, and if all
what has been said will not satisfy, we have Gods own oath for it, saying, by
the mouth of the Prophet, I have sworn by my self, and the word is gone out of
my mouth in righteousness and shall not return, that unto me every knee shall
bow, every tongue shall swear; and the Apostle affirms it from the Prophet,
that at the name of Jesus every knee shall bow of things in heaven, and things
on earth, and things under the earth, and that every tongue shall confess that
Jesus Christ is Lord to the glory of God the Father; I will add one place
more, which proves all that has been said of the time, the place, and the
King, and that is showed in the days of the voice of the seventh Angel, when it
shall begin to sound, there shall be time no more, the mystery of God shall be
finished; there is the end of the world, the time; and the voice he sounded
says, the Kingdoms of this world are become the Kingdoms of our Lord and his
Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever; there is the place and the King
both as he has declared to his servants the Prophets.


Him. To me the consent and harmony of the Scriptures thus applied, give great
satisfaction and is very comfortable; I pray Friend, make good your promise in
the other particulars.


Silv. The next thing I promised, was to consider what the Scriptures declare
concerning the Subjects of this glorious King and Kingdom, for the Prophet
says, the Lord shall build up Sion when he shall appear in his glory; by Sion
we are to understand Gods faithful people, and by building them up a restoring
of them to an estate of perfection according to his promise. Now because the
Subjects of the world to come in a general respect is the whole creation, for
so intimates the Apostle, not only we, says he, but every creature also
waits for the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God; therefore we will
consider them in their order; and first for the Angels to prove they shall be
subject, it is written, and let all the Angels of God worship him; Angels,
says the Apostle, they are ministering spirits sent forth, etc. that is
Subjects or Servants, and the reprobate Angels, they are included in the
general dimensions of the Prophets and Apostles before mentioned. Now in the
next order of creatures we will consider mankind; first, the Saints, then the
wicked.

And that the Saints shall fear and serve their Lord the King, is clear by
that Oath which he swore unto our Father Abraham, witnessed by Zacharias the
Priest, that we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, might serve
him without fear in righteousness and holiness, before him all the days of
our lives: and these (of all other) the Prophet David calls the most free
faithful and loyalst Subjects in these and other words: O come let us worship
and bow down, let us kneel before the Lord our maker, for he is our God and we
are the people of his pasture: and again, Praise ye the Lord, sing unto the
Lord a new song and his praise in the Congregation of Saints, let Israel
rejoice in him that made him, let the Children of Sion be j^yfull in their
King; for the Lord takes pleasure in his people, he will beautify the meek
with salvation, let the Saints be joyful in glory, let them sing aloud upon
their beds. And Saint John he joins in the Angels with all the Saints,
saying, And I beheld and heard the voice of many Angels round about the Throne,
and the holy Beasts and Elders, and the number of them was ten thousand times
ten thousand, and thousands of thousands, saying with a loud voice, Worthy is
the lamb that is slain to receive power and riches, and wisdom, and strength,
and honor, and glory, and blessing, and the four Beasts said Amen* and the
four and twenty Elders fell down and worshipped him that lives for ever and
ever; so David calls upon the house of Israel, the house of Aaron, and the
house of Levy: Ye, that fear the Lord, bless the Lord, blessed be the Lord
out of Sion which dwells at Jerusalem, praise ye the Lord.

I find four things in Scripture that do set forth and declare the excellency
of the glorious estate of the Saints in light; first, by a chaste spouse for
purity and beauty; Secondly to a goodly City, for glory and safety; Thirdly, to
a high Court of commission for authority, wisdom, and Judgment; and fourthly,
to a curious planted garden for pleasure and delight, and all these are subject
and subordinate to their King, and that the Saints in their glorified estate,
are set forth by a bride or chaste Virgin, is plain, full and admirably described
in Scripture, the Prophet Esaias is very elegant, in this, speaking of the
Churches glorification, says, thou shall also be a Crown of glory in the hand
of the Lord, and a Royal Diadem in the hand of thy God, thou shall no more be
termed forsaken, neither shall thy Land be any more termed desolate, but thou
shall be c^ll^d, my delight is in her, and thy Land married, for the Lord
delights in thee, and thy Land shall be married, for as a young man marries a
Virgin, so shall thy Sons marry thee, and as the Bridegroom rejoices over
the Bride, so shall thy God rejoice over thee Isa. 62. So the Apostle speaks to
the Corinthians, that his ministry, his labor and Godly jealousy over them,
was to present them a chaste Virgin unto Christ, and they that sung before the
throne as it were a new song which no man could learn but the hundred and
forty, and four thousand which were redeemed from the Earth, these are they
which were not defiled with women faith the holy Ghost for they are Virgins,
and so also this holy Apostle says, And I John saw the holy City, new
Jerusalem coming down from God out of heaven prepared as ^ Bride adornea for
her husband: So also she is called the Lambs wife; and again, Let us rejoice
and be glad, and give honor to him for the Marriage of the Lamb is come, and
his wife has made her self ready: And to her was granted that she should be
arrayed in fine Linen, clean and white; for the fine Linen is the
righteousness of the Saints; in the time of her temptation and sufferings she
was the Kings daughter, and all glorious within; but now in her exaltation and
nuptials she is also all glorious without, excelling in ornament and
perfection; and in that she is the Lambs wife, she has right and interest in
all his glory, that is, honorable above all Lords and Kings, being their Lord
and King; for she is flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone. And as her
chastity and purity excells, so does her beauty, so that the Lord her
Bridegroom calls her the the fairest among women, glorious as the morning,
fair as the Moon, clear as the Su^ne. My beloved, says the Church, spoke
and said unto me, Rise up my Love and fair one, and come away, for lo the
winter is past, the rain is over and gone, the flowers appear in the earth,
the time of the singing of Birds is come, the Fig tree puts forth her
green figs, and the Vines with the tender Grapes give a good smell: Arise my
love, my fair one, and come away: which place shows plainly these speeches of
love and beauty are spoken to, and of the Church in her perfection and
restoration, and what speeches can exceed for love and beauty these
expressions?

Secondly, the eternal glory of Gods people is set forth under the name of a
City; And so says that holy Prophet, Glorious things are spoken of thee, O
thou City of God; yea even as a City stately builded, gloriously ordered,
impregnably fenced, prudently governed, soundly and fully taught and
instructed, safely kept and watched, the beauty and luster of whose building
astonishes and amazes all that pass by which consider and behold it: For thus
says the Lord, Look upon Sion, the City of our Solemnit^es, thine eyes shall
see Jerusalem a quiet habitation, a Tabernacle that shall not be taken down,
not one of the starks thereof shall be removed, neither shall any of the cords
thereof be broken; and the inhabitant shall not say, I am sick; the people that
dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquities: And I will, says the Lord,
make thy Officers peace, and thy exactions righteousness; Violence shall be no
more heard in thy Land, wasting nor destruction within thy borders; but thou
shall call thy Walls salvation, and thy Gates praise: And be you glad, says
the Lord, and rejoice for ever in that which I create; for behold I create
Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people a joy; and I will rejoice in Jerusalem,
and joy in my people; and the voice of weeping shall be no more heard in thee,
nor the voice of crying, for from henceforth shall no more come into thee, the
uncircumcized nor the unclean; none shall enter into this City but such only,
which are both in heart and in flesh circumcised, as the Prophet Ezeck says:
And the holy Citizens of this heavenly City, the Sun shall no more burn them
by day, nor the Moon by night, they shall neither suffer hunger nor weeping,
nor sin, nor dye more, says the Lord: Wherefore awake, awake says the Prophet,
put on thy strength, O Syon, puton thy beautiful garment, O Jerusalem, the
holy City: This is the City of the great King, wherefore arise and shine; for
the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee: For thus says the Lord, I will
extend peace unto thee like a River, and the glory of the Gentiles as a flowing
stream: As one whom his mother comfort so will I comfort you, and you shall
be comforted in Jerusalem: This is Sion whom the Lord has chosen, he the Lord
has desired her for his habitation, this is my rest for ever, says the Lord,
here will I dwell. The glory and safety of this City is so amply set forth by
the Apostle, when he saw her in a vision, where he says: And he carried me
away in the spirit to a great and high mountain, and showed me that great
City, the holy Jerusalem descending out of heaven from God, having the glory of
God, and her light was like unto a stone most precious, and describes the great
City in her glorious building, her walls great and high, having twelve Gates
kept by twelve Angels, and that she had twelve foundations, so precious for the
matter of it, that it exceeds pure gold, and all precious stones and pearls,
magnificent for form, the length, the breadth, and the height of it equal;
upon the twelve foundations were written the names of the twelve Apostles of
the Lamb, the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof,
the Nations of them that are saved shall walk in the light of it, and there
shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defiles, etc. Here is both the
glory and safety of this happy City described; this is the City that God
prepared for the Patriarchs, the City with foundations before showed, which all
the faithful expected and looked for, whose builder and maker is God: And upon
one and all the Citizens of this City I will write upon him says the Lord, the
name of my God, and the name of the City of my God, which is new Jerusalem,
which comes down etc. And these faithful Subjects of God the holy Ghost
calls by the name of the City it self, speaking of the evil reign and time
of Antichrist: And they shall says he tread the holy City under foot forty and
two months; but when those days of the Cities desolation shall be ended, then
she shall have a Commission under the great Seal of heaven, to tread her
enemies under her foot, for so faith the Apostle, The Saints shall judge the
world. And now we are come to the third particular, The commission of power and
authority that the Saints shall have with their Savior, which the Scriptures
do largely declare. And thus the Lord says to prove it, He that overcommeth
will I grant to sit with me in my Throne: There is the commission and authority
too, even as I have overcome, and am set with my Father in his Throne: and so
promises our Lord to his Apostles, and assures it with an asseveration, Verily
I say unto you, that ye which have followed me in the regeneration, when the
son of man shall sit in the Throne of his glory, ye also shall sit upon
twelve Thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel: and what in this he said
unto them, he said unto all. And this the Prophet David well knew, when he sung
this song, Jerusalem is buildea as a City that is compact together, whither the
Tribes go up, The Tribes of the Lord unto the testimony of Israel, to give
thanks unto the name of the Lord, for there are set Thrones of judgment, the
Thrones of the house of David. And so in another place, Let the Saints be
joyful in glory, let the high praises of God be in their mouth, and a two
edged sword in their hands, to execute vengeance upon the heathen, and
punishment upon the people, to bind their Kings with chains, and their Nobles
with fetters of Iron, to execute upon them the judgment written: This honor
have all the Saints, praise ye the Lord. And thus says the Lord to the Church
of Thiatira, To him that overcommeth, and keeps my word to the end, to him
will I give power over the Nations, and he shall rule them with a rod of Iron:
As the vessels of a Potter shall they be broken to shivers, even as I received
of my Father. So likewise does he speak to the Angel of Philadelphia, Behold I
will make them of the Synagogue of Satan, which say they are Jews and are
not, but do lie; Behold I will make them to come and worship before thy feet,
and they shall know that I have loved thee; So speaks Solomon in his
Proverbs, the prudent are crowned with knowledge, the evil bow before the
good, and the wicked at the gates of the righteous, then shall it be most true
in the world to come, as hereafter shall be showed: So the Lord by the Prophet
Jeremiah, speaking of Israel, The rod of the Lords inheritance says, thou art
my battle Axe and Weapons of war, for with thee will I break in pieces the
Nations, and with thee will I destroy Kingdoms, and with thee will I destroy
old and young, and with thee will I break in pieces the Chariot and his rider:
And I will render unto Babylon, and to all the Inhabitants of Chaldea all their
evil that they have done in Sion, in your sight says the Lord: And when thine
eyes shall see this, thine heart shall rejoice, as I have showed before; Sing O
daughter of Sion, shout O Israel, be glad and rejoice with all thy heart O
daughter of Jerusalem, for the Lord has taken away thy judgments, and has
cast out thy enemy: the King of Israel is in the midst of thee: thou wast
humbled, but now thou art exalted; thou wast oppressed, but now thou art
delivered, thou wast judged, but now thou art freed; thou wast of low degree,
but now thou art raised: Jerusalem is set up the praise and Judge of the whole
earth.

According to this speaks the Prophet Micah to the Church concerning her
deliverance from sufferings to reigning: Behold at that time, says the Lord, I
will undo all that afflict thee, and I will save her that halteth, and gather
her that was driven out: and I will get them praise and fame in every Land
where they have been put to shame: At that time will I bring you again, in the
time that I gather you, and I will make you a name and a praise amongst all
people of the earth when I turn back your captivity before your eyes, says the
Lord.


Him. I am much beholding to you for this excellent discovery of Gods servants
condition in the world to come; I pray declare to me the fourth particular you
promised.


Silv. I said that the state of perfection the Scriptures did well illustrate
by a Garden for pleasure and delight, And in this the Prophet Isaiah is very
fluent in speaking of the perfection of Gods people and says; for the Lord
shall comfort Sion, he will comfort all her waste places, and he will make her
wilderness like Eden; and her desert like the Garden of the Lord; joy and
gladness shall be found therein, thanksgiving and the voice of melody. And so
in another place he says, And the Lord shall guide thee continually, and
satisfy thy soul in drought, and make fat thy bones; And thou shall be like a
watered Garden, and like a spring of water, whole waters fail not. So says
the wise King Solomon in the person of Christ; A Garden enclosed is my sister,
my Spouse, a spring shut up, a fountain sealed, thy plants are an Orchard of
Pomegranets, with pleasant fruits, Camphire, with Spikenard, Saffron, Cinnamon,
with all trees of Frankincense, with all the chief spices: Awake thou
Northwind, come thou South, blow upon my Garden, that the spices thereof may
flow out: And the Church says again, let my beloved come into his garden, and
eat his pleasant fruits: All which express nothing but pleasure and delight
in reciprocal affection between Christ and his Church, the King says the Lord
dwells in the garden: and the Lord him self says, I have chosen Sion to
dwell in her. The beauty and excellency of this Church in her perfection was
showed to Balaam in a vision: And made him thus fall into admiration: yea, how
goodly are thy Tents oh Jacob, and thy Tabernacles O Israel; as the valleys are
they spread forth, as gardens by the River side, as the trees of Ligna aloes
which the Lord has planted, and as the Cedar Trees by the waters. And there is
a great deal of reason that the holy Ghost in the testimony of the Prophets
should set forth the estate Eternal, the estate of perfection by a pleasant
Garden, for so God created it at first in that perfect condition in which it
stood, where he gave his holy man Adam Dominion over all, over the Fish of the
Sea, and over the Foul of the Ay^e, and over every living thing that moves
upon the Earth; And just so it shall be again in the Restoration, the second
Adam the Lord from Heaven, shall have a never fading and a perpetual Dominion,
as the Apostle speaks; for unto the Angels he has not put in subjection the
World to come, whereof we speak: But one in a certain place speaks, which is
David, admiring what was prophesied of Christ's Kingdom, breaks out in a
Question (being amazed at the great Glory and Dominion prophesied of) and
asked, What is man O God, that thou art so mindful of him, or the Son of
man, whom thou so visitest to give him Dominion over the Work of thy Hands!
Thou have put all things in subjection under him: And this the Apostle
understands the Prophet speaks of Christ and his Kingdom.

That holy Scribe Ezra, being largely showed the glorious estate of the
Churches Deliverance in the World to come, says, For unto you is Paradise
opened, the Tree of Life is planted, the Time to come is prepared,
plenteousnesse is made ready, a City is builded, and Rest is allowed; yea, a
perfect Goodness and Wisdom. O happy are they that have thus the Lord to be
their God, happy are the peohle that are in such a case: Arise, shake thy self
from the dust, arise from trouble, and sit down in quiet; Oh Jerusalem enter
into your Masters joy.


Him. Good friend, seeing the glory is so great of such as shall be saved which
are willing and obey; and therefore eat the good things of the promised Land,
what shall become of such as perish?


Silv. They that would not in their life time learn obedience by mercy shall be
constreined after death by pain; its true that Hagars generation the
bond-womans Children shall be cast out from inheriting with those that are free
born of Sarah, for so directly speak the Scriptures by a doub^e witness, the
Lord himself and one of his servants: Cast out this bondwoman and her Son for
the Son of this bondwoman shall not be heir, with my free born Son even
my Son Isaac; Where its plain and without all question that this generation
shall not inherit, that is, shall not participate of the glory in the world to
come, (whereof we speak) with Sarahs free born Children, but that they shall
serve, and be subject to their King and his Saints for ever, and this appears
plainly by Scripture, thus speaks Noah by the spirit of prophecy, Cursed be
Canaan, a servant of servants shall he be unto his brethren, and Canaan shall
be Shems servant, and again the Lord says in another place, the elder shall
serve the younger, and that the younger shall be Lord over his brethren, and then
as all things shall be made new, so righteousness and judgment shall have the
victory, and then shall Esaias serve Jacob, Ishmael Isaac, and Cain Abel; and
although in their former life time, they hated, persecuted, scorned, disdained,
and killed them, even serving themselves of them whom they ought to have
served, if truth had taken place; yet at the return of the Lord, as all his
enemies shall be subdued to him and brought under his feet, these enemies
amongst the rest shall be subjected: now the principal enemies to God, Christ
his truth and his children are the Devil, and these hard hearted, stif-necked
rebels his Children, that as their Father, so are they implaceable and
unreconcilable, and as he, so do they resist the holy Ghost, and will not have
this man to reign over them, that is the Lord Christ; but they do and will
break his bonds and cast his cords from them: and as they have always done, so
they do now and will continue, (till he comes to reign in power and Majesty)
profess themselves sworn enemies and adversaries to him and his; but when this
world shall come to an end, and that world is come of which our Savior says,
his Kingdom is of; then even shall he take, and slay before him all those his
enemies, Slay them before me, says the Lord, then shall the head wholly
prevail and triumph over him that ever has so exceedingly bruised, mortified
and persecuted his heel, then he shall so subdue and break in sunder Satan
and his Children, by his invincible power and regal authority, that he shall
undo, frustrate, and make void Satan's whole plot and work; and the Scripture
then shall be fulfilled which says, and he, that is Christ, shall break his
head, then the Devil that has deceived mankind ever since the world began,
shall be cast into the lake of fire and brimston, and shall be tormented day
and night for ever and ever.

Then there shall not be one knee amongst all the reprobate Angels and men, but
shall bow, nor any tongue but shall confess (to the glory of God the Father)
that Jesus Christ is both Lord and King, and although now they rage and take
Counsel together against the Lord and against his anointed, and invent lies
and mischiefs against the Lords truth and all his faithful servants, yet he
that sits in the Heavens does laugh at them, the Lord shall have them in
derision, for the begotten of God the King of Sion, shall rule, govern and
subdue those heathens, yea, he shall break them with a rod of Iron, says the
Prophet, and dash them to pieces like the vessel that the potter makes of
clay, as was before mentioned, and as the Lord, so shall all that are his, have
dominion over all the outcast, heathenish* hard hearted and unregenerate
gentilish generation, for such names the Scripture gives them all, and
therefore thus says the Lord himself, he that overcomes and keeps my words
unto the end, to him will I give power over the nations, and he shall rule them
with a rod of Iron, etc. even as I received of my Father, that is, they shall
execute the same power my Father has given me; to this agrees that Scripture
which says, All nations shall fea^e and obey him: And again, the Children of
those that afflicted thee, shall be sold for slaves unto thee; And again, With
thee will I break in pieces Captains and Rulers, the old and young man and
maid, Kings and subjects, none exempted of what language, sex, estate, or
degree whatsoever: Finally, the last particular is, that the whole Creation,
that is to prove all other Creatures besides men and Angels, they shall for ever
serve, that is, magnify, set forth and further the glory of the great King and
his Kingdom for ever without any opposition, cruelty, savagenesse or evil
whatsoever, and therefore its contained in Scriptures, that every creature that
is in Heaven and on the earth and under the earth, and such as are in the Sea
and all that are in them, heard I saying, says Saint John, blessing honor,
glory, and power be to him that sits upon the Throne and unto the Lamb for
ever and ever; this proof is so general, as it takes in all places, Heaven and
Hell, the whole Earth and the Sea, and all that are within them, are heard by
the Apostle, to praise, honor and obey the Lamb, and this truth, the Prophet
David declares excellently, where he says, What is man that thou art so
mindful of him, or the Son of man that thou visitest him? thou have made him
a little lower then the Angels, thou have crowned him with glory and honor,
thou have made him to have Dominion over the work of thy hand, thou have put
all things under his feet, all sheep and oxen, yea, and the beasts of the
field, the fowls of the air, and the fishes of the Seas; which makes the
Prophet cry out in admiration and wonder, O God our Lord, how excellent is thy
name in all the earth! Now the Apostle to the Hebrews declares this, that David
spoke of Christ's Kingdom the world to come, as has before been described, and
therefore, says he, for unto the Angels he has not put in subjection the
world to come, whereof I speak, but one in a certain place testified rehearsing
the very words before repeated of the Prophet David, so that if any man say,
the Prophet is not so to be understood, the Apostle himself makes answer and
gives us an assurance so to believe, and this doctrine he preaches for truth
without exception to the holy Romans, where he says for the earnest
expectation of the creature, waits for the manifestation of the Sons of
God, and he gives the reason clear and plain, because says he, the creature
it self also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption into the
glorious Liberty of the Sons of God, for we know, says he, speaking as if it
were so well known to them, as certain, as their hoped for inheritance, that
the whole creation, that is every creature groaneth and travaileth in pain
together until now, note how exact and elegant he is, he expounds the whole
creation to be every creature, and that all these by a special instinct of
nature are like a woman in travel that nothing in the world can prevent her
bringing forth; and so it shall be with the whole creation in its restitution to
its perfection, and lest it should not be clear enough, the Apostle goes on and
in particular and apart speaks of the adopted of God, the heirs of the world
to come, the inheritance of the salvation, saying, and not only they, but our
selves also, which have received the first fruits of the spirit, even we our
selves groan within our selves, waiting for the adoption, to wit the redemption
of our bodies; the words are so plain they need no exposition, proving the
restoration of the whole creation as well as the Saints, which is further
confirmed by that knowing Evangelist Saint Luke, who says, And he shall send
Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto you, whom the heavens must receive
until the times of restitution of all things, which God has spoken by the
mouth of all his holy Prophets since the world began, which truth in times past
was well known unto men, although now the world through ignorance understand it
not, for the Lord says by a holy Prophet; that his covenant with Sun and Moon,
day and night is for ever, and again he says he made not the Earth for
naught, but to be inhabited, and he has established it that it shall not be
moved; and in another place speaking of the general restitution as Saint Paul
does, he says with righteousness, shall he judge the poor, and with the
breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked; and then from mankind goes on to
other creatures, and says, then shall the Wolf dwell with the Lamb, and the
Leopard shall lie down with the Kid, and the calf and the young Lion, and the
Fatling and a little Child shall lead them: and the Cow and the Bear shall
feed, their young ones shall lie down together, and the Lion shall eat straw
like the Ox, and the sucking Child shall play over the hole of the Aspe, and
the weaned Child shall put his hand on the Cockatrises den, they shall not hurt
nor destroy in all my holy mountain, says the Lord, for the earth shall be
full of the knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover the Sea; and in another
place the same Prophet says again, that the Wolf and the Lamb shall feed
together, and the Lion shall eat straw like the Bullock, and dust shall be the
Serpents meat; and again he says, seek ye out of the book of the Lord, and
read, no one of these shall fail, none shall want her mate, for my mouth it
has commanded, and his spirit it has gathered them, and the beast of the
field, says the Lord by the same Prophet, shall honor me: and again, Oh Sion
break forth into singing, and let all the trees in the field rejoice and clap
their hands, for in stead of the thorn shall come up the Figg tree, and in
stead of the bryer shall come up the myrtle tree, and it shall be unto the Lord
for a name and for an everlasting signethat shall not be cut off; and another of
the Lords faithful ones, says, moreover even the woods, and every sweet
smelling tree shall over shadow Israel by the commandment of God, for God
shall lead Israel with joy, with the light of his glory, even with the mercy
and righteousness that comm^th from him.


Him. That all Creatures shall be restored, me thinks the Scriptures are plain
and evident for, so that I cannot but acknowledge it is so; yet many objections
also appear to me, some of the Scriptures you allege because such expressions
are used which concern this present life, as the Calf, a Child, and Straw, as
if there should be plowing* and sowing, and increase, and multiplication of
Creatures again.


Silv. As you say the Scriptures, in some particulars, do seem so to speak,
both for fructification and sustentation; for the last our Lord speaks as if
there might be such a thing, even as Adam had for his delight and pleasure to
eat even in the time of his innocence in Paradise, the fruit of all the trees
in Eden, and excepted none but the tree of knowledge of good and evil, and the
words of our Lord are these, but I say unto you, I will not drink hence forth
of this fruit of the vine, until I drink it new with you in my Fathers
Kingdom: Note here this fruit of the vine, as distinguished from that which
shall be new when the Kingdom of God comes, as Luke says, as also that our
Lord speaks further these words, and I appoint unto you a Kingdom, as my Father
has appointed unto me, that you may eat and drink at my Table in my Kingdom,
and sit on Thrones judging the twelve Tribes of Israel, and that there shall
not be any more marrying or giving in marriage, by which I understand there
shall be no further increase, but that man shall be as the Angels of God in
Heaven in the resurrection; secret things belong unto God, and things revealed
belong to us and our Children, and seeing the Scriptures have revealed so much,
therefore break forth into joy, sing together ye wast places of Jerusalem, for
the Lord has comforted his people, he has redeemed Sion, the Lord has made
bare his holy Arm in the eyes of all the nations, and all the ends of the
earth shall see the salvation of our God: thy faithfulness, Oh God, is unto
all generations, thou have established the earth and it abides, they continue
this day according to thy ordinance, for all are thy servants.

Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name? for thou only art
holy, for all nations shall come and worship before thee for thy Judgments are
made manifest.


FINIS.

