The Great Eclipse of the Sun, OR, CHARLES HIS WAINE Over-clouded, ^y the evil
Influences of the Moon, the malignancie of Ill-aspected Planets, and the
Constellations of Retrograde and Irregular Stars. ^therwise, Great CHARLES,
our Gracious KING, Eclipsed ^y the destructive persuasions of His Queen, by the
pernicious aspects of his Cabbinet Counsel, and by the subtle insinuations of
the Popish Faction, Priests, Jesuits and others. As also from the firing of
Towns, the shedding of Innocent Blood, and the Cries of his Subjects.

depiction of Charles I's suppression of his subjects Thy Subjects blood!
with fire and sword,
Cries Vengeance Lord.


Conscience that checks the poor man for his sin,
Here plays the Ghost, and tells our mis-lead KING,
That firing houses, and his Subjects slaughter,
Have so Eclipsed him, he will scarce shine hereafter:
For when by Fire and Sword Kings bloody prove,
They loose at once their Light, and Subjects love.
Printed according to Order, by G. B. August. 30. 1644.

The great Eclipse of the Sun. OR Charles his VVaine.
THe Commonwealth may most fitly be compared to the Glo^ of the Heavens. The
King is the Sun, the Parliament are t^ bright Stars; Malignant Counselors to
the King, are the ev^ aspected Plannets, such as Bristoll, Cottington, Lord
Keep^ Littleton, Digby, Jermyn, and others, whereby the King h^ been Eclipsed,
and has lost that Light which should rend^ him Glorious in the eyes of his
People, and brought hims^ to the lowest degree of respect amongst his Subjects;
A^ whereas the King should have been a Sun, shining by examp^ and maintaining
the Light of the Gospel, he has suffered it from the beginning of (...)
Reign, to be extinguished and put out; we should have had no Gospel, nor any
Fai^ but what the King and the Bishops would have forced upon us; This Plot was
handso^ly carried on by the Bishop of Canterbury, and had not our Brethren of
Scotland be^ true, Popery had spread it self over this Kingdom, and long since
we had been (...) Papists and slaves to the King and his Prerogative. For the
King was eclipsed by t^ Queen, and she persuaded him that Darkness was Light,
and that it was better to be (...) Papist, then a Protestant, the Bishops
affirmed as much, and the Learned Divine Preached good Roman Doctrine at
Court, and cring'd and bowed in the pulpit, flatte^ the King, prayed for the
Queen, and so got advancement to be Prebends and Dea^ of great Cathedral
Churches. The Judges put out the Light of the Kings understa^sting, by telling
him, That he had an unbounded Prerogative; The Court Politicians info^med him
that Monopolies and Taxes would make his Subjects obedient, that such mil^
beginnings of slavery would make the people fit and apt for subjection, and
that t^ Counsell-Table would be a terror to those that were stubborn, and the
High Comm^sion Court and Star Chamber would serve to Fine, and punish
offenders. The light (...) the Kings understanding being thus Eclipsed, and the
eyes of the Protestant Rel^ being put out, we must have groap'd out the way to
heaven through Catholic blin^nesse, without any light at all, unless it were
the Wax Candles burning on the Altar, (...) the Light of Meriting by giving
Alms; and the Bishops told the King, it was true Re^gion to pray unto the Lady
Mary, and be ruled by his little Queen Mary, for this was ^dolatry, but the way
to increase his Royal Offspring, and Progeny, whereupon (...) King being in
full Conjunction with this Popish Plannet, the Queen, he was totally ^lipsed
by her Counsel, who under the Royal Curtains, persuaded him to advance (...)
Plots of the Catholics, under the color of mainteining the Protestant
Religion. Or^nary women, can in the Night time persuade their husbands to give
them new Gowns (...) Petticotes, and make them grant their desire; and could
not Catholic Queen Mary ^ink ye) by her night discourses, incline the King to
Popery? and make him believe (...) he had no true obedient Subjects, but
Catholics, that there was no salvation out of (...) Church of Rome, that his
Majesty's Predecessors of famous memory were Catholics, (...) the Universities
desired the advancement of Popery, all their Colleges being built (...)
Papists, that it was no disparagement for his Majesty to acknowledge the
Suprema^ of the Pope, while the Roundheads would take away his Prerogative, and
therefore (...) Majesty should protect the Papists, and they would defend his
Right, and pray for (...) as their supreme Governor next under the Pope. The
Queen having thus read a ^taine Lecture to the King, he began to be full of
Fears and Jealousies, and to look (...) a discontented brow upon his
Parliament, and came with a swaggering crew of ^mmy-Cavaliers to the House of
Commons, to take away the five Members, which ^le Act, being in vain
attempted, his Majesty was persuaded, that his Person was (...) danger by the
coming to Court of a swarming multitude (as he called them) of un^ factious
Brownists, Anabaptists, and Roundheads, and so forsaking the Parliament, he ^ed
down from London to York, thinking by his presence to gain the Love of his
^thern Subjects, that is, The Catholics and Delinquents in those parts, and so
fell (...) with his Parliament and people, and would not Love them, that were
sick of Love for (...), but in his Waine, or Chariot (like Phaethon) down he
went, with his Evil Coun^ors, that governed his affections, made him set
England on fire, and engage is in the ^mbustion of a civil war; then he
began to set on foot the illegal Commission of Ar^, and to get a Guard about
him, as big as an Army, while his Majesty made fine ^eeches to the Mayor of
York, and to the Gentry and Yeomen in that County, endea^ring to make the
Parliament odious, and crying out for assistance against the Parlia^nt, that
would induce an Alteration of Government, and would all be Kings. The ^bitious
Clergy, preached very earnestly for the King; and contributed very largely to
^e the King an Army, to maintain his Right, and the Protestant Religion, but
indeed to ^hold the Usurping Bishops, who were then ready with Lucifer, to fall
down even as (...) as Hell.

The Sun of Majesty, being thus Eclipsed by Error, by Evil Counsel, and by
the ^rs of Papists and Delinquents; has summonned by Proclamation, all the
Malignants (...) assist him in raising a speedy war against the Parliament,
advising them, that as they ^dred Monarchy, and the true Protestant Religion,
they should endeavor, under the ^our of a Guard, to raise him a great Army.

Hereupon the Malignants began to move forward in a posture of war against
the Parliament, the Gentry sided with his Majesty, and the common people were
compel'^ or led on by a blind affection to the Crown.

The Bishops began also to bussell up themselves, and to stand for the King an^
Queen, they remembered that Kings and Queens had ever been indulgent fathers
an^ nursing mothers to the Roman Church, that unless they had a King to
support their Lubberly Lordships, they could not be King in their own Dioces
over the rest of the Cle^gie; and besides the Parliament had voted them out of
the House, and therefore the^ would with St. Paul's sword fight for the Pope;
Bishop Williams sometimes Chancellou^ of England, got himself Arms, with a
Sword and Gauntlet, to kill Roundheads; he^ saw his Bishopric was not long
lived, and he would not live to see it took from him* he had rather be killed
or hanged, which he deserved and his other fellow Bishops, rather then be outed
and cast out of his Dioces and fat Bishopric; with these fat Bul^ that were
silent enough in their Pulpits) all the Malcontents joined, and all Proiecto^
that by Monopolies had made England mourn in foul linen, not for her sins,
but for want of soape, and some that had heard of William the Conqerour, would
have Kin^ Charles be a Conqueror of his own subjects; but it had been better
for him that he^ had Conquered himself, Conquered his own passion, subdued his
affection to Poperi^ and subjected himself to reason, and come home unto his
Parliament, then to be carrie^ on by evil councillors to shed the blood of his
subjects, giving Commission to Prin^ Rupert to butcher and kill his subjects,
and fire their houses; and all because they wou^ not be slaves, or put on
fetters being born unto freedom; but would rather have the Ki^ see his errors,
and acknowledge what others see and know, and have felt by the rage (...) the
Kings sword: O therefore let the King incline his Royal heart unto his people,
an^ if he will be written valiant to posterity, let him I say, Conquer himself,
and return from Rebels and Traitors that possess him. It is the eye of
Justice which they shun, and h^ Sword which they fear: But the King has in
this a Prerogative, that he must only (...) tried in Foro Conscientiae, in the
Court of his own Conscience, and no doubt but Mer^ may weigh down his sins,
if he would yet put an end to these bloody Wars, and (...) friends with his
Parliament and people; then he would shine again in glory, but now (...) the
case stands all the love and obedience showed him by his subjects by the hazard
(...) their lives, to regain his Royal person, and to preserve their Liberties
and Religion, a^ not at all regarded, and having lost the light of Reason, the
light of Religion, and Mo^rall humanity, he does yet endeavor by the help of
the Cavaliers, to cut a passage wi^ the sword for the Romish religion to enter
into England; yet it must march in upon t^ legs of the Protestant Religion,
bear the same colors with it, and with Armies in t^ West, and Armies in the
North all must be wasted and consumed, and all the Protestan^ killed, and then
the King and the Bishops and the Cavaleirs will alone maintain the Pr^testant
Religion, and then there would be a strange new Government, if King Charl^
could subdue his subjects and bring them to slavery, he might be well called
and stile^ William the Conqueror; for he would have his will preferred above
Law, and as it is (...) France, we should not have a bed, a dish, nay a spoone,
or a stool to sit upon, but it mig^ (...) taken from us for the Kings use, the
Cavaleirs do show you how it should be in Eng^nd, they plunder and take away
all they can find, the goods of the Roundheads are ^eir own, they have the
Kings Commission for it, and if they will not yield they will ^ke them smoke
for it, setting fire to the town, and though the King be Eclipsed and (...)
seen in these actions, yet he cannot walk nor ride so invisible but his hand
has been ^en in these plundering firing Commissions, Signed with C. R. whereby
we may see, ^at R. which stands for the King is to be much blamed; for what
the Cavaleirs do, may ^e said to be done by the King, if the Kings affections
were not cruelly bent, the Cava^eirs actions would not be so bloody nor
inhumane; but they know that all his Protesta^ions to maintain the Protestant
Religion were but complement, and that now he is so darkened in true glory,
that we had need to pray he may recover the light of his Sceprer, ^d the love
of his subjects, and therefore they will fight it out; desperate diseases must
^ave desperate cures, and the King will pawn his Crown (if he could get it
from Westminster) to maintain the Miter, and now fight Dog fight Bear, fight
Cavaleir and fight Roundhead, you have barked long enough at one another, and
now the King will have you fight it out, though you fight him out of his
Kingdom, and make him and his Ca^leirs fly down Westward, as if his Majesty
had done some mischief, he knows the ^ound-heads will make severe
constructions of his proceedings, and that his will first ^rried him from his
Parliament; but there is a thing called Conscience that does follow after the
King and his Cavaleirs, faster then our Armies can do, it does bring in a
Cata^gue of crimes, and will twich the King by the heart and give him shrewd
Items, it is worse then Hamlets Ghost; for it will haunt him every where, and
cry unto him, O King ^pect revenge for the blood of thy subjects. Who has
wasted, undone, and ruinated ^e most famous Kingdom of England? who has fired
the Towns, plundered, killed, and ^estroy'd his own subjects? who has given
Commission for it? who has broke his word and his promises made in so many
Declarations? who sent for the Irish rebels to come ^ver to kill the
Protestants, and who in all this war has endeavored nothing but the
^intaining of Popery and his own Prerogative, I fear Conscience does tell his
Maie^y it was King Charles; who has for three years together and upward
maintained an un^turall war against his Parliament and people? Conscience
replies, King Charles? who ^nt into Spain to learn the Protestant religion,
then returned and married a Catholic Queen? who has been a chief party in
mischief against the Protestants? who harkned (...) Queen Mary's counsel, and
believed it more then Gods word, and was angry and ^ught with his subjects, and
'tother day hanged up fourteen Clothiers, was nor the King ^en present?

Did he not come with an Army from York, which was all composed of
Malignants and Delinquents that fled from the Parliament, and of Papists,
though His Majesty ^romised their horses should have Protestant Riders, there
were (as I said before) first ^e Bishops, or the Bishops Malignant money, which
was sent into pay Soldiers that ^ould fight under the Popes Banner; and the
lack-Latine Priests and Clergy contribu^ed largely to the Kings Army, fearing
that for their ignorance and scandalous lives, they should be thrust out of
their Viccarages and Parsonages, and that the Parliamen^ would put Religious
Ministers in their places. The young flashing Gentry that ha^ spent their
father Patrimony, in whoring and dicing, these would stake their fortune^ with
the King, in hope to get estates and be Knighted for cutting the Protestants
throat^* The country people would have their old ways, their old fashions,
and their old Religion, their old Homilies, which were better then Roundhead
Sermons, they would have Feasts and Rush-bearings in the North, and Saint
days, and give Cakes for a^ Christen Souls on All-Soules day, and being Ingram
people, half Papists and half^ Atheists, they would stand for the King and the
old Common prayer Book, as for the Gospel and the Parliament, they knew not
what they were, but they were persuaded i^ their country consciences, they
ought to honor and obey the King.

And thus with an Army of Malignant Nobility, Clergy, Gentry and Common
people, the King came to Kenton-field, and in some hours space made the ground
look re^ with the blood of his Subjects, is it for this he now hides his face
from us, is he ashame^ that so many of his Subjects lives should be lost in one
Field, I find no such matter i^ the Story, the King from this Field gets into
the West, there to rest himself after he ha^ done so good a days work in
butchering his Subjects at Kenton field, where many thousands fell on both
sides, as Sacrifices to his Prerogative.

But the King being now in the West, most of the Malignants coming in unto him,
h^ had (as he thought) an invincible Army, and therefore he was resolved now
with a^ cruelty to proceed against the Roundheads, and the Cavaliers
proceeded in plunde^ing and firing of Towns, and killing all Roundheads; for
it was his Majesty's pleasur^ they should so do; Alas what needs the King
hide himself from the sight of his Parliament, and his other Subjects, he
fights but to maintain his will as a law, or a thin^ above the law called
Prerogative: Can Majesty shine glorious without cruelty? Le^ Subjects hate
their King, so they fear him, a few evil Counselors can protect hi^ from
all danger, and has he not an Army for a guard? It is then nothing but
Conscience, this troublesome thing Conscience, that will be telling His
Majesty of his faults and in despite of Digby, Cottington, and Jermin, will
take the King alone, and charg^ the King with many cruel actions, that it has
rained blood all his reign, that thoug^ the Pope and all the Devils in hell
should encourage him in this bloody war, yet it i^ unnatural in the sight of
God and man, that there is a Hell and Domes-day, and Damnation, as well for
Kings, as poor Subjects, that when His Majesty after a happy raign^ should end
his days in a good old age, and with the love and honor of his Subjects b^
laid into his grave, what can he expect who has murdered so many of His
Subjects, an^ laid them in their Graves: But alas King, fly not from this
Conscience, hide not thy self, do not fly from place to place before the
Lord Generals Army: Loosing gamesters will change their places to change
their luck, sick men will change their chambers to change their diseases: But
thou, O King, that were wont to cure the Kings evil in thy Subjects, art now
made a King of evil consequence and destruction to thy Kingdom, by the
influence of evil Councillors, the beams of Mercy, Piety, Religion*
Obedience to the Laws, Omnipotency in goodness, not badnesse, Will
conformable (...) Gods Will, and thy Justice which should empale thy Brow, are
took away from thee (...) the Cavaliers; so that thou do not see, or if see,
not pity thy distressed Subjects, ^d as long as thou art thus affected, thus
darkened in thy Royal Attributes, and wilt be ^nely a King of Rebels and
Cavaleirs, thou shall be like unto Noah's Dove, not in inno^ency, but in flying
from placs to place, and shall not find a place to rest thy foot in, as ^ng as
this Deluge of blood does overflow thy Kingdom.

But what a saucy fellow is this Conscience? Can thou not meddle with thy
match, ^d tell poor men only of their offenses? Me thinks thou should have
little desire (...) follow the Kings camp, when thou were formerly whipped out
of his Court, and out (...) all the Courts of Justice; for had thou continued
in this Kingdom, the Pope and (...) Majesty, and his Bishops could never have
brought about their own ends: but when ^ou and Religion were banished both
together, then the Bishops began to laugh in their ^awne sleeves, then they
thought to have altered the Case, and to alter the Table, alter ^eir Posture
Preaching and Lordly titles, the little Bishop should have been a great
^rdinall, and the other Bishops should have governed the Church more Roman,
ac^ording to the Roman fashion, and it should have been dressed and trickt up
with the ^ages of St. Anthony, St. Francis, St. Patrick, St. John of Jerusalem,
St. Dominick, ^d the Lady Marie; then Crosses, should have been new builded and
painted over, ^re should have been little Preaching, unless they were Sermons
of Liberty and free^ome of sports upon the Sabbath Day. And the little Levites
the small Lights of the Gospel, should have walked in cloakes down to their
shoes like Jesuits, being in the ^niversities Jesuited in heart as well as
habit, the Star Chamber should then have cen^r'd Religious men to have their
ears cut and clipped, as some were that suffered for thy ^ke; because Conscience
would not permit them to see Popery and blindness brought ^o this land, to see
the light of the Gospel Eclipsed and blown out by the Devil and ^e Bishops;
but Conscience what have thou to do with Kings? may not they be flat^r'd that
they are Gods; but that thou must tell them they are but men? and that if they
^verne not their Subjects according to the known Laws of the Land, and do
allow ^eir Subjects their Rights and Liberties, seeking not to alter but
maintain their Reli^ion, they are no better then wilful bloody Tyrants. Is
this thy blunt way of speaking ^to Kings? Well as long as thou take this
course, and do lay before the King his ^e, his er^ors, his spilling of blood,
with a long Catalogue of private sins, never ^agine that thou shall rise in
his favor, or be made a Bishop; for there was never any ^eat Courtier, Bishop,
Lord Keeper, or any eminent Statesman that was created Lord-^onscience,
Bishop-Conscience, Lord-Keeper-Conscience; for as soon as they were ^vanced to
these dignities they had no Conscience at all, but would take bribes in the ^y
of golden thanks, for giving unjust judgment to the overthrow of the best
causes.

Is it not a fault in thee Conscience that the King cannot rest in his chamber,
but thou ^st make him see strange Dreams and Visions, as the battle at
Kenton-field, where so ^ch blood was spilt for the King; for this the King does
hide himself, is ashamed, and ^clips'd from the sight of his Subjects.

Why do thou tell him of his Commission of Array, arming his Subjects to kill
(...) another? This is an old Story, must thou Conscience revive these matters
in the Ki^ remembrance, and thereby seek to Eclipse his fame and glory.

Cannot the Cavaleirs plunder the Kingdom all over, and fire Towns cum
privile^ and show the Kings hand, giving them Commission for it? but thou
Conscience (...) make the Kings heart ache for it, and tell him this is the way
to be counted a Tyrant, (...) to be Eclipsed in the love of his Subjects.

Must not his Majesty favor Delinquent Lords: but thou Conscience must tell
(...) they are evil Counselors, and that he has almost undone Himself and
his Poster^ by being ruled by these Malignants, who know if the wars should
cease, the block (...) expect them, or the gallows, and therefore they will
fight to defend the King from (...) Enemies, which indeed are themselves, and
the King must fight against his Subject^ (...) keep them from the hands of
Justice, and by this the fame and renown of King Cha^ is Eclipsed.

Cannot the King suffer the Irish to kill so many thousand Protestants, and
the^ make a Cessation of Arms with them, and to call them his Catholic
subjects, and af^ward to send for them by ten thousands at a time to aid him
in this unnatural war; (...) Conscience must tell the King that this is
contrary to his Protestations of maintain^ the Protestant Religion, when indeed
this war was Bellum Papale, the Popes war, and (...) setting up of Popery was
always intended: does not this cruelty, this false dealing, (...) bringing
over and sending for Irish Rebels, Eclipse the glory of his Majesty?

Conscience seems thus to reply, I fear neither King nor Subject; The King I
tell (...) true is in a great Eclipse of light and love of his people, I have
shak'd him up soun^ and told him that he mocked the people with a smooth
pretense of the maintaining (...) Protestant Religion, that to defend
Delinquents he should not lay his Crown at sta^ for if he should loose that,
he could not stake again, that the dye of war was uncert^ that in this war
nothing was certain to his Majesty but loss, loss of his credit, and p^haps
the loss of his Kingdoms, that it was his fathers glory to write this for his
Mo^ Beati Pacifici: But his Motto will in succeeding Ages be writ in Caracters
of blo^ thus, Maledicti Belligeri, Cursed are the war-makers, That all the
blood which (...) been spilt will be laid unto his Majesty's charge: But the
King is Eclipsed still, F^ by the Queen in chamber Conjunction with her, and
now since by Malignant Coun^lers, he has (with grief be it written) no Light,
no Reason, no Religion left, but a^ Ecclipsed, and there is nothing but God and
his own conscience that can discover (...) him that great Eclipse of Light
which he now suffers in the West, the causes when have been here largely
declared, and the King proved to be in a great Eclipse.

FINIS.

