A GREAT VICTORY IN THE NORTH, OBTAINED By the Forces under the Command of
Lieutenant General CROMWELL, against Duke Hamilton, and the Scottish Army.
Wherein is declared, the manner of the late Fight near the Confines of York,
the routing of Lieutenant General Cromwells Forces upon the first O^set, and
after three miles pursuit (by the Scots) rallied again, fell upon the Scottish
Forces, killed Duke Hamiltons Lieutenant Colonel, a Major, diverse Captains,
Officeta, and Soldiers, routed the whole Body, and regained the^r ground.

Also another Fight near Pomfret castle in Yorkshire, a Defeat given to the
Parliaments Forces, and diverse taken prisoners, and carry^d to the said Castle.

Whereunto is annexed, An humble Petition to the Kings most Excellen Majesty,
concerning the King and his People, and ev^ry subject in particular of thi^ his
Kingdom of England.

Behold! all ye that pass by stand still, and see the wonderful works of the
Lord, which he has wrought for the people of England, by His Servant King
Charles.

Aug: 8th London, Printed for the welfare and happiness of all true and
Loyal Subjects. Anne Dom. 1648.

A Great fight between the Forces belonging to Lieutenant General Crumwell,
and the Scots forces under the Command of Duke Hamleton.
Right honorable,
MAjor General Lambert having received some fresh supplies, and joined his
Army with the additionall forces sent from Lieutenant General Cromwell, a
motion was made to dispute a piece of ground with the Scots, which was assented
to, and about 20 Troops of the Lieut. Genesis horse charged the Scots, both
parties bodied, and some action happened, but the Scots being to rumerous, the
Liuet. Genesis horse were forced to retreat; the Scots pursued, protesting not to
leave a man of them alive; whereupon the English rallyed, charged Duke
Hambletons own Regiment of horse, and some others that pursued them, and after
a great conflict worsted them, put them to a retreat and followed the pursuit
within one mile of the main body, and made good their passage with the loss of
15 killed, and some few wounded. The Scots loss is far more, their number
killed, wounded and taken prisoners amounting to 85. some of them being men of
quality, as the Dukes, Lieut. Col. a Major, our headquarters 10. miles on this
side Barnard Castle, the Scots advancing up with small parties, but the Body
moves slowly. We hear that the Wasps of Pomfret have stung some of L.G.
Cromwells horse, and took their Riders, sallying upon them as they were on
their march to the Maj. Genesis A small defeat: the gaining of which, cost them
dear, they lost in the dispute near upon 20. Officers and Soldiers, the
Governor himself being dangerously wounded.

York August 1648.
To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
M^st gracious Sovereign,
IT is the saying of Solomon (the penman of the Holy Ghost, and the wisest
King that ever was) Prove. 21.1. The Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord as
the Rivers of water; he turns it whithersoever he pleases: I, a poor
despicable man, (despicable because poor) do presume, out of my sincere loyal
affection, and duty to your Maj. and my earnest desire for the re-uniting of
You with your Parl. and Subjects of this Kingdom, to offer, or rather to
sacrifice, my weak Conceptions to Your gracious Acceptance or Refusal. Sir, We
are all in an Egyptian darkness, be you but pleased to cause the Sun-shi^e of
your Mercy and Goodness to break out upon Your poor Subjects of this Kingdom;
and there is great hope we may soon be delivered from this fearful Confusion
whereinto we are fallen. For my own part, I believe, Your Maj. not being
conscious of the misery Your poor Subjects are in (in regard of the unkingly
restraint You are for the present unhappily under) is the cause You cannot be
so zealous, as otherwise you would, to redress it; and that your want of
knowledge of the present conjuncture of Affairs is that which renders your
people so infinitely miserable, that they are ready every minute to precipitate
themselves into the Gulf of Despair. It is said of Almighty God, There is mercy
with him that he may be feared, and his mercy is over (or above all works: And
I believe (without least flattery I speak it that there is abundance of Mercy
and Bowel^ of Compassion with You, toward Your poor Subjects, that You may be
both loved and feared; and that Your mercy will shower it self down to the
amazement and reproach of those that seem not to believe it: Did I say, Your
Mercy, yea and Your Justice also, even against Your self, in the voluntary
clouding of Your own Princely Royalty; and that Prince, who shadows his own
Glory (merely for the good of his Subjects) is a rare Pattern: And the first
giver of so great an (unexampled) Example, must needs render himself glorious
to all Posterity. Sir, in the first place, I presume (with boldness enough I
confess, yet will I not fl^tter you so much as to say, I beg your Maj. pardon
for it) to remember you, that Self-denial is the only way to happiness,
Temporal (here, Eternal hereafter:) and had it been but a little practiced on
all hands (by the 3. Estates of Parl.) at the beginning or budding forth of
these unhappy differences, (although Malice it self cannot but say, that Your
Maj. acted Your part, and the very Lepers of Samaria shall one day rise up in
Judgment against some, and say that that was a day of good tidings, and they
ungratefully held their Peace, In your abolishing of Monopolies, putting down
the Star Chamber, disannulling the High Commission Court, outing of Bishops
from the House of Pears, Regulating the Council Table, granting of Triennial
Parliaments, and continuing of This, not to be dissolved without the consent of
both Houses;) Your Maj. and Your People had not felt Gods heavy hand, as You
and they have done for these seven years past, and yet do: but for me to
presume to tell your Majesty what Self-Denial is, were a most unpardonable
offense.

And yet, for your Majesty to believe that this Peace offering, which you
sacrifice to the good and happiness of your people) in the sad condition your
Majesty is in, and the most miserable one they are plunged into) can be happyly
begun without self denial (one your part first, and then all the peoples part
also) is (so far as I can apprehend in Reason and Religion) altogether
unpossible: and by the sequel of my discourse I doubt not but to make good the
truth of it at the full.

Sir, look into your own heart, and see whether in former times you were not
more your own (or others who abused you then your subjects universally: The
word proprium is of a near relation, and I doubt whether it sits not as close
the hearts of Kings as of subjects, which your Majesty well knows is not
compatible with self-denial. Sir, you are a great Monarch (true) yet you are
but a Steward (nomine and re) a Steward of the great house of the
Commonwealth; and one day it shall be said to you, as to the Steward in the
Gospel, (Read rationem) Give an account of thy stewardship; And the accounts
of Kings are of a vast extent. Sr. you are a Shepherd also a Shepherd of a
great flock, our Savior calls himself a Shepherd, the great Shepherd of Israel,
and he tells you, a good Shepherd will dye for his Sheep he did so: And S.
Paul. Phil. 2, 5 speaking of our Savior Christ, and there deducing him from
all eternity to time, has these words; Let this mind be in you, which was also
in Christ Jesus: who being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be
equal with God: But made himself of no reputation, etc. And shall I doubt your
Majesty will imitate our bl^ssed Savior in all you can? I doubt it or: He
prayed for this persecutors, and taught us so to do, he forgave his enemies
that crucified him even upon the cr^sse [Father forgive them, they know not
what they do] nay he dyed for them [ who dyed, says the Apostle for the sins
of the whole world.] You are not desired Sr. to dye out of the world, or to
part with your soul, by a sequestration of it from the body. Let the greatest
curse that ever fell one the head of any man, fall on that head that has but
such a wish or thought in his heart. All you have to do or suffer, is but to
part with a syllable or two, from one single word, a few let^ers cut off from
that Monster, as the people call it PREROGATIVE, a little paring off some
superfluous part of it, will prove Balm from Gilead, to heal this whole
Nation of the most Epidemical disease that ever yet seized this poor dying
Kingdom.

Sir, it was said in the beginning of this Parliament, (by Mr. Pym, if I mistake
not that the Parliament would make you a glorious King, and who knows whether
your Maesty, when you were in the head of your Army at Edghil, (or else where)
had not some hopes to make your self a (glorious King? And I have been told,
that this Army would have persuaded you, when time was, that they make you a
glorious King.

Sir, you have failed in your hopes, they in their promises, and who knows
whether, what your Majesty hoped and they promised, and they performed not, may
not yet be done another and a better way, if (at least) you will be pleased to
take him for your guide (who has hitherto so miraculously preserved you, and I
hope ever will.) I say (Sir) taking God for your guide all may be made good,
and and may yet, be brought to pass by your self, not by fighting any more to
the hazard of your Royal person, and the persons of your Princely Issue, and
of your Nobility, and the destruction of your loving subjects; but by extending
and really performing of those two God like Acts of mercy and justice, without
partiallity, to all your people. And this is Via Regia indeed, and well
becoming the Majesty of King Charles.

And now Sir, behold how wonderful the ways of God are, contary to the ways of
men, past finding out till himself discover them: you have long layen under the
cross (restraint to a King is a great cross, were there no more in it,) you
are not free, I dare not say you are a captive, and yet your person, with the
power that God has given you over your self and the Grace he has endued you
with to serve him must suddenly come forth to the redemption of your Subjects
out of their captivity,) captives in their native Country under their fellow
subjects) or they are lost, lost for ever. In this Abyss of Exigency, no
expedient can be found to save your people but the presence of your sacred
Person, armed with mercy and justice, Mercy and justice to your people, and
justice against your self, nor could You so easily do it, as I believe, had not
God thus fitted, prepared, and quallified you by the cross; whereby You have
obtained a fellow feeling of the miseries of Your subjects; David said of
himself, It was well for me^ that I was afflicted. Great Sr. let Your
engagements and promises to Your people for the time to come, in Your
perfecting of this blessed peace, be like the laws of the Medes and Persians,
irrevocable. And so God shall bless you and Your posterity for ever: so much
of good toward his people so much honor to himself, no King ever had in his
power to act, as your Maj. nor has by the saving the effusion of so much
innocent blood, and perhaps the Kingdom from utter ruin, which is the prayer of
him who is,

Your Maj. most humble subject and Servrnt R. F.

FINIS.

