A GREAT VICTORY OBTAINED BY Colonel Jones, and the Parliaments Forces at
Dublin in Ireland; showing the manner how they sallyed out of the City upon the
Marq. of Ormond, and the Lord Inchiquin, fell upon them near their Trenches,
advanced up to their Works, put many to the sword, and beheaded one, which
caused the enemy to cry out and say, That the Devil was in the Roundheads,
for the taking off of heads. Also the Marq. of Ormond's Declaration concerning
Lieut. Genesis Crumwell, and the protestation of the Soldiery thereupon.



London, Printed for G. Oreton, and are to be sold near the Royal Exchange in
Cornhill, 1649.

Bloody News from Dublin in Ireland; containing the particulars of a great
Fight between the Princes forces and the Parliaments, the manner how Colonel
forces sallyed out of the City and how the King of Scots horse pursued them
toward the Gates.
Honored Sir,
ON Sunday morning last, a party of the Marq. of Ormonds horse faced our
frontier Guards, keeping a great careering near the City Walls, and making
several bold attempts within Pistol shot of our Line, Spurs, and Sconces,
which continued for the space of half an hour; till at the last Capt. Cambray
(Commander in chief of the new Fort) made a salley out with a party of horse
and ^oor, who placed the Musketeers in an obscure trench, for an Ambuscado; he
himself being the Coy, for the calling in and ensnaring of the adverse party;
but upon his first advance toward them with his horse, he found it a Work very
full of difficulty, by reason that they had used the like point of policp:
However, he resolved to dispute the place, and thereupon divided his horse
(being 60 in number) into two parties, he himself commanding the one, and
Corner lack for the other; Capt. Cambray charged the Van of the Enemies
Forlorn, Cornet Jackson flank them, and upon their first charge exchanged
ground, with the loss of three men on both sides; but upon their present
wheeling, both parties received each other with a second desperate Onset, who
with great courage and resolution kept their stations, disputing the place with
great gallantry; but at last our men being overpowred (by the coming on of a
fresh supply of horse) were forced to embrace an honorable retreat; the enemy
pursued to the very turn pikes, where they were soon welcomed by the sons of
Mars, both from the mouth of the Canon and Musquer, at which Volley, 7 of them
were forced to yield obedience, and one man having his head separated from his
shoulders by a Drake shot, his right hand man being somewhat startled thereat,
immediately replied, The Divel's in these Roundheads for taking off heads.
Whereupon the enemy soon deserted engagement, leaving dead and wounded upon the
place about 17, of our party five slain and two wounded.

Since the enemies receipt of the intelligence of the Lord Lieutenant Cramwels
designment for this bleeding City, they have somewhat awakened us with stronger
all arms, and (as we heat) have entered into Protestation, to live and die,
stand and fall together, and to sight it out to the last man, and that upon
receipt of the foresaid intelligence, Ormend called a Council of Officers, at
the head quarters near Fingles, the result was, whether they should prepare for
a storm, before his Lordships landing, or whether they should begin the City,
streighten other Garrisons, take in what they could and then randezvouz and draw
into a Body, and give him battle at his landing: Upon mature deliberation
thereon, it was unanimosly declared by most of that Popish and Prelaticall
faction. That if he set footing there they would fight him; in the mean time
they would use their utmost endeavors for the reducing of those Garrisons
which the Parliament had in possession.

But the thing that our Soldiery are most doubtful and dubious of, is, that
they fear the enemy will not give them a field upon the additionall forces
landing, but that they will rather betake themselves to the Bogs and Woods.

And although we cannot but represent our selves in a very sad condition
(without timely relief) yet we cannot but exceedingly rejoice at the gallantry
of faithful Col. Jones our Governor, under such a state, in his
Representation to the Lord Inchiquin; the sum whereof follows:

My Lord, As for that conference by your Lordship now propounded and desired,
it cannot be in prudence admitted, espacially in matters of this consequence,
and in times when such debatings must needs be dangerous, as being subject to
whatsoever constructions and misconstructions also. But so well am I satisfied
in the justice of my cause (whereupon the Lords blessing has dwelt visibly, as
I trust it does) and I am fixed to my just principles, whence by letters and
discourses I am not to be removed; and I wish heartily your Lordship had done
so likewise.

Your Sword has been (I confess) prosperous, but remember, my Lord, the cause
in which you then appeared, the same with this now by us here maintained,
against those bloody Rebels.

But now is your Lordship with them most unhappily joined, to the admiration of
those who formerly knew your Lordships professions, etc.

Our Governor is very vigilant, and resolved not to surrender upon any
conditions. By the next I shall impart my self more fully.

Dublin 11. July, 1649.
A Representation of the proceedings of the Royal par^^ for CHARLES the second.
SIR,
THe Royal p^^^^ begins to declare very high for the declared King of Scots,
against the present authority of this Nation, and insulteth very much o^^ the
well affected party, saying, That Charles shall be (...) and woe be unto them
that says against it; and upon (...) day last several Gentlemen extraordinary
well moun^^, and gallantly armed) of quality came to Manchester, and there
proclaimed Prince Charles (eldest Son to Charles the first) King of England,
Scotland, and Ireland; which done they departed the town without interruption
or molestation; and from thence went to Wiggin, where they caused the like to
be proclaimed as formerly; and from thence they went to Kendall in Westmerland,
where they met with some opposition at the proclaiming thereof; the manner thus:
A party of the Parliaments Soldiers having received information of their
deli^^^, prepared to received them, and even in the nick of time came in upon
them, disputed the place with several Vollies and at last the Royal party
seeing themselves overpowred in number, beco^^ themselves to a retreat, and by
the swiftness of their horses made an honorable retreat, and escaped, with
the loss of two men.

One Col. Walton is said to be the Commander in chief of the Royal party, and
leaves no means unassayed for the advancing of his young Masters Cause.

Liecester 9 July, 1649. Sir, We hear that the Royal party about Newark upon
Trent has lately proclaimed Prince Charles King of Great Britain, France and
Ireland, (...) Market place, and give out very high language against (...)
present Authority of this Nation, saying that they will (...) a King, and that
they neither can nor will lie and (...) under the insupportable burden of
cruelty (...) ^^pression; but it hoped care, w^ll be (...) of the distempers of
these troubled spirits, and sp^^^^ (...) taken for the preventing of the like
for (...)

By Letters from the West it is said, that the ad^erse (...) in Cornwall, have
lately had a meeting (...) they declared their Resolutions for the proclaiming
of (...) Charles King, and to use all possible means for his rest^^ration; but
its believe, that if they possess on this treasonable design, as the Parliament
of England has (...) i^, they will suddenly receive a (...).

We likewise hear, that a Squadron of the Princes ships has fallen on the
Northern Fleet, and that they have taken about 30 ships laden with commodities
for London, and dispiersed the Convoy: this Victory (it is said) fell to Capt.
(...) Admiral to the Prince) (...) carrying (...) of Ordnance, called The (...)
of Dunkirk, formerly the King of Spain's Vice Admiral.

Since which time we hear, that Capt. Harris has obtaind some gallant
achievements at Sea, and that he has taken three of the Princes ships, and
sunk two, with the loss of eight men.

The K. of Denmark has caused to be proclaimed through all his Dominions, That
whosoever will take up Arms against the Parliament of England, they shall have
free egresse and regresse into his Harbors, and may freely secure within his
Dominions any prize made upon the English ships, belonging to the Parliament.

By Letter^ from ^ristol it is advertized, that the in^tants in those parts
show themselves very forward to ^^^pagate the Work in hand, for the relief of
bleeding D^ the Citizens having also declared a great willingness ^^pedite the
same, and to accommodate and furnish the (...) Lieutenant with such
necessaries, as shall become ^^^^^mentall for so great and faithful a patriot
and true P^^nage. The Colors of his Lifeguard are black and (...) and in his
match not far beyond Windsor, a she^^^^ boy espying them, said, perhaps they
might be died (...) ^^^gh before they returned from thence; who being over
(...) he was apprehended, and committed to sale custody.

Letters from the Navy say, that there has lately happened some dispute and
action between the Parliaments Fl^^^ (...) the Princes near Kingsale, but no
great hurt done on (...) side.

FINIS.

