NOTES AND OBSERVATIONS UPON SOME PASSAGES OF SCRIPTVRE.

By I. G. Master of Arts of Christ-Church OXON.

R. Hillel said, (...) Si non ego mihi, quis mihi? Et cum ego mihimet ipsi,
quid ego? and si non modo, quando?

OXFORD, Printed by H. Hall Printer to the University, for Ed. Forest Junior.
1646.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD BRIAN, Lord Bishop of Sarum, and Tutour to
both their Highnesses, The most Illustrious CHARLES the Prince of Wales, and
the most noble JAMES the Duke of York, my most Honored Lord and Patron.
Right Reverend Father in God,
YOUR Lordship has often times called upon me to go out and show the people
their Transgressions, and the House of Jacob their sins.

Next to my own conscience I confess my self bound to give your Lordship
satisfaction.

To fall foul upon the degenerous and intractable nature of this people cannot
answer you, for it does not me.

I do not say I am not eloquent, and therefore that you would send by the hand
of Him whom you should send. When I am indeed able for these things, I doubt
not to have Him with my mouth, because I mean to leave all my self out. There
was never more provocations for all men to speak then now, when all the
mischeife that other ages did but imagine are practiced by a Law, and in the
mean time the dumb Asses are taught to forbid the madness of the Prophets.

The Harvest is confessedly Great, but then the Laborers are not few. And if
while so many are thus excellently employed about the rest of the Building,
some one or other do as well as he can toward the making good of the Ground
work, I think he may be let alone at least. The hopes of the Superstructionly
from the assurance of the Foundation I shall give them leave to be Pillars:
This I am sure is the Cornerstone, and I need not tell you how rejected, I
mean it not of all, but of the Common Builders.

If the Church be an Arc he that has never so little to do with the
Compass, though he sit still in his place, yet does as much or more then all
the other necessary Noise in the Ship The Comparison is quit of arrogance, for
it holds in the design, it is not meant of the performance.

The course I have run here is Labor too, and in the same Vineyard. And I
trust my self for this, that my accounts will be as well passed above, if I
reckon upon these pains, the pretense whereof though not so popular, yet is as
substantially proficient toward the maine Aedification.

I have principally endeavored to redeem my Reader from that slavery, by
which I have so long sat down my self, in not printing (so near as I could
I have not) the same things over again.

I am sure I have set down nothing but what I believe, if more sometimes then
I well understood, I have company enough, and the acknowledgement of an error
is more ease to me, then the committing of it was.

Why I should make these Addresses to your Lordship there is all the reason in
the world; what have I but what I have received from you? and that which is,
would be Nothing of it self. Rays of incidency contract no warmth upon the
Earth, unless reflected back upon their original Sun.

My Lord, As once the Sons of the Prophets said unto the Man of God, Behold
now the place where we dwell is too straight for us. We are humbly expecting
the last course of that Judgment which began at the House of God. What shall
be done to the dry Tree, or where the sinner will appear, is to be left to him
to whom vengeance belongs.

The Great Genius of this Place must now burn a while like those Subterraneous
Olibian Lamps under the Earth. We shall see it but Bernardin. Scarde^nius de
Priscis civibus Patavin. Lib. 1.
not now, we shall behold it but not nigh.

Have, salve, sit tibi terra Levis.
Abite hinc pessimi fures, Quid vostris vultis cum oculis Emissitiis.
Your Lordships most faithful Servant and Chaplain. JOHN GREGORY.

To the READER.
Chronicon. de vitis Mahumet. and Successor.

Ben Sidi Aali de Dogu^at. Mus^e manor. and vid. Maronit. De Morib. Oriental.
C. 14.


THE Mahumetans say, that the first thing that God created was a Pen: Indeed
the whole Creation is but a Transcript. And God when he made the world did but
write it out of that Copy which he had of it in his divine understanding from
all Eternity. The Lesser worlds or men are but the Transcripts of the Greater,
as Children and Books the Copies of themselves.

But of other Books the Wise man has pronounced upon them their doom
already, that in making them there is no end, and that the reading of them
(especially many of them) is a weariness unto the flesh.

But if you will hear the end of all, there is one Book more besides the
great Volume of the World, written out of God himself, such a one as may
indefatigably be meditated in day and night. This indeed is the only Text we
have, all other Books, and arts, and men, and the world it self are but Notes
upon this.

So unworthy are they to unloose the Seals of this Book, or to look thereon
who recessefully and impertinently pretend to a Spirit of Interpretation.
Ephraims that feed upon the wind^.

This is indeed a Spirit that blows where it lists, and no man can tell
whence it comes, nor whither it will go. I would have you tell me by this
spirit of what kind the Dyall of Ahas was, or how the Sun could go ^on
degr^^^ backward^* For the kind I Am sure 'twas like none of ours now in use,
and if the Retrocession could be meant of the shadow (and some men look no
farther) the same thing may be made to fall out every day upon an ordinary
Dyall, and (notwithstanding Pet. N^niu^.
what a good Mathematician has said to the contrary) in a Site and Position of
Sphere without the Tropick^.

Therefore the going back is to be meant of the Sun it self.

Tell me by the same Spirit how darkness could be upon the Face of the whole
Earth at the Passion of our Savior, and no Astronomer of the East, nor any man
of all that Hemispheare (excepting those of Jerusalem) perceive it?

Make it good if you can out of the mouth but of two witnesses (what is Phlegon
and Apollophanes?) or if the first be one, the Notice is so single, that it
will not serve to celebrate, but bring the Wonder into doubt. The Sun was not
totally Eclipsed as to all the World. One Hemispheare of his body shined still.
And the Face of the whole Earth is to be meant of the Land of Judaea, as it is
elsewhere.

By the same Spirit I would know why the Greek and Hebrew Scripture should
differ so vastly in Account, and how the Cainan (...) got into Saint Luke's
Gospel intolerably (Jo: Scaliger has said more) against all original trust.

But I may possibly tell you the manner of that hereafter, and that the Jews
did not cut off (as the Arabicke Catena would have it) but the Hellenists or
Graecists (so it ought to be read, not Grecians, Act. 6. 1.) added what is
supernumerary to these Epilogismes. And Cainan came in too, at this back
door, as I think I shall be able to show you at some other time, and from an
inconsiderable ground (but for this it were so) of the Hellenisticall Chiliasts.

But if by this or any other Spirit whatsoever (that of God only excepted) you
can declare what was Melchizedeck's Generation, I shall think you tried here
too much.

To say he was Se^ the Great, as Hugh Broughton.
one especially, in a bundle of business has taken so much pains to do, is
not little enough to despise, and too much to answer too. I reckon it at the
same rate as I do their opinion who accounted him for the Holy Ghost, which I
had not mentioned but to take my self the easilier off from that wonder which
is justly to be conceived upon that grave and late learned Man, who could
Cun^u^ de (...) pub. Heb.
not be content with any other recourse of this Heresy, but to mistake him (and
with a great deal of Judgment too) for Christ himself.

I cannot promise you it is all truth, but I can tell you some news as
concerning this Great Man. In the Arabicke Catena to these words of the Text,
Genesis 10. 25. The name of one was Phaleg. This Note is set in the Margin. (...)
i. e. And this (that is, Phaleg) See Epiph^^iu^.
was the Father of Heraclim, the Father of Melchizedek, Cat. Arab. Cap. 31.
fol. 67. a.

But in the Chapter going before his Generation is declared in a set and
solemn Pedigree. (...) That is, Melchizedek was the Son of Heraclim, the Son
of Phaleg, the Son of Eber And his Mothers name was (...) Salathiel the
Daughter of Gomer, the Son of Japhet, the Son of Noah. (...)* And Heraclim
the Son of Eber married his wife Salathiel, and she was with Child, and
brought forth a Son, and called his name Melchizedek, that is, the King of
Righteousness, called also the King of Peace. Then after this, the Genealogy
is set down at length. Melchisedeck son of Heraclim, which was the son of
Phaleg, which was the son of Eber, which was the son of Arphaxat etc. till
you come to (...) which was the son of Adam, Peace be upon him. Caten: Arab:
c: 30. sol: 66. a*

Sahid Aben Batricke directly says that Melchisedecke was (...) the son of
Phaleg. And so he interprets (and does it well too) the (...) in Saint Paul,
Heb: 7. 3. not without Descent or Pedigree, as we. He is not therefore said
(says he) to be without Father or Mother, as if he had none, or no known
ones, but (...) Because he has no Father or Mother put down among the rest of
the Genealogies. And so the printed Arabicke translateth the place, as the
Syriacke also, etc.

Do you know now of what spirit you are?

Alcoran. Arab. Ms. in Arch. Rod.
The Turk writes upon the outside of his Alcoran (...) Let no man touch this
book but he that is pure. I would no man would meddle with ours (Alcoran
signifies but the Scripture, you need not be afraid of the word) but such as
indeed are what other men do but think If I have not an opportunity to tell
you henceforth what the meaning of this Chor^sie^ Bishop was you may see (if
you have a mind to it) The Processionall of Sarum upon Saint Innocents day,
and Molanus de Canoni^i^ Lib: 2. ^. 43. which is De Episc^p. (puerorum) iu ^ie
Innn^entium (...).
themselves.

If I should meet a Prophet or the son of a Prophet with any pretense to this
spirit about him, ^e would look to me like the little Child in Salisbury
Church that lies buried in a Bishops Robes. Indeed I believe God ordained more
strength out of the mouth of these Episcopal Babes* and because of his Enemies
too. Psalm: 8. 2. then from these other Infants of days and Children of a 100
years old. Esaias 65. 20.

I was asked once by an able and understanding man whether the Alcoran as it is
of it self, had so much in it as to work any thing upon a Rational Belief.
I said yes. Thus much only I required that the believer should be brought up
first under the engagement of that book, That which is every where called
Religion has more of Interest and the strong Impressions of Education, then
perhaps we consider of. Otherwise for the Book it self it is taken for the
greater part out of our Scripture, and would not hear altogether so ill, if it
were looked upon in its own Text, or through a good Translation.

But (not as to gain any thing by this) the Alcoran is scarcely Translated
yet. The best disguise of if is, That in Arragonois by Joannes Andreas the
Moore, but the Entire Copy of it is not easily met with.

Our Scripture to the eternal glory of it, is rendered almost into the Whole
Confusion. Strangers at Rome, Parthians, Medes and Elamites, Cretes and
Arabians, may all read the Wonderful Works of God in their own tongue in
which they were borne.

This Book of ours (or a good part of it) may be read in Samaritan, Greek,
(and the vulgar Greek ^00.) ^n Chaldee, Syriacke, Arabicke. The Jerusalem
Tongue, In the Persian, Armenian, Ethiopian, Copticke or Egyptian, Gothicke,
Russian, Saxon, etc. to say nothing of the more commonly known, Italian,
Spanish, French, Dutch, etc.

And though we meet not yet with any piece of Scripture translated into the
China Tougue, yet there is extant even in that a very full Tradition of our
Gospel, as it was found written upon a Stone, wrought in the form of a long
square, and dugge out of the ground at the building of a wall* in Sanxuen, in
the year 1625.

Pr^dro^. copt.
The Title of the Stone is written upon with 9 Characters in the Chinois,
expressing as follows. Lapis in laudem and memoriam aeternam Legis Lucis and
veritatis portatae de Judaea, and in China promulgatae, erectus.

The Stone says, that our Savior ascended up into Heaven about Noone, and
relinquens septem viginti tom^s doctrinae ad portam magn^, conversionis mundi
aperiendum.

And left behind him 27 Books of Doctrine (so many there are in the New
Testament) to set open a Gate for the great Conversion of the world.

Baptismum instituit ex aqua and spirit^ ad abluenda peccata, etc. Excitat
omnes voce Charitatis reverentiam exhibere jubens versus Orientem, ut pergant
in via vitae gloriosa. He instituted Baptism by water and the spirit to wash
away sins, He stirred all men up in the voice of Charity, and gave command that
they should worship toward the East, that they might go forward in the way of
a glorious life.

If the Stone say true you have reason to take it so much the better, which you
will find hereafter said of this Leading Ceremony.

But whether you do or do not, I shall make bold to tell you here that this
was the reason why our Savior so often made use of the Mount Olivet (which was
upon the East side of Jerusalem) for his Private Devotions.

And because I am fallen upon this, I will here satisfy something which has
been objected unto me as concerning this Adoration toward the East, how it
can be made good upon all positions of the Sphere. Suppose Jerusalem to be
the Center, and the Aequinoctiall East of that to be the East of the whole
world, because it answers to the Place of our Saviors especial presence in
the Heaven of Heavens.

It is required that I tell which way they shall worship who live a quadrant of
the Equator or more East from the Horizon of the Holy City. The answer is ready.

They are to worship toward the West, in respect of the rising of the Sun,
which is not the thing regarded in this matter, for I am not engaged to account
for the word but as to this Northern Hemispheare, the Center whereof
Jerusalem is to be and the Aequinoctiall East of that the Center of all
Adoration and devotion from all degrees of the whole Circle, be it where it
will.

For the Stone I mentioned the Original could not so well be brought off from
the Place. But Alike to that they can show you still at Rome, in Bibliotheca
Domus professae.

There is a short and admirable Tradition of the whole Creation in
Hieroglyphicall Scripture, where you may see the great world written all out
into a lesser print then that of a Man. In the lower Limb and second Scheme of
the Tabula An Hieroglyphicall Table given to the Public Library with an
Arabicke Map, and many other Monuments of Ancient and unusual Learning, by
that great example of excellency and Fatality, the Most Reverend Father with
God, William Laud Archbishop of Canterbury, and the ever to be honored and
remembered Chancello^r of this University.
Laudina Hieroglyphica (it is the same with that which the Cardinal Bembus
had) there is set down the Figure of the Searabaeus or Beetle for the Trunk,
but with the Head and Face of a Man, and holding a little Table with this
Copticke Inscription, (...) About the Neck a Number of Concentricke Circles to
express the Orbs and motion of the Heavens, upon the top of the Head a Face
of the increasing Moon to show her Monthly Revolution; within that a Cross
mark for the Vid. Athanas. Kirch. reconditissimae eruditionis virum in Prod.
Copt. Cap. ult.
four Elements, near to all this above a winged Globe, and wreathed about with
two Serpents.

The meaning of this last is told you by Barachias Alben^phi in his Book of
the Ancient Egyptian learning, and in that part thereof, where he discourses,
(...) of Pharoahs Obelisques. He says, (...) i. e. The winged Sphere wreathed
about with Serpents is the Hieroglyphicke of the soul and spirit of the world.
The Humane face is meant of the Sun and his courses.

For the Holy Beetle (which an old Egyptian durst not tread upon) Horus Apollo
says it signifies for the Figure of the world* and he gives this reason and
secret for it.

The Beetle, says he, when it has a mind to bring forth, (...). Takes the
Excrement of an Ox, which having wrought into small pellets round as the
world, it turns them about from East to West, it self in the mean time (as
to call up Great Nature to these Travailes) turning toward the East.

The Egyptian word (...) held out in the Table is the same with the Greek
(...), to show that the whole frame hangs together by a true magneticke Love,
that invisible harmony and binded discord of the Parts.

I cannot think that time sufficiently well employed which has been spent
upon the Integrity and distinction of Scripture into Canonical and
Apochryphall.

There Is no Apochrypha in the Alcoran. It is told you in the Synodicum set
forth by Pappus, that the Council of Nice made a miraculous Mound betwixt
those two. (...). They set all the Books in a Church ^ little below the Holy
Table, and prayed God that those of the company Pappi (...). Syno. 34.
which were done by his inspiration might be found above, but the spurious part
underneath; and God did so. Do you believe this?

The Canon of Scripture subjoined to the Council of Laodicea is much depended
upon for this matter of distinction.

And yet this very Canon it self is not extant in so me very ancient
Manuscripts. It is wanting in one Greek (...) (...)* gr. Ms. in Arch. Baroc.
cod. council. Arab. Ms. ^n Arch. Re^n. Bibl. Bod.
here, and moreover then so it is not to be found in Joseph the Aegyptian's
Arabicke Code*

And there is no man of sense but must think, that this was a thing more
likely to be put in into some Copies, then left out of any.

The Hebrew Canon indeed is a good sure ground. And yet you must not think
that all, ^o nor any of the Apocthyphall Books, were first written in the
Greek.

The Hebrew Edition by the Jews at Constantinople is the undoubted Text of
Tobit (Saint Hierome says as much for Iudeth) Libellus vere aureus, as Munster
said truly of it.

For that of the Son of Syrach it is confessed in the Preface, where I must
tell you by the way that this Book of Syracides was heretofore accounted among
the Hagiographa.

Talmud in Baba Kama. Cap. 8. fol. 92. b.
I know not what else to make of that in Baba Kama, where the Talmudists quote
this Proverb out of the Cetubim (which is the same with Hagiographa) (...) etc.
Every Bird sorteth it self with one of the same kind, (Birds of a Feather,
etc.) and so every man to his like.

The Tosephoth say to this that (...) etc. perhaps it is in the Book of Ben
Syra (was Ben Syra reckoned for Canonical too?) but sure enough there is no
such saying in that Book. In the Book of Syracides you meet indeed with it,
C. 13. v. 20. (...).

For the Wisdom of Solomon, a Book worthy enough of that name, and comparing
with any that was ever writ by the hand of Man. That this Book was written in
Chaldee is certain, for R. Moses Ben Nachman quoteth it so out of Chap. 7. v.
5. etc. and v. 17. etc. in the Preface to his Comment upon the Pentateuch.

One of the Books of the Macchabees are known to be in Hebrew, and the worst
of all the company (and excepted against by Bellarmine himself) though
appointed to be read in our Churches) that is the fourth of Esdras will be
clearly of another credit and Reputation to you, if you read it in the Ms.
Arab. in Arch. Bibl. Bod.
Arabicke.

The story of the Woman taken in Adultery has met with very much adversity.
Saint Hierome notes it wanting in several Copies of his time. The Paraphrast
Nonnus had nothing to say to it. Not is it noted upon by Theophylact, etc. The
Armenian Church (as one of their Priests informed me) allow it not a place in
the Body of the Gospel, but reject it to the latter end as a suspected piece.
The Syriacke Paraphrast leaves it out (that is, the Printed Paraphrast) But in
some of the Manuscripts it is found to be, though not received as the rest of
Scripture, but written upon with this Asterisme. (...) That it is not of the
Text.

But the Arabicke has it, and in the Greek Manuscripts it wants but in one
of seaventeene, sed ita (says Beza) ut mira sit sectionis varietas, enough to
make me (he says so too) ut de totius istius narrationis fide dubitem.

E^cles. hist. lib. 3. fol. 32. b.
But Eusebius noted long ago, that the setter forth of this History was the
ancient Papias. (...). And that it was to be had in the Gospel, Secundum
Hebraeos.

Et suspicari merito quis possit (says Drusius) ex Evangelio illo ad nostra
exemplaria dimanasse, though I shall conclude from hence (but as he does) with
a Nihil affirm.

To say nothing here of Salomons Psalter lately put forth by de la Cerda, our
account of David's Psalms is 150. but the Arabicke and some other Translations
set down one more. Josephus Hypomnesticus says that David made (...), Joseph.
Christian* graec. Ms.
an infinite number of Psalms.

Athanas. in Synop.
Athanasius says he made 3000. and reckons this to be one, (...), etc.

In the Greek Psalters it is no rare thing to meet with it in the Manuscripts*
It Is extant in more then one or three in our public Library.

One has it in Magdalen College, another in Trinity College, and a third in
Corpus Christi College, given them by Claimund their first President.

In the late printed Copies you are not to look for it, but in the older ones
you will find it, in that of Aldus especially. And Justine Decaduns who wrote
the Epistle to the Reader tells you, that having gotten so excellent an
Assistant (as Aldus indeed was) they were resolved to begin to the world
(printing was not very ancient then) with (...). The Book of Psalms inspired
by God. And yet they reckon this supernumerary for one of the company.

You may take it perhaps as forbidden by the Laodicaean Canon among the
Idioticall Psalms. But the Arabicke Scholi^ to that Canon will mind you of
another matter. Joseph. Egypt. Cod. Council. Arab. Ms. in Arch. Roan. Bibl. Bod.
(...)

i. e. No man shall read in the Church any other Psalms then those of David,
for it had been related to the Holy Synod that certain men among the
Heretics had made to themselves other Psalms over and above those which were
made by the Prophet David, and that they read the^ in the Church, saying for
themselves boastingly that they were good and honest men as well as David the
Prophet, and that they were able to prophecy as well as He. And they alleged
for themselves out of the Book of the Acts that of the Propbet Joel. Your
Sons and your Daughters shall prophecy, and your old men shall see Visions,
etc. And there were that received these new made Psalms, but the Council here
forbids them.

But I can tell you something which will not make very much toward the Repute
of this Psalm.

In the Maronites Edition you find the Number in the head of it, and which is
worse then that, it is there said that David felled the Giant with three Stones
which he flung out in the strength of the Lord.

You will not easily meet with either of these things in the Manuscripts: Here
are several to be seen, and one I have of my own, but all without mentioning
the Number, or this Particular.

The Revelation of Saint John, you know what Erasmus himself has said of, and
how little Beza has said to that.

What if it be wanting in some of the Syriacke Copies? it is extant in others.
It Is wanting in a Manuscript Arabicke Translation in Que^nes College. The
Printed Arabicke has it, so the Copticke, Armenian, etc.

What if the Loadi^^^^ Canon acknowledge it not? It is more to be mervail'd at
that it should be found in the Apostolical. In the Greek I do not say, but
in the Arabicke Translation it is thus mentioned. (...) The six th is the
Revelation of Saint John, called Apocalipsis.

Bodin. method. Histor. c. 7. sub initium. cap.
Judicious Calvin being once asked his opinion concerning the Apocalypse made
answer, Se penitu^ ignorare quid velit ta^ obscurus scriptor; qui qualisque
fuerit nondum constat inter eru*ditos. That for his part he was altogether
ignorant what that obscure Author would have, and that no body yet knew who or
what he was.

For the first part of the Answer it will pass well enough, Cajetan said
right, Exponat qui potest.

The later words (if they were his) do not become the Writer of the
Revelation, or the man that spoke them.

Kirstenius in his Notes upon the Lives of the four Evangelists written in
Arabicke, lets fall this Observation.

Observandum qu^que est hunc Authorem ^e verbo quidem un^ mentionem facere
(...) D. Ioannis, quam quidam hunc Evangelistam in Path^^ scripsisse ^sserunt,
qua authoritate ipsi videant, atque id^^ semper i^^e liber^nter Apochrypha
reputatus est. You are to note here too (says he) that this Author makes not
any mention at all of Saint John's Apocalypse, no not in one word, and therefore
they would do well to consider what they do, who affirm that this Evangelist
wrote that Book in Patmos. Indeed the Book was ever yet reckoned among the
Apochrypha.

And yet his great reason is, because this Arabicke Author makes no mention of
the Book. But you will find the Learned man (it might easily be) very much
mistaken.

His order is not to make a full and answering translation of the Arabicke, but
to turn the principal and best understood sense of it (as to him) and so to
set down the Text.

He takes the same course in this matter. Iamitaque verba Arabica ad locos hos
tres pertinentia adscribere tempestivum est. Quorum periodum ultimam
doctioribus hujus linguae relinquimus. I shall lay no claim to the
Doctioribus, but I doubt not to read the words right, and then the place will
easily be understood.

The Period which he will not undertake upon, is this. (...) Abogalmasis indeed
signifies nothing, it should be read, (...) Abogalubsis (there is but one
letter mistaken) and then the English of it will be, And it is said that John
delivered the Apocalypse to Pheugir.

This Pheugir was a Disciple of his, as the same Arabicke Author says before.

The leaving of this Book out of some Copies is just nothing against it; you
may say as much (and as justly too) of the Canonical Epistles, and there is
the same reason for all.

These were more lately written and therefore not so soon received into the
Canon as the rest.

I think every man ought to have a very reverend and singular opinion of that
Epistle of Clemens Romanus to the Corinthians, and yet I do not think that
either this or the rest of that Book was of Tecl^'s own handwriting no more
then I believe that John Fox translated the Saxon Gospels into English. I have
seen the third Epistle of Saint Paul to the Corinthians in the Armecian
Tongue, beginning Paul a Servant of Jesus Christ, etc. And an Epistle of the
Corinthians to Lib. Ms. Armeni^e cum ^e^si^ne Ital. apud ingeniosiss^mum virum
Gil^ertum North.
Saint Paul in the same Tongue, beginning, Steven, etc. to our Brother Paul,
greeting. Kinstenius says that there be many Epistles of Saint Paul in
Arabicke, which we know not of yet.

The Armenian Priest I mentioned before told me they had more Books of Moses
then we.

But now to discharge my self of all this that has been said, and to give up
a sincere and sober account of the thing.

An indifferent man of any Nation under heaven could not deny but that this
Book throughout, discovers an incomprehensible secret power and excellency;
enabled to make any man whatsoever, Wise to Salvation. And that Canon of it
which is undoubtedly received on all hands, is sufficiently entire.

And for detracting any the least jot or Title from this, unless it be
notoriously made known to be heterogeneous and abhorrent (and he that
beleiveth this too must not make have) God shall take away his part out of the
Book of Life. But for him that shall add any thing thereto, though it were a
new Epistle of Saint Paul (as to Seneca or the Laodicaeans (and as good as any
of these we have) God shall add unto him the Plagues that are written in this
Book.

You must not reckon of the Scripture by the Bulk. It were the biggest Book
in the world if it were less then it is, and it was purposely fitted to that
proportion it has, that it might compare and comply with our Size and
Magnitude.

If you would have all written that Solomon disputed from the Cedar in Lebanus
to the Hysop that grows upon the wall; or all that which was done and said by
One that was Greater then he, and spoke as never man did, The world it self
would not be able to cont^ine the Books that should be written. Amen. that is,
The Lord let it be so as it is.

It will not be so successful an argument for this Book to urge the
miraculous conservation and Incorruption of the Text. The Alcoran it self has
had much better luck.

That of the Old Testament how tenable soever it has been made by their
encompassing and inaccessible Masora. I do not find it so altogether (though
wonderfully enough) entire.

But for the New, there is no profane Author whatsoever (^aeteris paribus) that
has suffered so much at the hand of time. And what of all this! Certainly the
providence was showed to be greater in these miscarriages (as we take them)
then it could have been in the absolute preservation. God suffered Tares to be
sowed in the Genealogies (while men slept) or in some Elementall parts, that we
might not insist upon those (...) (See Ben. Bar. Jonah's Itinerary) Extracta
quaestionum as these things are called and kept by the Jews themselves. I^ is
an invincible reason for the Scriptures part that other escapes should be so
purposely and infinitely let pass, and yet no saving or substantial part at
all scarce moved out of its place. To say the truth, These varieties of
Readings in a few by-places do the same office to the maine Scripture, as the
variations of the Compass to the whole Magnet of the Earth. The Mariner knows
so much the better for these how to steer his Course.

For the style of this Scripture it is unspeakably good, but not admirable in
their sense who reckon the height of it from the unusualnesse of the phrase.
The Majesty of that Book fits upon another Throne. He that was among the
Heardsmen of Tekoah, did not write like him that was among the Priests at
Anathoth. Read Ben Syra and the Arabicke Centuries of Proverbs. Read the
Alcoran it self. Though the saying of our Savior, It is easier, etc. was
originally, It is easier for an Elephant, etc. Yet Mahomet expresses as our
Savior did, They (...) in Sirrat. (...) in (...) 17.
shall not (says he) enter into Paradise, (...) till a Camel go through a
Needles ey. You will get more by that Book to this purpose, if you make no
worse use of it then you should.

Yet you must have a care too, for the Authors of that good confused heap have
elsewhere expressed loosely enough. They say in another Surat (...) That the
Angels and God himself too say prayers for his Prophet, that is, that God
prays for Mahomet. An odd saying you may think, and yet how much different
can you make it to be from that of ours, where it is said, that the Spirit
makes Intercession for us, etc. but do you make this use of it. It is from
hence that the Mahumetans express the memory of the Dead in God, (especially
of the Prophet himself) by those strange words, Peace and the Prayer of God be
upon them.

But if you would raise a Reputation upon our Scripture like your self, and
the dimensions of a man, take it from those without. I should think it to be
very well that Aben Rois in his Arabicke Commentaries upon Aristotle's Moralls
translated into Latin, should call the Greatest Man of the East, Beatum
Augustine. Ste^ch. in Job. ult.
Job, Blessed Job, and to urge him for an example of Fortitude.

Galen in his Book De usu partium, not knowing what to say to the hair of the
Eyelids, why it should so strangely stand at a stay and grow no longer, takes
an occasion to undervalue Moses his Philosophy, and says of God, Neque si
lapidem repent velit facere hominem, efficere id poterit, etc. (yes but he
could even of these Stones too) But Old Orpheus says that the man that was
borne out of the water (so Moses indeed is to be called in the Egyptian) did
well, and Dionysius Longinus (one that knew what belonged to expression) having
first of all cast a scorn upon his Homer, says, (...), that the Lawgiver of
the Jews (...) (no ordinary man neither) was in the right, when he brought in
his God, saying, (...), Let there be Light and there was Light, etc.

If you see what Strabo, Tacitus, Justin, Diodorus Siculus, See the Translation
of Abu Maasciar, or Albumazar. Introductor. Lib. ^. C. 9.
Ptolomy, etc. have said as to this, you will be no great looser (in your
Faith) by the hand.

I have thus much left to wish (and I hope I do it well) to this Book, that
it might be read (so far as this is possible) in a full and fixed Translation.
And upon that a Clear and disingaged Commentary.

The way to do this will not be to do the Work a great, and undertake the
whole or any considerable part of the Book by one man if he could live one Age.

How little we have gotten, and lost how much by those who have prayed to God
they might live to make an end of all the Bible in Commentaries, you cannot
choose but perceive enough.

You must not think to look upon this mirror of the word as you are to be
seen in Roger Bacon's Perspective, Vbi unus komo videbitur plures, where one
man will seem to be more then so. No, Break the Glass in pieces and see
every one a face by himself.

He that shall thus begin to build may perhaps be one of those that will be
able to finish.

Leo Moden. Di Gli Riti Hebrai^i. Part. 1.
The Jews when they build a house are bound to leave some part of it
unfinished in memory of the destruction of Jerusalem. The best Master Builder
that shall come to this work will be forced to do so too. And yet if those
that have undertaken upon the whole had instead of that completed but one
small part, This House of God and Tabernacle of good men had been reared up
ere this.

He that goes upon this with any Interest about him, Let him do otherwise
never so admirably, he does indeed but translate an Angel of Light into the
Devil.

I would not render or interpret one parcel of Scripture to an end of my own,
though it were to please my whole Nation by it, if I might gain the World.

These Wresters of the Book are unstable if not ignorant men, and it will
follow that they must needs do it to their own Destruction.

When all these things are fitly and understandingly resolved upon, It would be
good too to bring these principal matters as near to a Standard as we can,
that we might have something to trust to, and settle upon.

Some say that the Heavens could not move unless the Earth stood still. I am
sure since the Earth began to turn about, The Kingdom of Heaven has suffered
a violence of Rest, and does not seem to be so open to all Beleivers as before.

I am sorry I have so much to accuse my Nation of that ever since the times of
Hen. the 8. they should go about in a max^ of Reformation, and not know yet
how to get either us or themselves out.

I am not much given to the Admiration and amusements of Astrologicall matters,
therefore I will not tell you (plainly) here what Giafar Abu Maasciar Belchita
(commonly called ^^bumazar Abala^c^i) puts our Religion under the Dominion
of inde (says Roger Bacon) intri^atinribus et pr^fundis maxim momentis
laborat propter impeditos illes motus, and Eecentrum Eecentri. It is indeed
like enough to in one sense. It is good with the good, and bad with the bad.
Facit homines ancipitis naturae and semper nova ex^ogitantes, qui non quiescunt
and non adeo manifes^e sua agentes. Ranzovius. Alc^indus says that we are
signified by the Woman planet, unde oratoria figuris and picturis decorari
solent. What because you Turks have none? Would the Religion had no more to
do with that Planet, then so.

Others put us under the Sun (I think they cannot tell what to put us under
very well) Silen says that we are governed by the Moon, and the Scots by If
it be so, then is not so dull a Planet as R. Bacon took him for, who gives
this reason why the Jews rested upon the Saturday.

But as to the first our Eshwid quoteth an old Astrologer to say as much and
with this Unde, Augli vagi and sunt insta^iles, nunc ad summum nunc ad imum
delati. Did. 8. cap. 1. fol. 42. ^.

Ptolomy places us under and unde impatientes regni, etc. says he. Cardan
adds that therefore we are a rebellious and unlucky Nation, semper novosritus
legis and divini cultus fabricantes, aliquando quidem in melius, But for the
most part in deterius, in Tetrab. C. 3. Tex. 12.

Hali Aben Ragel says that he found in an old Book called Andilareprosu that
the sign of the world is Aries. It Is the same with ours. And it were well that
the fashion of the whole had not less passed away then that of the Divisos
orb Brittannos. They did right to call us a people by our selves, for I think
we are like to no body else.


Ptolomy, Cardan, Silen, Alchi^d^s, Eshwhid, Roger Bacon, etc. say of us. And
yet the Sage G^id^ Bo^^te (Zoroaster in chief to some Almanacke men) I cannot
choose but give you notice of.

This Gymnosophist in the 13 Chapter of his First part tells you that Christ
himself was an Astrologer, and made use of Elections. The same Man in the
third Chapter at his third Part is busy to let you know under what Figure of
the Heavens you are to pare your Nails.

But that which I indeed intend to say to you is this.

In the Geographicall Resemblances I find that Maginus could liken Scotland to
nothing. But for England it is fancied by some to come very near the fashion of
a Triangle. I am sure it is far enough from a Square, or that Honest man in
Aristotle who falls still upon his own Legs.

The Arabicke Nubian Geographer likeneth us to an Estritch (indeed we have
digested Iron enough) But this is that silly thing which leaves her Eggs in
the Earth, and warmeth them in the dust, and forgets that the foot may crush
them, or that the wild Beast may break them. She is hardened against her
young Ones as though they were not hers, her labor i^ in vain without fear.
And why? Because God has deprived her of wisdom, neither has he imparted to
her understanding. And yet what time she lifts up her self on high, she
scorneth the Horse and his Rider.

Indeed if ever any Nation perished for want of knowledge, we are like to be
the Men.

NOTES UPON SOME PASSAGES OF SCRIPTVRE:
CHAP. I.
Also he bad them teach the Children of Judah the (use of) the bow: Behold it
is written in the book of Jasher.

2 Samuel 1. 18.
A Strange Parenthesis to all Respects, but especially that of the bow. Yet so
the Targum reads it, and so the Rabbines constantly expound. R^b. Salomons
gloss is. And David said -- from henceforth seeing that the mighty in Israel
are fallen, it will be necessary that the men of Judah learn to exercise their
arms, and to draw the bow. Levi Ben Gersom says that inasmuch as David saw
that the death of Saul was caused by his fear of the Bowmen, and that there
was none in Israel skilled in this kind of Artillery, he gave order that the
men of Judah, (as being the principal men at Arms) should be taught the use
of the Bow, etc. To the same purpose R. David, and others quoted in the Celi
Jakar, fol. 264. a. et b. And yet R. Isay says, that Saul and Jonathan taught
the sons of Judah the bow, because the sons of Judah were mighty men, and
fit to draw the Bow by the blessing of Jacob, Genesis 49. 8. Where it is
prophesied that the hand of Judah shall be in the neck of his Enemies, that
is, (says Chimhi as some of our wisemen expound) the Bow. Therefore they take
the Book of Iasher to be the first of Moses called Genesis, in which the Acts
of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the Ieshirim, or upright men are recorded; but
especially they take the book to be Beracoth Jacob, or the Blessings of Jacob.
Thus the Jews.

Though we have wisemen of our own to follow them in the Interpretation of the
Bow. Yet they will appear to be as idle in this. as in their conceit of the
book.

Is it a thing to be thought that the men of Judah were now to learn the use
of the Bow? 'Twas the common Tacticke practice.

The Hebraisme of Bow is like that of bread: It names for all other kind of
Ammunition. And where is the consequence here that because Saul and Jonathan
(excellent Archers themselves, for the Bow of Jonathan turned not back) fell
down before the Arrows of the Philistines, that therefore the men of Judah
should be taught the use of the Bow? But the Coherence is worse. And David, etc.

The Author of the Book brings David in beginning an epicedium upon the
death of Saul and Jonathan, and immediately breaks him off with an
impertinent command to the sons of Judah, that they should learn to handle
the bow. And where is it, or why is it that this should be written in the Book
of Iasher?

Therefore Mariana very understandingly stepped aside out of the common Road of
Interpretation, and considered with himself that the Bow here might be taken
for the Title of the Song, which cannot be strange to them that will compare
this with the granted superscriptions upon David's Psalms, as Psalm. 69. To the
chief Musician upon Shashannim. Psalm. 67. Upon Neginoth. Psalm. 59. To the
chief Musician Altashith, etc. So here to the chief Musician Kesheth, or the
Bow. For so the Text is to be read. And he bade them, that is, the chief
Musicians Heman, Ethan, and Ieduthun to teach the ignorant people how to sing
this Lamentation of David upon the death of Saul and Jonathan. It was entitled
Kesheth, or the Bow, because it was occasioned by the Philistin Archers, 1 Samuel
31. 3. But especially respecting to the Bow of Jonathan, which returned not
back from the blood of the slain, as the Song it self expresses. And David
could not but remember the Bow of Jonathan out of which that Arrow was shot
beyond the Lad^ 1 Samuel 20. 36. It was the time when that Covenant was made, and
that affection expressed betwixt them which was greater then the love of women.

And it is said there too that David exceeded, v. 41. And there also Jonathan
required that this kindness of the Lord should be showed unto him longer then
he lived. And thou shall not only whilst yet I live, etc. v, 14, 15.

The Lxx will bear out this Interpretation. The version there is, (...). [that
is] And David lamented this Lamentation upon Saul and Jonathan his Son, and
caused it to be taught to the Sons of Judah. Behold it is written in the
Book of the Just man:] So the vulgar. Planxit autem David Planctum
hujusmodisuper Saul and super Jonathan filium ejus, and pr^cepit ut docerent
Filios Judah planctum sicut scriptum est in libro Iustorum. And here it is
plainer yet that David commanded to teach the Sons of Judah this Lamentation.
It Is true the late Editions of this Translation have shifted in the word Arcum
instead of Planctum. But in the ancient Manuscripts it is so as I have quoted
it. And in the Elder printed copies it is Arcum, but in the Margin only which
afterward crept into the Text, if I may call the Translation so.

Therefore also by these two great Authorities that which the Sons of Judah
were commanded to learn was not the use of the Bow. But the Bow, as it is
originally set down, that is, a Song of David so called, or this Song of
Lamentation over Saul and Jonathan. And this is that which was written in the
Book of Iasher. Why this Book was so called, or who was the Author of it, I
cannot tell you. That it was not the first of Moses (as the Rabbines would have
it) is ridiculously plain. Josephus has let us know thus much that it was a
Record in the Temple, and you must not think it hard if it be lost to us as
yet, you shall hear more of this hereafter. It is quoted twice in Scripture,
here and Josh. 10. And if both places be considered, it is to be judged that
nothing was recorded in this Book but Memorialls of this kind, and which is
more to be noted, they were metricall too. The place in Joshua put to this here
makes it clear. There it is quoted out of the Book of Iasher, that the Sun
stood still in Gibeon, and the Moon in the valley of Ajalon. This Quotation is
a plain Canticle. Chimhi comes so near to the matter as only to make a
doubt of it. But the thing is certain, It is reckoned among the 10 Songs by
the Mechilta an old Commentary upon Exodus to the 15 Chapter. The 4 is that of
Moses before his decease: and the 6 is that of Deborah and Barak, and this of
Joshua is the fifth. I would say more of this, had not the learned Masius
prevented me upon the place, Josh. 10. 12. This is enough to show that the Song
of the Bow might, but the use of it could not be set down in the Book of
Iasher. It is certain that this command of David to the Children of Judah, is
not delivered in Meeter. Indeed matter of that kind was no fit subject for a
Song. And now it is come to Tyndalls turn again, for the New must be corrected
by his Old Translation. He rendered thus, And David sang this Song of Mourning
over Saul and over Jonathas his Son, and bade to teach the Children of Israel
the Staves thereof.

Here I may note one thing more and I mervaile at it too, that the vulgar
Edition has one verse over and above in the Canticle of the Bow. Considera
Israel pro his qui mortui sunt, super excelsa tua vulnerati. It seems to
pretend as if it would translate the first verse of the Song; but that is done
and better too imemdiately in the next, Inclyti Israel super Montes tuos
interfecti sunt. Quomodo ceciderunt fortes? I found it so in some of the
written as well as the printed Copies. And yet I think Arias Montanus did
better to leave it out, then some others since to keep it in. It is plainly
void and supernumerary, and an escape not fit to be accounted upon the
Sagenesse of that translation.

CHAP. II
Why our Savior said not Jehovah Jehovah, but Eli Eli, (as Saint Matthew) or
Eloi Eloi (as Saint Mark) in that great case of Dereliction.
FOr the variety of Reading, the Criticisme need not be done over again.
According to the Syriack translation of the Psalms, Saint Mark might as well
set it down Eloi Eloi, as Saint Matthew after David's Hebrew Eli, Eli, it is all
one. My God etc.

To the Respect of the Question we know already that the greatest enterveiwes
'twixt God and man pass especially upon the terms of these two Attributes
Mercy and Justice, where also it will be something too to observe how mercy
rejoices against Judgment.

The Hebrews note, Quando egreditur sententia ad Clementiam etc. That in all
proceedings of God with men concerned in mercy and loving kindness, he chooses
to be called by his great Name Jehovah, as to Moses in the Clift of the Rock
Iehova Iehova. The Lord merciful and gracious, slow to anger. etc.

But as the same Doctors observe quando egreditur sententia adjustitiam etc: In
any process of justice and Judgment etc. he always styles himself Eloah or
Elohim. So the matter will be to distinguish of the use and dignity of these
two names as to this purpose.

Jehovah*
Jehovah is his proper name of his own Imposition and incommunicable to any
Creature, of what Rank or Quality soever, a Name of such Immoderate Reverence
amongst the oldest Jews, that it was forbidden to be written right or
pronounced at all in this world, but by the High Priest, and but in one place
the sanctum sanctorum, and but at one time of the year, in the day of
expiation.

And (which is more to the purpose) only in one case, which was that of
Benediction, when the Blessing and Goodness of God by the holy intervention of
the Priest was to be derived down upon the People.

At any other time or in what place soever for any man of Israel to presume to
utter this Name was more then death by the Law, as by a Report of theirs in the
Talmud in the case of Teradion's son.

And as it would seem to be by the Jews, our Savior might not himself make
use of this Name in kind; for after their malicious rate of Tradition, they
hold that he did all his miracles by the Paraphrasticall Tetragrammaton, or
Shem-hamphorash (as they call this Name at length and in other words) and this
way of Enunciation they say was cut into his feet, and produced as occasion
served, as to cast out Devils (by a known Recesse of the black Art) through
him that is the Prince. And to exalt and make up the Legend they can afford his
mother (the blessed Virgin to us and very well spoken of in the Alcoran it
self) no better Language then that she was a cunning woman, and brought this
kind of Legerdemaine out of Egypt.

Elohim:
Elohim (says a great Master in the Language) Nomen divinum a Iudicio, quasi
Deus Iudex, though I think he translated this sense rather from the use then
the power and Original of the word, which retained (as many other) in the
Arabicke, though not in the Hebrew; reaches not to this meaning directly (and
yet not unfitly) for there it signifies first for power and force, and nothing
could more properly make up the Judge of all the world in words then such as
were derived from a sense of Omnipotency. And to this the Scripture bears
witness and Correspondency enough.

Now this Name of Elohim is not proper to God, but common to him with the
Creature. The Angels are called so, Psalm. 86. 8. Men are called so, (the Judges
especially) Exodus 21. 6. 1 Samuel 2. 25. Nay and the false Gods too. Joshua 23.
16. The sum is, that the Name Iehova was of higher Import and estimation,
then that of Elohim. Also that in Addresses of mercy and loving kindness God
was pleased to be called rather by the former, but in those of Execution and
Sentence by the Later.

Therefore our Savior (in the ease he was) cried not Iehova Iehova: (much
less Father, as at other times) bu t Eli Eli, or Eloi Eloi. My God, My God. as
naming the Judge of all the world, and doing the extremest right upon his own
son treading the Winepresse alone under the Person of all Mankind.

CHAP. III.
(...) or (...)
The upper Rooms.
And he shall show you a large Upper Room etc. Mark 14. 15. And when they were
come in, they went up into an Upper Room etc. Act. 1. 13. Whom when they had
washed they laid her in an Upper Chamber. Act. 9. 37. Then Peter arose and
went with them, when he was come, they brought him into the Upper Chamber v.
39. And there were many lights in the Upper Chamber, where they were gathered
together etc. Act. 20. 8. And there sat in a window a young man named Eutychus
etc. v. 9.
THe Latin turns it Coenaculum, for that the Fashion was to sup or dine in
these Upper Rooms. But that is the Roman Mark. 14, 15.
fashion (and not that neither.) The Jews eat no Supper here but that of the
passover, (as the Christians afterward that of the Lord in the same place.)
It was their Beth Tephillah, or private House of Oratory in the upper-most part
of their Dwelling Houses.

The Disciples therefore being returned to Jerusalem from the Mount Olivet
(...), went up into an Upper Room where they continued all with one accord in
prayer and Supplication. Act. 1. 13. 14.

Sch ol^ast. Syriack Ms. in Act Apostolor. in Arch. Biblioth. Bodleianae.
L^dori^. de Dieu. Animad. in Act. c. 1. 13. Geogr ath. Nu b^ens Clim. 3. Par.
5. p. 113.
A Syriack Scholiast upon the place, says. That it was the same (upper Room)
in which they had eaten the Passover.

It was so truly an House of Prayer, that by some it is taken for an upper
Room in the Temple it self. for ^o it may seem by the former Treatise. (Chapter
24* 53. (...) etc. And they were continually in the Temple.

And an Arabicke Geographer finds this upper Room in the Temple of Sion,
where yet (says he) the Table remains, upon which our Lord did eat with his
Disciples, and that it uses to be solemnly visited upon the Thursday, meaning
(as I think) that before Easter.

I added this to De Dieu's note because it seems to bear up toward his
meaning, but it is not to be expected that it should prove so in the Recesse.

I can tell that the Second, as the Former Temple (1 Chronicles: 28. 11.) had it is
(...), or Upper Rooms, and those too of religious use, but not of this kind.
Judge of the rest, by one of the likest, and yet nothing at all to this purpose.

The Code Middoth makes mention of an (...) or upper Room in the second
Temple, the Western wall whereof was Talmud in Mid does. c. 4. fol. ^7. a.
let in with holes into the sanctum sanctorum etc. But it follows in the
Mishna, that the use of these was (when occasion of reparation should require
(as the Gloss there) to let down the workmen by ropes in Chests into the
Sanctum Sanctorum etc. (...) that they might not feed their eyes ('it is the
expression of the Text) with the sight of that Presence there.

To speak it after ou^ own rate. Such profane and common men might not enter
by the doors, nor be suffered to see any more of that holy place then they
were to mend.

As I will not deny, so neither will I charge any Superstition upon this
practice, but when I compare their extremes with ours, I can be sorry to
think that instead of Holiness upon Aarons Brestplate, we are now about to
write filthiness to the Lord.

But as to the matter of the Upper Room, when it shall come to be considered
what an (...) of the kind we speak to, is to be, it will be besides
expectation that any such should be found in the Temple.

Therefore notwithstanding the learned likelihood of De Dieu's conjecture, it
must pass, that this upper Room into which the Apostles went up (Act. 1. 13.)
was appertaining to some private house; though whether that of Saint John the
Evangelist, as Euodius delivered, or that of Mary the mother of John Mark (as
others have collected) cannot be certain. The Disciples indeed were (...),
continually (that is daily) in the Temple. Act. 2. 46. Not all the day, but at
the hour of Prayer, (...). Act. 3. 1. At other times, and especially for the
Breaking of that Bread, that is the Eucharist (as the Syriack) or distribution
of the Body of Christ (as the Arabicke) they met together, (...), in these
upper Rooms, Act. 20. 7. which could not possibly be in the Temple, for it was
not at Jerusalem. They continued daily with one accord in the Temple (but)
Breaking Bread (...) from house to house, or as the margin there is* at home.
Act. 2. 46.

And now to reflect upon the word, that meaning which is intended, this is to
be remembered.

That the Jews were bound to worship in the Temple, toward the Arc; without
the Temple, toward that, or at least toward the place whereabouts that was,
at what distance soever.

Cas. Effend. Com* ad Alcoran. Arab: Ms. in Archiv. Laudints Bib. Bod.
It is noted by Casus Effendus in his Commentaries upon the Alcoran to Sura tol
bacara which is the second Chapter, where he says that the Nazarites (as he
calls us Christians) worship toward the East, the Jews toward their Country*

The Canons for this out of the 2 Chronicles. 6. are set down by the Talmudists in
Beracoth Cap. 4. fol. 30. a. Maimon in Halaca Tephilla Cap. 5. fol. 42. a.
Orach chajim Number. 94. Shulchan Aruch Number. Eod. fol. 40.

And the rule is of a strict requirie, for the Mishna says, that in case a man
at the hour of prayer should be riding abroad upon his Ass, he must alight,
if that may be, or if not, yet he must turn his face toward the Sanctuary, In
like manner he that is carried in a Chari^t, or in a Ship at Sea. And if he
cannot turn his Face, he must turn his heart toward the Sanctuary. Talm in
Berac. Cap. 4. fol. 28. b. Maim. in Halac. Tephill. C. 5. Number. 3.

And therefore the Reader is to be advised of that passage in a learned Author,
where he tells that though it be more then Sckiekard de Jure Reg: Hebr
he know whether the Jews bury their dead (as we Christians) toward the East,
yet he is sure they pray that way. It Is true they do so, but no otherwise then
of those in these parts which lie West of the holy Land. And so their own
Rabbin is to be understood, Leon Modena Histor. de gli Riti Hebraics di quests
tempi Part: 1: C: 10: Number: 3^
where he says, Dalla part di Orient ^posto un Arca etc. that the Jews set
their Arc in the Eastern part of their Synagogues.

He treats of the modern uses of the Hebrews, according to which they are
to have a little Chest imitating as much as it may the fashion of the old Arc,
in which they put the books of the Law, and do their devotions toward it.
This Arc they therefore always set in that part of their Synagogues which
points toward Jerusalem, so that those in Italy, as any where else in these
Western parts, were to place it toward the East.

Johan. Baptist: Bellus de Temple Augurali: C 9: page: 164:
And for him that said that the Jews within Solomon's Temple, worshipped
toward the West; but without it, toward the East. I remember such a Proverb
in the Arabicke Centuries, That the errors of wise men are so too; but if I
grant him that this was learnedly, I must tell him too that it was
(industriously indeed enough and) sufficiently mistaken. Solomon's Temple I
know was set toward the West, and I know for what reason too, and that the
Worshipers within the Temple turned that way, not toward the West, but toward
the Arc which was placed at the West end of the Sanctuary. Without the Temple
they worshipped toward the Temple it self, and according to their distance of
abode, toward the holy City, or however toward the Holy Land, meaning still
the Place where the Arc was, And to this rule whatsoever, wheresoever, they
say as concerning this matter, is to be exacted.

Now the better to accommodate this rite of Devotion, their private Oratories
were appointed in the uppermost Contignation of their Houses, called therefore
by them (...) Alijoth from Alah to go up* which the Greek well rendered (and
from them the Authors of the New Testament) (...), upper Rooms, so the Syriack
and Arabicke have rendered or rather expressed, for they do it for the most
part by the same word* And so the Original ought to have been turned Dan. 6.
10. Jeremie. 22. 13, and 14. and elsewhere. I say not simply Chambers, as we
do it, but upper Chambers.

Here (as hereafter) I forbid any quarrel against the grave and learned
Interpreters of That book.

The work was usque ad invidiam aliarum gentium elaborata versio, as one said
that understood it. Yet to show us how Drusius
unprofitable we men are when we have done all, the Jews say that God himself
when he made this World, purposely left one part unfinished. It Is old Eleazar's
Tradition in the Zohar (...) he left a hole in the North.

Eustath: in Iliad* (...)
Now then for the Notation of the word, (...) says Eustathius is from the
Lacedemonian (...), for so they call (...), the uppermosts of their Houses,
(...) (says Moschopulus) (...), Moschopul: (...) p: 138:
is a Room built upon another Room etc. And he interprets (...) by (...), as
Hesychius does (...) by (...), and (...) by (...), as the upper Room is called.
Mark. 14. 15. Luke 22. 12. So that the Greek account of this word is the very
same which the Hebrew Grammarians give of their Alijoth, they are so called
says Kimki (...) because they are to be gone up to by ascents, as being in the
uppermost parts of the House.

And the (...) in the Gospells is the very same with the (...) in the Act.
chap. 1. The very same upper Room (if the Scholiast I first mentioned has
observed rightly.) However, the several words signify the same thing, and so
the Arabicke and the Syriacke have translated them, and in both places, by the
very Hebrew word it self, Alijah.

Now you shall see how all this holds.

Dan: 6: 10:
Daniel the Prophet, after the signing of the writing went into his house, and
his Windows being open in his Chamber (his upper Chamber it should be) toward
Jerusalem, he kneeled upon his knees three times a day, and prayed, and gave
thanks to his God, etc.

The Greek is, (...).

Upon this practice of Daniel in Babylon, the Talmudists ground that Canon in
Beracoth, That no man pray but in such Talm. in Berac. c. 5* fol. 31. a. and
34. b.
a Room, She jesh be Challonoth, which has Windows or Holes in the Wall,
opening toward the Holy City.

And Benjamin Bar Jona says, That the Jews of his Time in Babylon went to
Prayers (...) not only in their Synagogues, but in this very upper Room of
Daniel. It was Ju^hasan. fol* ^3 1. Tsemach David. fol. 55.
an old stone* house, (he says) and that it was built by the Prophet himself,
etc. Bar Jona died in the year 933 of theirs, that is, 1173 of our Computation.

It shall be plainer yet by this Tradition in Tobit.

Sarah the daughter of Raguel, in distress at Echbatane, is said to have gone
up (...), into her Fathers upper Room (so some Hebrew Copies of that Book)
and that there Tobiae versio Arab. Ms. in Arch. Bodleian.
she prayed, etc. I meet with an Arabicke Translation which renders (...)
etc. that she went into the Bedchamber of her house, and did not eat, etc.
The Author understood not the Place.

But the Original Hebrew (so the Jews Edition at Constantinople, reprinted
afterward, and translated by Paulus Fagius, is taken to be) reads thus, That
she went up into her upper Room, and turning her self (...) toward the
window, she prayed and said, etc. which the Greek very well rendered (as that
in Daniel) (...), toward the window or hole in the wall, which opened toward
Jerusalem. And though the Greek expresses not that She went up, yet it
plainly says, that she came down (...), out of her Fathers Upper Room,
says the Hebrew of Muuster's Edition, The Greek is (...), out of her own,
The Original Hebrew is, out of the upper Room in which she had prayed.

Note here, that in stead of the Greek (...), the Hebrew of Munsters Edition
is that she prayed (...) Before the Lord, that is, toward His Sanctuary at
Jerusalem, where the Shecina sat. And therefore these or this Hole in the
wall, (it was commonly but one) is called in Jeremy the Prophet, Gods window,
Chap. 22. 14. Woe unto him that says, I will build me a wide House and large
Chambers (it should be Upper Chambers, and so v. 13.) and cutteth him out
Windows (it should be My Window, as the Margin confesses) and it is sieled
with Cedar, and painted with Vermilion. The meaning is, that if a man ('it was
spoken of a King) shall raise himself up a vast and stately Pile of Building,
and proportionably erect an Upper Room to my honor and Service, and cut me
out a Window opening toward the place of my Sanctuary, and siele it with
Cedar, and paint it with Vermilion, yet if this be done by oppression and
unrighteousness, Woe to the man and his magnificence.

Here we may give to, and take light from Petronius.

He calls this Window, or these Holes in the Wall, Summas Coeli auriculas,
The uttermost ears of Heaven, as the Learned Va^^ar. L^ction. Lib. 2. C. 1.
Petit has almost observed before me.

Iudaeus licet and porcinum Numen adoret,
Et Coeli summas advocet auriculas.
The Jew though that the Swine as God he fears.
And prays as far as utmost Heaven has ears.
Petronius means it especially of their Proseuchae (Houses of prayer without
the Towns) the respective walls whereof were bound to open toward Jerusalem,
with such Holes as these. But the matter comes to the same.

But wholly to assure the meaning of the word (...), and moreover to make good
this use of these Upper Rooms in Saint Lukes own time, Receive this Tradition
of the Elders out of the Code Beracoth. (...) The Elders deliver Talmud in E^
Omedin* Berac. c. 5. fol. 34. b*
that the Son of Gamaliel (that Gamaliel at whose feet Saint Paul was brought
up) was sick, and he sent Two of his Disciples to R. Hanina Ben Dosa to pray
to God for him, so soon as he saw them, (...)) he went up into his Alijah, or
upper Room, and there prayed to God for mercy upon the Sick man. When he came
down again, he said unto the Disciples, Go your way, for the Fever has
left him, etc.

It is a further argument of the Separation and Sanctity of these Upper
Rooms, that the walls of these were counted fittest to be hung and written
upon with the Tables and Figures of the Moons Phases (...) etc. The same
Rabban Mishna Talm. in Ros* Hassan. fol. 24* a. Gemera Tal* in Avoda Zara* fol.
48. a.
Gamaliel had Pictures or Similitudes of the Sun and Moon in Tables, and upon
the walls of his Alijah or Upper Room, which he showed to the Country People,
and asked them whether it appeared thus or thus. For example two men said they
saw the Moon, etc.

From the Moon (says the Son of Sirach) is the sign of Feasts.

Leon. Modena. De Gli* Riti. Hebraics de queflo temp^. Part. 3. c. 2* Number. 2.
The Civil also, but especially the religious part of the Jewish Calendar, was
concerned in these Appearances of the New Moon, the Reports whereof were made
by the Country People. And of these the Sanhedrin was to Judge, especially the
Prince of that Court, as Gamaliel then was. He showed the Country men the
several appearances of the New Moon which were painted upon the Walls of his
Upper Room, and asked them whether it looked so, or so. The answer to this he
examined by his Tables which showed him the Place and aspect of the Moon to
the Sun at that time, and according as these agreed it was judged for the
Ne^menia in the Beth Iaazak* or great Court (so called) in Jerusalem, Rosh.
hashan. fol. 23. b.

Therefore as to confess the religion and solemnity of this purpose, these
Tables were disposed of in the most holy Place, or (...) of the Rabbans House.

It will serve my turn in something which is to be said hereafter, Tab.
Astron. Marocchenses, et Tab. Cas Cyriaci Arabice. MS. in Arch. Laud* Bibl. Bod.
if it be added here that the Mahumetans go by the like manner of Lunarie
Calculation. Albategni says, that the observation of the Moone's Phasis is
principal to their Tarick or Calender; the Rules and reasons whereof are set
down by Alphraganus, The Marocco Tables, and those of Alkas.

It is observed already by the Learned Scaliger, that this is the reason why
these Worshippers cause the Crescent or Figure of the New Moon to be set up
upon the Spires of their Moseques, or Mesgids, as we the Cock upon ours,
Scalig. de Emend. Temp. They set it upon their Ships too instead of the
Heathens Castor and Pollux: Indeed it is the general Cognizance of the Grand
Seigniorie, and it is common to the Persian with the Turk.

But (to come to the (...) again) Note one thing more yet: The Hebrew Sages
call their Wisemen (...) Filios Coenaculi, or Sons of the Upper Room, as in
an Old Say of theirs in Succah. R. Jeremy said from the tradition of R. Simeon
Talmud in Succa fol. 45. b.
Ben Iochai (...) I beheld the Sons of the Upper Room, and lo they were few.

The Gloss there is (...) that the Sons of the Upper Room are the Company of
those which presens themselves before the Shecina or special Presence of God
in the Sanctuary. Which will amount to this, that the Company of those which
look out of Gods Window in their Upper Rooms, toward Jerusalem, are but few.

More Nevoch. Part. 1. c. 34 fol. 22. b. of Aben Tybbo^s Heb. Translat.
The Learned Maimon in his More makes the Proverb to mean for the rareness
and Scarcity of Wise men. Hinc dicitur express (says he) non multi Sapientes
sunt, and huc pertinet illud Rabbinorum nostrorum. Vidi filios Coenaculi and
erant pauci, nam plurima sunt quae nos a perfectione arcent and detinent, etc.

It is easily reconciled to the Gloss. There is no such distance betwixt true
Prudence and Prayers. Indeed the Beginning of this Wisdom must of necessity
be, That fear of the Lord.

ff. De his qui eff^d. veldejec. L. Praet. ait. Si fill. fam. De offic.
Prefect. Vigil. L. Nam* Salut. Vt curam.
And so it is proved enough that the Upper Rooms in Scripture cannot be taken
any longer in the Roman sense, as by Vlpian in the Law, where the Inquili^i or
Inmates are charged, That no fire come to pass by their negligence, pr^terea
ut aquam un^squisque in Coenaculo habeat, and moreover that they be all
provided of Water in their Upper Rooms. thus indeed it was vilissima part
aedium -- Et r^rus ve^it in Coenacula miles, but not apostolis ut peregrinis ac
fortunae tenuis tributa. let out to the Apostles, as Strangers, and men of low
condition, Heins. in Act.
etc. as the Learned must observe no more.

It may be noted out of Varro and Vitruvius, that the Ancient Roman Houses were
of one only contignation at the first, sed in ea majestate urbis and Civium
infinita frequentia, says Vitruvius, but when the City grew to that height, by
the Architectur. l. 2. c. 8.
infinite increase and confluence of People, they were forced to raise up
higher Stories, altitudines extructas crebris contignationibus coassatas (so it
should be read, not coaxatas, as Philander has let it pass) and coenaculorum
summas utilitates, etc. And since the Citisens began to go up stairs, they
thought it more agreeable to their State and glory (it holds still) to have
the dining Room above, then below in the Area plana, as Vitruvius calls it.
Now Varro notes moreover, that since this fashion of dining above came in,
omnia superiora domus, all the upper Rooms whatsoever were called Caenacula,
though this was the first, and proper name only of the second Story where
they used to dine. Which justifyeth that Translation of the Vulgar, Act. 20. 9.
where for the Greek (...), the Latin is, deci^it e tertio Coenaculo. So that
the Lowest Room also might be called Coenaculum. But the word Coenaculum in
the most usual and latest Roman sense is still meant of the Garret or
Cocke-loft as we call it, which was indeed the most contemptible part of the
house, and of no better use then to be hired out to very ordinary and common
people. To say the truth, they were but ordinary men that let them out, for the
Conductor in the Law is said Coenaculariam exercere. But to the purpose,
Coenaculum in this sense is no where in Scripture (scarcely any where else)
called (...). It is so called indeed in the Ius Orientale (and 'twill trouble
you to find it elsewhere) for in the Glosses to the Basilica, (...) is said to
be, (...)* a house built up upon a hired ground.

So that (which is the sum) the word Coenaculum in the last sense has no
reflexe upon dining or supping, neither can it at any hand render the word
(...) in Scripture. These Roman Cock-lofts were no fit receipts for a
hundredand twenty people. Act. ^. 15.

If these things agree not with the Annotations in the New Model (they call it
so themselves) it will not be my fault, and in my imputation I would not have
it too much to be accounted theirs. To the (...) in Saint Mark. 14. 15. (which
I told you before is the same with the (...) in the Acts) They say,

The Greek word signifies that part of the House which is highest from the
ground (so far they are right) to what use soever it be put, but because they
used to sup in that part of the house, they called it a supping Chamber.

But because they did not use to sup in that part of the House, therefore that
must not be the reason.

To Saint Luke 22. 12. a large upper Roome] their Note is. which they were wont
there to have, as for entertaining of Strangers, so especially for the
Passover.

The [Especially] was well put in.

I do not wonder at the mistake how great soever, for unless the right sense
of (...) had fallen into their ways it could not be expected, that they should
have done much better then they did. Only it sounds not altogether so well,
that the some placeshould be so profanely put to it as to serve the turn in
both capacities.

There is some difference betwixt entertaining of passengers, and Receiving the
Communion.

But (to go no further aside) the upper Rooms in Scripture were such as I
have said, places in that part of the house which was highest from the ground,
set a part by the Jews for their private Oraisons and Devotions to be
addressed toward Solomon's Temple, or the place of that, which for the
Consecration and convenience of Recesse, the Apostles made use of in the
Christian way.

Contrary to this as it may seem to be, Peter is said, to have gone up not
(...), but (...) upon the house top to pray. Act. 10. 9. Here if I would take
it, as Saint Hierome does. Dan. 6. 10. and Erasmus Mark. 14. 15. I need not to
doubt any further, for (...) and (...) are all one to them. And so the learned
Master Meade took it to be, and says that the signification is ex usu
Hellenistarum.

I do not think it will be found so. I am sure that in Scripture (...) is
expressly distinguished from (...) 2 Samuel 11. 3. and from (...) Mat. 24. 17.
And from (...) 2 King. 23. 12. Where it is said (...). That Josia brake down
the Altars which were on the top of the upper Chamber of Abaz.

But Peter is said to go up (...). It will not be proper to say that, he went
up upon the upper Room, It should have been (...) or (...). But Peter went up
upon the house Top. The Saxon is (...)aene (...) the Roof of the House. So the
Syriacke, the Arabicke is the plain Roof as the Tops of their houses were
made. Peter was now at Joppa* where he lodged in the house of one Simon a
Tanner, the state of which place it seems would not hold out for an upper
Room of the religious kind. For want of this he made use of the house Top. If
there had been an (...) there, he had gone up into that, as Saint Paul did at
Troas Act. 20. 8. and Saint Peter also at the same City of Joppa but in a house
of greater note in the case of Tabitha. Act 9. 37, 39. for of both these (...)
I mean to make good, that they were of the same kind which is here noted
upon. And for that at Troas, it is plain, for there were many Lights in the
upper Room, the Disciples were there gathered together, and there Paul
preached. It is more to be noted, that the young man sat (...), in God's
window, and fell down from thence (as Ahaziah once 2 King. 1. 2.) It had been
God's before, but was now out of Jewish Reverence and observation.

And for that of Joppa I take this course.

Tabitha was sick and dyed, and when she was washed they laid her in an upper
Chamber.

The Mahumetans to this day, when they have washed their Dead they dispose of
them in such a place, where they may be laid out so as that the Face and Feet
may most directly be turned toward Alkibla, or the Temple of Meccha, as their
Sharach Almenhag* and Hali Ben Moses in the Rythmicall Ritu les lib* Arab: MSS.
in Arch Laudin. Bib. Bod.
Rituall.

He that knows but as much as any man might do, of their manners, cannot deny
me but that the outside, and Caeremoniall part of their profession, was
altogether transcribed out of the Jewish Platform.

The shortest way to tell you this (besides the Lunary calculation spoken of
before) is in the matter of their Kibla.

This word signifies to them (as the same word in the Hebrew does) (...), any
thing that is before or over against, from thence they call the place toward
which they worship Alkibla* The Kibla.

El Sahan Hist: Arab. MS. in Arch. Laudin.
They first of all (says Ibn* el Sahan) worshipped toward the Temple of
Jerusalem, afterward, (as now) toward the Temple of Meccha etc. And this the
fame Author calls, The changing of the Kibla.

Now this very thing is a case of the Kibla or term of adoration, which is
fully concerned, not only in the whole frame of outward worship, but also in
the situation of Temples and Position of the Dead. But for this I remit you to
another Tract which wants not much of my last hand.

Seeing therefore that the Jews and they had once the very same Kibla, and now
have the same by imitation, that which is pretended to, is of easy consequence*

I infer upon this, that it was an old Jewish funeral rite to carry up their
dead bodies (after they were washed) into such a place where they might best
compose them in the religious posture, with their Face and Feet toward
Jerusalem.

Therefore the upper Room into which Tabitha was carried up, was the (...) of
the House. It is not to be mistaken as if she had been carried up thither to
this end that she might be placed toward Jerusalem. The Rites of her Funeral
were now to be Christian. It was to lay her out so that her Face and Feet
might be turned toward the East, which might be in that upper Room, for
Jerusalem was East from Joppa.

I was forced for the present to make use of this way o^ proof* because I
could not be fully enough satisfied asconcerning the Jewish Rite in the
position of their dead. Schickard confesses he knew not so much though he
lived amongst them. And their own Rabbin says no more then that they lay out
Les mod de gli Rit. Heb. Part. 5. c. 1.
a dead Corpse, co piedi verso la portae dalla camera, e una candela de capo di
cera posta in una pignatta di cenere, with the feet turned toward the Chamber
door, and a wax Candle at the head put into a pot of ashes.

But whatsoever the modern practice is, the ancient must be to bury toward
Jerusalem. Though I have no authority for it other then this Mahumetan
imitation, yet it must be true upon course from the Kibla, for all professions
buried toward the place they worshipped, as in the Tract I referred you to, I
shall be able to let you know.

In the 18 of the Act. v. 22. It is said that When Paul had landed at Caesarea,
and gone up and soluted the Church, he went down to Antioch.

The learned Master Meade collecteth here from the word (...) that the Apostle
went up into an upper Room, the rather because (as de Dieu has noted already)
the Aethiopicke renders it, Et descendit Casaream* and ascendit in domum
Christianorum, and salutavit ^os, and abiit Antiochians. That Paul came down
to Caesarea, and went up into an house of the Christians, and saluted them* and
departed from thence to Antioch.

This Collection I confess to have very much of the felicity of that man's
usual judgment in the Scriptures. But the context requires us to another
sense. Paul had now newly been at Ephesus, where he had been much importuned
to make a longer stay in that place, but he bad them farewell saying* that
Geograph. Nubiens: Clim: 2. part. 5. Sed Rex liberalitate ac sump tibus devicta
natura, etc. Joseph De Bell. Jud: Lib: 1. C. 6*
he must by all means keep the next feast at Jerusalem, but that he would
return again unto them, if God permitted* So he sailed from Ephesus and came
down to Caesarea. It was the Caesarea Stratonis, and his safest passage to
Jerusalem. The course by Joppa had been a shorter cut. And this Jafo or Ioppe
is called by an Arabicke Geographer. The Haven of Jerusalem, but a very
dangerous one; which was the reason which most of all moved Herod to repair
the old Haven at Caesarea, though at a vast expense, and with as much violence
as Art could force upon nature.

Paul therefore having landed at Caesarea, went up, so the Arabicke and the
Syriacke explain the Greek, that is, he went up to Jerusalem, as the word
(...) in the Greek suggesteth of it self; for to say no more in such a case
then that he went up* is to say, that he went up to Jerusalem. So some
Syriacke Translations read it: otherwise I understand not what Tremelius could
mean by his putting in the word with this note upon it, quaedam exemplaria non
habent nomen Vrishelem. It is to say no less then that some Copies have it.

I do not find it in the printed (...) nor in some manuscript Copies of good
note, If it were not at all to be found, it is necessary to the sense of the
place, and therefore ought to be supplied, or at least understood. For it
cannot be suspected, but that the Apostle did go up to Jerusalem at this time,
for he told the Ephesians that by all means he must, and no man can devise how
it could be otherwise done then from Caesarea, for to depart from Caesarea to
go to Antioch had been all one as to go back to Ephesus, and so to go by
the same place to Jerusalem, unto which he promised in his return from
Jerusalem to come again if God would.

There are yet some places of Scripture which fall within the present
consideration. As the 1 King. 10. 4. ^ Chron. 9. 4. where we translate it in
both places the ascent of Solomon, though in the latter expressly it should be
his upper Room. It is noted there (as those in Jeremie) for the most admirable
piece of Workmanship in all the Kings House, and reckoned therefore among
those rarities which so amazedly took with the Queen of Sheba, though notable
not only for its own structure, but also for that famous Ascent by which he
went up out of this House of Prayer into that of the Lord.

So Psalm. 104. 3. God is said to lay the beams of his Chambers (it should be
his upper Chambers) in the Waters. The Saxon translated it rightly (...)ae
uplaecen

Judge. 3. ^0. Eglon the King of Moab was sitting in his summer Parlour, or
Parlour of cooling, as the margin there. And yet the Hebrew word is Baalijah,
in the upper Room, in Coeuacul^ refrigerii, as others truly.

2 Samuel 18. 33. The King was much moved (at the death of Absalen) and went up
to the Chamber (the upper Chamber it should be of the Gate] and wept etc.

It is said also that a great woman of Shunem, made a Chamber ('it is an upper
Chamber there) for Elisha the man of God, furnished with a Bed, a Table, a
Stool, and a Candlestick. etc. 2 King. 4. 8.

And the Widow woman of Sarepta provided that other man of God such a Chamber
(an upper Chamber that should be too) where he laid the Child upon his Bed,
and cried to the Lord and said, O Lord my God etc.

It is said moreover, that the King Hezekiah, lying sick upon his Bed turned
toward the wall, and prayed etc.

To these Readings, it may be noted thus. That the word Alijah, does not
always signify in the principal and religious sense, but when it does so, it
is always set down absolutely. Otherwise if it be meant for an ordinary
upper Room, it is most usually expressed with a note of distinction, as the
Coenaculum portae, or upper Room of the Gate 2. Sam. 18. 33. The Coenaculum
refrigerii, or cooling upper Room, Judge. 30. 10. the Coenaculum parietis, or
upper Room of the Wall. 2 King. 4. 8.

And it may be perceived moreover, that besides the common (...) of the house,
the Bedchambers also, especially those of the Prophets, were bound to be (as
much as they might) of the same kind with these upper Rooms, and opening
toward Jerusalem. The case of a sick man (besides others) laid a necessity
of Devotions here too, and therefore, these also were to have their prospect
toward the holy City, or if that could not (it could not always) be, then
respect was to be had of that Wall of the Room which pointed toward the
Temple. Therefore the King Hezekiah turned himself toward the Wall, Don Isaac
Abraban* in Isai: 38. 2.
and prayed. Ionathans Targum renders it toward the Wall of the Sanctuary,
meaning (says Abrabaniel) the Western Wall where the Arc stood. All this is
true, but the immediate sense is that the King turned toward that wall of the
Room which pointed toward the Arc which stood under the Western W^ll of the
Sanctuary.

It Is possible this Wall might be written upon with some title of Reverence and
Remembrance; for the Jews to this very day inscribe their walls, with East,
West, North, or South, according as the holy Land lies from the Country where
they are, only to put them in mind of that Coast, toward which they are to
worship. So the Jews in the West* as Italy Germany, etc. write (...) Mizrach
upon their Walls, that is Oriens, because Jerusalem lies East from them, as
the learned Schickard has observed, and their Menasse Ben Israel answered me
by Letters.

Whether or no this kind of upper Room for this reason might not be called
Coenaculum (...) Kir, or Parietis. The wall upper Room. I would not so
presently resolve, though I know it pretends much better then the received
meaning.

Once more, Herodotus tells that when Sennacherib the King of Assyria came
out against Egypt, Sethon, who had formerly been a Priest in Vulcan's Temple)
but was now made King) being reduced to a very hard condition, by the revolting
of his men, retired himself in Coenaculum (so the Translatour) into an upper
Room, and there lamented his case before the Gods. The success was, that the
Assyrian forces were suddenly and totally disappointed by an Army of Mice, to
the memory whereof, the Statue of Sennacherib was set up in Vulcan's Temple
holding in his hand a Mouse, and saying these words (...). He that looks upon
me let him learn to be religious, This put me upon the consideration, whether
there might not be some such use of the Hebrew (...) in the Egyptian way. But
I did not find that any matter could be made of this, more then a mistake in
the Translation. The Greek is that the Priest went up (...). The Scholiasts of
Homer and Hesiod* as Phavorinus also etc, say this word signified at the first
(...) a stately pile of building, or a great man's house, but was afterward
taken for any ordinary one. Indeed the latitude of the word is so great that it
has been sunk down from a Palace, to a Stable, for so also it signifies,
somewhere.

But Julius Pollux reckons this word among the Loca Sacra, and therefore it
should not have been translated there. Magalia. (...) is quoted by Suidas for
a Place Holy enough. It must needs be taken there, for the (...) or Sanctuary
it self, for it is taken for such a Place into which none but the Priest might
enter.

And this was the meaning of Herodotus, that Sethon went (...), not into an
Upper Room, but into the Adytum, or Sanctuary of Vulcan's Temple, and there
made his case known, (...), Before the Idol, etc. Herodot* in Euterp.

The Talmudists make yet another use of this word Alijah, in the Tract Nidda,
fol. 17. b. where the womb of a woman is called by this name of recesse. The
Place is quoted by the Aruc, and out of that by Drusius, and made up into this
Proverb, Drus. Adag. Hebraic. fol. 106.
Ovis cecidit supina and ex^it sanguis e Coenaculo. But by a very great
mistake, for there is nothing of a Sheep, or a Proverb in it, as the Learned
Buxtorfe has already admonished, In addendis ad Lex. Talmudic. Col. 2676.

Es, 3. 26.
CHAP. IV.
And her gates shall lament and mourn, etc.
And she being desolate shall sit upon the ground.

DEsolation in Scripture is otherwise expressed by Silence and sitting upon the
ground; By the first because Great Sorrow is so. And the 2d has Nature enough
in it besides a derivation down from the manner of the Hebrew Mourning. So
Ezech. 8. 14. there sat women weeping for Tammuz. And in the 8 of Amos at the
third, It is said, That the Songs of the Temple shall be howlings, in that day
many dead bodies shall be in every place, tbey shall cast them forth. Peace, or
be silent. So the Margin according to the Letter, which must needs here take
place, for the paraphrase in the Text (in silence) expresses not enough.

But as the things themselves, Sitting, and Silence, fall not out single, so
they are most commonly put down in company. So Job 2. 13. His three friends
came to him, and sat down with him upon the ground seven days, and seven
nights, and none spoke a word unto him, for they saw that his Greise was very
great. So Es. 4 7. 5. Lament. 2, 10. etc.

We may know this (as we do some other things) the better by the contrary. But
then first of all it is to be observed, That in Capital causes, as in the case
of Suspension, Lapidation, or the like just violences against Natures course,
it was forbidden both by the Roman and the Jewish Law to make any Lamentation
at all for any such miscarriages of Dissolution. By the Roman. De his qui not.
inf. L. Liberorum. Non Solum. The Jewish is under the Title Sanhedrin, C. 6.
fol. 46. b. in the Mishna (...) That these are not to be lamented by the
Lamentation of Mourners, but only in the heart, that is (says the Gloss)
that they are not to be mourned over by any sumptuous or solemn (...) but by
the closest Rite of funerals, etc. Col. 2. Their Burial too is as negligently
appointed, and leaving them in little better condition then that of an Ass,
fol. 46. a.

This is to tell the reason why the Blessed Virgin and the other Women which
stood afar off, (as the other Gospells) or near, (that is, as near as they
could for the Soldiers) were not to make any solemn, usual show of
Lamentation. The Mother of Jesus must needs be reduced to the Extremest state
of sadness and contristation. If the Face and Countenance of the Action were
too little, yet these words, Woman, behold thy Son, could not choose but turn
her heart within her, (as God said once of himself, Hos. 11. 8.

And yet, though No sorrow were like to hers, Lament. 1. 12. She would be
terrible in these praises. This was the reason why She, and the other Women
stood: It Is no such wonder of the other Women. But She stood up still in a
resolute and almost impossible compliance with the Law.

For you are not to take it so, as if the word Standing there, were an
Expression of Course. 'Twas necessary. And they might not sit down in that
case, as some of the Masters ignorantly paint the story. They were to stand, as
by the wrong posture to free the Company from any suspicion of Mourning for a
Malefactor.

It Is true indeed that we read of Mary Magdalen, and the other Mary* sitting
over against the Sepulcher, and they sat there to mourn over the dead, And
therefore they sat, but this was after leave obtained of the Governor to bury
the body. This leave vouchsafed, and the Law discharged, the two Mary's might
sit down and weep over the Sepulcher in the open and usual manner.

Now from this behavior of the Jewish mourners, Sitting, and Silence, the same
words use to be said of a dead City or Country. As Esa. 47. 5. The daughter of
the Chaldaeans is bid to sit down silent, and get her into darkness, and he
no more the Lady of Kingdoms. So Lament. 2. 10. The Elders of the daughter of
Sion sit down upon the ground and keep Silence. So here. And she being
desolate shall sit upon the Ground.

The words are spoken of the Daughter of Sion, the special part of Jerusalem,
and here meant of the whole City and Country.

The Prophecy pointed at a nearer desolation, but might possibly have an
influence upon the last destruction thereof by Titus Vespasian. I am sure as if
it had been so, The Reverses both of the Father and the Son, made for the
memory and celebration of this conquest, are imprinted with the fullest
expressions and commentary upon these words.

In stead of the daughter of Sion, a silent Woman, Sitting upon the ground, and
leaning her back to a Palm Tree, with this Inscription, Judaea Capta.

Note here that the Reverses made to commit victories to memory, were allwaies
written upon with some representation of proper respect unto the Place
conquered, as in a very Jean Poldo de 'l' antiquite de la cite de Nismes.
ancient Coin of Augustus Caesar, Brass. The Face is double, This Inscription.
Imp, Divi. F. that is, not Imperatores Divi Frat^es, as the Antiquarie of
Nismes. (Imperatores with a single P is false writing in the Medals) but
Imperator Divi Filius, for Augustus Caesar is principally meant, though Julius
be there.

The Reverse a Crocodile enchained to a Palm Tree, the Inscription, Col. Nem.
that is, Colonia Nemausen^ium, or the Colonie of Nemausium, now called Nismes
in Languedoc. The devotion of the reverse is to celebrate the absolute victory
of Augustus over all Egypt, after the Battle at Actium. The Palmtree is
common to Egypt with Iudaea, the Crocodile almost proper. And it is signal in
both these that the conquered should be fastened to the Palm Tree, which is the
Emblem of victory.

But it is more to be considered* that no Conquered City or Country besides
this of Judaea (I could observe none) especially before the Times of Titus) is
expressed upon the Coins, by a woman sitting upon the Ground. I know that the
posture of sitting is a Ceremony of Roman Lamentation too. But to call a
Flourishing City The Lady of Kingdoms, Es. 47. 6. or the Princess among the
Provinces, Lam. 1. 1. And to express a taken or destroyed City, by a woman
sitting upon the Ground, is clear Hebrew Phrase, or if it were not only
theirs, yet it was theirs first, and must be learned from them.

And therefore I must needs think that the Emperors Reverse was contrived out
of this Prophecy.

And when I consider how great a man the Jew Josephus was in the Emperors
Court, and that he served him presently, and famously in the Action, before the
Walls of Jerusalem, I continue to imagine who it was that had a hand in the
Device.

To save this Interpretation harmless, I must confess here that I find in
one of Vespasians Reverses, Silver, A woman standing upon the Ground, and
leaning her self to a Palmetree, with the very same Inscription, Iudaea capta.

This put me to some wonderment at the first. But when I took notice that her
hands were bound, I perceived that the mind of the Reverse was, not to
express the Desolation of the Place, but the Captivity of the People.

CHAP. V.
The Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force,

Mat. 11. 12.
This is a Strange Phrase, if it should be exacted by our manner of expressing.
The Greek word is (...), and must not be passively rendered, as Beza would have
it, but as Erasmus and the English rightly. And so the Syriacke and the
Arabicke are to be understood.

But for the manner of the Speech it is to be referred unto this Tradition of
the Elders.

Two men had an inheritance divided betwixt them by equal Talmud. in Jon. ^.
C. 4 fol. 30. ^.
portions, and it is said of one of them (...) that he carried away his own part
and his fellows too, therefore they called him Ben-Hamtsen, or The Son of
violence until the day of his death, etc.

By The Kingdom of Heaven is plainly meant, The Inheritance of the Saints and
the means whereby to purchase it. The Gospel of the Kingdom, as it is
therefore so called Mat. 9. 35. which compare with Luke the 16. 16.

This Inheritance was bequeathed to, and equally divided betwixt the Jew and
the Gentile in a Christian way of Gauealkin. It was first offered to the Jew to
take his Half, but which the Jew refusing to do, the Apostles cast off the
dust off their Shoes, and turned to the Gentiles. And so the Gentile, like a
good Ben Hamtsen, or Son of violence, took his own share, and the Jews too.

CHAP. VI.
Noah's Lent.
And the Rain was upon the Earth forty days and 40 nights,

Genesis 7. 12.
During this time Noah and his Sons (so I find it in the Eastern
Traditions) kept a Solemn Fast, taking meat but once a Catena Veteru^,
precipue Ortentalium, in Pentateuhum, Arabice MS. in Arch. Bibl. Bod.
day, (...) that is, And Noah was the first who made the 40 days Holy, (or
instituted the Quadrage simall Fast) in the Arc, Caten. Arabica, Cap. 24. If
it be as the Tradition pretends to, The Institution of Lent is ancienter then
we took it for.

CHAP. VII.
Caeci and Claudi.
And (the Jebusite) spoke unto David, saying, thou shall not come up hither
unless thou take away* the Blind and the Lame, saying (with themselves) David
shall not come up hither. And David said in that day whosoever smites the
Iebusite, and recovereth to the Fort, and (smites) the Lame and the Blind,
hated of David's Soul. -- Therefore they said, the blind and the Lame shall not
come into the house.

2 Samuel 5. 6. 8.
So the Original expressly.
To prepare for that meaning of the words which I intend to take upon me, I
shall insist a while upon some unobserved superstitions of the Ancients in the
foundations and assurances of their Cities, Forts, etc.

'Twas a Rule the trembling Heathen went by to undertake nothing (nothing anew
especially) inauspicato, without some ominous performance, we may call it what
we please, but they did it upon grounds thoroughly concerned in experience and
effect still attaining their end by what dark and secret ways of cooperation
soever brought to pass, as undiscovered to themselves as us.

To the matter in hand, the first was the propitiation of the place by
reconciling the Genius with a respective Sacrifice, (...), etc. says Hesychius
Milesius concerning the foundation of Byzantium.

Arrian* (...). p. 52.
Like Ceremonies were performed by Alexander at the building of Alexandria, as
Arrian in the third book of his Expedition.

Such are often remembered by Ioannes Antiochenus, and out of him repeated by
the Fasti Siculi, George Cedren, and others.

But I choose to instance a less known passage out of Abdilphakar in his
Arabicke History of the Foundation of Antioch.

When this was laid by Antiochus the King, it happened that whatsoever the
workmen dug up by day, was again thrown in by night, and they were
affrighted from the work by a dreadful Apparition. The King called for the
Astrologers and wise men, who after Sacrifice rightly performed, discovered an
appearance of Almarick or Mars. It was agreed therefore Abdilphakar. Arab. MS.
in Arch* Laudin.
(...) that a magnificent Temple should be erected to his name, and his statue
there set up, and that the foundation of the City should be laid under his
Ascendent, etc. Also an Anniversary of three days festival was instituted
etc. and the Author says, that these things continued (...) until the
Manifestation of Jesus the Son of Mary. Peace and the Prayer of God be upon him.

This Tradition of the Arabian includes another manner of the Ancients laying
the foundation of their Metropolitan Cities under a certain Configuration of
the Heavens the most propitious that could be erected for the time being.

So Muazzus the Top of the Fatimaan family, caused the City of Gran Cairo to
be set up under the same Ascendent of Almarick (...) that as Mars had a
coercive power in the superior world, so the City might be Coactrix Orbis here
below* therefore the name of it was called Alchahira, as the Note upon
Elmacinus in the Tarich Mulsliminorum lib. 3. p. 227.

Hali ad Carpum. Ptol. adverb. 15*
The Ascendent of a City (says Haly) is that sign cujus ascensione quis
incipit collocare primarium lapidem, which rises in the Horoscope at the
laying of the first stone.

The Art of this is to be taken out of the first part of Apotelesmaticall
Construction, called by Ptolomie, Catholicon, Tetrabib. 1. Where he appoints
his Astrologer in giving judgment of the Accidents of a City to take knowledge
of the Sun and Ptol. Tetrab. ^. 5. 6. 4. and 5.
Moons place in the Zodiacque which they had (...), at the laying of the
foundation, (...), but especially of the Ascendent as the most principal Angle.

According to these Rules Tarucius Firmicus cast the Nativity of Rome, and
Vectius Valens an Astrologer of Antioch, that of Constantinople, the figure
whereof is extant in a Greek Manuscript in the Vatican. The Horoscope was
Cancer, and the Astrologer judged by the apparences that the City should stand
702 years as the Vatican book, as Cedren and others, 696. which if it be
taken of those years, (...), Zonaras Annal. tom. 3. in Constant* Mag. p. 7.
in which the City flourished under a full state of discipline, the Astrologer
was not so much out, as Glycas thinks. And moreover before the taking of the
City by Mahomet the second, a great Conjunction was observed under the
Horoscope. But in assigning the Ascendent of this Alkas Cyriac. Tab. Astron.
Arab. MS. in Arch. Laudin. Ben. Isaac. Geograph. Arab. MS. Ibid.
City, the Greeks and Arabians agree not, nor the Arabians themselves. For in
the Tables of Alkas, Constantinople is set under (...) Libra, in Ben. Isaac's
Geography under (...) Taurus, and though the same place may have several
Horoscopes, yet to so much variety it will be hard to reconcile the matter.

This Superstition has been as commonly and more lately practiced in the West.

At the instauration of Rome by Paul the third, Gauricus drew the Figure of the
Heavens. Vincentius Campanatius observed the time by his Astrolabe toward the
instant whereof he cried out with a loud voice, Ecce adest hora praecisa de^ima
sexta sere completa. Then immediately Ennius Verulanus the Cardinal laid the
first stone.

The curious may see several Nativities of Cities, Forts, and Castles, with
the Judgments given in Gauricus, Iunctin, Garcaeus, etc.

The Figure of the Old Lodging at Merton College is yet to be seen in one of
the Wardens Windows. I set it not John Chambers.
here down because it is already done by another in his Book against
Judicial Astrology.

These Catholicall Nativities were so much believed in by the Ancient Kings,
says Haly, that they enquired into the Genitures of all the principal Nati
under their dominions, where if the Planets were found to look with a
malicious eye upon the Nativity of the Kingdom. Interficiebant eum puerum,
quod ejus Regnum erat contra Regnum ipsorum.

It may be seen also what Zonaras has reported of Tiberius and Domitian, Tom.
2. Annal. p. 174. and 198.

Now because that in the Nativities of Cities (...), as in the Genitures of
men, (says Ptolomy,) the Astrology is the same.

Therefore after consideration had of the life and being of the City from the
Horoscope, the next care taken was of the (...)* or part of Fortune, the second
Ascendent, so called in the Figures of men, or the Horoscopus Athlorum.

The Part of Fortune found out, was mysteriously included in a Statue of
Brass, (...), Telesmatically prepared. The Joh. Antioch.
Rites were, A pure Virgin was offered up in Sacrifice. A Statue of the Virgin
set up, imposed upon with a New and secret Name, and Sacrifice done to That.
And all this (...). For so the Statue was called. The Fortune of the City.

Job. Antioch. in Arch. Barro^^^an.
So in Seleucus his foundation of Antioch, (...), etc.

The like Ceremonies were observed by the same Founder at the building of
Apamea. (...), etc.

The Fortune of old Byzantium was called (...), Ceroe. When this was repaired
into Constantinople, the Emperor's Statue was set up. (...). Holding in his
right hand the Fortune of the City which he called Anthusa. But the Sacrifice
was not as before.

The Emperous offered up (...), Incruentum Sacrificium, (...). A Sacrifice
without blood, and not to the Fortune of the City, but to God himself.

Briefly Thus. The Founders of old at the building of their principal Cities,
Castles, or the like, caused their Astrologers to find out a luckie position
of the Heavens under which the first stone might be laid. The Part of Fortune
found out in this first Figure was made the Ascendent of another. The first
judged of the Livelihood and duration. The second of the outward Glory and
Fortune of the City under the Influence of this latter configuration they
erected a Statue of brass into which this Fortune and Genius of the City was
to be called by Art. Thus spirited with this secret power, it was disposed of
in some eminent or ^ecessefull place of the City, and looked upon as that thing
which was only concerned in the fortune and fatality of all.

Such a one was the Trojan Palladium no (...), says Joannes Antiochenus, but
(...), or as John Tzetzes quoteth the place to Lycophron, (...), telesmatically
consecrated or under a good Horoscope by As^es the Philosopher, and presented
to the Founder Trous, (...), i. e. as a Statue enabled by Art to preserve the
City wherein it should be laid up in a victorious and impregnable State.

Olympiodorus relates from Valerius Governor of Thracia under Constantius the
Emperor, (...), Pho^. cod. 80*
of certain Silver statues (laid up under the confines of Thracia and Illyria*
Telesmatically consecrated against the Incursions of the Barbarians* which at
the command of Valerius being dugge out and taken away. (...), etc. within a
few days after all Thracia and Illyria was every ^^ne by the Gothe^ and Hunnes.

I say then of the Claudi and the Caeci, that they were no other then those
(...), Statuary Telesmes so much celebrated of old (as Nicetas) which unless
they kept the City, the watchman labored but in vain.

They were placed by the Astrologers in some convenient Recesse of the Fort,
and had doubtless made good the place against David's men* but that as the
great Sooth*sayer himself confessed, There was (...) enchantment against
Jacob, nor divination against Israel, Numb. 22. (...)

The usual Interpretation of this place is, (and it is the best of the bad)
that the Iebusites trusting themselves to the invincible condition of their
Fort, brought up Lame and Blind men to call a scorn upon David's approaches.
Therefore his soul hated them. I am sure I have made the best of this
construction, and yet he that shall run it through all the Circumstances of the
Text, will find it to be as impertinently cast up, as that of the Chaldee,
which instead of the Lame and the Blind renders by way of Paraphrase; the
sinners and ungodly Jebusites. Which some of the Hebrews endeavor to follow,
but at an intolerable distance.

I shall not want for a very considerable part of them, who though they have
not lighted upon the very same, yet have said enough as to the clearenesse and
advancement of that sense and meaning, which I have resolved upon. In the Celi
Jakar you will find that the Lame and the Blind may be taken for R. D. Chim^hi.
R. Lev. Ben. Gerson. Celi. Iakar and R. Esaias in* locum.
Images. R. Solomon says expressly (...) that they were so, and R. David that
they were (...) Images of brass. R. Esaias as R. David and Levi Ben Gerson say
moreover -- That the Blind and the Lame were Images written upon with the oath
which Abraham and Isaac made to Abimelech, and that they were called Blind
and Lame, because they had eyes and saw not* they had feet and walk not etc.

But as concerning the conceit of Abraham and Isaacs oath to Abimelech I leave
it at large. That which I take from them is, that they were Images of Brass,
and the reason why they were called the Blind and the Lame, which if it had not
^in suggested by them, yet is the very phrase of the Scripture.

They were the St^ichiodae or Constellated Images of Brass, set up in the
Recesse of the Fort, called in scorn (as they were hated by David's soul) the
Blind and the Lame. Yet so surely entrusted with the keeping of the place,
that i^ they did not hold it out, the Iebusites said they should not come into
the house, that is, they would never again commit the safety of the Fort to
such Palladiums as these. Therefore they (that is the Iebusites) said the
Blind and the Lame etc.

CHAP. VIII.
1 Samuel 6. 5.
Wherefore ye shall make Images of your Em^eds and Images of your Mice that
mar the Land* and ye shall give glory unto the God of Israel: peradventure he
will lighten his hand from off you, and from off your Gods, and from off your
Land.
When the Arc was taken Captive and detained by the profane Philistines, the
hand of God was sore upon them, and smote them with Haemorh^ides, and
ebullierunt villae and agr^ in medio Regionis illius, and ^ati sunt m^res, and
facta est confusi^ martis magna in Civit^^e. So the vulgar adds, the ancient
Greek Copies have it not. The later agree not, some Hebrew Copies acknowledge
it not, says Mend^za, as if there were any that did? It Is found indeed in the
Dras, as Chimhi has observed. And it cannot be denied to the Romanists, but
that it seems to be wanting, but by no means to be so supplied: 'Twere
better the Arc should shake still, then that Vzzah should hold it up.
Howsoever it is true that there was a plague of Mice, as well as of
Haemorrh^ides. Concerning which the Astrologers being consulted gave counsel
that there should be made 5 golden Images of the Mice, and as many of the
disease to give glory to the God of Israel. The number was according to the
number of their Lords, but for the thing it self the expositours whatsoever
pass lightly over it, or stop the mouth of the letter with a mystery,
perceiving no more of the natural sense, then a bare trespass offering, but
wondering withal and not without cause, what glory could accrue to the God of
Israel from such a homely present as the Counterfeit of a Mouse, or that which
is worse. A thing which the holy Ghost here vouchsafed not to call by its own
name, for the ^ert i^ Teb^r^c^m, A^^rum Vestrorum. But the meaning of the
^^^ges is St^ichi^ticall, and to be given out of the Telesmaticall Traditions.

^tolem. Centiloq. Verb. 9.
(...) (says (...) the (...) (...). i. e. the generable and corruptible forms
are affected by the Celestial, which therefore the Talismans make use of by
observing the entrance of the stars into them.

The meaning is (says Hali Aben Rodoan) or as the Hebrew translation, (Abu
Giafar) that the forms of things here below are answered with the like
figurations above, and that the Celestial forms have a ruling influence upon
the sublunary, for example, the Scorpion and Serpent in heaven upon those in
earth. Therefore the Sapientes imaginum inspiciebant quando planeta de sub
radiis solis egrediebatur, and ingrediebatur h^s vultus, eumque in ascendente
ponebant, and vultum quem intrabant sculpebant in Lapide, and miscebant cum eo
alia ad has necessaria, faciebantque cum eo ex aptatione vel destructione quod
volebant. etc. Observed when a planet was out of his Combustion, and enterd
into any of these forms, then placing the planet in the Horoscope they
engraved the form upon a stone, then adding what else was necessary they
fitted it to preservation or destruction, as they pleased, etc.

These conceits the Greeks termed (...), otherwise (...), from whence the
Arabicke Talismath. The Chaldeans from the word in the Text Tsalmanija, Images.
An experiment of the force is set down by Hali upon his own knowledge
practiced upon a Saracens servant in diebus Camorchae Regis. The servant had
been stung with a Scorpion, and was cured by his master with a stone of this
kinds engraven upon with the figure of a Scorpion. And the Saracen said, that
the figure was cut when the Moon was in the sign Scorpio, and that the sign
was in one of the 4 Angles. The mightiest in operation of this sort was
Apollonius Tyaneus, a man of that note in the Heathen balance, that Hierocles
the Se^ick* put him into the Scale with Christ himself, nay he accounted him
the better man of the two, but which is sufficiently returned upon him by
Eusebius Pamph. Cont. Hieroclem*

But the performances of this man had such appearances of wonder, that they
extorted this doubt from the Orthodox themselves, (...), Justin Martyr Res. ad
Orthod quest. 24. 245*
etc. If God be the Creator and Lord of the World, how comes it to pass that
Apollonius his Talismes have so much overruled the course of things, for we
see that they also have stilled the waves of the Sea, and the raging of the
winds, and prevailed against the noisome flies and incursions of wild beasts
etc.

And though Philostratus in that large Legend of his life has no memory of
these things, yet they are constantly ascribed unto this name by Codin. Cedren.
Hesychius, Olympiodoyus, the Greek Ms. cited by Leunclavius, The Chronicon
Alexandrinum and John Tzetzes, C. 60. of his third Chiliad. quod omnino
legendum (says Scaliger) siquidem horum (...) notitiam Joseph Scalig: Epist.
180.
habere placet, and sane lectio non injucunda. Nam in illo capite Apollonius
sculptura Culicum and Ciconiarum, culices Antiochiam* Ciconias Byzantium
ingredi prohibuit.

But a fuller Tradition of this matter I shall here set down out of Domninus
cited by Joannes Antiochenus Melala in the 10 Book of his Chronographie.

Joan Antioch n. Ms. in Arch. Baroccian. Bibliothec. Bodleian.
(...).

In the same times of the Reign of Domitian, flourished the most learned
Apollonius Tyaneus who got himself a great name by traveling about and making
Telesmes in all places where he came, for the Cities, and the Countries. From
Rome he went to Byzantium* and entering into that City of Byzus (now more
happily called Constantinople) he made there also many Telesmes at the instance
of the Citizens, as that against the storkes, against the river Lycus which
passes by through the middle of the City, that against the Tortoises, that
against the Horses and other strange things. Then afterward leaving Byzantium
he went and did the like in other Cities. From Tyanis he came into Syria, and
so to Antioch the great, where also he was desired by the chief men of the
City to make such Telesmes as they had need of. And he made one against the
Northern wind, and set it up upon the East port of the City.

The Author goes on, and at large describes Apollonius his charms against
the gnats and scorpions, adding moreover that Apollonius walking upon a day
with the chief men of the City to observe the situation of the place, happened
upon a ruinous pillar, and enquiring into the purpose of that, the Citizens
related unto him, that in the days of Caius Caesar when the City had been
shaken with an Earthquake, (...). Johan* Antiochen Ms. in Arch. Baroci^n Bib.
Bod*
One Debborius a Talisman to prevent the falling of the City in case an
earthquake should happen again, set up this pillar and upon that a marble
Pectorall inscribed (...), but which in process of time had been consumed by
lightning, etc. The Citizens therefore were earnest with him, to set up a new
Telesme, but Apollonius fetching a deep sigh (...) refused to make any further
Telesmes against the Earthquakes; but the Citizens being urgent upon him, he
took writing Tables and foretold as follows. (...).

And thou miserable City of Antioch shall suffer twice, and a third time shall
come upon thee, wherein thou shall be consumed by fire even in that part by
which Orontes runs. And it may be thou shall suffer yet once more.

This written, he delivered the Tables to the Citizens, and departed into
Sel^ncia, and from thence into Egypt, (...).

But the most concerning Telesme to the matter in hand is that against the
Scorpions, (...). Apollonius caused an Image of a Scorpion to be molten in
brass, and set it up upon a little pillar in the midst of the City of Antioch,
and the Scorpions vanished out of all their Coasts.

A like Telesme to this was set up at Hemp^^ a City of Syria Apamea, that which
Ptolomy calls (...). In the middle of this, says an Arabicke Geographer, a
stone there is set up Geograph. Nubiens Cl^n. 3. part. 5.
in a wall having upon it the figure of a Scorpion, and when any one is bitten
he brings Clay and takes out the figure, which having applied to the place
affected, he is immediately oured.

In the nether Region of Grand Cairo the Crocodiles were harmless, in the
upper they destroyed the Inhabitants. To ^ardan. de subtilitat. l. 9.
Scaeliger. exercit. 196. Number. 6. Joan. Bodin* mag. d^mon^man. l. 3. C. 6.
provide against this, the Talismans cast a leaden Crocodile, which written upon
with an Egyptian charm they buried in the foundation of a Temple. This for a
long time defended the people, but when at the command of A^hm^t Ben T^lon the
Caliph the leaden Image was melted, the Crocodiles returned to their own
malice again.

The (...) or fortune of Byzantium stood with one foot in a ship of brass, the
Statue concerned the general Genius of the whole City. The Ship was a Telesme
erected against the dangers of that tempestuous Sea, and while it stood entire
stilled the rage, but some parts thereof being (none knew how) broken off and
conveyed away, the Sea began to be as unruly as before* The cause whereof being
curiously enquired after and discovered, the broken pieces were sollic^tously
searched, sound out and p^t together again, and forthwith Zonaras Annal. lium
Tom. 3. in Anastasie.
the winds and seas obeyed.

(...) (...), i. e. And that it might be certainly known that this indeed was
the cause why the ships could not safely arrive, the pieces of the brass were
again taken away. Thenceforth whatsoever vessels touched upon the Coast were
driven back by the violence of the winds. This confirmed them in opinion that
the breaking of the brazen ship was that which hindered their Carriages from
coming up to the City. They therefore caused the ship to be most carefully
repaired.

These Consecrations (for so also they are called) were more usually but not
only practiced in the East. For Gregory of Tours reports, that at the
repairing of a Bridge in Paris, there was found the Images of a Serpent and
Dormouse in brass, and that at the taking away of these, the Serpents and the
Mice came up in great number. More might be added of Leuncla v. pandect. hist.
Turc. Number. 130.
the Serpentina columna, and the Statue Equestris ahenea, set up (this latter)
against the Plague in Constantinople, the destruction whereof has been
followed with fearful and periodicall Mizald. Cent. MS. Gaffarel. curiositez.
innoyes su^la sculpture Talismenique des pers. c. 6.
mortalities. But enough has been said, Mizaldus may be seen, and the late
Author of the Curiosities.

If we draw all up, the Sum will be the Ancient Rite of Averruncation, That in
case a City or Country should be infested with any plague either of disease or
noxious Creature, the Talismans were consulted and desired to erect an Image of
the plague under a certain Influence of Celestial Configuration.

And this I say was the cause why the Philistin Astrologers gave counsel that
golden Images should be made of the Haemorrhoides, and the Mice that marred the
Land, to give glory to the God of Israel.

The Telesme against the Mice according to Paracelsus is to have this manner of
Consecration. Make an Iron Mouse under the Conjunction of Saturn and Mars, and
in the House of. Imprint upon the belly Al^amatatox, etc. Then place the
Archidox. mag. l. 3. p. 135. edit. Let. germanica. p. 103.
Telesme in the middle of the House, and the Vermin shall instantly leave the
place. More then so he promises. Take a live Mouse and tie it to the Iron
Image, and it shall dye immediately. But I undertake not that the golden mice
were so ceremoniously consecrated; yet that they had a Telesmaticall way of
preparation answerable to the beginnings and mediocrity of the Art, my own
reason, and above that the weight of Maimon's words induce me to conclude.

More Nevoch. Part. 1. c. 1.
I say (says he) of that of Samuel concerning the Images of the Haemorrhoides,
that they were so called not so much from their external form, as from a
secret influence within, remediall against the plague in the hinder parts.

The Astrologers had perceived that this God had been pleased with the Brazen
Serpent, which Moses the Talisman (so they would account him) set up upon a
pole in the wilderness, Numb. 21. 8. And I need not stick to affirm, that
this Brazen Serpent against the fiery Serpents was the first occasion (I say
not given) but taken, of all these Telesmaticall practices.

And thus also we may come to know (See Pliny Lib. 10. C: 27. Cyrenaici
Achorum: Deum muscarum multitudine pestilentiam inferente, invocant. why the
God of Ekron was called by the name of Baal zebub, that is, (...) (as the Lxx)
or the Fly-God. The Greek Copies of the Evangelists for the most part read
(...) Beelzeboul-Deus or Belus Stercoreus. So the Printed Arabicke and the
Hebrew Translation of S. Mat. But I presume not originally. And so Saint
Hierome observed, for seeing the Idiome of Zebul is Syriacke, it would have
been expected, that that Paraphrase should not have read as it does, (and
undoubtedly ought) Beelzebub.

But for the reason, if any could be given, Scaliger was likely to give as good
as another, and yet his reason is, that the Scripture put this name upon the
God of Ekron by way of derision, quod in Templo Hierosolymitano Muscae car^es
victimarum non liguriebant, quum tamen Gentium fana a muscis infestarentur
propter nidorem victimarum.

True indeed it is out of the Pirke Avoth, that a Fly was never seen in the
Slaughter* house of the Temple. And 'twas a privilege of the Jewish Sacrifices
above those of the Heathen. But that therefore the God of Ekron should be
called the Fly-God, is a reason below that man's sagacity. He was properly so
called as the most learned Seldom. But for the Syntagma^* 2. c. 6.
cause he confesses, Nequeo dicere, nec mihi quis alius opinor satis potest.

But the Ekronites were pestered with noisome flies; To avert this Nuisance the
Astrologers set up the Image of a Fly Telesmatically endued; the people finding
the benefit of this (...), made it a God. The Israelites themselves did as much
to the Brazen Serpent.

CHAP. IX.
(...).
Act. 19. 35.
(...).

Here (...), is falsely; (...), not fully rendered. Our own Translation is, And
when the Towne-clerke had appeased the People, etc.

But then it should rather have been as in Thucdyides, (...), that is, (...),
i. e. The Reader of the common Records, as the Scholiast there.

But a man of this calling, (...), (as the Greek Orator of Aeschines) must
not have undertaken upon the unweildy people. The Syriacke therefore and
Arabicke Translations render it, A chief Man of the City. The Aethiopicke, as
the vulgar, simply, The Scribe; truly enough to the Letter, but not filling up
the sense, nor themselves well knowing what they mean. De Dieu finds in the
Glossarie, (...), Scriba, Tesserarius. Therefore (says he) Quum hic in Vrbe
Epheso designatur aliquis qui absolute vocatur, (...), merito intelligitur
praefectus, qui militibus Symbola and munia praescribit.

But none of all this will do right to the word. It Is thus.

At that time the Asiarchae (so they are termed, v. 31.) who advised Paul not
to adventure himself into the Theater, exhibited the Olympicks at Ephesus to
the honor of Diana, which is a reason to me why Paul notwithstanding his
purpose in the spirit to go to Jerusalem, yet staid in Asia for a season, to
win the more to his way, out of that solemn confluence of Heathen Saints
then gathered together, (...), out of the whole Common of Asia.

In these Celebrations three principal Officers of Ludicrous, but Holy State
were concerned.

The (...), the (...), and the (...). I learn this of an Ancient Author quoted
by Ioannes Antiochenus Melala, in the 12 Book of his Chronography. (...), Joh.
Antioch. MS. in Arch. B^roco^an, Bibl. Bod. Lib. 12. (...).
etc.

(...).

(...) (...), etc.

That after the reviving of the long intermitted Sports (by an Edict from the
Emperor Commodus) in the same Sacred Sanction Aphronius a Citizen of Antioch,
and one of the Expraefecti was first named Alytarcha, under the person whereof
he was daily honored and adored by the name of Jupiter. And during the
Solemnity, never came within doors, or lay upon Bed, but slept upon the
ground, in the open air, lying upon stones covered over with a rush mat, and
clean Carpets. His Habit was a long gilded Robe white as the Snow, upon his
Head a Crown of Carbuncles, Pearls, and other precious Stones. In his hand an
Ivory Scepter, and white Sandales upon his feet.

The Grammateus then first chosen by the Senate and People was Pompeianus by
Name, a Quaestor, and descended of the Roman Senators. His habit also was a
long white Robe, upon his head a Crown all of Gold made after the Laureat
Fashion. And Him they honored and adored under the name of Apollo.

The same Senate and people chose Cassius Illustrius (...), etc. Procopius
Illustrius Caesariensis, etc.
Amphithales, whose habit was in like manner a long white Robe of Silk, upon
his head a wreath of bays, in the middle (or hanging at his breast) a golden
pectorall, upon that the figure of Jupiter. He was honored and adored by the
name of Mercury, as I find all this in the learned Domninus his Chronography,
etc. So Johan. Antiochenus.

The office of the Grammateus I conceive to have been the registring of the
Victors names, the time and Style of Rewards, etc. which were therefore called
(...). The Records of the Holy Conquerours, as the inscription upon the
Farnesian Marble: and the Receipt or Office of these Records was answerably
termed (...). See Faber's Agonisticon, Lib. 3. C. 23. and 27.

And such a Scribe or Actuarie as this was the (...), Who when he had appeased
the people, said, ye men of Ephesus* etc. which how proper it was for him to
do, will be easily confessed by them that shall consider what the Tradition
has that the Alytarcha was named by the Emperor, but the Grammateus and the
Amphithales were chosen by the People themselves. And the Grammateus was first
in order.

CHAP. X.
(...).
Act: 19. 35. What man among you is there that does not know that the City of
Ephesus is a worshipper of the great goddess Diana? etc.


SO we translate, as the vulgar, Cultricem Diana.

Quatuor Evangel: Epist. Apostol. and Apostolor. Act: Ms* Arab: in Arch:
Biblioth: Reginens.
The Arabicke Paraphrast does not seem to have understood it. Junius his
Translation of that is, Viri Ephesii, quis nescit Civitatem Ephesiorum esse
Artemidis magna* His note in the margin is, Gr. (...) non est hic. I had
otherwise thought it might be an error in the printed Copy, but I found it so
too in a fair pointed manuscript in Queens College Library.

For the Greek, the Etymologists notation is, (...), from (...), Attically
(...), and (...) in the signification of (...), One that makes clean the
Temple. (...) (says Phavorinus) (...), one that sweepeth the Church. But
Suidas (...), Not one that sweepes but adornes and beautifies the Temple,
(...), Scholiast. Arist: ad (...). p. 61. Astronomic (...)* Lib: 4. C: 7.
as the Scholiast upon Aristophanes.

The word is sometimes read in Latin and elsewhere then in the inscription
cited by Grut^r. for Julius Firmicus says Defluens a. Luna si plena lumine
feratur ad facit magnes etc. Neocoros quoque, aut prophetas, vel Sacerdotum
principes. And the same Author in another place. Serapis in Aegypto colitur hic
adoratur (i e. Alexandriae.) hujus simulachrum Neocororum turba custodit, and
ad memoriam vetustatis errans populus ordinem sacrorum in honorem integerrimi
ac prudentissi^i hominis constitutum contentiosa hodie animositate custodit
etc. Where also it may be noted that in great and frequented Temples, the
Neocori made up a considerable number, and were distinguished therefore into
degrees of order, as by that (...), a Io. Go^osi^d Ed^s.
in the body of inscriptions. (...), and by the vetus Expositio totius orbis,
C. 18. in the Description of Alexandria.

The word is (by those who do it most properly) translated Aeditua, so the
Syriacke. And it is the uttermost sense the Interpreters have as yet gone down
into. We may render it, as the Italian Translation by Deodate, Sagrestano, the
Sacrist of the great Goddess Diana. But to be said here in so collective a
sense of a whole City is without any known parallel in Master Seldom.
Books, if men of the greatest conversation in these have sufficiently observed.

In the marbles, (though less in these, but in the Greek Coins most
frequently) it is found from the beginning of the Empire down to Gallienus.
The inscriptions are in those of Augustus. (...). In the Tiberian. (...); In
others, (...).

Antonius Augustinus his note upon the word, is, Questa parola per intender la
d'a molto da fare a quelli che veggono le Medaglie con qualche diligenza. That
it has perplexed even those who have perused the Medals with the greatest
circumspection and sagacitie.

Animad verse. in Sueton p. 131.
Causabon to the Monumentum Ancyranum, has this opinion. That when Caesar
Augustus and the succession by his example, granted to provincial Cities the
erection of Altars and Temples, and exhibition of the Olympickes etc. for the
upholding of common interest, and to confess the honor and Divinity of the
Emperors, the Cities so indulged, accounted it a special grace to be styled
the (...) or Sacrist of the Solemnities.

For other Moments making up to the untying of this hard word, I remit you to
Master Seldom upon the fourth Arundell Marble: where I think there is as much
said, as by the revealed stock of Antiquity could possibly have been, though
you may see to the later Petit. variar. Lect. Lib. 4. C. 10. But I shall set
you down something out of an ancient Author, which will reconcile the word to
this very sense and requite it to a less strange and unlikely sound.

That the word is a term of Devotion respecting to these holy Games, the
mentioned Marble intimates enough, (...) etc. Sacrum Certamen, etc.

And the reverence indeed was of such an intemperate height that not the
solemnity it self only, but the people also for the time being, and the
victors ever after were accounted and called Holy.

Johan Antiochen. uli S^p.
For, (...).

If any of the Company, whether Maiden or young Man, upon the acclamations of
the holy People, were crowned, The Crowned as victor, was to spend the rest of
his days in a cloister: for immediately after the Games were ended he was
consecrated a Priest; likewise the virgin votaries, if crowned, were made
Nuns.

Nay so yet more holy was the opinion of these games, that the Emperors
themselves accounted it no fall of Majesty to bear the Alytarcha's part and
be a May. King, or Mock. Jupiter in these Rovels.

(...).

The Emperor Diocletian (as the same Author out of Domninus) took upon him
the person of the Alytarcha, with this difference only, that whereas the
Alytarcha wore a long white Robe of Silk, the Emperor wore one of purple. In
all other respects he was habited as the Alytarcha used to be, holding in his
hand a holy Scepter, and doing reverence to the People.

And as if he had been greater in these then in the Imperial Robes, (...),
etc. i. e The Olympickes ended, he would be King no longer, saying, I have put
off the Empire by putting on the habit of Immortal Jupiter. And so continued
ever after.

The like was done by Maximinian, as the same Author in his life.

Put all this together, and the sum will be,

That the Celebration of these Games in this or that City of the Common, was a
Solemnity thoroughly sanctified in the opinion of the people, as an observance
of high devotion and Religion to the Gods and Emperors, the performance
whereof could not be done without a Preisthood of Ministers.

And to that sense the Asiarchae ought rather to have been rendered, not
Principes (as the vulgar (or Primores,) as the Syriack and Arabic) that is,
the Chief of Asia, as we: (though this will hold too) but Sacerdotes Summi,
The High Priests of the solemnity* the devotion whereof could not but move the
City so obliged very much to affect the Dignity and Title of the (...), to
adituate such a piece of Divine Office, where so many Gods were present by
their Proxies, where not the sports, themselves but all the Company were
reputed Holy for that time, and some accounted so ever after.

The Grace of this how often it was granted to this or that City, (as to some
it was the fourth time) so often was the style expressed in the imperial
Coins. to the present purpose that of Valerian serves best.

Du Choul Discourse: de la Religion des ^ncieu^ Roma^nes p: 117.
Upon the Reverse 3 Temples, in the midst an Altar, with the fire kindled, and
wreathed about with a Serpent (the heathen Hieroglyphicke of Mysteries and
religion) with this inscription, (...). Upon the face 3 heads, answerable to
the 3 Temples; The first of the Emperor himself, the other of his two sons,
Gallienus and Valerian Caesar.

For the Connotation of the turn or time as (...) etc. with mention of the
Deity sometimes, but so often without it. The reason is hard and slippery. The
last resolution that I know to have been made is this: That in all likelihood,
The Matter Deum or the mother of the Gods was common to all the Cities of Asia;
And that whenever the (...) is written with a note, of the time only, as in
those of the Gallieni, (...) In those of Caius; (...), etc. and most constantly
so, The mother of the Gods is to be understood. Otherwise, if the special
Deity of the place be mentioned, as (...) in those of Maximine, and (...), the
God of the place is to be meant single.

Certainly the Games could not wear out so much of their old relation as not
to be principally addressed to the Gods of the first right, though not without
a flattering concernement of the Emperors, the Gods below (as the times then
were) having taken the place of those above. The old Gods of the Games were
Jupiter in the first place, and the next Apollo. And that the respect to them
continued still and beyond these days of Claudius, is plain by the note
before, where the later is represented by the Grammateus, the former in the
Alytarcha's part. And so I doubt not to understand the Reverses, where the
(...) are set down without expression of the Deity. Where it is otherwise (and
that is not often, especially if the last Observers Note be good; vixque aliter
usurpatum M. Petit.
praeter tria quod sciam exemplareperias) It is a special
super-acknowledgement of the God of the place; as the (...), The great Diana of
the Ephesians* whose (...) the City of Ephesus now was. It is not (...)* but
(...), the now Sacrist of Diana. And why the mention should be so often ('it is
only so for ought I yet know) of this Diana is not so strange, if it be
considered that she was not only great of the Ephesians, but of all the
Common; and to whose shrine there went up a more famous and frequent pilgrimage
of Devotaries, then to any Holy Land o^ theirs whatsoever.

This is the sense of the (...), and this was the meaning of the Actuary.

CHAP. XI.
(...).

Act. 19. 24. For a certain man named Demetrius a Silver smith, which made
Silver Shrines for Diana, etc.


THE Syriacke Paraphrast leaves the Greek (...) as he found it. The Arabicke
and Aethiopicke translate it Silver Images. Beza, Templa argentea, Silver
Temples, but meaning by this certain Coins stamp't upon with the Figure of
Diana's Temple.

Such indeed as these are found, Silver too, and among those of Claudius.

Julius Pollux. Onomastic. Lib. 9. C. 6.
And it is the more probable, for that some ancient Coins have been called by
the name of their Expresses, as the Athenians had a certain Coin (says
Pollux) (...), from the figure of an Ox imprinted upon it. So the
Peloponnesians had a kind of Coin called (...) (as Suidas) or (...) (as
Hesychius) from the figure either of a Swallow, or Tortoise enstamped upon it.

And the Jews too had a Coin of very aged Memory, called by the name of the
Print, which was a Lamb, to intimate (as it sounds to me) Him that was slain
from the beginning of the World. It Is said in the 42 and last chapter of Job,
that all his friends gave him a Piece of Money: The Syriacke there is, pecudem
unam. So the vulgar. The Greek and Chaldee, A Lamb. The Original is, Kesita,
and but twice more found in Scripture, Josh. 24. 32. which repeateth over that
of Genesis 33. 19. where Jacob is said to have bought a parcel of Land for a
hundred pieces of money. So we. The Margin is, or Lambs. But that is, as the
Talmudists expound it, money enstamped upon with the Figure of a Lamb. R.
Akiva said, (...) etc. When I travailed into Aphrica, Talm. in Rosh. Hassanah.
fol. 26. a*
I heard them call money Kesita, or by the name of tae Lamb, but to what use
will this be? why to the expounding of that which is said in the Law: a hundred
Lambs, that is, pieces of money, Genesis 33. 19. etc.

It cannot well be otherwise, for if we take the price of the field in Lambs
(not doubting neither but that the old manner of exchange by wares was then
most possible) what shall be said to Saint Steven's Tradition, that the field
was bought (...), for a price of Silver, the same field, though Abraham be put
there instead of Jacob, corruptly enough notwithstanding what Master Broughton
has said, yet there it stands still, and upon irreconcilable terms in
Reverence to the Book. Use that reverence still, The Book will be the bigger,
and the Scripture the less.

The Heathens say too, that the impresse of a Sheep was marked upon their
first Coin, and from thence their money was called Pecunia: and Varro says
that the hint of this was given a pastoribu^. The Roman Shepherds might have
it from the Hebrews, to whom this trade of life was more famously peculiar.

But the truest understanding is that of Erasmus, that the (...) were little
silver Chapels representing the form of the Ephesian Temple, with the image
of Diana enshrined.

Ammian* Marcell^n. in Juliano. ^i^ 22. Number. 12. D^o (...) Lib. 40* fol 82. De
Militia Roman. Lib. 4. Dialog. 5.
And to this agree the Heathen Rites; For Asclepiades the Philosopher, Deae
coelestis argenteum breve figmentum quocunque ibat solitus est secum afferre,
was ever wont whithersoever he went, to carry about him a small silver Image of
Urania.

And Dion says of the Roman Ensign, (...). That it was a little Temple, and
in that the figure of an Eagle set in gold. But this to Lipsius is but
I^tricatum aliquid, ubi enim in Nummis usquam talis effigigies? quin nudae eae
conspiciuntur (and centenae aliquot extant) sine tegmine ullo Sacelli? In
columna tan^um Trajani nescio quid in alis Aquilarum impo^tur, quod Sacelli
figuram refer^, etc.

Du Choul. p. 187.
It Is true, that in the Coins this is very rarely expressed, though it be
certainly found in a Reverse of Maxentius, Silver. The Eagle and Temple in
Trajan's Pillar (though this use be made of it by some) cannot so justly be
wrought over to this meaning. However it is a thing that will hardly go down
with any body, that Dion should not know what belonged to the Roman Eagle.

But the matter is not great. It Is more to this purpose, (...). Lib. 39 p. 62.
which the same Author mentions. (...), a little Temple of Juno set upon a
Table, and turning toward the East.

This indeed is enough to declare the use of these Little Shrines in the
Heathen Devotions, but supplyeth not the maine want of a like acception of the
word (...) or (...) passing (as in the Text here) in the diminitive sense of
(...) or (...), without the addition of (...), or the like.

'Twill be very hard to find it so elsewhere. And therefore make the more of
this lucky passage in an old Scholiast upon Arist. Rhet. Lib. 1. C. 15.
Aristotle's Rhetoric.

Aristotle says (...), that Callistratus accused Melanippus for cheating the
(...) of three Holy halfe-penny farthings. The (...) are rendered by the Latin
Interpreters fabri aediles, or templorum constructores. As if the Architecture
of a Church were any one man's artifice. The old Scholiast expounds the (...).
Temple-makers. But that is, (says he) (...), certain small wooden Temples
enshrined with Images which they made to sell.

A like sense of (...); See in Codin, De Offici^^ Aula Constantinopol.

And such Temples as these (abating the Material) were the (...), The Silver
shrines not for, but of Diana, made by Demetrius and the Craftsmen to be sold.
And the respect of this was that which moved the quarrel. The great Goddess
indeed was pretended, but at this time there was a solemn Confluence of all
the Lesser Asians, to the (...), or Holy Games celebrated at Ephesus, to the
honor of other Gods, but to Diana in chief. And it must needs have been very
much out of the Craftsmens way, if it could have been persuaded (as Paul
endeavored to do) that these enshrined Idolillos of Diana so much bought up
by the devout people, were no Gods because they were made with hands.

And such a shrine as these (...) was the (...), c. 7. v. 43. as the Lxx
rightly translate that of Amos the Prophet, c. 5. 23. The Original is, (...)
Siccuth, or Succoth Malcec^m; that is, not an Idol so called, as the vulgar
and others; but the Tabernacles of your King or Moloch. Their King was Saturn,
whom the Persians and Arabians called Civan or Caivan, as Aben Ezra truly
observed* and the Persian Glossaries make to appear. The Egyptians called him
(...), as may be seen in the Copticke Table of Prodr^m. Copt. C. 5. p. 147.
the Planets.

The Idolatrous Jews were to call a Heathen God by the Natives name, Ciun or
Civan. The Natives were the Arabians, in whose wilderness they then were.

Therefore the Prophet retained this word. But the Lxx as translating to
Ptolomy, rendered Rephan, which Saint Steven followed. In these little
Tabernacles they enshrined (as the Ephesians those of Diana in the (...)) the
(...), Figures which they made to worship (it was the figure of a Planet) The
Figures of Saturn, or the Stars of their God Rephan.

CHAP. XII.
Job. 26. 6. 7. Hell is naked before him, and destruction has no covering.

He stretches out the North over the empty Place, and hangs the Earth upon
Nothing.


THough Hell be naked before Him that made it, (and yet he made not death) as
to us, destruction has a Covering. I have wondered much at the Curiosity (how
learned soever) of some who undertake to set down the subterraneous Geography
of this place* and describing so confidently as if they had been there
already, not the Gates and Chambers of death only, but the very points of the
Compass in that Region Rusca* de Infern. etc.
and shadow, and how many Souls may sit upon the point of a Needle.

I will only put these men in remembrance of the Syriacke Reading in the last
verse: where instead of those words (but how little ae portion is heard of
him?) that Translation renders. Et qualis sermo malus auditus est de eo? which
seems to confess, as if our best expressions of the works of God were but
in a manner to give the Maker ill language.

And if it be so, then for men to speak of Hell as if it were Naked before us
too, is to give him the Lie.

But my business is to tell the meaning of Job in the next words, He
stretches out the North, etc.

The North here is not to be taken for the Terrestrial Globe, as the Jews
would have it* for they are deceived who think the latter clause to be a
Repetition of the former.

The North is meant of the Heavenly Expansum, as the word extending
sufficiently intimates. And though the North only be named, yet the whole
sphere is meant. And yet not only for this reason (as all think yet) because
the Northern Hemispheare was principal as to Job's Respect, and the Position
of Arabia, but because this Hemispheare is absolutely so indeed, it is
principal to the whole, for as the Heavens and the Earth are divided by the
middle line, the Northern Half has a strange share of Excellency. We have
more Earth, more men, more Stars, more day. And which is more then all this,
the North Pole is more Magneticall, then the South. Ridley of Magneticall
bodies and motions* C. 6.
For I have always observed (says a learned man in this experience) that the
Pole of the Magnet which seateth it self North, is always the most vigorous
and strong Pole to all intents and purposes.

This North (that is the whole Firmament) He stretched over the Empty Place,
that is, not the Air, as it uses to be said.

The word in the Text is (...) Tohu. This word signifies Nothing. So the molten
Images Esai. 41. 29. are said to be (...) Wind and Tohu, that is, Confusion as
we. Or Wind and Nothing. For therefore it is that Saint Paul said that an Idol
is Nothing in the world. But especially it signifies that Nothing in the Chaos
before the Air or Earth was made; as Gen* 1. The Earth was Tohu, that is,
Nothing, or as the Lxx translate, (...) invisible, or (as the Saxon turns it)
the Earth was (...), idle. Over this Tohu or Nothing it was, that He stretched
the North or Firmament, and then hanged the Earth upon the same Nothing. But of
this manner of appension somewhat more is to be said.

God in the beginning (as Mercator devises) struck a Center in the Tohu or
Inane, endued with that quality as might call unto it the congeniall parts of
the Chaos, which immediately applying themselves gathered into this Globe.
Which pretends, as if the Frame consisted by an Equilibration of parts to the
Center of Gravity, as it continues to be mistaken by common Philosophy. But it
is time to know that the Earth does not hang ponderibus librata suis, -- but by
magneticall vigor impressed by the Maker upon the whole Frame, but especially
communicated from the Center to both the Poles by Meridionall projection, by
which engagement and conjuncture of parts, the whole so firmly and obstinately
consists, that if by Staticall impulsion as Archimedes undertook, or by a
higher distress it should be forced from this situation, it would eagerly and
instantly return to it is own place again.

The thing is certain from the conformity of the Needle, to the Axis of the
Earth in all parts of the Gellibrand of the varia^ion* of the variation, etc.
world.

From the Reasons of variation (and the variation of that too) caused by an
unequal proportion of this Magneticall force in several parts of the Globe;
from the Experiences made upon the Terrella or little Earth of Loadstone, the
Poles whereof being found out by the filings of steel or otherwise, If a
Needle or small wire be applied to the Equinoctial parts, it will place it
self upon a Meridian, moved from thence it makes an acute Angle to the Axis.

About 34 degrees from the Equator it makes a right Angle, from thence it
continues to be recto major, till it come to the Pole it self, where it
stands perpendicularly.

Therefore the Globe of the Earth consists by a Magneticall dependency, from
which the parts cannot possibly start aside, but which howsoever thus strongly
seated upon it is Center and Poles, is yet said to hang upon Nothing, because
the Creator in the beginning thus placed it within the Tohu, as it now also
hangs in the Air, which it self also is Nothing, as to any regard of Base
or Sustentation.

CHAP. XIII.
(...).
Luke 13. 19. It is like a grain of mustard seed which a man took and cast
into his garden and it grew and waxed a great tree, and the fowls of the Air
lodged in the branches of it.


PYthagoras said, Sinapi principatum habet ex his quorum in sublime vis
feratur. That Mustard seed has the preeminence among those things whose power
is to ascend upwards. which might seem to pretend to the growing spirit of
this grain, had not Pliny preengag'd us to the sense of Plin: Not: hist: lib:
20. C. 22.
operation, quoniam non aliud magis in nares and cerebrum penetret.

The grain especially of the second sort, quae rapiciam froudem exprimit, is
not unapt to shoot forth in a garden soil under what clime soever not
intemperately cold, and to a proportion of height more then ordinary; and it is
one of those which a great Naturalist of our own bids us make experience of,
whether it would not grow up out of a Staggs Horn. Cent. 6. 550.

But of so prodigious a stature as the Gospel describes I could not find any
observation made by those who have most of all noted upon the exotic simples.
It is to be imputed to the strange pregnancy of the Hebrew earth, concerning
which, as of their City, very great things have been spoken.

K tub. fol. 3, b.
In the Babylonish Talmud R. Joseph says, (...).

A certain man of Siehem had bequeathed by his Father three bows of Chardell
or Mustard, one of which was broken off from the rest, and it yielded nine Kabs
of seed, and the wood thereof was sufficient to cover over the Potters House.
The same Tradition is remembered in the Jerusalem Talmud cited by Tremelius
Tremel i^ Mat: 13* 31.
out of the second (it should have been the seventh Chapter) of Peah, or de
angulo agri, the Corner of the field to be left for the poor etc. and here the
bow yielded (...) not nine, but three Kabs of Chardell or Mustard seed.

In the same place of the Jerusalem Talmud (quoted also by Tremelius) Simon
the son of Calaphta says (...) I had a stem of Chardell in my garden, into
which I could climb up as into a fig tree,

Though I doubt not but the Doctors overreach, yet it argues so far the
extraordinary growth of this Herb in that good Land, that our Savior is quit
of the strangeness and wonder of his words.

So when he says that the Mustard Seed is the least of all seeds, though it
be not precisely true in respect of the smaller seeds of Poppy, Rue, etc. yet
it is as properly spoken to the Jew as if it were, who when he uses parvis
componere magna, More Nevoch: P. 1. C* 56. f^l. 37. b.
commonly does it by the grain of Mustard Seed: so in the More, Maimon makes a
comparison betwixt the Firmament and a grain of Mustard Seed. They are
comparable, (says he,) in the three dimensions, though the one be of the
greatest and the other of the smallest magnitude.

CHAP. XIV.
Mat: 6. 1. (...). etc. Take heed that you do not your Alms before men. etc.


VEry ancient Copies have it, (...). And so the Vulgar. Take heed that you do
not your righteousness etc. which is the word for Alms in the Oriental
phrase.

That of Solomon Prove. 10. 2. The treasures of wickedness profit nothing, but
righteousness delivers from death: The book of Tobit renders (...).

Alms deliver from death. So the Lxx Psalm. 24. 5.

Perush Ben Syrae. 10. Alph. 1. Psalm 17.
The Hebrew ancients say that David gave Alms to the poor every day, and
moreover as often as he went into the Synagogue or School, saying those words, I
will behold thy face in righteousness etc. as the Perush to the wise sayings
of Ben Syra. Where also the poor man's box is called (...) the box of
Righteousness.

The poor indeed in Scripture are called Domini bonorum nostrorum. Prove. 3.
27. Withhold not good from them to whom it is due. Mibhahalau from the owners
thereof. And therefore to give to the poor is but suum cuique tribuere.
Aristotle's Justice.

The Hebrew style of begging intimates alike. Their Maunders use to say, (...)
think me worthy. Or it is just that I receive. Vaijkra Rabba, 34. Nay (...) Da
mihi praeceptum, Give me the commandment. (...) for so Alms is called in the
Jerusalem tongue, says the Gloss to Shemoth Rabba.. 36. which is the reason
why our Savior called those riches withheld from the owners thereof, (...),
The unjust, or unrighteous Mammon. Luke 16. 9. The Targum upon Hosea 5. 11.
calls it (...) Mammondiskar, the Mammon of a lie, so Shakar most properly
signifies, but is often rendered by the LXX, (...). which therefore may bear
the same signification Hellenistically in this place, and opposing to the (...)
or true Mammon in the next verse. for (...) signifies both.

The Syriack and Arabic render Mammona iniquitatis, the Mammon of iniquity,
which is the proper meaning of (...) and first respected unto by our Savior,
that is Riches unjustly detained from them to whom it is due. Or (to take
Shakar Arabically) the Mammon of the poor.

(...), before men.

Talmud in Chagig fol: 5. ^.
R. Jannai saw one giving a Luz (the fourth part of a Shekell) to a poor man
before company, he said unto him, it had been better not to have given him at
all.

Nay he (say they) that does his Righteousness in secret (...) is a better man
then Moses our Master.

CHAP. XV.
2 Timothy: 3. 8. (...). etc.
Nonv as Jannes and Jambres, etc.

COnsidering what Saint Paul cites elsewhere out of Aratus, Epimenides, etc.
He might possibly take this from Numenius Apamensis a Philosopher of Pythagoras
his Sect, quoted by Aristobulus in the book dedicated to Ptolomy Philometer.
The Philosopher delivers. (...), etc. See for the rest Eusebius. Pamphilus
Evangel. Praeparat l. 9. page: 241. Edit. Steph. 1544. The sum of his
Tradition is, that Jannes and Jambres the famous Magicians of Egypt, were
accounted worthy to contend with, and thought to come not far behind the
great Moses in the matter of the Plagues.

Otherwise the Apostle might learn this at the feet of Gamaliel.

For Jonathans Targum reads Exodus: 7. 11. And Pharaoh called the wise men and
Magicians.

And they (that is, the Magicians Jannes and Jambres) did the like with their
enchantments.

Pharaoh called them (says an Arabicke Geographer) out of Ansana, an ancient
City of Egypt pleasantly situated by the Nile, Vrbs antiqua, ^dificio,
Viridariis and locis amaenis ad animum relaxandum aptis perpulchra, plurima
fructibus and fertilitate Geograph. Nuliens. p: 4. Climat. 2.
at que frugibus abundantissima, (...).

And this is commonly called the City of the Magi, and from hence Pharaoh
called them upon appointed days to contend with Moses the Prophet. Upon whom
be peace.

The manner of the contestation is set down in Menachoth cap. col.
Haccorbonoth Hatsibbur. (...) Talmudin Menach: fol: 85. a. Shemoth Rabba: 9.
etc. i. e. John and Mamre said unto Moses, thou bring straw to Aphraim. He
said unto them, men use to bring herbs to Iarak.

The meaning is (as the Gloss there, and Sherirah in the Baal Aruch) Aphraim
was a place in Egypt abundant in corn, and to bring straw thither was (to
speak it in the heathen phrase) to bring Owls to Athens. So for Moses to
show his Legerdemaine in Egypt, where the black Art was so notoriously
known. Moses retorted upon them like for like.

Iarak was a place abounding with herbs, and yet all men carried their herbs
thither. See the learned Buxtorf. Lex: Tit. in (...).

Plin: Not. Hist: lib. 30. C: 1.
The Tradition was not altogether unknown to Pliny, by whom the Contestation
is called Magices factio a Mose and Ianne and Iotape, Iudaeis pendens. Apuleius
also makes mention of Ioannes a great Magician mistaken by Pius for Saint
John. (...) Sive Vita Mos: fol* 5. 6.


In the Dibre Hajamim Mosis they are called Jane and Mamre, and said to have
been the two sons of Balaam. So Ionathans Thargum. Numb: 22. 22. and the
book Zohar upon the same place. fol: 90. Col: 2. where they are called Jones
and Iombres, as in the Tauhuma fol: 40. But Gedaliah in the Shalshelet says,
that their native Names were John and Ambrose fol: 13. Col: 2.

Palladius tells us of the (...), etc. An enchanted Garden in Egypt Palladius
in vita Macari^*
where Jannes and Jambres the Magicians of Pharaoh intended to lie buried, and
Macarius saw the place, the Well, the Iron chain, and brazen bucket etc. the
Magicians hoped to enjoy this Paradise after death.

But they failed of this expectation, for as the sounder ancients receive, they
were drowned in the Red Sea. (...) that is, the sages of blessed memory deliver
(says an old Midras upon Exodus 15. 10.) that what time the Egyptians were
overwhelmed in the Sea, the two Magicians John and Mamre were drowned with them.

The same Tradition I find in an Arabicke Catena upon the place in Exodus*
(...) Catena Arab. MS. in Pentateuch. cap. 17.
i. e. The tenth (Plague) He brought out the Children of Israel with a strong
hand and a mighty Arm, but Pharaoh and his Host were drowned in the Red sea,
Vid. Geograph. Nubiens. p. 5. Cl^m. 3.
called also Mare Suph, and Mare Calzem. And these are the Names of the
Magicians which stood up against Moses and Aaron, and resisted the work of God
before Pharaoh King of Egypt, Dejannes, Jambarus, and Sa^udas. These caused
Pharaoh and his People to transgress, and God destroyed them with Pharaoh and
his Host in the Red sea, etc.

The place was that Part of the Red sea which lies upon the Coast of Jethran,
a dangerous and Tempestuous sea, says the Arabicke Geographer, (...) Geog.
Nubiens. p. 3. Clim. 3.
i. e. And in this Place it is said that Pharaoh (cursed of God) was
overwhelmed.

CHAP. XVI.
(...)
Genesis 41. 45. And Pharaoh called Joseph's Name Tsophnat Paaneah.


THat which is here stood upon, first is; whether the Imposition of the Name be
out of the Kings own Egyptian, or out of Joseph's native language. If
Egyptian it be, (says Aben Ezra) then I know not what it means: If
Chaldean, then I know not the name of Joseph, etc. The first word Tsophnat, may
seem reducible to the Hebrew (...) Tsaphan, which signifies, to Hide, but for
the next, (...) R. Bechai in Penta^ fol. 56* A. Col. 1.
It has no fellow in Scripture, says Bechai (...) etc. but I find (says he)
in a certain Oraison (...) Hampaeaneah Neelamim, A Revealer of Secrets.

But whosoever will derive this Name from the Hebrew (Calvin may better say it
then I) are but argute ridiculi. The imposition of new Names in the Egyptian,
as in the Persian Court, was (...) a reflection of honor and Joseph. Ja^chiad*
Paraphras. in Dan. C. 1. 7
worship, says Don Joseph. And a considerable circumstance of this reputation
it needs must be, that the Names should be given out of the Prince his own
Tongue, from whom the honor descended. Putatur esse vocabulum Aegyptiacum,
says Buxtorfe. It Is certain. For besides the Authority of Philo, Ramban, and
others, it is assured by the Copticke Pentateuch, which expressly reads; And
Pharaoh changed Ioseph's name into (...). The Samaritan reads as the Hebrew:
but the Lxx as the Copticke, (...).

So the followers of that, though I meet with an Arabicke version of the
Greek Pentateuch in Syriacke letters, reading not as the Lxx* which it
tranflateth, but as the Hebrew Tsophnat Paaneah: a difference which I was not
able to reconcile unto that common consent which appears against it. Though I
meet also with another Arabicke Translation of the Greek, rendering much after
the same rate, where yet the word is set down in the Margin right, and in
Copticke Characters, (...) Psonthon Phanek* with this Arabicke note upon it
(...) Pentateuch. Arab. MS. in Arch* Laudini^.
i. e. And the meaning of this name in the Language of the Place (the
Egyptian) is, One that knows secret things.

The Armenian Translation renders, And Pharaoh called Joseph Fes^^t. But what
the meaning of this should be, the most learned among themselves are
confessedly ignorant.

This is all the inconstancy of reading I could observe. For the
Interpretation, Procopius says it signifies, Fertilitatem sive commodam Aeri^
temperiem. Saint Hierome rather in words then sense otherwise, renders it,
Salvator Mundi. So the vulgar. Vertitque nomen ejus* and vocavit eum lingua
Aegyptiaca, Salvatorem Mundi. And the Author of the Lexicon to the
Complutensian Bibles sets down (...) Paaneah, Orbis, Mundus: but did very
well to add* Secundum Translationem nostram. And yet to save the credit of the
vulgar, the Roman Expositours generally rest themselves upon this meaning. And
the reason given is, eo quod orbem ab imminentis famis exitio liberasset. But
this should rather have been the reason why the same Joseph was called (...)
Shor, The Ox. Genesis 49. 6. as Iarhi and the Jerusalem Targum there. For the
seven fat kine in Pharaoh's dream, were joined in presage with the seven full
ears of Corn, as the mysteries of Cheapnesse and Fertility.

The Impresse of an Ox has the same signification in the Ancient Roman
Coins. And an Ox of old (as Varro says it) was counted a man's fellow: for by
the Law of that time, He Varro de Re. Rust. Lib. 2. C 5.
that should take away an Ox his life, was to redeem it with his own.

In an old Roman Marble, the Complete Husbandman is described holding a
Bullock by the mouth, and setting his left knee upon the Back: which
Camerarius unridleth out of the Hieroglyphickes; where a Bull is written for
the Earth, as Macrobius is his Author in the Saturnal. Mahomets Parable was,
that the world was supported by an Ox, the Head whereof was in the East, which
whether it respects to the strength of this kind, or be an Allusion to the
former sense (as it might be) I distinguish not.

(...). But there be that think (says the Tradition in Suidas) that the Great
God of Egypt, Serapis, was no other then Joseph. And the Stories run
parallel, for this Apis is said to have been (...), a certain rich man, etc.
who during the dearth at Alexandria, supplied the Peoples wants at his own
proper cost and charges, (...). To whose memory therefore, after his death, A
Temple was erected, and in that an Ox dedicated, as being the Hieroglyphicke
of an Husbandman.

But whosoever he was that revealed to Saint Hierome this gloss of the name,
Salvator mundi, sufficiently abused the Father. Moses Aegyptius expressly
affirms that after diligent inquiry made of the Natives themselves, he
received this Notation of the words (...) Hammegulleh nistarim, a revealer of
Secrets. The Copticke bears him infallible witness, where (...), Phanec,
signifies vates, an Augur. (...), Psonthon, futura, things to come. So the
Greek Interpreters. (...); What means Psontomphanec says Theodoret? (...).
Theodoret (...).
i. e. An Interpreter of hidden things, as one that was able to tell the
understanding of Dreams.

So Zonaras, Philo, Josephus, etc. Nam and prodigiorum Sagacissimus erat (says
Justin out of Trogus Pompey) and somniorum primus intelligentiam condidit. Thus
also the Scholiast Scholiast: Arab: Ms* in Pentat: in Arc^hiv: Bodleian.
upon the fore* quoted Arabicke version of the Greek Pentateuch (...) i. e.
This interpreted, is the name of one that can interpret hidden things.

The Babylonish Targum, as that of Oncelos, leave out the name, but render as
before. And Pharaoh called Joseph the man that revealed Secrets, as the one; or
the man to whom Secrets were revealed, as the other. And thus the Rabbines
universally. One of the Jews entitleth his Commentary upon the Pentateuch
Tsophnat Paaneah. Another calls his book Paaneah Razah, which is all one. A
revealer of Secrets. The Syriacke Translation sets down the Name and
renders accordingly. So the Onomasticon Syriacum cited in the Prodromus
Coptus. Likewise the Arabicke Paraphrases, as well the Vatican Copy, as that
of Erpens Edition. They express diversely, but their Interpretation is the
same.

The Collectour of that which is called the Chronicon Alexandrinum, attained to
this sense of the word (...). Which interpreted, is one to whom it is revealed
what shall be hereafter, and delivers moreover, (...), that the Egyptians,
after the introduction of those plagues upon them by Moses, called him
Psonthonphanche, or one that kn^w things to come.

CHAP. XVII.
Gen: 4. 15. And the Lord set a mark upon Cain, least any one finding him
should kill him.


ONe will needs persuade us that some other Copies read it, and posuit Deus
Cain in signum, that God made Cain an example. If he knows any Hebrew or
Samaritan Copies that read so, he knows more then all the world besides do. If
any other Copies, he knows nothing to the purpose, for it is impossible for
that sense to be wrested out of the Original. So that upon the matter there is
no variety of Reading at all. Only the Persian Taric or Chronology instead of
Cain, sets down Kabel, by what Tradition or Corruption I know not, unless
to swallow the murderer up in his Brothers name. Therefore the Translations
universally agree, excepting one or two Arabicke versions of the LXX, who
translate it vachukka, And the Lord imprinted, etc. as if the mark had been
made with a pen of iron, or the point of a Diamond.

I observe but one Criticisme noted upon the Text, and that by Moses
Gerundensis. It is that he says not (...). signum dedit, or signum fecit, but
(...) and signum posuit, to show (says he) that it was a mark of that kind
that it should stick by him. It may be added that whereas we translate it, And
the Lord set a mark, we may render it, And the Lord set a Letter. For so the
word (...) Oath signifies too, and gives name to all the Letters of their
Alphabet.

According to the natural Magicians and Cabalists, the first man Adam and all
the rest of mankind in his right had divine original marks imprinted upon
them by the finger of God. The marks (as they receive it) were (...) Pachad
and (...) Chesed. The first was to keep the Beasts in awe of men, The latter
to keep men in love one with another. The first they otherwise call the left
hand and sword; the other the right hand and scepter of God. These characters
at the first were very strong and of great prevail. But since the
prevarication these Traditioners say they grew very much defaced and worn, and
very hardly to be distinguished either by Man or Beast; not utterly defaced, but
partly remaining, and so much the more or less legible, as the man has more
or less blotted out the Image of God in him. Quod sentiens Cain (says
Cornelius Agrippa) timebat, inquiens ad Deum, omnis qui inveniet me etc.

So far as this holds, it was necessary that Cain should have a new mark
set upon him. There could not be much of the old impression in him. R. Menahem
says that he was of a Diabolical extraction, begotten of seed conveyed by the
Serpent into the Woman, He is said indeed to have been of the wicked One. 1
John. 3 12.

But it is certain and enough that he made the earth guilty of Blood, innocent
blood, the righteous blood it is called, his own brothers too, so soon and
first of all, and in so small a World of Mankind.

The Conducement of all this is but Cabalisticall, and so to go.

For the mark it self. The Greek and Latin diversities are not great, the
most and Soberest concenter in this misunderstanding of the Lxx, who translate
that which should be vagus and instabilis, a vagabond and a runnagate etc.
(...), concluding from thence that the mark was nothing else but a continual
trembling and consternation of his whole Body, especially his head. (I wonder
how they knew that) manifestly, pointing out and distinguishing him to any one
that should cross the way, which very opinion is also quoted by Don Isaac
Abarbanel out of his Wisemen. But besides that this sentence cannot be safe
from a mistake in the ground. The mark must needs be more signal then so.

Aben Ezra quoteth some to say that a strong heart was given to Cain, which
made him formidable to all, and that this was the mark; but my own opinion
(says he) is that the Lord set a Real mark upon him, but the Scripture has
not declared what it is. R. Solomon says that it was a mark imprinted in his
forehead. Theodoret says it was such a one as rendered him (...), So Barabbas
is called in the Gospel (...) a notable prisoner, a notorious one it should
be, or as the Saxon, (...)man a strong theife. This manner of expression must
needs be derived down from some visible mark imprinted at the first. And the
occasion could not be given before Cains time, for he was the first man that
ever had a mark (such a mark) set upon him.

The Author of the Arabicke Catena makes him proof against man and beast and
all the Elements. He says that the mark was such an impression upon Cain, as
enabled him to walk and be securely among the wildest of the Beasts (...)
Catena Arab. Ms. in Arch. Bodle^an C. 8.
A sword could not enter him, fire could not burn him water could not drown
him* the Air could not blast him, nor any Thunder or lightning could strike
him* etc.

In the Berisheth Rabba or great Genesis. R. Judah says that the mark was a
circle of the Sun rising up upon him. R Aba said that it was a Dog delivered
to him, and Isaac Abarbinel reports from them, that this was Habels dog
wherewith he was wont to keep his sheep, but appointed now by the blessed God
to keep Cains body. R. Joseph said, that it was a Horn branching out upon
him. Others say it was a Letter taken out of the Tetragrammaton, etc. See R.
Isaac Ben Arama in his Commentary upon the Pentateuch, fol. 30* a. Col: 1.
Ole Tamid: fol: 43. a: Col: 1.

These Traditions are wild and distant, and cannot reconcile any belief.

Ezech 9. 3, 4. etc.
But in the vision of Ezekiel, the Lord said unto the man that had the writers
Inke-horne by his side. Go through the midst of the City etc. and set a mark
upon the foreheades of the men that sigh and that cry etc. He was utterly to
slay old and young, maids, women and children, but he was not to come near
any one that had the mark upon him.

If it can be found out what mark this was, I think it may be as equally
devised what that was which was set upon Cain, least any one finding him should
kill him.

The Margin there is, Mark a Mark. Theodotion, the Vulgar, etc. more
expressly set down, mark a (...) Thau, which is the last letter in the
Hebrew Alphabet. And the Original is without controversy so, as Junius has
very earnestly proved upon the place. Sixtus Senensis may be seen Lib: 2. p.
115, 116. Biblioth. Sanctae.

I am not of their Interest who would contrive this Letter into the sign of
the Cross (otherwise a mark of all reverend aestimation) but this Letter is
nothing like it in the Hebrew or Samaritan Alphabet, in the Aethiopicke it
sufficiently resembles, but that cannot be brought over to this concernment.
Saint Hierome indeed, Origin etc. are quoted to the contrary; but it is all one
as to bid one not to believe his own eyes. Unless we will prefer that
manuscript Alphabet in the Vatican transcribed by Bellarmin and Villalpend us
before all the general trust. In this Alphabet the Samaritan Tau is so much
like a Cross and no more.

The Doctors say so in Shabba of the Talmud fol. 55. Col. 1.
It Is enough that it was the last Letter of the Hebrew Alphabet, and so the
ancient Hebrew Doctors hold themselves as R. David upon the place (...) our
Doctors (says he) of blessed memory, interpret the word Thau here to be the
Letter Thau, etc. This Tradition follows. That the blessed God said unto
Gabriel, write upon the foreheades of the just men the letter (...) Thau in
ink; but upon the foreheads of the wicked write the same letter in blood, etc.

The same Doctors deliver elsewhere, that the mark which was set upon Cain
was the first letter of the word (...) Teshu ba which signifies Repentance. If
it be so, (and it is very likely) these repenting men in the vision, and Cain
had one and the same mark; the first letter of the word for Repentance and
last of the Hebrew Alphabet; but to be set down in the Samaritan Character,
because the vision was before the Captivity. The form of the Character was
this N. Th. or as the manuscripts thus, Z.

'Twas a mark of repented Murder, it pointed out the Justice of God enough,
but his mercy more. The vengeance seems to have meant his Death by the same
violence, but by a long expected and accidental hand. The mystery of the
mark was of easy tradition from one to another, for the world was not so
presently numerous. The sentence of it self went forth severe enough, but was
not given to stand all. He was promised to be a Vagabond and a Runnagate, but
you find him in the next verse getting of Children, and building of Cities.
And by the greatest Man in the East of his Time. It is to be thought that it
was a custom of those parts for the Head of the Family to offer up set and
solemn extraordinary Job. 1. 5.
Sacrifices for the Children; for Job said, It may be that my Sons have sinned
and cursed God in their hearts, etc. And therefore I think it not unlikely
that Adam the High Priest of the World then, should do his uttermost to make
an atonement for this Blood. Josephus himself says, that he was quitted of
the Murder by Sacrifice, but he says too, what no man yet has believed, that
it was by his own.

I know not how to account his long life a downe*right punishment, but indulged
by the mercy of God, and necessary to the multiplication of mankind. As the
Greater before, so the Lesser Worlds now were but in their Chaos, till the
Soul of Society was infused, and then they became a politic Living Thing.
'Twas Cain that first built a City, and called it after the name of his son
Henoch.

I cannot impute his Invention of Arts to the Curse. Though simplicity of
Living might become a new made world, and the beginings of things; yet the
growth toward a Commonwealth and stature of People, required an exaltation of
the first homeliness by a device of crafts and mysteries.

I conceive no great matter in this, that Cain went out from the presence of
the Lord. So did Adam and Eve too. But Cain went and dwelt in the Land of Nod.
And Abarbinel says, that he finds in our Latin Books that Cain dwelt in
Hodu (so the Eastern Geographers call India) and that it is possible that place
may be called so from Nod, in the sense of wandering, etc. But how wandering is
to be reconciled to dwelling, somebody would do well to say.

The greatest part of Cain's curse lay in this, that there was a separation
betwixt him and the Faithful Church of that time, concluded up in the family
of Seth. Said Aben Batric says (Saint Chrysostom also and Epiphanius, as they
are quoted in the Catena Arabica) that our Father Adam after the Fall retired
himself into a Mountain of India called the Holy Mountain, prophesying that
from this Mountain one should ascend, and another go down; He meant Henoch
by the first. The other was Cain, who said to his Brother (according to the
Samaritan, etc.) Descendamus in Campum, etc. And in these Plains the Murder
was committed. After which the Family of Seth kept themselves to the Hill,
instituting a Holy Life, and were therefore called The Sons of God; But the
Cainites continued still, as they increased, to inhabit and take up the
valley, leading a Life there so wretched and forlorn, that as James the Bishop
of Sarug in Mesopotamia says, (...) Jacob. Sarug. Epis. in Cat. Arab* MS* c.
15.
Neither the Children could tell who were their Fathers, nor the Fathers which
were their Children, etc.

Therefore these Cainites were called the Sons of Men. And thus far he went
indeed from the face or presence of the Lord.

CHAP. XVIII.
Zach. 6. 12. Ecce Vir Oriens nomen ejus.
Behold the man whose name is the East.
Zach. 3. 8. Adducam egoservum meum, Orientem.
I will bring forth my servant, The East.

TO redeem this place (and many other equally engaged) from the received
sense: I must needs lay down this new ground.

That the special Presence of God ever was and is in that part of the Heaven
of Heavens which answers to the Equinoctial East of the Holy*land.

Here I desire not to be told over again, that God is in all places. I know
it. Or that he is in all places alike. I know that too, and in what respects.
But I am sure he is otherwise present in Heaven than in Hell, and so otherwise
in one part of Heaven, then in another.

Neither is it to be thought, as if there were an East or West point in that
place which needs not the Sun or Moon to shine upon it. Nevertheless I
require that that part of the highest Heavens which answers to the
Equinoctial East of the Holy*Land be so called for the present, and I will
prove it hereafter that the Scripture has called it so already.

Now to make good the ground, you may hear what the Ancients say, (...); To
the Gods we attribute the Eastern parts, says Porphyrie de Nympharum An^ro;
and these parts are called by Varro in Festus, Deorum Seeds, The Gods Abode:
for Cincius and Cinnius Capito gave this reason, why the left, that is the
Eastern Omens, were more prosperous then the Right.

Physico^. Lib. 8. Text. 84.
But more expressly and excellently, the Philosopher himself. The First Mover
(says he, meaning God) (...)* etc. must of necessity be present either to the
Center or Circumference of his Orb, (...), etc. (...); but motions are most
rapid in the nearest distance to the Impression; Therefore the Mover ought
there to be. But that part of the Sphere is most rap^ly moved, which is most
remote from the Poles: therefore the Movers place is about the middle line. It
is the reason (as I think) why the Aequinoxes are believed to have so sacred
an import and signification in Astrology; for by them it is judged (says
Ptolomy) as concerning things divine, (...), etc. and the service belonging to
De Coelo. l. 2. c. 2 Text. 15. Averroe^. l. 2. Text. 3. Proxima autem fa^c^bu^
utrinque imposit^ Montescoercent, Claust^^ A^^la Afri a, Europ^ Calpe, Laborum
Hercul ^ metae. Quam ^b causam indig nae Columnas e ^s Dei vocant, creduntq^^p
rf^ssas (...) admisisse maria, and rerum naturae mut^sse faciem. Plin. in
Pro^m. l. 31. Averro^s. in Arist. De Coelo Lib. 2. Text. 3. Plin. l. 6. c. 17.
the House of God.

But the Philosopher's meaning is not, as if the Mover presented himself alike
unto the whole Circumference, but assisting especially to that part, (...),
from whence the motion does begin, that is Orienti, to the East, as Aben Rois
rightly, Vnde quaedam Leges, adorant deum versus Orientem. Which is the Reason
(says he) why some Religions worship God that way.

But the Aequinoctiall East passes through the whole Circle.

Of Necessity therefore it is to be meant of some certain position; nor is it
possible to mean it but of the Horizontall segment of the then Habitable
world: the uttermost bounds whereof from Sun to Sun, they absolutely termed
East and West. In the Philosopher's time the Circle of this Horizon passed
through the Pillars of Hercules in the West, and the Altars of Alexander in the
East. Those of Hercules if (as it is most received and probable) and which I my
self have seen, says Aben-Rois) they were the Calpe and the Abyla raised up
at the letting in of the Sea; It is the place where the Arabians fix their
great Meridian, but in honor to Alexander, unto whom, (and not as others, unto
Hercules) they ascribe this Labor. For those of Alexander, as both himself
and his Geometers Beton and Diognetus deliver it, the River Hyphasis, or as
Ptolomy calls it, Bipasis, was Terminus itinerum Alexandri, Alexander's Non
Vltra. Exuperato tamen Amne arisque in adversa ripa dicatis, which yet he
transpassed, and set up Altars on the other side, whereabouts they are found in
the Emperors Provincial Chart with this Adscription. Hie Alexander Responsum
accepit, usque quo Alexander? that here the Oracle should say* Alexander no
further. Tabul. Peutingerian. Abulfed Arab MS. in Arch. Biblioth publ.
Cantabrigiens
Segment. 7.

The Arabicke Meridian passes through the tenth degree of Longitude from that
of Ptolomy, so Abulfeda the Prince in the beginning of his Geography. The River
Hyphasis Ptolomy places in 131. 35. The difference of Longitude is about 120
degrees. The second part of this is 60. And because the Meridian of Jerusalem
is 70 degrees from that of Ptolomy, Ptol. Geog. l. 7. Asia Tab. 10.
that is, 60 from the Arabian; the Holy City was as it was anciently termed,
Vmbilicus Terrae, the Navell of the Earth, precisely placed betwixt the East
and West of the Habitable world.

Therefore the Equinoctial East of Jerusalem is the Equinoctial East of the
whole, and answering to the First Movers Receipt, which therefore was said to
be in Orienti Aequinoctiali.

This is fair for the Heathen. The Christian has far greater reason to
believe it, and yet beleiveth it less.

But for late resentments they are not much to be valued. This is not the only
old truth which is overgrowne with Time and Interests. Some men purposely yield
themselves intractable to such things as they are not willing to hear of. This
is the strongest and most impertinent kind of unbeleife, fitted only for this
or that Generation, and getting up for the present to a repute of wisdom
above that of the Children of Light.

There is a foolishness of God which is wiser then all this.

For the matter, the best and the oldest of the First Times were fully
satisfied of this Article, for it may be reckoned among those of their
substantial belief.

The Notion of Paradise in the Christian acception was that part of Heaven
where the Throne of God, and the Lamb is. The Notion is elder then so. 'Twas
the Reverend Say of Zoroaster, the Magician in the Chaldaean Oracles, (...),
Seek Paradise, that is as the Scholiast Pletho, (...). The all enlightened
Recesse of Souls. The Scholiast Psellus yet more sagely, (...). The Chaldaean
Paradise (says he) is a Quire of divine powers incircling the Father.

This grave saying of Zoroaster holds very well with Irenaeus his Tradition.

Irenaeus adu. Here Is Lib. 5. C. 5.
He delivers, That the Receipt of Just and Perfect Men is a certain Paradise
in the Eastern Part of the Third Heaven. And moreover he says, that he
received this Tradition from the Elders, that is, (as he himself interprets)
ab Apostolorum Discipulis, from those which heard it from the Apostles.

See Saint Basil. D^ Sp. Sanct. 6. 27. Gregory Nyssen orat. 5. in Orat.
Dominic. Eusebius. Hist. Ecclesiast. Lib. 9. C. 17. or fol. 97. b. of the Greek.
Gregentius in Bibliotheca Patr. Anastas. Sinait. in Hexaemeron. C. 7. etc. in
all which you shall find as much as this comes to. But you have Scripture for
it also.

The Sun of the Morning said, I will ascend up into Heaven, and sit in the
sides of the North, that is, (if Hieronymus Magius may expound it) in the left
side of the North, or Eastern part of Heaven where the Throne of God is
thought to be. He makes himself the surer of this, because of that horrible
vision in Esdras, the appearance whereof was from the East. But the vision in
Esdras has no greater Authority then a Latin Translation corrected by no
Original; besides what Interpolations there be, not coming so near to
Canonical Scripture, as to be taken for Apocryphal.

But the fault is not so much in the Book it self. The Original we know,
whatsoever it were, is given over for lost as yet. But the Arabicke Translation
has escaped. The Manuscript I meet with entitleth two Books unto Ezra the
writer Cod. Arab. MS. in Arch. Bo^.
of the Ancient Law. The second containing the Canonical and received Ezra and
Nehemiah; The first is this fourth Apochryphall, but very clear of the
suspected passages.

No mention here of the two strange Beasts Henoch and Leviathan: No dividing of
the Age into twelve parts, etc. I have cause to believe, that it is the most
authenticke remain of this Book; though for the horrible vision it avails
me nothing, for it begins at the third Chapter of the Latin, and ends in
the fourteenth, not imperfectly, but acknowledging no more.

In the Visions of the Temple, The Glory of the God of Israel passed through
the Eastern Gate; Therefore that Gate was shut up, and might not be opened any
more but to the Prince. Ezech. 44. 2.

It is generally consessed that the Representations there made cannot be taken
for any Temple which before was, or which afterward was to be in Jerusalem;
also that it is to be meant of the Jerusalem which is above.

And so the Eastern Gate may be said to be, Extra termin^s hujus mundi, not in
this but in the other world, as Saint Hierome concluded.

But whatsoever the Vision describes, whether a Temple made with, or one made
without hands, yet this is plain, That the Glory of the God of Israel was
seen to come by the way of the East.

But of this I make no great matter. That in the Revelation, Chap. 7. 2. if it
look not this way, I know not which else it can.

The words are,

And I saw another Angel ascending from the East (from the rising of the Sun)
having the Seal of the Living God, etc.

Some of the best of the Ancients (as Primasius, etc.) doubt not to set down
here Christ himself instead of this other Angel. Then it was he that ascended
from the Rising of the Sun.

But because this Book also is a Piece of Scripture, which very few men (and
the fewer the better) have made bold to understand: I shall make use of an
Authority which is sufficient of it self, Ps. 68. 32, 33. David says, Sing
unto God ye Kingdoms of the Earth, O sing praises unto the Lord. Selah. To him
that rides upon the Heaven of Heavens (which were) of old* etc. So we
translate it, or from the beginning.

This runs counter with that strange Interpretation of Genesis 2. 8. by the
Chaldee, Theodotion, Saint Hierome, and some more. Plantaverat autem Dominus
Deus Paradisum a principio And the Lord God planted a garden of pleasure first,
or from the beginning. Which leaves the Cabalists in a probable condition, for
they say that seven things were made before the Creation, and they reckon this
Garden for one.

But now since that, men have better advised themselves, and generally
translated the Place as the Lxx did of old. And the Lord God planted a Garden
Eastward or toward the East.

It should be so here too, which rides or sits upon the Heaven of Heavens
Eastward, or in the Eastern part. (The same word Kaedem is used in both places)
so the Old Saxon, (...)am (...).

So the Lxx, (...), and so the Syriacke, Arabicke, and Aethiopicke
Translations. Indeed the Syriacke and Arabicke of the Maronites Edition
renders with some difference and transposition of the Original, etc. (...)
audire fecit vocem suam ab Orient, vocem fortem, He made his voice to be heard
from the East. a strong voice.

And thus I found it also in an Arabicke Manuscript, de praecept. Relig. quoted
hereafter.

But I have an Arabicke Translation of the Psalms (the possession whereof I am
bound here to acknowledge amongst many other favors to the learned Master
Seldom) which renders the place closer to the Original. It Is there, Sing unto
the Lord riding or sitting (...) upon the Heaven of Heavens in the Eastern
part.

They that would have it otherwise, seem to understand Constitut: Apostol* l.
2. c. 61.
it better then the Apostolical men did (for I cannot account the Authors of
their Constitutions very much below.)

Then rising up (say they) (...). and turning toward the East let them pray
unto God which sits upon the heaven of heavens in the Eastern part.

This is the ground I promised to lay down.

The superstructions I mean to set up upon it, shall help to assure the
ground it self as well as be assured by it.

This is the reason why God planted a Garden in Eden Eastward.

The simplest meaning and most resolved upon, is, that Moses described in
respect of Judea. But then it had been sufficient for the Geography to say
Beeden, for Eastward added nothing to the situation. Others therefore coming
nearer to the words translate it ab Orient Edenis, referring it to the Country
of Eden. And so the garden was planted Eastward, that is upon the Eastern side
of Eden. But consider the word again, and you will find that Mikkedem, Eastward,
respects to Paradise not to Eden. And therefore Mercer, nil obstat (says he)
generaliter accipere in part mundi Orientali consitum fuisse tunc Paradisum
Orientem Solemn versus.

But to lose over no more of that time which has been curiously spent upon
the Delineations of Paradise, note only what Damascen and the Bishop of
Bethraman deliver. That Moses Bar-Cepha de Paradis. lib. 31. c. 13.
at the beginning of March the Sun always rises directly over Paradise.

The meaning of Moses is this, that the Garden of Eden was planted toward the
Aequinoctiall East of the Holy Land. And the meaning of that is, that the
Sanctum Sanctorum of this Mother Church pointed toward that part of Heaven,
where the Sun rises in the Month Nisan.

The Sanctuary of Paradise was that Recesse of the Garden which was
distinguished and made so to be by the presence of the Tree of Life. It Is said
indeed, that this Tree of Life was placed Betoch haggan, that is (as we
translate it) in the middle of the Garden. And S. John seems to bear us this
witness too in the Apocalypse. But Tremelius knew this was but an Hebraisme in
the old, and but an Hellenisme in the New Testament. And therefore the Woman's
answer in his Translation is, Sed de fruct^ illius Arboris qua est in horto hoc
etc. And yet because the conjunction here is dis^retive, But of the Tree, one
concludes from thence, that therefore it must needs be in the middle of the
Garden, though the hebrew be (...) not Sed, but, And of the Tree. I know it may
be taken for But, as elsewhere, let it be so. Yet the He is emphaticall both to
the Tree and to the Garden. And so the words are. But of the Tree which is in
this Garden God hathsaid etc.

Do we think that God spoke unto Moses out of the Center of the Bush, or that
our Savior would have the man and the millstone thrown into the very middle of
the Sea? The Tree stood in the Eastern part of the place. Otherwise why the
Cherubins and the flaming sword upon this side of the Garden to keep the way
of the Tree of life?

And whither should it respect but this way, that Cain went and dwelt in the
Land of Nod on the East of Eden. Gen: 4. 10. Nay the Man himself, when he was
driven out was assigned to dwell (...) over against the Garden, as the Greek
adds, that is on the East of Paradise, as the Greek is rendered by the
versio Arab. Ms. LXX. in Arch: Bodl: Gen: 3. 24.

The truth is (how strange soever it may seem to be) that Adam worshipped God
in Paradise toward the East, and so did the whole world till Abraham's time.

The Hebrews deliver that God created Adam with his face toward the East. I
cannot tell that, but that he was no sooner dispatched out of the dust, but he
fell down to the same earth again, and adored his maker this same way, there
is this great probability.

Besides the commonly used words for East, West etc. in the holy tongue there
be 4 other Names assigned to the 4 Cardinal points of Heaven of a more
especial and sacred Imposition, and expressed from the measure of a man. The
East is otherwise called Mizrach, i. e. the rising, the West, Maarab; that is,
the setting of the Sun etc.

But in the Holy way the East is called Kedem, that is, the face or forepart,
the West Achor, the backe-part. The North Smol, i. e. the Left; the South
Teman, that is the Right hand. But the Heaven could not be said to have a Right
hand or a Left, or if it could, then seeing the East was Kedem the face or
forefront, the North must have been the Right hand, not the South.

Indeed Kedem properly signifies not the face, but that which is before the
face. It is the same with Kibla in the Arabicke. It is certain therefore, that
these Impositions respected either the making of the first man toward the East
(which amounts to as much) or rather the Religious posture of that time, and
that Adam called the North the Left hand, and South the Right, because he
himself in the service of God turned his face toward the East.

I know there be that will tell you, that the reason of this Imposition was the
Shecina bammaarab or sitting of Gods presence upon the Arc in the Western
part of the Tabernacle and Temple with his face toward the East; as if these
names had not been imposed long before the Arc was known or thought of in
the world, Nay before Abraham was, these were, and yet this passes with some
sot a very happy Criticisme.

But however, that not only Adam, but the whole world also worshipped toward
the East till Abraham's time, my Authors are not only Maimon in his More, but
the great Saint Ephrem also and others in the Arabicke Catena. The Tradition
there is (...) Caten. Arab Ms C. 35. in Genes.
i. e. from Adam till Abraham's time, which was the space of 3328 years, they
worshipped toward the East.

I depends from the very same ground, that the most solemn piece of all the
Jewish service, I mean that great atonement but once a year to be made by
the Highest and most Holy man, and in the most Holy Place, was performed toward
the East, quite contrary to all other manner of addressement in their devotion.
So I interpret that place Leviticus C. 16. 14, 15.

It is commanded there* that the High Priest shall do with the blood of the
Goat as with the blood of the Bullock, and that he shall take of the blood of
the Bullock and sprinckle it with his finger upon the mercy seat Eastward.

Strange it is to see what shift the Expounders have made to make good this
place. They are much troubled to know how the Priest can be said to sprinckle
the blood Eastward; they may well enough, for they suppose the Priest to have
stood with his face toward the West.

Tawos the Persian paraphrast renders it super faciem propitiatorii in
Orient, upon the mercy seat in the East, Meaning I think, as an Arabicke
Translation of the Greek, On the Eastern side. The Greek it self is (...),
Eastward as the English. So the Chaldee, the Syriack, Saadiah Gaons Arabicke,
etc.

All word for word, for indeed the Text could be no plainer then it is. That
the Blood was to be sprinkled Eastward. The meaning is thus. It is known that
the sprinckling of blood, this blood especially, was the Figure of him, who by
his own Blood entered in once into the holy place and obtained eternal
Redemption. Heb: 9. 12. Aaron therefore though at Mishn. Talmud in Tamid. c. 4.
fol. 35. B.
other times he still turned his face toward the West; Nay though at the
killing of this very Goat, and this Bullock he not only turned his own but
even their Faces also toward the West. As the Talmud in Joma; yet when he was
to execute Mishna Talmud in Joma, c. 3. fol 35. b. Maimonid. in Jom.
h^ccippurim.

Isych: Hieros^lom. in Levit. c. 16.


this greatest Course of the Mystery, he placed himself on the wrong side of
the Arc, and turning his back to the beggarly Ru^^^ments of the world* he
sprinkled this blood Eastward, The Jerusalem Isychius understood his meaning.
It was done (says he) to represent the Man Cui Oriens nomen ejus, Whose Name
is the East.

You may perceive also that the Scripture intimates enough that the Man Christ
came down to us from the very same Eastern part. The ground laid is able to
put a like understanding upon the places.

(...) (^aith Baruch) (...), etc. Look about thee, O Jerusalem, toward the
East, and behold the Joy that comes unto thee from God. Baruch. 4. 36.

I know there be that loose this prophecy upon the captivity. I am not
certain but that Cyrus may be pretended by the Letter; but I assure my self
that our Savior lies hid in the Mystery.

Olympiodorus perceived this. Look about thee, O Jerusalem, toward the East,
etc. that is (says he) (...), Toward Jesus Christ our Lord the Son of
Righteousness etc, That the Messiah is aimed at, will be certain to any one
that will but consider the prophecy, for none else could be called the
Everlasting Savior, verse 22. But ^e that says look about thee toward the
East, appoints them to a certain place, and not nigh: but then why toward
the East? It is evident, that he means it of that part from whence the Savior
is said to have come down from Heaven, and was made man.

Therefore the Father is said to have raised up (...) ob Orient Justitiam,
Righteousness from the East, Esaias ^1. 2. That is as Procopius, Hierome, and
Cyrill, Christ our Righteousness.

The more part I know, crook the Prophecy to the Patriarch Abraham; He is
called indeed by the Apochryphall Wisdom 10. 6.
Wisdom, the Righteous; but more duly the faithful Abraham. Galat: 3. 9. But
Righteousness it self is too great and abstract a Name.

In the 46. Chapter, He calls a Bird from the East v. 11. Some ancient Copies
read it I call a just one from the East. Cyrus is certainly to be meant by the
outside, (as the Jewish expounders rightly.)

If our Savior be included, as by Saint Hierome and Cyrill it is presumed, the
insolency of the Metaphor is taken off by Malachy, where the Sun of
Righteousness is promised to arise with healing in his wings. Mal: 4. 2.

W. Tindals Note (I think it is his) upon that place of Esaias is a good old
truth. The Prophet means (says he) King Cyrus which should come swiftly, as a
Bird flies and destroy Babylon, and set the Israelites at liberty. He should
fulfill that which the Lord had devised and decreed. In him is figured Christ,
which with the light of his word, purges the whole world of Error and
Idolatry, and sets the Consciences at peace and liberty. He flies swiftly
out of the East, that is out of Heaven, whereupon he is called the day spring
from on high. Luk: 1. 78.

But the prophecy of Michah is plainer yet: And thou Bethlehem Ephrata, though
thou be little among the Thousands Micha. 5. 2.
of Judah yet out of thee shall come the Ruler of Israel etc.

(...) the which (not fearing to do it without example) I translate. And his
goings forth are out of the East from the days of old.

And this is one of the reasons (for there is another too) why our Savior is
said to be the Man whose name is the East.

The other reason is this.

It was said before, that from Adam till Abraham's time the whole world
worshipped toward the East.

This Original, Principal, and (as it ought to have been) everlasting
Ceremony, by an Error of the Persian and Chaldaean worshippers, degenerating
into an Idolatry to the Sun, Abraham (says the learned Maimon) by the
instincts of God appointed out the West to his Hebrews. Therefore the
Tabernacle and Temple were set toward that side of Heaven, God in the mean
time seeming to leave his mistaken place in the East, and come down to this
stiff-necked people. This was a Literal, and Pedanticall Nation and (to
comply with the secret intended mystery) were so to be dealt with. They did,
and they did not worship toward the West.

It Is true all the sacrifices were offered up toward that way. In the Rites of
Azazell, the two Goats were to stand with Maim: in Iom. Hakkip: c. 3.. 2.
their faces the same way. The pile set up for the Phara adumma or Red Cow was
to have windows in it, and the prospect of these was to be toward the West.
Talmud. in Phara* fol. 96. a.

The 6 Lamps in the Golden Candle-sticke were appointed to burn toward the
7th, which was that in the middle, but the face of this (says Maimon) was to
burn toward the most holy place, and that it was called the Western Lamp.
Beth habbech: C: 3.. 8.

But all this while they worshipped no more toward the West, then toward the
North. They worshipped toward the Arc (it was told you before) or toward the
place of that. They do so still. And they were, and they are to do so, because
the Sun of Righteousness was to set upon their Horizon. Therefore they were;
And they are to do so, because (as to them) The man whose name is the East is
not yet brought forth.

Observe but the Economy and dispensation of this business throughout, and
there needs no more to make good the Ground.

That this MAN was called the East will appear by the places in Zachary. c:
6. 12. c: 3. 8.

Behold the man etc. And I will bring forth my servant etc. In the Holy Text it
is Behold the man whose name is (...) Tsemach, that is, as not unlearned men
have rendered it, the Branch. It is to be noted, that as the Greek (...)
signifies also germinare, so the Hebrew Tsemach signifies lucere and oriri,
for that which we translate the Brightness, the Syriacke renders the Tsemach
of his glory, Heb: 1. 12. And in the Jewish Astrology the Horoscope or East
Angle is most commonly so called.

We are to read the prophecy as the Lxx did (...). Dialog. (...): p 105.
i. e. Behold the man whose Name is the East. Thus it was urged to the Jew
Tryphon in the most ancient times of Justin Martyr. And thus also to James the
Jew in a like conference in the Cetab ol borhan c: 6. and 6. meeting.

The purpose of that book is to prove out of all the Prophets Ge^ab. ol.
borhan Arab. MS. in Billioth. Ba ^^o^ensi.
etc. that our Savior was the Christ etc. Justus alleged this place among the
rest. (...) The strong God said (by Zachary ehe Prophet) Behold a man whose
Name is the East.

But Saint Luke puts all out of doubt, where another Zachary relating to the
former says of our Savior that he was (...), we render it the day spring from
on high, or as Erasmus and the vulgar, the East. Which Beza not knowing how to
dislike, and yet considering with himself, that the old Prophecy must be so
translated, or else the new must not put it down Germen ex alto, the Branch
from on high, but which no man accepted of.

That the Tsemach in Zachary was the fame with Saint Lukes (...), Beza judged
rightly.

But that (...) cannot be rendered by Germen, it is convinced by the words
following. To give light unto them that sit in darkness etc. And therefore
qui Germen vertunt (says Scaliger of the Tsemach in Zachary) imperite faciunt,
audeo dicere neque mentiar, contra verbum Dei; who so translate it the Branch,
do ignorantly, nay I may say and say true too, they do contrary to the word of
God. The place in Zachary is to be read thus. Behold the man whose Name is the
East, and he shall rise up or shine out from under him, that is from under God
the Father.

Jeremie the Prophet would not otherwise be understood c: 23. 5. Behold the
days come says the Lord, that I will raise up unto David, (...) Tsemach
Tsaddick (...), the Righteous East, as the Lxx, that is (...), says Severus,
Christ the Sun of Righteousness, (...), says Eusebius, who elsewhere is
called the light of the Gentiles, and the light of the world.

Taeitus himself does unawares deliver some such thing as this, Hist: lib: 5.
He is there telling of the destruction of Jerusalem; how the doors of the
Temple flew open on a sudden, and a more then humane voice was heard, that
the Gods were now upon departing etc.

These things says he made some reflect upon an old prophecy that was found
antiquis Sacerdotum literis, which foretold, eo ipso tempore fore ut valesceret
Oriens. That at such a time the East should prevail. I doubt not but the
Prophet who ever he were, directed himself to the Man, Cui Oriens Nomen ejus,
Whose name is the East. Zach. 6. 12.

Greg. Mag. Moral. in Job: cap. 1^
In relation to this Name of Christ the Christians also by some have been
called Orientales. It Is Gregory the great's Moral upon those words of Job,
That he was the greatest man in the East. Referring to the same the blessed
Virgin has been termed Orientalis porta, the Eastern gate; as if that were
the meaning of Ezekiels vision c: 44. So Saint Ephrem upon those words of
Jacob, this is the house of God and this is the Gate of Heaven. This saying
(says he) is to be meant of the Virgin Mary, who became as it were another
Heaven, truly to be called the House of God, as wherein the Son of God that
immortal word inhabited; and as truly the Gate of Heaven, for the Lord of
Heaven and Earth entered thereat; and it shall not be set open the second time,
according to that of Ezekiel the Prophet. And I saw (says he) a Gate in the
East. the glorious Lord entered thereat, thenceforth that Gate was shut, and is
not any more again to he opened. Caten: Arab: C: 58.

It is not to be omitted that his Star appeared in the East, and that the
wise men came from thence; but which is more to be observed that the Angels
sent from God, with the Gospel of this Nativity, they also came from the
East,; for their Temple is to be seen upon the East of Bethlem, as the Nubian
Geographer.

He was borne too in the Eastern parts of the world.

Nay he was borne in Orientali angulo Civitatis Bethlem, Eccl. Hist. lib 5. c.
17.
in the Eastern part of Bethlem, as the Venerable Bede out of Adamannus. The
Heavens also met the Earth at this time, for the Autumnall intersection (one of
the Aequinoctiall Easts) was the ascendent of his Nativity. But of this there
is more to come.

The Holy men of Jerusalem hold a Tradition generally received from their
Ancients, that he was buried also with his Face and Feet toward the East. It
is affirmed by the Geographers of the Holy Land. But that he ascended up into
the Eastern part of Heaven, it has had the most ancient and full confent of
the whole Church. (...), says Damascene, when he was received up into Heaven
he was carried up Eastward. It was the cause why they read that place of the
Psalmist. Qui ascendit super Coelum Coeli ad Orientem; utpote says Origin* a
mortuis post passiouem resurgens, and in Coelum post resurrectionem ad Orientem
ascendens. Who rose from the dead after his passion, and ascended up into
Heaven toward the East after his Resurrection. So the Aethiopicke who ascended
up into the Heaven of Heavens in the East. In like manner the Syriack and some
Arabicke Translations. But then the Greek should have been (...), as in the
18 of that Psalm. (...). Ascendisti in Altum.

(...) is not properly said but of him that ascends his Horse or his Ass,
upon which (...) is said to sit. Say unto the daughter of Sion, behold thy King
comes (...), sitting upon an Ass Mat: 21. 5. It fully answers to the
Prophets Laroceu, which the older Translation tendered very fitly as concerning
the letter, who rides (or sits) upon the Heaven as it were upon a Horse. v.
4. So the Oracle, (...). i. e. O thou that sit or ridest upon the Heavens.

But the Prophet Esaias is plain for the Ascension, as I find him cited in the
Cetab: alborhan cap: 4 and ^ meeting.

Cetab olborhan Ms. Arab. in Archiv. Bibl. B^li^lens.
James the Jew urges (...) i. e. as the Prophet Esaias says. The Lord alone
shall be exalted and lifted up above the East. The strong Lord shall be exalted
in Righteousness.

So he reads the 16. v. of the 5. Chapter. But the Original as now received
makes no mention of the East, or lifting up, If then it had not, a Jew must
needs have known it; and I see not with what face it could be urged in this
Conference; but I begin to think what Justin Martyr charged upon this people
(...) etc. He makes it appear to Tryphon, that the Jews had circumcised their
Scripture too, Liber Ms. Arab d^ praecept. Relig. part. 1. c. 14 de Oratione.
Liber ex^at in Biblioth. D. He^^i^i King. Epi. Cicestrensi^.
p: 83. of the Dialogue.

If our Savior ascended into Heaven by the Eastern part, we need not doubt
but that he will return by the same way which he went. The Angels intimate as
much. I meet with an Author which testifies that he himself said that he would
(...)

Furthermore (says the Author) we are to turn our faces toward the East (in
the time of prayer) because that is the Coast concerning which the Christ, unto
whom be glory, said that he would appear from thence at his second coming,
And I Mat: 24 27.
think he he refers himself to those words of our Savior, sicut exit
fulgur etc. Hear therefore what Saint Damascene delivers as from the
Apostles, (...).

(...).

And thus shall he come again in like manner as he was seen to go up,
answerable to what He himself said. For as the lightning comes out of the
East, and shines even unto the West, so shall also the coming of the Son of
Man be. We worship him therefore toward the East, as expecting him from thence.

And this (says he) is by uwritten Tradition from the Apostles.

A Canon to this purpose I find ascribed to their Name in the Arabicke Code.
(...) Cod Conciliorum Arab. Ms. in Arch. R^an. Biblioth. Bodloi.
When ye pray (say they) turn your selves toward the East. For so the words of
our Lord import, who foretold that his return from Heaven at the Latter day
should be like the lightning, which glittering from the East flasheth into the
West. His meaning is that we should expect his coming from the East.

I was ready enough to think that the mention here made of Lightning was to
intimate the suddenness and praecipitation of that coming, but not being able
to devise any special reason (other then what is here given) why the Lightning
should rather come from the East, I had the less to say against the Tradition.
Paul de palatio says, that this meaning of the words is made good by the
common consent of all Christians, Credentium quod in Orient Humanitas Christi
sedeat. Ab eo ergo loco veniet ubi nunc est; believing that our Savior as
respecting his humane Nature sits in the Eastern part of Heaven. There he
is, from thence therefore he is to come.

Therefore that sign of the Son of Man, that other Baptist as it were of his
second coming, is expected to be seen in the East.

A sign of the Cross it is to be, as the Fathers Chrysostom and Saint Ephrem
promise. And the Ethiopian Church is so sure of it, that (as their Zabo says)
it is professed among the Articles of their Creed. That it shall appear in the
East, it is undertaken by Hippolytus. (...). For a sign of the Cross (says
he) shall rise up more glorious, then the Sun it self, shining from the East
into the West, to give notice unto the World that the Judge is coming.

Considering all these things, I am altogether of their mind who persuade
themselves that the Seat and Tribunal of that last Judgment shall be placed
in the Air over against the Mount Olivet.

Joel the Prophet is thought to have foretold as much, when he says that all
Nations shall be gathered into the valley of Jehosaphat; and his feet shall
stand in that day upon the Mount Olivet; which is before Jerusalem toward the
East. I cannot devise (says one) for what reason the Prophet should make so
particular a Description of this unto them that knew it so well. It is
certain, says another, spectare haec ad diem judicii, that these things are
to be meant of the day of judgment, etc. And if Clemens may be trusted, the
Apostles themselves understood no otherwise.

Our Forefathers lived and dyed in this hope. Let us think (so the Priest
used to preach upon the Wake days) that Christ dyed in the Este, and therefore
let us pray besely Lib. Festivalis in Dedicatione Ecclesiae.
into the Este, that we may be of the nombre that he dyed for. Also let us
think that he shall come out of the Este to the doom. Wherefore let us pray
heretily to him and besely that wae may have grace of contrition in our hearts
of our misdeeds with shrift and satisfaction, that we may stand that day on
the right hand of our Lord Jesus Christ. etc.

It is said indeed, But of that Hour, It is not said but of that place knows
no man. Yet not to be so particular as to point out the very Mountain or
Valley, or to take care with that Doctor in the Jerusalem Talmud, how the
bones of Wise men shall roll under the earth into this place, most manifest it
is that this great assise is to be holden upon the Holy Land. Here the World
may be said to have been created, and here it was redeemed; Here the Sun
rose first, and here the Sun of Righteousness; here he dyed and was buried,
and the third day he rose again from the dead, he ascended up into Heaven from
hence, and shall come thither again at the end of the world to judge both the
quick and the dead. And therefore Quid non statis viri Galilaei? Why stand you
not gazing ye men of Galilee, this same Jesus which is taken up from you into
Heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go up into Heaven.
Act. 1, 11.

Commentar. Arab. Ms in Pentateuch: c: 5. in Archi. Bod^eianis.
I reinforce all that has been said with an ancient profession of the
Eastern Church (...)

We pray (say they) toward the East, for that our Lord Christ when he ascended
into Heaven, went up that way and there sits in the Heaven of Heavens above
the East, according to that of David the Prophet in his Psalter. Praise the
Lord which sits upon the Heaven of Heavens in the East. And in very deed we
make no doubt but that our Lord the Christ as respecting his humane nature has
his seat in the Eastern part of the Heaven of Heavens, and sits with his
face turned toward this world. To pray therefore or worship toward the East,
is to pray and worship toward our Savior.

And that all this is to be meant of the Aequinoctiall East (which also is to
be considered) it is made to appear by Moses their Bishop of Bethraman in his
discourse of paradise l. 1. c. 13. He says there, that the place toward which
they prayed, is that over which the Sun rises in the month Nisan, which is the
Vernall Aequinox.

CHAP. XIX.
Exodus 23. 19. 34. 26. Deuteronomy. 14. 21. Thou shall not sees a Kid in his Mothers
Milk.


THe Chaldee renders this. Thou shall not eat flesh with Milk. So the Arabicke
of Erpenius his Edition. That of Saadia Gaon not much differently. Thou shall
not sees or dress flesh with milk. The Jerusalem Targum is. It is not
lawful for you, O my people the house of Israel, to sees or to eat flesh and
milk mixed together. This sense may seem to have a ground from the like
prohibition of Linsey*woolsy garments, and the sowing of a field with mingled
seed. Levit. 19. 19. besides the present observation of the Jews, who have
practiced this sense of the Text immemorially for ought we yet know.

And this seems to be a strong argument for this Reading to be right, for it
is not readily to be suspected, but that the thing which is now and has been
so long done by them must of necessity acknowledge it self upwards to some
uncontroleable Tradition of theirs. For it can hardly be thought that a whole
profession of Worshippers should possess themselves of such an opinion without
a General and confessed witness of their Ancients.

The Jews Kitchen (as if there were a sex in meats and dishes too) is divided
as their Synagogues where the Women pray by themselves in another Room. They
are indeed of the Congregation, but not of the Company. And this should be so.
But to keep the Milk pan from the company of Flesh*pots. To have one dish for
Flesh, and another for white meats, and to have a supernumerary knife for
Cheese and Butter (for these and flesh may not be cut with the same) and to
quote for all this the Prohibition here spoken of. Thou shall not sees a Kid
etc. is to make the word of God of none ^ffect by their Traditions. Mat: 7. 13.

It Is more then I need to do to set down the particulars of this Superstition,
or all their distances twixt flesh and milk. See Maimon in the Halaca of
forbidden meats. c. 9.. 1. Shulcan: Aruc: in Halac: Basher Vecheleb. Numb. 87.
If Leon mode de gli R^^* Hebr. part. 1. c. 3. n 3. and part: 2. c 6. n. 12.
not, see the Late Rabbin in his Book of modern Rites, or the learned Buxtorf.
Synagog, Iud: c: 26.

The sum of it is, that by this law they may not sees or eat flesh and
milk together.

But did not Abraham their father, when he entertained Angels instead of men
under the Oak of Mamre, take butter and milk, and the Calfe which he had
dressed, and set it before them? and they did eat etc: Genesis 18. 8.

If this practice of the Jews be grounded upon a misinterpretation of the
Text, then the more ancient and universal it is, the Error is the greater.
That the Text is absolutely misunderstood Mat: 15. 3.
is a clear and granted case and will be plainer yet anon.

And how these men use to transgress the Commandment of God by their
Traditions is believed enough.

I will here set down but this instance. Psalm. 17. 14. We render it as we
should. Whose belly thou fillest with thy hidden things. They read it, and the
North shall fill their bellies, and misapply it to the matters of generation
(...) etc. Talm: in Beracoth fol. 5. b. c. ^*
whosoever say the Doctors in Beracoth shall set his Bed North and South shall
beget male children, Ps. 17. 14. etc. Therefore the Jews hold this Rite of
Collocation (and by these very words of the Psalm) to this day. Therefore
also at the Celebration of their Nuptials, the Bride is appointed to stand
with her face turned toward the North or South, as an Omen of happy
procreation both for the Number and Sex of Children. They tell you also of
David's harp hung up upon the Tester of his Bed, which being every midnight
constantly blowed upon by the Northern wind, warbled of it self. Talm. in
Berac. fol. 3. b. As if David's Bed had been set in this posture too.

And yet all this (how much soever pretended) is none of the right reason why
the Jews place their Beds North and South. They are bound to place their Beth
Haccisse, or house of office, in the very same situation, so that he that sits
down to cover his feet may have his face turned toward the North and South,
but by no means toward the West or East. Talmud: in Bera: fol: 62. a:

For however the Doctors Alphesi and others in contemplation of the Causes of
this have sought out many inventions, yet the reason of the last is the reason
of the first. Which the Gloss gives to Beracoth c: 1. fol: 5. b: And it is,
That the uncomely Necessities of Nature (or Matrimony) might not fall into the
Walk and Ways of God, whose Shecina or dwelling presence lies West and East,
etc.

The Lxx renders it, Thou shall not sees a Lamb in his Mothers milk, and so
an ancient Arabicke Translation of that Thou shall not dress (...) a Lamb in
the milk of his Mother.

The Persian paraphrase is (...) Na Koshtani Basbache der shier madreau. Thou
shall not kill a Kid in the milk of his Mother.

This reading seems to suggest a ground for their interpretation who would
have it to be thus. That no man of Israel should sees a Kid of the Goats, or
Lamb of the flock, or any other youngling in the milk of the damme; that is,
as some, the damme with the young. As in the case of a Birds nest: others make
it respect to their sacrifices, that no man might bring a Kidde or Lamb etc:
to the Lords House before the eighth day; for seven days it was to be with
the damme and then it might be brought to him; Otherwise they say that however
they might sacrifice any young thing even in the milk of the Mother (for
Samuel offered up a sucking Lamb or Lamb of the Milk) because the Religion
of the thing would bear it out) yet in common eating it might not be, that is
they might not eat a Kid so long as it was with the damme, or sucking.

Let it be taken notice of here that the Lxx and the Arabicke Translation of
that were not much out in translating the place Thou shall not dress a Lamb
etc: for Gedi signifies a Kid of the Sheep, as well as the Goats. And in
Exodus you'! find a Lamb of the Goats, as well as the Sheep, Chap: 12. 5. So
that this cannot be depended on.

To refer it to the sacrificing of a Lamb or Kid before the eigth day will
not be sense, for this is otherwise forbidden before, and in plainer words,
Seven days shall it be with the damme etc: Exodus: 22. 30.

And to make it concerned in their common eating, as to forbid cruelty or put a
restraint upon delicious feeding, imposes yet more absurdly upon the Law.

Isaac ben Solomon (adopted son to one of the Kings of Arabia, and a famous
Physician of his time) in his book of dyets translated out of the Arabic has
this consideration upon Goats flesh.

Sunt enim Lactentes, sunt and vicini suae nativitati, sunt quoque Isaac Judah
de die^^s particular part. 4* c. de Ca^ne H^r^ina.
juvenes and decrepiti. Lactentes vero sunt caeteris animalibus in sapore and
nutriment^ praestantiores. Lac enim natutralem ^is praestat humiditatem, eorum
complexio temperata est in calore and humiditate absque sui corruptione.
Facilem ergo and subtilem dant dietam. Et quo diutius lacte nutriuntur eo
meliores ac teneriores erunt.

The Author, says that no flesh whatsoever can more exactly nourish then that
of a sucking Kid, or Kid of the Milk, and moreover that the longer it is with
the damme, by so much it is the more excellent meat.

The same Author says de Agnis Lactentibus, of Lambs of the milk, pessimum
dant Sanguinem, that they breed the worst blood and as bad as that of an old
Goat.

Experience teaches all this to be true.

And would you have it so then that the Lawgiver should forbid his people the
worst of meats to restrain delicacy, or the best of nourishments to avoid
cruelty. And yet this is the case of the Text.

But now to make way for that sense which the Prohibition indeed intends to,
I think fit to lay down these grounds; And they are such as will need to be
taken better notice of by those that hereafter shall undertake to tell the
meaning of Moses Law.

Know then from Him that knew it best and first (the most learned Maimon) that
the praecepts in the Law, those of this kind especially, are still set down
with a reflex upon the Heather Rites, and not those only of simple Idolatry,
but most of all such as were complicated with Magical and unreasonable
Superstition.

Neither is the Respect of these Laws so large and indistinct, as to look
upon all the Heathen in Gross, but referring purposely to that neighboring
part of Paganism professed by the Egyptians, Canaanites. Chaldaeans* and
Amorites.

These Superstitions were termed by the Ancient Rabbines Viae Amorhaeorum, the
way of the Amorites, that is ways which the Jews were bound to call Heresy.
Otherwise they were called Zabiorum or Zabaistarum Cultus. i. e. The Eastern
Idolatry.

These Rites the Zabii had written in many books; a good part of which were
translated into Arabic, and these Maimon made use of, as the Sepher
Hattelesmaoth or book of Telesmes. Sepher Hasharab, Sepher Tamtam, Sepher
Maaloth haggalgal, Sepher Isaaci. Abooke of Isaacke the Zabiist of all the
Rites and Customs of their Law. But the book of greatest account, says
Maimon, is the Sepher Avoda Henbattith, or liber de Agri-Cultura Aegyptiorum.
By this book you may judge of the rest, and of this by a strange passage
quoted out of it in the Sepher Haccozri (...) i. e or as the Books of the
Avoda Henbattith, which make mention of some certain names, Ianboshar,
Tsagarith and Roani, and they say that these (men) were before Adams time, and
that Ianboshar was Adams Tutor. etc. Cozri: lib. 1.

Out of these Zabian books, this latter especially, Maimon made good the
greatest part of the Ceremonial Law, and which is more made it familiar too,
and reconciled the strangeness of those precepts to any man's proportion of
reason and belief. Only about the case of wine why God would have that used
in sacrifice, seeing that the Zabii did so too, he confesses himself to be
very much troubled, and not knowing how to refer it.

Yet he gives a reason from some others, that God with a Respect had to the 3
principal parts of man, The Heart, the Liver, and the Brain, would have his
sacrifices be made up of three answerable things, Flesh, Wine, and Music,
More: part. 3. c: 46.

But in other cases the prohibition in the Law (for the greater part) lies
against some Rite or other of Magical Idolatry.

So from this prohibition in the Law Lev: 19. 19. Thou shall not sow thy field
with mingled seed, nor thy vineyard. Deuteronomy: 22. 9. The Hebrew Doctors lawfully
conclude, that all diverse kinds of Trees are to be meant as much. As to graft
one Tree upon another of another kind. And Maimon turns this back upon the
ways of the Amorhites. For the Zabii (says he) used so to do, They observed
such a place of the Moon, made such a suffumigation, uttered such and such
words at the grafting of one Tree upon another assuring, themselves that those
Rites were necessary to fructification. More part: 3. c. 37.

I should think that Saint Paul had an eye upon this, when he tells his
Amorite or Gentile that he was but cut off from the wild Olive, and grafted
contrary to Nature (that is the ways of the Jews) into a good Olive Tree.
Romans 11. 24. As things stood before, so heterogeneous a branch might not be
inserted, but now Saint Paul was in Saint Peter's case. He was not to call any
thing Common or Unclean.

Maimon repeateth there another practice of theirs to the same purpose, but
such a one as will uncover too much if it be rendered in our words.

But the fittest instance to this end is from the Laws of blood. It is
forbidden there that any man of Israel should eat blood.

Also it is commanded that the Blood be sprin ckled upon the Altar, and
moreover that it be covered with dust, or sprinkled upon the ground as water.

Some of the Zabii did use to eat the blood, some others who reckoned this to
inhumanity, at the killing of a Beast reserved the blood, and gathered it up
into a vessel or trench, and then sitting down in a Circle about the blood
they are up the flesh, and satisfied themselves with an opinion that their
Demons fed upon the blood, entertaining a strong conceit that this manner of
sitting at the same Table with their Gods would engage them to a nearer tie of
conversation and familiarity, and promising to themselves also that these
spirits would infinuate themselves in dreams and render them capable of
Prophecy and things to come.

In reference to these ways of the Amorites, God expressly forbad his people
to eat blood, for so some of the Zabii did; and to meet with others who
gathered it up into a Vessel, he commanded that the blood should be spilt upon
the ground like water.

And because they ate their sacrifices in a Circle round about the blood. He
also commanded that the Blood should be sprinkled (not about but) upon the
Altar.

So here it is forbidden to any man of Israel to sees a Kid in the milk of
the Damme.

It is certain that this must respect to some Idolatrous Rite of the Heathen,
for to take any other course with it is not to tell the meaning, but to make a
shift with the place.

Here to hope for any such custom to be found of the Heathen in gross, the
labor has been sufficiently lost already.

If it were true, as Tostarus said (out did not believe himself) that the
Gentiles used to sacrifice a Kid sodden in the dammes milk to the God of the
fields, it would make very much toward the matter. Thus much is so, that
Sylvanus was the God of the woods and fields, and that milk was one of those
things which were to him offered in Sacrifice, as a Kid to Faunus. Milk also
was among the Sacrifices of Pan the God of the Shepherds, and the same was
offered to Ceres in the Ambarvalia. There is reason also why a Goat and Goats
milk should be of Reverent importance in the Heathen devotion, for Jupiter
himself sucked no other milk then this. It is expressed upon a Reverse of
Valerian silver. The young God upon a she Goat holding by one of the Horns*
with this Inscription Jovi Crescenti. Neither is it to be denied, but that in
the sacrifices of Bacchus both a Kid and milk were offered. But of a Kid
sodden in the damms milk in any Rites of late Heathen devotion it rests to
be revealed as yet.

One Simler notes, that some of the Hebrews say, that the Ismaelites used to
sees a Kid in Milk. It Is true indeed deed Abarbinel says they do so (...) to
this very day. But see what Aben Ezra said to that upon the same place of Exodus
23. etc.

By the Ismaelites we are to understand the Arabians, that is the Saracens
before, and the Turks now. And yet in whose Ritualists as Ben Casem, Side Ben
Hali, Abdalla etc. if you find any such thing, it will be more then could be
expected from them that have looked for it too.

That they eat Milk and Goats flesh also I know, so do we too: And what
then?

If they did to the Text here, they are to sees a Kid in Milk, which is more
I think then the best man in the Kitchen will undertake to do, (...) unless
he take time to do it (as Aben Ezra says.) But this is not all, a Kid is to be
sodden in Goats milk, and which is more then that too, it must be the milk of
the damme.

The first words bear a troublesome sense, and the last are so plainly
Magical, that of themselves they prevent any other way of interpretation.
Therefore Abarbinel made his recourse thus far this way, as to think that it
was an Idolatrous Rite of the Heathen, To sees a Kid in Milk at the time of
in-gathering of fruits, hoping by this to propitiate their Gods.

And he pretends as for a ground for his meaning the Spanish mesta a kind of
Country feast which their Shepherds use to make themselves merry at twice a
year with Kiddes and milk.

But to eat Kid or milk, or both, is a continual Nothing to this purpose.

The very words themselves instantly import a Magical preparation. Therefore
the very learned Maimon, though he interpret this place for company as the
ordinary Jews do, yet he doubted not to cast it upon the way of the Amorites,
for this reason, because he finds it twice annexed to the 3 anniversary turns
in the year, Exodus: 23. 19 34. 26. Tribus vicibus conspicietur omnis masculus
tuus, etc. And this reason (says he) magnum apud me pondus habet, licet eam
hactenus in libris Zabiorum nondum viderim, very much prevails with me,
though I have not met with it in the Zabian books.

But it seems the Karraite (quoted by Master Cudworth a learned man of the
equal University) had met with this Tradition. The Karraite says, that

It was a Custom of the ancient Heathens, at the In gathering of their fruits
to take a Kid, and sees it in the milk of the Damme, and then (...) in a
Magical way to go about and besprinckle all their Trees and Fields and Gardens
and Orchards, thinking by this means they should make them fructify and bring
forth fruit again more abundantly the next year. So the Karraite.

Note this also, that these Zabians might not make any other but a Magical use
of a Kid. These Worshippers did sacrifi^e More. N. p. 3. c* 46.
to the Seirim or Demons in the form of Goats; Therefore the eating of Goats
flesh was forbidden them. Notwithstanding, nay for that reason the Magical use
of Goats was Holy and Religious.

The Magical preparation of a Kid has a plain respect unto the Seirim or
Goat-Divells. But for the reasons of the manner they cannot be given, for then
it were not Magical.

It Is enough that such a thing was used in the way of the Amorites, and
therefore expressly forbidden to the people of God. Also it may very well be
thought that the People of God themselves (some of them) drew down this
Example of the Zabii into their own practice. Why not this as well as
sacrificing to the Seirim or Devill-Goats. Levit. 17. 7? If the people of God
did so, that is sees a Kid in the milk of the Damme, to hasten the maturation
of their Fruits, then this was the reason why the Prohibition is so often
repeated in the Law.

Maimon quoteth a like practice of the Zabii out of their book Avoda
Henbattith.

They putrified certain things (which the book names) having observed when
the Sun was in this or that degree. They performed some Magical operations,
and so went away with this persuasion, that whosoever should be sprinckle a new
planted Tree with this charm, the Tree would fructify in a shorter time then
otherwise it would have done.

This affords another likelihood for the Karraites Tradition of seething a
Kid etc. that this also was to be found in the Zabians books, though the
learned Maimon had not yet met with it.

CHAP. XX.
James 4. 13, 14, 15. Go to now ye that say, to morrow we will go into such a
City, and continue there a year, and buy and sell, and get gain.

Whereas ye know not what shall be on the morrow. For what is your life? It is
even a vapor that appears for a little time, and then vanishes away.

For that ye ought to say, If the Lord will we shall live, and do this or that.

1 Corinthians: 4. 19. 1 Pet: 3. 17.
IT was a custom among the Jews, especially and first to begin all things
with God. They undertook nothing without this Holy and devout Parenthesis
(...) If God will. They otherwise expressed it (...) If the Name please, or (...)
If the Name determine so. And by the Name they mean the great one, Jehovah.

It was a phrase of so common speech with them, that they contracted it into an
Abbreviation of their kind, which to avoid repetition at large, uses a Letter
for a word. The Abbreviation is. (...) It is not only a Phrase of the Jews
and Scripture, but of all the men of the East.

You rarely meet with a book written in the Arabicke, but begins
Bismillahi, In the name of God, etc. An Alcoran especially, or any other Book
of their Divinity. And for the Alcoran, it does not only All, or the whole
Book begin so, but every Surat or Chapter of that Scripture, as they account
it.

Not only so, but they make a common use of this very expression If God will
Their words are, (and the Persians use the very same) (...) Si Deus voluerit,
or (...), If the High, or Allmighty God will, as Nassyr Eddyn in his
Commentaries upon the Arabicke Euclid, at the end of his Preface to the tenth
book, and elsewhere.

The Arabicke Nubian Geographer begins his book, in the Name of the
merciful and compassionate God, from whom is help. And in the end of his
Preface, he says the same thing in more words. Quapropter potentissimi ac
summi Dei, quem unum and solum esse fateor, qui sufficientissimus atque optimus
Protector est, auxilium exposco.

From the Oriental part of the World this manner of speech descended down
upon all the Inhabitants of the Earth. The Greeks ^ender it (...), which is
the same with the Latins Deo volente, If God will. Of which you may see more,
and very much to this matter, if you consult with Brissonius de Formulis etc.
Lib. 1. p. 68, 69. etc.

Indeed it were very much, if we men of what Nation soever under Heaven should
go about any thing without this seasonable condition of Gods help. If we live
and move, and have our being in him, (as Saint Paul quoteth out of Aratus) and
the Scholiast Theon interprets to be meant of God (...) (...)* certainly we
ought not to venture upon any thing without A Jove principium. As he ought to
be in all our thoughts, so especially in those of enterprise and design, be it
of the greatest, nay be it of the smallest undertaking. Especially we men, (I
can believe the Angels of God do so to) for though the Gospel say, that the
providence of God comes down to the price of a Sparrow, (and were not two of
these sold for a farthing?) Yet Maimon says that God does not take care for
Oxen, but setting all other things aside makes it his only business to
procure the matters of Mankind. See his excellent discourse upon the Providence
of God. More: Nevoch: Par. 3. C: 17.

Considering the engagements either of Gods provision, or men's usual
Fatalities, one would think this manner of speech to be equally natural to
the whole race of Mankind, yet (as I said before) the Jews gave the first
example, and they themselves brought it into use, but upon this occasion.

It relates to one of the wise sayings of Ben Sira an old Sage of theirs, and
believed by them to be Jeremie the Prophets Nephew. The saying is this

(...)

i. e The Bride went up into her Chamber, but did not know what was to befall
her.

Upon this the Perush there makes this Explication. (...) i. e. Let a man
never say (he will do) any thing* without this (exception) If God permit. There
was a man who said, To morrow I will sit with my Bride in the Bride-chamber,
and, will know her there. They said unto him, say, If God will. He said unto
them, whether (God) will or will not, To morrow I will sit with my Bride in my
Bride-chamber. So he did. He entered with his Bride into the Chamber, and sat
with her all day. At night they went both to bed, but they both dyed before
they knew one another. When they found them dead in the morning each by other,
they said the saying of Ben Sira was true. The Bride went up into the
Bride-chamber, but did not know what was to befall her. Upon this they said.
Whosoever has a purpose to do any thing ought to say If God permit, Otherwise
he is not like to prosper.

The words of Saint James have a full respect upon this Tradition, you may
easily perceive it, if you mark these words.

To morrow we will go etc. especially the close. We shall live, and do this,
or that.

CHAP. XXI.
Amos 6. 1, 3, 4. Woe unto them that are at ease in Zion, etc.

Ye that put far away the evil day, etc.

That ly upon beds of Ivory, and stretch themselves upon their Couches, and
eat the Lambs out of the flock, and the Calves out of the midst of the Stall.


NOt so much to interpret the place, as the interpretation of that; and
moreover to tell the meaning of a hard word in the Law, I make this
animadversion.

The Note upon this in the Midbar Rabba, is (...) Mid: Rab: fol. 238. Edit:
Cracovt Venet^, 158.
i. e. Go down and see how every tribe has a Maiuma of its own, and when any
one is minded to go to his Maiuma, he causes all his flock to pass before
him, and chooses out the fattest, and kills it, etc. But says the Author of
the Gloss here, (...) I have not found, nor heard what should Aruch. in (...)
he the meaning of the word. David de Pomis says it is, (...) the name of an
Idol. As Philip Aquinas thinks, it answers to, (...) Marbeck in the Text,
and is to be rendered. Saginarium, The stall. Munster expounds it, Socius Comes.
The Aruch quoteth the word in this passage out of the Megillath Ecah, (...) i.
e. And they bring in the Maiumas into the Theater with his head uncovered. But
for the meaning of the Maiumas either here, or in the Midbar, the Interpreters
have left it in a very doubtful condition. I may possibly have better luck,
(I pretend not to so much skill as they had) in expounding the words.

Though the word in the Aruch and in the Midbar be the same, yet by the sense
they cannot be of the same signification. The word in the Aruch (as I think)
is taken from the Greek (...), as the very next word, (...), and means no
otherwise.

But for the meaning of the same word in the Midbar, it must needs bear
another manner of construction: And if it be not that which is to follow, it
will be hard, I am sure, to say what it is.

The forementioned Author of the Gloss conjectureth C. De Maiuma L: unic. Cod
Theod. lib. 15. ^i^. 6.
from the sense, that it is to be meant of (...) A Festival day. And this was
the meaning of the Midbar, and to be understood of that Maiuma in the Justinian
and Theodosian Codes.

And that was (if Suidas knew it) (...). etc. A Roman Solemnity celebrated in
the month of May, when the Chief of the City of Rome were wont to go to Ostia,
and there disport themselves, thrusting one another into the waters. The Gloss
to the Basilica names not what, but sth it was a kind of Solemnity observed
by the Romans in the Month of May, but that it was done at Rome, and (...), to
the honor of Maia. And in Aethicus the Cosmographer it is found, that the
people of Rome went in procession with the Consul to Ostia Castorum
celebrandorum causa solennitate jucunda. Tacitus also makes mention of a
certain sacrifice done at Ostia in the Castors Temple, sed ventorum marisque
causa factum, says Ammianus Mareellinus, Lib: 19. To Lipsius, all this is one
and the same with the Maiuma in the Ad Lib. Annal. 11.
Law.

If there were no more in it then so, Hotoman did well enough, out of
Vandulphus, to reckon this among the innocent sports: though that he should say
it was Armorum ludicra exercitatio, cum aliquot adolescentes me^se Maio oppidum
in aqua positum dimissi in aqua ludibundi oppugnabant, is by I know not what
authority.

The Civilians make some less; none more of the matter.

Bartol said, it was Ludus quidam, a kind of sport.

Cujacius, Alciat, Gothofride etc. hold themselves to the Tradition of Suidas,
and Gothofride referres us to Gregori^s Cosmographie; Cujacius more correctly,
to his Chronographie.

But it should have been, not Gregorii, but Georgii Chronographia. Nor is
Georgius Cedrenus to be meant, as Cujacius thought: but Georgius Theophanes.
And the words are:

(...). etc. Which Anastasius Bibliothecarius renders; Praeterea (...) facta
Imperator in Sophianis sedit cum filio suo* etc. Hist. Miscell. lib. 23.
Gyraldus guessed it to be the Floralia, with which indeed it can compare in
obscenity and debauchment.

But it is not made known by any of all this, what the Maiuma was. 'Twas an
Oriental Celebration (as Baronius well observed) but of what sort, only
Johannes Antiochenus has discovered. The Author had before related out of
Pausanias the Chronographer, that Sosibius an Antiochian had left as a Legacy
to the City of Antioch, the yearly revenue of fifteen Talents of Gold, toward
the expense of the public sports: which by the corruption of the Feo^^ees
having been disposed of the wrong way, the Citizens petitioned the Emperor
Augustus, that it might be restored to the first use. Which was granted: but
the same case falling out again, they addressed a like suite to the Emperor
Commodus, by whose commands the Legacy was again shared, and a due portion
thereof set out for the Olympicke Games; another for the Ioh: Antioch: M^^n
Archiv: Baroc. Biblio. the^* Bodleian.
Circensian, (...). etc.

(...). i. e. In like manner also for the trietericall sports (celebrated by
night in Tents, I mean the Orgia, that is the mysteries of Bacc^us and Venus,
commonly called the Maiuma, for that they were solemnized in the month of May)
a considerable sum of the Gold was set out for the charge of Lamps and
Candles, and other necessaries for this Solemnity or Wake, in which they took
their pleasure for the space of thirty whole nights together etc.

I must not here uncover the (...) Veneris (...), as Clemens Alexandrinus calls
them* It is not once to be named Clem: Alex. in Protrep.
amongst us, what this people did in the dark: (...), etc. as the same Author.

Illud vero (says the Emperor Arcadius) quod sibi nomen procax licentia
vindicavit, Maiumam, soedum atque indecorum spectacul^m, denegamus. Cod:
Theodos: Lib: 15. Tit: 6.

It was forbidden (as Me^rsius took it) by the LXII Canon of the Synod in
Trullo: (...). etc.

But the reading there is not, (...), the first of May; but, (...): the first
of March. And so the Cod Concilior. Arab. MS. in Archiv. B ll. Bodleian.
Arabicke Code (...) i. e. And the first day of the first Month, that is, Nisan
or March.

For the derivation of the word, if any such disport in the waters was made, as
Suidas remembers to us, it were obvious to fetch it from the Oriental (...)
Majim. Or if it were found that these Orgia were first, or most celebrated at
Maiuma (the sea side of Gaza) it is possible that the place might give name to
the celebration. which has the more color, for that in the Tetramphodus or
Quatrefois of that City upon an Altar of stone there stood a marble statue of
Venus, representing the figure (...); Metaphrast. Ms. in Archiv. Baroc. Feb. 25.
of a naked woman, etc. as Marcus Diaconus in vita Porphyrii Gaz^orum Episcopi:
otherwise, the Authors own derivation must be taken.

If the Prophet may at all be understood in the sense of the Midbar, it
sounds not much unlike to that which the Emperor Julian told the Antiochians
in his Misopogo^.

(...). There Is none of you all (says he) but can willingly spend upon your
private banquetings and feasts, and I well know how much many of you can throw
away upon the Maiuma: but for your own, or the Cities safety no man offers
up any thing either in private or in public.

The word of Amos is: Woe to them that are at ease in Zion etc. That stretch
themselves upon their Couches, and eat the Lambs out of the flock, and that
chaunt to the sound of the Violl. etc. That drink wine in bowls etc. But they
are not greived for the afflictions of Joseph.

CHAP. XXII.
The meaning and Considerations of Light in Scripture.
GOD is Light, and in him there is no darkness at All. John 1.

The Reflection of this Original Glory shining upon the dust, the dust became
Light, that is man, for so the Ancients termed him; (...) says Phavorinus, we
call a man light. but the opacous body of sin interposing it self betwixt
this borrowed Light, and the Fountain, cast a shadow, the shadow of death.

The darkness being so thick and so exceeding, that (if we regard what the
Master of the Sentences has said) the Sun it self shined 7 times brighter
before the fall, then ever it did since.

To bring the world out of that darkness into this Marveilous Light, the day
spring from on high was to visit us. To prepare for this day there first
appeared a Burning and a shining Light. John 1. but he was not that Light, but
came Iulij Schiller. praefat. in V. r^nogra^h. Christian. p 6. Col. 2.
before to bear witness of the Light. Soon after Jesus, that is (as in the
China Tongue it signifies) the rising Sun, that Sun of Righteousness,
himself arose with healing in his wings, Malac. 3. It was then the longest
Night in all the year; and it was the midst of that, and yet there was day
where he was; for a glorious and betokening Light shined round about this Holy
Child. So the Tradition, and so the Masters describe the Night-peice of this
Nativity.

At his Transfiguration a greater Light shined about him. His face was brighter
then tbe Sun, and his very Clothes whiter then the Light. Till now the Father
of Lights himself dwelt in the thick darkness, never showing himself but
in a Cloud; but in these last days, he is God manifest 1 Timothy: 3. 16. and in
the Brightness of his glory. Heb. 1. I do not find, (says Venerable Bede)
among so many Angels* that were sent before the Law, that ever any were seen
with a Light shining about them.

Now a Light shines about S. Peter in the prison, and about Saint Paul (...),
a very great Light. Nay a Light shined about the Shepherds too. And though it
were then the dead of the Night, yet the word was brought by the Angel hodie
Natus est, etc. This day is borne to you etc. Therefore also at the setting of
this Sun which was the Reverse part of the Mystery, darkness fell upon the
Earth, the Natural Sun eclipsed in the midst of Heaven, and therefore the
Moon making it more then Midnight in the subterraneous position all of the
color of Saturn the signifier of blackenesse, who rising from the Horoscope
beheld these two Eclipses in a square Malignant aspect.

Not so only, for in the self same day (which is more perhaps then you have
heard of) there hapened a natural defection of the Moon in the 11 of Libra,
beginning at Jerusalem about 6 in the Evening, insomuch that the Sun was no
sooner gone down, but the Moon appeared in the East Ecclipsed of more then
half her Light; So that as the Light was taken from that day, so darkness
was added to that Night, and within the space of 6 hours, the Sun was once
unnaturally, and the Moon twice Ecclipsed. The Calculation and Figure of this
Lunar Eclipse, you may see (if you will) in Chronologia Catholica Henrici
Buntingij fol. 237. b: and 238. a: See also Sethus Calvisius in Tiberius
Caesar. ad An: post Ch: n: 33. to the 3 day of April.

As our Lord himself, so his Gospel also, is called Light, and was therefore
anciently never read without a burning Taper, etiam sole rutilante ('it is Saint
Hieroms Testimony) though it were lighted in the Sun, Supposing therefore out
of Albumazar, that every Religion is governed by some Planet, as the Mahumetan
by Venus, the Jewish by Saturn, etc. Some Astrologers did not inconveniently
to attribute the Christian to the Sun.

Not the Gospel, but the Preachers of it also are called Lights; Vos estis Lux
Mundi, ye are the Light of the World; and the first preacher of Repentance was
said to be Lucerna ardeus, etc. a burning and a shining Light.

The careful Church perceiving that God was so much taken with this outward
symbol of the Light, could do no less then go on with the Ceremony.
Therefore the day of our Lords Nativity was to be called (...), the Epiphany,
or appearing of the Light; and so many Tapers were to be set up the Night
before, as might give Name to the Vigil Vigili^ Luminum* And the Ancients did
well to send Lights one to another, whatsoever some think of the Christmas
Candle.

The receiving of this Light in Baptism they called not usually (...):
Eucholog. fol. (...). A.
so, but (...), Illumination, which further to betoken, the rites were to
celebrate this Sacrament, (...), etc. with all the Tapers lighted, etc, as the
Order in the Euchologue. The Neophytus also or new convert received a Taper
lighted and delivered by the Mystagogus, which for the space of seven days
after he was to hold in his hand at Divine Service, sitting in the Baptistery.

Who perceives not that by this right way the Tapers came into the Church,
mysteriously placed with the Gospel upon the Altar, as an emblem of the truer
Light?

It was imitated again by the white garment received at the same time in
Baptism, as the Emperors expound it in Theodosian's Code; Coelestis Lumen
Lavacri imitantis nova^ sancti Baptismatis Lucem vestimenta testa^tur. Cod.
Theod. de Spectae. So the Priest in the order of Severus. (...) Change (says
he, bespeaking the new Converts) your Garments, and be white as the Snow, and
let the Light shins as the Angels.

Remaining yet unto us of this is that which we more commonly call the Chrisome
(ab unction^, as the Manual, etc.) wherewith the women use to shroud the
Child, if dying within the Month. Otherwise it is to be brought to the Church
at the day of purification.

But by an Order of Baptism in Edward the sixth's Liturgy of the year, 1549.
It was to be put upon the Child at the Font; for the Rubricke is, Then the
Godfathers and Godmothers shall take and lay their hands upon the Child, and
the Minister shall put upon him his white ^esture, commonly called the
Chrisome, and say

Take this white vesture for a token, etc.

And good reason; for (...), White does best of all become the Children of
Light, says Clemens Alexandrinus.

The Apostles in the Alcoran are called Elhava^i^^a, the white men, Viri
vestibus albis i^duti, (as our Robert of Reading translated it) Men clothed in
white apparel. So also they are called in the Arabicke Preface to the four
Evangelists, and for the same reason, Vt viri doctissimi putant, says
Kerstenius in vit. 4 Evangelist. p. 16. Some Commentatours upon the Alcoran I
know give another derivation of the word, but it concerns not this place.
It Is the Color of the Angels clothes, Apoc. 4. 4. Nay the Ancient of days
Himself is said to go in White, Dan. 7. 9.

And that our Holy Garments are of this color, the reason is good, as
respecting the Gospells Light.

The funeral Tapers (however thought of by some) are of the same harmless
Import. Their meaning is to show, that the departed souls are not quite put
out, but having walked here as the Children of the Light, are now gone to walk
before God in the Light of the Living.

The Sun never arose to the Ancients, no nor so much as a Candle was lighted,
but of this signification. Vincamus was their word, whenever the Lights came
in, (...), for Light (says Phavorinus) betokens victory. It was to show what
trust they put in the Light, in whom we are more then Conquerours. Our meaning
is the same, when at the bringing in of a Candle we use to put our selves in
mind of the Light of Heaven; which those who list to call superstition, do
but darken Counsel by words without knowledge, Job. 38. 2.

But the Rising of the Sun was observed with a more. solemn Oraison; For no
sooner did this Light appear, (so the Syriacke Rituall) (...) (...) but every
man was to turn himself toward tht East, and worship God, and then say this
prayer. Jesus full of Light, in thy Light may we see Light, for thou art the
true Light which enlighteneth every man that comes into the world. Enlighten
us with the glorious Light of thy Heavenly Father.

CHAP. XXIII.
Genesis 1. 7. (...) Tehom Rabba.

And God made the Firmament, and divided the waters which were under the
Firmament from the Waters which were above the Firmament, etc.


Upon my uttermost strife with this Place, I see not how it can be well avoided
but that an Abyss of waters must be granted to be above the Supreamest Orb.
God I know has bound up the waters in his thick Clouds, and the Cloud Job.
26. 8. Albert. de Saxon. lib 3. physic. Q. 6. art. 62. conclus. 3. Mendoza
v^id. Lib. 4. problem. 47.
was not rent under them. And the Air it self is not so unlike to water but
that (as some undertake) it may be demonstrated to be navigable; and that a
Ship may sail upon the Convexity thereof by the same reason that it is carried
upon the Ocean.

But to take these waters for the Cloudy part of Heaven, is not possible from
the Text. For the (...) Rakia or Expansium is to be meant of the whole Frame,
for He called the Firmament Heaven, and the waters are to be above all this;
for the word (...) meal, cannot be otherwise (but violently) construed,
notwithstanding what Paraus, Junius, and others have informed.

And 'twas too suddenly apprehended of those who think that the Waters above
the Heavens called upon by the Psalmist and the three Children in their Song to
praise the Lord, can be taken for the Watery Region of the Air, for in the
same Canticles, by an express enumeration of all the Meteors, this Region is
distinctly invited to the like Celebration. O every Shower and Dew, bless ye
the Lord, etc. Fire and Hail, Snow and Vapor, Stormy wind fulfilling his
word, etc.

According to the first Model of the Creation the stories of this Great Pile
stood not as now they do. The Earth was without Form and void, i. e. (as
some would have it, but I have told you the meaning of it before) unbecomed
with that glorious furniture which now it has, standing all covered over with
a Globe of waters vastly extending, which the Maker did, to show that the Earth
was his before he gave it to the Children of Men, Psalm. 115. 16.

Here he might have staid his hand reflecting upon himself this Mighty Power
which could settle such a ponderous mass upon it self. But to show also that
He created it not in vain, but formed it to be inhabited, Isay, 45. 18. He
divided the waters from the Waters by a Firmament or Heaven.

The waters below this Firmament he commanded to gather together, which made
the Seas.

And the dry land appeared. Not now so precisely globous as before, but
recompensed with an extuberancy of Hills and Mountains for the Receipts into
which he had sunk the waters. In the space above the Firmament, He laid up the
Depth in Storehouses, Psalm. 33. 7. From whence when He uttered his voice (as
at the Flood) there was a multitude (or Noise) of Waters in the Heavens, Jer.
10. 13.

And whosoever shall look back with an uninterested eye upon that immane, and
(if the Scripture had not said it) all incredible Deluge will be far to seek
how such an impossible confluence of waters could otherwise be assembled
together.

For to lay the charge of this huge effect unto the Stars, or any Conjunction
of the Superior Bodies, as Abraham and Albumazar did, is not to release, but
entangle the Wonder* For besides that those Lights above are not entrusted with
so unlimited a power, no not in their strongest conspiracies of Influence, the
Astrologers tied the Coniuction to a false time, as the Learned Mirandula fully
enough, though himself not so truly, has declared against them.

A Conjunction indeed there was of and going before the flood, but looking upon
the effect at such a distance as could be of no considerable avail.

And indeed for any hand the Stars could have in this matter we are to
receive it at the same rate as that of the Arabian Astrologers to the Egyptian
Caliph.

They answered that the cause of Noah's flood was (...) Sepher Iuchasin fol.
148. b,
that there happened at that time a Conjunction of all the Planets in Pisces.

And yet the same Astrologers foretold of a particular deluge to be at such a
time in the Deserts of Arabia, which (if the Story mock not) proved true; for
the Pilgrims to Mecca (so that says) were drowned upon those Sands, where
others before time had perished for want of waters.

And to give up that account which the Common People in Philosophy use to do,
that these mighty waters could be emptyed out of the bottles of Heaven, the
Clouds whatsoever or Condensations of Air runs us a ground upon a
ridiculous course in Nature, or indecent in Miracle; whereas if we betake our
selves to this other way, one only intercourse of Omnipotency will serve the
turn, to force down the motion of these waters by a high Hand, which
otherwise according to Received Nature must have been more then 100 years in
falling.

What if it rained 40 Days and 40 Nights, had it rained 40 years what could
this have done toward such a heap of floods as prevailed above the highest
mountains 15 Cubits upwards? be their perpendicular height taken after the
most moderate estimation.

So that in justice of reason we may conclude, that these Decumani fluctus
could not be raised without a supply from this great Abyss; and unless one
depth had called another.

And the Scripture it self confesses as much, that the fountains of the
Tehom Rabba or this great Deep, or (as the Angel calls them in Esdras) the
Springs above the Firmament, were broken up. Genesis 7. 11. the same Deep upon
the Face whereof the Darkness was. Gen: 1. 2. for the Spirit of God moved
upon the waters.

And at the abatement of these waters when God remembered Noah, the same
Fountains of this Deep are said to have been stopped Gen: 38. 2* which can
admit of no other (but a miraculous) se nse; for we cannot understand it of any
subterraneous Abyss, without an open defiance to the Principles of Nature.

Therefore betwixt the Heavens and the Heaven of Heavens there must be a Tehom
Rabbah, or great Deep, and for this it is that he is said to have laid the
Beams of his Chambers in the waters. Psalm. 104. 3. His upper Chambers it
should be (as the Saxon rightly) and it makes very much for the matter, for it
will follow from this that these Chambers were the Heaven of Heavens. Where the
Lord is upon many (or great) waters. Psalm. 29. 3. And Wisdom saw him set this
compass upon the Face of the Depth. Prove. 8. 27.

And he is said to have watered the Hills from these Chambers Psalm. 104. 13.
Not from the middle Region of the Air, for the Tops of some Hills (whose
heights are his. Psalm. 95. 4.) are lifted up above all the Clouds. But he
watered the Hills from this great Abyss, when at the flood those Cataracts of
Heaven were opened.

Joel. 3. 18.
But let the Hills be taken for such as flow with milk, and drop down with
new Wine, even thus also it may be said, that he waters them from these
Chambers, that is from Above. The Reconcilers on the contrary part are forced
to make use of more unmannerly Constructions.

But let the Chambers be taken as before v. 3. by result at least it was that
from these he watered the Hills whatsoever, and satisfied the Earth with the
fruit of his works v. 13.

I am almost persuaded to think, that until Noah's time The Lord God had not
caused it to rain upon the Earth, but a mist went up and watered the whole
face of the ground. Genesis 2. 5, 6. And a River went forth of Eden to water the
Garden etc. v. 10. But in the 600 year of Noah's life, in the second month
etc. Gen: 7. 11. He caused it to rain upon the Earth. etc. v. 4.

It is no stranger a thing then to find the whole Earth in such a case for
that time as the Land of Egypt has been ever since, or those everlasting
Hills which (the days of Noah set out) were never yet wetted with the dew of
Heaven. If it be otherwise how could he then first set his Bow in the Cloud?
for as Porphyrie said it must have been there before.

I say then, that proportioning the perpendicular height of the Mountains to
the Semidiameter of the Earth, there is nothing to hinder but that this
Abundance of Waters supplied from the Springs above the Firmament might be
sunk into the Cavernes of the Earth, from whence it has been upon occasion
called forth by the heat and influence of the Host of Heaven. And so ever
since as Heat and Cold, Summer and Winter, Day and Night, so the Former and
the Latter Rain has not ceased.

Our Savior may seem to have pointed to those Springs above the Firmament,
where he brings in Father Abraham, saying to the Rich man, And besides all
this betwixt us and you there is a Great Gulf fixed* etc. Luke 16. 26.

Talmud in chagig. C. 2.
All this is intimated in the Name of Heaven, Shammajim, (...) from the Waters
there, as R. Jose in Chagiga. fol. 12. a.

If it sound ill that any corruptible Nature should be lodged above the
Heavens, it will be answered, that the Heavens themselves are in no better
condition whose Matter howsoever trusted by some ill husbands in Philosophy to
an Inamissible Form, yet has been found subject to the like Passions with
that here below, as the well known Tycho has demonstrated in the case of the
New Star.

To doubt the passage of the Blessed through this great Abyss is an effeminacy
of Belief, for not to say that the Children of Israel passed through the Red
Sea upon dry Land; These waters are themselves to pass through that fire unto
which the Heavens and the Earth which are now, are reserved and kept in store,
2 Pet. 3. 7.

The suspension of these waters in a violent situation (if such it be) I no
more marvel at then that the thick Clouds bound up with so many Waters
should hang in the Air unrended under them: less; then at the Stretching of
the North over the empty place, or the hanging of this Earth upon Nothing, Job.
26. 7.

In all this I must acknowledge that there is something of the Paradox (which
yet has been done over by others too Vid Scheineri Ros. Vrsin.
and more elaborately) and so I would be taken for the present, but that is till
I can see how otherwise the Text it self can be likely to come off clear.

CHAP. XXIV.
Deuteronomy. 22. 3. (...)

Lapis errantium.

And with all lost things which he has lost, and thou have found, shall thou
do likewise.


TO this purpose The Great Stone in Jerusalem remembered of by the Gemara in
Baba Metzia, (...) Talmud. in Bab. Metz. fol. 28. b*
i. e. In Jerusalem there was a Stone of the Strayes. He that had lost or found
any thing, was to repair thither. He that had found was to stand there to
produce it. He that had lost, to tell the Signs and Marks. (...) He that had
found any thing that was lost, was to cry it three times, and after seven days
once more, etc. Ibid. See also the Misne Torah, Part 4. Halac. (...) Cap. 23. 3.

But the Benefit of the Provision reaches not unto us, for by the Rules in
Baba Kama (and generally by all their Canonists) A Jew is not only not bound,
but forbidden too to restore any thing that is lost, to a Christian. And yet by
the Jerusalem Talmud, He is bound to restore for the sanctifying of the name of
the Lord, as the Tseror Hamm^r has observed.

CHAP. XXV.
Heb. 12. 24. Sanguis Abel.

And to the blood of sprinckling which speaks better things then that of Abel.


SOme Copies (as the Regia Biblia) read it (...). which speaks better things
then Abel. So Fabricius translated the Syriacke, but unfaithfully. For there it
is, as We, Better things then that of Abel. So the Hebrew, The Arabicke yet
more expressly. Speaking more then, or above the blood of Abel.

(...); But did the blood of Abel speak says Theophylact? Yes. It cried unto
God for vengeance, as that of sprinckling for Propitiation, and Mercy. Which is
Cyrils also, and the most received Interpretation.

And yet Theophylact (as Oecumenius also) is more inclinable to think, that
the voice of this blood is that whereby Abel though he be dead, yet speaks.
That is (says Photius) (...) in the expressions of memory and Celebration, in
that Testimony given him by the God that answers by fire. So Theodotion
rendereth, (...). i. e. And the Lord had respect unto Abel's Offerings, and set
them on fire. By which he obtained witness that he was Righteous. God himself
thus testifying of his Gifts, Heb. 11. 4.

He is therefore called the Righteous Abel. And this blood is called the
Righteous Blood, and reckoned from him, Mat: 23. 35. Luk: 11. 50.

And the Blood of Abel was so Holy and Reverend a thing, in the sense and
Reputation of the old World (they say so) that the men of that time used to
swear by it. The learned Master Seldom has observed as much out of Sahid Aben
Batric. That the Sethians took a Solemn Oath upon the blood of Abel that they
would not go down from their Holy Mountain into the plain of the Cainites.

The same Tradition is to be found in the Arabicke Catena, where also I observe
that they used to say their prayers in the name of this Blood, as in a short
Letany there said to have been conceived by Noah, and daily prayed in the Arc
before the Body of Adam. (...) The Arabicke Copy which ^ go by is written in
Syriacke Leters and there indeed the word is (...) Alzaghar, but mistaken as I
think for that which I have put down.
Cat: Arab: c: 24.

The Prayer of Noah.
O Lord, excellent art thou in thy truth, and there is nothing great in
comparison of thee. Look upon us with the eye of Mercy and Compassion, Deliver
us from this deluge of waters, and set our feet in a larger Room. By the
sorrows of Adam thy first made Man, By the blood of Abel thy holy one, By the
Righteousness of Seth in whom thou art well pleased, Number us not among those
who have transgressed thy Statutes, but take us into thy merciful care: for
thou art our Deliverer, and thine is the praise from all the works of thy
hands for evermore.

And the sons of Noah said, Amen, Lord.

Here I shall need to make you a Note or two as concerning this Prayer. It may
possibly seem strange to you, that this oraison should be so daily said before
the body of Adam.

To take you off from that you must know that it is a most confessed Tradition
among the Eastern men (and Saint Ephrem himself is very principal in the
Authority) that Adam was commanded by God (and left the same in charge to his
posterity) that his dead Body should be kept above ground till a fulness of
time should come to commit it (...) to the middle of the Earth by a Priest of
the most high God.

Saidus Patriarch. Alexand. Arab: Ms. in Archi v: Bibliothec. P. b. Cantabrig.
For Adam prophesied this reason for it, (...) that there should be the
Redeemer of him and all his Posterity.

The Priest who was to officiate at this Funeral they say was Melchisedec. and
that he buried this body at Salem, which might very well be the middle of the
habitable world as then, and that it was indeed so afterward, it has been
told you before.

Therefore (as they say) this body of Adam was embalmed and transmitted from
Father to Son by a Reverend and Religious way of conveighance, till at last
it was delivered up by Lamech into the hands of Noah. who being well advised of
that fashion of the old world, which was to worship God toward a certain
place, and considering with himself that this could not be toward the Right
(which was the East) under the inconstancy and inconvenience of a Ship,
appointed out the middle of the Arc for the place of Prayer, and made it as
Holy as he could by the Reverend presence of Adams Body.

Toward this place therefore the prayer was said, not as terminating any the
least moment of Divine worship in the body (it were a stupid thing to think so)
but (where it ought to be, and where all worshippers do, or should do so) in
God himself and only him, as the very Tradition distinctly clears the case.
(...) Catent Arab. c. 25. fol. 56. b.
(...) that is, And so soon (...) ever the day began to break, Noah stood up
toward the Body of Adam, and before the Lord, he and his Sons, Sem, Ham, and
Japheth, and Noah prayed, etc. and his Sons and the Women answered from
another part of the Arc, Amen Lord.

Where you may note too, (if the Tradition be sound enough) the Antiquity of
that fit custom, (obteining still, especially in the Eastern parts) of the
separation of Sexes, or the sitting of women apart from the men in the Houses
of God. Which sure was a matter of no slight concernment, if it could not be
neglected, no not in the Arc, in so great a straightness and distress of
Congregation.

That this was a practiced use in Primitive Christianity. I think is not much
doubted of.

And to this sense the learned Gothofred (by a strange reach of unusual
sagacity, untieth or entangleth (for I know not which to call it yet) that
intractable passage (as to us) of Saint Paul to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. cap.
11. v. 10. For this cause ought the woman to have power on her head because of
the Angels. So we translate according to the received Greek, which is, (...).

But Gothofred would have us to read it thus, (...) [exuvi^m] (...), or (...).
And then the English must be. For this cause ought the woman to have a veil or
covering upon her head because of the young men.

It is not denied at all but that a veil or covering is to be meant here, and
indeed the vulgar translateth it so.

And for (...) to be written instead of (...), was an easy and obvious escape.

Though I dare not altogether undertake for the Reading, yet I will add this
improvement to it.

In a Manuscript Arabicke Translation in Queens College Library. I find
indeed the place rendered thus, (...) that is, And for this cause it is
commanded that there should be a Sultaan or Dominion upon her head because of
the Angels.

But in the printed Arabicke Translation set forth by Erpenius, it is, (...)
Zadaan, I am confident it should be (...) Radaan, ('it is mistaken but by a
point) And then the English is, For this cause it is commanded that there
should be a veil upon her head; etc.

I would willingly have known how the Aethiopicke, Armenian, and Copticke
Translations deal with the place, but that could not be, for they are not here
to be had for ought I could find out at least.

The other Note I shall need to make you, will concern that passage in the
Prayer, By the sorrows of Adam.

The Eastern Traditioners mean by this the continual sadness and
contristation of heart, which Adam had, and made for the loss of Paradise, and
his First Estate.

Jacob. Sarugens. in Cat. Arab. C. 14.
It is noted of him by James Bishop of Sarug in these words, (...) And Adam
turned his face toward the Garden of Eden, and from his heart lamented (his
fall.)

The same Traditioners give this very reason for Enoch's Translation, (...)
that is, We say that Enoch sat down for the space of three hundred years
bewailing the Transgression of Adam. And for this cause God took him up unto
him. Caten. Arab. C. 20. fol. 47. a.

CHAP. XXVI.
Isa. 66. 14. Your Bones shall flourish like an Herb:


OF the interruption of the Souls Immortality, betwixt the moment of Death (it
must not now be called Departure) is the insidious debate of these eager days.
A fitter and more congeneall time to bring this Monster to the Birth, (though
there is not strength to bring forth) was never yet endeavored to be wrested
out of the hands of Providence, by the greatest deepenesse of Satan.

The familiar that conversed so much with Cardan's (...) told him, That their
Spirits and the Devils dye too. (...) were good to believe this also.

But if the Beasts and we have all one breath, then why do not their Spirits
too return to God that gave them. If Incorruption have put Corruption on, we
may very well eat and drink as we do, for to morrow we dye indeed.

The unlikely Heathen ploughed in more hope then so, In Hieroglyphicall
learning, the Egyptians set down the Axis of a Pyramid for the Soul, and
therefore the Figure of their Sepulchers was Pyramidall. The mystery is
Geometrical, that as by the conversion or turning about of a Pyramid upon his
Axis, the Axis remaining still the same, there is a Mathematical creation of a
new Solid or Cone, so by the Revolution of a certain time of years about the
Soul (the soul continuing still the same in a constant course of immortality)
A new body shall arise and reunite again.

Augustine. Steuch. Eugubin.
Indeed he that will turn over the Books, De p^renni Philosophia, will find
that these Heathens did believe not only this, but the greatest part of our
divinity more then we our selves do.

I am induced to believe that without any further subtility or arrogance of
dispute, there is an invincible argument for the thing secretly imprinted in
the Instinct and Conscience of the Soul it self, because it is every good
man's hope that it shall be so, and every wicked man's fear that it will. And
that at least a parcel judgment may presently be pronounced upon his wandering
Soul.

However the opportunity of this part of Scripture does not so directly call
upon me to any such kind of Controversy. Indeed I would be taken to be so
secure of the Souls Immortality, that I am going about to leave the Body it
self in a very fair Condition of Incorruption. And I see not but that it may
very well suite with the Immoderations of the time to advance up the
Immortality of the Body, when men have so little to do as to raise suspicions
upon that of the Soul.

The Jews commonly express Resurrection by Regermination, or growing up
again like a Plant. So they do in that strange Tradition of theirs, of the
Luz an immortal little Bone in the Bottom of the Spina dorsi; which though
our Anatomists are bound to deride as a kind of Terra incognita in the Lesser
world, yet theirs, (who know the Bones too, but by Tradition) will tell ye that
there it is, and that it was created by God in an unalterable state of
incorruption, that it is of a slippery condition and makes the Body but
believe that it grows up with, or receives any nourishment from that.
Whereas indeed the Luz is every ways immortally disposed, and out of whose
everliving Power fermented by a kind of dew from Heaven all the dry Bones
shall be renuited and knit together, and the whole Generation of mankind
recruite again.

There is a better temper and holding a more lawful correpondency in that Rite
of theirs, which of old they observed, and still do at their Funeral
Celebrations.

It is thus taken notice of by their late Rabbine L^^ Modena, Nel ritorn^ dalla
fossa, ^gn' un^ spianta dell^ herba dalla terra, due o tree volte, e se la getta
dietro, dicendo quell^ parel^ del Salmo, espuntaran^ dalla citta come l' herba
della terra, per s^gno della resurrection^. That is, As they return back from
the Grave, every one of them plucketh up the Grass from the ground twice or
three times, and throws it behind him, saying those words of the Psalm,
(they shall flourish ^ut of the City like the grass of the Earth) in token of
the Resurrection, etc. De gli. riti Hebraici di questi tempi Part. 5. Cap. 7.
number. 4.

In some places they say these very words of the Prophet here; Your Bones, etc.
The Rite is very proper, a^ to show that the dead are not quite plucked up, but
only cut down like a flower, which at the return of time reinforcing from its
root and stock, springs up again.

But if our Bones are to flourish like an Herb, we have a surer word of
experience from the Fact. If a vegetable can be called up out of its ashes,
there is a stronger pretense to our urnes.

The Grounds of Chimicall Philosophy go thus.

That Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury, are the principles into which all things do
resolve. And that the Radical and Original moisture whereby the first
principal of Salt consists* cannot be consumed by Calcination, but the
forcible tinctures and impressions of things, as Color, Taste, Smell, nay and
the very forms themselves are invisibly kept in store in this firm and vital
principle.

To make this good by the Experiment, they take a Rose, Gillyflower, or any
kind of Plant whatsoever. They take this Simple in the Spring time, in its
fullest and most vigorous consistence. They beat the whole Plant in a Mortar,
Roots, Stalks, Flowers, Leaves and all, till it be reduced to a confused
Mass. Then after Maceration, Fermentation, Separation, and other workings of
Art, there is extracted a kind of Ashes or Salt including these Forms and
Tinctures under their Power and Chaos. These Ashes are put up in Glasses,
written upon with the several names of the Herbs or Plants, and sealed
Hermetically, that is, the mouth of the Glass heated in the fire, and then the
Neck wrung about close, which they call the Seal^ of Hermes their Master.

When you would see any of these Vegetables again, they apply a Candle or soft
Fire to the Glass, and you shall presently perceive the Herbs or Plants by
little and little to rise up again out of their Salt or Ashes in their
several proper Forms, springing up as at first (but in a shorter time) they
did in the Field. But remove the Glass from the Fire, and immediately they
return to their own Chaos again.

And though this went for a great secret in the time of Q^ercetan, Curiositez.
innoyes. L. 5. N. 9.
yet Gaffarel says, A present ^e secret ^est plus si rare; c^^ Mounsieur de
Claves un des excellent Chimistes de nostre temps, le fait v^ir tons les jours,
etc. that now it is no such rare matter, for Mounsieur de Claves, one of the
most excellent Chimists of these days, uses to make show of this at any time.

And therefore hear the word of the Lord, o you dry bones; Come from the four
winds o breath, and breath upon these slain that they may live, Ezekiel. 37.

O Earth, Earth, Earth, hear the word of the Lord. Thy dead men shall live,
with my dead body shall they arise; Awake and sing ye that dwell in the dust,
for thy dew is as the dew of herbs, and the Earth shall (...) ^ut the dead.
Esaias. 26. 19.

CHAP. XXVII.
1 Cor. 15. 36. Thou fo^l^ i That which thou sowest is not quickened except it
dye.


THis admirable instance of the Corn is one of those things which Saint Paul
was taught at Gamaliel's feet.

In a discourse concerning the Resurrection, had before Julius Caesar the
Emperor (and at which Rabban Gamaliel was present (...) that is, Cleopatra the
Queen asked R. Meir, and said, We know that they that lie down (the dead)
shall live, because it is written, And they shall spring up out of the City
like the herb of the ground, but when they stand up (from the Dead) shall
they vise up naked, or in their Clothes? Kal vechomer i^ as much to them as
Argument^m a minori* ad majus, or the contrary as to us.
He said unto her, Kal Vechomer from the wheat. What of the wheat which is
buried naked, and yet rises up very well clad, how much more the Just men who
are buried in their Clothes? Caesar said unto Rabban Gamaliel, etc. Talmud in
Sanhedrin, C. 11. fol. 90. b.

It will be worth the knowing to observe here a practice of the Greek Church
not yet out of use, and very properly concerned in this matter of the Corn.

The use is, (...)* etc. to set boiled Corn before the ^i^ge^^ of those Holy
Hymns which use to be said at their Commemorations of the dead o^ those which
are asleep in Christ.

And that which the (...) would have* is ^o s^gnifiethe Resurrection of the
Body.

And that it is indeed a well enough proportioned emblem, The Author which I
quote has endeavored to express with more elegancy then I looked for.

Mathaeus Blastares Hieromonachis. Gr. MS. in Arch. Baroccian. Bib. Bod.
His Title is, (...). that is.

What is the meaning of the boiled Corn at the Commemoration of these that
sleep in Christ, and at the Holy Mysteries of the Saints?

To which, he is not content to make a Man come down, and compare with all the
little moments belonging to an ear of Corn; But he would have you know too,
(...); That death here is manifestly both the Father and the Mother of Life.
The Earth labors not after the ordinary way of a woman in travail. Her infant
Corn is not quickened except it dye, should it live still, it could not be
formed in the womb. And consider with me the miracle of these throws. The
Earth only receives but the bare Corn, and restores it again by corrupting
it, and delivers it up in a much better fashion then it took it in, habited
anew as to all respects of appointment in the parts. And can we receive a more
forcible impression of argument for our own restoration, then from this
example.

The Author says yet more, (...).

And how should all these stalks grow up from one grain of corn, and that as
good as dead? The wonder of this is far above that of the Resurrection of our
bodies, for then the Earth gives up her dead but one for one, but in the case
of the Corn she gives up many living ones for one dead one. O the intolerable
madness of unbeleiving men! They see that the Earth gives up to the
Husbandman that which it received not, and should it be accounted among the
impossible things that the same Earth should surrender up (to the Creator too)
that which she has received in pawn? (...), etc. as the Author goes on.

Here (though the opportunity seems to be very fairly offered) I avoid to
gain any reputation toward the Resurrection of our Bodies from that parcel
Rising of Legs and Arms, etc. which uses to be seen and believed at a place
in Egypt, not far from Gran Cairo, upon Good Friday and the Eve of that.

It Is true indeed (if the thing it self be so) that in this case too our Bones
do flourish like an herb, for those little Resurrections are not seen to
rise, but risen.

And so like Limbs of Immortality they spring up from the Earth, as they did
from that other Deadness of their Mother's womb.

We our selves grow thus up too like the Grass of the Field; we are not seen
but found to do so.

It Is so with these fore, running parts. If you draw near to touch a head or a
leg, you shall perceive no more of this Resurrection for that time, but if
you give back, and leave the Miracle to it self, you shall presently find it
more a man at your return.

Because I mean to make no more use of this wonderful prevention of those
that sleep, then what I first pretended to, I shall be bound to trouble you
the less with any much repetition of the particulars. You may find a
competent store of this matter in Camerarius his Historical Meditations. C.
73. of the first Century. I will add to that this only out of Simon
Goulartius, from the Relation of one Steven Duplais, an eyewitness, and a man
of very good and sober note in his acknowledgement.

Si^. Goulart. Histoires admirabil. T. 1. fol. 32. 34. etc.
Il me disoit d'avantage avoir (comme aussi firent les autres) touch diverse
members de ^es^r^suscitans. Et comme il vouloit se s^isir d' une test chevelue
d'^nfant, un homme du Caire ^'escria tout haut, Kali, Kali, ante materasde,
c'est a dire. Laisse Laisse, tu ne scais que cest de cela. i. e. And he told me
moreover that he had (and that others had done so too) touched diverse of these
rising Members; And as he was once so doing upon the hairy head of a Child, a
Man of Cairo cried out aloud, Kali, Kali, ante materasde, that is to say, Hold,
Hold, you know not what you do.

That which seems to be wanting to the Authority of this strange thing is,
that there should be no ordinary memory (none at all I can meet with yet) of
the matter in any of their own Books. That in the Greek Liturgies out of the
Lesson for the time, I know not how to make reckoning of, as enough to this
purpose. In any other Books of theirs, and some likely ones too, I meet not
with any notice at all. And yet as to that I can retort this answer upon my
self, that a thing of so cheap and common belief amongst them could not
fitly be expected to be written out as a rarety by themselves, and sent forth
into these unbeleiving Corners of the world. Which though it may pass for a
reason why there should not be any such common report of the thing, yet leaves
me scope to think, that there is some special mention of it in the Arabicke
or Copticke Histories, which when it shall be met with, if it be found to
refer up the Wonder to some excellent and important Original, it will the
better defend this matter of Fact, from the opinion of imposture.

Indeed the rising of these arms and legs otherwise is but an ill argument to
be used for the Resurrection of our Bodies, for it is easier to believe this,
then that.

The Arabicke Nubian Geographer tells of a place in Egypt called Ramal
Altsinem, or the Sands of Tsinem, (...) that is, Where there is a great miracle
of the most Glorious God, And it is, that if you take a bone and bury it in
these Sands for the space of seven days, by Gods permission it shall turn
into a very hard stone, etc. Clim. 3. Part. 3.

And what if all our Bones were buried in these Sands? As if God were not able
even out of those Stones to raise up Children unto Abraham.

If the Phoenix of Arabia should prove to be an Vtopian Bird, (as I will not
now suspect after such a size of Apostolical Authority, and so sufficient a
countenance given to that) It will be enough for us that the Swallows know
their time too (as well as the Storke) and after such a manner as if they knew
(or at least would have us to know it) ours too.

These at the beginnings of Winter use to fall down in heaps together into the
dust or water, and there sleep in their Cha^s, till hearing the voice of
returning nature at the Spring, they awake out of this dead sleep, and quicken
up to their own life again.

Georgius Major.
A commentatour upon the Corinthians to this fifteenth Chapter, affirms that
he himself found a company of Swallows lying dead under an old Table in a
Church at Witteberge, which for want of the natural time of the year, were by
an artificial heat recovered unto life again.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Math. 3. 4. And the same John had his Raiment of C^mels hair, and a Leatherne
Girdle about his Loins, and his meat was Locusts and wild Honey.


THe rest is plain enough, but for the Locusts there has been a great deal
of unnecessary Criticisme devised, and as it falls out to make the word in a
worse case then it was beore, (...) is the word, and it can signify nothing
here but Locusts, and the question needs not to be whether these be man's meat
or no, it is certain that the Jews might eat them by the In Dioscorid. Lib.
2. C. 46.
law of Moses, Lev. 11. 22. And Mathiolus upon Dioscorides says that this was
the reason why John Baptist made use of them as a strict observer of the Law.

But that they are eaten in the East and elsewhere, you may see Kerstenius his
Note upon an Arabicke Translation of Saint Mathew's Gospel. And John Leo in
his Description of Africa; But that which is here to the purpose is the note of
Agatharchides in his Tract upon the Red Sea; where he speaks of the
Acridophagi, or eaters of Locusts. He says, (...). That their habit of body is
thin and meaguer, etc.

So Cleonards Note of the Country people of Fez in Africa, will be fit to the
matter. It is in his last Epistle to his Tutour Latomus, toward the latter end.

Nova de Bellis, nihil ad Brabantinos: neque enim stropitum armorum audietis,
alius est Exercitus quem Deus his regionibus immisit; paucis ante diebus Fesae
vidisses Coelum obductum locustarum agminibus, quae hic non solum saltant, sed
avium ritu volitant. Jam coram video minas priorum prophetarum* multis in locis
Nocte una sata perdunt universa, bellum strenue cum ijs gerunt rustici. Nam
plaustra plena Locustis advehunt Fesam, nam hos hosts vulgo hic commedunt, Ego
tamen sum tam delicatus, ut malim perdicem unam quam locustas viginti quod
totam hanc regionem gens locustica devora^^^. i. e. I can tell you Vi^.
Eustath. in Hexaemeron.
news of wars, but not like yours in Brabant; No noise of weapons here, it is
another kind of Army which God has sent into these Coasts. Within these few
days you might have seen the whole Heaven clouded over with Troops of
Locusts, such as do not hoppe about like your Grasshoppers, they fly here like
Birds. Me thought I saw here fulfilled in mine eyes that of the old Prophets.
In many places they will destroy you all the Corn in one night. The Country
people fight very stoutly with these Locusts, they bring them home by whole
Ca^t loades to Fesse, and then ^at these enemies when they have done; but for
my own part I am so tender palated that I had rather have one Partridge then
twenty Locusts; for that these Locusts have devoured this whole Country.

And this indeed was the thing to be spoken too, for as the coursenesse of the
Raiment, so the slenderness of the diet is equally to pretend toward a rigid
and austere condition of life. And as to this sense I shall make you this new
Note out of an Arabicke Commentary upon the Alcoran. The Tradition is, (...)
Com. Arab. MS. in Alcoran. a ^ernero ^itatus.
(...)

That John the Baptist when he was yet a Child, being in company with some of
his fellows, they asked him to play with them, but he said unto them, I was not
created for sport.

CHAP. XXIX.
Jsa. 13. 22. And the wild Beasts of the Islands shall cry in their desolate
houses, and Dragons in their pleasant Palaces, etc.


'TWas spoken of Babylon, and the Prophecy is fulfilled.

A Days journey from hence (says Benjamin Bar Jona in his Itinerary) is
Babel, (...) i. e. This is that Babel which was of old, a City of thirty miles
in breadth. It Is now laid wast. There is yet to be seen the Ruins of a Palace
of Nebuchadnezar, but the Sons of men dare not enter in for fear of Serpents
and Scorpions which possess the place.

Now you may read the rest of the Prophecy.

V. 19. And Babylon the Glory of Kingdoms, the Beauty of the Chaldees
Excellency, shall be as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah.

V. 20. It shall never be inhabited, neither shall it be dwelt in from
generation to generation, neither shall the Arabian pitch his Tent there,
neither shall the Shepherds make their sold there.

V. 21. But wild Beasts of the Desert shall lie there, and their houses shall
be full of doleful Creatures, and Owls shall dwell there, and Satyrs shall
dance there.

CHAP. XXX.
Luke 15. 10. Likewise I say unto you, there is joy in the presence of the
Angels of God over one Sinner that repents.


THese words of our Savior will sound the less strange to you, If I help you
to a counterchange of Eastern Expression.

Would you think that in Heaven it self, whither when we come all tears
shall be wiped from our eyes, there should now be weeping and mourning for the
dead in sin because they are not. It Is a Tradition firmly received by the
Jews, and from them derived to the Mahumetans.

In an Arabicke Manuscript of theirs this answer of God to Moses, is found
(...) O Moses, etc. Even about this Throne Lib. qu^st. Arab. MS. a Gaul. citat.
of mine there stand those, and they are many too (...) that shed tears for the
Sins of Men.

If there be tears and sorrow in Heaven for one that is gone astray, how much
more ought there to be Joy over a sinner that Repents?

And our Savior was not the first that said it.

The words have a reflexe upon that old position in the Hebrew R. Chimbi. in
Isai. 57. 19.
Divinity. (...) i. e. That a Repenting man is of greater esteem in the sight
of God, then one that never sell away.

This is the meaning of that expression, more then ninety and nine just persons
that need no repentance.

Their Elders talk higher yet of this excellent virtue. The Man in Saint
Austin might have returned another answer to him that asked him what God
employed himself about before the world was made. He was making Hell? No such
matter.

The Doctors in the Talmud say, He was creating Repentance, or contriving all
the ways how he might be merciful enough Talmud in Iom^. fol. 86.
to the Man he is so mindful of, and to the s^nne of Man so much regarded by
him.

They say more. That one day spent here in true Repentance, is more worth then
Eternity it self, or all the days of Heaven in the other world.

CHAP. XXXI.
Isay. 57. 15. For thus says the High and Lofty one that inhabiteth Eternity,
whose Name is Holy, I dwell in the High and Holy Place, with him also that is
of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to
revive the heart of the contrite ones.


BUt will God dwell upon the Earth, the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain him.
How much less this House which we have built?

All things are full of God. He is therefore called in the Holy Tongue, (...)
Hammakom, the Place. Or that Fullness which fills All in All. God (as the
great Hermes) is a Circle, the Center whereof is every where, and the
Circumference no where. If I climb up into Heaven thou art there, if I go
down to Hell thou art there also.

Nor is He present only to these real Capacities of Earth and Heaven, but
even also to those Imaginary spaces of incomprehensible receipt and infinitely
extending. He is there where Nothing else is, and Nothing else is there where
He i^ not.

But then are we to think, that we men have his Company but as the Devils
have, to tr^mble at. No: The Cry there is, What have we to do with thee thou
Son of the most High? Not so here, but why art thou so far from me o my
God. P^. 10. 1. The Finger of God is there, as in the Plagues of Egypt. Exodus
8. 19. But his Right Hand is here. Psalm. 20. 6. They have God Almighty, we
All-sufficient. There He is a consuming Fire. He. 12. 29. Here Immanuell, God,
not against but with us.

Therefore it is that though He were here before, yet upon our occasion He is
said to bow the Heavens and come down.

He was seen at Moria. At Peniel Face to Face. Genesis 22. 30. The Patriarch
Abraham invited him to Dinner, and He lay at Lot's House a^ Night. Jacob
wrestled with him at Mahanaim, and got the better, and would not let Him depart
except He blessed him. He past once by Moses in the Clift of the Rock. He met
him often at the door of the Tabernacle. He wandered with his People in the
Wilderness. When the Arc stood still, so did He* When the Arc set forward He
also was spoken to to arise. Rise up Lord, (the Leader said) and let thine
Enemies be scattered. Numb. 10. 35.

To allow for all this we are to take knowledge of some considerations,
according to which it may stand with the divine Immensity to be as differently
present in some places, as alike in All.

We can do no better then rest our selves upon that ancient and well advised
of distinction delivered in the School.

God (says the Master) by his presence, power, and Essence, immutably existeth
in every Nature and Being, indetermin'd by Circumscription or definition; He is
otherwise and more excellently present with Saints and Holy Men, by his Grace
and Holy Spirit. But most of all and most excellently present by Union
Hypostaticall, in the second person in whom the Fullness of the Godhead
dwells bodily, etc. 1 Did. 37.

To these three Molina superaddeth the fourth and fifth difference, the one per
peculiaria signa, giving instance in Jacob's Ladder; the other whereby God is
present, Cum C^nciliis and summ^s Pontificibus.

But these differences are written upon as supernumerary by Nazarius, Gonzales,
etc. The two being indeed but one, and that no other then the second of the
three whereby God is present by his Grace and Holy Spirit.

By presence, power, and essence, the Doctors generally mean; by the first,
an appropinquity of Vision, that all things are open and naked unto his sight;
by the second, an Approximation of power, that He works in, and rules over
All; by the third, an Indistance of his Being to all things whatsoever, of
Actual or possible existence.

Thus God is intimately and indivisibly present with all and with every thing.
Nay thus He is also present with Nothing, (if so we are to call that vast
Receipt without the Universe comprehending infinitely this created Nature of
Things) which needing not to be argued from any actual operation or conserving
causality sufficiently follows the Nature of Immensity.

'Twould imply a Contradiction to say he could be actually present with that
which is not, or with that which shall be, before it is, yet not to say that He
is there where Nothing else is, or shall be but himself, is to say he is not
Infinite. Nor is Gouzales disp. 17. uu. eod. Bonavent in 1. Th. q. ^. a. 2.
Alex. Hal. 1. p. q. 9. Memb. 5. Cap^eol. n. 1. did. 37.
it otherwise answered by those Doctors which pretend to the contrary sentence;
for though they cannot be gotten to say that God is present without, yet they
confess He cannot be comprehended within the Universe, making all up with a
Negative Extra, and Potentiall existence, as to no purpose they may be seen,
in 1. Thom. q. 8. and 1. Sent. did. 37.

Relating to this first Respect of Presence, Power, and Essence, we say that
God equally disposes of himself to all things and men, and that he cannot
thus be more in one place then another.

But the Respect of Grace and Spirit superinduceth a Special influence and
Immediation of blessings, and imprinting the Nature or Being whatsoever with a
much more intimate and more excellent Relation. Thus God is said to be nearer
to this man then to that, more in one place then in another. Thus he is said to
depart from some and come to others, to leave this place and to abide in that,
not by Essential application of himself, (much less by local motion) but by
Impression of Effect.

It may be said of all places, Deus hic est* God is here. But of some, as Jacob
of his Bethel, Vere Deus hic est* Truly God is in this place. Vere, that is,
says Saint Bernard, Certius and Evidentius, by a more evident and more
effectual presence. With just men, says he, God is present, in veritate, In
deed, but with the wicked, dissemblingly, ('it is the Fathers expression) in
dissimulatione.

As he is to all and in all places, he is called in the Holy Tongue, Jehovah,
He that is, or Essence; but as he uses to be in Holy places he is called
Shecinah is taken by some of them (as R. Menahem) for the presence of the
Messiah, by others for the Ruach hakkados, or presence of the Holy Spirit, as
the Chaldee Paraphrast upon Genesis 45. 27. And so the Hebrew School makes even
with ours, for Jehovah signifies the first member of the distinction for
Presence, Power and Essence; Messiah, for the Last or Hypostaticall union, and
the Holy Spirit for the second. Indeed the most general and constant sense of
this word Shecinah to the Jews, means still a more intimate application of
the presence of God to such a Person or Place; then that of his common and
equal Abode. He is said to dwell there (says Maimon) where M^r* Part. 1. C.
25.
be puts the marks or evidences of his Majesty and presence. And he does
this by his Grace and Holy Spirit. Therefore Churches are said to be the Houses
of God, and good Men the Temples of the Holy Ghost.

This is the Reason why Michael the Archangel is called, (...) Princeps
faciorum, or the Prince of the presence, in the Books of Zor^babel; for in
their account he is so near to the King of Heaven, as to be admitted to fit
down by him, and register the good Acts of the Isra^lites.

It Is in his power also to blot them out again as occasion shall be given him.
Talmud. in Chagigah. fol. 1^. (...).

As to the respect of Gods applying himself to a person, they have an old
saying, (...) That the Shecinah will dwell with the meek and Humble Men, but
flies away from the pr^^d and angry. Which seems to me to cast a light upon
those words of Saint James, C. 4* 6. God resists the Proud, but gives grace
unto the Humble.

The Greek is, (...), God sets himself in array against the proud. The words
are quoted out of Prove. 3. 34. The Syriacke translation whereof is deturbabit,
He will cast down, but the Chaldee is, illusores propellet, that is, He will
cast the proud or scornful men far away out of his sight, but gives Grace
to the humble, that is, draws near unto them and dwells there by his Grace
and Holy Spirit.

And thus also you may the better understand the word (...), in the verse
before going, where the spirit that dwells in us is said to lust to envy.

One of the wise sayings of Ben Syra is, (...) etc. Mitte panem tuum super
faciem aquarum, and super aridam, and invenies eum in fine dierum. i. e. "Cast
thy Bread upon the "face of the Waters, and upon the dry Land, and thou shall
"find it in the end of days.

To this the Perush or Exposition faith, (...) etc. Let thy Table always be
prepared for whosoever comes, that thou may be accounted worthy to have the
Shecinah rest upon thee. So that they account God will dwell with such a man as
keeps good hospitality.

They say also, that the Shecinah will not rest upon a sad or sorrowful man,
but upon a wise, a valiant, or a rich man it will. And many like recesses they
have to this purpose, capable enough of a good construction.

As to the other respect of Gods application of himself to a place, The Son of
Halaptha said, Wheresoever 2 or 3 are ^itting Pirke Avoth. C. ^.
together and conferring together about the Law, there the Shecinah will be
with them. It Is the meaning of our Savior, where he promises* Wheresoever two
or three are gathered together, there am I in the midst of them. As if he had
said, The Shecinah shall be there, or there I will be by my dwelling presence
or special exhibition of my self by signs of Blessing and Grace.

In other places he is only said to be, but in Holy places to be wonderful*
Psalm: 68. 35. The face of God is every where alike. Quo fugerem a facie tua,
said the Psalmist? whither can I fly from thy face? He said not quo fugerem,
etc. whither shall I fly from thy Back parts, for these are more visible in one
place then another. It Is there, as every where The Lord. But here the Lord
merciful and gracious siow to anger and abundant in goodness and truth.

Therefore even the most high thus dwells in Temples made with hands, and
though Heaven be his Throne and Earth his Footstole yet we men can build him a
House. A House of prayer (as it is called) unto all Nations. And this is the
place where his Honor dwells. We say it again not more essentially here, but
more graciously, (...) S. Maximus Mystagog. cap: 24.
etc. as the blessed Maximus, by the Grace of his holy Spirit. (...), which
though not seen by us, is yet always resident in the Holy Church.

So the Apostolical form of consecration (as we receive it of the
Metaphrast.) May it please thee merciful God that thy most holy spirit may
inhabit in this House which we have built in thy name etc.

The presence of this Holy spirit applying to the Place consecrate by a secret
and invisible kind of incubation discharges it of all those black
incumbrancies which the Prince of the Air might intrude upon it, and bringing
it under the shadow of the Almighty, exalts it to a Reverentiall state of
holiness and Divinity, which intermixing with that Space and Site of Gronnd,
not by gross adhaerence, but by Energeticall Communion, induces a Nature and
condition, apt to quicken and assure devotion, and disposes the Acts there
done to more Illustrious and infallible effects of blessing and success.

In regard unto this great and glorious presence, I am moved to reflect upon
two principal inconsiderations. The singularity of some, and the irreverence
of almost All. The first is theirs who prefer the Barn before the Church,
as if God would be more at home in their outhouses then in his own dwelling
Mansion. He hears indeed whatsoever prayers, wheresoever made, but his ears
are said to be arrect and intent only to those that are made in this place. I
know that our Father is to be prayed to in secret, but that is that he is not
to be prayed to in the Corners of the streets, that is those ends and corners
of the streets where the Gates are, as the Aethiopicke very well rendereth. For
the Eastern fashion is to have a Gate almost to every street, so that these
Corners of the streets where eminently open and the fittest places that could
be chosen for one to pray in, that did it therefore that he might be seen of
men.

The King Hezikiah was heard upon his bed, but his prayer, what was it,, but
that he might go once more to Church? 2 Chronicles: 20. 5. And even then though in
that extremity, he could not go up into the house of the Lord; yet at least he
turned himself in his Chamber that way, supplying what he could not do by
bodily remotion with holy Ecstasy and transportation of mind.

But the greatest fault is committed by those that come, for as we demean our
selves, 'twere much better for us not to be there, or if we be, that God
himself were away. How unreverently we enter and depart and yet how fearful
is this place, But in the Business it self, how most unseasonable we are and
strangely impertinent? By the Constitutions called Apostolical the Deacons
charge was to over look the people (...) that no man whispered, that no man
laughed, nay that no man so much as n^dded his head, or twinckled his eye. T^
vero (says Saint Ambrose to his Virgin) in ministerio Dei, tusse^, excreatui,
absti^^, he would not suffer her in time of Divine service no not to cough, or
to spit aloud.

Instead of any such severe appointment, we sit like those in Chrysostom,
(...), s^r^gging, yawning, and benumbed with dullness. And would ^t were no
worse then so.

Our whole deportment there is so intollerably notorious and desperately
profane that if Saint Paul's, I^fidell should come in, he would be so far
from falling down and worshipping that he would presently be bound to report,
God is not in you of a truth. 1 Cor: 14. 25.

Some Christians do more Reverence to the outside of a Church, then we to the
presence of God within it.

Those of Habassia if in a journey (though upon the speed) they are to pass by
a Church, no man is so unreverent as to Viaggio fatto nell Ethi^p: c. 26.
sit still upon his horse; ma dismonta fin che pass a pi^d^ la chiessa and el
cimiterio per u^ grand pezz^, but dismounting himself (says Alvarez) he
walks on foot till he has left not the Church only, but the Churchyard
also very far behind him.

Will you take an example from the Turks, while it is called to day, and ere
yet they rise up in judgment against us.

Their Church behavior is after this [another] manner. Called to prayers by
the Illah Illahi, or the voice of him that cries (for they have no Bells) they
first wash themselves* then, putting off their shoes at the threshold of the
M^sque door, sum cum silenti^ discalceati ad instratum pavimentum accedunt,
Emamus sive Antesignanus Orationem incipit. omnes s^quuntur, and dum flecti^
g^nua alii id^m praestant, and ill^ erecto, ^a^^ri s^ ^^igunt and ipsum, vocem
attoll^nte^, vel Maronitae de moribus Oriental: c: 10.
deprim^nt^m, adstantes i^itantur, ubi neminem tussientem, oscitantem,
d^ambulantem ant confabulantem invenia^, sed sum ^il^ntio ^ratio^^ p^r^cta
resumptisque calceis discedunt. i. e. They draw near with great reverence to
the Pavement of the Mosque covered over with Carpets, or Mats, as it may* Then
the Emam or High Priest begins prayers and all the Company follow him, and
when he kneeleth down, they do the like, and when he stands up they do so
too, imitating his voice throughout, either in elevation or depression of the
Tone, And here you must not think to find any one coughing, yawning, walking
or talking, but having performed the service with all possible silence they put
on their shoes and depart.

Nay a Turk, (^ Sic vero stabant in mesquidis suis immobiles, ut in illo solo
de^ixi, aut ibidem succrevisse vide^entur, nulla tussis, nullus screatus, nulla
^ox, nullus circum^cts corporis aut respicientis motus etc. Immo si vel digito
scalpant caput, pe^isse sibi precationis fructum arbitrabantur.

Busbeq: Epist: ^. Johan: Cottovic. Itiner. c. 4.


Turk I tell you) should he but scratch his head in time of Divine service
would be verily persuaded that he should loose ^he benefit of coming to Church
for that time.

But the very Heathens themselves will go before us into the Kingdom of
Heaven. Saxo Gramma^* Hist: Dan: lib: 14. fol: 158. ed t: Bassil: 1534.


Saxo Grammaticus tells us of the Priest of Arcon that he had the house of
his Idol-God in so much Reverence, that he held it not lawful for him not so
much as to fetch breath in that place, quo quoties capessend^ vel emitt^nd^
^pus habebat, toties ad Januam procurr^bat, ne videlicet Dei pr^sentiam
mortalis halitus c^ntagio pollueret, and therefore as often (...) he had occasion
so to do, he was to go to the Church door and do it there, lest happily the
presence of God might receive some pollution from the breath of a man.

When I think of these things I cannot but remember my self of those words of
our Savior quoted out of the Moralities of these lost men (as we reckon the
matter) whatsoever you would that men should do unto you, do you the same unto
the^. But that this should be The Law and the Prophets -- His other words
elsewhere, It shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah at the day of
Judgment etc. put me to (...) great a stands What do you tell me of
Christians? Get to be Heathens first.

I Will tell you what an Arabic Commentatous upon the Turkish Alcoran has said
(...) Commentar. Arab. Mian* Alcoran. a^^rn^ro citat.
i. e. He that desires to escape (H^ll) fire, and go into Paradise, let him
believe in God, and the day of judgment, and d^ (...) every man as h^ would be
done by.

And what would you have these Heathens to be? some of their own Prophets have
said, that God is the Center of all things, especially of all men. And as the
respect is from the universal merit of Christ. I am sure the lines are all
drawn equal, the difference will be only in the application and tendency to
this point. The Christian accounts (and justly too) that he moves thither by a
stronger and more proper inclination, and yet some have entertained so good an
opinion of the Heathens morality and good course of life, that they think
their case to be not much unlike that experiment in the Staticks of two bodies
moveing downwards, which how unequal soever in size and gravity, yet if they
be of the same figure and matter, the heavier will not prevent the lighter in
the falling and concurrence, but they will both meet together in the Center at
one and the same time.

But what have I to do with another man's servant? The worst you can say by
these men, is, that they have not the knowledge of Christ, but we say we know
him, and contradict our selves again, by doing the works of our father the
Devil. They are blind indeed, but our case is worse, for we say we see. And
which do you think is better, not to know Christ, then to have no Cloak for
denying him?

You know who said it, that the Christian Religion had been the cause of all
the distractions in these parts of the World, I am sure it has been the
pretense, and how controlled by private interest, and crooked to engagements of
every ones particular, we may find in all other states as we now feel in our
own.

As we make it, Religion is indeed but a politic engine of State, as useful
for the battery as defense, and as equally tractable to the Ruin as to the
conservation of a Commonwealth, necessary to the turning of affairs here
below, but of no concernment to the other world.

If it be any thing else why does every man profess it to a scope and end of
his own, and never brings in God but by the by? Why do we give the Enemies of
God every day new occasion to blaspeme? Why do we come hither to see our Faces
in this mirror of the word, and straightway forget what manner of men we were?
Briefly why do we live without fear, and die without Wisdom.

There be many other and those horrible accidents of life too, that may
convince us to our heads that we are indeed the (...) the only men almost that
are without God in the world but so foul a Failing in that only thing too,
which can pretend us to be good, even in our own opinions (and in which the
dogs which are to be without (as we think) ever did and still do outgoe us,
cannot but expose us to the scorn and derision of him that dwells in Heaven.

Luk 9. 51.
Our Savior himself when he went up to Jerusalem, (...), i. e. as one makes
bold to construe it, put on a New Face, as to go into the Temple, you may
think what you will of that Temple, but however you are to know that there is
a greater then Solomon here.

How we can lay the ground better for the Heathen, or worse for our selves,
then by neglecting this great point of Devotion, as confidently as we therefore
receive the Sacrament it self unworthily, I will not say I cannot, Let every
man tell himself.

That we dare to do thus before the Angel Eccles. 5. It Is not possible but
such prayers should be turned into sin. Thus. It Is iniquity even the solemn
meeting. But take we heed lest we come to know that God was here by his
departure from hence, and that voice be uttered out of our Temples, which was
once heard out of that of the Jews, (...), Migremus hinc.

CHAP. XXXII.
But by my name Jehovah was I not known unto them.
COncerning the pronunciation of the Tetragrammaton under its proper consonancy
of Letters, when, by whom, and in what cases the word Jehovah may be uttered, A
very sufficient account has been already given by the Learned Buxtorfe,
Drusius, and others.

It may be added, that this thing was not unknown to the very Heathen
themselves, as a Chronographer of Antioch quoteth it out of one of their
Ancient Divines.

(...).

He quoteth Orpheus to say that he heard from the Oracle the Ineffable Name of
God, Hericep^o. And that the interpretation thereof in common speech, is
Counsel, Light, The Giver of Life, etc. Io^^^^s Antiochenus Melala (...).
Libro 3o Chronic.

To think this word to be Greek, besides the Interpretation here given, the
very sound of it is plainly averse. It betrayeth it self enough to be of the
Eastern Notation, and of the Hebrew to choose; And yet to bring it home to any
one or more words in that Language like it self, or especially meeting with
the Interpretation made, I could find no way.

It was obvious to doubt after this rate at the first, but the last resolution
that could be made with any likelihood necessarily determined in some recesse
of the Cabalists.

Amongst their Arithmeticall Traditions they have this number of the Name
Jehovah. (...) K^p^ or Kepeo, which they deduce after this manner.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...) that is, Ten times 10. is 100. five times 5 is 25. behold 125 six times
6. is 36. L^^ 161. Five times 5. is 25. H^^e or Heri behold. Kepeo or 186.
which is a numerall Hamphorash or expression of the Name of God, and the
Oracles meaning of (...).

CHAP. XXXIII.
Math. 22. 16. (...). etc.

And they (the Pharisees) sent unto him their Disciples, with the Herodians, etc.


SErarius in his H^red reckons up (if he sufficiently distinguish) ten
several opinions of these Herodians, and lastly confesses that he knows not
which to fasten upon.

It seemed to Drusius that they were certain Grecians brought up by Herod out
of the Desert into the habitable Land, and there by him instituted a Sect,
therefore called Herodians from their Authors name, and from the place from
which they were brought, Dorsians. For so he renders the Baal Aruch in (...)
Herodes Rex adduxit see^^^ Grac^^ ex desert^, Praterit^^. ad M^^. 22. 16.
C^^^ent. ad v^^. N. Test. p^ster. c. 2^ Buxtorf. in Le^. Talmud.
and educavit ^os in Terra habitata and fec^runt sect^^, v^catique sunt de
Nomine ejus Herodiani, and Dorsiani a Loco unde abducti fuerunt. The Learned
Casaubon, Beza, and others received it upon this trust. But (as the Master in
these things has noted already) The Aruch there cites the Tradition of the
Elders in Cholin cap. Siluach bakken, ^ive Demissie Nidi, Cholin. fol. ^^8. b.
for it treats of that Mosaicall precept, Deuteronomy. 22. 6. Thou shall not take
the Damme with the Young. Concerning which the Mishna there says, (...) etc.
that the Extent of the Law reaches only to birds, and to th^se only (...)
which are not prepared. (...) as Geese and He^nes which n^stle in the Garden,
but if they nestle in the House, as the Herodian Doves, a man is not bound to
let go the Damme.

The Arucht Perush or exposition of the Herodian Doves, is, (...) (...) i. e.
Herod the King brought Doves out of the Desert, and bred them up in the Land
inhabited, and they became a Breed, and they were called Herodians from his
name, and from the place from whence they were brought Dorsians.

So Bartenora and R. Solomon's Gloss, and Ramban says, that they were so
called from Herod, because He was the first that bred up (...) Doves in the
House.

And so the Gemara it self expounds the Mishna, fol. 139. b.

And again these Herodians are reckoned among the Hens* and Geese in Shabba.
fol. 155. b. where the Mishna says, (...) etc. They set not water before the
Bees, or before the Doves of the Dovehouse, but they set it before the Hens and
Geese, and the Herodian Doves. And the Gloss expounds as before. The
Herodian Doves were of a tamer and more domesticke kind then those of the
Dovehouse, and it is likely too that they were of a rarer and more outlandish
breed, especially because Josephus in the description of Herod's Palace amongst
other Moments of Gallantry and Magnificence, Josephus de ^el. Iudai^. l. 6. c.
13.
makes mention of (...), Many Towers stored with tame Doves. This would not
found so big to us, and it is nothing indeed without this understanding that the
thing was very rare in Judaea then, and newly brought in by this Herod, a man
noted to be of a vast and curious mind.

But what the Herodians were we may partly know by the old Scholiast upon
Persius, to these words of the Poet.

-- at cum
Herodis venere dies, unctaque senestra
Dispositae pinguem Nebulam vomuere lucern^
Portantes violas, rubrumque amplexa Catinum
Cauda not at Thynnis, tumet alba fidelia vino,
Labra moves tacitus, recutitaque Sabbata palles.
Sat. 5. 1.

S^boliast. ve^. in Persium.
Herodes apud Iudaeos regnavit temporibus Augusti in Partibus Syriae. Herodiani
ergo diem Natalem Herodis observant ut etiam Sabbata quo die Lucernas accensas
and violis Coronatas in fenestris ponunt.

Herod (says the Scholiast) reigned over the Jews in Syria in the days of
Augustus, The Herodians therefore observed his Birthday (as the Sabbaths also)
setting up in the Windows lighted Candles incircled with Violets.

The reason of this Honor done to Herod was, for that these Jews believed him
to have been the Christ, mistaking the Non deficiet Sceptrum in Jacob's
prophecy, under which Title of heresy, they are accounted by Epiphanius among
the Sects of Iudaisme. But Epiphanius should have referred the Faction to Herod
the Great. Tertullian before him delivered the same Tradition, Lib. de
praescript. ad Har. cap. 46. Victor. Antioche^. etc.

And nothing (says Casaubon) seems to me to have been more probably set
down concerning these Herodians then this, but his Quotation out of Drusius is
to be corrected as before.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Esaias. 9. 6. And his Name shall be called Wonderful.


ANd very well it might be so, not only for the usual observed reasons, but
for something else too which may be noted anew.

I know it is enough to fill up the measure of this great Name, that He was God,
as the Jewel quoted by a Learned Antiquary Fulvius Vrsinus.
expresses Him in the most excellent and short sufficiency. The Gemme
represents the Image of our Savior in his younger days, then when he
increased in Wisdom, Stature, and Favor with God and Men. With this
Inscription, (...). that is, (...), as the Antiquary took it, a Stripling of
Ian. Rutgers. variar. Lect. L. 1. C. 1^.
hopeful note in the Macedo^icke War. But a Critic of good worth who had
the opportunity (and knew how to use it) of seeing a Jewel of the very same
kind in the French Kings Archives, judged with others by a better proportioned
rate of sagacity, that the Inscription ought to be read on this manner, (...).
(...), Jesus Christ God.

But I am not going about to declare his Generation this way, for who can? I
mean to tell you how wonderful The Son of Man was; and what happened unto him
as he was made like unto one of us.

It will be a moment of that sort which ought to do, (if it does not) stir
you up to Wonder.

It was an accident (if it be to be called no more) which fell out at his
Nativity, and such a one (if I take the height of it right) as might very well
be in company and consignifie with that work of God, that strange work, that
Act of his, that strange Act which he brought to pass, when a Virgin was to
conceive and bear a Son, and a Woman to encompasse a Man.

Here I must tell you that I mean to deceive his Expectation who thinks I am
going about to give Judgment upon any of my Saviors Accidents of life from
the Influences of the Stars or Planets.

The Star which guided the Wise men (or as the Saxon has well enough rendered
it, andungal Whitegan, the Astrologers or Astrologicall Prophets) is enough of
it self to forbid any man this impertinency.

To show how little those in the Firmament or lower Heavens should have to do
with his matters, he had a Star of his own, appointed to another Sphere,
and moving by another kind of motion then those in their Course, purposely
created for and by Him, and made to walk in the Air, and keep pace with the
Magi. It must have been in the Air, otherwise it could not have directed the
Wise men to the T^oh^ Brac^e^^ No^ili^ Danus.
place, as the most Noble Tycho has excellently observed.

It was a Star because they were Astrologers that were to be guided by it.
And it was a new one, because none of the old could have done it, for the
verticity of any of those could not have come and stood over the place where
the Young Child was.

This star appearing out of order bid a defiance to all the Persian
Astrology and let the St^rre-g^^^rs know, that there Numb: 24. 17.
was one of Jacob now risen, which was not to be found in their Barb^ricke
Sphere.

Nevertheless, and though I mean to do as I have said, I will take Liberty to
set down here the Figure of our Saviors Nativity, that is with what Face the
Heavens looked upon the earth at that time as to the Horizont of Bethleem.

In the Sphaera Persica (says Aben Ezra out of the (...)) there arises up in
the Face of the sign Virgo a beautiful Maiden, she holds two ears of Corn
in her hand, and a Child in her Arms, she seedeth him and gives him suck,
etc: This Maiden (says Abumazar) we call (...) Adre nedefa, the pure Virgin.
She brings up a Child in a place which is called Abrie (the Hebrew Land) and
the Child's name is called (...) Eisi (Jesus) Introductor. lib. 6. c. 1.

This was enough to make Albertus Magnus believe that our Savior Christ was
borne in Virgo; and therefore Cardinal Alliac erecting our Lord's Nativity by
his description casts this sign into the Horoscope. But that was not the
meaning of Abumazar. His meaning was (says Friar Bacon) quod beata Virgo n^ta
fuit q^ando Sol est in Virgin, and ita habetur signatum in Cal^nd^rio, and
quod nutriet Filiu^ suum in Terra Hebraeorum. That the said Virgin was borne
the Sun being in that sign, as also we have it set down in the Calendar, and
that she was to bring up her son in the Hebrew Land.

But according to the received Tradition of the Church, our Savior was borne
the 25 day of December at midnight in the year of the world 3967. The Circle
of the Sun was ^. and of the Moon 1. etc.

Therefore the Ascendent of his nativity was not Virgo, but Libra, and this was
the Figure of the Heavens.

. 5.

42.

. 5. 22. Lanceator (...) sive Aucturus.

Spica.. 1. 43.. 7. 8. Gemma Coron^.

Conjunctio ^r^tum.

. 28. 29.

27. 41. Lucida. Lyra 28 24.

69. 1. 51. Praesepe (...) s^^e Cor Leoni^ in 1. 5. Stella Nova.

(...) JESU CHRISTI Do mini nostri (...) An. M. 3967. December. die 25.

Nocte media.

Ad Latitud. Horizont.

Bethlehem.

Juxta Calculum Prutenicum.

1. 51. 1. 5^. 5 33. (...). 27. 35 (...) sive Clara Aquil^

27. 41... 28. 24... 12. 8. Pro^^on. (...) sive S^rius

28. 29. Plei^ (...) in. 1. sive Oculus 5. in.. 11. 15.

Con Orb.

Prima Stella Ari^tis. 1. 43.. 27. 44.. 7. 22.

5. 22.

5. 42. 16. 58.



I tell you I do not this as if I thought the Star of Jacob were Subject to
his own Firmament. I abhor to say as Cardan did, that Jupiters being in the
ascendent was the cause of his so soon disputing with the Doctors; or that he
so often traveled from place to place, because the Moon was with Mars in a
Terrestiall sign, or that it should be from Saturnes altitudes, that our
Savior should be so often seen to weep, but never once to laugh, much less,
that Saturn with Venus could make him to have a mole in his Face. He quoteth
Josephus for these two last accidents, but you will not find it there. That
excellent Author gives indeed a very grave and honorable Testimony of Jesus
Christ, in the 4th of the 18th book of his Antiquities, but without any such
mentions as these.

But still I do but hold you in hand.

That which I may lawfully and innocently observe in the Scheme of our Lords
Nativity concerns thus.

First the of Righteousness was very fitly borne in Libra, the sign and
Constellation of Justice. Next to this the Redeemers Horoscope was quite
contrary to that of the World. The Ascendent of the Creation was Aries, for the
World was created in the Spring, as to the position of Judea. I cannot stay to
prove it here, I have done it elsewhere.

But much above all this there fell out at this time a Conjunction (the
greatest that can be) of the 8 and 9 Spheres in the Head of Aries. From whence
it will follow that whereas at the beginning of this world the Asterismes were
all out of their proper places, (it pleased God to have it so) now at the
restitution of the world, they were all found in their own divisions. It is an
appeareance of that kind which nature can show the World but once. The same
Figure of the Heavens never could before, nor never can fall out again, unless
the World should unreasonably last against all Christian expectation, by the
most moderate Account, for if you cast about the slow Revolution of this
period, it will trouble you to call these or almost any other the latter days.

The period according to some is to finish a Circle of 30, if not 40 thousand
years.

This great year began at our Saviors Nativity, but for any man to expect
that it should ever have an end, as to us and this World, cannot be thought of,
but upon grounded Atheism and absurdity.

I have only one thing here to confess, that this figure of our Saviors
Nativity is erected according to the Dionysian rate of account, which uses to
be called Vulgar initium annorum Domini. The vulgar Epoche of the years of
Christ, but demonstrated to be false (as they themselves doubt not) by
Mercator, Christmannus, Joseph Scaliger, Sethus Calvisius, Suslyga the
Polonian, and others, Masters all in Mathematical Chronology; some of them
demonstrate that this Era is false by one year, some by two, others by three,
the Polonian by four, and some others by five. But when I saw that there could
be so many true Accounts, I thought it best to sit down and abide by the old
false one, as well in reverence to the Tradition of the Church, as for the rare
appearances in the Scheme it self, sufficient of their own strength to
evidence, that this was the time both for the year and day, though reason and
Tradition should pretend against it.

And because there be some (and some too that know not why they do it neither)
who continue to call in question the Antiquity and truth of this day, I will
put in a little more weight into their Scale who have very well assured this
matter already both by historical tradition and Mathematical demonstration.

That which I mean to superadde first, is an Apostolical Joseph Egypt Cod.
Concilior: Arab: Ms: in Archivis Roanis Bibliothe^^ Bod.
Canon as I find it in Joseph the Aegyptian's Arabic Code (...) i. e. Also
that you Constitute an Anniversary feast at the Nativity of the Lord Christ in
the day in which he was borne, and that was the 25 of the first Canun, for this
is the principal of all the Feasts. Also that (...). Chrysostom.
you do every year celebrate the Feast of Alchamim or Baptism of our Lord the
Christ upon the day in which he was baptized by John the (...) or Forerunner
and that was the sixth day of the second Canun.

A Persian Ephemeris to the same day of the same Canun sets down (...)
Nativitas Eisi, or the Birth of Pe^sica Epheme, is Ms: Cas cyriac. Tab^lae
Astro^^m.

Arab: Ms. in Arch: Laudin^^ Biblioth. Bod.


Jesus.

So Alkas Cyriacus in a Calendar of the like Nature (...) i e. the Nativity of
Jesus Christ.

The same Author to the sixth day of the latter Canun (January) puts down
(...) i. e. the feast of the Epiphany, or Benediction of the Waters.

The Syriack Church observes alike, and as concerning this Benediction of the
Waters at that time of the Epiphanie you may see what their Mar Michael Chi^dis
(out of That is, Iacobus Or^ohaita as he is quoted by Moses Barcepha the Bishop
of Bethraman in his Commentaries of Paradise, and often times in the Catena
Arabica by the Name of Iacobus Alrohavi which is all one.

The Learned Master Seldom in his Interserenda to E^tychius has a very good
note out of the same Author as concerning Helena, that she was brought up and
taught to read the Scriptures by Barsica Bishop of Rhea in Gezira^, and taken
to wife by Constantius the Emperor with the consent of her Parents, etc. For
Algezira he took it right. It is the same with Mesopotamia, but for Rhea he
says, Vbina^^ haec Rhea ego me nescire fa^e^r. See Ortelius in Edessa, and
Leunclavius his Onomastic. in Roha.

It was a City and Seat of a Bishop in Mesopotamia. And so it is put in by the
Arabic Nubian Geographer at the beginning of the sixth part of the fourth
Clime. Verum Algezira est quod includitur inter Tigrim and Euphratem ejusque
urbes sunt Racca, etc. Roha, Harran, Sarug, etc.


James the Bishop of Vrho^a) has said, as he is quoted by Marsilius de Columna
in his Hydragiologia, p: 506.

Chrysostom imputes a great Miracle to this consecrated Water. He says (the
Patriarch Severus in his Syriack Ritual says as much too) that our Savior
Christ when he was baptized, sanctified the Nature of the Waters.

And for that reason (says Chrysostom) it is a custom of the People at the
Epiphanie to fetch of the Waters and reserve it by them, (...), and look
whatsoever water is drawn that day it will not corrupt in a long time, no not
in a whole year, and sometimes not in two or three, but remain as sweet, and
fresh as at the first drawing.

But as concerning this day of our Lords Nativity Sahid Aben Batric has noted
in his History that he was borne upon the 25 of December, which is observed by
the learned Master Seldom already, and (as I think) out of the life of
Augustus. De Anno Civili veterum Jud. Cap. 8.

But the same Author in the life of Constantin^ says it again, and
endeavors to prove it there, in his discourse of the Celebration of Easter.
The result whereof (as it makes to this matter is (...) i. e. And our Lord and
redeemer Jesus Christ was borne the 29 day of Coihac, and upon the 25 day of
the first Canun.

Saidus Batricides Arab: Ms: in Constantino magno. Liber penes est
Illustrissimu^ Seldenum e^tat etiam in Arc^ivis Bibl: publ: Cantabrig.
And for the Epiphanie or Baptism of Christ he says it was (...) upon the
eleventh day of Tybi, and upon the 6 day of the second Canun. So the Copticke
or Egyptian Calendar. Athanas. Kircker. de Comput. Eccles. Copt. c: 3.

The same Tradition both for the Nativity and Epiphany. You may have too out of
Joannes Antiochenus in the beginning of the 10. book of his Chronography. He
says that Jesus Johan: Ant: Melala Ms. in Arch. Baroccianis.
Christ was borne (...). Upon the 25 of the month December. (...). etc. And
that he was baptized in Jordane a River of Palestine upon the 6 day of January.
etc.

I was willing to note out of them for both the Holy days because some of the
Eastern profession (they are not many to that whole Church) observe the memory
of these matters in a shorter line then we do, thinking, out of Saint Luke that
our Savior was borne and baptized upon one and the same day, which to them is
the 6 of January. The thing I have seen done here by an Armenian Priest of
Haleb (or Aleppo) within the regard and compass of my own conversation.

The Rubric of the Celebration he showed me indeed in his Armenian Calendar,
but the uttermost authority I could gain of him to refer it to, was a
Tradition of Saint James to be found in their books (he told me so) but
unknown to us as yet.

The ancient Runicke* Calendar does not only acknowledge the 25 of December to
be the day of our Saviors Nativity, but for that reason too makes this day the
beginning of the year, and the Night before (which indeed was the time) they
call Modranect or the mother Night (our own Saxons did so too.) And the day it
self is expressed in the Danish wooden Almanacks by an Infant wrapped up in
Swaddling clothes. See Olau^ Wormius de Fast. Danic: lib: 1. c: 12. l: 2. c: 9.

CHAP. XXXV.
Romans 9. 3. For I could wish my self were accursed ((...)) from Christ, for my
brethren, my kinsmen according to the flesh.


WHen a Son of Israel would express the extremity of his brotherly kindness
toward any one of, or toward all the Children of his people, he entitled
himself by a kind of devotion to all the mischance and evil that should
befall his Brother, wishing the whole patience upon his own head.

These Excesses of Compassion used to go under this form, (...) sim ego
expiatio ejus, or that (...) Ecce me in expiationem. Let me be, or behold I am
his Expiation. That Aruch in (...)
is, says the Aruch, (...) Behold I am in his place to bear his iniquities.
So all the people Sanhedrin* C. 2. fol. 18. a.
to the High Priest in Cohen Gadol of the Sanhedrin, (...) Be we thy Expiation,
that is, says the Gloss, (...) Be we in thy stead for whatsoever is to happen
unto thee. Rabbi Samuel said, (...) The Sons of Israel, be I their Expiation,
etc. that is, their Redemption as Rambam. and it is a form of speech says he,
to express, (...) the exceeding greatness of his love.

This will make you the less marvel at that strange ejaculation of Moses,
when for the same people of Isreal's sake, he wished to be blotted out of the
Book of God.

Not without reference to this form of Devotion is the Apostles wish here,
that he might discharge the unhappy condition of his Brethren all upon
himself, (...), for I could wish my self to be an Anathema from Christ:
(...). So Hesychius and Phavorinus, a man accursed, or not to be kept company
with, or as Photius, (...), a man separated. The Arabicke Translation is (...)
that my body were Moharrama, an unlawful thing, or forbidden from Christ. The
word it self as the sense respects to the Haerem, which was the second
degree of Jewish excommunication, whereof the first was Nidui, the third
Shammatha, and wheresoever in the New Testament the Reference is made to the
second degree. Anathema is singly named, as where to the third Maranatha is
added, which is but the Syriacke Interpretation of Shammatha, Dominus venit,
which is therefore called by the Talmudists the Anathema or excommunication of
the God of Israel.

Stephanus in his Book (...), has a Tradition more concerning the word
Maranatha, then to be left out in this place. (...). He tells of a Shepherd
belonging to the Syrian Laodicaea, who being thunder-stricken cried out,
Ramanthas, that is, God from above, for Raman signifies Above, Athas, God. So
Philo.

Phavorinus indeed says that (...) signifies (...), High Things. And it is
true it does so, and in the Syriacke too.

He says also that (...) is the same with (...), the God above. It Is almost so
indeed, and then Ramanthas or Ramas Atha might be the same, as the High God
comes.

But by a smarter guess which some men have made, Ramanthas Hensius in Novum
Testament.
was but a common Country pronunciation of the right Syriacke words, and served
the Shepherds turn instead of Maranatha. So he would have said, Dominus
venit. And so it seems the Imprecation was more familiarly used among the
Syrians then we knew before.

For these three kinds of Anathema see others, but especicially the learned
Buxtorfe in his Lexicon Talmud.

The Condition of a man lying under the censure of Haeraem, is delivered by the
Doctors in Moed Katon. Rabbi Joseph Talmud iu Moed Katon fol. 15. a. ^o^e Dea.
number. 3* 4.. 2.
says. (...) i. e. An excommunicate by Nidui may teach or be taught, hire or
be hired, but the Muchram or excommunicate by Haerem may neither teach nor be
taught, neither hire nor be hired, but he may study alone that he forget not
his learning, and he may make himself a little Cottage for his necessaries.

Maimon says* that he is not permitted to have any manner of conversation with
any man, only he may buy himself victuals. Madda. c. 7. but no man might eat
or drink with him. Shulcan Aruc in Jore dea, Numb. 334.. 5. From whence that
of the Apostle, (...), with such a one no not to eat, 1 Cor. 5. 11.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Act. 11. 26. (...).

And the Disciples were called Christians first in Antioch.


THey were called Nazarites before (the Mahumetans call them so still) from
Jesus of Nazareth, as now Christians from Christ.

And now you may know whence Suidas had it.
Joannes Antiochenus can tell you who gave them that Name. (...). i. e. At the
beginning of the Reign of the same Claudius Caesar, ten years after Jesus
Christ our Lord and God was ascended up into Heaven, Evodus received the
Episcopal Imposition of hands, and was made Patriarch of Antioch the great in
Syria, immediately succeeding to Saint Peter the Apostle. In whose time the
Christians were (first) so called, for this Bishop at a conference held with
them named this name upon them, whereas before that they were called Nazarites
and Galilaeans.

But that which I have most an eye upon here is the word (...), were called
Crhistians? It Is an expression below the moments and circumstance of the
matter. We do not now name the least Child of the company (so far as we can
stretch our Interest) without a full appointment and congregation of witnesses;
and do we think that they baptized the whole profession with so narrow a
regard of Ceremony and Solemnity. The word will approve it self otherwise to
you then so. And the meaning of this, Ioannes Antiochenus can best of all tell
you. When the Provinces submitted themselves to the Imperial Government, the
use was for the Emperor to cause a (...), or public Edict to be drawn up
and proclaimed openly upon the place. The tenor whereof was first, to entitle
himself to all respects of dominion and supremacy over that people, and then
to abate from this by a popular insinuation of all possible sacredness and
liberty of the Subject. This latter indeed was ad faciendum, etc. but these men
were as good as their words.

An instance of this manner of Nuncupation (I know not what to call it else in
English) take here from the Author I promised you of.

(...). Joan. Antioch. Ms. Chronograph. lib. 9.
(...).

When the City of Antioch had yielded it self up into the subjection of the
Roman Empire, an Edict of the Liberties thereof was sent by Julius Caesar, and
openly proclaimed at Antioch upon the twentieth of May. the Tenor of the Edict
was,

At Antioch the Holy, Sacred and free City, the Metropolitan Queen, and
President of the East. Caejus Julius Caesar. etc.

The Provinces used to return the honor of these Privileges back upon the
Emperor by this way of acknowledgement.

To keep the Emperors Grace in perpetual memory, they reckoned all their
public affairs ever after from the time of that. (...). Therefore (says the
same Author) Antioch the Great in honor of the Emperor fixed their Era in
Cajus Julius Caesar, and made this year of Grace the first.

Therefore this Era of theirs was peculiarly called (...), because at the
fixing of this the Emperor did (...), that is, publicly name himself to all
the Title of Dominion, etc. (...), and publicly entitle them to all the
Privileges, Immunities, etc.

From this Antiochian use of the word, and in this very State sense the (...)
in Saint Luke was, and is to be taken.

Saint Luke was a Physician of Antioch. One of our Greek Catalogues makes
mention of D. Luc^ (...) a certain Recipe of Saint Lukes, but I have not seen
it as yet.

But the matter is that He was of Antioch, and having occasion to record unto
Theophilus, the first naming of the Disciples Christians, and that this was
done at Antioch made use of their own word (...), by which he would be
understood that the Imposition of this new name was openly and circumstantially
done, and in as solemn and public manner as it might.

Saint Paul makes use of the same word in the same sense, Romans 7. 3. So then
if while her Husband be living she be married to another man, she shall be
called (the Greek is (...)) she shall be notably called, or notoriously known
to be, an adulteress in common fame and voice.

Here indeed it is taken passively (as no doubt it might) but Saint Luke uses
the word in the first and most original way of acception, for thongh we
translate it were called, as some Arabicke and almost all Translations do,
yet (...) is there to be understood.

And so it is. And the Disciples first styled themselves Christians, etc. You
will perceive as much by this passage of Joannes Antiochenus concerning
Augustus Caesar. (...) (...).

(...), etc. i. e.

And the most Sacred Augustus then began to be the first and only Monarch of
the Empire, and Prelate of the Holy Rites, (Sacrorum Antistes) and he styled
himself ((...)) thus.

Caesar, Octavian, Trophaeall, Augustus, the Mighty Emperor. And he reigned,
etc.

And by this Passage you may correct a pitiful one of the same pretense
(there be many more in that Book that need as much) in the Chronicon
Alexandrinum. There it is, (...), (Lego (...) says the Editioner) (...). Rader
the Editioner perceived what (...) was to be. But for (...) it is to be set
down (...), and the other place is to be read not (...) ((...)) but (...).
Which is the principal thing of note here as to the Active and first acception
of the word.

Otherwise Rader is not so much to be found fault with for the Text as the
Translation sometimes. I confess where he turns the Greek word (...), by
tributa or vectigalia, though it be fearfully false, yet is not so foul an
escape as some others there.

There is a vast difference 'twixt Tributes and Telesmes (for so the word ought
to have been rendered) and yet might be easier mistaken by him (as at that
time) then it can now be done right by some others.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Heb. 3. 12. Take heed lest there be in any of you an Evil heart of unbeleife,
in departing from the Living God.


THe Arabicke is, (...) An obdurate and unbeleiving heart, and which goes
far, or quite away from the Living God.

It Is a fearful thing too to fall out of the hands of God. The Imaginations
of men's hearts are only evil and continually, therefore the Spirit of God does
not always strive with them, if it did, our Spirit would faint under him, and
the Souls which he has made.

If a man do start aside (as we all and often do) like a broken Bow, God puts
us together again and fastens us unto himself as soon, and taking as good
hold as he can.

And these things (says Holy Job) God will do once and twice, that is, often
times for a man.

To day if we will hear his voice. To day, that is, whenever a sinner, etc.
He will turn and repent, his heart will be turned Hos. 11. 8.
within him, and his Repentings rouled together.

And all this that our hearts may not be hardened through the deceitfulness of
sin.

Every man whatsoever has this long day allowed him. And o that thou had
known even in this day of thine* but now it is hid from thine eyes.

This is that hard heart of unbeleife which we are bid here to take heed of;
this loses all our hold, and utterly estrangeth us from the Life of God, and
leaves us altogether without him in the World.

Our other backslidings and variations from him, how wide and distant soever,
yet may be thought to be but like those of the Compass, more or less
according to a less or greater interposition of earthly mindedness, but this
is like to that of the Magnet it self, which while it lies couched in the
mineral and united to the Rock, it conformeth to the Nature and verticity of
the Earth, but separate it from thence and give it free scope to move in the
Air, and it will desperately forsake its former and more public instinct, and
and turn to a quite contrary point. So as long as a man is fastened to the
Rock Christ and keeps but any hold there* he will still be looking less or
more toward the Author and finisher of his Faith; but broken off once from
thence, and beginning to be in the open Air and under the Prince of that, he
presently turns aside from the living God, and points to a Pole of his own.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Mat: 6* 2. For thine is the Kingdom etc.
Glory be to the Father etc.

I Am going about to conclude this small matter of Book with some notice upon
these two Doxologies.

For the first, the question has been made up so high, as to leave us in
doubt whether it be a piece of Scripture or no: Beza confesses it to be
magnificam illam quidem and sanctificam, a most high and holy form of
expression, sed irrepsisse in contextum and quae in vetustissimis aliquor
Codicibus Graecis desit, but to have crept into the Text and to be wanting in
some very ancient Copies.

That it should be wanting in some others is the less wonder, because it is
not to be found in that Vetustissimus Codex given by himself to the University
Library of Cambridge.

It is not a full book of the New Testament, but containing only the four
Gospels and the Acts of the Apostles. The Book is written as well in Latin as
Greek, but both in the same greek Character* And it is that of the great
Capital kind, which in their opinion, who use to judge of these things, is
the uttermost reputation of antiquity which could be pretended to.

In this book the Clause is not to be found (so far as possibly I can
remember) either in the Greek or Latin.

I had occasion once to say as much as this amounts to, before the most
Reverend and Learned the Primate of Armagh, and the Doctor of our Chair the
now worthy Bishop of Worcester, but was forced to yield to so great a presence
with this only answer, that even this Copy too was corrupted by the Heretics.

I knew it might be and deny not but it may in some other part of Genealogy or
the like, but how any Haeresie could possibly serve its turn upon this Clause
(I know that of the Trinity) at least to me the way does not so easily approve
it self.

I confess the Syriacke has it, but I know not what then.

The Arabicke has it too, not only the printed Copy by Erpenius, but a
Manuscript too of very good and gallant note in Queens College Library. Yet
in the Medicean Copy I do not meet with it. And in that which Kirstenius has
noted upon, the Clause indeed is set down, but not running along with the
Text. It Is written above in Red letters, and pointed to by this Note in the
Margin. Non h^c in Aegyptiaco, and sunt in Romano and Syriaco. So that there is
no more to be gained by this, then that the Clause is extant in the Syriacke
and the Roman (that is the Greek here, (...) Alrumi signifies so too) which
is no more then we knew before for the Adversary part, and so much less too,
that it is not to be found in the Copticke or Egyptian form, which also may
be known to be so bythat Specimen in Athanesius Kircherms.

The Mahumedans have another Lords Prayer, called by them the Prayer of Jesus
the son of Mary. But that ends See the learned Master Seldens Commentary
upon Eutychius.
(...) And let not such a one bear rule over ^e that will have no mercy upon
me, for thy mercies sake O thou most merciful.

But this is not material enough. Indeed the Mahumedan forms of prayer are
more for, then against the thing. But it moves not a little that the Clause
should not be extant in the Gospel of the Nazarites, or that secundum Hebraeos
(as it uses to be called) This Gospel was commonly believed in Saint Hieromes
time to be ipsius Matthai Authenticum. Very ancient however it was. And that
the Prayer it But for the meaning of (...). Give us this day. etc. See the
Learned Salmasius about the latter end of his third Book, De Foenore
Trapezitic^.
self was there I am sure, for Saint Hierome upon those words Panem nostrum
quotidianum etc. notes that the Hebrew in this Gospel was (...) mahar, panem
crastini da nobis hodie, who because he takes no notice of this clause does as
good as say it was not there, for if it had, so substantial a variety and
concerning him so much, could not possibly have escaped his Annotation.

The whole engagement of the Latin Church against this Clause though very
strong and preponderating. I let alone. The Greek use of it is more against us
then the Latin leaving of it out. Their Services aequally subjoyne it to other
Oraisons and to this. As to the Prayer that begins (...) etc. Eucholog* fol.
(...) B. To the (...) etc. Euchol. fol: in B. To the (...) etc. Euch: (...) A
To the the (...) A prayer to be said over such a^ had eaten of any unclean
thing to renew in them a capacity for the holy mysteries. Euchol (...) A. To
the (...) A prayer which they said at the foundation of a house. Euch. (...) A.

They subjoyne it also to their Hymns, as to the (...) Typic: fol: (...) B.
Col: 1.

But it is yet more manifest, for secondly we find sometimes the (...) without
the (...) as in the (...). B. Col: 1. In the Eucholog: fol: (...): B: where
also the Rubricke writes over it (...) as under (...) etc: Eod: A. giving us
to understand that they have it in no other condition, then of any other Loud
Respond: as by the (...) I undertake them to mean.

Othertimes again we find the (...) without the (...) as in the Typic: fol:
(...): A: Col: 1. (...): A: Col: 1. (...): A: Col: 1, and 2.

Moreover also whenever we find them immediately, we find them still
distinctly rehearsed, and the (...) is always the peoples; the (...), always
the Priests Repetitition.

(...), etc. (...), etc. Eucholog. fol. 1. B. (...). B. (...). A. (...). A* and
B. Typi^. fol. ^. (...). A. Col. 2. and B. Col. 1. (...). A. and B. Col. 2
(...). A. and B. Col. 1. and 2. and infinitely elsewhere.

And yet for all this (and more then this too, if I had a mind to put it down
here) I will not say as Erasmus did, magis taxanda fuera^ illorum tem^ritas qui
non veriti sunt tam divine precationi suas nug^^ assuere. He doubts not to call
it but a Trifling patch tacked to this Holy form by some rash and unadvised
hand.

Nay I will not say so much (though that be much less) as Kirstenius did, quae
certe a pio quodam fidei imbecillis tanquam nova precatio addita fuit, that it
was added anew by some good meaning man, but not very well knowing what he did.

I would not be moderate against the Scripture where I can possibly avoid it.

Therefore I note here two things which do principally prevail with me for
the Antiquity and Authority of the Clause.

In Lucian's Philopatris, (...)* Let those alone, (says Triephon to Critias)
(...). And say that prayer which begins from the Father, and let the
glorious Hymn conclude it.

Rigaltius notes upon Tertullian, that by the (...), the Pagan meant the Lords
Prayer, if he did, then it may very well be thought that the (...) is to go
for this Doxology. And if that be so, the Testimony is beyond all exception,
for then the Clause was of the Prayer in Trojans time, or (which was not much
under it) the time of Marcus Antoninus Philosophus, and that was less then two
hundred years after the Prayer was made.

And that this should be the meaning of Lucian is the more likely because the
Interlocutours in that Dialogue make it their business to cast a scorn upon
the Christians, and their Profession, for first they fall upon the Holy
Trinity. Deum alte regnantem magnum aethereum, atque aeternum Filium Patris,
Spiritum ex Patre procedentem, unum ex Tribus and ex uno tria, For (...) see
Julius Pollux his Onomasticon.

(...) cannot be rendered as it uses to be, justo naso praeditus, therefore I
have guessed at it by the Characters of the Greeks and Trojans in Ioannes
Antiocheu^s quoted out of Dictys Cretensis. But do you see Isa^ius
Porphyrogenet. in Ianus Rutgersvar. Lect. L. 5.


which how well soever it sounds is but a Jeere there.

And of Saint Paul they say (what think ye?) (...). The bal^-ill-nos'd
Galilaean that was carried up through the Air into the third Heaven, and
taught there very mervailous matters, etc.

Then having spoken their pleasure of the Lords Prayer too, and sufficiently
despised our ways, they lastly address themselves (as such fellows should
do) to the (...), or unknown God at Athens. See the end of the Dialogue.

But I promised you another Reason. you shall have it.

Note that our Lord gathered up his Form of Prayer out of the Traditions of
the Elders. It must not seem strange to you. If you know how to consider of
it, you will perceive that nothing could be more purposely done.

That it was so, will be easily evident from this Recollection out of their
own Euchologues.

Pater noster qui es in Coelis fac nobis gratiam, Nomen tuum Domine Deus noster
sanctificetur, and memoria tua glorificetur in Coelo desuper and super terram
inferne. Seder Tephill. Lusitan. p. 115.

Regnum tuum regnet super nos in seculum, and in aternum. Sepher Hammussar. 49.
1.

Pij priores di^ebant remitte and condona omnibus ijs qui vexant me. Com. in
Pirk. Avoth. fol. 24.

Ne inducas ^os in m^nus tentationi^, sed libera nos ab occursu malo. Seph.
Hammussar. 9. 12. (...)

Quia tuum est regnum and regnabis gloriose in secula seculorum, i. e.

Our Father which art in Heaven be gracious unto us. O Lord our God hallowed be
thy Name, and let the remembrance of thee be glorified in Heaven above, and
upon Earth here below; let thy Kingdom reign over us now and for ever.

The Holy men of old said, Remit and forgive unto all men whatsoever they have
done against me.

And lead us not into Temptation, but deliver us from the evil thing. For
thine is the Kingdom, and thou shall reign in Glory (or power) for ever and
for evermore.

Therefore there is the same reason for the Clause as for the whole Prayer, and
the reason as from hence is very full and following.

You find such a kind of Doxology at the end of Noah's Prayer, and you will
generally meet with some such thing in the Common forms of Eastern Devotion.

CHAP. XXXIX.
Math. 28. 19. Go and teach all Nations and baptize them in the Name of the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.


FOr the Gloria Patri,

It is most commonly believed that this Hymn was composed by the Council of
Nice. The Cardinal Baronius is of opinion that it is more ancient then so; and
that from the Primitive times it was appointed by the Apostles themselves to be
sung by the new converts in Baptism; and Saint Basil seems to him to say as
much; but it is to be presumed that this Hymn was not ancienter then the cause
of it, and that was the Arian blasphemy; though otherwise it is most true that
the Antiquity thereof is to be fetched out of the ancient form of Baptism, so
far the Cardinal was right: I go about to make up what is wanting on his
part.

The Form of Baptism set down by our Lord himself, was, In the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

It was purely observed until such time as that Heresy brake forth which durst
to say of the second person, (...). There was a time when he was not; then it
was added unto by the Church, with sicut erat in principio, As it was in the
beginning, etc.

So the order in the Buchologue.

(...).

Then the Priest holding the N. upright, and turned toward the East, (himself
also turning the same way) says, The Servant of God N. is baptized in the Name
of the Father, Amen, and of the Son, Amen, and of the Holy Ghost Amen, now
and for ever and for evermore, Amen.

Severus Patriarch. Alexandrin. In Ordine Baptismi Syriaco.
The very same was to be acknowledged by the N. in his own person, for so the
Syriacke order (...) Then turning toward the East he says, I such a one do
confess and believe and (...) baptized in thee, and in the Father, and in the
Holy Ghost, now and for ever and for evermore, Amen.

Of a Confession it soon became to be a Hymn, and then it was, (...). We give
Glory to thee, the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, now and for
ever and for evermore, Amen.

And thus it was uttered at the first only by the new Converts and the rest
which happened to be present at the Baptism. The Te Deum is a kind of Creed
expressed in the fashion of a Gloria Patri, etc.
It was afterward annexed to the Antiphones, and after that to all the Psalms
and Hymns; The Te Deum for a special reason excepted.

Gregory the great annexed it to the Versicle* Do^ine ad adjumand^^ nos
fastina, O Lord make have to help^ (...) etc* as in our own Liturgy, where
also we find it in the ^eta^y.

In the Greek Services we meet it very often, and no less then 6 or 7 times
in their Order of Baptism; the Church it seems taking all other but
especially that occasion to inculcate unto her Children the Incomprehensible
and unbeleived Article of the Trinity.

Therefore the first matter of the Gloria Patri were the words of our Savior
In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. And because
at the uttering of these words the Priest and the N: were to stand up and turn
themselves toward the East, therefore also the hymn it self was to be said
or sung the same way. And so we observe it. In the Letany (our own I mean) we
seem a little to transgress, for no man rises up to that Gloria Patri; but
we are to consider that this verse was there inserted, when the Letany was,
what it is now, but called, Procession, a procedendo, and then it was no
exception.

In some places the Gloria Patri etc. only was said toward the East, but the
sicut erat in principio, toward the West. Whether to put a difference betwixt
the divine and the humane part of this Hymn, or for what other reason is of no
necessity to enquire.

It was said or sung toward the East by the Greek use (...) as the
Pentecostarium fol: a. b: Col: 1: The Priest in Saba's Typic^^ says it (...)
before the holy Table. but that also is (...), toward the East, as in the
Liturgy of the holy Mount. Eucholog: fol: 15. B:

And here I must tell you (how much soever you see written to the contrary)
that you will not find any the least mention of Adoration toward the Altar in
the whole stock of Church Antiquity Greek, Latin, Arabicke, or whatsoever:
you will think perhaps I take too much upon me, but you will find it to be
true; and where you think you meet with any such thing, understand it still of
the East, or else you will be out. And for want of knowing this, all the
discourses which have been so lately written to this purpose have very
absolutely miscarried.

(...).

A NOTE OF THE TEXTS of Scripture which are purposely interpreted or any
otherwise referred unto.
Genesis.
Genesis I VII. page 112 Genesis 2. 5, 6. 115 Genesis 2 8. 77 Genesis 4. 8. 71 Genesis IV. XV.
66 Genesis VII. II. 115 and 116 Genesis VII. XII. 28 Genesis 33. 19 51 Genesis XLI. XLV. 62
Genesis 49. 8. 2
Exodus.
Ex. VI. III. 145 Ex. 7. 11. 60 Ex. 15. 10. 61 Ex. XXIII. XIX. and XXXIII.
XXVI. 91 Ex. 32. 32. 157
Leviticus.
Lev. 16. 14, 15. 81 Lev. 19. 19. 96
Numbers.
Numb. 21. 8. 41
Deuteronomy.
Deu. XIV. XXI. 91 Deu. XXII. III. 117 Deu. 22. 9. 96
1 Samuel.
Sam. VI. V. 35 2 Samuel V. VI. VIII. 29 2 Samuel I. XVIII. 1 2 Samuel 18. 33. 22
1 Kings.
1 Kin. 10: 4. 21 1 Kin. 17. 19. p. 22 2 Kings, 4. 8. p. 22 2 Chronicles: 9. 4. p.
21
Job.
Job. 1. 5. 70 Job: 2. 13. 24 Job: XXVI. VI. VII. 54
Psalms.
Psa. 24. 5. 59 Psa: 33. 7. 113 Psa: 68. 18. 86, and 87 Psa: 68. 32, 33. 77
Psa. 68. 35. 139 Psa. 104. 3. 13. 115 Psa. 104. 3. 21 Psa: 148. 4. 115
Proverbs.
Pro: 3. 27. 59 Pro: 8. 27. 115 Pro: 10. 2. 58 Ecclesiastes. 11. 1. 139
Esaiah.
Es. III. XXVI. 24 Es: 5. 16. 87 Es. IX. VI. 149 Es. XIII. XXII. 133 Es: 14.
12, 13. 75 Es: 26. 19. 126 Es: 38. 2. 22 Es: 41. 2. 82 Es: 41. 29. 55 Es: 46.
11. 82 Es: 47. 5. 26 Es: LVII. XV. 135 Es: LXVI. XIV. 123
Jeremiah.
Ier: 10. 13. 113 Ier: 22. 13, and 14. 11, and 13. 11 Ier: 23. 5. 85
Ezekiel.
Ez: 9. 3. 4. 68 Ez: 37. 9. 126 Ez: 44 2. 76 Daniel, 6. 10. 11
Joel.
Joel, 3. 20. 12. 89 Joel, 3. 18. 115 Amos, VI. I. III. IV. 103 Micah, 5. 2. 83
Zechariah, VI. XII. 72 III. VIII.
Malachy, 4. 2. 82 Tobit, 3. 11. 17. 12 Baruch, 4. 36. 82
The Song of the three Children.
37. 45. 113
Matthew.
Mat: III. IV. 131 Mat: VI. I. 58 Mat: 6. 5. 141 Z 3 Mat: Mat: VI. XIII. 164
Mat: XI. XII 27 Mat: 12. 34. 41 Mat: 18. 20. 139 Mat: XXII. XVI. 147 Mat: 23.
35. 118 Mat: 24. 27. 88 Mat: XXVII. XLVI. 5 Mat. 28. 19. 169
Mark.
Mar: XIV. XV. 7 Mar: XV. XXXIII. 5
Luke.
Luke 1. 78. 83. 84. Luke 9. 51. 145. Luke 11. 50. 118. Luke. XIII. XIX. 57.
Luke XV. X. 134. Luke 16. 9. 59. Luke 16. 26. 116.
John
John 19. 25. 25.
Acts.
Act: I. XIII 7. Act: 2. 46. and 3. 1. 9 Act: 7. 43. 53 Act: 9. 10. 17 Act: IX.
XXX. VII. 7 Act: XI. XXVI. 159 Act: 18. 22. 20 Act: XIX. XXIV. 50 Act: XIX.
XXXV. 42. and 45 Act: XX. VIII, IX. 7
Romans.
Rom: 7. 3. 161 Rom: IX. III. 157 Rom: 11. 24. 96 1 Corinthians: 5. 11. 159 1 Cor:
11. 10. 121 1 Cor: XV: XXXVI. 127 2 Timothy: III. VIII. 60 Heb: XII. XXIV. 118 Heb:
III. XI. 163 James. 4. 6, 5. 159 James IV. XIII, XIV. XV. 100 1 John I. V. 108
1 John 3. 12. 67 Revel: 7. 2. 76
FINIS.
To the end of Chap. 8. page 42.
IT will be to the purpose here to add a not much unlike accident of Heathen
story noted by the Scholiast of Aristophanes in (...) to those words of the
Poet.

(...). --

He tells you there that Phallus is, (...). A long pole fitted at the top
with a coriaceum virile pudendum, and that this used to be set up in honor to
Bacchus, etc. It was a kind of Priapus, the Figures whereof I had rather you
should see in the Marbles.

It happened (says the Scholiast) that some of these Images were brought from
Eluthera, a City of Boeotia to Athens. (...). And the Athenians did not so duly
and honorably receive the God, but this rash advice of theirs did not so well
succeed Scholiast. Aristoph. page 272. Edition, Froben. An. 1547.
unto them.

(...). For the angry God struck them with an incurable disease in the Secret
parts, which being given over as impossible to be dealt with by any art or
legerdemaine, they made have to send to the Oracle, and this answer was
returned, that the only way to be rid of the disease was to receive the God
with all reverence. The Athenians persuaded by this made themselves Images of
these things, ((...)) privately and publickely, and with these they did honor
to the God in memory of the Disease.

Page: 121. set down this Quotation in the Margin, Jac: Gothofred. De Imperio
Maris, Cap. 3*

ERRATA.
Page 7. etc. Read (...).

Page 90. In the Arabicke Quotation. Take the last word (...) and put it ne^t
to (...) at the end of the third Line above.

Page 121. Read (...) and (...).

Page 152. In the Figure of the Heavens, in the 3d house, for set. In the 12
House contrariely.

In the 8 and 9 Houses this Character is to be taken for Taurus, and not for
Opposition.

There be many more I know, but the Reader I intend my self too, knows wh^^
belongs to that.


