THE LAST COUNSEL Of a Martyred KING To His SON.

Wherein is contained,

1. The last Precepts of the most Christian King Charles the First, written by
his own hand to his Son Charles the Second King of Great Britain France and
Ireland, etc.

2. His Majesty's heavenly Advice the day before his Death to the Lady
Elizabeth and the Duke of Gloucester.

3. His mil^ and courteous Speech to Hewson the Cobbler and those Janisaries who
spit on his Majesty's Face, as he came from the Black Tribunal, after the sad
sentence of death passd upon him by his Bloody judges.

4. The last Discourse that passed beween his Sacred Majesty, and Doctor Juxon
Bishop of London.

5. The manner of solemnizing His Funeral by the Duke of Lenox, tht Marquess of
Hertford the Marquess of Dorchester, the Earl of Lindsey and four of His
Majesty's faithful servants, to whom his body was delivered after it was
embalmed.

6. A Divine Eligie upon the great Sufferings and Death of his sacred Majesty.

Never Published before.

By J. D. Esquire a Loyal Subject and Servant to His Majesty.

LONDON, Printed for J. Jones and are to be sold at the Royal Exchange in
Cornhill, 1660.

A LETTER WRITTEN By CHARLES the First King of Great Britain, etc. To his Son
the Prince.
Dated November. 26. 1648. SON,
BY what has been said you may see how long we have labored in the search of
Peace. Do not you be discouraged to tread those ways in all those worthy means
to restore your Self to your Right; but prefer the way of Peace: show the
greatness of your mind rather to conquer your enemies by pardoning then by
punishing. If you saw how unmanly and unchristianly this implacable disposition
is in our ill-willers, you would avoid that spirit. Censure us not for having
parted with too much of our own right: the price was great, the Commodity was
security to us, Peace to our People. And we are confident another Parliament
would remember how useful a Kings Power is to a Peoples Liberty. Of how much we
have divested our Self, that we and they might meet again in a due
Parliamentary way, to agree the bounds for Prince and People. And in this give
belief to our experience never to affect more greatness or Prerogative than
what is really and intrinsically for the good of your Subjects (not
satisfaction of Favorites). And if you thus use it, you will never want means
to be a Father to all, and a bountiful Prince to any you will be
extraordinarily gracious unto. You may perceive all men trust their treasure
where it returns them interest: And if Princes, like the Sea, receive and repay
all the fresh streams and rivers trust them with they will not grudge, but
pride themselves to make it up an Ocean. These considerations may make you a
great Prince, as your Father is now a low one; and your state may be so much
the more established, as mine has been shaken. For Subjects have leanrt (we
dare say) that Victories over their Princes are but Triumphs over themselves,
and so will be more unwilling to hearken to changes hereafter. The English
Nation a sober People, however at present under some infatuation. We know not
but this may be the last time We may speak to you or the world publicly; We
are sensible into what hand We are fallen, and yet We bless God, We have those
inward refreshments, that the malice of Our Enemies cannot perturb. We have
learnt to own Our self, by tetiting Our self, and therefore can the better
digest what befalls Us, not doubting but God can restrain our Enemies malice,
and turn their fierceness into his praise. To conclude, if God give you
success, use it humbly and far from revenge: If he restore you to your Right
upon hard conditions, what ever you promise, keep. Those men which have forced
Laws which they were bound to observe, will find their triumps full of
troubles. Do not think any thing in this World worth obtaining by foul and
unjust means. You are the Son of Our love: and as We direct you to what we have
recommended to you, so we assure you, We do not more affectionately pray for
you (to whom We are a natural Parent) then We do, that the ancient glory and
renown of this Nation, be not buried in irreligion and fanatic humor: And
that all our Subjects (to whom we are a Politic Parent) may have such sober
thoughts as to seek their Peace, in the Orthodox Profession of the Christian
Religion, as it was established since the Reformation in this Kingdom, and not
in new Revelations: And that the ancient Laws, with the Interpretation
according to the known practices, may once again be an hedge about them, that
you may in due time govern, and they be governed, as in the fear of the Lord.

C. R.

The Commissioners are gone, the Corn is now in the Ground, We expect the
Harvest, if the Fruit be Peace. I hope the God of Peace will in time reduce all
to Truth and Order again. Which that he may do, is the prayer of

C. R.

A true relation of the Kings Speech to the Lady Elizabeth and the Duke of
Gloucester, the day before His Death.

His Children being come to meet him, He first gave his Blessing to the Lady
Elizabeth, and bad her remember to tell her Brother James, when ever she should
see him, that it was his Fathers last desire that he should no more look upon
Charles as his eldest Brother only, but be obedient unto him as his Sovereign;
and that they should love one another, and forgive their Fathers Enemies. Then
said the King to her, Sweetheart, you will forget this: No (said she) I shall
never forget this: and pouring forth abundance of tears, promised to write the
particulars.

The King taking the Duke of Gloucester upon his Knee, said, Sweetheart, now
they will cut off thy Fathers head (upon which words the child looked very
steadfastly on him) Mark child what I say, They will cut off My Head, and
perhaps make thee a King: But mark what I say, you must not be a King, so long,
as your Brothers, Charles and James, (when they can catch them) and cut off thy
Head too at last: and therefore I charge you do not be made a King by them. At
which the child sighing, said, I will be torn in pieces first; which falling so
unexpectedly from one so young, it made the King rejoice exceedingly.

Having given an Account of His Majesty's Letter and his Advice to the rest of
his children, I shall now give you some passages touching the Kings Trial. viz.

After Sentence, the King being hurried from their Bar, as he passed down the
Stairs, The Common Soldiers (laying a side all Reverence to Soveraignity)
scoffed at him, casting the smoke of their stinking Tobacco in his Face (no
Smell more offensive to him) and flinging their foulpipes at his feet; But one
Hewson a Cobbler more insolent then the rest, defiled his venerable Face with
his spittle, for his Majesty was observed with much patience to wipe it off
with his Handkerchief, and as he passed, hearing them cry out Justice, Justice,
Poor souls (said he) for a piece of money, they would do so for their
Commanders. That Night being Saturday January 27. the King lodged at
White Hall; that Evening a Member of the Army (acquainted the Committee) with
the desires of the King, that seeing they had passed Sentence of Death upon
him, and the time of his Execution might be nigh, that he might see his
Children, and receive the Sacrament, and that Dr. Juxon Bishop of London, might
be admitted to pray with him in his private Chamber; both which were granted,

Tuesday Jan. 30. Was the Fatal day wherein this horrid murder was to be acted;
at which time his Majesty was brought on the Scaffold, where he made a short
speech, but Dr. Juxon upon serious thoughts of the peoples expectation said as
follows. viz.

Dr. Juxon. Will your Majesty (though it may be very well known your affections
to Religion, yet it may be expected that you should) say somewhat for the
worlds satisfaction.


King. I thank you very heartily my Lord, Sirs, My Conscience in Religion I
think is very well known to all the world, and therefore I declare before you
all, That I die a Christian; according to the Profession of the Church of
England, as I found it left me by my Father, and this honest man [Pointing to
Doctor Juxon.] I think will witness it. Then turning to the Officers said,
Sirs, excuse me for this same, I have a good cause, and I have a gracious God,
I will say no more. Then turning to Colonel Hacker, he said, Take care they do
not put me to pain, and Sir, this, and it please you; But a Gentleman coming
near the Ax the King said, take heed of the Ax, pray take heed of the Ax, then
the King speaking to the Executioner said, I shall say but very short prayers,
and when I thrust out my hands -- Then the King called to Doctor Juxon for his
Nightcap, and having put it on, he said to the Executioner, Does my hair
trouble you? who desired him to put it under his cap, which the King did
accordingly by the help of the Executioner and the Bishop: then the King
turning to Dr. Juxon said, I have a good Cause, and a gracious God on my side.


Doctor Juxon. There is but one Stage more, this Stage is turbulent and
troublesome, it is a short one: But you may consider, it will soon carry you a
very great way: it will carry you from earth to heaven; and there you shall
find a great deal of cordial joy and comfort.


King, I go from a corruptible to an incorruptible Crown; where no disturbance
can be, no disturbance in the world.


Doctor Juxon, You are, exchanged from a Temporal to an Eternal Crown, a good
exchange*

The King then said to the executioner, is my hair well? Then the King rook off
his Cloak and* his George, giving his George, to Doctor Juxon, saying, Remember
-- Then the King put off his Doubler, and being in his Wast-coat, put his cloak
on again, then looking upon the block, said to the Executioner, You must set it
fast. Executioner. It is fast, Sir. King. When I put my hands out this way,
stretching them out, then -- After that, having said two or three words (as he
stood) to himself, with hands and eyes lift up; Immediately stooping down, laid
his neck upon the Block: and then the Executioner again putting his hair under
his Cap the King said (thinking he had been going to strike) stay for the sign.
Executioner, Yes, I will and it please) our Majesty. And after a little pause,
the King stretching forth his hands. The Executioner at one blow severed his
head from his body, which was with the Body put in a Coffin covered with black
Velvet, and conveyed to his Lodgings.

After which the body was conveyed to St. Jameses, where it was embalmed, and
put in a Coffin of Lead, it lay there a fortnight, and after was delivered to
the care of 4 of his Maj. servants, viz. Mr. Herbert, Capt. Anth. Mildma^,
Capt. Preston and John Joyne^, who with others in mourning accompanied it to
Windsor, and placed it in that room formerly called his Majesty's Bedchamber.
The body being brought thither the most convenient place they could find for
burial was in a Vault where they conjectured K. Hen. 8. lay, where they interrd
the Kings body, which was conveyed by the Officers of the Garrison, the 4
Corners of the Velvet Pall being held up by the Duke of Lenox, the Mar. of
Hertford, the M. of Dorchester, and the Earl of Lindsey, the Bishop of London
and other persons of quality following, the Velvet Pal was cast in upon the
Body and these words were upon the Coffin,

KING CHARLES 1648.


An Elegy on the Sufferings and Death of King CHARLES I.
COme come, let us mourn, all eyes that see this day
Melt into showers, weep your selves away:
O that each private head, could yield a flood
Of tears whilst Britains Head streams out his blood.
Could we pay what his sacred drops might claim,
The World must needs be drowned once again.
Hands cannot write for trembling, let our eye
Supply the Quill, and shed an Elegy.
Tongues cannot speak; this grief knows no such vent,
Nothing but silence, can be eloquent.
Words are not here significant; in this
Our sighs, our groans bear all the Emphaesis.
Dread Sir! what shall we say? Hyperbole
Is not a figure when it speaks of Thee.
Thy Book is our best Language, what to this
Shall e're be added, is Thy Meiosis:
Thy Name's a Text too hard for us: No men
Can write of it, without Thy P^ts and Pen.
Thy Prisons, Scorns, Reproach and Poverty,
(Though these were thought too courteous injury)
How could Thou bear? Thou Meeker Moses, how?
Was ever Lion bit with Whelps till now
And did not roar? Thou England's David, how
Did Shime^'s Tongue not move Thee? Where Is the Man?
Where is the King? Charles is all Christian.
Thou never wanted'st Subjects, no; when they
Rebel'd, thou made thy passions to obey.
Had Thou regained thy Throne of State by Power,
Thou had not more been then a Conqueror.
But Thou, thine own Soul's Monarch, art above
Revenge and Anger, Can thou tame thy Love?
How could thou bear thy Queen's divorce? Must She
At once thy Wife, and yet thy Widow be?
Where are thy tender Babes once Princely bred,
Thy choycest Jewels, are they Sequestered?
Where are thy Nobles? Lo, instead of these
Base savage Villains, and thine Enemies:
Egyptian Plague! was only Pharaoh's Doom,
To see such Vermin in his lodging-room.
What Guards are set, what Watches do they keep?
They do not think thee safe, though locked in Sleep.
Would they confine thy Dreams within to dwell,
Nor let thy Fancy pass their Sentinel?
Are thy Devotions dangerous? or do
Thy Prayers want a Guard? These faulty too?
Varlets, 'twas only, when they spoke for You.
But lo a Charge is drawn, a Day is set,
The silent Lamb is brought, the Wolves are met.
Law is arraigned of Treason, Peace of War,
And Justice stands a Prisoner at Bar.
This Scene was like the Passion-Tragedie,
His Savior's Person none could Act, but He.
Behold what Scribes are here, what Pharisees!
What bands of Soldiers! What false Witnesses!
Here was a Priest, and that a Chief one; who
Durst strike at God, and his Vicegerant too.
Here Bradshaw, Pilate there: This makes them twain.
Pilate for fear, Bradshaw condemned for Gain.
Wretch! coul'dst not thou be rich, till Charles was dead?
Thou might have took the Crown, yet spared his Head.
Thou'st justified that Roman Judge; Who stood
And washed in Water, thou have dipped in Blood.
And where is the Slaughterhouse? Whitehall must be,
Lately his Palace, now his Calvarie.
Great Charles, is this Thy Dying-place? And where
Thou were our King, art thou our Martyr there?
Thence, thence thy Soul took slight; and there will we
Not cease to Mourn, where thou did cease to Be.
And thus blessed Soul, he is gone: a Star, whose fall
As no Eclipse proves Ecumenical:
That Wretch had skill to sin, whose hand did know
How to behead three Kingdoms at one blow.
England has lost the influence of ^er King,
No wonder that so backward was her Spring.
O dismal Day! but yet how quickly gone?
It must be short, Our Sun went down at Noon.
And now, ye Senators, is this the thing
So often declared; Is this your Glorious King?
Did you by Oaths your God and Country mock,
Pretend a Crown, and yet prepare a Block?
Did you, that swore you would Mount Charles higher yet,
Intend the Scaffold for his Olivet?
Was this, Hail Master? Did you how the knee
That you might murder him with Loyalty?
Alas! two Deaths! what cruelty was this?
The Ax designd, you might have spared the Kiss.
London, did thou thy Princes Life betray?
What? could thy Sables vent no other way?
Or else did thou bemoan his Cross? then ah!
Why would thou be the cursed Golgotha?
Thou once had Men, Plate, Arms, a Treasury
To bind thy King, and have thou none to free?
Dull beast! thou should before thy Head did fall,
Have had at least the Spirits Animal.
Did You, Ye Nobles, envy Charles his Crown?
Jove being fallen, the Puny gods must down,
Your Rays o^ Honor are Eclipst in Night.
The Sun is set, from whence you drew your Light.
Religion Va^ls her self; and Mourns that She
Is forced to own such horrid Villainy.
The Church and State do shake; the building must
Expect to fall, whose Prop is turned to Dust.
But cease from Tears, Charles is of light bereav'n;
And snuft on Earth to shine more bright in Heaven.
FINIS.

