MORBUS EPIDEMIUS Anni 1643.

ENGLANDS New Disease most Contagious at present in Oxford.

With the Signs. Causes. Remedies.

Published by His Majesty's Command.

OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the University.

MORBVS EPIDEMIVS Anni 1643. OR, The New Disease.
THis so frequently termed, The New Disease although as ancient as In Epidem.
Hippocrates, to define it with the times, is a Malignant, and contagious
Fever, being comprised under the Genus of a putrid, continued Fever, which
proceeds from putrefaction of blood, or humors contained in the greater
vessels. So that the disease may be truly called, Febris putrida, continua,
maligna, and contagiosa; that is, a putrid, continued Fever, both malignant
and contagious, which we shall endeavor to prove, first, Negatively by showing
that it is not the Plague, (as the Relations and hopes of our enemies, and the
Fears of others have suggested) which may appear by these Reasons.

First, Hip. 3. E. pid. and Gal. comm. 1. in Lib. de Vict. rat. in Morb. acat.
text 9.
Pectis plerosque ex iis, quos corripit, jugulat, of those that are infected
with the Plague, there always dye, more then escape, but of this Disease,
where one dies, ten at least I may safely say more, recover.

Secondly, Inseparabile signum e non proprium and quod non soli conven it.
Pestis sum contagiosa est: as we may instance in that of the Athenians,
described by the (...).

Thucyd. de Be^lo. Pelo. pon. Lib. 2.


Historian, where the Physicians could no sooner come to their Patients
relief, but they themselves were infected. -- inque ipsos saeva Medentes
erup^t clades. But in this many hundreds have visited their sick Friends
without Infection; Physicians, Chirurgians and Apothecaries, who have been
daily conversant with them, not any way tainted, although some few have fallen
sick, for which it cannot be denied but that is somewhat, although not
extremely, contagious.

Thirdly, those, which they call, Bubones and Carbunculi, are frequent
concomitants of the Plague, neither was it ever known, but that the virulency
of the Plague in some bodies, though not in all, betra'd it self by
Carbuncles. Although I am not ignorant, but that these arise many times where
the Plague is not, yet I am of Lib. 8 de Bebr. cap. 5.
Horatius Augenus his mind, that in the time of Contagion, every Bubo, (unless
proceeding a Lue Venera is Pestilentiall, and so to be accounted. But
wheresoere this Disease has spread it self, I never yet saw any Carbuncle to
arise: yet some of late (I hear) have appeared, but very rare, and I hope,
never to be seen again.

Fourthly, Few, or none spotted, in the Plague, escape, in this sickness, many
although are spotted, very few (in comparison of them that recover) do dye.

Notwithstanding, I cannot aprove of their Opinion; who to avoid one extreme,
run into another, and because it is not the Plague, therefore conceive it not
at all Pestilentiall, nor to contain an Malignity, or Contagion, wherefore I
shall show them in the second place, Positively, that it is Malignant, as we
before defind it, and Contagious.

For if they allow that Morbus benignus is that, which, as Physicians say,
Supra propriam naturam nullum grave Symptoma habet, they must be enforced to
grant, that this is Morbus Malignus, because it has, pejora quam pro suae
essentiae ratione Symptomata, or as L. Pro^het. text. 14.
Galen, (...). And sure none upon due consideration, can deny, but that the
Symptoms of this Disease are more violent, and of far greater danger, then
what ordinarily belong to putrid Fevers; which dangerous Symptoms shall be set
down among these following Signs, which will undoubtedly distinguish,
Malignant Fevers, from others.

The first sign is Magna virium imbecillitas sine manifesta causa, A great
weakness without any manifest cause appearing. which has been, and is still
very apparent in this Disease, in so much that strong men, in a very short
time, have so much lost their vigor, as they have not been able to walk, or
scarce to stand, without the help, and assistance of those about them, although
there has been no sudden evacuation to disenable them, either by Vomiting,
Purging, Sweating, or Bleeding, neither naturally, or by art. Nay, the
Malignitysometimes has so far prevailed over the vital spirits, that there
has been, to the great affrightment of those about them, frequens Syncope, and
Lipothymia, Fainting and Swounding, as often as removed from their beds.

The second sign is, Pulsus frequens, parvus, and admodum debilis, formicans
nonnunquam and intermittens, A quick, weak, creeping Pulse, and sometimes
intermittent. It would be too long and tedious to show the cause of Simple, or
Respective differences in Pulses, it will suffice to know, that the
preservation, and distribution of the natural heat, and vital spirits, is by
the Pulse, the use of which in general is, conservari (...) caloris nativi, or
as Lib. 1. Fen. 2. D octr 3. cap. 1.
Avicen, regere spiritum. Now if the heart, being caloris and spiritus vitalis
fons, domicilium, focus, and officina, and together with the Arteries the
Isntrumental cause, shall be affected by putrid, malign Vapors, empoysoning
the stream, and current of Spirits, from this Fountain, the vital Faculty
must necessarily decay, and the Pulse be found weak, and Languide, and that
with several variations.

It is likewise very observable, that Febris omnis, qua Febris, pulsus facit
magnos, then on the contrary it must needs arise from the Malignity, that does
parvos and debiles reddere pulsus.

A great controversy there is, whither by the Urine also, Malignant Fevers
may not be discerned. My opinion with some others in brief is, they cannot,
because the Maligna and venenata qualitas does insensibly steal, and seize on
the heart, without any violent agitation, or perturbation of Humors, from
which proceeds the alteration of Urines, so that the greatest Argument of a
Malignant Disease is, the Urine to appear good, when there are very bad
symptoms. Both In Comm. 2. Pro^rhet. ad text. 2.
Hipp. and Galen tell us, nullum in Vrina esse signum quod dilirinm portendat,
and delirium is no where so frequent, as in these Diseases. Yet for the most
part, Vrinae tenues, and crudae sunt, containing no sediment, or if they do,
Excremento potius simile est, quam sedimento.

Many other signs there are, taken from the Symptoms, or rather are indeed the
Symptoms themselves, which you may read at large in Theodoro Angelutio a
Belforte: Eustachius Rudius.

Joh. Colle. Octavianus Robertus. Coyttarus. Carolus Gallus.

Th. Minadous, etc.


Authors, I shall, for brevities sake, mention them together. Dolores capitis
intensi, Vertigo, Oculorum caligo, narium stillicidia, Aurium surditas and
tinnitus, Imaginatio laesa, somnus variis and absurdis imaginibus
interpellatus, facies horrida, Cardialgia, Lipothymia, singultUs, Humorum
corruptorum vomitus, vermium excretio, alvi dejecto valde faetida, atra,
livida, virescens; extrema corporis frigida. And near upon all these have I
observed in this City, in particular persons; since the progress of this
Disease.

But what need we any farther signs then the Spots, which appear upon half
the number at least of those that fall sick. Febres Petechiales, Peticulares,
Lenticulares and Purpuratae, were never yet known, or otherwise accounted then
Malignant. except by In Scholiis in Meth. Med. Michaelis Joh. parchialii Lib.
1. cap. 1.
Peredam. whose worthless arguments, I pass by. Nor is it to be doubted, but
the Spotted Fevers were very well known to the Ancients, although no tract,
extant, has been written of them, since Lib. 5. Meth. Med. cap 12.
Galen makes mention of his '(...), and Hippocrites his (...), and (...), like
to the bitings of Gnats and Fleas, the material cause of these Spots, is the
most thin, and subtle part of the morbifique matter, thrust out to the
skin, and although it be the strength of Nature, to send out these Spots, and
therefore by some are accounted Critical; yet they argue abundance of
putrefaction within, and therefore may be accounted Symptomaticall. and
(contrary to the common opinion) the more Spots, the more danger.

Some from the color of these Spots draw Prognostics, and tell you, that
rubrae maculae, red spots arise from a good and well tempered blood, though now
corrupted, and therefore are of all the most safe. Maculae flavae vel virides,
yellowish or greenish Spots from putrid Choler, and therefore are of a worse
condition. Maculae puniceae and nigrae, Black and blew spots from Melancholy,
and adust Humors, and therefore are the worst of all. This for the most part
holds true, yet oftentimes we find them escape, and dye too, with Spots of all
Colors.

Concerning the Causes of this Disease, there are diversities of opinions; and
that of Divines deserves the first place, as being most certain that Diseases
are sent from God, as the punishments of sin, who has been most merciful to
this City, in sparing us heretofore, when our neighbors round about us were
visited, but although with them, we acknowledge, that God may by his absolute
power, and without ordinary, and second causes, send the Plague, or other
Diseases among us, yet usually he does it, according to his ordinary power,
working by the mediation of ordinary, natural Causes, which we shall now
farther enquire after. And first to speak of the generant, then the propagating
Causes, Some attribute the cause of the disease to the Air, which this Summer,
by reason of continued Rain, has proved hot and moist, of which 1. de (...)
cap. 4.
Galen speaks thus. Pestilentes (vel malignos morbos) oriri est necessarium,
cum aeris temperatura, a naturali habitu ad caliditatem, and humiditatem
immoderatam fuerit conversa. of which constitution of the Air 3. Epid. Com 3.
Hippocrates likewise writes at large. Therefore if the weather were seasonable
and very hot, the humiditie, as some suppose, would be spent, and the Disease
cease. As it is reported the Plague does at Aleppo, and other places in the
Turks Dominions. What may happen in that Continent, I know not, but in this
our Island, I conceive there never wants moisture enough, to be answerable to
the greatest heats, either of the Canicular days, or any other, and then the
danger may be, if the season proves hotter or dryer, that this disease may grow
to a higher degree of putrefaction, and malignity, it being too, too often
known, that these Malignant Diseases forerunne the Plague. But I do not
conceive those accidental properties of the Air, Heat, or Cold, to be
necessarily requisite, either to the Generating or Propagating of malignant
Diseases. Since we find them rage in all seasons, many years together, as that
malignant ^o. Caius, Lib de Ephemera Britannica.
Sudor Anglicus, or the sweating sickness, Anno 1486. continued Summer and
Winter, near upon forty years. I am therefore of opinion with Fernelius,
Platerus, and others, that the hot and Moist constitution of the Air, can be
but Causa praeparans, but to make up the adaequate Cause of Malignant Diseases,
there is required that (...) Hippocratis, which is thought to be, Aeris
constitutio occulto modo and tota natura nobis adversa, the Air having its
alteration, and (...) from the occult influences of the Heavens: there may be
such strange malign influences of the stars, at this time, but it is more
then we know, or more then Astrologers have foretold; if the Cause of this
Disease must be found in the Air, I should rather attribute it to those putrid
exhalations, drawn up by the Sun, from stinking matter, Dung, Carcases of
dead Horses, and other Carrion, in and about the City, and were there care
taken for the remooving these noisome inconveniences, and keeping the Streets
sweet, and clean, it would doubtless tend much to the abatement of the
Disease.

A Second Cause is attributed to Diet, and although there be no such scarcity
of Provisions as to force us to feed upon bad meats, yet I cannot altogether
excuse our Drink, being for the most part (by reason of the multitude, and
concourse of people) over-new, and not ripe or fit for drinking. I could wish
the Brewers would somewhat regard our health, as well as their own profit, in
drying their Malt sufficiently, thoroughly boiling their Beer, making clean
their Vessels; whereas the complaint against them is, they make use of
slack-dried Malt, not half boil their Beer, add few, or no hopps, and
tun it up in unwashed Vessels, which causes the Drink to be crude, raw,
and apt to corrupt within us. The Brew-houses all stand upon the Banks of the
River Isis, which of it self is a cold hungry water, the source and springs of
it arising from Cotswold in Glocestershire; where at the spring head, the
extremity of coldness in the water is such, that as it is observed, Beasts
refuse to drink of it; how great care then ought they to take in the boiling,
whereby to alter, and amend this quality of the water.

But we need not look far for a cause, where there is an Army residing, as
the old verse shows, which the Thucy^ Lib. 2.
Athenians called to mind in their Calamity; (...) Or as Iliad. ^
Home speaks of his Greeks. (...) It being seldom, or never known, that an
Army where there is so much filth, and nastinesse in Diet, worse lodging,
unshifted apparel etc. should continue long with contagious Diseases.

The cause of its Propagation and diffusion is, Natura eius contagiosa. That
this Disease is contagious is not to be Malignn. esse, est proprietas alicu^us
^antum ^peciei morbi c^ntagiosi.
doubted, since the Rule holds constantly true, All Malignant Diseases are
Contagious, though all contagious Diseases are not Malignant, the infection,
and Seminum Contagij being that which the Grecian call (...) which are sent
forth, and slow from the party diseased, sometimes per expirationem and haltum,
sometimes perporos, cutis and (...), and after being transmitted, and received
in corpore analogo, do operate, and produce in it the same specificiall
Disease. The Question is how long these semina morbi may lie hid in the body
before they Habet se contagium Fermenti instar, quod in corpore analogo
receptum, simil m dispososiliodem illi inducet. Sen.
Fermentate the Humors, and break forth into action. Cardan and many others
hold they may lurk not only days but some weeks, before the infection betray
it self; as for example, the venomous biting of a mad Dog, does long prece'de
(...) or Fear of drowning; t Lib 1. de 26.
whether the Contagion be taken immediately by contact, or immediately, and at a
distance, and that either per Fomitem or per Aerem, how the (...) or in
quinamenta, do lurk in the body, and whether that body must necessarily be
corpus analogu that must receive them, so that beasts cannot catch the disease
of us, as we do not each the Murrein of beasts, it is not Material here to be
determined. Sufficient it is for our purpose, that it appears to be Contagious
by infecting whole Families, and seldom in any house, where sick Soldiers of
either side are quartered, but the Inhabitants likewise fall sick of the same
Disease; but if any man be yet obstinate, and will not believe it Contagious, I
answer him as Proteus in Lucian did Menelaus, who would not believe he could
turn himself into fire also, (...) Let him go near and try. The Remedies.


It may be thought by most, but lost labor, to attempt the setting down any
Remedies, since it is commonly reported, as Coyttarus writes, was of his Febris
purpurata that the Physicians themselves know not the Disease, nor, the cure of
it. True it is, we do not here proceed altogether in the same order and
method, as in common putrid Fevers, which contain no malignity in them, but as
we find altera indicantia, so we must provide altera remedia, yet we are not
destitute of Rule and Method, to be observed in the cure of these occult
malignant Diseases, but as Lib. 1. cap 1.
Eustachius Rudius well conceives occultis omnibus praeter naturam affectibus,
tacita quidem and occulta medicamentorum proprietate succurendum, non tamen
Empiricorum ritu, sed art and methodo. For as in many other things, so in the
Nature, and Remedy of these diseases, we must with Scaliger have refuge to that
falutare Asylum of occult qualities, who likewise tells you: Exercitat. 218.
Sect. 8.
ad manifestas omnia deducere qualitates summa impudentia est, and they, which
go about to endeavor it rations ineptas, vel ridiculas adferunt, as Lib. 1.
de Not. Fac. cap. 14.
Galen says of Epicurus and Asclepiades. These Morbi maligni are indeed,
Fernelius his Morbi totius substantiae, contra quos, non calidis, frigidis,
humidis and siccis, sed his quae tota substantia agunt pugnamus, That Maligna
(...) contpined in them, is not to be expelled by any other Medicaments, but
(...). It will there fore plainly appearere, that in the cure of this malignant
Fever now raging, all our intentions ought to be directed to these two, the
Malignity, and the Fever, from which of these the greatest danger may arise is
chiefly to be considered. The Fever sometimes requires Vomiting, Purging,
Bleeding; especially in the beginnig, of which we shall speak more hereafter
That which is principally to be regarded, is for the most part, the malignity,
which being timely prevented by some Alexipharmacall Medicine, there will be
little danger of the ensuing Disease. I have known some who presently upon
complant of Chillness, of a king and diznesse in the head, have taken a
Cordial, gone strait way into bed, and swet, and risen next day, without any
distemper: which may very well be, by dicussing, and expelling the (...), and
inqninamentum putredinale, before it have fermented, and assimilated the whole
Mass. And by this means alone was cured that most fatal Disease (...) or
Sudor Anglicus, which raged with such destructive violence, (till constant
sweating for 24. hours, the only certain Remedy was found out) that
neighboring Countries did not believe this Island had so many inhabitants as
died. It is requisite therefore to set down proper and specificiall Medicines,
ad (...), or the expulsion of the Malignity. Theodoro Angelutio a Belforte, who
writ his book, de Febre Maligna after his recovery from the Disease, and
therefore may be the better credited, divides those Medicaments, which preserve
the Heart from malignity, into fix Classes, but more compendiously, they may
be divided into these two, Simplicia, and Composita: of the first sort are
Angeleca Valeriana, Carduus benedictus, Scordium. Acetosa Tormentilla,
Dictamus, Scabiosa, Vincetoxicum, Ruta, Morsus, Diaboli, Veronica, Pimpinella,
Scorzonera, Galendula, Absynthium, Zedoaria, Imperatoria, Gentiana, Baccae
Juniperi, Cornu Cervi, Os de Cord Cervi, Bolus Armenus, Terra Sigillata,
Smaragdus, Hyacinthus. The second sort, or Compounds, are, Theriaca Andromachi,
Mithridatium, Confectio Liberans, Electuarium de Ovo, Diascordium Fracastorii,
Pulvis Saxonicus, Antidotus Guidonis de Cauliaco, Pulvis, Caesaris rubeus, and
Gryseus, Electuarium Camphoratum Kegleri, Gal de Antidot is. v.
and Others. Out of all which upon occasion we may make choice, select Cordialls
for our use and purpose, the poorer sort, and Common Soldiers, when they first
find the Disease coming upon them, may take a draught of Carduus-Possetdrinke,
and with it some Diascordium, Venice or, London Treacle, sweating after it, or
an Electuary may be compounded of them after this manner;

R. Confect. Liberant. vnc. 1. Diascord. Fracast. vnc. sem. Theriac.
Andromachi. Pulv. Saxon. Elect. ex Ovo. an Drach. ij.
Cum Syrup. ex Acetos. Citri. Vel Luiula fiat Electuarium.
Take a Dram of it in a draught of Posset drink, in which Carduus, Angelica,
Scabious, Sorrel, or Marigold Flowers, have been boiled; The Richer sort may
take likewise of the same Electuary, and drink after it three or four ounces
of this Iulep made of distilled waters, which do penetrate more, and sooner
provoke sweat.

R. Aq. Cardui. b. Angelice. Buglosse. an. vnc. iij. Sudorif. Theriacal. an. j
ss.
Syrup. ex Acetos. Citr. vel e Limon. unc. ij. Luiule. unc. 1.
Spirit, Vitrioli gt. 12. Misce.
Some repose great confidence in costly powders, as Bezoar, Contraerua, Gas^ons
Powder, Unicorns Horn, and now a days the Lady Kents Powder (as it is
vulgarly called) is in great esteem. The ingredients of which are not commonly
known, although we may guess at them. It Is generally found by experience, they
say, that this powder is of incomparable virtue, although I have known when it
has not answered our expectation, and that Cordialls fetched from the
Apothecaries shop, have at last proved more effectual. Neither do I think it
good to trust altogether to new inventions, when we have so many Antidotes
approved of by the Ancients, and continued with happy success to these our
times. Praestat been inventis, ac probatis uti, quam nova componere; and I know
not who speaks thus to the purpose. Cum omnia illa Alexipharmaca experientia
potius quam ratione inventa sunt, nemo suam salutem gloriosis nonnullorum
promissis concredat, neque novis medicamentis, sed iis, quae a multis probata
fuere, considat. For if the Bezoar stones (which are thought to give the virtue
to most of those powders) be very rare and scarce among the Indians
themselves, sure the great number we have must needs be couuterfeit, and very
unsafe it were for any man to rely upon them alone, to save his life. What
likewise that rare, treasured up Unicornes horn is, I know not, nor could yet
ever learn, and have no such confidence of its virtue, as to entrust my life
to it.

Nor is it enough, to take Cordial Medicines once or twice, thinking then we
are secure; but all the time of the Disease, as toward night, to drink this
or the like Julep.

R. Aq. Borrag. Acetos. an. unc. j Bezoard. Sem. unc.
Syrup. Luiule. unc. j Diascord. Fracast. Confect. liberant. an. Scrup. j.
Asceti scordii. drach. ij.
Misce.
to drink like likewise one or two ounces, every second, or third hour, of
this following.

R. Aq. Cardui. b. unc. iij. Luiule. Herculis Saxon. frig. an. unc. ij.
Bezoard. unc. 1.
Syrup, Garyoph. Luiule. E Limon. an. drach. ivj.
Confect. liberant. drach. ij. Alkerm. drac. 1.

M. ft Iulapium.
These or the like may be altered upon any occasion, and made fit to be
answerable both to the Disease, and the Symptoms. The shaving of Harts-Horne
are of singular good use in this Disease, both to boil in Posset-Drinke and
broth, or to make a decoction thus.

R. Rasur. Corn. Cerv. unc. Sem. C. C. praep. drach. ij. Aq. Fontaine Lib. ij.
sem.
Coq. ad Tertias, addendo. Kad. Scorzonere, drac. ij. Sem. and Cort. Citri. an.
jss. Santal. Citrin. Sem. drach.
Affunde Aq. Scordii. unc. 5. Ebulliant semel atque iterum. Col. utm add.
Snccie Limon. unc. Sem. Syrup. e Limon. unc. ij. Sp. Vitrol. q. s.
ad gratam aciditatem.

This Drink quenches the Thirst, opens obstructions, and resists both
putrefaction and malignity. Of which or there waters we may likewise make
Cordial emulsions.

R. Sem. Cardui. b. Napi. an. ^ ss. Aquilegie. drach. ^. Melon. excort. unc.
sem.
Simul contuna. in Mortar. Marmoreo, sensim affusis. Aq. Borrag. Cardui. b.
Acetose. Scabiose an. unc. ij.

Pt s. a. Emulsio. cui add. Magist. Perlar. drach. sem. C. C. ust. praep.
Scrup. ij.

M. Dulcoretur Rotul. Manus Christi perlat. q. s.

The Malignity thus provided against, we are in the next place to consider the
Fever, and in this, as in other putrid Fevers, many times we find Nature
endeavoring to expel the Morbifick matter by Vomiting, and that very often
cum aegri (...), and the great ease of the Patient, which course we may safely
fallow, and help Nature in the beginning of the Disease, for which Method in
Practice, we can produce more reason and experience, then authority although we
are not destitute of Gal. comm. in Hipp. Aph. 24 Lib. 1.
That neither, when there is Turgida materia ad superiora vergens. And in that
Malignant Camp-disease, which raged in Hungary, anno 1566. and agrees very much
with this our Morbus Castrensis, Tob. Coberus, writes thus. Obs. Castrens.
Ungarie De^ad. 2. Observat. 5.
In morbo Vngarico ad vomitum, tanquam sacram Anchoram, mox confugiendum esse,
neminem negaturum, qui curationi hujus morbi interfuerit. and draws his
Argument from the copiousnesse of viscous, tough Humors, lodged in the stomach,
and entrails, which Nature was not able to concoct, nor could they be
otherwise discharged, but by this sudden evacuation. By this means usually,
that Saburra vitiosorum humorum in ventaiculo and primis vi^s, is removed, and
the Nausea, Dolor, Aestus, Amaritudo, Anxietas, incident to this Fever, much
lessened, if not quite taken off. Yet I would wish a man well advised, before
he adventure to give strong, Antimoniall Vomits in this disease, gentle and
easy Vomits, as Aqua tepida, Oxymel, Vinum Scyllit. Decoctum Raphani, etc. may
safely be administered.

But all Bodies are not apt, or fit for vomiting, and to such Lenitive
Medicines, moderate purging Physic may be prescribed, as Syrup of Roses,
Manna, Cassta, Tamarinds, and (Turgente Materia) Rheubarb, Agarick, Sena, or
our common purging infusion, consisting of the three latter, and their
correctives, with an addition of some proper Syrups to it. And these minorative
medicines must be taken in the beginning of the Disease, (si turgeat materia)
before the third day be past, otherwise better it is (in reference to that of
Aph. 22 lib 1.
Hippocrates. Concocta movere and purgare oportet, non cruda) to forbear all
these, and make use only of Clysters, or sometimes (if occasion so require)
purging per Epicrasin. With these purgatives likewise Heurnius tells us, he
has admixed Alexipharmaca, d Lib. de Peste cap. 9.
putting Nature to contrary motions, Purging, and Sweating both at once, and
that, with very good success. But from strong violent Purgatives, as
Scammonie, Colocynth, Turbith, etc. we must by all means abstain, it being
known by sad experience, that they have proved fatal to the sick, by overmuch
disturbing, and weakening of Nature, drawing inwards putrid, malign Humors,
after which, too, too often follows, a desperate Diarrhaea, and (...).

In the beginning likewise of this Fever, the opening of a Vein is very
requisite, especially for Plethorick bodies, where the Quantity of the Blood
distending the Vessels is burdensome to Nature, and where Repletion is another
Disease: For if fullness of Blood be of it self dangerous, as Lib. 3^ de Di^ta.
Hippocrates tells us, how great must the danger be, when this fullness shall
be corrupted? Wherefore Lib 11 de Meth. Med.
Galen universally pronounces, Saluberrima est in omni putrida febre sanguinis
missio. Yet some there are, who utterly condemn letting blood, and object the
horrid Symptoms, and great weakness incident to this Fever. But we find in
Pestilentiall Fevers (where the Symptoms and weakness are not loss) Lib. 14.
de Meth. Med. cap. 10.
Galen lets blood, and Rufus (more ancient then Galen) whom Cap 25. lib. 6.
suae Synopseos.
Oribasius commends for so doing. So likewise Lib. 2. c. ^6.
Paulus Aegineia, Cap 94.
Aetius, and with the Grecians consent Avicen, Averroes, the chief among the
Arabian Physicians. Phlebotomy therefore does well before the fourth day be
past, after which time when the Diseasehath diffused it self, and wrought a
Turbulency, and confusion in the Humors, for the Generality it is observed,
not so much to help, as weaken Nature, although by Leeches the Haemorroide
Veins have been opened after that time with good success. And in case the
Physician be not sent for till five or six days be past, Galen advises us (if
there be Ingens morbus and virium robur) after that time to let blood. Lib. de
C^^and ratione per sanguinis ^issionem.
Quoniam quintum saepe diem, aut sextum ab initio expectant, priusquam nos ad
curandum accersant, expediet nihiolo secius sanguinem detrahere, etiamsi hujus
auxilii tempus sit omissum. Where there is Cacochymia, sine Plethora, we must
sparingly diminish the Quantity, and (as far as may be) endeavor to amend
the Quality. And since there is no loss of blood without some loss of Spirits
also, we must not unadvisedly draw blood, but seriously consider, and weigh the
Lib. eo^em
(...), set down by Galen for our direction. The Patients, Age, Strength,
Constitution, Country, Diet, the time, etc. Guided by which we cannot err, nor
shall ever have cause to repent of what we have undertaken. The Question is
when the Spots appear, and that Nature seems to thrust out the Disease,
whether we may let blood, or not? Lib. 3 de Contagione. Cap. 5.
Fracastorius Forbids it. But the Answer in brief is, we may; because the
spots are only putrid evaporations, thrust out to the circumference, the seeds
and matter whereof remain within, in the Center, and are in part drawn away by
letting blood: in the Small Pox or Measels, the case is far different, for
there the Putrid matter it self is thrust out to the skin, which by
bloodletting would be drawn back again. But in Lib 6. Cap. 4.
Febre Petechali, Iohanes Colle, and Ludovicus Mercatus (if you think them
Authentic) say, Semel, bis, ter vel saepius sanguinem detrahere licet,

I know noe reason, why the Common people account it death to sleep after
letting blood, and therefore keep them waking all the day after, or at least
six hours. Lib. 2. Meth. Med.
Fernelius only gives the reason thus, ne languidior calor extinguator, aut
obruantur i^inuti spiritus which after one hours space, I think we need not
fear I I am sure Meth. Med. cap. 4.
Galen when he had drawn blood from his patient usque ad animi deliquium,
within two hours let him sleep, and would not wake him, and in the greatest
Haimorrhages which come of themselves, we let them presently sleep without
danger.

Vesicatories applied to the extreme parts, Arms, and Legs, are of good use,
by drawing and diverting the virulent matter from the head, and Principal
parts. Cantharides are most in use to make them, nor did I ever yet find, which
many fear, that the Bladder suffered any inconvenience from them, they may be
applied safely upon any, but a Critical day.

Concerning Ligatures, and Frictions, of the Legs and Thighs, setting on
Cupping-glasses, scarifying, applying Pigeons to the Feet or opening Veins in
the Feet, if a delirium be instant; to speak particularly of these, and to
answer all doubts and objections, which may be raised, would require a Volume.
There being as Lib. 2. cap. 3.
Thomas Minadous calls them, an Ocean of difficulties, De sanguis missione,
says he, de Phaenigmis, optime deus? quanta habita dissentio est, de
Curbitulis, de malleolorum scarrificatione, de hirudinibus, de ipsis interdum
Frictionibus, De lavacris, etc.

Concerning Diet and the government of the sick, quo ad res non naturalis, some
are of opinion, because those of the Northern Climates are the greatest
feeders, therefore meat and the custom of feeding ought not to be prohibited
in acute Diseases. But reason and experience show the contrary, Victus tenuis
is here by all means to be observed, and the more violent the Symptoms are, the
more sparing and slender the Diet. Nature having enough to do in concocting
the peccant Morbisicke matter, cannot with security be taken off, from that
employment, to concoct meat also, and who ere shall adventure to give meat,
will find, that he does not so much nourish the Man, as the Disease. But for
the most part, their stomachs nauseate and abhor sollid meats, therefore
their chief nourishment consists of broths, altered with the shavings of
Harts-Horne, sufficiently infused in the water, over Embers, then boiled with
these or the like Roots, and herbs, as Succory leaves, and Roots, Persly
roots, sweet Fennel, and Asparagus roots, Sorrel, Borrage, Buglosse leaves
and flowers, etc. Broths in this or the like manner prepared, are as well
Medicaments, as nourishments. Sometimes for exchange they may be permitted,
Watergruell, Pannado, Caudle, Mace-Ale, or the like.

They wrong the sick very much doubtless, who in the extremity of Heat, and
drougth; altogether forbid Drink, suffering the very radical moisture to be
dried, and consumed by the preternaturall heat prevailing, therefore small
Beer, as they may not drink overmuch, so neither must it altogether be
debarred them; but because many times through negligence, it is cru'de and not
well boiled, twere safer to take clear Posset-drinke, with a small quantity of
sugar added, or to make it more effectual, boil shavings of Harts-Horne in
the Posset-Drinke, adding some few drops of the Spirits of Vitrioll withal to
drink sometimes Harts-Horne decoction, and other Iuleps before mentioned,
which quench the thirst, resist putrefaction and mitigate the violent heat of
the Fever. I have heard diverse commend Vlmaria, or Made-sweet, and attribute
so much to it is virtue as the cure of this Disease, being boiled in Broth, or
Posset-drinke. I know no such rare virtue it has, yet I conceive it may
conduce somewhat to those who are troubled with the Diarrhaea, or slux in this
Disease, being of a styptick quality, as also cold, and dry.

There is required a pure Air, void of all noisome, offensive smells, and
Temperate, as not cold, to cause a constipation of the Pores, so not overhot,
to increase the Fever yet the patient must be sufficiently covered with
clothes, to discuss, and breath forth Putrid Fuliginous vapors.

Sleep strengthens the Spirits, increases the natural heat, and concocts
vicious, peccant humors. Therefore if hot vapors, by inflaming the Brain,
attenuate, and disperse the Animal Spirits, and so consequently cause
continual waking, we may warily use Medicines to fix, quiet, and sweetly
compose the same spirits, and so procure sleep. Such are Theriaca recens,
Philonium, Requies Nicholai, etc. and if need require Laudanum Paracelsi.
Diacodion Fracastorij admixt, does the like. Or the temples may be anointed
with Vnguentum Populeon, Oleum Violac. Nympheae, Nucis. Mosch. express. and
some few grains of Opium.

Repose and quietness is very requisite, Motion and exercise dissipates the
natural Heat, which should be employed in concocting the Morbifick matter:
therefore 6. Epid. Com. 3. text. 31.
Hippocrates justly reprehends Herodicus, for that he had killed many, by
advising them, to strive and use exercise in Fevers.

Many inconveniences, and ill symptoms follow from the Excrements overlong
retained, therefore if the body be not otherwise answerable, every other day
make use of a Glyster, or Suppository.

Be Cheerful and Pleasant, as far as the Disease will give leave, avoid all
all sad thoughts, and sudden passions of the Mind, especially Anger, which
adds fire to that Heat, inflames the Blood, and Spirits, and at length, sets
the whole Fabric in Combustion.

The Preservatives.
After the Remedies, I conceive it may prove very beneficial, and worth
labor, to set down in brief some Praeservatives, for avoiding the Disease.
The Common-souldiers or poorer sort, may take a Clove or two of Garlic in the
Morning, which by 1. de distr. Febr. cap. 3.
Galen himself is called Rusticorum Theriaca, and although it be no good food
or nourishment, yet it is a good Medicament. Next they may drink Wormwood Beer
in the morning, which resists putrefaction of humors, and keeps out infection,
or they may eat with Butter some few leaves of Rue, or Sage, and when they
accompany their sick fellow Soldiers, let them smell to Rue or Wormwood. Let
them burn in the houses where they are Quartered, Pitch, Refine, Frankincense,
Juniper wood, or flash a little Gunpowder. The Apothecary will afford the
better sort Ruffus his Pills, which are good, as against the Plague, so all
malignant Diseases, make half a dram into three Pills, and take them in the
morning fasting. They consist of these three things, Aloe, which strengthens
the Stomach, and Intestins, freeing them from vicious ill humors. Myrrh,
resists putrefaction, Saffron, strengthens the Vitalls. Of these three likewise
consists Elixir Proprietatis Paracelsi, only there is Oil of Sulphur added,
which is also very well known, to resist putrefaction. This is doubtless an
excellent Preservative being taken six or seven drops, in some Bezoardick
water, or in a little glass of Sack, or Whitewine. Those which go to the
Sick, may do well to put some Mithridate, or Venice-Treacle into their
Nostrills, to bite Zedoarie, or Angelico, and hold it in their Mouths, or
smell to Balls, or as they usually call them Pomanders, made of Ladanum,
Benzoin, Styrac, Calamit, Lignum Aloes, Rhodium, etc. Let them burn in their
Houses, the wood, and berries of Juniper, Bays, Amber, Myrrh, Benzoin. Other
preservatives I could here likewise put down, but they are for the most part
more Elaborate, Chymicall, and not to be readily procured against this present
occasion. But the best means of preserving us, and those which, (under God) we
chiefly rely upon, are Medicamenta Alexipharmaca, Antidotes, and those that do
(as we said before) tota substantia agere contra Morbos malignos, as Theriaca,
Diascordium, Mithridatium, etc. Those being absolutely the best Preservatives
against the Disease, which are the Remedies of it. Cap. 16.
Galeu himself most excellently in his Book de Theriaca ad Pisonem approves
and advises this course. Sanus frequenter Alexipharmacis utatur, ut exterius
occurrentibus injuriis, and contagio corpus resistat, and si quando passum
aliquid fuerit, ad fanitatem facile reducatur.

Thus for the ease and benefit of others, have I described what things are
necessary and useful against this Epidemicall Disease: and that I might
conceal nothing material, I have descended even to the lowest and meanest
Directions, which some perhaps would have permitted, as slight and trivial,
but I account nothing minute and contemptible, which may conduce to the Life
and Preservation of MAN.

FINIS.

