A GREAT VICTORY OBTAINED BY Prince Charles HIS SHIPS; Upon the North Coast of
England, with the particulars thereof, and the proceedings of the Rear-admirall
with fifty Pieces of Ordnance.

ALSO, A new Rising in Lancashire, and proclaiming of His Highness King of
Great Prittain, and Ireland, at Newark upon Trent, and in the North of England;
and a bloody fight thereupon.

LIKEWISE, The Declaration of the Cornish-men, concerning Prince Charles; and
the King of Denmark's Proclamation against the Parliament of England.

C R
angels bear the royal blazon or coat of arms of Charles I

Imprinted at London, for R. Williamson, 1649.

A RISING IN Lancashire for Charles the second, the proclaiming of him King in
the North of England, and a bloody fight thereupon.
SIR,
THe Royal party begins to declare very high for the declared King of Scots,
against the present Authority of this Nation, and insulteth very much over the
wellaffected party, saying, That Charles shall be King, and woe be unto them
that says against it; and upon Friday last several Gentlemen (extraordinary
well mounted and gallantly armed) of quality came to Manchester, and there
proclaimed Prince Charles (eldest Son to Charles the first) King of England,
Scotland, and Ireland; which done, they departed the town without interruption
or molestation; and from thence went to Wiggin, where they caused the like to
be proclaimed as formerly; and from thence they went to Kendall in Westmerland,
where they met with some opposition at the proclaiming thereof; the manner
thus: A party of the Parliaments Soldiers having received information of their
design, prepared to receive them, and even in the nick of time came in upon
them, disputed the place with several Vollies, and at last the Royal party
seeing themselves overpowred in number, betook themselves to a retreat, and by
the swiftness of their horses made an honorable retreat, and escaped, with
the loss of two men.

One Col. Walton is said to be the Commander in chief of the Royal party, and
leaves no means unassayed for the advancing of his young Masters Cause.

The Parliament of Scotland seem to be exceedingly discontented at the
transaction of affairs in England, and at the present proceedings of their
young King (as they say) and have sent a Message to the queen of Sweden, with a
large Narative of what they did jointly with the Parliament of England, where
they fell off, how they detest their late proceedings, in reference to the
executing of their late Sovereign Lord the King, how their young King is
seduced by evil Council, and from thence has not given their Commissioners
satisfaction necessary for his own and the Kingdoms Weal, desiring her Majesty
to send an Embassy unto him, to persuade him to a Condescension, and speedy
Agreement; but this seems a mystery to many, diverse conceiving it to be one of
Jockies new Riddles.

For it is frequently said, that the Articles of Agreement are already
concluded of, and that they begin to cast this Mist, only to obscure the
eyesight of the English until they have brought to maturity their design in
hand, for the raising of 15000 Horse and Foot to join with the 5000 already in
Arms, which they pretend to be for the safety of that kingdom against foreign
Invasion. Only Genesis Lesley denies the Generalship, the Marq. of Argyle its
conceived will be chosen Commander in chief.

His Excellency General Lesley being desired to deliver up the strong Castle
of Edinburgh, returned answer, That he was resolved to keep it for the
succession of those who had entrusted him, meaning the late King of Great
Britain, Charles the first.

The Parliament are very private in their debates, and (say some) are resolved
to shake the foundation of Heresy.

Lieutenant Colonel Hobson is come to Edinburgh, his business is variously
spoken, some whisper that he desires passage for some to go for Ireland, others
to make way for some farther overture from Parl of England, what ever it is he
is looked upon with a jealous eye.

From the Isle of Man our Intelligence says, That Sir Lewis Dives, and many
other English Gallants, have made great preparations in that Island against the
Parliament of England, and are resolved for Ireland, to assist the Marquess of
Ormond, and strengthen the siege at Dublin; from whence it is said, that the
Parliaments party is reduced to Dublin, Dredah, Dundale, Trim, and
Londonderry, the first and last being besieged; by Ormonds coming up to Dublin
he has got the greatest part of five Counties from Col. Jones, which afforded
him many thousand pounds contribution.

We hear that Genesis Oneal is united with Ormond, and has strengthened his Camp
with 4000 Foot, the E. of Clanrickard and Col. Monro is expected there with
another Brigade, by which means they will be both potent and powerful, the
Army amounting to above 20000 Horse and Foot.

Lancaster 7. July, 1649.
SIR,
THe Marq. of Ormond, and the L. Inchiquin with 14000 Horse and Foot, have
entrenched themselves (in many places) within Musket shot of the Walls, and by
their strong allarums keeps us in continual action: the last night their
Pioneers wrought exceeding hard, and raised an half Moon within musket shot of
the North Port, where was placed about 200 musketeers, and four pieces of
Ordnance; it was contrived very artificially and strong, with a running Trench
from their frontier incampings: this moring we sallyed out upon them, with a
resolution to beat hem off from the said Fort; but finding too much opposiion
retreated to our Redout, which was within Pistol shot hereof; about 4 of the
clock several parties of horse and oot were drawn forth on both sides, who
engaged each other, and after a sharp conflict disputed with great gallantry
the enemy retreated, and having a Reserve ready at hand our men durst not
embrace the pursuit, but returned Victors with 7 prisoners, 9 horses, and left
dead and wounded upon the place about 15 with the loss of 9 men, which the
enemy in the night time set off and buried.

In one of our former Sallies, Capt. Glyn with a party of 30 horse fell upon a
desperate party of the Besiegers, and after a sharp dispute took

prisoners
Lieut. Colonel Dungan. Major Williams. Captain O Brian. Captain Talbot.
Lieutenant Ogleby. Cornet Bembrick. And about 12 Troopers.
killed
Major Dungan, brother to the aforesaid Lieu. Col. Dungan. Captain Willkin son.
Quartermaster Mackart. Corporal Pemerton. And about 7 men.
We are seldom out of action, and our renowned Governor is infinitely tired
out, having not been in his bed these ten nights, and most part of the day is
viewing the enemy, or repairing our Works and Fortifications, and planting
pieces round the Line: the Irish Officers have made choice of a great Episcopal
Bishop to be their chief Engineer, who acts and studies very politikely both
spiritually and temporally.

Our condition being dangerous, causes sadness unto us, eevry day the enemy
being strong, and our men many of them persidious, most dishonorable,
betraying their trust, the Lord Moon with a gallant troop of horse, is gone to
the enemy, who upon a salley forth, pretended to engage against them, but when
he was within pistol shot, faced about, and fell upon a party of our own
horse, a troop of Sir Thomas Armstrongs run away also, and Col. Yeamonds troop
moulter away, and desert us extremely; the enemy has besieged what Garrisons we
have not slighted, Drogedan is in great danger of losing, many others will be
lost, for we cannot fly from this City to help them without better store of
Force for their relief. Col. Trevor has likewise deserted us, and is gone to
the enemy, where he entered into protestation to the Marquess, declaring, That
he would use all the interest (...) possible he could, for the calling away of
his Regiment, and the he was assured of their coming, with many othhrs also,
the enemy continues drawing nearer this place, hindering all Markets, so that
we are brought very low, every thing being extraordinary dear, and the
Inhabitants so taxed for support of the Soldiers, as that they will be undone.
God in mercy look upon us, and help us.

From bleeding Dublin the fourth of July, 1649.
Liecester 9 July, 1649.
Sir, We hear that the Royal party about Newark upon Trent has lately
proclaimed Prince Charles King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, at the
Marker place, and give out very high language against the present Authority of
this Nation, saying, that they will have a King, and that they neither can nor
will lie any longer under the insupportable burden of curelty, tyranny and
oppression; but its hoped care will be taken for the allaying of the distempers
of these troubled spirits, and speedy course taken for the preventing of the
like for the future.

By Letters from the West it is said, that the adverse party in Cornwall, have
lately had a meeting near Truro, where they declared their Resolutions for the
proclaiming of Pr. Charles King, and to use all possible means for his
restoration; but its believed, that if they persist on in this treasonable
design, as the Parliament of England has declared it, they will suddenly
receive a Cornish hug.

We likewise hear, that a Squadron of the Princes ships has fallen on the
Northern Fleet, and that they have taken about 30 ships laden with commodities
for London, and dispiersed the Convoy: this Victory (it is said) fell to Capt.
Plunket (Rear Admiral to the Prince) who has a gallant ship carrying 50
pieces of Ordnance, called The Mirror of Dunkirk, formerly the King of Spain's
Vice Admiral.

The K. of Denmark has caused to be proclaimed through all his Dominions, That
whosoever will take up Arms against the Parliament of England, they shall have
free egresse and regresse into his Harbors, and may freely secure within his
Dominions any prize made upon the English ships, belonging to the Parliament.

FINIS.
Imprimatur,

T. J.


