OLD ENGLISH BLOOD Boiling afresh in LEICESTERSHIRE MEN: Occasioned by the late
barbarous invasion of the SCOTS. As appears by this Letter from my LORD GRAY,
To Major General SKIPPON.

LONDON, Printed by H. for Giles Calvert, at the black spread-Eagle, at the
West end of Paul's. 1648.

OLD ENGLISH BLOOD Boiling a fresh in LEICESTERSHIRE MEN: Occasioned by the
late barbarous Invasion of the Scots.
SIR,
BEcause your ancient and well approved faithfulness speaks it self through
the Kingdom; I have thought good to communicate the state of our affairs in
this County unto you: which is thus.

When we understood that our proclaimed enemies (the Scots) were drawing
toward us, even to fall upon this Nation when it was weak; as he did, on his
Brother (and this Esa is Edom, red and bloody) or as those brethren in
iniquity, did upon the Shechamites, when they were sore. We thought all lay at
stake, and the God of our mercies awakened us here, to see what might be done
for our safety; we tried what volunteers would appear, which were not a few,
that tendered themselves and their own horses, and those that wanted we horsed
upon those that were dissenters; insomuch that (by the blessing of God) we
have mounted a considerable number for so inconsiderable a County, and shall be
able to march with a good strength very suddenly: and this course we have and
do propound with all earnestnes to all our neighboring Counties; not waiting
upon the customary way of pay and quarter, which would retard us, and such a
work as this.

We had our men so willing to go forth as if they should find theit wages in
their work; yea, though in the highest of their harvest, and this unseasonable
weather; At our meeting a March being propounded, they cried, ONE AND ALL.

Sir, We are pressed forwards hereunto by the violent call of necessities
surrounding us; nor can we be blamed for neglecting some punctilioes, since
selfe-safety, and our present preservation admit no delay.

It would rejoice our hearts to see English blood stirring in the veignes of
men at this juncture; professing to your self that your honorable carriage in
order to the good of this poor shattered Nation makes us to assure you, we can
(through mercy) readily live and dye with you upon your pious and noble
principles.

I have enclosed sent you a Copy of the last from Lancashire, whereby you may
judge of the inhumane temper of the enemy, and the sad condition of our friends.

I wish every Tribe in Israel had this laid at their doors. Alas (Sir) did
these men bring to us more Holiness, Justice* Truth, and faithfulness, or
rather did they not undermine that Gospel, they say they come to settle; we
would meet them with open arms and bended knees: But I wish their inviters
hither do not feel to their cost the ill consequence of the bargain.

Sir, (with our worthy Neighbors in the Eastern Association, or any others
like minded) we resolve (by Gods help) rather to dye free English men, then to
live hewers of wood, and drawers of water to base men whose mercies are
Cruelties.

Our Horse appearing last Monday at our Rendezvous, were near three thousand,
all of this County; who expressed much forwardness in this service,
ambitiously desiring to be in action, waiting only upon a call, which we daily
expect from our friends in the North, and for which we making our selves ready
upon an hours warning.

My request unto your self, and all honest English hearts is, that you send us
all the help you can through your prayers; and I beseech you to continue to
improve your interest in Heaven and Earth to preserve a Kingdom, that must be
saved against its will, for which God has so immediately and even miraculously
spoken from Heaven within three or 4 months last past, in curbing the malice of
men, appearing in such desperate tumults every where: The Great Monnuments
whereof remain in these places, viz. London, Norwich, South Wales, Kent, Bury,
Willoby, Kingston, Needs, Hereford, Shropshire, Stafford, Nottingham,
Woodcraft, Scarborow Yarmouth, Tinmouth, Cumberland, Bristall, Isle of weight,
Chester, Exceter, North Wales and Cambridge, etc.

Oh that men would see these wonders, and bow before the Lord that has smiten
them, and tremble before his footstool.

To whose grace I commend you, and all the faithful with you. I remain

Sir, Yours really to serve you Thomas Gray.
August 24. 1648. POSTSCRIPT.
Sir,
SInce I degan to write the Scots are beaten, twelve thousand prisoners are
taken; their Army broken: three thousand Horse of theirs where Duke Hambleton
is, we are this morning pursuing with my forces, who bend toward the North:
but are in desperate confusion, we hope to give agood account of them.

Yours, Thomas Gray.




