Great NEWS from DARTMOVTH in DEVONSHIRE.
Of the Wonderful Escape of diverse French Protestants from Charente near
Rochel, and their safe Arrival at Dartmouth, the 24th of March. 4.April. 1692
Licensed, April 2. 1692.

J. F.



ALthough there are too many Persons remain still amongst us, who do both
secretly and openly favor the French Interest, magnify their Power and
Wisdom, and wish good Success to their Arms, in order to restore the late
abdicated King; notwichstanding so many fresh Examples of their implacable
Malice and Cruelty against the Northern Heresy, as they call it, that is, the
Protestant Religion, endeavoring by all possible Methods to root it out; so
that no Persons in their right Minds can imagine, but that should they prevail
(which God forbid) they would entirely destroy both our Religion and Liberty:
For if they continue to exercise such unheard of Cruelties on their own
Contrymen and Neighbors, what must Strangers expect?

The last Week there put into Dartmouth a small French Vessel, about twenty
five Tuns, which brought in about Twenty French Protestants, Men, Women and
Children, who are well known to their Brethren of Darthmouth, where they have a
Pastor and Congregation. Some of these poor People had procured this Vessel,
and put a small Quantity of Wines and Brandies on board, pretending to go for
Dunkirk in Company of a great Fleet that was thither bound, with a supply of
Provisions for the French Armies in Flanders; and for so doing, they were
forced to give security by some of their Brethren who were to remain (as they
thought) at home: But in the Nightime they got all their Securities, with
their whole Families on board, hid them away in the best manner they could to
prevent Discovery. Some in Cask, others in Bags, and so came up our Channel
with the French Fleet, and took their Opportunity in the Nightime to steer
away for Dartmouth, where they got in in safety, and relate that their
Brethren, who have been Dragoon'd, do most earnestly wish and hope for some
Deliverance from their most barbarous Oppression, of which there is now a good
Prospect entertained.

London: Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane.
1692.


