A LETTER TO THE Lord Gray of Grooby. Wherein is declared a great victory
obtained by the Parliaments Forces near Hinkeley, Where they have Slain
Captain Manwaring, 12 Common Soldiers.
Taken Prisoners,
Lieu. Gray, brother to the Lord Greys Cornet, Lieutenant Rawlings,
Quartermaster Deckins, Col: Nevels Trumpeter with a silver Trumpet. 44 Common
Soldiers,
Surprised,
Many Arms, 150 Horse, 80 Heads of Cattle, Diverse packs of Ammunition.
Whereof they have rescued 2 Ministers, and 30 Country men. Which the enemy
had taken Prisoners.

Printed for Andrew Coe, according to Order, 1644.

A LETTER TO The Lord Gray of Grooby.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
UP on Sunday night about eleven a clock J received advertisement from Captain
BODLE, that the enemy past Nielfon, with three hundred and fifty horse, and
advanced toward Litterworth with a purpose to sweep the whole Country upon
Monday, I drew forth Major BINGLEY, Captain HACKERS, and Captain BODELS
Troops to go and fight with them; hearing they were at Sutton, but missing
them there; I marched to Hinkley hearing they would quarter there that night, I
came to Hinkley about seven a clock where I fonnd all passage into the Town
blockt up about half a mile from the Town, I took one of their Scouts, who
affirmed them to be three hundred horse and fifty Dragoones, and that they had
been in their Quarters two hours, I entered the Town at the end toward
Barwell, first causing my Dragoons to light by the Mils, where I left their
horses with a small Guard, and caused my Dragoons to advance with the Forlorn
hope of thirty horse, commanded by Captain FITZGARRET to force the passage
which after some resistance, was effected: My self with the small body that I
had, one hundred and twenty charged up to the Cross, where I found the Enemy
in a body, and after one quarter of an hours fight we beat them out of the
Town, being in the field they Rallied again, and were advancing to charge us,
whereupon I drew up my Dragoons, and caused them to advance with my horse into
the field, where after some shots made, the Enemy gave way, then I charged them
again, with my horse which they stood not to receive, but wheeld off and fled,
I pursued them above half a mile, but being in the night and in a dirty
Country, I thought it not safe to pursue them any further, knowing they were
as many more as I had. There were slain of the Enemy one Captain MANWARING, of
common Soldiers about twelve, but I am confident there were many wonnded. For
J hear that there were some went into houses and died by the way. I have
Prisoners Lieutenant GRAY your Lordships Brother) Lieutenant RAWLINGS,
quartermaster DECKENS, one Trumpetter with his si lver trumpet, four and forty
common sonldiers, a great many arms which I gave most unto Captatne BODLE, for
his Treope and Dragoons, we took above one hundred and fi fty horses, eighty
head of Cattle, and diverse packs with some Ammuuition I released two Minist
ers, Prisoners, and thirty Countrymen taken from Cosby and Laer, the Horse and
Cattle being most taken from our Friends were most rest ored, some little
satisfaction being made to the Soldiers, this was done with 120 Horse and 50
of Musquettiers of my Cosen Greys Company, his Lieutenant is a very brave man,
whom your Lordship must needs think off, the Enemy by my cosen Greys
confession were 300: being three troops that came out of Newarke, two of
Lichfield: one of the Lord of LOUGHBOROUGHS; one from Tissington, and one from
VV iverton, besi des Dragoons, the Trumpet says si xty, my Cosen acknowledges
twenty: The glory I wholly ascribe unto God of this action, J acknowledge it was
his hand, and not ours that defeated the Enemy. For certainly had they stood to
it, when they were got into a body in the field, we should have had the worst
of it, My Lord, I hope, by my next to send your Lordship good news: From
Newarke, In the mean time I am

Right Honorable Your most faithful Servant, Henry Gray.
Leicester the sixth of March, 1643. Publi shed according to Order.

