A GREAT VICTORY OBTAINED Against the Enemy, at the raising of the Siege from
before TAUNTON, on Sunday last, May 11.

WITH The manner of the several Fights; and what was lost on both sides: How
the Enemy dispersed themselves, 20. Colonels, Majors and Captains slain, and
300. common Soldiers in the siege, and many wounded.

Certified by two Letters: the one from Colonel Weldens Quarters, to Sir
Thomas Fairfax his Quarters, and the other from Sir Thomas Fairfax his
Quarters, to a person of note with the Parliament.

Published according to Order.

With a Letter of thanks to be sent to Sir Thomas Fairfax for his care, and
another to Colonel Welden, etc. for their good Service to the Public.

LONDON, Printed for R. Austin. 1645.

The Copy of a Letter, sent from Petmister, from our quarters there, to Sir
Thomas Fairfax his Army, which was then at Whitchurch, about 12. miles from
Newbery.
SIR,
BY this enclosed Copy you may understand the happy news of the relief of
Taunton, with that part of our Army which Sir Thomas Fairfax sent thither. And
we (which were another party of the Army with Sir Thomas Fairfax) are come back
to Whitchurch, which is our Headquarters. This night we hear, that Goring is
upon his march; some of his Forces are already at Bath, and is himself upon
his march after with his Army speeding Westward.

Whitchurch, 13. May. 1645.
Here follows the collection of the Letters enclosed, which were sent from
Petmister to Sir Thomas Fairfax his Quarters, and delivered at Whitchurch.
Honorable Sir,
BLessed be name of God, who has given to us this cause of joy, which may come
unexpected to you, and indeed all good people have cause to rejoice, that we
have such happy news to write to you, which makes me salute you with these
joyful (though rude) lines.

On Thursday the 8.th of this present May, we marched from our quarters near
Blanford toward Taunton, but the soldiers being encouraged by our Officers,
were so earnest upon their march, (though many of then had scarce shoes with
any soales for them to tread upon) for the relief of poor Taunton, that they
were ready to advance early in the morning, and having some additionall forces
to come from the Country, so doubled the courage of our men, expressing great
joy at the hearing of their coming; we quartered that night between Birdport
and Bemister, our strength being then in all about 6000. Horse and Foot, we
called a Counsel of War about ordering our business in falling upon the
enemy, being resolved if they stayed till we came up, to fight with them, some
disputes there was whether Col. Graves commands of the horse, or Col. Welden of
foot should have the guide of the business, some delivered their opinions for
the one, some for the other, but laying all self ends aside, they being
resolved that the work should not be neglected not regarding who had
precedence, so it was effected, the next morning early they were again upon
their march.

On Friday the 9.th of May, we marched by Pellisden Pen, and Bur^oeke, and so
on toward Chard, which is about 10. miles from Taunton, where we had an intent
to quarter that night, and about 3. or 4. hours before night after that we had
passed Ford, and were come over the bridge, and so upon our march, never
disovering one Scout of theirs all the way, until we came near Winchan in
Kingsbury Hundred within 3. miles of Chard, where we received notice that the
enemy were still before Taunton, and that the town was much straitened by them,
and in great danger to be lost, if we did not speedily relieve them; so we
marched on, and quartered at Chard that night, no enemy all this while
appearing to us.

On Saturday May the 10:th the enemy faced us with a small party of horse, not
above 300. in sight, others between them and Taunton, acting what they could to
hinder our going on, we drew out upon them, and made them to retreat, but by
reason of the Inlands they by constant opposition, did so trouble us that they
hoped to out-vapour our intents, but were deceived; we drove them back by
several charges upon them, all the way between Chard and Petmister, which is
about 3. miles short of Taunton in the way of Wellington, on our march by
parties charging each other, there were six prisoners taken, and one killed of
the enemies party; and four prisoners taken, and one killed on our party.
The enemy continued facing of us still, and the siege was continued before
Taunton, (as we understood afterward) but we went still on, following, and
driving them back, till w^ came between Trull and Orchard, within a mile of
Taunton, and there we shot off a warning-peece, to give them notice in the
town of our being there: but (it seems they had but little store of powder in
the town, for) there was no answer made to us. but night being come, we could
not go any further without great danger: and therefore bettook our selves to
our quarters, setting a strong watch about us; and indeed we rested but little
that night; for all the Army generally thought i^ long till morning came, that
they might be upon their work, all being resolved to force the enemy to rise,
or to fight with them. And then making inquiry into the state of the enemy, and
what had been done that day, as also inquiring into their strength, and
advising how to manage the next days business. There was declared unto us by
those that we had taken prisoners, that they were confident that we would not
have been so soon with them; but took our Army to be their friends, and that
ours was Gorings Army that was come up to strengthen them, they wondering why
we fought with them; so for that night we rested in our quarters at
Pitmister, Pounsford, and Trull, intending the next morning to fall upon the
enemy, who (as we heard) were about four or five thousand.

On the next morning (which was the Lords Day, May it.) we drew our selves into
a posture to fight with the Enemy; but the enemy had so blocked up the way with
trees, timber, and other combustible matter, that we could not pass; so that
we were feign to make our way, which we did with what speed could be; and when
we came before the town, the enemy was gone; and therefore in the next place I
shall certify you further certify you what is declared to me concerning the
proceedings of the enemy before the town, and how they now marched off from
thence.

The enemy have made many assaults upon the town, and have been gallantly
repulsed: Colonel Blake the Governor, and diverse other Officers, with the
soldiers, having (during all the siege) showed so much gallantry in the
defense thereof, that they were resolved to fight it out in the defense of that
place, while they had any power left to defend themselves withal.

On Thursday the eight of this present May the enemy had stormed the town with
great violence, but were gallantly repulsed, and diverse were hurt and killed on
both sides: and although the town was in so great distress (and the enemy had
taken a house from them which commanded one of their Works) and that they were
not certain of speedy relief, yet (trusting in God) they were resolved still
to stand out, notwithstanding the enemy played hard upon them.

On Friday the enemy very desperately stormed the town again, and were again
as valiantly repulsed from the Garrison, to the great loss of the enemy. That
which Colonel Blake most wanted in the town (besides horse-meat) was match,
whereby they were forced to burn their bed-cords in stead of it. And they
began to be straitened of powder; they played upon them all this day, and got
so close up to the town, that they burn 20 houses; but could do no good of it
for all that: the town still held out, and opposed them.

On Saturday the enemy was not so furious, yet made some shot against the town
again; it is conceived that they stayed in expectation of Gorings coming up to
them; and that by their own Scouts mistaking, they took our Army for Gorings,
as it seems they did when they met them at Chard; and so lay still till Goring
came to them.

On the Lords day they did not much trouble the town, by reason of our men's
coming upon them, which found them work enough for that day: and in the night
the enemy drew off their Cannon, and raised the siege, taking the opportunity
of the night to fly by; and they divided themselves several ways, one part
went toward Wellington, in the way to Exeter, and the other toward
Bridgewater, marching away very disorderly, we have made some charges upon
several parties in their Rear, and killed and taken some: but by reason of
the inland country, and most of all for the great need that Taunton stands in
of present relief; as also, for that the Soldiers have marched themselves
almost off of their legs, they could not without great prejudice (many ways)
desert the carrying in of relief speedily into Taunton, to follow the enemy.
It is believed, that the enemy will be suddenly on our skirts, and should these
Forces be drawn away, they would soon lay siege before the town again,
especially when Goring is come up to them.

There are in Taunton about 200 wounded men, and about 50 (I hear) have been
slain during this siege: Colonel Blake is very well, and there has not many
Officers been lost: what the particulars are of the enemies losses, we cannot
certainly learn for the present; but there is much lamentation on their part,
for the loss of diverse gallant men, that were of the Kings best Soldiers;
they have had many Colonels, Majors, and Captains, and other Officers of note,
at the least 20 slain: and it is believed, that at least two or three hundred
men have been killed of theirs: and they have abundance of wounded men. They
have had many notorious Irish Rebels there, but still they having the burial
of their own dead, we shall scarce have all the particulars of their loss.
But blessed be the Lord, that has given to us the victory against those
bloody Papists, and wic-Incendiaries, that care not what mischief they do
amongst honest godly Protestants.

It is believed, if the Army continue in those parts, that there will be a good
addition of the Contrymen, who are very much enraged against the enemy, by
reason of their cruel and barbarous carriage toward them.

Dated at Pitmister May 12. 1645. It is ordered by the House of Commons in
Parliament, that a Letter of thanks be sent to Sir Thomas Fairfax for his care,
and another to Colonel Welden, Colonel Graves, and the rest of the Officers
and Soldiers, for their good service in the releeving of Taunton.



FINIS.

