GREAT VICTORIES Obtained by the Earl of Denbigh at Shrewsbury, Chulmely, and
other parts in Cheshire.

Where were taken prisoners.

The Lord Newports son, Lieutenant Colonel Harton, Sergeant Major Manly
Governor of Banger, Sergeant Major Fisher, 1 Lieutenant Colonells Colors, and
others. 100 Arms. 2 Barrels of powder and store of bullets. 66 Prisoners more,
amongst which some others of note, good horse, and other purchase. Sergeant
Major Pinkney slain on our side, and 5 or 6 wounded.
With the copy of the Oath that was imposed on the Cavaliers before the
Garrison was taken.

Published accoridng to Order.

London, printed by J. Coe, Anno Dom. MDCXLIV.

A LETTER FROM An eminent Commander in the Earl of Denbighes Quarters.
SIR,
SInce my last, the messenger whereof is pistold by the way with my Lords
Lettere and mine; these are to inform you that we have been in very hot and
sharp service, making attempt to gain a bridge to Shrewsbury which we did
gain and made the enemy fly in half an hours hot service. My Lord himself
lead on galantly in the forlorn hope, having not patience till the bridge
could be let down, we all in the forlorn hope crowded through the R^ver to
our horse skirts, we only had one man fell over there was drowned, so we
pursued and took Major Fisher Major Manly, and many other prisoners, they
iss^ed out of Shrewsbury and fought with us, we beat them in, and finding our
selves to few to besiege it, we in the night retreated and are now this day
upon news received marching for York. The news to us is this enclosed, for I
now am in haste.

Dated at Weme, newly come from Shrewsbury. July 9. 1644.

SIR,
I Bless God I yet live to praise him for his renewed mer^e to me and our
Army, and to write to you our condition, and that you may have a true test, my
General hates idleness, I must tell you he ets us not rest night nor day, but
upon on design or other we were this day sevennight at Mauchester, then
hurried we to Knotsford, North vvitch, and to Osvvestrie to relieve that: at
which place and in that service, Sir Thomas Middletons Troop and mine had the
brunt of the service, and came off with honor: they tired our with often
charging. Sir Thomas brought up other horse to relieve them: who fell on
gallantly, and did good service: and pursued the Enemy near Shrewsbury, and
took many prisoners of quality, the Lord Newports son a Parliament man,
Marrow hardly escaped.

The very next day my Lord General sent Captain Rent to give Orders for all
horse and foot to quarter on and about Sutton on the Hill, in the way to
Shrewsbury, early next morning we marched toward Mansford Bridge where the
Enemy kept Garrison: and a drawbridge over the Severne: our men fell on
gallantly, and my Lord himself appeared in the Van of the Forlorn Hope for
their encouragement, which caused them to stir bravely, and to strive to
adventure beyond expression, to gain the passage in a quarter of an hours time
the Enemy fled: upon which my Lord sent Cap. Keme to call the Forlorn Hope of
Horse, and after other horse which he did, and we came so hastily on, that
one Captain Shipply a gallant man, not having patience to stay till the draw
bridge was let down, ventured over the River after him, rent the Forlorn Hope,
In pursuit, and my Lord was in the midst of them, and only one man next me, and
not far from my Lord, fell into a hole of the River, hardly escaped drowned.

Thus we got out, and by this time the bridge was down, our Army crowding
over. I mean the horse out of Captain Kemes Troop came in at a house over the
bridge where they kept the Court of Guard, and took a Lieutenant Colonels
Colors which he gave his Captain to present to my Lord, but we followed the
pursuit, and between the Bridge and the Heath we took most of the men, and had
we not hallowed for all our horse to come up we had entered Shrewshury, with
the enemy, many of their horse and foot quartering our of Town which we
lighted on some of Marrows Dragoones: We drew up till our army came up on a
Heath on this side Shrevvsbury a mile, the enemy came in parties up
Ambuscadoes, the lanes we beat them from them. Colonel Booth lead his
Regiment of Foot on himself valiantly: and my Lords own horse, his life
Guard commanded by Captain Tovy a gallant man pursued to pistol shot of the
Works: Marrow came out, and Major Manly, and fought with us; and there was a
hot bout for two hours and above: We took Major Fisher, Major Manly
Governor of Bangor, and diverse other Officers and Soldiers.

We made good the ground within Musket shot of their Works till night: then
seeing our little Army was not able to sit down before it: my Lord drew off
and we retreated that night to the Heath.

A mile off and the whole Army quartered in the fields, the horse, foot and
carriages on the Heath. Next morning we matched away upon advice of the
Council of War to Weme: where we quartered all night, being Friday. Saturday
we marched to Whitchurch: On the Lords Day morning, my Lord had Captain Keme to
preach, which he did and after dinner gave him order to order a Randevouz at
Normans Heath which was done: where my Lord further declared his intentions to
send the Cashire Gentlemen, and on his march to observe the commands of the
Committees of both Kingdom to secure Lancashire and Cheshire to wait on P.
Rupert, to call in at Cholmley house, a strong Garrison of the Enemies: My Lord
with his own Troop and Colonel Bartons; and Ma or Burtons, and Captain
Kemes, and Captain Farmers, and some two Troops more marched to view the
ground, we came to it, and found it full of difficulty, unless we spent time
on it. Ye my Lord sent them a summons by a Trumpet, which was to tell them,
he required in his passage to have quater in the house for his army, for the
use of King and Parliament; the Enemy scorned to answer, but shot at the
Trumpeter: upon which, my Lord gave order to draw up his Cannon, and early
saluted them: and finding them to cake little effect, resolved to storm it;
upon information it was surrounded with a small ditch only; But the Cheshire
men that knew it was a Moat deep and broad: were somewhat backward to adventure
their men: My Lord told them his Honor was engaged in it; what he did was in
affection to express his affections to them. And if they would not go on, he
would go on with his Stafford foot him self; Major Low then a gallant man
lately come out of prison: hearing it went to some of the Cheshire Officers,
and told them what my. Lord said: upon which they drew forth a 100 out of a
Regiment. So Major Pinkny a most valiant honest Gentleman led on the Stafford
foot, who had the brunt of the business: Lieutenant Colonel (...) the
Cheshire, and Major Croxon, and after the signal of two piece of Ordnance,
fell on to storm it, and such a storm, as I never heard the like but at Basing,
in half an hours time, they within cried quarter; but by reason of hollowing,
and Drums and Trumpets they could not be heard: at last our men entered the
draw bridge, and took it.

In which entry Major Barton Captain Tory, and Captain Hitchcock, and Captain
Harford did good service, facing their horses, and in which enery in the crowd,
I had like to have lost my life, or taken the more when we came in four men
were so merciful to give them their lives, till we heard brave Major P nkney
was slain, shot in the belly and in the arms by two flags, who is much
lamented, Captain Keme is to p^each, this evening at his funera, he was my
Lords Major of St^fford foot, under Colonel Rudgeley. In the house was little
riches only some good horses, 2 barrels of powder, and store of bullets: what
there was the Soldiers had, and arms about a 100 prisoners, Lieutenant
Colonel Horton, and others, 66 in all. My Lord gave them to the Cheshire
Gentlemen, and the horse to Rear Garrison. It is a place if you see it
miraculonsly gained by Gods free love, with loss but of five men, and 6
wounded, This night we came to Namptwitch, to morrow is a day of Thankigiving
to God for our selves, and the great business of York. I have sent you the
Cavaliers Protestation I found in the house. My love to all our friends. Pray
and praise God, I rest yours.

Nontwich, the 9 of July, 1644.

A PROTESTATION, Confirmed by Oath, taken by the Major and the Loyally affected
in the City of Chester, for the Defense of that City, against this present
Rebellion. 1644.
I A. B. Dofreely, and from my heart vow and Protest, in the presence of Alm
ghty God, that I will, with my life and utmost Power, maintain and defend this
house of Chulmley, against al Forces raised, or to be raised without his
Majesty's express consent upon any pretense whatsoever; and particularly
against the Forces now under the Conduct of the Earl of Essex and Sir William
Brewerton, and all Forces which do or shall adhere unto them, or either of them
or their Party. And I will neither directly, nor indirectly give or suffer to
be given, any Intelligence to the said Earl of Essex, or Sir William Brewerton,
or any their Forces or Adherents in Prejudice of this house, or the forces
within the same; but will discover to the Governor of the Forces within the
said house, all such Plots and Designs as I shall know to be against the said
house. And this I vow and Protest, without any Equivocation or mental
Reservation; Believing that I cannot he Absolved from this my Vow and
Protestation; And wishing no blessing from Almighty God if I do not perform
the same; So help me God, And by the Contents of this Book.

GOD SAVE THE KING

