A Great Victory BY THE Blessing of God, obtained by the Parliaments Forces,
against the Scots forces.

Commanded By the Earl of DERBY, on the 25 of August 1651. near Wigon in
Lancashire.

Certifyed By a Letter from Col Lilburne, and two Letters from Chester. Also a
Letter from Col. Birche, to Mr. Speaker.

1500. Totally Routed, Earl of Derby wounded and pursued toward Boleon. L.
Widdrington mortally wounded and taken prisoner. 400 Prisoners taken, amongst
which many Officers and Gentlemen of note.
SLAIN 3 Knights and diverse Colonels, and other considerable Officers and
Gentlemen.

With A List of the chief particulars of the Victory.

Imprimatur

Hen. Scobel Cleric. Parliamenti.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Ibbitson dwelling in Smithfield near Hosier Lane
end. 1651.

A LETTER FROM Col. THOMAS BIRCHE. TO The Right Honorable Will: Lenthall Esquire;
Speaker of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND.
SIR,
IT pleased the Lord yesterday to give an utter overthrow by Col. Lilburnes
Regiment of Horse to the Earl of Derbie, who was raising men here in this
County for the Scots King. The Earl at his coming over from the Isle of Man
brought but 300 men whereof 60 were horse, but landing about the middle of the
shire, when the Scots Army were passing out of it, he had the better
opportunity by our destractions to march up to Warrington to them, and there he
had the assistance of Major Genesis Massy with a Regiment of Horse to countenance
his proceedings while he gathered more to him, who afterward leaving him when
the Earls Forces were reputed considerable to carry on the work, and there
being none in this County left competent to make opposition, but all marched
out with the Army; I sent both to my Lord General, and the Major Generals to
acquaint them with it, whereupon Col. Lilburne came very opportunely, yet the
enemy being stronger in Foot, and securing himself betwixt two Rivers, he was
not to be attempted by Horse only, and all that could be afforded in assistance
were two Foot Companies from Chester, one of my Regiment left about Manchester,
not being so ready as the rest to march out, and what Musketeers I horsed from
hence, with some few Country men; but since my Lord Generals own Regiment of
Foot being sent up, and within one days march the Enemy attempted toward the
Scots Army, and being pursued by Col. Lilburnes Regiment, and the small
addition before named, without the conjunction of my Lord Generals Regiment.
It pleased God to give them an absolve overthrow, as the enclosed from Col.
Lilburne intimates. The number of Prisoners, and the slain, with their
Qualifications, I cannot yet give further account of, but I hope the success
prevents all designs in these parts I must beg excuse for this distracted
Letter, and ever am, Sir,

Liverpoole, Aug. 26. 1651. Your most real and humble Servant, Tho. Birche.

For the Right Honorable Will. Lenthall Esquire Speaker of the Parliament of the
Common wealth of England, at Westminster these present.

Honored Sir:
THe Lord has been pleased this day to appear for us, in the total rout and
overthrow of the Lord of Derby, and his Forces, which was increased to about
1500. he himself though wounded, escaped, though narrowly. I would only entreat
you to send out what Horse you have, or can get, to ride up and down the
Country to gather up straglers; I cannot enlarge my self at present, but I
entreat you to accept of this from him, that desires to express himself,

Wiggan, 25. Aug. 1651. Your very humble Servant Robert Lilburne.


Your Ammunition is come safe.

The Lord of Derby I hear is fled toward Bolton, but his Sumptures and
Treasure are here; we intended for Manchester this night, and had hopes to take
my Lord Genesis Regiment of Foot, and to have had five hundred men in readiness
to join with them; the Lord Witheriugton cannot live long, Colonel Boynton,
and Tildesley are slain, and others very considerable. I have diverse Colonells
Prisoners.

For my Honored Friend Col. Birch, Governor of Livirp^ole these, haste.

A Letter from Chester.
SIR,
THe last night within three miles of Wiggan your Forces engaged the Earl of
Darby and put them to a perfect rout, about 400 prisoners taken.

The Lord Widdrington mortally wounded, Sir Francis Gamul, Colonel Tildesley,
Col. Throgmorton, Col. Trollop, and Galliard, and diverse others of quality are
slain.

About five a clock this day, the Country men brought in about ten stubborn,
resolute Gentlemen of the scattered party. VVhither the Earl is fled is
doubtful, but its certain he is wounded, and of 1500 men not any left to
engage.

Chester 26 August. 1651.

Another Letter from Chester.
Honored Sir,
I Could not but let you know what an earnest the Lord has given us of what
undoubtedly he will do in a far larger manner Yesterday about 3 of the clock the
Forces that were under Col. Lilburne with 200 from this Garrison fell upon the
Earl of Derby near Wiggan in Lancashire, who had gotten about 1500 together,
the dispute was not for near an hour, but then the Lord decided the
Controversy, and the Earls Forces totally routed, the Earl himself wounded but
escaped, the Lord Widdrington mortally wounded, Sir Tho. Tildesley, Sir Will.
Throgmorton, Sir Fran: Gamull, Col. Boynton, Col. Trollop, Lieut. Colonel.
Galliard, and many others of quality slain, 400 prisoners taken, whereof many
of them were Officers and Gentlemen, we were not half their number, and scarce
half ^f them could come up to charge, but the Lord has wonderfully made known
his power, and I am confident will go on to perfect his great work, we lost no
Officer that we yet hear of, and not above 10 or 12 in all, Let God have all
the Glory.

Jo: Whitworth:
Chester 26 Aug. 1651.

A List of the chief particulars of the Victory.
1500 totally routed. Earl of Derby wounded and pursued toward Bolton. Lord
Widdrington mortally wounded and taken prisoner. 400. prisoners taken, amongst
which many Officers, and persons of note.
Where were slain:
Sir Thomas Tilsley. Sir William Throgkmorten. Sir Fran. Gamull. Col. Boynton.
Col. Trollop. Lieut. Col. Galliard, and diverse others.


29 August 1651.
Imprimatur

Hen. Scobel Cleric. Parliamenti.

FINIS.

