RULES OF LIFE: BEING Good Wishes to the CLERGY And LAIETY; For whose use the
ASSE'S COMPLAINT Was Written.

BY LEWIS GRIFFIN

LONDON, Printed for Henry Marsh at the Princes Arms in Chancery Lane, 1663.

THE PREFACE.
MAn that is in honor, and understands not, is like unto the Beasts that
perish; when our first Parents lost Gods Image they were degraded from Humanity
as well as Divinity, and became as brutish as the Creatures below them; so that
there is no Beast, or Monster in the Wilderness of the Great World, but what
may be found in the Microcosmus or Little-world of Man.

Hence it is that false Prophets are said to be inwardly Wolves, Drunkards
inwardly Swine, Whoremongers inwardly Goats, Dissemblers Foxes, Flatterers
Dogs, Valiant Men Lions, Innocent Men Lambs, as though we had Clothed our
Souls with their Natures, as well as our Bodies with their Skins.

Amongst the rest it has been my Part to act the Ass, and no wonder, for the
whole Kingdom has done the same before me, and (like the Tribe of Issachar)
been a long time Couchant betwixt two burdens, that is (in plain English) the
Profaneness of some who call themselves the Kings true Subjects, and the
Hypocrisy of others, who term themselves Gods precious Saints, as though
Loyalty consisted in Ranting, Swearing, and Drunkenesse, or Religion in
Treason, Murder and Sacrilege.

I am not ignorant how some have rebelled against the King in nomine Domini,
witness the Devils Martyrs at Charing-Crosse, who pretended their
unparrallel'd Treason was Acted in the fear of the Lord; others have sinned
against God in nomine Regis, witness those Hectors of the times whom if you
should check for Swearing would call you Phanatick; others have dishonored the
Church in nomine Episcopatus, and (as the wickedness of Phinehas, and Hophni,
made the people abhor the Sacrifice) so has their Ignorance, Scandal,
Insufficiency, made the Sacred name of Bishop, the decent Ceremonies of the
Church, and the Divine Liturgy, become odious.

And shall a man see all this and be afraid to speak? no Friends; these are not
times to daub, and flatter; the sinful burden of a corrupt Balaam will make a
dumb Ass turn Orator; The Soul of a Man or Woman (I hope I may speak it
without offense) is worth more than his Majesty's three Kingdoms, and shall the
charge of a Whole Congregation of these be committed to a Dunce, a Drunkard, a
Beast, that has neither Grace, nor Learning? God forbid; shall he that writes
nothing but Truth, and Reason, have this Mouth stopped with being, told he is a
Seditious Person? Shall it be more safe for some men to Commit Sin, then for
others to reprove them? I hope not.

In the Verses called the Asses Complaint (however they may be mistaken) I know
nothing that can justly offend a sober Man; The King Himself has Declared that
it is, and shall he his Majesty's Will That no Insufficient, Negligent, nor
Scandalous Ministers be permitted in the Church, etc. and may not a Subject
Lawfully Beg that which the King is Graciously pleased to Grant; He that says
the Ass has spoken Treason, Let him tell him that Prays Thy Will be done,
that he speaks Blasphemy.

But (possibly) it is supposed by some that Ignorance, and Scandal, are quite
out of fashion, and that there is no such thing in any of the Clergy. Truly I
could wish it were so indeed; But when our Savior amongst twelve Disciples had
one Devil, it would be a wonder that the Bishops amongst so many thousand
Curats should have none; Yet to name, or mention any particular Person (until
I have further occasion (I think) will be as absurd, as for a Minister, that
reproves any gross Sin, to tell his Parishioners, openly in the Pulpit, the
name of any Person whom he knows to be Guilty.

Let this suffice, although others are unsatisfied with the harshnesse of my
Expressions, yet I my self am well satisfied with the honesty of my Intentions,
which (I question not) will bear me out against all malicious Gainsayers.

Now whereas it is objected that my unlucky Pamphlet, has proved a Doctrine of
Sedition unto disaffected persons. What then (I beseech you?) have they not
also made the same use of the Sacred Word of God? If a Revengeful wretch should
stab his Neighbor, would that hand that made the Sword be found acessory to
the Murder? I think not.

It was not my purpose, when I published those Verses, to encourage Sedition,
but to rebuke Profaneness; and therefore, to give the Reader further
satifaction, I have written these following Precepts, which are the Rules by
which those People walk, for whose sakes the Cry was written; You may find in
them seasonable advice, which, though it seem to lie confusedly in my
Meditations, will be brought into better order in your Practice.

He that would know more of my mind, let him read my Apology which follows the
Verses of H.W. (for the rest of His name I know not) I could wish that he had
employed his Wit to a better purpose; I can only Judge this, that the Gentleman
is a civil Person, and his Reply is an Ingenious piece of Misconstruction; as
for the Rest who have written against me I regard them not at all, I shall not
throw stones at every Dog which I hear bark; Only I beg of the Ingenious
Reader, to weigh my words in the balance of Reason, and not (like the rude
Barbarians) to account me a Notorious Sinner because he sees I am stung with
Viperous Tongues.

It is not unknown to several persons of credit in the Country where I lived,
how much I have been persecuted by the Presbyterian party; and yet I am now
threatened by some (who have more malice to conceive Mischief, than power to
bring it forth) for being a supposed Enemy to (that which I always Adored)
Episcopacy, And not only I, but the Stationer who Printed my Verses, Mr. Marsh,
although he has (to manifest his Loyalty) Printed more Sheets against that
Monster in Politics, called the Rump, than all of his Profession in London, to
the Hazard of his Life, and loss of his Liberty; Which things being rightly
considered, we both may Deserve a Milder Censure.

THE DOCTRINE OF THE ASS.
1. Stay! hasty Reader -- Least the strangeness of our Title, which (at the
first view) may seem to promise nothing but some antic piece of Drollery, or
mess of Ridiculous Nonsense, should cause thy careless hand too soon to cast
away this well meaning Paper; Remember (I beseech thee) that however
contemptible the Ass is in this age, yet in the days of the Prophet Isaiah he
was a great Rabbi in Israel: insomuch that Heaven and Earth were called to
witness how far he excelled the very people of God in Knowledge, nay we may
confidently believe that, even in our times, the Churches of Christ and Houses
of Prayer would be more frequented, if those dark Souls whom error, or Atheism
detains from the public Ordinances, had but such a Schoolmaster to teach them
to know their Masters crib. Neither is the Ass less exemplary for his
Obedience than Knowledge; Observe how faithfully he gave Balaam an account of
his Service, and for his falsely supposed Crime pleaded Primum Tempus; Alas
Reader, should Divine Justice bring thee and I to a Reckoning but for the sins
of one hour, yet which of us could use the Asses Apology? Certainly this is a
Creature both serviceable and harmless, or else our Savior had not chosen him
for his own use, The Ass carried Christ to Jerusalem, a most honorable office
of which even the greatest Prelate might be justly ambitious; Be not therefore
offended at our Title; we present thee with nothing that savours eitheir of
Profaneness or Faction, if thou art Evil it may do the good, If good it will do
thee no hurt, thy eyes may safely read it without any breach of their Covenant.

2. It is no wonder that we live in a straggering age, for the fall of Adam
broke the bones of his Children, and cripled his Posterity; the Sons of men are
both blind in their Judgments, and lame in their Practices, and
(notwithstanding the still voice which is behind us) we are continually turning
unto the right hand or to the left, and either falling into a Religious
rebellion or a Loyal profaneness. The pious Apostle foresaw our failings, and
therefore left us two excellent Precepts, Fear God, and Honor the King, that
all our lame Professors, who halt betwixt God and Baal, might make use of them
as a pair of Crutches.

3. Do not think that thou can be a Friend to the King whilst thou art an
Enemy to God: Drunkenness, Swearing and Whoredom are no Badges of a
Christian, nor of a true Cavalier, His Majesty will not protect Sin, neither
can thou honor him by dishonouring his Master; If thy crying iniquity should
invite Gods Judgments to the Court, it would cost thy Sovereign Dear to give
them entertainment.

4. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom; There is no Wisdom
without Fear; the voice of God made our first Parents afraid; a serious sense
of Gods allseeing eye begets in us a Holy timerousness and conscienscious care
to do all things as in his presence; Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice in
him with trembling; Lest thou should presume, let thy service be joined with
fear, and least thou should despair let thy trembling be mixed with joy.

5. Consider where thou art, and in what place thy Lines are fallen, thou
fittest not in the Region of the Shadow of Death, but in the clear sunshine of
the Gospel; and therefore should thou be condemned, it would not be for want
of Light, but for love of Darkness; Thou have a Double birth right, first
above other creatures, as thou art a Man: Secondly above other Men, as thou art
a Christian, Thou art also entrusted with five talents, whereas the Jew has
but two, and the Heathen but one: be not therefore a profane Esau to sell thy
Birthright, nor an unprofitable Servant to imbezel thy talents, nor a cursed
Ahab to forfeit the reversion of Paradise for the Possession of thy Neighbors
Vineyard, nor one of those poor penny-wise Politicians, who striving to gain
the World loose their own Souls, which is as if a Man should cut off his hands
to purchase a pair of Gloves, or pull out his Eyes to buy a pair of Spectacles.

6. Beware therefore of the World; God is said to rain upon the wicked snares,
fire and brimstone; It is the wickedness of men which makes Pleasures, Riches,
Honors, Friends, and all other Temporal Blessings, prove unto them mere Traps
and Gins. And it is to be feared, that he who will not endeavor to shun the
shower of Snares in this World, will hardly avoid that of Brimstone in an
other. In brief, the World is a Dissembling Jael; If thy Necessity compel thee
to drink of her Bottle, yet let not thy folly betray thee to sleep in her tent;
for know she has both milk to feed thee, and a Mantle to cover thee, and a
nail to strike into thy temples.

7. Yield not unto the Devil; but resist him and he will flee from thee; He
was once baffled by Angels and now he is fighting against Men; He appeared in
Heaven in the shape of a Dragon, but upon Earth he has taken the form of a
Lion, and is continually going about seeking whom he may devour; those in whom
he dwells are either openly Profane, or close Hypocrites; but observe this
distinction, he is Rampant in the one, and Couchant in the other. When he
tempted our Savior he had three strings to his bow, which he makes use of to
this day; If thou art a poor man he courts thee with the Temptation of Bread;
If thou art unstable in thy Religion he sets thee upon the Pinnacle; If thou
art proud and ambitious, he carries thee up into the high Mountain. Who ever
thou art, if thou travellest in this world thou will daily meet him, he has a
strategem like that of Joab to Abner, he will call thee aside pretending
business; But turn not unto him; If he upbraid thee with the first Adam, tell
him of the second; If he boast of his Victory in the Garden, ask him how he
Sped in the Wilderness.

8. But chiefly take heed of thy Judas flesh which betrays him who daily
nourishes and feeds it; Look not upon a Woman to Lust after her, but if Jezabel
be got into the window of thine eye, then let holy thoughts (like those
Officious Eunuchs) cast her out in penitential Tears: Listen not to the voice
of a Land Siren, neither let Satan Buffet thee with thy own Rib; But abstain
from carnal Lusts and thou shall be happy, for he that keeps a Lent in his
desires shall have an continual Easter in his Conscience.

9. To this end be advised by the Royal Preacher, Remember thy Creator in the
days of thy youth; It would argue a very bad memory in thee to forget him as
soon as thou art come out of his hands: Repentance in old age is like Rain in
Harvest, it may do good, but (believe it) it is very unseasonable; The time to
weep is mentioned before the time to laugh, and the time to sow before the time
to reap; Mistake not therefore thy Seasons, but let thy youth be a sowing in
tears, that so thine age may be a reaping in joy.

10. Study principally the Practical part of Religion, and strive rather to
obey thy Masters known will, than to search into his secret Counsels; it
becomes not Men presumptuously to enquire into that which is hidden from the
very Angels. We read how Job was posed concerning Hail, Snow, and other
Questions in the book of Nature; Now tell me (shallow Man) since thou can not
give a true account of what is done, but in the Clouds and Firmament which are
only the outhouses of Heaven; how will thou presume to give Intelligence of the
Affairs of Jehovahs Closet, and of the Transactions of his Counsel-Table?
Praedestination is a fitter Subject for wonder than dispute, It is a mysterious
Euripus in the blood of Christ; And it would be better for thee (like
Aristotle) to cast thy Soul in with the Tide, than in vain to study the cause
of the flowing.

11. That thou may have a right Judgment, and Apprehension both of Men, and
things, learn to distinguish betwixt Good and Evil, which is the great
Dicotomy of the intellectual world, and the two terms in thy conversion; The
Devil perhaps has taught thee an other lesson, only to make thee forget this;
that is to distinguish betwixt Papist, and Protestant, Praelat, and
Presbyterian, Independent, Anabaptist, Quaker, and other Sects, whereof if
every one should have a particular Station at the day of Judgment, we might
imagine our Savior to be Centemanus (as the Poets feign Briareus) having an
hundred hands; But know these are distinctions of Passion rather than Reason,
and a strange kind of Language which our Babel-Builders have learned since
their late Confusion, for there are but two ways; Men are not Saved or
Condemned for being called by this, or that name, but through Faith, or
Unbelief; a Devout Papist is better than a Hypocritical Protestant, a Godly
Presbyterian, than a Debauched Conformist; and there is Room in Heaven for
Religious Anabaptists, and Well-meaning Quakers; Let not therefore thy Temper
so far impose upon thy Judgment, as to make thee abhor the Harmless and
Decent Ceremonies of the Church because they are said to be Popery; nor to
dissent from any Orthodox truths, because some may call them Arminian Tenants;
nor to Persecute any of thy Brethren because they differ from thee in Notions
and Speculations; (In a word) as thou art not to believe every man's Opinion, so
thou ought not to hate any man's Person, for the one would show thou had
too much Faith, and the other would argue thou had too little Charity.

12. Think not that it is enough to make thee a Christian that thou were once
Baptized with water in thy Infancy; perhaps thy sowish Soul has been a
thousand times in the Mire of natural pollution since that sprinkling; We
commonly say to Dirty Children that the Gardener will sow Leeks in their faces;
we may more truly tell our Bruckled Professors that the Devil will low Tares
in their Souls; to prevent this, Baptize thy Soul in the Blood of Christ, and
Rebaptize thy Face in thine own Tears. The Baptism of John, was a Batism unto
Repentance, and therefore he that has been Baptized, but, not unto Repentance,
shall have cause to Repent that ever he were Baptized.

13. As for thy Prayers, let them be frequent, and fervent; Let not thy Tongue
outrun thy Heart, but be such inwardly to God, as thou would willingly
appear outwardly to Men; Let there be no incongruity betwixt thy voice, and
hands, neither let thy Soul study the Phrase of Ashdod, whilst thy Lips speak
the language of Canaan; Make use of thy own gifts in private, of the
Common Prayer in public, of the Lords Prayer in both; But tell me ( Zealous
Brother) art thou offended at the noise of the Organs? And therefore hugely
taken with their Doctrine who make it their Business to rail against them? On
how gross is thy Ignorance, to run from that Music which is so highly
commended by the Psalmist, and yet to follow the Lectures of those scolding
Seducers, who (the Apostle tells thee) are but as sounding brass, and as a
Tinkling Cymball; It is unwholesome for thy Soul to sit in the wind of such
Doctrine which may make thy Charity to get cold, and blow dust into the eyes of
thy understanding.

14. Think it not strange concerning the Fiery Trial; The Lord has promised
to parge away our Dross, and to take away our Tin; the Dross is gross
Profaneness, the Tin is glittering Hypocrisy; Now till we find our selves
freed from these, we must expect the Refiners fire in the Furnace of
Affliction. Sustine, and Abstine, was Epectetus his Philosophy, The Lord
gives, and the Lord takes away, was Jobs Divinity; study therefore to
understand the one, and labor to practice the other; for if thou can
abstinere when the Lord gives, thou may sustinere when he takes away.
Consider the Example of the Holy Jesus. Remember his Sufferings. With what an
unwilling willingness did he take off his bitter draught? If therefore
Providence should put the same Cup into thy Hand, would thou refuse to pledge
that health which thy Master first began to thy own Soul? He that well
understands the Glory of the Cross, will never complain of its weight, there
is in it plus honor is quamoneris; How can thou expect greater preferment in
this world than to be Standard Bearer to him who is the Captain of thy
Salvation?

15. If thou art stung with fiery Serpents, (that is calumniating tongues) run
presently to the Brazen Serpent, which thou may find lifted up in the Gospel;
Blessed are ye when men Revile ye, and Persecute ye for My names sake, etc.
If thou art a Common Drunkard, Profane Swearer, or base Whoremonger, whilst
thou continuest so thou shall be called a good fellow, an honest Cavalier, and
a well bred Gentleman; But when thou changest Saul into Paul, and reprovest
those Sins which thou did once commit, what can thou then expect, but that
the Devil who was before leading thee to Presumption, should now attempt to
drive thee to despair, and cast into thy face both the iniquities of thy
Childhood, and the follies of thy Youth; and (if these fail) thy Poverty, and
natural Deformity shall be charged (as Crimes) against thee; But be not
discouraged at these things, There will (one day) be honor for thee as well as
comfort for the mourner, for amongst the people of God there will be both a
wiping of Tears from the Eyes, and a washing of Dirt from the Faces.

16. Be not discouraged from walking in the ways of God because of the scandal
and miscarriages of some Professors; The best things being corrupted become
the worst; Mercy may be abused, Grace turned into wantonness, and Christ
himself be made a stumbling block; Shall we therefore have no Mercy, no Grace,
no Christ? God forbid; The wolvish nature of a few Hypocrites shall not make
sheeps-cloathing become odious; neither will we lay down the Profession of
Religion, because some who took it up proved Rebels and Traitors; The Scribes
and Pharisees had not been condemned for their Long-Prayers, If they had not
used them as so many Graces before their cursed Meals of Widows Houses.

17. When thou hear the word preached, consider Who it is that Knocks at thy
Door; Will thou be a Religious Hotham to shut the King of Glory out of his own
Garrison? or will thou (like those discourteous Bethlemites deny thy Savior
entertainment in the Inn, thy Heart, and lodge him only in the stable, or
outward room, thine Ear? Know (careless man) that if thou denyest to open to
him in thy day which is the day of Grace, he will refuse to open to thee in
his Day, which is the day of Judgment.

18. That thy Soul may enjoy her freedom, labor to subdue thy Passions, Let
not the Sun go down upon thy Wrath; Anger is said to rest in the bosoms of
fools; for indeed no wise man will be willing to harbor (in his House) a Thief
or Murderer; wrath of four and twenty hours standing takes a Degree in the
School of Satan, and commences Revenge; The Devil can, in the space of a Day
and a Night, hatch his Cockatriceegges in thy warm Bosom. But observe the
fruits of Sin, That which buds in Anger, blossoms in Malice, grows ripe for
destruction, and is gathered in Damnation. It was an Antidote prescribed by
Athenodorus to Augustus Caesar to repeat over the Letters of the Greek
Alphabet; It would be a Christians better, and safer Remedy to think upon him
who is the Alpha and Omega.

19. To avoid those many, and dangerous falls which may happen unto thee (in
thy Journey) by that unruly Beast, thy Tongue, be sure to take (along with
thee) David's bridle; Take heed of that cursed Cacoethes, which is now accounted
Badge of a Gentleman's Swearing; If there will be ( one day) an account given of
Idle words, there will be surely a stricter reckoning for Oaths, and
Blasphemy, and if to say Lord we have prophesied, and preached in thy Name,
will be no good excuse, certainly then to say Lord we have sworn and ranted in
thy Name, can be no Lawful Apology.

20. Have a great care to observe the Lords day; If we refuse to keep a day of
Rest, how can we expect a time of Peace; the breach of one Commandment draws
on the Violation of an other; When the Profane party had liberty Given them to
break the fourth Commandment, then did the Hyppocritical take Liberty to break
the fifth.

21. Let thy Recreations be manfull, not sinful; there is a great vanity in
the baiting of Beasts, the Bears and Bulls lived quietly enough before Adams
Fall; It was our sin that set them together by the Ears, let us not therefore
rejoice to see them fight, for that would be to glory in our own shame, And to
take delight in that which is the fruits of our Apostasy.

22. Honor and obey thy natural Parents although thy be poor; for if thy
earthly Parents cannot give thee riches and honors, yet thy heavenly Father
has promised thee length of days. But especially forget not thy duty to thy
Political father the King; who is a visible God, as God is an invisible King;
If thou honor not the one, thou can not fear the other. They who murdered
the King would have done as much to Christ had he been then in the Flesh.

23. Let not thy envious eyes be dazzled at the Glory of thy Princes mercy,
neither Go about to rip open these wounds which his Royal clemency has
healed. There are some sick of Jonahs disease, who because the Gourds of their
foolish hopes, and expectations of preferment are withered, grow sullen and
discontented that the poor penitent Ninivites are not destroyed: men of such
Principles have cause to give thanks that their selves are not Kings, for
divine Providence foreseeing the mischievousnesse of their Spirits did wisely
to set them in such places where they might do the Least hurt.

24. And as thou art to honor the King, so likewise is it thy duty to
Reverence the Bishops, and Fathers of the Church; for the one is Gods Vice roy,
and the others his Ambassadors; be not like those who envy their greatness,
and gape after their Lands; but love their Persons, and obey their Doctrine:
and since it is Gods will to make them Bishops, I hope thou will give the King
leave to make them Lords. Why not my Lord Bishop as well as my Lord Judge? I
think, of the two, the Divine is the more noble Function.

25. Labor to Keep alive in thy breast that little spark of caelestial fire
called Conscience; Conscience, like Virgils Gnat, does with her sting awake the
sleepy Soul thereby to prevent the stinging of the Serpent; Conscience to an
evil man is a never dying Worm, and (as the Poets feign of Prometheus) a Vultur
continually Gnawing his Liver, but unto a Good man a perpetual feast; so that
he may well say with Samson, out of the eater came forth meat.

26. The chief Perfection of a Christian is Love; which ought be the duty of
all men, Art thou for old things, the old Religion, old Ceremony, old Customs,
consider there is nothing so old as love; or art thou for new things, new
Lords, new Laws, new Lights, (or rather new nothings) alas poor Child! there is
nothing so new as love; Whether therefore thou art an old Heretic called a
Jesuit, or new one called a Phanatick, let love oblige thee; Love is the Alpha
and Omega, the New and the Old Commandment; If thou will not Believe me,
enquire of St. John the Apostle, and he will show thee Epistle for the One, and
Gospel for the other.

27. If thou would enjoy true content, live quietly in that Vocation unto
which Providence has called thee; Meddle not with another man's trade and
employment, but learn to move in thy own Sphere, and to mind thy particular
Function; Our old Aversary, the Devil, who tempted Adam, with a promise to make
him as a God, has a fine bait for thee also: If thou art a Traitor he will
promise to make thee as a King: If thou art a Factious Presbyter he will
promise to make thee as a Bishop. It is his design to set the Church upon the
wrack, and to dislocate the Joints of the Mystical Body of Christ.

28. Call thy self to an account each night for the sins of the past Day, and
reckon in the Morning for the iniquities of the night; God has a book for thy
sins, and a Bottle, for thy tears; If humane frailty run 'oth' Score in his
book, then let Repentance fill his Bottle. The way to avoid Gods judgments is
to judge thy self, and by condemning thy Self thou may shun Damnation.

29. Remember often the brevity and uncertaintie of thy Life; consider what
business thou have here upon earth; thy Life is called a Race and warfare, So
run this Race that thou may obtain, and so fight this Warfare that thou may
become more than Conqueror through him who has loved thee; take heed of being
Uxorious as well as Covetous; Whores and Plunder will ruin any Army; Self and
Pels, Bag and Baggage undo the World.

30. If thou art not yet Married but intendest it, get thee a Wife modest,
rather than Beautiful; Meddle not with those Ladies of the Game, who make
Pageants of their Cheeks, and Shops of their Shoulders, and (contrary to all
other Trades) keep open their Windows of the Sabbath day, impudently exposing
their Nakedness to the view of a Whole Congregation, which Eve modestly
covered which there was no man in the World present save only her Husband;
Black Patches are an abomination in the sight of the Lord; And I believe that
when God and Satan shall divide their flock (it will be as with Laban and
Jacob) the spotted, and ring-streaked will fall to the Devils share; Join not
therefore thy Self unto an Harlot unless thou have a mind to Hire a Guide to
Hell.

31. But let it be thy main endeavor to wed thy Soul unto Christ which will be
the happyest match; The Marriage of the First Adam was not so Honorable as that
of the Second will be Glorious; for then will he give unto his Spouse Fullness
of Joy for a Possession, and make her a Jointure of everlasting Pleasure;
whereas the chiefest Jewel that the Flesh, the world, and the Devil can boast
of is Deaths head set in the Ring of Eternity.

This ( Christian Reader) is pat of the Doctrine of the Ass; as Good Advice as
my Sick Head can (at the present) afford thee; But when the powerful voice of
Almighty God shall command a Calm in the troubled Sea of My distempered Mind, I
shall present thee, If not with better matter, yet in a better Method. In the
mean time accept of this form him who is

Thy Servant in him who became a Servant to make us free,

LEWIS GRIFFIN.
THE ASSES COMPLAINT AGAINST BALAAM: OR, The Cry of the Country against
Ignorant and Scandalous Ministers.
To the Reverend Bishops,
YE, mitred Members of the House of Peers,
The Kings Churchwardens, and Gods Overseers,
Fathers in Christ, we your poor Children cry
Oh give us Bread of Life, or else we die.
For we are burd'ned with our old Sir John's,
Who when we ask for Bread do give us stones;
And only cant a Homily or two,
Which Daws and Parrots may be taught to do;
Drunkards Cannonical, Unhallowed Bears,
That name God oftener in their Oaths then Prayers.
Into what darkness will our Church be hurld.
If such as these be called The light of the World?
These that have naught to prove themselves devout
Save only this, That Cromwell turned them out.
Mistake us not, we do not mean those Loyal
And Learned souls, who in the fiery trial
Suffered for King and Conscience sake, let such
Have double honor, we shall nere think much.
But this our tender Conscience disapproves,
That Ravens should return as well as Doves;
And croak in Pulpits once again to bring
A second Judgment on our Church and King.
Though England does not fear another loss,
'Cause God has burned his Rods at Charing-crosse;
Yet Clergy sins may call him to the Door,
Even him who whipped and scourged them out before.
Oh therefore yet that read the sacred Laws,
Eject their Persons, and disown their Cause:
God, and the King have both condemned this crew,
Then let them not be patronized by you.
It Is not their Cassocks, nor their Surplices
We quarrel at, there is no hurt in these;
We own their Decency, yet every Fool
Cannot be called Monk that wears a Cowle;
Were grace, and learning wanting (by your leaves)
We would not pin our faith on your Lawn-sleeves;
It Is Aarons Breast Plate, and those sacred words
Become a Churchman best, THAT THAT my Lords
Which pious Baxter makes his livery,
Would all our Curates were but such as he!
Pardon my Lords, we do not make this stir
To vindicate the Factious Presbyter;
We hate his ways, and equally disown
The Zealous Rebel, as the Idle Droan;
And beg as often to be delivered from
The Kirk of Scotland, as the Sea of Rome;
We pray for Bishops too, Oh may ye stand
To heal the sad distractions of the Land;
Then give us Priests loyal and painful too,
To give to Caesar, and to us our dues;
Who maugre all the powers of Hell have stood,
Men that are neither drunk with Wine nor Blood:
God save King Charles our Christian Faiths Defender,
And bring Religion to its wonted Splendor.
Written in the behalf of the Country by Lewis Griffin.
A Supplement to the Asses Complaint against Balaam: Or the Cry of the Country
against Ignorant and Scandalous Ministers.
AVaunt ye Smooth-tongu'd Flatterers of the Age;
Praesto ye Mealy-mouthed Prophets; clear the Stage;
Enter the Ass again, who (though he Kneel
Unto the Higher Powers) lifts up his Heel
Against all those who make Gods house a Den
Of It has been a Den of Lay-Theeves long already.
Clergy Thieves; Have at them once again.
But hark; I hear a Country Parish cry,
"Were ever Christians in such slavery?
"Must we be taught by an Illitr' ate Bear?
"He Preach? He Will only teach our Boys to swear.
Is then your Priest a Swearer? Hah -- must he
That taunts a Bishop taste a Pillory?
And it is but Just, and right; yet who controules
Him who Blasphemes the Bishop of our Souls?
What? Is an Oath less poenal than a Word?
Or is the Servant greater than this Lord?
No; He that Swears commits the fouler Sin,
And more deserves to lose his Ears than --
It Is true, Seditious Spirits, that Deny
Obedience to the Sacred Hierarchy,
Merit Severe Correction, let them hae't;
They Are the Disturbers both of Church and State;
Yet Prelat's Zeal would be much better shown
In striking Gods offenders than their Own.
Nay, Gods are theirs; for he that wears lawn sleeves,
Like Christ is murdered 'twixt a brace of Thieves,
Both show their enmity, but Diverse ways,
The Presbyter denies, but This betrays;
Now tell me ( gentle Reader) which were Greater,
The sin of Judas, or the crime of Peter?
Then let the Bishops cast them out, for thus
They do but Justice to themselves and us;
Like the wife Mariners, who, to appease
The fury of the Raging Winds, and Seas,
Threw Jonas overboard; such was his sin,
There was no Cannon Law to keep him in.
Nor is it Reason all should be maintained
In The Church, who took Degrees, and were Ordained;
For He that after proves a Drunken Beast,
Degrades himself from Man, much more from Priest.
And such they were who caused our Bloody War,
When Levy's tribe were kicked by Issachar;
For though Men speak with a not so thy Sons,
Yet God reproved them with the voice of Guns.
Phanaticks, those Philistines, wan the field,
Whilst our poor Israel were forced to yield;
For Ely's boys had lost the Ark of God,
Each Phinehas begot an Ichabod.
Then Oh ye Bishops, heal these sad disasters,
We do not call for Rectors but for Pastors.
A Priest should lead his Parish as a Guide,
Not leap upon their galled backs and ride,
For it is our Mother Church's grand disgrace,
That these black patches stick upon her face.
Written by Lewis Griffin.
BALAAMS REPLY TO THE ASS: OR THE CLERGIES Answer TO THE Countries Complaint.
To the Reverend Bishops,
You Learned Prelates of the House of Peers!
That sit in Moses Chair, and bow your ears
To Widows just Complaints, and Orphans tears!
Grave (Fathers of the Church) to you we come!
Begging for Justice! though they say we are dumb;
If we were so indeed 'twere well for some.
To you we render our complaints alas,
None fitter then an Angel to appese
The fray, betwixt poor Bala'm and his Ass?
And that your Lordships are concerned I Am sure;
Unless you can both scorn and loss endure,
The livings are your own, our's but the cure!
Twill be no wonder to your Learned Train,
That Issacar of Levy should complain!
The Asses spleen, will in his mouth remain.
Nor will it I hope seem strange to any one,
That there is amongst us such division,
Proud Jack did evermore abuse poor John!
In vain it is for Bala'm to reply
Unto the Asses charge, when all men cry,
A switch and spurr's the best Philosophy!
Yet in my heart I think no wife men do,
Think us false Prophets, for they all do know,
They are but Asses, that do count us so.
But oh we cannot hold, should we not speak,
And sigh aloud, our very hearts would break,
'Twould vex a Moses were he never so meek!
Say can it choose but grieve our souls to see?
Simeon and Levy fight, both disagree?
And sorry boys, old Fathers villifie?
Did ever any since the cursed Came,
Turn up his Fathers skirt, divulge his shame?
Yes, yes, mine own dear sons have done the same!
And as if God were deaf, and Conscience dumb,
Rebellion but a peccadillo, some
Like Nero have displayed their Mothers Womb.
Lord did thou send, the wild and Savage Bear,
To slay th'untoward boys that scoffing were,
At the good Prophet for his want of hair
How can thou stay thy hand, when men and all,
Do join together, and us scoffing call,
Though not bald Priests by chance, yet Priests of Baal,
And why Sir John? what mean those names and words?
Or has the Church her Knights, as well as Lords?
Or, tell me are her Keys exchanged for Swords?
True not long since he lay dead in a sown,
Of civil Wars, the cross, and waining Moon,
Parted her Ensigns, and she was undone.
But that some gallant hearts that scorned the loss
Of life and goods, at best but splendid dross
Stayed for to help their Mother bear her Cross.
But why Sir John? would not St. George have been
A better Epethite, but chiefly when
Griffins, and Draggons are so nee' a kin?
Or was it a greater piece of eminence,
To be a Mother, than a Maids defense,
Is love inferior to obedience?
Why the rude Vulgar folk do call us John,
And add a Sir, I must profess I Am one
As must go seek a revelation?
True, we have been as we do all confess,
A long time in the howling wilderness,
Save that we might not preach up righteousness!
Besides our Commons too were very small,
Like to the Baptist's, yet they differ all!
John fed on Honey, but we fed on Gall.
Yet we embrace the title, it is no shame
For to be Christn'd with the Baptists name,
May we be like him all a burning flame!
But ah this is not all that you do see,
A thousand harder names as yet there be
In the poor Parsons Genealogy.
Dogs, Bears and Wolves, Tigers and such as they
That range the Meant Woods, live on the prey,
Are Hieroglyphics fit for us they say.
And yet God knows our hearts, and souls we could
Nor fight, nor fawn, be insolent, nor proud,
Or flush our selves with quaffing humane blood!
But so the Tyrant Monarchs of the East,
Used (in their Triumphs, or their solemn Feasts)
To bait poor Christians in the skins of beasts.
What it is we have done, truly we do not know,
To merit ill of them, did we we would go,
With bended knee to supplicate our Fo!
If we have took away from any one,
More than our Tenth's, on this condition,
We are ready to make restitution!
If Altars, Tapers, be Idolatry,
Gowns, Casfack, Tippets, rags of Popery,
Show us good reason for it we will lay 'em by?
But if the reading Prayers be all our blame,
Cause Daws and Parrots may be taught the same,
The Ass may then return from whence he came?
For is there any man does stand in need,
Of so much wit, as that he will not conceed,
To this, a Pie may sooner speak than read?
But oh we cannot pray our hearts are scant,
Strange that we cannot pray, and yet can cant,
The poor man never did expressions want!
True, wa cannot hang the head, and look demure,
1Talk fast, and loud like Monkeys in a Lure,
And then not question but to sin secure!
We do not love a long and tedious story,
Full of Parenthesis, pride and vain glory,
The Pater Noster's the best Directory!
We do profess that we are none of those,
That Circumflex their Sermons with their Nose,
And mingle Hopkins Rimes, with Wisdoms Prose!
Yet would you but vouchsafe to view the Prayers,
Of your good Mother since these latter years,
Mixed with the incense of a Prelates Tears?
Would you but hearken to her groans, and cries,
Her sweet Patheticks and Apostrophies,
You Would say there was not richer Sacrafice!
The penitent Disciple I durst swear,
Never wept so much, when the pert Presbyter,
Fastened his Fetters, and did him secure!
Even so the Balm tree, lovingly bestows,
Its Tears on them, that do return it blows;
Tears healing as the blood that from it flows!
But stay here comes a scrole of Items, fright
Just like a Tailors Bill, a threadbare Knight,
They say we are sottish, loose, profane, and light!
I do not with these Articles may be,
As false a charge, as manifest a lie,
As those were of a former Century!
For then the bribed Person that should go,
To prove the imputation to be so,
Would be the greater scandal of the two.
But yet I pray, that we may be no less
Religious in plenty then distress!
In Canaan, then in the Wilderness!
But we are Drunkards, men will lie and swear,
Though we with modesty and tears declare,
True is our Doctrine, Temperance our prayer!
Then us for Thieves, and Robbers they do brand,
Though we profess we would upon no hand,
Purchase an Acre of the Churches Land!
But we are wanton, lustful, fond and fickle,
And in our Neighbors Corn do thrust our Sickle,
When we God-wot all hate a Conventickle.
Lastly we are dark Lights, blind Guides by name,
Though if we were, say which deserves most blame,
A glimering Taper, or a wandering flame?
And yet the faults not ours, we had no doubt,
Remained till now, bright shining and devout,
Had not a Sequestration blew us out!
That Northern Gust, that Fatal Hurrican,
That rushed through all the quarters of the Land,
Rooted up Oaks, but let the Mushroms stand!
Good Lord how prejudice and passion blears
Our eyes; how self ends lug men by the ears,
Which way the wind does blow, the Saylor steers!
If we say nothing then they spurn and kick,
Call us dumb dogs, and throw us bones to pick,
The Ass will vapor when he Lions sick!
When we refuse to see, at least to mind,
Their gross abuses, then the Priest is blind,
Weeping perhaps to fee them so unkind!
But if we justify our holiness,
And prove by reason, what we do profess,
The wisdom of the world is foolishness!
At last when envy cannot find a hole,
To shroud her self, down they fit and Condole,
It Is a poor silly superstitious soul!
These are the Scoffs and Jeers, the cruel hits,
That wicked heads invent in drunken fits,
To vex good men, and exercise their wits.
O wicked World, O Monstrous Commonweal,
When men with great applause might kill and steal,
Sensure was Saintship, Sacrilege was Zeal!
When Churches lay like stables, Altars bare,
Or turned to Mangers, Priest, and Organs were
Both silenced, none might preach unless they would swear!
No Music in the Church but Widows cries,
No Sacraments but Oaths, no Rites but lies,
No Christian Burial, and no sacrifice!
But thanks be to our gracious God, for why?
He heard our prayers, and harken'd to our Cry,
And thereupon turned our captivity!
We'are all in peace, long may we so remain,
May the Crown flourish on our Sovereign,
And Aarons Rod blosom and bloom again!
May all the Kings and Churches Enemies
All their plots, projects, and conspiracies,
Be blown away like silly Gnats and Flies!
And now my Lords since we to you have cried,
And nothing that concerns us from you hide,
Pity our sorrows, pardon us beside!
O Father Abraham how can thou see,
The bondsman scoff at Isaac and not be,
In love to him, offended presently?
Alas we don't sigh and complain, because
Our honors lie at stake, but the good laws,
Your reputation, and the Churches cause.
It Is time, it is time my Lords, or to keep in
For your own safeties, or go armed when
The Lyon's couchant, in the Asses skin!
I Will say but this, take it on a Levits word,
When once the Ass does of his own accord
Thus kick Sir John, He Will quickly fling my Lord.
Written by H. W.
THE APOLCGY Of the AUTHOR of the Asses Complaint against Balaam.
Rage on, Ye proud Philistines of the Land,
I scorn your Weakness, and (like Samson) stand
Armed with an Asses Jaw Bone in my hand.
Sure he that tells me of John Baptist, jests,
And of the Tyrants, and their Solemn Feasts;
It Is I that combat with Ephesian Beasts.
Hark! Hark! how Isgrim howles, and Bruin roares,
Had Dives kept such Ban-dogs at his Doors,
They Would Worried Lazarus, not licked his Sores.
They tell us of a Pillory; What then,
We hope to see a Resurrection, when
The Harmless beast shall have his Ears again.
Nay they may take his Life, a worthy prize!
Yet he that spills his Blood cannot be wise,
For Asses never were used in Sacrifice.
But must he Die? pray give him leave to pause,
Is the poor Ass condemned by Lydford Laws?
Sure if he Die you will let him know the Cause.
What think you then? If he that does declaime
Against Drunkenness, and Swearing merits shame;
Then he that writ the Cry, was much to blame.
Or if those men of Israel who (with tears)
Complained of Eli's Sons, were Mutineers;
Then Balaam's Ass deserves to lose his Ears.
But if amongst the pious Learned train,
Dunces are crept, who their profession stain,
Be patient Sirs, our Cry was not in vain.
What shall the Ass forsake his Masters crib,
And follow those that use to swear and bib?
No, He fears neither Pillory nor Gib.
Let Fools and Traitors dread such things, not I,
Who in the Dangerous times of Tyranny,
Owned that, which now they say I do deny.
I that opposed Presbytery when Some
Complied, and Flattered, Others were struck dumb;
It Is known how often I prayed Thy Kingdom come.
His Sacred Majesty I have adored,
And always reverenced the Mitred Lord;
And will defend them both with Pen and Sword.
I quarrel not with him that bows the Knee
Toward the East, Although the Altars be
Mere Stumbling-stones to Some, they are none to Me.
For well I know the King and Parliament,
Our Lawful Lords may by a joint consent
Make Necessary of Indifferent.
As for the Harmless Tapers let them burn;
Yet when the Bridegroom wakes her from her urn,
These will not serve the Sleepy Virgins turn.
To Gowns, and Surplices I am a Friend;
Let Others Cavil, they that will contend
About these things have sure some farther end.
But yet how prudentlie the King prevents
The Churches Rape; He sees their base intents
That 'gin to Rifle her of her Ornaments.
Nor must false Acban long enjoy his wedge,
Justice prepares a Halter and a Sledge;
These are the bitter fruits of Sacrilege.
These deep-dy'd Rebels, Hyppocrites in grain
That Swallowed Bishops Lands, oh what a pain
Was it for them to belch them up again.
Then welcome Loyal Hearts, that scorned to take
Those dangerous Oaths that did Three Kingdoms shake
You that were sequestered for Conscience Sake.
Shine forth again Ye Pious and Devout
Sons of the Church, your Sufferings without doubt
Did only snuff your Light, not put it out.
Yet there are Some whose Age and former smarts
Have much impaired their Learning and their Parts,
Enough to crack their Brains, and break their Hearts.
And plead we against these? no; let my tongue
Be Cursed for ever, if I do them wrong;
They shall not bear the burden of my Song.
He that has suffered poverty, disgrace,
Sickness, and banishment from place to place;
Heaven blast that Hand that throws dirt in his face.
Yet Priests there are, who neither have been true
To God nor Caesar, Oh'tis here the Shoe
Does pinch; the Devil has His Martyrs too.
And now me thinks the Reader pittyes us,
And cries, What kind of Beast is this Whom thus
The Ass calls Ignorant and Scandalous?
Went he to the University? What then?
So the French King with twenty thousand men
Went up the Hill and so came down again.
What did he there? he ate, and drank and slept,
He played at football; and at last he crept
Into a Hood, Then int' Pulpit stepped.
How hap'd it then that he was not refused
By the Bishops? (Friends pray let them be excused)
The Prelates oftentimes have been abused.
As in this Case; A Patron of our age
Presents one Mopsus to a Viccarage,
Far fitter for a Bear-ward, or a Stage.
Now for a Handsome trick they cast about
This Mopsus was A soul unlearned Lout,
And knew the Bishop soon would find him out.
Then learned Corydon in Mopsus name
Went and obtained the place for which he cames;
And now Sir Mopsus does possess the same.
Thus a Good Prelat may be soon betrayed,
When the loose Yet the Patron in this Case had no such corrupt intent.
Patron Pins a Chambermaid
Upon Sir John, her Dowry must be paid.
Should these things hold What Is Learning or the
It Is Money rules the Worlds and some inherit
Their Parsonages by favor, not by merit.
This this Begat the Courtryes scorn and hate,
And made their Squeamish Stomachs nauseate
That Power which now has broke the Serpents pate.
But lo a Reformation! oh sing praise
To Heaven, for now the Bishops clearer rays
Will chase these fogs, and give us better-dayes.
Ye rigid Presbyters lay down your Pride,
And Join; you Know once when a Case was tried,
She had no interest that said Divide.
Yea Dippers, now baptize your selves in tears,
And be not Drawn to Error by the ears;
In spite of Hell, Let Us all be Cavaliers.
Shall our Religion be (like Joseph's coat)
Motly, and bloody? Then the World will note
It Is a true sign we cut our Master's throat.
Ye Conscientious Romists why do we
Wrangle with you? Is it not time to agree?
Take you our Faith, Lend us your Charity.
Oh! If all these would lay aside their passion,
How would the Gospel flourish in the Nation,
Free from old Legends, and new Revelation!
Then Englands Church would outshine other Spires,
Like the Bright Moon amongst the Lesser fires;
And this is all that the poor Ass desires.
Now as for that ingenious pen that writ
Balaam's reply: I shall not carp at it;
His Verses savor both of grace and wit.
But yet I wonder much how he mistook
The Asses Meaning; if again he look
Sure he May read without a Const'ring-book.
Banish but Passion, we shall soon agree,
I bow unto the Prelates, and will be
As true and faithful to the Church as he.
I ever will obey their Just Commands,
And pray to God to Keep them from their hands,
That Hate their Persons and yet love their Lands.
But I should Grieve to see these Men of God,
That sit in Moses chair, and sway his Rod
Prove Grandsires to a Fatal Ichabod.
I would vex my Soul to see Lewd Phinehas race,
Or any Pulpit suffer that disgrace,
To lose a Man and have a Beast in's place.
Sound, powerful preaching is the thing we want,
Yet I abhor their Rhetoric that do rant
In vindication of the Covenant.
And is'c for this the Ass, is made a Mock
By Pamphleteers? And grown a Laughing Stock,
Base ill-bred hounds, that would destroy the Flock.
Then oh ye Gospel-Shepheards do not keep
Such Currs, Although to you they fawn and creep,
That Dog that Bites an Ass, will Worry Sheep.
Lewis Griffin.
FINIS

