A GREAT VICTORY Obtained by the KINGS FORCES In the West of ENGLAND At the
Island of SILLEY.

And the full particulars of the great and bloody Fight between the Parliaments
Forces and the Cavaleers, with the manner how they surprised the said Island,
and took Prisoners, Colonel Butler, the Governor. One Major. Two Captains.
And Diverse other inferior Officers. One Troop of Horse, Great store of Money
and rich Apparel. And all their Ordnance, Arms and Ammunition.


ALSO, Another bloody Fight at Scarbrough Castle in Yorkshire, between the
Kings Forces, and the Parliaments, upon their sallying out of the Castle, and
surprising their Guards, and the number killed and taken prisoners.

Printed in the Year, 1648.

HIS MAJESTY'S LETTER To the Earl of WARWICK
Dated at Newport, October. 19. 1648. Right Honorable,
HIs Majesty's present Concessions with the Commissioners, does plainly
manifest his candid intentions, and real resolutions for peace; and therefore
desires, that the Ear of Loyalty, and the heart of Obedience, may be ready to
receive his gracious promises and Condescentions, for a general peace
throughout his Realms and Dominions, promising upon his Royal Word to leave no
means unattempted for the peace and liberty of his people; and for the better
faciliating of the present work in hand, his Majesty desires that (during the
time of the Treaty) there may be cessation of Arms, and all acts of Hostility
whatsoever, both by Sea and Land, and that no Mariners or Seamen, either upon
the Coast of England, or else where, might plead ignorance thereof, his Majesty
sent a Letter to the Earl of Warwick, purporting,

That his Majesty earnestly desires to put a speedy period to the unhappy
differences of his bleeding Kingdoms; requiring all true subjects to lay their
hands upon their hearts, and to endeavor the propagating of this blessed
Treaty, desiring his Lordship to be isntrumental therein, and to sheath the
sword at Sea, during the said term of time, by giving Express Orders to the
respective Captains aboard the Fleet, to forbear any further Acts of Hostility
against the Princes Navy, till they have further Orders from his Lordship.

His Majesty in the said Letter) likewise intimated that he had given the same
directions to his Son the Prince of Wales, having sent a Letter unto him,
whereby he may understand the will and pleasure of his Majesty.

This morning here arrived a messenger from the Isle of Silley, who purports
very sad news from thence, viz.

That the Soldiery in that Island have declared for the King, secured the
Castle and Fort, and seized upon all the Ordnance, Arms and Ammunition, but
not without loss; for upon notice of their combination and confederacy, about
200 of the well-affected Islanders gathered to a head in the night time, and
sent a messenger to col. Butler (the Governor) the next morning, to advertize
him thereof, and to send some more aid unto them; but the messenger being
intercepted, their design were discovered, and a party of Horse and Foot were
forthwith sent out to suppress them, which caused some action, both parties
bodying, who disputed the place with great resolutenesse and gallantry, for the
space of half an hour; but the Islanders being overpowred were forced to
retreat, the Soldiery pursued them to the very clifs of the Sea, killed ten of
them, and took above 50 prisoers, the rest escaped away in long Boats.

During which conflict, another party of the Revolters hastened to the
Governors quarters, but missing of him, made toward the Church, where they
fell upon Col. Butler, and his party, and after many desperate and combatant
blows, disarmed the Colonel, one Major, two Captains and some other inferior
Officers, and dragged them by the hair of the head to the chief Fort, vowing to
cut their throats.

They have also broken open their lodging rooms, and plundered them of all
their moneys, clothes, and arms, and says, That they shall lie and rot in the
dark Dungeons, if they will not declare for the King: this strikes terror to
the well affected, much lamenting the loss of so considerable a place, the
enemy having possessed themselves of 20 piece of Ordnance, 400. arms, 15 Tun of
Match, 20 Barrels of powder, and a Troop of Horse.

Newport 21 October. 1648.

New propositions from the undanted Independents.
Letters from the Army say, that their hearts are of known integrity and
faithfulness, both toward King, City, and Country, and are resolved to see
the King invested, the Kingdom settled, and the Liberties and Franchises of the
City of London firmly preserved and maintained, without any violation
whatsoever; and as a testimony of their fidelity, have declared that they will
use their utmost endeavors for the composing of all differences, and
inthroning of the King in his Royal Throne at Westminster, and unite Him with
His great Council of England, which God grant may speedily be effected. This
is the sense of many in the Army, although diverse objects against the same;
especially the Northern party, and their Adherents, who have presented their
Remonstrance and Desires to both Houses, as follows.

Humbly desiring, That Justice may be impartially and speedily executed upon
the grand Delinquents o the Kingdoms, especially such as have been the only
promoters of this last Rebellion, who are traitors by the Law of the Land, and
ought to be made exemplary without partiality, there being no exception therein
to excuse any particular person (though the highest and greatest Incendiary and
Delinquent) from Justice, who have confessed themselves guilty of all the
blood, rapine, murder, and almost utter ruin of these three poor dying, and
last gasping Kingdoms, with whom a Treaty must be had when they are twice
conquered, and when God has delivered them up into the hands of his people, to
the end Justice may be executed on them, and their lives sacrificed as traitors
to all future Generation. Further remonstrating and declaring, that with
unexpressible grief of heart, they find the affections of Parliament alienated
from them, in slighting their just and lawful addresses, thinking them not
worthy of an answer thereunto, whereby they conceive themselves in the capacity
of enemies, or not free men, which will justly challenge the same from them, as
being their Deputies and Trustees, or else petitioning for things unjust,
though they know they are according to their solemn League and Covenant, and
their own proceedings and printed Declarations, upon which they engaged with
them, and for them; and without which, we should never have drawn a sword the
second time in their quarrel. And declare, that if their intentions further
appear (as they have too much of late) to side with, and act for their enemies,
and against the interest of them, and all the free Commons of England, in
making their enemies and conquered slaves to be their masters and commanders,
they must look to and depend upon the law of nature for their preservation
against those divellish and malignant principle, to which they declare
themselves open enemies, and resolve to he utmost of their abilities to oppose,
with the loss of lives and fortunes. Protesting, still to keep their first
integrity without spot or blemish, and not bow their knee to Baal at the Kings
Command, neither at the Pariaments, and that if they act against the truth
reposed in them by the people, the people are bound in conscience and duty to
act against them, Salus populi being Suprema Lex.


A bloody Fight at Scarbrough Castle,
SIR,
ON Monday last the Besieged in Scarbrough Castle sallied out upon our Forces,
who by the negligence of three Sentinels, surprised one of our guards unawares,
killed 5 of our men, took about 30 prisoners, and wounded may; this sudden
Onset allarums the horse guards, whereupon Col. Bethel advances, charging the
enemy with one troop of horse, fell in amongst them, rescued the prisoners,
killed nine of the enemy, the rest retreated, Col. Bethel pursues, and chased
them to the very Gates, took, 14 prisoners, and made good his retreat with the
loss of one man.

Beverley 18. October. 1648.

And it is further advertized from the Kingdom of Scotland, that the Earl of
Lanerick is gone to the Prince to advise with his Highness, touching the
disposal of the Fleet, and to invite them into the North Road, if possible to
escape the Earl of Warwicks Navy. And it is said, that diverse Agents are sent
from France, and other places, to treat with the States of Holland, for a
conjunction between Vantrump (Admiral of the Dutch Fleet) and the Prince of
Wales. But the States disapprove thereof, and have declared against the same.


FINIS.

