Die Mercurii 24. April, 1644.
IT is this day ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That Sr Robert
Harley and Sr Robert Pie do from this House give thanks unto Doctor Stanton and
Master Green, for the great pains they took in the Sermons they preached
this day at St Magarets Westminster at the entreaty of this House, it being
the day of public Humiliation: And they are desired to print their Sermons:
And it is ordered that none shall presume to print their, or either of their
Sermons, but by the Authority of their hands writing.

H. Elsyng. Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I appoint Philemon Stephens to print my Sermon,

John Green.

NEHEMIAH'S Tears and Prayers FOR JVDAH'S AFFLICTION, And the ruins and
repair of JERUSALEM.

Delivered in a SERMON in the Church of Magarets Westminster, before the
Honorable House of COMMONS upon the day of their Monthly Humiliation, April
24. 1644.

BY JOHN GREEN Master of Arts, late Pastor of Pencomb in the County of
Hereford.

Isai. 22. 4. Look away from me, I will weep bitterly, labor not to comfort
me, because of the spoiling of the daughter of my people.

Ver. 9. Ye have seen also the breaches of the city of David, that they are
many.

Psalm. 51. 18. Do good in thy good pleasure unto Sion: build thou the walls of
Jerusalem.

LONDON, Printed by G. M. for Philemon Stephens, and are to be sold at his shop
at the golden Lion in Paul's Churchyard. 1644.

PIISSIMO,

Amplitudini vestrae in Domino Joh. Green.

A SERMON PREACHED Before the Honorable House of COMMONS at their Monthly
Fast on April 24. 1644.
NEHEMIAH 1. 3, 4. And they said unto me, The remnant that are left of the
captivity there in the Province, are in great affliction and reproach: the
wall of Jerusalem also is broken down, and the gates thereof burnt with fire.

And it came to pass when I heard these words, that I sat down and wept, and
mourned certain days, and fasted, and prayed before the God of Heaven.


THe first Verse of the words read (if you look back to that next before) are
the answer of Hanani and certain Verse. 1.
men of Judah unto a question moved by Nehemiah being then in Shushan the
Palace, the winterhouse Lavater ex Athenaeo, lib. 1^. cap. 3. Antiquitar. lib.
10. cap. 5.
of the Kings of Persia: Josephus relates the story thus: Nehemiah meeting
certain strangers entering the gates of the City Shushan, perceiving them to
have come a long journey, and hearing them speaking one to another in the
Hebrew tongue, he demanded of them whence they came, they answering that they
came out of Judea, he puts a twofold question unto them, one how it stood with
the people of the Jews, that were returned out of the captivity, and then in
the province of Judea; the other what the condition of Jerusalem: And in the
former words of the Text they give answer to both (and it was a sad answer) for
the Jews that came out of the captivity, they are in a very miserable
condition, in great affliction and reproach, under many hard pressures, full of
scorn and contempt, and for Jerusalem it remains still in its old ruins, the
walls continue broken down, the gates burnt with fire; and if we shall add to
these the time Nehem. 1. 1. 2. ^.
when this report was made, which will appear by comparing the first verse of
this Chapter with the first of the second, to have been in the twentieth year
of Artaxerxes the King, we have, as I conceive, the sum of that which the
former verse holds out.

In the latter you may see how this sad report affected Nehemiah, it put him
also into a sad condition, when he heard how it was with the people, how with
Jerusalem, he wept and mourned, and it was not a little sudden melancholic
fit for a time, but it held out certain days; and to show that this mourning
of his was real, did really affect him, that it came indeed from bowels of
pity and compassion toward the people and the city, it put him upon those
means, that (if any) would minister relief to the city and people, and make
way for their freedom from former pressures, and expedite the repair of
present ruins: And these are two, he fasted and he prayed, and in the latter
you may consider unto whom he prays, to the God of heaven, if you look to the
last verse of this Chapter, you shall find Nehemiahs maine request was to the
King, that he might find favor in his sight, his suit was to a man on earth
(so he calls him in that verse, this man) yet he goes to heaven for the
obtaining of it, as knowing it would little avail him to go unto the King,
unless he went first unto God to move the Kings heart, he had small hope that
his petition could speed with man, which had not first been presented unto God.

Here is ground you see for variety of observations, I shall do, as you use,
when you go to a shop furnished with choice of several wares, you will not
take all that may be had, but only such as best fit your occasions; So shall I
by Gods assistance out of this variety observable from the Text, endeavor to
single out what I conceive will best suit with our present times* and somewhat
further the duties of this day.

Observe. 1. Jer. ^9. 10, 11.
You shall hear the Lord before the Captivity making a gracious promise by
the Prophet Jeremiah unto the people of the Jews; when 70* years are
accomplished at Babylon, I will visit you, and perform my good word toward
you, in causing you to return to this place, for I know the thoughts, that I
think toward you, says the Lord, thoughts of peace, and not of evil, to give
you an expected end. Here was a precious Promise made before they knew the
misery, that should make them stand in need of such a Promise: And the Lord
began to make this good, when in the first year of Cyrus, according to that
Promise, the Lord stirred up the Ezra 1^, 2, ^.
spirit of Cyrus by Proclamation to grant free liberty unto all the people* to
go up unto Jerusalem, and to build the Temple: And if ver. 5.
you go to verse the fifth, you shall see how fairly the work proceeded, The
Lord stirred up also the spirits of the chief of the fathers of Judah, and
Benjamin, and the Priests, and the Levites, with all them whose spirit God had
raised, to go up, to build the house of the Lord, which is in Jerusalem.

And yet many years after (as you shall hear in the following passages) comes
this sad report to Nehemiah, that all was at a stand for Jerusalem, The remnant
of the people that are left were in great affliction and reproach: the wall of
the city remained broken down, and the gates thereof burnt with fire.

An expected end God had promised, and questionless the people of the Jews
had long looked for the accomplishment of this promise, but it must not come
yet, they had more affliction to suffer, the walls of Jerusalem must remain
longer in their ruins, and the gates in their ashes.

Thus we shall find the Lord often dealing with his Church and people, they
seldom enjoy any great blessing, or enter upon the fruition of any special
promised mercy, but it costs them dear: God made a merciful Promise to
Abraham, that he would give Genesis 15. 7.
him and his posterity that goodly land of Canaan, yet they must pay dear for
this before they had it, Know of a surety, (says God) that thy seed shall be a
stranger in a land that is not theirs, and ver. 13.
they shall serve them, and they shall afflict them four hundred years. They
must not look to have so pleasant and fruitful a land for nothing; No it must
cost them dear, many years hard service, a great deal of affliction, they
must go through an iron furnace, Deuteronomy. 4. 20. Genesis 15. 17. Genesis 37. 5, 6, 7, 8,
9. Psa. 105. 17, ^8. Divino ju l^^io quod de^l^r are conatisunt rea^tendo
ser^^erunt, Greg Moral. l 6. c 1^. Ideo venditus est a ^ra^r^b^s Joseph ne
a^oraretur ^ed ^deo est adoratus, quia venditus, sic div^^um consil^um du^^
devitatur, impletur, sic bumanasaptentia, du n reluctatur, comprehend t^r, Id
ibid. Isai. 65* 17, 18, 19. Rev. 21* 1, 2, 3, 4. 2 Pet. 3. 13.
so is Egypt called, represented (as it may seem) to Abraham in his vision in
that smoking furnace: another instance may be that of Joseph, who was assured
that he should have the honor which his dreams had promised, but it must cost
him his being sold for a servant, his casting into prison, his feet hurt with
fetters, he was laid in it on, or as the margent, his soul came into iron, and
hitherto he was brought into a far lower condition, then he was at the time of
his dreams, yet see the overruling Providence of the most wise God so
disposing, that every descent into a lower condition, was made unto him as a
staire to ascend unto that honor which his dreams had promised.

To come nearer unto our selves, and that which concerns the Church in this
latter age of the world, there was a glorious Promise made to the Church by
that Evangelicall Prophet Isay, Behold, I create new heavens, and a new earth,
and the former shall not be remembered, nor come into mind. But be you glad and
rejoice for ever, in that which I create. And John the Prophetical Evangelist
gives the Church such assurance of this, as if he had then seen it performed,
I saw a new heaven and a new earth: for the first heaven and the first earth
were passed away. And I John saw the holy city, new Jerusalem coming down
from God out of heaven. And the Church expects the accomplishment hereof, We,
says the Apostle, according to his Promise, look for new heavens, and a new
earth, wherein dwells righteousness. It is now the Churches expectation, we
look with John to see this new heaven, and new earth, and to behold that holy
City coming down from Heaven, we hope the Lord at this present is about this
work: but go back to the former part of this prophecy, and you shall find,
that the Church must not have this new heaven and new earth, till it has paid
dear for them, you may see from the eighth Chapter to Rev. 12. 3, 4, 13, 15,
17.
this 21. what the Church paid for this before she had it; I will instance only
in the 12. and 13. Chapters, in the former you have a great red dragon, that
is, as our best Interpreters take it, the Devil, and what mischief he did to
the Church, you may find in several passages of that Chapter, he stood before
the woman, which was to be delivered, for to devour her child as soon as it
was borne, not being able to devour the child, he persecuted the woman which
brought forth the man child, casting out of his mouth water as a flood after
the woman, that he might cause her to be carried away of the flood, and when no
prevailing against her, he went to make war with the remnant of her seed, which
keep the Commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ.

Rev. 13* 1, 7, ^1, 14.
In the next Chapter there is one beast rising out of the sea, having seven
heads and ten horns, the heathenish Roman Empire, And to him it was given to
make war with the Saints, and to overcome them, ver. 7. in ver. 11. there is
another beast rising out of the earth, the Papacy, which had the power of the
first beast, and did by many lying wonders deceive them that dwell on the
earth; what the Church has suffered by the cruelty and subtlety of these two
beasts, the histories of the Church do abundantly manifest: It cost the
Primitive times the tortures and blood of many thousand Martyrs before truth
and peace settled by Constantine and Theodosius* I need not tell you what our
own Kingdom, Germany and France paid for the beginning of Reformation.

If you would have my thoughts, why the Lord in his wisdom sells his choice
mercies at so dear a rate, I conceive it may be, England, great matters are
expected, but how do we prize them? surely it cannot be better known, then by
what we will give for the purchase of them: Will we part with all to enjoy
them? Do we think our whole estates, our children, our nearest friends, our
dearest blood not too dear a price to pay for them? It is an undoubted
evidence, that we highly prize those things which we neither will nor can want
whatsoever they cost us, when all that we have, and more if we had it, shall
freely go for them, and questionless that wise merchant could no way so fully
manifest his Matthew. 13* 46.
esteem of the pearl to be more worth then all he had, then when he sold all
that he had, and bought it.

when he is pleased to bestow them: health is much prized by all, but more by
those that have lain many years upon the bed of languishing: Liberty is sweet
unto and desirable of all, but most of those that have known the hardship of
a long imprisonment; the violence and danger of a storm makes a safe harbor
the more welcome: Mark 5. 25, 26, ^7.
the diseased woman that was cured of her issue of twelve years continuance,
would have taken it for a great favor, if any of the Physicians she made use
of could have cured her, but when she had spent all, and found her self not
the better, but the worse, then Christ to come and heal her without any
further cost or pains but only the touch of the hemme of his garment, could not
but work in her a greater and more thankful esteem of her cure: The Joh. 5.
2, 4, 5, 6, 7.
impotent man at the poole Bethesda, that had an infirmity thirty eight
years, would have been very glad if any man would have helped him into the
water, when the Angel troubled it, and it was his complaint to Christ, that he
could find no such favor from any, now when after so long waiting, man would
do nothing for him, for Christ to come and heal him with a word, it could not
but work in him an high esteem of that comfortable healing: Abraham much
desired a child, and so desired, that when God told him, Genesis 15. 1, ^. Genesis
17. 17. Genesis 21. 6, ^8, 12. Riserat pater admirans in gaudio, riserat and matter
dubitans in gaudio, sed side confirmata ri^^s ^l^e non al irride^dum opprobr^i,
sed ad celebrandum gaudium pertinebat. Aug. de Civ. Dei, l. 18* c. 31.
I am thy exceeding great reward, he replies, Alas, Lord, What will thou give
me, seeing I go childlesse? as if all that God could do for him was nothing,
till God gave him a child: The Lord did at length give him a child, but it
was when Abraham and Sarah were out of all hope, and see how this affected both
their hearts, the Text says, Abraham laughed at the promise, he grew to such
an excess of joy, that he could not contain himself from laughter: and Sarah
when the Promise was made good, and Isaac borne, God, says she, has made me
to laugh: though her former laughter proceeded from unbelief, yet this from
joy; and to show the height of joy, whereunto this mercy had raised them,
their son must bear the name of their joy, be called Isaac, that is, Laughter,
Genesis 21. 3.

It is ordinary with us, what costs little, we do not usually esteem much,
and we can easily part with it; our common Proverb, Lightly come, lightly go:
but such an estate, such an house cost me so many thousands the purchase, so
much in building, so much in furnishing, and other accommodations for my
content, so that I laid out my whole estate, nay, hazarded my life in running
through some dangers to compass it, what part with this? No, I will rather
part with my life then forgo this: Surely, I am persuaded, that Reformation,
just Liberties, and Privileges, with other Mercies we now expect, if the Lord
please to give unto us our expected end; or if this favor denied to us, yet
vouchsafed to our posterity, I am persuaded (I say) that we and they will
far more prize and esteem these, by how much more they cost our forefathers
and our selves such loss in estates, so much blood to purchase and obtain
them at Gods hand: Is not then that done for Religion, for Reformation, the
assurance of just Liberties, and after Peace which we expect, and for which we
have long prayed, yea, and pai'd much also, surely it is to be feared, and we
may probably conceive, that we are not yet come to Gods price, England and
Ireland must both bid more and abide more, before they enter upon those great
desired mercies. Has it cost us much of our estates already? it is somewhat
probable it must cost us more, suppose our whole estates, nay, our lives, yet
that pearl in the Gospel, the Kingdom of God in its power and purity will
prove more worth then all.



Soldiers will never grudge the hazard of limbs, of life, so they may get the
victory, and what should dishearten or dismay any who^e hearts the Lord has
inclined to further the work in hand, willingly and cheerfully to lay out
themselves, and what they have in their power, whereby they may help the Lamb
to overcome, and to set Christ upon his Throne, that this and all the Kingdoms
of the earth may be his, who is the King of kings, and Lord of lords.

It is storied of Epaminondas that having received by a spear Aemilias P^cb^
in vita Epaminond^.
his deaths wound in the battle betwixt the Thebans and Lacedaemonians, the
spear head remained in the wound till he heard that his army had gotten the
victory, and then he rejoycingly commanded it to be plucked out, his blood and
life issuing forth together, with these words, Satis vixi, invictus enim
moriar, I have lived enough that die unconquered: and being told a little
before his death that however he had lost his life, yet his shield was safe, he
cries out by way of exulting, Vester Epaminondas cum sic moritur, non moritur,
your Epaminondas thus dying, does not die.

Ephesians. 6. 16.
There is no shield like that of faith, and if the heart be right, he may die
with comfort in that cause, which preserves life in the doctrine of faith,
leaves that safe and entire: Oh tell me, is it not an estate well weakened, that
strengthens the power of Religion? is it not a life well lost, that helps to
save the life of truth? and yet a life so lost (if we dare take Christ's Word)
is not lost, but saved, Mark ^ ^5.
Whosoever shall lose his life for my sake, and the Gospels, shall save it:
since then we hear what Gods people have paid for such mercies as we expect,
if we have not hitherto received what we desire* let us think, we are not yet
come to that price which God looks for, and which these great mercies must
cost before we have them.

Nehemiah for perfecting the work of the Courts of the Temple, and repairing
the ruins of the city Jerusalem, had that which was already done cost the
people much affliction, many sufferings, and does there yet come a sad report
of the low, afflicted and despised condition of the Jews then in Judea, let
the consideration hereof help to support the spirits of Gods people in their
most sad dejecting times: you have heard there is a new heaven and a new earth
promised, a Jerusalem to come down from heaven, a glorious building going up:
And you know they which build large and great houses, being to set them upon
hollow and false ground (as we call it) are forced to dig very deep before they
lay the foundation, and usually when we see workmen digging very low for a
foundation, we presently conclude, here is some great building, a frame of more
then ordinary weight to be set up: I hope this is the Churches present case;
it has been brought very low in Germany, in Ireland, in our own land, and we
trust the Lord is all this while digging the foundation, this is the work the
Lord suffers the Churches enemies to labor in, to prepare the groundwork
for erecting in his Church a glorious fabric, that these at the worst shall be
but the Lords mattocks and spades, and if the Lord be still pleased to continue
them at their work in Ireland, in England, it is to be feared, that it may be,
too many of the Irish hearts are yet to Godward as rotten and hollow as their
bogs, and we in England, though we have firmer ground, yet I doubt as false
hearts, a great deal of hypocrisy, hollownesse, and rottenness remaining, so
that the Lord, though he have already gone very deep, brought us low, is not
yet come to firm ground, so may go on to bring us lower in our affliction, to
work us lower in our humiliation.

And I could wish our spirits in regard of humiliation always solow as our
condition, that when God throws us on the ground, we would lie on the ground,
put our mouths in the dust: but at no time to be low in distrust, for our
confidence in God, to have highest spirits in lowest estates, as knowing that
our raising up is then at hand: If a stranger one that never heard of the
ebbing and slowing of the sea, and of your river, should come to your Thames
side at an high water, and should stay and observe how much it falls in six or
seven hours, he might probably think, that your river would run it self
dry; whereas you that are acquainted with your tides, know that when your ebb
is at the lowest, the tide of a rising water is returning, and trust unto it
the lowest estate of the Church Osiander Cent. 4. cap. 5. Sethu^ Calvisius,
anno Christi, (...) 8. Osiand. Cent. 4. cap. 9. Idem Cent 4* cap 14. and 3^.
is mostly an immediate forerunner of its raising; the Church in the Primitive
times found it thus, the most raging and violent of those ten bloody
Persecutions was that of Dioclesian, never the like tortures invented and
executed, nor so many martyred and banished, only in Egypt 144000. put to
death, 700000. banished, yea so violent his rage that his wife Serena (however
a well deserving Lady) put to death, because a Christian; but this cruelty
and rage of his followed with the mild and peaceable times of Constantius the
father and Constantine the son: And it is the Lords promise it shall be thus,
and that upon a right and religious observation of days, of fasting and
humiliation, Is not this the fast Isai. 5^. 6* 7* 8, 9, 10.
that I have chosen, to loose the bands of wickedness? and in the close of ver.
10. then shall thy light rise in obscurity, and thy darkness Psalm. 30. 5.
be as the noone day, thy darkest and saddest night of calamity shall be
followed with a gladsome and comfortable morning of joy, so cleared from
after-clouds of sorrow and distress, as is the Sun at noon day, when it
shines in its full strength.

Observe. 2.
To proceed, are the walls of Jerusalem broken down, and her gates burnt with
fire? Jerusalem that had out-stood so many sieges, from before which the
confident, potent, and numerous army Isai. 37. 36, 37.
of Zenacherib was forced to rise and retreat with shame and loss of 85000* in
one night, of whom the Psalmist sung after that 2 Chronicles. ^0.
deliverance as some think, or as others after that from that combination of
those many Kings that came against Jehoshaphat, Compass Psa* 48. 12, 1^.
about Zion, go round about, and tell the towers, mark well the walls thereof,
behold her bulwarks, see if a stone shaken, or a turfe fallen in her outworks?
what Jerusalem, She that was princess Lam. 1. 1. Calvisius ex Iosepho.
among the nations, so strong, so populous, as twenty hundred thousand in it
at the beginning of the siege, or as some above four millions; in so seeming
secure a condition, as the Kings of the Lam. 4. 12.
earth, and all the inhabitants of the world would not have believed that the
enemy should enter into the gates of Jerusalem; the walls of this Jerusalem
broken down, and her gates burnt with fire?

Oh learn that former deliverances will not secure sinful Kingdoms, and
sinning Cities from after dangers and ruins; I will only commend unto you the
instance of Nineveh made secure by the Lords turning away a former threatened
judgment, and within 40. days of execution, yet then exposed to a miserable
ruin, Art Nehum 3. 8, 9.
thou better then populous No? from ver. 8. to the end of the Chapter, a fit
resemblance in many particulars of this land of ours, the Lord grant we may
neither be like that in sin, or destruction.

2 Chro. 12. 4. Isai. 36. 1, 2.
cities that belonged to Judah would not satisfy Shishak the King of Egypt, but
he came up against Jerusalem* the like of Zennacherib, the like certainly the
enemies malice and fury against your city, and methinks I hear their
Generals saying of yours, as once ^ King. 22. 3.
Ahab of Ramoth in Gilead, Know ye not that London is ours, and be we still,
and take it not out of the hands of Rebels and traitors? (for so they call
you) or as Haman once of Mordecai, all the Esther 5. 1^.
honor and favor I enjoy availes me nothing, so long as I see Mordecai the Jew
sitting in the Kings gate: That they have Bristoll in the West, York in the
North, with others, will not satisfy, unless they had London also: And
believe it, their taking of other places, is but to make way for the surprizall
of this: You shall observe a workman sent into a rough wood for the felling of
some great Oak beset with briars or smaller shrubs, first cutting up these; but
for what End? surely that nothing might stand in his way, which might hinder
his full stroke at the Oak to cut that down, so assuredly their taking of what
other places soever, is but to make way for their full (and if they could reach
it) fatal blow against this City.

As therefore to raise up your hearts unto great thankfulness, we may say of
your City, as they of Laish, It is a place where there is Judge. 18. 10. ver. 7.
no want of any thing in the earth, so I beseech you, let not that be said of
you, which was of them in a former verse, they saw the people that were
therein, how they dwelt careless, quiet and secure, and no greater
provocations to an attempt then wealth and security, the Danites presently set
upon them; let therefore the ver. 9, 11, 12.
enemies rage and vigilancie for your ruin, double your circumspection, and
increase the firmer union of hearts affections and endeavors for your
preservation.

Observe. 3. Calvisius, and al^is.
To go yet further in the report, when came it to Nehemiah? it was (as you
heard) in the twentieth year of Artaxerxes the King, as our best Chronologers
compute, about 146. years after their return from Babylon. So slowly for the
most part go up the repaires of Gods people, not alone in the Civil, but
Ecclesiastique state, the Temple whose foundation laid the second year after
their Ezra 3. 8, 6, 15.
return, not finished till 111. years after, in the 6th year of Darius, and
for Temple-Service and Worship, Reformation of many things concerning the
Sabbath, teaching the Law, and re-building the gates of the Courts of the
Temple, not done till after this time Osiander.
by Ezra and Nehemiah: It was thus in the Primitive times, Philip the first
heathenish Emperor that was baptized began some Reformation in the year of
Christ 247. Constantine went on where Philip left in the year 310. Theodosius
395. added what Constantine had omitted; so Reformation then an 150. years
growing to any measure of perfection.

Several reasons might be given why Temple and City work went on so slowly
in Jerusalem, I shall entreat you to take notice of the most remarkable.

Nehem. 2. 10.
State, which the power and policy of Hell did not oppose.) It grieved
exceedingly Sanballat the Horonite, and Tobiah the servant of the Ammonite,
that there was come a man to seek the welfare of the children of Israel: and
in these enemies, we may Ezra 4. 8.
consider first their quality, men of place and command, Rehum the Chancellor,
or as Tremellius reads it, Praeses Concilii, President of the Council, one
that ruled the Council Table, and Shimshi the Scribe, or as in the Margent,
the Secretary, or as Tremellius, Legis Ezra 5* 3.
peritus the Lawyer; and to their assistance came Tatnai the Governor, or as
the Geneva, the Captain and his Companions, and to make them a square number,
a quaternion, you shall find Noadiah a Nehem. 6. 14.
Prophetess (the female sex will be stirring) and other false Prophets
appearing against the work, and the persons employed in it, and surely when any
good work is intended or begun for Church and State, it would be a wonder, and
the devil might seem much to forget himself, if he should not make use of
some ill affected, or disaffected Churchmen to hinder and oppose it.

I will not stay you with their Methods, by engaging the Kings of Ezra 4. 12,
13.
Persia in the opposition, by procuring Edicts and Letters, and Proclamations
against them, and that upon false informations of rebellion, sedition, not
paying tribute, custom, and endamaging the Kings revenue; nor will I trouble
you with their manner of opposing, Nehem. 2. 19. 4. 2, 3, 8. 6. 10, 12.
by scoffs against their persons and their work, by combinations to take up
arms, to hinder the work by the sword, and by hire to corrupt some of those
that sided with Nehemiah, either to betray him, or to put him upon some
dishonorable or hazardous attempt, all these are obvious to every eye that
will but read the story, and I presume you often hear of them: so that whither
you Judge. 15. 4* Cant. 3. 15. Isai. 9. ^5.
consider the variety of the opposers, like Samsons foxes turned tail to tail
and firebrands betwixt them (and I am sure the Scripture affords some of them
no better names) an association of Courtiers, Lawyers, Soldiers, false
prophets; or their drawing in Kings to countenance, protect and authorize them,
or lastly, all their Methods and proceedings, you may discern our times so
paralelling those, as if the present plot were drawn from theirs, and the
model fetched from thence.

Judah and Benjamin, and whether all of these a question, their Nehem. 7. 67.
whole number with men and maidservants under 50000. and those that did
return, so much minding their own houses, the repair of their own ruins, as
the Temple and Jerusalem neglected, so the Prophet, Is it time for you, O ye,
to dwell in your cieled Hag. 1. 4.
houses, and this house lie waste?

What great hindrances have private interests been to the public good, the
breaches of Jerusalem less minded, because too many too much mind their own,
My house, says the Lord, is waste, ver. 9.
and why, ye run every man to his own house? It was that which Judge. 5. 17.
kept Asher from joining with Deborah and Barak against Sisera, Asher continued
on the Sea shore, and abode in his breaches, he dwelt in a sea-towne much
decai'd, had suffered already by the enemy, and so had enough to do, to make
up and make good his own breaches: Don Alfonso King of Arragon, was wont to
say, Fr. Chapter de Fonseca.
that if he had been Emperor when Rome flourished, he would have built a Temple
before the Capitol, wherein the Senators should lay down all private
interests, and lay aside their own particular benefits whenever any thing was
to be done for the wealepublique, before they went to crave the assistance of
their gods; And surely it is great pity, that any man's private respect should
hinder the common good; nor will it be well with the body politic, where it
is not with this as in the natural, which will willingly loose a great deal
of blood in some vein, many times unto fainting, will endure the cutting off a
limme or two to preserve the health and life of the whole.

And here give me leave to commend unto all, (whose hearts and desires the Lord
has stirred up to further the public good) these two short directions: 1. So
seriously to mind the public good, as if in respect of that they minded
nothing else; and 2ly, to go about the public work with united minds, see the
fruit of these two both for Temple and State-work in the story of Ezra and
Nehemiah, Ezra 3. 1.
how speedily went up the Altar and foundation of the Temple, Nehem 4. 6.
when the people gathered themselves as one man to Jerusalem: and for the
cities repair, So built we the wall, and all the wall was joined together unto
the half thereof: and he will tell you what caused this, the people had a
mind to work, a mind and union of minds what will they not compass?

Psalm. 1^7. 8. Calvis. anno Christi, 95. Rev. 18. 2.
in Italy, as once of Babylon in Chaldea, Babylon, who art to be destroyed: and
this so certain, as an Angel near 1600. years ago, spoke of it, as already
down, Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen, and the time of her fall is we
hope so near, as me thinks I hear the Lord summoning all the parts of his
Church throughout the world against Romish Babylon, as once against that other,
Put Jer. 50. 14.
your selves in array against Babylon round about: all ye that bend the bow,
shoot at her, spare no arrows: for she has sinned against the Lord. Let me, I
pray you have your leave and audience to press this with some enlargement.

Rev. 17. 17.
The Lord long ago foretold, that those ten horns, which had formerly given
their power to the whore, should hate the whore, and shall not all be willing
and ready to do that, which God will have done, but must we go no farther,
then to hate her, yes, this hatred must carry us on to the use of all means to
make her desolate, and naked; but why hate her and shoot at her? because she
seeks our lives, plunders us of our estates, bereaves us of our peace? no look
at the close of the verse in the Prophet, for she has sinned against the Lord,
robbing in most of her doctrines God of his glory, Christ of his honor.

The Bow and Arrows were in former ages the glory of our Nation, many
glorious victories gotten by our English Archers, never sure more need to
appear then now, and the Lord now if ever calls for them, and there is none
in this Congregation from the greatest to the least, but God has given him a
Bow and Arrow wherewith he may shoot against Babylon.

Your Bow, noble and worthy Patriots, is that power which Scylurus the
Plutarch. Moral. de ga^ru^^tate.
Scythian King his 80. arrows given to his 80. sons at his death, is I am
persuaded well known, and I desire may be always thought on, no strength
being able to break them, whilst bound up, and bundled together in the sheafe;
the Lord give you Joseph's blessing, and you, as he, have need of it, The
Archers have sorely grieved Genesis 4^. 23, 24.
him, and s^ot at him, and hated him; is not your condition like? are not you
those against whom the workers of iniquity bend their Psalm* 64. ^, ^, 4, 5.
bows, to shoot their arrows, even bitter words? but his bow abode in
strength, and the arms of his hands were made strong, by the hands of the
mighty God of Jacob; The Lord also be pleased to give you all a double portion
of Jobs honor, My glory (says he) I^b 29. ^0.
was fresh in me, and my bow was renewed in my hand, that is, say some, Let my
power and authority be never diminished, let me not Pineda.
err in judgment, let all my counsels be directed and prospered by the Lord,
or as others, let there be a daily increase of my strength, to Mercerus.
pass through all oppositions, and to overcome all difficulties, and the Lord
keep that in the Psalm far from every one of you; They Psalm. 78. 57.
turned back and dealt unfaithfully, they were turned aside like a broken bow?

Those unto whom the Lord has given ability of body, their Judge. 5. 9.
My heart is toward the governors of Israel, which offered themselves
willingly, it would be very pleasing unto God, if that might be found in them
in the literal sense, which the Psalmist otherwise Psalm. 110. 3.
applies, Thy people shall come willingly at the time of assembling thine
army, so the Geneva translation reads it, and know you can never more honor
God with your strength, then by joining with those that fight the battles of
this strong Lord against Babylon.

1 Chronicles. 29. 6, 7, 9.
me commend a worthy pattern unto you, of David and the chief of the fathers,
the captains of thousands and hundreds, and it was for Temple work, and they
offered largely, Then the people rejoiced for that they offered willingly,
because with a perfect heart they offered willingly to the Lord, and David the
King also rejoiced with great joy.

2 Samuel 1. 22.
will be as successful, as that bow of Jonathan, that turns not back from
the blood of the slain, from the fat of the mighty, it is the bow of prayer,
the ejaculations of an holy heart, shot up to heaven, these arrows have steel
heads, they will pierce and stick where they light, sharp and keen in the
heart of the enemy, they are invisible arrows, the enemy can neither
discover nor decline them, they will kill in the dark, this arrow will find a
joint in 1 King. 22. 34.
Ahabs armor, draw this arrow as Jehu did against Jehoram with 2 King. 9. ^4.
your full strength, and doubt not but it will in Gods time smite our Romish
Jehoram at the heart, and sink him in his Chariot and chair of pride; O that
when ever our armies are in the field charging the enemy, a shower of these
arrows of fervent prayers, a volley of this shot might light as thick on the
enemies camp, as those hailestones at Bethoron, we should I doubt not see more
slain Josh. 10. 11.
by this shower of prayer then the sword.

Neh. 4 10.
rubbish, so that we are not able to build the wall.

I pray you lay this to heart, you that desire in any way to be repairers of
our breaches, do repaires in Church and state move slowly? Let me ask, is all
the rubbish of our Church and State removed? God be blessed much is, but is
there not too much remaining? are there no more oaths in our streets, in our
armies? no Achans in our camps, that either bear too great affection to some
rags of Josh 7. 21.
the Babylonish garments of Rome? or look more after our shekels of silver, and
wedges of gold; more to the pay, then an end of the war and the welfare of
Church and State? Is there no more drunkenness in our taverns, no falsehoods in
our shops, no whoredoms in our chambers, no excess and vanity in our attire?
what means that costlinesse and lightness in apparel, it may be, even on this
day of mourning, Non est conveniens luctibus ille color:
Surely sable colors will best suite with sad times, when the people mourned
upon the hearing of evil tidings, No man did put on him Exodus 33. 4.
his ornaments, or as the Geneva, no man put on his best raiment.

How do I wish, that I might not justly take up that charge of the Prophet
against Israel, with a little variation, and that to the worse, The pride of
Israel does testify to his face, too openly Hosea 5. 5.
and manifestly declares it self in the faces of some, what means the
continuance of paint, of spots, of nakedness, are not these part of that
rubbish, which God looks we should remove? Let me reason a little with you, (if
any such here) is it not better for you to remove them your selves, then stay
till God in wrath come to remove them? if you will not suffer your selves to be
cured by admonition, God has a cure for all these, which when it comes you
cannot put off: They say there is white and red paint, oh wash them off with
tears of repentance, lest God bring upon you that in Ier. 30. 5, 6.
the Prophet, a voice of fear and trembling, and all faces gather Joel 2. 2, 6.
palenesse, either through fear or famine: and for black spots, think a day of
blackness may come too soon, wherein all faces shall gather blackness; hear
Jeremie lamenting this when it came upon Lam 4. 7, 8. 5. 10.
them, Their visage is blacker then a coal, even theirs who were purer then the
snow, and whiter then milk, and whence came this? he will tell you in the
following Chapter, Our skin was black like Isai. 47. 3.
an Oven, because of the terrible famine; and for this nakedness of pride, one
Prophet will tell you, that God has a nakedness of vengeance; and he has an
enemy as in another, that shall discover her nakedness, shall take her sons
and her daughters, shall slay her Ezekiel. 23. 10.
with the sword and execute judgment upon her.

Much other rubbish and sinks of sin might be discovered in our persons, in our
families, you have Scavingers to cleanse your streets, well were it for your
city, if there was not more filth in many houses and shops, then is cast out
into the streets, happy would it be, if every master of a family (pardon the
word) would play the Scavinger in his own house, in his own heart, that the
inside Matthew. 23. 26.
of the platter might be made clean also, and take we heed lest the want of
this besome of reformation, bring not upon your houses Isai. 14 23.
the besome of destruction.

If ye will not hearken unto me, to I^r. 17. 27.
hallow the Sabbath day, and not to bear a burden, even entering in at the
gates of Jerusalem on the Sabbath day: then will I kindle a fire in the gates
thereof, and it shall devour the palaces of Jerusalem, and it shall not be
quenched. And if you will go to a following Chapter of this Book, you shall
find Nehemiah complaining, Neh* 13. 17, 1^
and charging the Nobles of Judah with this sin of the people, what evil thing
is this that ye do and profane the Sabbath day, the profanation was by them,
ver. 15. that trod wine-presses, and brought in sheaves on the Sabbath day, yet
the Nobles not hindering it are charged with it, and all the evils brought on
their fathers and the city ascribed to this sin.

They were my Meditations upon the coming forth of that book for that sinful
Liberty on the Lords day, (and I did not forbear to express them) when I too
often heard in neighboring Parishes drums beating up for a Morris or a
May-poole on that day, we had just cause to fear, lest the Lord should punish
that sin, with beating up drums for a march on that day; and the Lord has
brought our fears upon us, how many marches have been on that day since the
beginning of these wars; I have long thought it one of the highest provoking
sins of this land, and me thinks the Lord would have us take notice of it (as I
presume many did) that leading general battle at Kineton on the Lords day,
could it do less then lead this Kingdom to take notice of that general
leading sin, the profanation of that day? But I hope those many Ordinances for
suppressing this profaneness will be a good means through Gods mercy to
quench our unnatural flames, if to good laws, which are the life of a State,
be added careful execution, which is the life of laws.

I have done with the report, and proceed to that it wrought in Nehemiah, And
it came to pass when I heard these words, that I ver 4.
sat down and wept, and mourned certain days. One would think Nehemiah had
little cause so to take on, at the report of the affliction of the Jews, and
Jerusalems ruins, himself then enjoying all the honor and content that the
favor of the King and the palace Shushan could afford: But alas, Gracious and
Religious hearts Observe. 4.
have compassionate and tender affections, and they cannot easily put off the
common miseries of Gods people; the Lord himself is affected with them, that
is a sweet expression in the Prophet, of the Lords love and pity toward his
people, In all their affliction he Isai. (...) 9. Judge 10. 16.
was afflicted; but that in the book of Judges is beyond expression, His soul
was grieved for the misery of Israel, and surely there are none of the Lords
people which are not in this partakers in part of the divine nature; I cannot
omit that of Esaias, Look away from Isai. 22. 4.
me, I will weep bitterly, labor not to comfort me, because of the spoiling of
the daughter of my people: and yet this when he did but Dan. 10. 2, 3.
foresee and foretell the spoiling to come. So Daniel mourned three whole
weeks, and did eat no pleasant bread, found no sweetness or delight in any
bread or food that he took, whilst his brethren the Isai. 30. 20.
Jews fed (as Esaias expresses it) with the bread of adversity, and the water
of affliction.

I dare not adventure to give reasons why it is, and ought to be thus, I shall
only entreat you, before I apply, to take notice, that Two sorts of Tears.
there are two sorts of tears required of Gods people, one of Compassion,
another of Humiliation, the former for the miseries of Gods people, the latter
for the sins of Gods people that brought those miseries; both which like two
streams falling into one channel met in good Nehemiah; I might for our
imitation commend Luke 19. 36, 37, 38, 41. 2 Ki. 8. 11, 12.
desolation coming upon it with dry eyes, When he beheld the city, he wept
over it: Add that of Elisha, when he did but look upon Hazael, The man of God
wept. And when Hazael said, Why weepeth my lord? He answered, Because I know
the evil that thou will do unto the children of Israel: their strong holds
will thou set on fire, and their young men will thou slay with the sword, and
wilt dash their children, and rip up their women with child.

Imperial history, Pedro Mexia translated by Edward Grimstone in the life of
Julius Caesar.

The same in the life of Charles the 5. Turkish history, Kn^es.


I might acquaint you with instances of compassion, even toward enemies,
Julius Caesar pursuing Pompey into Egypt, and there presented with Pompeys
head, he wept, and at his return to Rome, refused to triumph for that
victory, because over Citizens of Rome, though in arms against him: the like
of Charles the 5th upon his great victory over the French King at the siege of
Pavia, he strictly forbade all ringing of bells, bonefires, or any expressions
of joy for his victory, because against Christians, though his enemies; yea,
even the Scythian Tamerlane, when he walked amongst the slain after a bloody
victory against the Muscovites, he accounted those Princes unhappie, which by
the destruction of their own kind, sought to advance their own honor,
protesting himself to be grieved even from his heart to see such sorrowful
tokens of his victory.

And for tears of Humiliation, how these in the days of solemn Isai. 22. 12.
Joel 2. 12. Judge. 20. 26. 1 Samuel 7. 6. Esth. 4. 3. Luke 10. 37.
book have been watered with these, and what streams of mercy have issued from
them, has been at large in a very fruitful Sermon delivered in this place, I
will close both these with that of Christ's upon the Samaritans compassion to
the wounded man, Go and do thou likewise.

Germany, Ireland, and the most parts of our own Nation: or (which should more
melt us) the lamentable soul distresses of the remoter parts of our land,
those (...) Wales and the Counties adjoining, wherein there are (...) that in
respect of the knowledge of God, of (...) way to salvation, know not the right
hand from the left; now the good Lord incline your hearts to a seasonable and
speedy prosecution of that work which the Lord in mercy has begun in some of
those parts.

Nor if we look into our own bosoms, our families, our cities, our soaked and
watered with so much blood of the slain, they are the expressions of Esaias Isai.
34. 7. Ezekiel. 32. 6.
and Ezekiel, full of awakening terror if you please to read them, and the Lord
bring it to your hearts.

for the sins of this land: How melting are many of us at the reading of some
doleful and lamentable relation, which yet can read over and over the sad
story of their own and the kingdoms sins without shedding a tear? whenever
then your hearts are affected to express tears of compassion, ^et them help
to draw out tears of Humiliation: do for this, as those, that coming for water
to a Pump out of order, first cast in water to fetch up water; let your souls
take in tears of compassion, that they may be the apter to issue forth tears
of Humiliation; And surely, I fear we have all cause to be more abundant in
these of Humiliation, if for no other sin, but this, our want of tears of
real compassion for those former 2 King. 8.
miseries the Church has long endured; remember what fetched tears from that
man of God, when he looked on Hazael, it was not for any thing at the present
done, all runs in the future, the evil that thou will do: their strong holds
thou will set on fire: and yet could (...) have thoughts of this in his heart
without tears in his (...) were then our tears of compassion for Germany and
Ireland? wherein we have heard all these and worse have been done, their
strong holds have been set on fire, their young men have been slain with the
sword, their infants have been dashed in pieces, and their women with child
ripped up, and many more unheard of cruelties: have we read these with dry
eyes? with unrelenting hearts? O labor we to see what great cause we have that
our tears of Humiliation should be many, if for no other reason but this,
because our tears of compassion have been so few: That you may have both, pray
unto the Lord to give unto you tenderness of affection; a tender skin will
bleed at the touch of a needles point, Be Rom 1^ ^0, 15
kindly affectioned one toward another with brotherly love, weep with them
that weep: beg also broken hearts and wounded souls, ^ 1. 9. 1.
a wound in the heart will usually bleed at the eye, if the heart be full of
bowels of pity within, like full vessels a small touch or shake will Fo^s
(...) est ^or ^^^punctum and do^ens Cornel* a l^p. in ^oc. ubi (...).
make them run over without: water in the head and heart will have a fountain
of tears in the eyes: We, upon such days as these offer (as we think) much to
God, offer our lips in prayer, our ears in hearing, our persons and presence
in attendance of almost a whole day in his house and service; but would you
know, why the Lord has not hitherto so fully manifested his acceptance of
these offerings, in giving us what we have desired, nay, seemed by withholding
that, to reject the other; let me tell you, I am afraid, there has been too
little of that offered, which I am sure the Lord will not refuse, what that is
David upon his own experience will tell you, The sacrifices of God ^re a
broken spirit, sacrifices in the plural Psalm. ^1. 17.
because this in stead of all, and all without this nothing, and he goes on, a
broken and a contrite heart, O Lord, thou will not despise: We of this land may
truly complain with the Prophet, with some small variation, We have seen the
breaches of our Kingdom, Isai. 22. 9.
that they are many, breaches in our counsels, in our armies, in our
affections, in our estates, and I am persuaded all our breaches yet remain
great, because our hearts are so little broken for those great sins that made
them; take we heed then lest the withholding our tears of compassion from our
brethrens distresses, do not close Gods bowels of compassion toward our
selves, and lest our land shedding so few tears for sin, loose not yet much
more blood, as the just punishment of our impenitencie, and want of Humiliation
for sin.

Observe. 5.
But did Nehemiah rest in his tears for the afflictions of the people, and the
ruins of Jerusalem? was his pity only verbal? like that mercy rejected by
the Apostle, when to a brother or sister naked and destitute of daily food, one
shall say unto him, Depart in Iam. 2. 15, 16.
peace, be you warmed and filled: and yet give them not those things which are
needful for the body: had they only a return of good words from Nehemiah? I
am sorry to hear of your affliction and reproach, that your walls yet remain
broken down, and your gates burnt with fire; but be of good comfort, build
your walls, repair your gates, I wish it were in my power to relieve you, and
further the work. No, Nehemiahs heart was so really affected with their
miseries and ruins, as it put him upon the use of those means, which if any
would prevail for redress of their miseries, and these are two, Fasting and
Prayer; such as never failed, when used aright.

For encouragement to the first, I might commend unto you the Fasting*
comfortable success; that of Jehoshaphat set the enemies to kill one another;
that of Esther changed the heart of the King and reversed 2 Chronicles. 20. E^ther
4. and 5.
a bloody decree near execution; Ezra more trusted to this for a Ezr. 8. 21,
22, 23 1 King. 21. 27, 28, 29. 2 Chronicles. 12. 7, 9, 1^, 14.
safe convoy, then to a band of the Kings soldiers: Ahabs hypocritical fast
put off the judgment to his sons days: Rehoboam and his princes half
humiliation (as I may call it) brought same deliverance, Shishak King of Egypt
had only power to plunder him of his treasures, not altogether to destroy him,
our own comfortable experience since our last fast (blessed be our God) will
speak, though we be silent.

And pity it is, that so powerful a remedy, through our miscarriage in it,
should loose its power, that our monthly use of it, should make it, like the
same Physic often used, uneffectuall to us: Give me leave therefore in few
words, to give you the principal heads of the doctrine of fasting, and because
in this, I may deliver nothing which is not known to the most here present,
these may please, whilst I speak (it may be) to some for information, to
suffer their thoughts to go along with me in a way of examination, remembering
Joh. 13. 17.
that of Christ, If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them.

Fast should be observed as an holy day, an holy Levit. 2^. 27, 28, 30, 31, 32.
Numb. 29. 7. Joel ^. 14. Nehem. 9.
convocation, no work to be done on that day, it is called a Sabbath, and in
all respects to be kept with as much, if not more strictness then the Sabbath,
sanctified and set apart for holy duties, as praying, reading, preaching,
hearing, confession of sin, renewing of Covenants, as in that whole Chapter of
Nehemiah.

Fast, a whole day, from Even to Even: Lev. 23 31. Jos. 7. 6.
Joshua and the Elders kept it till eventide.

All persons of all ages and conditions to observe it; in Jehoshaphats 2 Chro.
^0. 13. Jon. 3. 5.
fast all Judah stood before the Lord with their little ones, their wives and
their children. In Ninevehs fast, all from the greatest to the least.

Ezra 10. 6. Esther 4. 16.
as strength of nature will bear; Ezra in his fast did neither eat bread, nor
drink water; In Esthers fast a charge not to eat nor drink.

Abstaining from marriage comforts, Let the bridegroom got Joel 2. 16. 1 Cor.
7. 5.
forth of his chamber, and the bride out of her closet, that of the Apostle
makes it clear.

days of their fast to lie in sackcloth, in Nehemiah's fast, in David's, Nehem.
9. 1. Psalm. 35. 13. Jonah 3. 5.
in that of Nineveh, with other instances that might be added.

Abatement of our ordinary sleep, so that of Esther applied by three days,
night Esth. 4. 16. Joel 1. 13.
and day, as also that of Joel, lie all night in sackcloth.

And wherefore all these, but to further the main duty of the day, the
humbling and afflicting of the soul; a duty of such necessity for that day,
as whatsoever soul it be, that shall not be afflicted in Lev. 23. 29.
that same day, he shall be cut off from among his people: And what will more
humble the soul then the serious consideration of its unworthiness to receive
pardon of sin, great mercies for the Church in general, for it self in
particular, then by its abstinence from all even the least outward comforts, to
profess its unworthiness of any the least of these: and surely we might by
such meditations as these, help to put our souls on the day of our Humiliation
into an humbled frame: We come, Lord, to beg this day pardon for our own sins,
and the sins of our Nation, reconciliation for our selves, for Kingdoms, to
entreat thy Majesty to give beauty for ashes, the Isal. 61. 3.
oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness,
and we acknowledge these every way so needful for our spiritual life, as food
and raiment for our natural, but, Lord, we profess our selves most unworthy
the least of these, and shall we not be humbled to think, that we are
altogether unworthy of any greater favor? I have given you a small hint, your
private thoughts may more fully enlarge.

But are these outward observances, and inward afflicting of the soul
sufficient? do not we hear some in the Prophet complaining? Wherefore have we
fasted, and thou see not? wherefore Isai. 58. 3.
have we afflicted our souls, and thou take no knowledge? here you see is
both fasting and afflicting, yet no acceptance, what is more then to be done?
the Prophet will there tell you, it is a forsaking of sin (for I will
instance only in that) without which whatsoever is done upon the day of our
fast, will neither have power with God, nor bring comfort to our selves: The
Ninevites were very punctual in the outworks of their fast, The King came
down from his throne, put off his robes, clothed himself with sackoloth, there
was crying mightily to the Lord, neither man nor beast took any food,
questionless God took notice of all this, yet when the Prophet comes to set
down, what moved the Lord not to bring upon them the destruction threatened, he
over-looks, as it were all Jonah 3. 8.
the rest, and fastens upon this, God saw their works, that they turned from
their evil way, and so he repented of the evil that he said he would do unto
them, and did it not; and believe it our fasts will never do that work, for
which we keep them, till this be done; now our souls are then truly afflicted
for sin, when sin is in our souls, like a thorn in the joint, that will give
no rest, till it be out, and surely were our putrified sores of sin once
thoroughly cleansed, I doubt not but the wounds of our land would soon be
healed, had the strong Physic, which the Lord has given our nation emptied it
of the foulness and fullness of sin, we should ere long have cordials of truth
and peace, and deliverance ministered unto us; to conclude this, could the Lord
see England and Ireland turning from their provoking sins, I doubt not, but
England and Ireland should also see God turning from the fierceness of his
wrath.

Observe. 6.
The time hastens me to that other means of Nehemiahs help, his Prayer,
(another main duty required on this day of Humiliation) 3. Encouragements to
pray.
and I might be very large in showing what several great encouragements we have
to use this help of Prayer in the behalf of the Church, I shall reduce them
to three, 1. in respect of God. 2. of Prayer. 3. of our selves.

Ask, and it Matthew. 7. 7.
shall be given you. The Lord knows what England and Ireland want, and what
every one of us stand in need of, for our particular necessities, and God wants
not will to give us, his Church, what mercies he sees wanting, but yet he will
be sought unto: Indeed Psalm. 21. 3.
we have cause to bless God, that of his free goodness he often prevents us
with liberal blessings, (so reads the Geneva) gives many unsought favors, yet
it is not safe to stay, till God bestow mercies without asking: many gracious
promises are made in the Ezekiel. 36. 37.
former verses to Gods people, but thus says the Lord God, I will yet for this
be enquired of by the house of Israel, to do it for them: You have not, (says
the Apostle) because you ask not, and assuredly James 4. 12.
we want many blessings from God, because the Lord has not our Prayers for them.

The second encouragement is drawn from Gods power, I prayed to the God of
Heaven, this assures, that what Gods love makes him willing to do, his power
inables him to do, when you seek to God in prayer, what ever your necessities
be, for soul, for body, for the Church, for your selves, you go not to a
weak God, that has not where withal to satisfy your desires, but you go to
the God of Heaven, that whatsoever is in Heaven, or in the earth, he has it at
his command to give.

I proceed to those encouragements that Prayer it self gives to

First, it is an help of the largest extent, other helps can go no farther
then your counsels, persons and purses can reach, but the help of Prayer can
extend to the redress of the miseries and distresses of Gods people in the
farthest parts of the world; David Psalm. 1^9. 7, 8, ^.
in his Meditations traveled through Heaven, earth, and the seas, and where
ever he went, he sound God present* I am sure Gods Church and his servants at
one time or other have found the like, and their Prayers have in all places met
with God, on the land (as more anon) on the sea, as Jonah; the breath of the
Churches prayers Jonah 2. 1.
has raised up such storms in this, as has scattered and distressed
invincible navies of their enemies, as Englands prayers did that Spanish Armado
in 88. they have also stirred up prosperous gales to bring ships for the
Churches relief in strait sieges to their desired haven, they did it for late
besieged Tredah in Ireland: in a word Psalm. 107. 30.
where ever God is there Prayer can come, and you know God is every where, as
the Lord himself, Am I a God at hand, says the Jet. 23. 23, 24.
Lord, and not a God afar off? Do not I fill heaven and earth?

Secondly, Prayer is a speedy help, many places miscarry and are of men,
arms, ammunition, money, etc. require time for raising and conveying, whereas
this of prayer is a quick, a speedy and present help, our prayers (if such as
they should be) are no sooner out of out mouths, nay, in our hearts, but they
are in Heaven, and no sooner in Heaven, but the benefit of them may be with the
distressed Church many thousand miles distant, Daniel found this, Whiles I Dan.
9. 21, 22, 23.
was speaking in prayer, the man Gabriel being caused to fly swiftly, informed
me and said, at the beginning of thy supplications the commandment came forth,
etc.



1 Kin. 8. from 33. to the end of 39. and from 44. to the end of 50.
is Salomons Catholicon, whatsoever plague, whatsoever sickness, war, want of
rain, pestilence, famine, cities besieged, enemies prevailing, yet if they
pray, and make supplications, turn from their sin, when thou afflictest them:
then hear thou in Heaven, and forgive, and do, and give to every man
according to his ways; I might single out many encouraging instances, Prayer
can give victory Exodus 17. 11.
in doubtful battles, as in Isreal's against Amalek, sometime Amalek prevailed,
but in the end Moses hands lift up in Prayer, not Joshua's sword, got the
victory: It can recover lost Judge. 20. 26.
battles, as in the Civil war betwixt the eleven tribes and the Benjamites,
after two battles lost, wherein were slain forty thousand Isai. ^7. 1^, 36.
of the Israelites, Prayer in the third obtained the victory: Prayer can raise
a siege even a dangerous and confident one, as was that of Sennacherib against
Jerusalem: Prayer can turn the plots and wisdom of the greatest
State-Polititians into foolishness, and for them on to twist an halter for
their own execution, the Prayer of ^ Sam. 15. 31. 17. ^4, 23.
David did it against Ahithophel: I might add many other both out of foreign
and our own Histories, the victory against Cedwall Fox. Martyr. vol. 1. 151,
^98* 18^.
and Penda in the time of the Saxons ascribed to the Prayers of Oswald, the like
against Su^no the tyrant, and Alluded against the Danes, I remember an
observation I have read of Constantine, that after God had blessed and honored
him with many victories, whereas the Effigies of other Emperors was engraven
upon their loins triumphing, he would be set in a posture of Prayer, kneeling,
to manifest unto the world, that he attributed all his victories more to his
Prayers then his sword: what was said of the wicked, their Psalm. 57. 5. 59. 17.
149. 6.
tongue is a sharp sword, swords are in their lips, may be truly said of the
tongues and lips of Gods people in prayer, they are as twoedged swords in their
hands to execute vengeance, and surely Gods enemies have often found the power
of this sword of Prayer, and those which are the Lords people may say of this,
when used as it ought, as David once of that which was Goliahs, There is none
like 1 Samuel 21. 9.
that, give it me.

To conclude this, such is the prevalent power of Prayer, that what is it,
which God can do, that Prayer has not, or cannot do? I had almost said, that
God cannot do that which the Prayers of his servants will not have him do,
and I may say it, for the Lord Exodus 32. 10.
himself has said as much to Moses, Now therefore let me alone, that my wrath
may wax hot: and me thinks I hear Moses answering, Lord, who lets thee? and
God replying, My hands, Moses, are tied from executing wrath, whilst thine
hands in Prayer are lift up for mercy.

I come to the last encouragement in reference to our selves,

First, a very safe help, many are kept from appearing in the

Secondly, it is an easy help, he that can do nothing else may pray, He that
has no money in his purse, let him have honey in his mouth: if you have not
ability, estates enabling you to contribute, or lend toward the maintenance
of an Army, you may yet contribute your Prayers, and lay out these for the
Lords blessing upon the Army: you shall hear some of the meaner rank say,
were we in such a condition, had we such an estate as these and these men have,
we would do this and that, which these and other rich men do not, take heed,
we have deceitful hearts, I would have you try them by this, what do you in
that condition wherein you are, even in this of Prayer? Do you herein what you
can? are you often on your knees? earnest with God to pardon the sins of the
land? that his cause may prosper, that the expectation of the Churches enemies
may be disappointed, that the Lord would give hearts unto all those, to whom he
has given abilities to lay out their utmost for the furtherance of Gods work?
certainly if ye be wanting in this, let me tell you, had you greater estates
you would not do much, I cannot think, that he which will not use his tongue,
will to any purpose use his hands or purse.



^ Tim. (...) 8. Ephesians. 6* 18.
help the Church, I will that men pray every where, said the Apostle; those
Christians which have put upon them that piece of Armor Prayer may use it in
their beds, in their chambers, in their shops, in their privatest closets; in a
word, that soldier, which fights for the Church with his Prayers, (and all may
be such) where ever he is, he still keeps file, cannot in any place be out of
his rank.

Well then seeing Prayer is of such excellent use, and that whereby every one
may help the Church, let me speak to all of this, as in Isai. 65. 8.
the Prophet one once did of that Cluster, Destroy it not, for there is a
blessing in it, O destroy not your Prayers, by not using them aright, it is a
Cluster from whence may be pressed many sweet and comfortable blessings, take
we heed then, lest by our not using them as we should they prove useless to
us, and to the Churches cause for which we use them: the poorest and meanest
amongst you may be instruments by this of great mercies to the people of God,
and to your own souls, be careful then what ever you do, not to destroy your
prayers by your ill usage of them; to help you herein, give me leave to
prescribe some few short and plain directions, for the right use of Prayer, and
for your better improvement of this so excellent an help, to the best
advancement of the cause of God.

First, Prayer that would prevail with God, must go up with an We may cause
Isai. 58. 4.
our voice to be heard on high, yet not casting off our iniquities, our works
of sin will outcry our words of prayer: Let every one then, I beseech you,
search into his own soul, and find out the sins ^e stands guilty of, and
whenever he goes to prayer, to preface unto his soul with that of the
Psalmist, If I regard iniquity in my Psalm. 66. 18.
heart, the Lord will not hear me; and not forget that of the Apostle, I will
that men pray every where lifting up pure hands, for 1 Timothy 2. 8. Isai. 1. 15.
undoubtedly, If God see impuritie in our hands, we shall find little
prevalencie in our prayers.

Prayer must go up with fervencie, heat and ardencie of affection, Let my
prayer come before thee as incense, said the Psalmist; and Psalm. 141. ^.
this never went up without fire, you know who said it, and upon what occasion,
The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man James 5. 1^.
avails much, effectual and fervent joined, to teach us, that our prayers
the more fervent they are, are always the more effectual, the Geneva reads,
The prayer of a righteous man avails much if it be fervent, the more
fervencie, the more prevalencie in our prayers; The soldiers of this City are
commended for good firemen, that there be powder and shot in their muskets will
do no execution unless they give fire well. O that we which are this day
fighting with our prayers, would labor for this fervencie in our prayers, if
they be nothing else but words, they are but as the powder and shot in a
Pistol, let there be no fire, no fervencie of spirit, they will never go off,
so as either to reach Heaven, or the Churches enemies: of all the four
Elements, that of fire is nearest Heaven, the more fire in any thing, the
higher it ascends heavenward; cold sluggish prayers have so much earth in
them, that like the Grasshopper, if they mount a little upward, they are
presently down again, fall short of Heaven: of all warlike engines your Grant
does and fireworks are most deadly, of all prayers, those that have most fire,
most fervencie, are most killing.

Luke 11. 5, 8. 18. 1, 5.
it was by Christ in those two Parables of the friend at midnight, and the widow
with the unjust Judge; We may not say of our approaches to God, as Solomon of
our neighbor, withdraw Prove. 25. 17.
thy foot from thy neighbors house, or as in the Margent, Let thy foot be
seldom in thy neighbors house, lest he be weary of thee, and hate thee; no
the oftener with God in his house, in our own houses, the more welcome, the
Lord will not say, here is an unreasonable man and woman, I can never be rid of
them, never at rest for them, they are still following me, praying, and crying,
and seeking with every day a new suit, they came to me the other day for power
against oaths, I gave it them; they came the next for strength against
uncleanness, I heard them; they come again for power against pride,
stabilitie to subdue sinful passions, I denied not, etc. and so what grace
soever they want, they come to me for it, they asked an humbled and broken
heart, I gave it them; a tender conscience, they have it; love of the word and
helps to profit by it, I bestowed it, yet still they are following me, they
cannot read a Chapter, sing a Psalm, hear a Sermon, not receive food,
undertake any business, but I am sought unto for a blessing: O no God will
never cast it into thy teeth, that thou may rest satisfied with what he has
done for thee, and trouble him no further, that thou come too Isai. 43. 24.
often; we shall indeed hear God complaining, thou have wearied me with thine
iniquities; but never, that he was wearied with the prayers of his people, when
such as they ought, no suitours so welcome to God, as those which are most
importunate, Gods people may be upbraided with their unbelief, and hardness
of heart, never Mark 16. 14. James 1. 5.
with their too often praying, hear the Apostle, The Lord gives liberally to
all, and upbraideth not; Let me then speak to all those, whose spirits are
ready to fail, and their hearts near sinking, because after many prayers
they have not what they desire, that if they will with Jacob hold God to it,
not let him go except he Genesis 32. 26. 1 John 5. 14.
bless, such is the goodness of God, they, that asking according to his will,
will take no nay, shall have no nay, but may be assured, that what they strive
by earnestness and holy importunity, to wrest (as it were) out of Gods hands,
he will at length in his own good time give into their bosoms. The Canaanitish
woman found it, who fastening the more upon Christ, by all those means where
with he seemed to beat her off, had at length, the utmost, if not more then she
sought, Be it unto thee even as thou will. Matthew. ^5. 2^.


Observe. 7.
In the last place, consider we unto whom Nehemiah goes in Prayer, it is to
the God of Heaven, I prayed before the God of Heaven. I have told you, that the
maine business he went about, was that he might find mercy in the sight of
the King, so the close of the last verse of this Chapter will tell you, and all
the words following, till we come to that, are a continued prayer for this: He
knew it was in the kings power to give liberty and assistance, for relief of
the peoples miseries, and the repair of Jerusalems ruins, that if there was a
probable way on earth to do it, it must be done by the King, yet observe his
first step was Heavenward: he had a place of great trust and favor with the
King, so he says of himself, Nehem. ^. 11.
I was the Kings Cup Bearer, or as others, Pragustator, his taster, which might
have encouraged him first to make known unto the King the condition of the
People and City, and his own heaviness of heart for their affliction and
decays, but he durst not rely on that, therefore he begins with God, and
prayed before the God of Heaven.

Nehemiah's practice, what is the Observe.
likeliest way to have our desires in this satisfied: In the following Nehem. 2.
2, 4.
Chapter you shall hear the King asking Nehemiah, Why is thy countenance sad?
for what do thou make request? What would thou have me do? one would
think here was encouragement enough to put him upon the present making known
all his desires to the King, yet he first goes to God, So I prayed to ver. 4, 5.
the God of Heaven, and I said unto the King. He had no hope that his petition
would find acceptance with man, which had not been first presented unto God:
you shall hear the like of old Jacob in that great famine of Canaan, his
sons at their first sending into Egypt found a great deal of rough and hard
both words and deeds from Joseph the governor, Simeon was left in prison
behind them in Egypt, and they must not return for further provision into
Egypt, except they brought Benjamine with them, their good aged father was now
in a wonderful strait, the Genesis 42. 36.
famine increased, their former corn eaten up, hear Jacob lamenting, Me have
ye bereaved of my children, Joseph is not, and Simeon is not, and ye will take
Benjamine away, all these things are against me, but what was Jacobs way for
help in this strait? he had no hope of relief, but in the Governors favor,
and what course did he take to win it? He does not omit other If it must needs
be so now, do this: take of the best fruits in the land in your vessels, and
carry down the man a present, but did Jacob trust in this, or the return of
double money in their sacks, and the sending of Benjamine with them? which last
was all that Joseph desired: No Jacob rested in none of these, he had a former
comfortable experience, which might help to Genesis (...) 9, 10, 11, 28.
lesson him in this, it was not the present he sent to Esau, but the Prayer he
put up to God, which gave him favor in the sight of Esau, it is this that he
now trusts unto, God Almighty give you mercy before the man, and it was this
that wrought it: and certainly, let us rest assured, there is no such
prevailing way to regaine the heart of our King, (which should have a chief
place in the petitions of this day) as to beg it of God by Prayer.

Solomon gives sufficient ground for this, Prove. 21. 1.
The heart of the King is in the hand of the Lord, as the rivers of waters, he
turns it whithersoever he will: I might be large in giving, though but a
short touch upon the several translations and Interpretations of those words
[rivers of waters] every Italian Deodate.
reads it small springs, Sanctes Pagninus and Vatablus, rivuli, small prils,
alluding to the custom of those which use to draw small springs, or brooks
over dry and barren soyles, which they easily turn with an hand plough, which
way they please, so easily is the heart of the King inclined this or that way,
as seems good to the Lord, instances Ahasuerus, Esth. 3. 11. 8. 8. Darius,
Dan. 6 7, 8, 9, 26.

The Septuagint, (...), impetus aquae, the violence of waters, (...), morus
violentus and impetuosus, St ph. (...). Psalm. 29. 10.
Testament is translated running or rushing violently, Matthew. 8. 32. Act. 19.
29. implying, that let the Kings heart be set never so violently on this or
that resolution, yet the Lord that sits and rules on the floods, that can
calm the greatest tempest, is able at his pleasure to quiet the most violent
spirits of Princes: and some from hence refer it to the ebbing and flowing of
the sea, to assure, that God who has set bars and doors to the sea, and
said, Hitherto Job 38. 10, 11.
shall thou come, and no further, and here shall thy proud waves be stayed, or
as the Psalmist, Thou rulest the raging of the Psalm. 89. 9.
sea, and when the waves thereof arise, thou stillest them, the same God has
set the counsels and power of Kings their bounds and limits, which they shall
not pass, and can easily, and if he please, suddenly calm their rage: what a
full and comfortable evidence hereof is that of Nebuchadnezzars rage and fury
against Shadrach, Dan. 3. 13, 14, 19, 20.
Meshach, and Abednego, ver. 13. full of fury, 19. yet see how quickly God
calmed him, ver. 26, 27, 28, 29. the place is worth your reading, and
observation; you shall see how suddenly Nebuchadnezzars blaspheming God, ver.
15. turned into his blessing God, ver. 28. his decree for worshipping the
golden image, ver. 10. changed into a decree for the honor of the true God,
ver. 29. his rage and fury against Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, ver. 15.
converted into his promoting them, ver. 30.

The vulgar Latin reads divisiones aquarum, the divisions of the bottles of
Heaven, which the Lord is pleased to empty on this Job 38. 37. Amos 4. 7.
place, and not on that, as in the Prophet: Or to the river Nilus, whose
overflowings sometimes fruitful, sometimes hurtful, so the Lord one while
inclines the hearts of Kings to the good of his people, according to that of
the Psalmist of a good King, He shall come Psalm. 72. 6.
down like rain upon the mowen grass: as showers that water the Exodus 15. 23.
earth: another time to the hurt of their people, suffering them to be like the
waters of Marah full of bitterness, and which is worse, 7* ^0, 21.
like the waters in the rivers of Egypt turned into blood, insomuch as there was
blood throughout all the land of Egypt: Others following the vulgar refer
these divisions of water, to the Lords dividing the red sea, that when Pharaoh
and his servants repenting of that liberty they had given to Israel for their
passage out of Egypt, pursued them with their whole strength: as the Lord in
that great strait of his people, made a division of the waters in the sea for
their safe passage, but caused them to return upon and drown Pharaoh and all
his forces; so the Lord can turn the counsels and pursuits of such Kings, as
set themselves against God and his people, as to the good of his people, so to
the ruin of themselves and their adherenes; but in this the Lord be merciful
to our Sovereign for his safety, and if nothing will calm the rage of the
sons of Belial, that then all the storms and waves which their malice and
fury has raised may return upon their own heads, and overwhelme themselves.

Nehemiah here sought, that we might at the length find favor in the sight of
our King; You have heard that the heart of the King is in the Lords hand, and
if ever we have it to out comfort, we must have it from thence; Now a
prevailing way for this Neh* ^. 3, 5, 7, 8
with God is: Let the Lord in our Prayers for the Kings heart, see in us
Nehemiah's spirit, he was all for the public, as will appear in several
verses of the second Chapter, not one word for his own particular; let the
Lord then see that our desires for the return of our King are for the general
good of Church and State, that Gods cause, Reformation may be advanced, that we
may behold Jerusalem Prove* 29. 26.
in its beauty, Religion in its Power and Purity: Many (says Solomon) seek
the rulers favor, but for what, surely most for 1* Sam. 22. ^.
that of Saul, He will give every one of you fields and vineyards, and make you
all captains of thousands, and captains of hundreds. Are not too many of our
hearts too much after such as these? so we may sit under our own vine, we
little care what becomes of Gods vineyard, let the wild boar make what spoil
and havoc he will in this, it little troubles us, so we can keep him out of
our own; Jerome reports of Nebridius the Empress sisters son, a great
Hieron. ad Salvinam de viduitate servanda.
Courtier, and in special favor with Princes, that he never put up any suit
but for others, chiefly the poor, and such as were in distress, insomuch as
Princes usually granted his petitions; upon this ground, what we give unto him,
we give to many; certainly it would much work with God, to give us our Kings
favor, if he did see, that we would improve it for the common good, especially
for Religion, when we much care not how it goes with us in our particular, so
that may be safe and prosper: David an excellent pattern, 2 Samuel 15. 1^, 14, 2^.
when things were at the worst, as in several Verses, yet what was the chiefest
of David's care, for himself, or his own safety? No, he so much looked to the
public, the safety of the Arc, which was Isreal's glory, as he overlooks
himself, saying in that 1 Samuel 4. ^2. 1 Samuel 15. 25, ^6.
extremity of his to Zadok, Carry back the Ark of God into the City, let that
be safe, and for my self, and mine own safety, I leave that to God, If I
shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me again, and show me
both it, and his habitation. But if he say, I have no delight in thee: behold,
here am I, let him do to me, as seems good unto him.

knows in this what our desires are, and at what we look in our desires,
certainly had the Lord and his cause more realitie in our hearts, we should
find more interest in the heart of our King.

Isai. 9. 6.
have been presented to Christ the Prince of Peace, find out first the mind
of Christ, before your minds made known to the King, for undoubtedly there can
be no comfortable assurance of establishing that peace on earth, which has not
also its sanction in Heaven.

We are all for Peace, we daily pray for it, our Armies fight for it, yet not
for Peace upon any terms, not a Peace dishonorable to God, but for such a
peace, as may best further and keep our peace with God (and I doubt not but
the desires of all our worthy Patriots souls are for this*) And here give me
leave to mind you Plutarch. Pyrrhus.
of Appius Claudius his carriage in the Treaty for Peace betwixt Pyrrhus and
the Romans, Pyrrhus fought three battles against the Romans, in the two first
he got the victory, but with such great loss of his men in both, that it was
said of him for the first, he might gloriari, non gaudere, brag of his
victory, not rejoice; for the second himself was heard to say, that if he got
such another victory, he was undone; after the first, Overtures were made by
Cine^^, Pyrrhus his Ambassador in the Senate for Peace, and many were apt to
incline unto it, as disheartened by Pyrrhus his late victory, and fear of a
speedy second attempt, whereof Appius Claudius having notice, being blind,
very aged, and who had devoted himself wholly unto privacie, yet the noise of
peace with Pyrrhus so wrought with him, as he caused himself to be carried in
his Couch unto the Senate house, and presently breaks out, Worthy and noble
Patriots and Senators of Rome, I have hitherto with some grief endured the
loss of my sight, but now that I hear your consultations and inclinations to
decree a Peace so unworthy and dishonorable to the glory and renown of this
City of Rome, with Pyrrhus your professed enemy, it now most troubles me,
that I am only blind, and not also deaf, that mine ears might not hear so
great an infamy and reproach to Rome. I know unto whom in this I speak, I
shall leave the application to their own thoughts.

Solomon hold true even of Kings? The preparations of the heart of man, and the
answer Prove. 16. 1.
of the tongue is from the Lord: as also that in a following Chapter, There are
many devices in a man's heart, nevertheless 1^. 21.
the counsel of the Lord that shall stand: assuredly, we may say of all the
Kings on earth, as Balaam once of himself, they cannot do either good or bad
of their own mind, Numb. 24. 1^.
but what the Lord puts into their hearts and hands. It will give us a great
deal of satisfaction, when we hear of a powerful man, one that may do us
much hurt, and that we know bears us no great good will, yet we are
assured, that we have a fast friend, which has his heart and hands in his
power, and can turn and wind it (as we say) at his pleasure, and we are
confident, that he neither will nor can do any thing against us but what our
trusty faithful friend will give way unto: This is the Churches condition,
and in this its happiness, and may keep up the spirits of Gods people, that
how ever sons of Belial, and of violence have had, and still keep our Kings
person, and it may be sometimes obtain his hand, yet God still keeps his heart
in the power of his hands, to dispose of it, as his love and wisdom sees
expedient, and there let us be content it may rest, till the Lord is pleased in
his own way, and his own time to give it unto the prayers of his people, and
those other means which the Lord shall please to own and further.

I dare lead you no farther then to the Throne of Grace, to crave a Blessing
upon what the Lord has given you attention and patience to hear, and unto my
weakness strength to deliver.

Amen.
FINIS.
Errata.
DEdication page line 11. read jussu vestro. page 7. li. 10 in the margent put
Use 1. p. 8. li. 2. read m^rior. p. 11. marg. r alii. p ibid. after Ezra 3. 8.
in marg. Chap. ^. 15. pa. 19. l. 13. r. May Pole. p. 2^. l. 4. r. coins. ibid.
marg. Psalm. 59. 7. p. 32. l. 25. r. ability. p. 34. l. 13, 17, 24. r.
Benjamin. pa. 38. l. 12. r. I beseech you then.


