A RELATION OF A DISPUTATION BETWEEN Dr Griffith and Mr Vavasor Powell.

And since some false Observations made thereon, by Dr Griffith (or one of his
Symonicall Brethren) to keep up the cracked credit of their bad Calling and
Cause.

As also to reflect upon Mr Moston (whom they suppose to be the Author of that
Relation) Mr Powell, and others.

This therefore is to show briefly the falsitie of those Animadversions: and
with all to justify that Syllogism (objected against by him) by good Authors,
Examples and Arguments.

1 Timothy 4. 2. They speak lies in hypocrisy, having their Conscience seared
with a hot iron. Lydi mali, post hos AEgyptij.

LONDON

Printed by M.S. and are to be sold by Livewell Chapman, at the Crown in Popes
head Alley. 1653.

A RELATION OF A DISPUTATION BETWEEN Dr Griffith and Mr Vavasor Powell.
IN Page 1. The Doctor denies that he promised a Sermon. Answ. There came a man
in the name of the Doctor, and the builder of the Chapel, with a Paper in his
hand, and publicly (after Mr Moston and Mr Powell had Preached) before a full
Auditory, in the presence of many of the Doctors own friends, and proclaimed,
that Doctor Griffith would Preach there at nine of the Clock upon the
disputation day: but its not strange for Doctor Griffith to deny that; for he
denied his own Doctrine Preached against honest people, tho several men at
the Disputation justified it to his face; and this made Mr Powell say to him;
That a Liar ought to have a good memory: although he said deb^t, yet presently
he said lap sus lingue, etc. And said Oportet mendacem esse memorem. The
captious Doctor might have remembered, That the wicked make a man an offender
for a word: Also that he himself praying for a sick man at Llandrynio, said,
Lord heal him as thou did Peter's servant, and the Captains wives Mother.

Page 4. The third Rule proved a tempting Question. Answ. That is not so; for
the third Rule was, that what could not be ended then, might be referd to
another day: and the Question was propounded by Mr Powell, after he had
declared he was not willing to dispute against other men's Callings, but to
justify his own.

Page 4. Then Mr Powell repeated his words. That Is false, he spoke them first:
and the Doctor said only, that he was both.

Page 5. He said he had nothing to say against the Church of England, and the
Calling of her Ministers. Answ. That Is untrue, his words were he had nothing to
say against the godly people, or godly Ministers in England: and this he has
often publicly and privately spoke in my hearing: and that was the Reason why
he asked the Doctor whether he was an Episcopal man, or a Presbyterian:and
whether he did undertake to defend the corrupt part of the Ministry of
England: for the godly party he would not dispute against.

Page 5. The Doctor demeaned himself in Christian meekness. Answ. Was it
Christian meekness for him to give Mr Powell (without the least provocation)
the lie twice. To which Mr Powell answered the first time, I thank you Doctor:
and the second time, Turpe est Doctori, cum culpa redarguit ipsum.

Page 5. All the knowing people of the Company were on the contrary side. What
nothing but untruths? There were there above a dozen Universitie men of Mr
Powells side; besides several scores of godly people, who were able to
Catechize your profane Brethren, the Ejected Priests, who were better known
there by their Adultery, drunkenness, swearing, gaming, and rebelling against
the State, then by their godly preaching, or conversation.

Page 5. The Doctor had some Interest in the Intention: as challenged to be a
party, etc. This is as unjust an Assertion, as that Mr Powell published the
Doctors first Letter; for both in Mr Powells Letter and his words to the
Doctor, he expressed fully he sent not at all to the Doctor any challenge,
which if he had the Doctor had given Cause thereof by his invective Sermons
against the godly Ministers and people.

Page 6. It is well known, That the Doctor has withstood Popery. Answ. How?
by maintaining holiness of places, setting up the Communion Table Altarwise, (as
it remains to this day in one of his Cures called Llandrynio) maintaining
Godfathers, the Cross in Baptism, prayer over the dead, wearing Surplices,
singing of Psalms before dead corpses, going procession (as he did last year)
receiving all the ignorant and scandalous that come out of several Parishes to
the Sacrament, as he did last Easter. Is this withstanding of Popery? Numa
religiosior.

Page 6. It is too evident, that Popery is now improved against us. Answ. It is
true amongst you; for I think one of the Doctors old Parishioners and friends,
a Papist has endeavored to make some Popish (as the Doctor does Prelaticall)
Profelytes. The Doctor and his friends would remember, how in opposition to the
Acts of Parliament, there was a scandalous Interlude or Play set up in the
Doctors Parissh in Shropshire about two years since, and another near this
year (and that by the Children of some of the Ejected Clergy) when they durst
not do it in Wales.

Page 7. The Moderator esteems of the Doctor as of his brother and friend.
Answ. That Is like enough to make him partial: besides their drudging and
drawing together in the Bishops times: and the harmony that still holds
between these Organstrings. The Proverb is herein true, When Bullocks are once
yoaked, they will hardly be ever parted.

Page 8. That party looks on the Doctor as a man standing in the gappe before
them. Answ. Its very true he is looked so upon, and not without cause, for he
has set up a Monthly Lecture (which he never did till now) to cry down
private meetings, laymens preaching, etc. And that he might do his work more
effectually, he would have brought in an Ejected Priest, who preached
publicly that the Spirit in the Preachers approved by Parliament was a
Hobgobling Spirit, and that the present powers were Traitors and Rebels that
had shed innocent blood. This will be proved against him.

Page 9. That the laughter did not immediately follow upon the Doctors
excepting against the Syllogism. Answ. It was immediately thereupon: and in
such an unchristian-like way (by a crew of carnal Cavaliers and outed
Clergymen) that made Mr Powell ask the Doctor whether he had brought a pack
of Beagles to bait him. Afterward the Doctor did ask in what figure the
Syllogism was in: and Mr Powell going to say the first figure, answered
suddenly Barbara: upon which the Ceutes did lift up a second cry, but that was
the last; for afterward God did so silence and shame them, that they hung
down their heads: when they saw their Champion (the Doctor) could not repeat
an Argument (unless it were first written and read) and it will not be amiss
here to help the Doctors memory when he said there was a fallacy in Mr
Powells. Argument: Mr Powell asked what fallacy it was, and whether in
dictione, or, extra dictionem (which argued Mr Powell was not ignorant in the
Moodes and Figures, nor in those Elements of Arts, which I heard him use
several times, both publicly and privately) which Question the Doctor could
not (and did not) answer; which made Mr Powell say, how now Doctors, what a man
of so many fallacies, yet ignorant of this fallacy?

Page 10. There was some talk of making Red-Castle an Universitie. And yet in
Page 11. You say that they must take this notice from you (as from a Promoter)
That the Separatists are upon disclaiming all Interests in Arts, and
Universities, and Scholars. Behold a palpable contradiction, and the two next
neighboring Pages confronting one another. What to be for Universities, and
yet against them, Nonne es in puteo constrictus Doctor? If we had been against
learning, we would not have sent to Oxford and Cambridge for Preachers, and
Schoolmasters, nor sent some thither to be made Scholars (as we have done.)
By this you may guess the truth of the rest.

Page 11. On this passage I ground my Conjecture I spoke of, concerning the
Author of the Exact Narrative. Answ. By several passages in these
Animadversions it may be more surely concluded, that Doctor Griffith himself
was the Author of them: then Mr Moston of the Narrative. But be it Mr Moston or
another, its certain the Narrative in the Substance of it is true, and if all
the Circumstances had been set down, it would more have galled, and shamed the
Doctor, as how he coming strutting with a band of profane men with him (that
thirty or forty of the scum of two or three Countries might have been picked
out) and his countenance falling like Nabals hearts, and fear surprising him
like Beltashazzar, by reason of the Consciousnesse of his cause, and the
convictions of his Conscience, in appearing against Gods people and ways: as
was told him by Mr Powell then; now I see that Scripture fulfilled, Isai, 29.
10. He shall cover the Seers.

Page 11. I trouble you with no more of the sylly nonsense (meaning Mr Mostons
good sense) he understands, speaks, and writes as good sense as any of you:
your books, and stolen, self-stuff'd Sermons, will all verify the Confession
of one of your brethren (that has since left Preaching to attend upon your
Pamphlet-Presse) I am a pen and inckhorne Divine. If Mr Mostons savoury, solid,
spiritual Sermons, were compared with your slight, superstitious,
supercilious, self-exalting and sinner-hardning Sermons, they that did read
them would say; What is the chafe to the wheat? Jer. 23. 28. But you say,
Page 12. One Orthodox true Sermon is more set by now then a hundred heretofore:
Such is the famine of the Word.

First, Your Sermons and opinions are like Mr Alexander Griffths (your great
Master-Minter) who did the last of September 1652. at Kinton in Hertfordshire,
before many hundreds, deliver publicly in a Sermon this Doctrine (from Jude
13.) That the Church and Parishes of England were Saints, and the Faith was
delivered to them: also that all England were Saints, and godly people: and
then in his disputation did affirm, from 1 Pet. 3.19. That Christ in his Soul
went locally to hell to preach to the damned Spirits. Afterward from Matthew.
13. He affirmed there was no Separation at all till the end of the world, (tho
he had before granted it) but that Heathen, Jews, Turks, Papists,
Protestants, and all were to live without any Separation to the end of the
world. Betwixt your Doctrine and his there is only pilus in medio.

Secondly, Is there a famine of the Word? the more shame for you and your
brethren, to follow that principle, No penny no pater noster: but this is your
false suggestion; for it is known and acknowledged by the very Enemies of the
Truth, that they never had more preaching; for at least (in this County of
Montgomery) there is weekly preached about sixty Sermons. But you say it is
prating. So did the Epicureans and Stoics (your Brethren) say of Paul's
preaching, Acts 17. 18. But we must ssay as Joh. 3. Ep: v. 10. You prate
maliciously against us, Multa and stulta loquuntur (loquimini.)

Page 12. I will help you and so he did. Mr Powell told you then he would not
seek your help: and I heard him presently reduce and repeat the Syllogism
ever the Doctor repeated it: and this may be said for Mr Powell, that he
intended not as he then, before, and after declared to be opponent against the
Doctors calling; but respondent for his own: and I saw all his arguments were
framed to that purpose: and what ever argument he urged against the Doctors
Calling, he was constrained to form them extempore, for unless Mr Powell
would dispute against his Calling, he would not go on: but as soon as his
Calling and conditions were brought to light, Murem ostendit pro Leone.

Page 13. That Mr Powell offered not any proof against, that forms were
against the gift. Yes Sir by your (bad memories) good leave Mr Powell urged,
Ephesians. 6. 18. Praying always with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit.
From whence he argued thus: If all prayers are in the Spirit, then the forms
of mere men's makings without the Spirit, as yours are, does exclude the gift:
But the Text says, that all prayers are to be in the Spirit. Ergo. The Doctor
after long pausing, puffing, and some prompting, said, there was a fallacy in
the argument. Mr Powell asked him what fallacy it was, and whether in dictione,
or extra dictionem (as is heretofore mentioned:) the Doctor gave no Answer,
remembering better his ten years used form then Logical fallacies: And
hereupon the Doctor answering nothing, but being amazed, denying somewhat (if
he knew what) Mr Powell asked him a reason of his denial. This is the sum of
what the Doctor does now do largely with his pen (in Page 14.) what he could
not do then with his tongue. And truly Reader these men can eat their meat
without their teeth as soon as give thanks either before or after meat
without a form.

Oh but of the Doctors personal qualification he has given sufficient
testimony, by his praying in true Latin. Has he so Sir, your principle does
speak you to be a neighbor to a Papist (if not to have a Pope in your belly)
Again, if this be a qualification to pray a formal prayer in Latin,
Westminster School boys are equal with your Doctor; nay an old Popish
toothlesse woman may use a formal Latin prayer: but it seems the Gentlemen
conceives none of this Opponents could do so much: but Sir know (tho that may
be your Masterpiece) that more then one of your Antagonists, can pray and
write in Latin and Greek, etc.

Page 14. You should have said that Powell, Moston, and Nevet, had nothing to
say. They had said so much, that it caused whispering between the Doctor and
his Cassack Counsel what they should answer, at last the Doctors Council (one
of the long Robe) said that Mr Powell shot at a man of straw; to which Mr
Powell replied, why then did you bring such a strawen man hither.

In Page 16. The Doctor tells you what Commission he had from Oxford; and how
he was invested by the Bishop and the Law of the Land. Not one word how he was
qualified, called, and commissioned by Christ and his people: he tells you of
his Polygamy or being married to three places (yea to three together, till the
Commissioners did divorce him from two of them) but not one spiritual child
begot in any of the three; nay I dare assure thee, that I know no Parishes in
Montgomery-shire more profane and opposite to godlinsse, then those Parishes
named by him, especially Newtowne and Llandrynio.

Page 17. The same way of captious arguing he uses still asking Questions. That
was the way of Christ and his Apostles; Christ was found in the Temple among
the Doctors, asking them Questions, Luke 2. 46. see Romans 3. 6. and 4. 1. 1 Cor.
15. 30. But because Questions tend to clear the truth, these men fall out with
that way. What is said in Page 17. and 18. is most of it true concerning the
Gentleman's ingenuitie above them all (save that Mr Powell did not at all scoff
at him) for Mr Powell commended the Gentleman: who indeed (being more prompt)
prompted the Doctor far more then Mr Nevet prompted any, for I was one of the
next to Mr Nevet, and heard not any thing from him, but what he spoke
publicly, for he saw no need to prompt.

Page 18. But a stander by, I remember not who the stander by was, unless that
Simon Magus the false accuser and blasphemer Mr Kyfyn, who was disproved (in
some things he did affirm) to his face, which made him turn his back for
shame. Yea Adulterers and Buggerers, the Company understood his meaning This
Buggerer was a wicked man that lived in Wrex^zm, but no Professor, much less
of that church
without saying more, etc. Does not fear of being found a liar, or punished as
liars take hold upon the heart of such a false Informer and Accuser? Was the
Buggerer which you mention, ever a Professor of Religion, much less a Member
of any of our Churches, nay was he not one of you, and of your Chruches?
Again, what Adulterer or other public Transgressor is either permitted or
unpunished amongst us. Discover it if you can. Latet dolus in generalibus. But
we could tell you of one of your Priests that made his brags (as was proved
against him) of several adulteries; another of the Ejected Priests that marked
and stole his Neighbors sheep within these four Months: another who with his
man stole brick from his neighbor, and got a Mason to work it by night:
another who married two wives, lately in prison for it: another Curate who went
from house to house last Easter giving the Lords Supper, who being, drunk
broke his neck (within this Month:) and of several Adulterers: But to come
closer home to the Doctor, has not his own Curate a Bastard by his wives
Sister, who is now in the house with him? If you go to speak of such things,
we could write in folio of your brethrens abominations. So that I may say to
you according to the Proverb, Coelum non animum mutant, qui trans mare currunt.

Page 19. A few of the Doctors Parishioners did sing Psalms coming to bury a
dead corpse July 23. 1652. Therefore they were superstitious and scandalous that
Elected him or approved of his Election, March 20. 1633. They were not few but
many that did so: and they are of the same lump with those that chose him: and
this with their kneeling and saying prayers at cross ways, with many
heathenish and Popish practices besides, which however the Doctor would not
then own, yet he has formerly both allowed and countenanced; otherwise that
Scripture like Priest like people, could not be verified (which indeed is) in
them. But in page 19. That popish custom of canting before a dead Corpse is
rather justified here, then condemned: only it is minced and mitigated,
because it is in a reformed Church. Tho singing of P salmes be lawful, yet let
it be considered whether it was seasonable then (being contrary to the
direction in Scripture, Jam. 4. If any be merry let him sing Psalms) and
whether it was not superstitious both in the end, and the manner of the action;
the end to follow humane Popish tradition, the action so done was to do what
is prohibited. Under such fine (but false) pretenses were all the Popish
Trumpery brought into you deformed Church.

Page 19. In charity the Doctor conceives the greatest part of his Parishioners
are Saints (or such Saints as are in Heaven.) Meaning his old Parishioners now
dead.
It is more then ordinary for these men to confess Saints to be-on Earth. (for
several of their Ejected Priests preached to the contrary) But the Doctors
Saints, are like the Chapel, which the Doctor in one of his latin Letters
faith was dedicated to the holy Trinity: whereas the building of it was a
penalty inflicted upon the builder for begetting bastards. But like Church like
children, and such as the Sanctus doctus is, so are the indocti sancti.

Page 20. Mr Powell thought him self facete in popping the Moderator in the
mouth with the Directory. If you count the Church of England your Mother; and
the Directory a Rule for the Church, why should you digress from it? Oh but
you have not yet don with the old English Mass, nor digested the Directory,
nor learned to practice your own principles.

Page 20. The Doctor distinguished and said, Apostles were considered either in
their persons or office. But have you forgot, the Doctors answer or
distinction, which was in these words (as it was then taken in short hand)
Apostles are either taken in Scripture for the immediate, or primary Apostles,
or for their successors. To which Mr Powell replied, Ubi scriptura non
distinguit ibi non distinguendum. The Doctor said, that distinction was in
Scripture. Where said Mr Powell? the Doctor after silence (which made all
indifferent men cry, what has nothing to answer) brought out that in John,
Whose sins ye remit, they are remitted. How pertinent this was to the Question
judge ye. Upon which Mr Moston said, what are ye silent? have ye no Scripture
for what ye say? we will help you to Scripture. Is not all this true
Animadverter? do you then blame Mr Powell for asking you Questions? and did not
the Doctor and his Associates deny Timothy and Titus to be Evangelists and of
the 70 Disciples, tho Mr Powell cited Scriptures to prove it; and the very Page
in Translation of Bish. Honmer out of Eusebius to confirm it, yet the Doctor
and his Bishop Hon. 4 Edit. page 517.
pupils continued still to deny it. Did not this improve the Doctors credit
much, viz. to be ignorant of Scripture (as the cloudy Clergy of Wales are
generally) and of prelaticall historito?

Page 21. It was time to call for an end of the Disputation. So it was indeed
when the Doctor was in his Masterpiece ( Ordination) so wounded, and weakened,
that two of his own friends, that were Scholars, said afterward, they
wondered at the Doctors weakness therein; and being therein wounded he would
not hear an argument more.

Page 21. This passage that he might choose another is not remembered. The
Proverb is true, Whether you would not, you know not the way. What, do not you
remember Mr Powell and Mr Moston urged it often, and called by name upon Mr Kyssin
(the great Reviler) or upon any other to stand up in the Doctors stead.

But you are told one challenged one of the bench and he refused. But that was
after the dispute, and the young man was Mr Jones (the Lord Herberts Chaplain)
who challenged Mr Charles Edwards to dispute it in Latin, and he received the
challenge in my (and many more peoples) hearing, but your Champion laid down
his cudgells, as your Doctor did his courage, and this I observe in these Vines
your (improperly called Clergy) they are like the old Cavaleers, that never
stand above one charge. So did the Doctor, he would not receive but one of Mr
Powells Arguments, and one Arrow taken up by the way, so wounded him and his
party, that I am persuaded they will never appear again in that cause.

Page 22. Mr Powell declared for himself that he received Imposition of hands
with fasting and prayer by a Presbytery in London. He did not say so, but that
before these wars he was chosen by fasting and prayer, by a Congregation of
Saints: and since he had a Certificate or Testimony, under the hands of twelve
of the Assembly besides the Prolocutor. He further said, That there was one
there that had received Imposition of hands by a Presbytery in London: which
notwithstanding your Confederates (by name the upholder of your drunken
Alchouse called a College, and the builder of your sacred Chapel) shut out,
tho he was an University man, approved by the Commissioners, and without
exception: And this was one of those that preached upon the side of a Hill
after the disputation, which you falsely accuse for inveighing against learning.
But you cry out that we send out, Weavers, Smiths, Cappers, Soldiers. It is
true, there is one Weaver a blessed understanding man, and one Smith a
religious godly man (and one that has more learning then some of your Curates)
and it may he two or three gifted godly tried and approved men besides, (who
may be Soldiers or rather Officers)that go along with our Preachers, as
Fellow-helpers (even as the Apostles and Ministers had in the Primitive times)
in the work of God, and God has made them successull. But is it not as lawful
for such men (who are godly and gifted) to exercise their gifts; as for simple
Sir John's, lack latin, lack-gifts, lack-grace, who kept poor Alehouses in the
Mountains: where they and the people spend togethers the greatest part of the
Sabbath in profaneness: of this sort we can produce four, for every Tradsman
the Commissioners have sent forth. Nay in point of learning they that are now
sent out and approved, shall compare with so many of the Ejected Priests, for
spiritual gifts and graces (I trow) most of your Ejected Clergy will not
pretend to.

Page 23, 24, etc. You say the Doctor made answers to such Scriptures as were
cited by Mr Powell. The truth is, he did answer; For

First he confessed that it was lawful for gifted brethren to preach (yet in
his Sermons he railed against them, tho he confessed publicly he knew them
not) but he excepted against the long try all of them. It Is to be wonderd the
Doctor (having been a Bishops domestic Chaplain) should forget that
Scripture, Lay hands suddenly on no man, 1 Timothy 5.22. But it seems the Doctor
would have other men run into the same errors which his Bishop rather and
himself ran into. And it would be better considered by the Doctor (and his
brethren) whether gifted men may not continue to exercise their gifts, and yet
never be made Ministers, or receive Ordination at all? And if the Doctor (or
any of his friends) puts Pen to Paper again, I shall desire them to answer
these Scriptures that justify gifted brethrens teaching without Ordination,
Number. 11. 25. Pro. 14. 25 Act. 8. 11. and 11. 19. Romans 12. 6. 1 Cor. 12. 7. and
14. 3. Heb. 5. 12. and 3. 13. 1 Pet. 4. 10. and to prove that Ordination is
essentially necessary to a Minister and without which one cannot be a Minister:
also let him anser those assertions of learned men; as

1. Electio nil nisi complementum Electionis.

Vel Confirmatio Electionis, as another faith,

Vel Testificatio Electionis.

Vel Ritus liber e observationis. Its true the Doctor will have Bellarmine to
join with him herein, but few (or none) of the Protestant Writers, or Churches.

Secondly, The Doctor acknowledged a Separation from persecuting profane
people (this is contrary to Mr Alexander Griffiths Non concordant inter se)
which made Mr Powell say, I wish Doctor you may express this your Principle
next Easter. But I fear as the Doctor did now willingly forbear to relate
this truth, least his brethren (who to speak truth, are for most part but like
Ravens to the Swan in comparison of the Doctor, as Mr Powells expression was)
should fall foul upon him. Truly reader, thou may believe it, the Doctor did
ingenously (whether out of policy, piety, or because he could not speak against
them) confess our separation from persecuters and profane people to be
lawful, and our Ministry, and that he had nothing to say against our Ministers
(which made Mr Powell answer, I hope the Doctor will become a separatist, and
one of us: at which the Doctor smild.) And this is all Mr Powell and those of
his judgment would have maintained; for they have publicly, and privately,
in their Churches, and elsewhere declared, they separate from none of the godly
Ministers, or godly people of England: and that they will receive any that are
godly (as godly) without respect to their opinions, if they hold the head
Christ, to join and partake with them. Take notice that the Preacher who they
say was (beaten in Dolgelly) a tradesman, was an University man; so there is
one untruth more. But I will follow them no longer in their falsities, but will
come in the next and last place to justify the Syllogism, which the Doctor
and his brethren, then excepted against, and still ignorantly maintain,
because they would not acknowledge either their own weakness, and ignorance, or
the Truth, on the contrary side. Let Us therefore examine the Syllogism, and the
Exceptions against it. The Syllogism runs thus;

They that are not qualified, elected and ordained, according to the word of
God; are not called of God.

But Doctor G. and his brethren, are not qualified, etc. Ergo.

1. The Doctor exception was, that the Syllogism consisted all of Negatives.
Answ. The Syllogism dos not consist of all Negatives (much less or mere
Negatives) for the word ( not) joined with the subject in the Major, does not
make a negation, but only a medium infinitum (implying an affirmative word
uncertain and unlimited) and so the word ( not) is to be taken in the Minor
Proposition: and so the most wife and solid Logicians take it for an
affirmative predicati infiniti.

2. The Syllogism must be negative in matter, and for me, before that rule is
verified; Neve negativis, etc. vel ex meris negativis nil concluditur: but this
Syllogism is not so, for the Minor Proposition (as before) is an absolute
affirmation: but you are not qualified, etc. The great Prophet Jesus Christ (
who is perfect wisdom) shall be produced against the Doctor herein. Joh. 3.36.
He that believes not shall not see life: (The Minor Proposition must be) But
you Jews believe not Ergo. You Jews shall not see life. So Joh. 5. 23. He that
honors not the Son, honors not the Father. The Minor must needs be; But
you Jews honor not the Son. Ergo. You Jews honor not the Father. The like
argument you find by Paul (a better Disputant then Doctor Griffith) Romans c.4.
etc. 8. Let the Doctor deny these to be true Arguments if he can; and if he
acknowledge these I am sure he must acknowledge the other, for there are no
more negatives in the other then in these. But the Doctor (who would wave
Scripture merely to cavell against and occult the truth) may object that the
Minor is not expressed in the text. What Granger in his Syntag. does often supply
that part of the Syllogism which is wanting; and it is rational so to do.
tho? does it follow, its not right arguing? Sure the Dr would understand if a
man should say, All Doctors and Ministers, that subscribe not the Engagement,
and acknowledge the present Powers, shall be Ejected. If the Minor Proposition
were not expressed: yet I suppose the Doctor would conceive that it did
concern him: but its probable he would cavell against that Law (the sstroake
of which by friendship he now avoyds) as much as he does against this
Syllogism, because that would touch his profit as much as this does his
credit. But

3. Because the Dr conceives that Mr Moston and Mr Powell do not understand,
or else wrong Burgerdicius, and Keckerman: let us see what is their verdit
herein, and for whom they will find. Burg. Instit. Leg. lib. 2. chap. 8. page
178. faith, Si negatio sit pars medij, bonus Syllogismus, es duabus negatibus
conficitur.

Exempt.great. Quod non sentit non est animal.

Planta non sentit. Ergo. Planta non est animal.

See further there: as also in Keck. Edit. 6 page 419. who gives the same
example as above. So Tho. Granger in his Syntagm. Logic. lib. 3. cap. 10. page
265. So Saunders and others. I might add here the opinions of four or five of
the best Logicians I know in Wales, who had this Syllogism propounded to them;
yea one of the best Scholars that was at the Dispute that day, (who adheres in
his Judgment, in other things, rather to the Doctor then to Mr Powell) said it
was a good Syllogism. But suppose the Syllogism had not been true in form,
yet consider what learned Alstedius faith in his AEncyclopedia Printed An.
1630. page 437. Max. Materia necessaria, libera est a legibus formae
syllogisticae Itaque syllogismus saepe numero concludit necessitate materiae,
ubi forma non est bona, Aquila non capit muscas. And as for the Doctors
Syllogism (or whose ever else they are) they differ very much from Mr Powells,
for they are mere negatives (to was not his) Secondly, if they could be found
as they are laid down in any figure, yet they are not in the first figure as
his was: and therefore the Doctor (or his Amanuensis) should leave off blinding
the people with their captious, vicious, fallacious arguing; and receive the
Syllogismes more truly and properly retorted upon themselves, thus;

1. Syllog: No unreasonable Creature is to be taken to be in capacity to
dispute.

But Dr Griffiths and his brethren are unreasonable Creatures. Ergo.

Dr Griffiths and his brethren are not to be taken to be in capacity to dispute.

Or thus; That which is according to the word of God, is not to be spoken
against.

But Dr Griffiths and his brethrens practice, is to be spoken against.

Ergo. Dr Griffiths and his Brethrens practice, is not according to the word of
God.

And so likewise the third Syllogism in the same manner. Thus you see Dr
Griffiths, by Christ's, and Paul's way of reasoning, and by the best Logicians,
(yea by his own witnesses) found guilty of ignorance, or forgetulnes in
Logic: and by that time the Dr has read this, and further considered, he may
possibly be sorry he gave heed to the cavells then put into his head by a young
Sophister, newly come from Oxford. Sed dolus and fraus patrocinaniur nemini. I
shall conclude with the saying of two learned godly men, whom the Doctor would
call Fathers, if they did not whip him, as he deserves.

Chrysostomus. Non solum ille veritatis proditor est qui palam mendacium pro
veritate agnita loquitur: Sed etiam is qui veritati agnitae pertinaciter
resistit. Et

Augustinus. Nimis perverso se ipsos amant, qui ideo alios errare volunt, ut
ipsorum errorers lateant.

Haec est prima mali labes, hinc corruit omnis Antique pietatis honos. Sed
bonis dicat male seque mentiri neget: tamen viget, vigebit, victa vincit
veritas.

Here truth through weak ones does prevail,
When Error in strong hands do fail.
Reader, pass by, or correct what faults have herein escaped.

FINIS.

