An Elegy upon the Death of Our Dread Sovereign Lord King CHARLES the MARTYR.
COm, com, let us Mourn; all eyes, that see this Day,
Melt into Showrs, and Weep your selves away:
O that each Private head could yield a Flood
Of Tears, whilst Britain's Head stream's out His Blood;
Could we pay what His Sacred Drops might claim,
The World must needs be drowned once again.
Hands cannot write for Trembling; let our Eye
Supply the Quill, and shed an Elegy.
Tongues cannot speak; this Grief know's no such vent,
Nothing, but Silence, can be Eloquent.
Words are not here significant; in This
Our Sighs, our Groans bear all the Emphasis.
Dread SIR! What shall we say? Hyperbole
Is not a Figure, when it speak's of Thee:
Thy Book is our best Language; what to this
Shall e're be added, is Thy Meiosis:
Thy Name's a Text too hard for us: no men
Can write of it, without Thy Parts and Pen.
Thy Prisons, Scorns, Reproach, and Poverty
(Though these were thought too courteous Injury)
How could Thou bear? Thou Meeker Moses, how?
Was ever Lion bit with Whelps till now
And did not roar? Thou England's David, how
Did Shimei's Tongue not move Thee? Where Is the Man?
Where is the King? CHARLES is all Christian.
Thou never wanted'st Subjects, no; when they
Rebelled, Thou made Thy Passions to obeie.
Had Thou regained Thy Throne of State by Power,
Thou had not then been more a Conqueror.
But Thou, thine own Soul's Monarch, art above
Revenge and Anger, Can Thou tame Thy Love?
How could Thou bear Thy Queen's Divorce? must She
At once Thy Wife, and yet Thy Widow be?
Where are Thy tender Babes once Princely bred,
Thy choicest Jewels, are They Sequestered?
Where are Thy Nobles? Lo, in stead of these
Base savage Villains, and Thine Enemies:
Egyptian Plague! 'twas only Pharaoh's doom,
To see such Vermin in His Lodging-room.
What Guards are set, what Watches do they keep?
They do not think Thee safe, though locked in Sleep.
Would they confine Thy Dreams within to dwell,
Nor let Thy Fancy pass their Sentinel
Are Thy Devotions dangerous? Or do
Thy Prayers want a Guard? These faulty too?
Varlets, 't was only, when they spoke for You.
But lo a Charge is drawn, a Day is set,
The silent LAMB is brought, the Wolves are met.
Law is arraigned of Treason, Peace of War,
And Justice stand's a Prisoner at the Bar.
This Scene was like the Passion-Tragedie,
His Savior's Person none could Act, but He.
Behold what Scribes were here, what Pharisees!
What bands of Soldiers! What falls witnesses!
Here was a Priest, and that a Chief one; who
Durst strike at God, and His Vicegerent too.
Here Bradshaw, Pilate there: This make's them twain,
Pilate for Fear, Bradshaw condemned for Gain.
Wretch! could not thou be rich, till Charles was dead?
Thou might have took the Crown, yet spared the Head.
The have justified that Roman Judge; He stood
And washed in Water, thou have dipped in Blood.
And where is the Slaughter-Hous? White Hall must be,
Lately His Palace, now His Calvarie.
Great CHARLES, is this Thy Dying-place? And where
Thou were our KING, art Thou our MARTYR there?
Thence, thence Thy Soul took flight; and there will we
Not ceas to Mourn, where Thou did ceas to Be.
And thus, blessed Soul, He Is gone: a Star, whose fall,
As no Eclips prove's Ecumenical.
That Wretch had skill to sin, whose Hand did know
How to behead three Kingdoms at one blow.
England has lost the Influence of Her KING,
No wonder that so backward was Her Spring.
O dismal Day! but yet how quickly gone?
It must be short, Our SUN went down at Noon.
And now, ye Senators, is this the Thing
So often declared; Is this your Glorious King?
Did you by Oaths your God, and Country mock,
Pretend a Crown, and yet prepare a Block?
Did you, that swore you would Mount CHARLES higher yet,
Intend the Scaffold for His Olivet?
Was this, Hail Master? Did you bow the knee
That you might murder Him with Loialtie?
Alas! two Deaths! what Cruelty was this?
The Ax designed, you might have spared the Kiss.
London, did thou Thy Prince's Life betraie?
What? could thy Sables vent no other way?
Or else did thou bemoan His Cross? then, ah!
Why would thou be the cursed Golgotha?
Thou once had Men, Plate, Arms, a Treasury
To bind thy KING, and have thou none to free?
Dull beast! thou should, before thy Head did fall,
Have had at least thy Spirits Animal.
Did You, Ye Nobles, envy CHARLES His Crown?
Jove being fallen the Punie-gods must down:
Your Rays of Honor are eclip'st in Night,
The Sun is set, from whence You drew your Light.
Religion Vail's her self; and Mourn's that she
Is forced to own such horrid Villainy.
The Church and State do shake; that Building must
Exspect to fall, whose Prop is turned to Dust.
But ceas from Tears. CHARLES is most blessed of men;
A God on Earth, more then a Saint in Heaven.
June 16 1644
FINIS.

