AN EXPOSITION CONTINUED Upon the XX, XXI, XXII, XXIII, XXIV, XXV, XXVI, XXVII,
XXVIII, and XXIX, Chapters of the PROPHET EZEKIEL, With many Useful
Observations thereupon.

Delivered at several Lectures in London, By WILLIAM GREENHILL.

PSALM 119.96. I have seen an end of all Perfection, but thy Commandment is
exceeding broad.

HEBREWS 13.14. Here have we no continuing City, but we seek one to come.

Miser est omnis animus vinctus amicitia rerum mortalium. Augustine. Confess. l.
4. c. 6.

LONDON, Printed for Livewell Chapman at the Crown in Popes-head-Alley; And are
to be sold by Henry Mortlock at the Phoenix in Paul's Churchyard, near the
little North door. 1658.

TO Those in the famous City of London, who are the Undertakers, Promoters, and
Maintainers of the Expository Lectures therein, and to all others who love
Truth.
WE read in holy writ of many Cities, which for their structures, situations,
fortifications, trading, accommodations, and Epithites, were famous; as
populous No Nahum. 3. 8. Nineveh the great Jonah 1.2. Tarsus in Cilicia Act.
21.39. Golden Babylon Isa. 14.4. Renowned Tyrus Ezekiel. 26.17. Righteous and
faithful Jerusalem Isa. 1.26. which exceeded them all: for as Canaan was the
glory of all lands, flowing with milk and honey; so Jerusalem had its milk and
honey, and was the glory of all Cities: There was the Lords Presence, his
worship, his Oracles, his Ordinances, and his Prophets, which made it the glory
of the World, and perfection of beauty. Had other Cities strong Towers?
Jerusalem had them, and the Temple also. Had they gods of gold, silver, stones
and sticks in them? Jerusalem had Jehovah the true and living God in her. Had
they wise Counselors in them? Jerusalem had the Sanedrim. Had they humane Laws
which were good? Jerusalem had Divine Laws, such as no City or People ever had
Deuteronomy. 4.8. Had they temporal Excellencies and Privileges? Jerusalem had
spiritual. Had they the glory of the World, Art, and Nature? Jerusalem had the
glory of Heaven. There God shined, Psalm. 50.2. But what now is become of these
Cities, and Jerusalem it self? are they not all laid waste, made heaps, dead
and buried in the womb of the earth? Cities have their periods as well as men:
Babylon had a time to be borne Genesis 11.4. and a time to dye Isa. 14.4. Nineveh
had her day to get up Genesis 10.11. and her day to fall Nahum 3.7. Tyrus had her
day of rising, and her day of ruining, and she is descended into the pit with
others Ezekiel. 26.18, 20. Jerusalem had her day for building, and her day for
burning Jerem. 52.12, 13. This is matter of lamentation, that such Cities,
especially Jerusalem, should have such an end. The Cause of such dismal ends,
upon search we shall find to be SIN, which is of so malignant a Nature, that
it destroies Nations, and pulls down the strongest Cities. Cruelty, falsehood,
and robbery, with many other, were the sins laid Nineveh waste Nahum 3. Pride,
fullness of bread, abundance of idleness, with neglect of the poor, were the
sins made the Lord take Sodom away Ezekiel. 16.49, 50. Pride, Violence,
unmercifulness, vain-confidence, and Treachery, were the sins rent Babylon in
pieces Isa. 47. Jer. 50. what sins destroyed Ammon, Moab, Edom, Philistia, with
their Cities; and what sunk Tyrus into the sea Ezekiel tells you chap. 25. and
26. A large Catalogue of those sins which kindled the fire in Jerusalem, and
turned her into ashes, you have in the 22. of Ezekiel, and other chapters; most
of which I fear are to be found in this City. Are there not in her those set
light by Father and Mother? are there not those do vex the Fatherless and
Widow? are there not those despise the holy things of God, and profane his
Sabbaths? are there not those take usury, and increase, are greedy of gain, and
live by dishonest gain? Ezekiel. 22.18. Are there not those that devise mischief,
and give wicked counsel? Are there not those carry tales to shed blood? Are
there not those exercise robbery, vex the poor, the needy, and oppress the
stranger? Are not her professors as dross, even the dross of silver? may not
the Lord say of this City as he did of Jerusalem. Thou have been to me a
provocation of mine anger, Jer. 32.31
and of my fury, from the day that they built thee, even unto this day, that I
should remove thee from before my face. Thou art the City, I have been purging,
but art not purged, Eze. 24.13
Thou shall not be purged from thy filthiness, till I have caused my fury to
rest upon thee. Surely LONDON deserves not better at the hands of the Lord than
other Cities did, especially Jerusalem, and having her sins, may fear her end.
Be instructed therefore O LONDON, lest the Lords soul depart from thee, and
thou be made Desolate; For the Lord has a Day to reckon with sinful Lands
and Cities Isa. 17.4. In that day the glory of Jacob shall be made thin, and
the fatness of his flesh shall wax lean. The Princes, Counselors, Soldiers,
Prophets, Priests, with their Cities, the rarities and riches of them, were the
glory and fatness of Jacob; These God had a day to take away, and so made
Jacob thin and lean. God had a day for Tire, Isa. 23.15
and interrupted her great merchandising for seventy years, by laying her in
the deep. If it be demanded how came Tyrus so strong and stately, so fat and
full, to so deplorable an end. The spirit of God tells you, when it says, Eze.
26.27.
thy Rowers have brought thee into great waters; that is, the Princes and
Rulers, by their Pride, Policy, and Profaneness, caused such storms as sunk
the Ship. Tyrus had as much to secure her as any City in the world, she was
built upon a rock, her borders were in the midst of the Seas, she had walls,
and an Army to watch them; she had Towers and Gammadims to keep them; she
wanted not for ships, Pilots, Mariners, for Soldiers, sheilds, and Helmets,
she had Counselors, Merchants, and plenty of all things, so that she seemed
invincible; but all these did not preserve her station, or make her
impregnable; for though she endured a fredge of thirteen years by
Nebuchadrezzar and his forces, Eze. 27.2^
yet at last she fell into the midst of the Sea, in the day of her ruin.
Jerusalem was so well fortified by nature and art, Psalm. 125.2. Psalm. 48.12,
13. Lam. 4.12
being compassed about with mountains, having walls, bulwarks, and Towers,
that it, was thought incredible, and impossible, for an enemy to have entered
her gates: but sin being found in her, and God against her, nothing secured
her. She was often warned by the Prophets, Isa. 37. Amos 4.
and judiciary providence of God, to repent and reform. She was as a pot
over the fire, when besiedged by Senacherib, when famine and Plague devoured
her inhabitants, but her scum went not out, and that was her ruin. Let none
think the poor to be the scum of the City, Prove. 22.2
the Lord made the poor as well as the rich, and despises not the work of his
own hands. Its the sin of Rich and Poor, its their wickedness which is the
scum. Great Cities have much sin in them, and so much scum; scummie Opinions,
scummie Counsels, scummy fashions, and scummie practices. Isa. 1.5
Thus was it with Jerusalem and her scum boiled in, she was the worse for
corrections and judgments, her scum being aegritudo and venenum ollae, caused
the cracking and bursting of the pot. These things the book of God holds forth
for our instruction, upon whom the ends of the world are come. Let our great
City and Citizens look to it, there is scum in the City, and not a little: is
it gone out, or boiled in? was not the Sword lately at your gates? was there
not yesterday great sickliness, within your walls? is not trading diminished?
have there not been strange murders amongst you? Have not many sad fires been
kindled, broke out and consumed your habitations? was there not a Plot (which
has cost some their lives) to fire your City? God has been warning you by
these judiciary dispensations, and are you bettered by them? has all you have
seen, feared, or felt, caused your scum to depart from you, if so, its well;
well will it be with you, well with your City, and well with your undertakings,
and well with your posterity; but if it be boiled in, and you are the worse for
all the boiling judgments and providence you have been in, and under, know
that so^e dreadful calamity, if not destruction it self hastens and will
certainly take hold of you and your City, without speedy repentance: Hitherto
you have had sparing mercy, and gentle corrections, if these lead not to
repentance, severity abides for you, Jer. 19.11.31, 32
and God will say from the first to the last, I have been provoked by this
City, I will break this people, and this City. How sad would it be, should the
Lord lay your City waste! Its not the strong structures, great treasures,
military or Naval forces, wise Counsels, which can protect you, if scumme be
found amongst you; if you are careful that the filth of the streets be carried
out, will you not much more see that the filth of your hearts and houses be
purged out? will not London be made clean, when shall it once be? let this be
the time; least the Plague, which has been much feared, enter your borders,
and cause sad cries in your streets and families. Now wash you, make you clean,
put away the evil of your doings, and learn to do well, seek judgment, relieve
the oppressed, judge the fatherless, and plead for the Widow; now let holiness
of life, execution of justice, speaking truth, doing righteousness, showing
mercy, and promoting the good of one another in love, take place, and they will
not only secure you and the City, but make you and it glorious, and perfect in
beauty, so that the Lord will take pleasure therein, and say of it and you,
This is the City of righteousness, the faithful City, and her Citizens are like
her self righteous and faithful. Now her Brass is become Gold, her Iron Silver,
her Officers peace, and her Exactors righteousness; therefore now her walls
shall be salvation, and her gates praise; now shall she be my habitation, and
her people my glory, and I will be to them a defense for evermore. That this
may be the portion of this City, and your selves, and that a blessing may go
with this work, is the hearty prayer of him who is,

Your servant in this Expository work of the Lord. WILLIAM GREENHILL.
The 30th. of the 5th. month. 1658.
Courteous Reader, By reason of the Authors distance from the Press, and too
much trust being put in the Correctors, through their Carelessness or
Ignorance, this work happens to be blurred with the following Errata's: which
thou art desired to take special notice of.

ERRATA.

PAge 22. line 9. read were, page 23. l. 38 (...), p. 24. l. 3. r. potibile, l.
11. r. Kircker, so in the Margent. p. 31. in Marg, r. Kircker, r. (...) p. 48.
in Marg. r. (...) p. 51. l. 21. r. eventually, in marg. r. paraphrastes, p. 62.
l. 32. r. Acts 3. p 64. in marg. r. frangere^, p. 68. l. 32. r. leads, p. 74.
r. Obs. not Obs. 1. p 77. l. 23. r. and my wales, p. 82. r. (...) and (...) in
the margent, and l. 30. (...) p. 83. in margent r. (...) and ils se sont
desbouche, p. 88. l. 16. r. inventions, p. 89. in the margent, r. altar, p. 97
l. 24. r. ever, p 102. ^. 16. r transform, p. 105. l. 27. r. where, p. 123. l.
23. r. so Montanus, p. 124. l. 16. r. ie leur, p 132. l. 5. r. Shecinab. p.
135. l. 21. r: ye shall smite your faces, p. 139. in margent r. predicandum
esse, p. 140. in marg. r. Theman natoph, p. 141. l. 4. r Darom, l. 9. r. e^etz,
p. 146. l. 6. and 8. r. parabolarum, p. 149. l. 18. r. therefore, p. 154. l 33.
r. Shevet, p. 156. l. 17. r. Avenarius, p. 162. l. 30 r. l'espee, p. 164. r.
Sanctius, p. 170. l. 3. r. ^8, l. 16. r. (...) p. 171. l. 30. r. (...), l. 31.
r. Mechovi, p. 172. l. 1. for word r. called, l. 15. r. kesem meri l. 22 r.
were, p. 185. l. 6. and 21. r. Cidarim, p. 186. l. 32. r. Hashshaphalah, p.
188. l. 6. r. translaters, l. 18. for Job 2. r. ibid. v. p. 192. l 8. r. or, l.
19. r. gam hajah, p. 200. in margent r. solvere, l. 22. dele commaes, after
Lehachil lemaan, p. 203. l. 12. r. Shave, p. 204. l. 8. r (...), p. 207. l. 21.
r. adam sheen, p. 215. l. 1. r. (...), l. 18. dele Commaes, l. 22. r. interitu,
p. 216. l. 6. r. massacre, l. 25. r. itteca, p. 217. l. 11. r. sarcasme, p.
219. l. 10. r. (...), l. 23. Proselite, p. 220. l. 28. r. (...) l. 32. r.
hommes, p. 221. l. 2. r. (...) in margent r. Occultan Calumniam, p 226. l. 18.
r. (...) p. 230 l. 22. r. Zech. p. 232. l. 2. r. Theodotion, l. 3. r. (...), p.
238. l. 7. r. true. p. 240. l. 13. r. degenerated, p. 245. l. 8. r. say p. 250.
l. 13. r. (...) p 257. l. 29 r. those, p. 259. in margent r. arguere nolebant,
p. 262. in margent, r. ^versare, p. 265. in margent r. poetae, p. 268. l. 5. r.
(...), l. 6. r. (...), p. 277 in margent r. demand quelque homme, p. 273. in
margent r. (...) p. 295 l. ^7. r. (...), p. 299. l. 9. r. shalishim, p 208. l.
3, 4. r. hiphshituc. p. 3^9. in margent r. Congruun^, p. 329. l. 16. r. hassir,
p. 334. l. 14. r. Forsterus, p. 343, l. 15. r. Zimmab, p. 359. l. 5. r. Saphad,
l. 12. (...) p. 361. l. 7. dele comma after vision, and make is after from l.
8. p. 365. l. 10. r. Psa. 647. p. 370 l. 7. r. (...), p. 377. l. 30. r. animus,
p. 386. l. 20. r. left, p. 387 l. ^6. r. (...), p. 39^. l. 12. r. (...), l. 25.
r. Shatecha, p. 393: l. 16. r. Shindler, p. 415. l. 30. r. enmities, p: 420. l.
8. r. here, p. 421 in margent r: Masius, p. 429 l. 2. r. Kavotollo, p. 431 l:
9. r. Palaetyrus, p. 434 l. last r. lirgaim, p. 435 l. 2. r: regagn, p. 438 l.
6. r. hammaiim, p, 439 l. 7: r. tachtijoth, l. 13 r: the living God, p. 440 l.
17. r: Palaetyrus, p. 446 l. 2, r. iophi. p. 447 in margent r: Quistorpium, p,
449 l. 12. r: Caallonim, p: 452. l. 32. r. shesh, l. 34. r. it was, p. ^57 l.
7: r: do, l. 16. r. (...) so l. 24. p. 459. l. 22: anochi magen lak, p. 461 l.
17. r. (...) p. 460 l. 25. for impos (...) sible, r. improbable, p. 462. l: 2:
r. Zidon, p. 463 l. 25. (...) r. Emporium, p. 404, l 5. r. (...), l. 17, Booti,
p, 465. l: ^5. r. Barzel berez, p. 471. l. 2, r, Chadchod, p. 472 in margent r.
Chalab, p. 477, l. 11. r. bemachlulius l. 15, r. teceleth, p. 480, l. 37. r,
destruction, p. 481 l, 1: r: destruction, p: 486 l. 29. r. for java gabbah, p:
494 l, 16, r: sense it without a comma p: 499 l. 11: r, sovillerunt, p. 502 l,
34, r: 12 have, p, 503 l, 7, r: esleve, p, 506. in marg. r, fastum, p, 507. l.
9. r. pantere in marg. venereos affectus, l, 35, r. nophech, p. 508, l: 24, r,
apyrotus, p, 511 l, 22. r, hassochech, p. 514. l. 31, r, the, p, 516, l, 5, r,
Proverb 14, 34, p, 518, l, 32, r, lifted, p, 534, l, 28. r, 2 Cor. 12, p 535,
l, 3. r. for Zidon, Judah, p, 542, l. 9. r, Scurment, p. 557 in margent r.
arundmeus, p. 518 l, 30, r. (...), p, 564. l, 8, r. seveneh, p. 164 l, 34, r,
Torniellus, p. 575, l, 37. r, ipse, p, 577 l, 5 r. Bashshater, p, 580 l, 29,
dele and, p, 584 l: 35. r: Kings, p, 588, l; 15 r, writ, p. 589. l, 32, r.
Pithcho^peh.

AN Exposition continued UPON THE PROPHESY OF EZEKIEL.
CHAP. XX.
Verse. 1 And it came to pass, in the seventh Year, in the fifth Month, the
tenth day of the Month, that certain of the Elders of Israel came to enquire of
the Lord, and sat down before me. 2 Then came the word of the Lord unto me,
saying, 3 Son of Man speak unto the Elders of Israel, and say unto them. Thus
says the Lord God, are ye come to enquire of me? as I live says the Lord God,
I will not be enquired of by you. 4 Will thou judge them, son of man, will thou judge them? cause them to know the abominations of their fathers.
IN this Chapter you have

1 The Exordium in the first, second, and part of the third verse.

2 A severe reproof, or refusal of those that came to the Prophet, verse. 3,
4.31.

3 A Relation of Gods dealings with them, in Egypt, in the Wilderness, and in
Canaan, and their sinful carriages toward him, from the 4. ver. to the 33.

4 A denunciation of judgment for their Hypocrisy, and other sins, mixed with
promises of mercy, from the 33. to the 45.

5 A parabolical Declaration of the destruction of Judea and Jerusalem, from
the 45. to the 49.

6 A doleful conclusion of the Prophet, v. 49.

In the Exordium or Introduction you have

1 The time of this Prophesy punctually set down, both the year, month, and
day, v. 1.

2 The occasion thereof, which was the coming of the Elders to the Prophet to
enquire of the Lord. Ibid.

3 The commission the Prophet had to give out this Prophesy, verse. 2, 3.

1 And it came to pass in the seventh (...). That is, of their Captivity,
Ezekiel began to Prophesy in the fifth year thereof, chap. 1, 2. and now it was
the seventh year of their Captivity in Babylon, and of Zedekiahs reign at
Jerusalem, and two years and five months before Jerusalem was besieged, as
appears 2 King. 25.1.

In the fifth month. Joseph. Antiq. l. 1. c. 4.
The Jews before they came out of Egypt, computed their year from the month
Tisri, or Ethanim, which was part of those months we call September and
October, but after they came out of Egypt, they began their year from the month
Nisan, which comprehends part of March, and part of April. Their fifth month
was called Ab, which had half of July, and half of August in it.

The tenth day of the Month. Often in this prophesy the very day of the Month
is set down, as chap. 1, 2. the fifth day of the fourth month, and chap. 8.1.
the fifth day of the sixth month, and here the tenth day of the fifth month.
The spirit of God put the Prophet upon an exact Chronology, both to strengthen
the credit of the Prophesy, and to mind them of the many years were yet behind
of their Captivity, that so they might repent them of their iniquity which had
brought them into that condition, and patiently submit to the Babylonish yoke
which God had put upon them for seventy years.

Certain of the Elders of Israel came. In the eighth cha^er. 1. the Elders of
Judah sat before him, and chap. 14.1. Elders of Israel came unto him, and so
its here; certain of the Elders of Israel came, the Hebrew is, men of the
Elders, that is, some of the ancient that were or had been Governors and chief
amongst them, they came, from whence? from Jerusalem say some, Hugo. Piscator.
but they had Jeremy there to consult withal, and its not likely that after
Zedekiah and the chief men had broken Covenant with Nebuchadnezzar, that men of
the Elders at Jerusalem would take a long journey to Babylon to consult with
Ezekiel: Others therefore say, they were of the Captives, to whose judgment I
should incline, if I could see how that is said in the 34. verse. and so after,
might fitly be applied unto them. It seems probable to me, that some of the
Elders at Jerusalem upon the revolt of Zedekiah from Nebuchadnezzar, and
falling in with the King of Egypt, might send to some of the Elders among the
Captives to make inquiry of Ezekiel, touching their affairs.

To inquire of the Lord. They came to the Prophet, that he consulting with
God, might make known his mind unto them. They had been now seven years in
Captivity, the false Prophets had possessed them with hopes of returning to
Jerusalem, which should abide and not be destroyed, as Jeremiah had said; and
therefore some think they came to inquire what should become of them. Others
make the ground of their coming to the Prophet, and inquiring, to be the
rumors of, if not the preparation for war by Nebuchadnezzar, because the Jews
at Jerusalem, had rebelled and broken Covenant with him. Hereupon they thought
it might go ill with themselves, that they might suffer very hard things, if
not be cut off by the Babylonians, and therefore came to the Prophet to
inquire what would be the issue of things. Its probable they were in danger
through the perfidiousnesse of their Brethren at Jerusalem, and that the
consideration thereof might have some influence into their coming to the
Prophet; but there was more than so. They now to secure themselves, thought and
resolved of a sinful way, v. 32. We will be as the Heathen, as the families of
the Countries, to serve wood and stone; they conceived, that if they conformed
to the Babylonian worship, they should be taken for good subjects, and be
safe, whatever befell them at Jerusalem for their provocation of the Babylonish
King. This they concealed from the Prophet, and come to him to inquire (seeing
they were now more odious to the Babylonians than before Zed^kiah's breaking
Covenant) whether it were not better and safer for them to disperse, than to
live in bodies, and multitudes together, which caused envy, hatred, and great
danger at that time as they pretended. But they dissembled deeply, for while
they lived together, they could not so easily desert the Jewish Religion, and
embrace the Babylonish Idolatry. There would be special observation of it, and
bitter reprehension for it. But if they had the Prophets counsel, and consent
to scatter themselves, and fix their habitations here and there, they thought
they might do it without any noise or check.

And sat down before me. The Hebrew for before me, is, ad facies meas, before
my faces, that is, in my presence, expecting some answer from me.

2 Then came the word of the Lord unto me. The Hebrew is, and the word of the
Lord has been to me.

Saying, Hebrew is, to say, the spirit moved him that he might speak to others.

There being an opportunity and season for speaking, the spirit came upon him,
and informed him touching the mind of God, and commissioned him to deliver it.

3 Son of Man. He says not Ezekiel, but Son of man, to mind him of his
original, that he was his creature, and ought to hearken too, and observe the
Laws of his Creator, of this appellation has been spoken heretofore.

Speak unto the Elders of Israel. Here is a command laid upon the Prophet the
Lord commands him to speak, and puts into his mouth what he shall speak. False
Prophets were neither sent of the Lord, nor spoke from the Lord, chap. 13.36.

Are ye come to inquire of me? Or, Do ye come to inquire of me? The words
are an interrogation, and this interrogation imports distaste at their coming:
do you come to inquire of me? your hearts are not right in this matter, you
play the Hypocrites and dissemble egregiously, for you pretend to honor me in
asking Counsel at my mouth, and that if you knew my mind you would do it,
whereas you are resolved before hand what to do, let my Counsels be what they
will, O you dissemblers, ye are come to try and tempt me, whither I will give
out what suits with your intentions and resolutions, if so, you will embrace
it, but if not, my Counsels must be rejected, and your own established.

As I live says the Lord God, I will not be inquired of by you. This
Hypocritical carriage of theirs did so displease, yea, provoke the Lord, that
he swears he will not be enquired of by them. Had they come in truth and
simplicity of Heart, intending to hearken to the Lord, and obey his voice,
whatever he had advised them, he would have been inquired of by them, but
being they had fallacious spirits, and came in a way of mockage unto God,
therefore he deals roundly and severely with them, and binds it with an Oath,
that he will not be enquired of by them.

But they did inquire of God, they came to the Prophet to inquire of him, verse.
1. how then is it true, that the Lord says, and swears, he will not be
inquired of by them? The meaning of those words is, I will not answer them,
(...) Non respondebo vobis. Je ne vous respondray point. So Montanus* in the
margent
let them inquire, ask what they please, I will not answer them, and so its all
one as if I were not inquired of; so the Septuagint, Vulgar, and French have
it, though they do ask, they shall not obtain, they shall not prevail. I will
not answer; or if I do, it shall not be ad votum vestrum, not such an answer
as you would have.

4 Will thou judge them. etc. Besides the Appellation, this verse consists of
an interrogation, and an injunction. The interrogation is double; will thou
judge them, will thou judge them? The injunction, cause them to know the
abominations, etc.

In this verse, the Lord does anticipate and prevent the Prophet, who having
good thoughts of these Elders of Israel, that came to inquire of the Lord, was
ready to plead for them, when he saw the Lord so severe and resolute against
them, as not to vouchsafe them an answer, Lord what is the matter? these men are
conscientious, they do their duty, they come to consult for the good of the
people, they would do nothing, being in a strait and danger without thee; Lord
be not so peremptory, listen unto them, and give them a gracious Answer. God
foreseeing that the Prophet would be their patron, and plead for them, he
takes him off from this, by saying, will thou judge them? that is, will thou
deem them to be honest, sincere, plain hearted men, that come with a purpose
to know and obey the will of God; thou art deceived, they are deep dissemblers,
devilish politicians, pretending one thing, and intending another, they come
not out of duty or conscience, but to get countenance from me and thee, to
cloak their cursed designs, therefore parley not with them, plead not for them,
be not troubled about them, pray not to me, in behalf of them. So that this
interrogation carries the force of a Negation, and prohibition with it.

The word Judge, is frequently used for pleading, as in Jerem. 5.28. Isa. 1.17.
Psalm. 72.4. Ezekiel. 22.2.23.36. and so we have interpreted it here. The doubling
of the words, Piscator an excusabis? Patrocineris e^s castalio.
will thou judge them? will thou judge them? sets out the heinousness of their
sin, and the severity of the Lord, that would not suffer the Prophet to plead
for them.

Cause them to know the abominations of their Fathers. Be thou so far from
pleading for them, that thou possess them with, and present before them the
abominations of their fathers which they follow. Ut eorum supplicia metuant
quorum ^lagitia sequuntur. Pintus.
Of abominations has been spoken before; by Fathers, their predecessors, Kings
and others, are meant, who were Idolaters, Oppressors, and profane.

Observe. 1

The Lord keeps an exact account of his peoples sufferings, be the time long or
short he observes it. In the seventh year, fifth month, and tenth day, that was
of their captivity: The Lord forgate not how long they had been in Babylon, he
notes how the time of their trouble passes, in the 24 of Ezekiel. v. 1. the ninth
year, tenth month, and tenth day are mentioned; in the 29. v. 1. the tenth
year, tenth month, and twelfth day are set down; in the 26.1. the eleventh
year, and first day of the month are specified; in the 40. and 1. v. the twenty
fifth year of the captivity is named. They were Captives in Babylon, suffered
hard things, but God took notice of the time, and how the years ran out. Its
said Israel served Eglon eighteen years, Judges 3.14. that Jabin oppressed them
twenty years, chap. 43. Its not said only, that the woman had a spirit of
infirmity, but the time is recorded also, she had it eighteen years, Luke
13.11. so in John 5.5. not only the man and his infirmity is mentioned, but the
time also how long, thirty eight years, so Aeneas is said not only to have had
the palsy, but to have kept his bed eigth years, Act. 9.33. God tells the
years, months, and days, that his do endure adversity; seventy years were
determined that they should be in Babylon* Jerem. 29.10, 11. and God gave them
to see, he observed as well, yea, better then they, how they passed.

Obs. 2 The time of men's doing some things is specially noted by the Lord.
These Elders coming to inquire of the Lord, the time of it is recorded, in the
seventh year fifth month, and tenth day. Though all things be noted by the
Lord, yet some things more especially than others. See how the actions of
Josiah are observed, 2 Chronicles. 34. v. 3. in the eighth year of his reign, while
he was yet young, he began to seek after the God of David his Father, and
in the twelfth year he began to purge Judah and Jerusalem, from the high
places, verse. 8. in the eighteenth year of his reign, he repaired the house of
the Lord his God, and kept the great Passover in that year, chap. 39.18, 15.
when Jeroboam feasted and sacrificed to the Calves he had made, God took
notice of the month and day, 1 Kings 12.32. it was the eighth month, and
fifteenth day, when Jehoiakim cut the roll, cast it into the fire, and burnt
it, God noted the time of it, Jer. 36.22, 23. When Esther was taken into the
royal house by Ahashnerus, the time is eyed by the Lord, and recorded, chap.
2.16. see Ezra 10.16. 2 Chronicles. 29.17. Esth. 9.1, 18. Jer. 52.31.39.2. where the
times of things are specially recorded. Let men take heed what they do, and
when they do it, Mat. 26.15, 16. God observed the time when Judas covenanted
with the chief Priests, to sell Christ for thirty pieces of silver, from that
time forth he sought opportunity to betray him: When the persecution of the
Church was, God took notice of it, Act. 8.1. at that time: so Herod's slaying of
James, at that time, he stretched out his hand, Acts 12.1, 2.

Obs. 3 Hypocrisy is a close sin, and is in those often times we little think.
Its found where it was not expected. In the Elders of Israel; Those here came
to Ezekiel, pretended piety, sat before him; as if they would hearken to
whatsoever the Lord should say, and do it: yet they intended no such thing, but
were resolved to go on in their own ways, and to be as the Babylonians and
Heathens, as you may see verse 32. that so they might enjoy peace and safety:
They did here, like many that are upon marriage, who will go to two or three to
inquire and have Counsel, but are resolved to go on what ever is said unto
them, so whatever Counsel they should have had given them from the Lord, they
meant to go on in their wicked ways, and this was profound hypocrisy, whose
wont it is to veil the foulest things with the fairest pretenses. In Ananias
and Sapphira there was dissimulation, Sanctissima specie.
Act. 5. so in those came to Jeremy, entreating him to pray for them, and to
consult with God for them, it was a time of affliction, and they would do what
ever God should say unto them by Jeremy, but they dealt Hypocritically with
him, and God; they were resolved to go into Egypt* although they sent Jeremy to
ask of the Lord, whether they should or no, he told them they must not go, if
they did, they should perish there, and because they would go, Jer. 42.20. he
tells them they dissembled in their hearts, when they sent him to the Lord to
pray for them: here was damnable Hypocrisy in them: So those that came to
Christ, Mat. 22.16, 17, 18. they carried a foul business very smoothly,
Master we know that thou art true, and teach the way of God in truth,
neither carest thou for any man, tell us therefore, what think thou? is it
lawful to give tribute unto Caesar or no? here was villainy couched under these
words; they thought to entangle Christ, and to have got advantage hereby, to
have cut him off, and therefore perceiving their wickedness, he says, why
tempt ye me ye Hypocrites? There be many its to be feared will be found
Hypocrites at last, who now frequent the Assemblies, and come to hear the word
of God, but do it not. Are there not many who come to hear and sit before the
Lord, and his Ministers, as if they would conform to what he should give out
by them, but they hold fast their corrupt opinions, vile lusts, wretched
practices, and what is this but Hypocrisy? those in the 33 of Ezekiel. 31, 32.
they came to the Prophet, heard him, gave him good words, but nothing they
would do, their hearts went after their covetousness, and they were no better
than Hypocrites, so now, etc. if men come not with honest hearts, intending to
do what they hear, they come Hypocritically.

Obs. 4 To inquire and ask Counsel of the Prophets and men of God, is of
ancient standing and warrantable. Here the Elders of Israel that had years,
experience, they come to a Prophet. Non male egerunt inquirendo, sed male
inquirendo, OEcolampad.
Their coming was not unlawful or condemnable, but their coming sinfully: It
was a frequent practice of Old, to consult with the Prophets, 1 Samuel 9.9. 1
King. 22.15. 2 King, 8 8. Jer. 21.2. 37.7. and their coming to them, was
coming to the Lord, as here they came to inquire of the Lord. Then men look
the right way, upon the Prophets when they look at God in them, and what he
says by them, with resolution to follow the same; what though now there be no
Prophets nor Apostles immediately inspired, and infallible to consult withal,
yet there be Pastors, and Teachers, with whom Christ has promised to be to
the end of the world, who are given to perfect and edifye the body of Christ,
and therefore upon consultation with them, you may be helped to that light
which of your selves, you cannot attain unto.

Obs. 5^ The Prophets were to give out the Lords mind in his name and words,
unto those they were sent unto, speak unto the Elders of Israel, and say, thus
says the Lord God: he might not speak his own mind, his own words in his own
name, he must not say, thus says Ezekiel, but thus says the Lord: this gave
weight and authority to the word, and bred the greater reverence in the hearts
of the hearers. That which is from the Lord, has a Divine stamp upon it, a
Divine power in it; but that is man's is like himself, frail, and feeble, you
may refuse it without any considerable prejudice, but not so with the word of
the Lord.

Obs. 6 How closely soever men carry their wicked devices, with what colors
soever they varnish and paint them over, though they may, can, delude and
deceive men, even Prophets, yet they cannot impose upon God and deceive him.
Ezekiel was out-reached by these old Foxes, these Hypocritical Elders, because
he could not see into their Hearts, discern their intentions, but the Lord
whose eye peirceth into the depths, saw what was within, and detected their
foul insides, notwithstanding their pious pretenses: are you come to inquire of
me? whom do you think I am? what a God do you make of me? am I like unto man,
such as your selves? No, No, I know your hearts ye Hypocrites, How dare you
come into my presence to inquire of me, when you are resolved to go on in your
own ways? The Lord knew they had Idols in their hearts, Ezekiel. 14.1, 2, 3. they
were Elders of Israel likewise, great men often times are great Hypocrites, they
think being crafty, to go beyond God, and his Prophets, but it cannot be; he
knows upon what grounds, with what purpose, intentions, resolutions, men come
to hear his word, to ask Counsel o^ his servants: look to your selves,
spirits, and all your ways, God sees and knows all, and if you be not
sincere, upright, without guile and hypocrisy; he will find you out and
detect you.

Obs. 7 When m^n come to God or his Ordinances with hypocritical hearts, they
get n^thing of him, he is so far from accepting and hearing of them, that he
rejects them, and resolves not to answer them; Come ye to inquire of me? as I
live I will not be inquired of by you. Do you think to have mine ear, my
countenance, my heart, my hand to do for you? No, you shall have nothing at all
of me, be gone, I will afford you no answer, though you be Elders of Israel,
yet you are Hypocrites, and they are odious to me, be they of the highest
rank, or lowest, its not your hoary heads will move me, seeing you have
Hypocritical hearts, you are resolved to go on in your ways, and I am resolved
to go on in my way, I will not answer you, come often, sit long before the
Prophet if you will, answer of me you shall have none, none suitable to your
desires and expectations. Job speaking of an Hypocrite, says, Will God hear
his cry when trouble comes upon him? chap. 27.9. at such a time he will cry,
and cry hand, but will God hear him? No? God has no pleasure in Hypocrites,
therefore says Ezekiel, 8.18. though they cry in mine ears with a loud voice,
yet will I not hear them, the like you have in Micah 3.4. If men's hearts be
not upright, sincere, let them pray, and cry in prayer, let them hear, and hear
attentively, let them come to a Prophet to ask Counsel, and wait, God
respects them not, will not answer them, the upright in their way are his
delight, Prove. 11.20. he delights in their persons, their presence, their
prayers, in doing for them, Prove. 10.29. the way of the Lord is strength to the
upright, what is the way of the Lord? prayer, hearing of the word, asking
counsel of his Prophets, and servants, are the ways of the Lord, in these he
appears, is found, lets out strength, but it is when men are upright, not
hypocritical, come not therefore resolved to go on in your own ways, but as
Peter says, Lay aside all malice, all guile, and hypocrisies, envies, and evil
speaking, and as new born babes, etc.

Obs. 8 Hypocrites and wicked men may carry themselves, so, as to deceive the
Prophets and servants of God. These Elders by their coming, putting the
Prophet on to inquire of the Lord for them, sitting before him for an answer,
bred such good thoughts of them in the Prophets mind, as that when God told
him, he would not be inquired at by them, he was ready to plead for them,
and excuse them from being Hypocrites, wondering the Lord should be so hot and
resolute against them, as not to vouchsafe them an answer. He thought they
were good men, and worthy of better entertainment at the hands of God, then
they had, but he was deceived. Simon Magus demeaned himself, so, that he
begat a good esteem in the heart of Philip, and was admitted to Baptism, Act.
8.13. In John's days many got into the Church, who seemed Saints, but were
Hypocrites, 1 John 2.19, they went out from us that they might be made
manifest. John and others had had good opinions of them, but were deluded by
them. False Apostles got into the Church of Ephesus, and for a time had gained
too much upon the Angel thereof, Rev. 2.2. When the Captains and people came to
Jeremy in a smooth way, promising to do what ever the Lord should say by him;
they insinuated so far into him, that they prevailed with him to inquire of
the Lord for them, but they juggled with him, Jer. 42. Prophets and Ministers
may be, and are deceived often with the specious pretenses of naughty men,
because they would not be uncharitable, they are many times too credulous.

Obs. 9 Hypocrites are not to be pleaded for: Wilt tho^ judge them, son of
man, will thou judge them? God would not have the Prophet to plead for, or
excuse them. Hypocrites are so odious in Gods eye, that he takes it unkindly
when his Prophets and Ministers appear for them, i^ they have thoughts that
way, he dislikes it, and forbids them. This double interrogation, is a double
negation: These Hypocrites would have drawn in God, and the Prophet to have
countenanced their vile intentions therefore God would neither answer them, nor
suffer his Prophet to speak for them. Hypocrites are not always the greatest
of sinners, but they are ever the worst of sinners because they pretend to be
holy, and under pretense of Holiness cover all their wickedness. The Devil is
never more Devil, than when he transforms himself into an Angel of light, he
seeming light being darkness is devillishly Hypocritical, hiding all his
hellish darkness under pretended light, and so do all Hypocrites who are his
eldest Sons, under the light of being religious they do all their deeds of
darkness. The Jews were an Hypocritical Nation, Isa. 10.6. Jer. 7.9, 10. and
therefore God for bids Jeremy to pray for them chap. 14.11. and what if the^
would pray themselves? you have an answer, in Job 13.16. God tells you that an
Hypocrite shall not come before him, that is, to have acceptance of his person,
or hear any comfortable answer from him; Christ has told Hypocrites what they
must look for Mat. 23. Woe to you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, woes they
may look for, and must hear of. Woe to them for imposing upon God, as if he
saw not their close wickedness. Woe to them for abusing Religion to further
their Devilish designs. Woe to them for deceiving others by their painted
shows and professions, and woe to them for deceiving themselves.

Obs. 10. The Prophets and Servants of God when they are inquired of by men,
must not proceed according to their desires, or their own apprehensions of them
that do so desire, but they must wait for the mind of God, and do answerably
thereunto. Wilt ^hou judge them Son of man? cause them to know the
abominations of their Fathers. They would have thee inquire of me for them,
but I will not be inquired of, they shall not have their desires, thou
apprehendest they are good, and would speak for them, but thou must not do
after thine own apprehensions, thou must attend my pleasure, and do what that
is, and its this, make them to know the abominations of their Fathers. They did
such things as provoked me to cast these their children into this Babylonish
captivity, and will they continue in their ways, or proceed to worse? go thy
ways, lay before them, the abominable things their Fathers have done, see what
effect that will have with them. Mind not their desires, stand not upon thine
own apprehensions of them; I have made known my will unto thee, go thou and
make it known unto them without dispute or delay. Not the Peoples desires, nor
the Prophets phancies, must be his direction, when he is to make Answer to
those that inquire, but the will of God made known by his word and Spirit.

Verse. 5 And say unto them, thus says the Lord God, in the day when I chose
Israel, and lifted up mine hand unto the seed of the house of Jacob and made my
self known unto them in the land of Egypt, when I lifted up mine hand unto
them, saying; I am the Lord your God. Here begins the third part of the
Chapter, which is the Relation of Gods dealing with them, and theirs toward
him.

1 In Egypt, from this verse. to the 10. 2 In the desert, from the 10. to the
27. 3 In Canaan from the 27. to the 33.
In the first of these you have sundry choice mercies of God set down, with his
command, and their notorious wickedness.

The mercies are reckoned up in the 5, 6, 7, and 9. v. and they are those.

1 Gods election of them. 2 His revelation of himself unto them. 3 His
profession of being their God. 4 His promise to bring them out of the land of
Egypt into the land of Canaan. 5 His confirmation of all these, by lifting up
his hand. 6 His sparing of them for his names sake. 7 His bringing them forth
out of Egypt.
The command is to cease from Egyptian idolatry, verse. 7.

Their sin was rebellion. v. 8.

I come now to open the words, and so to give you the observations.

In the day when I chose Israel. The Hebrew is, in the day of my choosing in
Israel. Septuagint, from what day I chose the house of Israel.

Day, here is not taken in opposition to night, as it is, Joh. 11.9, 10. nor
for time indefinitely, as Genesis 3.5. but for the time wherein some particular
thing was evidenced to be done.

By Election, Here is not meant the decree or purpose of God, to take the Jews
to be his people, that was before all time, from eternity, but the
manifestation of that election, in the day that I made it appear, that I had
elected you. Election or choosing in the Scripture, sometimes referres to
things, as Deuteronomy. 23.16. Genesis 13.11. 1 King 18.25. Prove, 22.1. sometimes to
persons, and then its either to Christ, as Isa. 42.1. or to Angels, as 1 Timothy
5.21. or to men, and then its spoken either of persons, who are invisible
members of the mystical body of Christ, as 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. or of a community and
visible body, and so it is here. God chose this Nation of the Jews to be his
Nation and Church, Deuteronomy. 7.6. to have his Oracles, Ordinances, and means of
grace amongst them.

In the day when I chose Israel, What time this was, is to be searched out. It
was not that time when God manifested himself to Abraham, and bid him get him
out of his Country, to a land he would show him, and he would make of him a
great Nation, Genesis 12.1, 2. nor that time when he appeared to Jacob, and said,
I am God, the God of thy Father, fear not to go down into Egypt, for I will
there make of thee a great Nation, I will go down with thee into Egypt, and I
will also surely bring thee up again, Genesis 46.2, 3, 4, They were not yet a
Nation, nor in Egypt, of both which the choice here is meant. The time then,
was, when God took notice of their hard sufferings in Egypt, by the rigorous
Taskmasters, and appeared to Moses, and bid him say to Pharaoh. Israel is m^
son, my firstborn, let my Son go that he may serve me, Exodus 4.12, 13. and
sent Aaron with him upon that message to Pharaoh, chap. 5.1. where they go in
to Pharaoh also say, Thus says the Lord God of Israel, let my people go, that
they may hold a feast unto me in the wilderness. Thou think these people
are thine, and therefore hold them in servitude and bondage, but the Lord
God of heaven is the God of Israel, he challenges this people to be his, and
commands thee to let them go and serve him.

And lifted up my hand. Lifting up the hand is a phrase much mentioned in the
book of God, it is seven times in this chapter, twice in this verse, once in
the 6. and then it is in the 15, 23, 28, and 42. verses. To lift up the hand
notes diverse things, and was used in diverse weighty things, 1 In blessing,
Psalm. 134.2. lift up the hands in the Sanctuary and bless the Lord, Lev. 9.22.
Aaron lifted up his hands toward the people, and blessed them, Luk 24.50.
Christ lift up his hands and blessed them.

2 In Prayer, Psa. 63.4. I will lift up my hands in thy name, 1 Timothy 2.8. I
will that men pray every where lifting up holy hands, and Psalm. 88.9. Heman
says, he called upon God daily, and stretched out his hands unto him, Lamen.
2.19. Lift up thine hands unto him for the life of thy children.

Levare manum est signum gratiae and auxilii sumpta figura d^cendi a
porrigentibus manum infirmioribus ad opem ferendam. Pradus. Gestus est ejus qui
potentiam and robur suum exerit. Vatablus.
3. It notes open mercy, favor, aid, Isa. 49.22. I will lift up my hand to the
Gentiles, that is, I will reach unto them the Gospel, and by the power and
grace of it, bring them to Sion. In this sense it is to be taken, Psalm. 10.12.
O God lift up thy hand, forget not the humble; that is, evidence thy power, and
help the humble and afflicted against their oppressors.

4 To lift up the hand, imports threatening, hurting, smiting; Psalm. 106.26. he
lifted up his hand against them to overthrow them in the wilderness, when men
are angry with others, and threaten to do them harm, to ruin them, they often
lift up their hands and fists against them, thus it signifies in Mich. 5.9.
Ezekiel. 44.12.

5 To lift up the hand, implies swearing, it was a gesture used in that sacred
act, Genesis 14.22. Deuteronomy. 32.40. it is expressed so in Esa. 3.7. in that day shall
he swear, the Hebrew is, lift up the hand, The first and second sense pertains
not to this place, and though some would have it meant of Gods lifting up his
hand to help the Israelites out of their bondage, by the smiting of Pharaoh,
and the Egyptians, yet to me the last sense seems most suitable: and lifting
up the hand here imports swearing, the Chaldee is juravi, it referres to what
you have Exodus 6.8. I will bring you to the Land concerning which I did swear,
or lift up my hand to give it to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob. God had
promised and sworn to them, that he would bring their seed out of Egypt, into
Canaan, Genesis 50.24.15.7.14.16.

Unto the seed of the house of Jacob. Montanus reads the words, for the seed of
the house of Jacob. Super semen domus Jacob.
Vatablus, upon, or on the seed. Here its unto the seed; Gods promise and oath
was for them, over them, and unto them. By Seed is meant, the posterity of
Jacob. God had told Jacob that his seed should be as the dust of the earth,
Genesis 28.14. and his seed did greatly multiply in Egypt, Exo. 1.7. and his seed
is called sometimes the seed of Israel, Isa. 45.25. and seed of the house of
Israel, Jer. 23.8. sometimes the seed of Jacob, Psalm. 22.23. and here the seed
of the house of Jacob, because Jacob or Israel was the root, stock, family, out
of which the Jews in Egypt sprung.

And made my self known unto them. Great were the afflictions of the Jews in
Egypt, they were like men in a storm at Sea, and that in a dark night, when day
breaks it is some refreshing, and such was Gods making himself known unto them.
This making himself known unto them, was for their deliverance. God appeared to
Moses in the burning bush, and told him who he was, and what he was about to
do, Exodus 3.2.6, 7, 8. he had promised Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, to give
their seed the land of Canaan, and now he was come to give being to that
promise, to make himself known by his name Jehovah, which they knew not, in
this sense they saw not that promise fulfilled* but Moses, Aaron, and their
seed should now see it, chap. 6.3.8. God would put forth his mighty power, and
by a strong hand bring them forth, ver. 1. God made himself known to them by
Moses, who was Gods messenger, and instrument to speak, and do what he
pleased, Psalm, 103.7. he made known his ways unto Moses, his acts unto the
children of Israel, Gods pity, faithfulness, and power were abundantly made
known.

After the Lord had appeared to Moses, answered all his Objections he made,
against undertaking the difficult work of delivering the People, and joynd
Aaron with him for his assistant. In the 4. chap. they gather all the Elders of
Israel together, they told them all the words God had spoken, and did the signs
by which God had confirmed the words concerning their deliverance which the
people believed, bowed, and worshipped God, ver. 29, 30, 31. here God was made
known unto them.

I am the Lord your God. Hebrew is, I Jehovah your God. The first is absolute,
the second relative. Of Jehovah I have spoken heretofore, it notes Gods nature
and being, which is of its self, within its self, and dependent upon none; all
other beings are from him, and depend on him, according to what you have, Romans
11.36. of him, through him, and to him are all things, and Act. 17.28. in him
we live, move, and have our beings.

Your God. This is a great word, and has great mercy in it; an ingageing word,
tying God and all his attributes to them, your God to counsel you, your God to
protect you, your God to deliver you, your God to comfort you, your God to
plead for you, your God to teach you, your God to set up my name and worship
among you, your God to bless you with the dews of heaven, and fullness of the
earth, your God to hear your prayers, and to make you happy.

While they were in Egypt, God professed himself to be their God, Exodus 6.7. I
will take you to me for a people, and I will be to you a God, and ye shall
know that I am the Lord your God. He would not be a Titular God unto them,
like the Heathens Gods, but they should have experience of him, and his
Attributes, he would do by them, and for them, as a God in Covenant.

Obs. 1 There be times when the Lord is pleased to show mercy to people in
misery and great afflictions. In the day that I chose thee; Israel was in a
distressed condition in Egypt, in a very low estate. Their lives were
imbittered with hard bondage, insomuch that they sighed and cried, Exodus 4.23.
and now at this time, and being in this condition, God heard their groanings,
looked upon, and had respect unto them, now he chose them, ver. 24, 25.
therefore Isaiah says, cha. 48.10. God chose them in the furnace of
affliction; times of misery, are times of Gods showing mercy; when they were in
a hot fiery furnace, ready to be consumed to ashes, no likelihood of
escaping, yet even then did the Lord appear and manifest his choice of them,
Ezekiel. 16. when this people were in their blood, filth, nakedness, says God, I
passed by thee, and looked upon thee, and behold thy time was the time of love,
I spread my skirt over thee, and covered thy nakedness, verse. 8. at that time
God took this people into favor. God has his day to bind up the breach of his
people, and to heal the stroke of their wound, Isa. 30.26. Hosea tells you,
that after two days he will revive his people, and in the third day raise
them up; though they be like men dead and buried, yet God has his time to
revive, raise; and to cause to live in his sight. They were as dry bones in
Babylon, and served a hard service there; but there was a day wherein God gave
them rest from their sorrow, fears, and servitude, Isa. 14.3, 4. The Gentiles
were a long time in the wilderness, in a lost and perishing condition, Ephesians.
2.12. there was a time they were without Christ, without hope, without God in
the world, but God had a day to manifest his choice of them, verse. 13. but now
in Christ Jesus they who were sometimes a far off, are made nigh, there was a
now, a time, a day for them. So Zeph 3.16.19, 20.

Obs. 2 The taking of a people to be the Lords, is of mere grace and mercy. It
is Gods own free act. In the day when I chose Israel, Israel did not choose him,
Israel had nothing to affect him, but out of his good pleasure he chose
Israel. The Lord makes open protestation, Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8. that he did not set
his love upon them, nor choose them, because they were more in number, than
other people, but because he loved them; and what made God love them, were they
better than other Nations? they came of the Amorites, and Hittites, they were
in their blood, when he said unto them, Live, Ezekiel. 16.3, 6. did he foresee
they would believe, repent, and persevere in keeping his commands, and honor
him above the rest of the world? no, he foresaw, that they would be more
wicked than the Nations and Countries round about them, Eze. 5.6, 7. and exceed
Sodom and Samaria in wickedness, as it is Ezekiel. 16.47, 51, 52. what was it
then caused God to love and choose this people? nothing without God himself, all
was within doors, that stirred him up to do it. I will say to them which were
not my people, thou art my people, Hos. 2.23. Gods will is the cause, and
nothing else, Romans 9.18. He will have mercy, on whom he will, Isa. 41.9. I
have chosen thee, and not cast thee away.

Obs. 3 When Gods people are in troubles, he discovers and reveals himself
unto them, one way or other, by one means or other. I made my self known unto
them in the land of Egypt, that was a land and house of bondage to them, they
met with reproaches, threats, stripes, rigor, and hard labor there, and when
the case was so with them, then God unmaskes, and shows himself unto them. When
Joseph's brethren were in great trouble, then he made known himself unto them,
Genesis 45. and so did God unto his people by Moses and Aaron, he made known what
Promise and Oath he had made to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; he made known his
tender-heartednesse to them, that their cries came up to his ears, and that he
was affected with their sorrows, and would no longer endure the Egyptians to
oppress them; he made known his mighty power unto them, that he was stronger
than Pharaoh and all his strength, Deuteronomy. 4.34, 35. has God assayed to go and
take him a Nation from the midst of another Nation, by temptations, by signs,
and by wonders, by war, by a mighty hand, by a stretched out arm, and by
great terror? according to all that the Lord your God did for you in Egypt
before your eyes, unto thee it was showed, that thou might know that the
Lord he is God. The Lord made himself known by these in an eminent manner unto
them. It is Gods way and wont to appear to his in the time of their calamity
and darkness, Isa. 54.11, 12, 13, 14. O thou afflicted, tossed with tempests,
and not comforted: Behold, I will lay thy stones with fair colors, and lay thy
foundations with Saphires.

I will make thy windows of Agates, and thy gates of Carbuncles, and all thy
borders of pleasant stones.

And all thy Children shall be taught of the Lord, and great shall be the
peace of thy Children, in righteousness shall thou be established, etc. What a
precious glorious discovery of God was here unto the Church being in a storm?
So when Rachel wept for her Children, and refused to be comforted, because
they were not, how did the Lord break out of the Clouds and shine, when he
said to her, refrain thy voice from weeping, and thine eyes from tears, for thy
work shall be rewarded says the Lord, and they shall come again from the land
of the enemy. In the time of affliction Gods words, and works are more
observed, take deeper impression, indear more unto him, therefore he loves to
manifest himself in them.

Obs. 4 God knowing men's weakness, condiscends for to strengthen and establish
them in the assurance of his favor toward them. Not only by word and works
did God evidence it, that the seed of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob were his chosen
ones, his people, which might have sufficed; but he took his oath on it: I
lifted up my hand unto the seed of the house of Jacob; yea, that it might be
the more firm, he doubled it. When I lifted up my hand unto them, Saying, I am
the Lord your God. For God to tell any people he has chosen them, argues
great favor, then, to appear unto them, and make large manifestations of
himself, and his good will unto them, by words, providentiall, and wonderful
working for them, argues more and more favor; and then to swear unto them, or
declare, he has sworn unto them, and not only to do some few things for
them, but to be their God, this is height of favor, wonderful stooping on
Gods part; and this he did to confirm their hearts in assurance of his love.
God cannot falsify his word, much less his Oath. God did swear, that Abraham
and his seed might have strong consolation, not stagger, question his love any
more; and the Apostle applies it to himself, Heb. 6.17, 18. to all believers
who are heirs of the promise, and under the oath of God, that we might have
strong consolation.

Verse. 6 In that day that I lifted up my hand unto them, to bring them forth of
the Land of Egypt, into a land that I had espied for them, flowing with milk
and honey, which is the glory of all lands. God having chosen the Jews to be
his people, made himself known unto them, and professed himself to be their
God; here he tells them of the good promise he made unto them, which was to
bring them out of Egypt into Canaan. The praise and encomium whereof is set out
more fully in this ver. than in any part of holy writ besides; its threefold, 1
From the discoverer, it was a land of Gods looking out for them. 2 From the
Commodities it had, that in plenty it flowed with milk and honey. 3 From the
eminency of it, above other Lands, it is the glory of all Lands.


Of Lifting up the Hand, has been spoken in the former verse.

The land of Egypt. The Hebrew is; the land of Mizraim: so Egypt is constantly
called in the Old Testament, and thrice the land of Ham, Psalm. 105.23, 27. and
106.22. and once the Tabernacle of Ham, Psalm. 78.51. Misraim was the Son of
Ham, who possessed that part of Africa, and from him it was called Mizraim, or
the land of Mitzraim, and sometimes the land of Ham, who was his father.

Paraeas in Genesis chap. 10.
Josephus says, the Egyptians in his time was called Mesraei, by the Eastern
people.

In the Septuagint its rendered Egypt, so called from one Egyptus, who reigned
there some 390. years after the Israelites came out of Egypt. This Land was
very plentiful, and in Joseph's days supplied Jacobs Family with Corn, Joseph.
l 1. contra Appionem.
when the Famine was great: for the fruitfulness thereof, it was called Horreum
populi Romani, but to the Jews it was an house of bondage.

Into a land that I had espied for them. This land was Canaan, which God looked
out for them amongst all lands in the world, (...) from (...) Explorare
circumcundo and circumquaque.
the Hebrew word signifies to search out by wandering over, and viewing on every
side, so did the Lord here, he took special notice of this land, his eyes did
run to and fro throughout the earth, to see what land was the chiefest, and
Canaan was the land he pitched upon. The Septuagint is, (...).
To a land which I had prepared for them: God had long before prepared and
provided this land. Israel was his Son, his first born, and like a loving and
provident Parent, he provided a land and habitation for him.

Flowing with milk and honey. This Encomium of this land is eighteen several
times in the book of God, four times in Exodus, as chap. 3.8.17. chapter 13.5.
chap. 33.3. Once in Leviticus chap. 20.24. twice in Numbers. chap. 13.27. chap.
14.8. six times in Deuteronomy, chapter 6.3. chapter 11.9. cha. 26.9.15. chapter 27.3.
chap. 31.20. twice in Jer. chapter 11.5. and chapter 32.22. once in Josh. chapter 5.6. and
twice in this Chapter, in this verse. and the 15. Doubtless the land of Canaan,
abounded with milk and honey, as may appear by Genesis 18.8. Prove. 27.27. 1 Samuel
14.26. 2 Samuel 17.29. but the phrase here of flowing with milk and honey is
proverbial, and notes plenty of all good and precious things, as you may see,
Joel 3.18. Amos 9.13. and in Job, plenty is set out by rivers, floods, and
brooks of honey and butter, chap. 20.17. and it is clear that the fruits of the
earth were called Milk and honey, Numb. 13.26, 27. when the Spies that searched
the Land came back and brought of the fruit thereof, they said, Surely it
flows with milk and honey, and this is the fruit of it, the figs,
pomegranates, and grapes, were part of the Milk and Honey. So that
Synechdochically here by Milk and Honey, are understood all good things, needful
and delightful.

This plenty is set out by Milk and Honey, rather than by other things,

1 Because they are most common, serving old and young, all sorts of people,
Milk is food for Babes, and for those whose age has so infeebled their
stomachs, as that they cannot bear strong meat.

2 They are always in a readiness. Other meats usually require much time to
fit them for our tastes.

3 They are sweet, and pleasant, though other things be so, as Oil and Wine,
yet not comparable to Milk and Honey.

That Canaan did abound with all good things, see Deuteronomy. 8.7, 8, 9. verses,
where it is called a good Land, in which they should not want any thing, this
was partly from the nature of the air and soil, the one being very wholesome,
and the other very fat, and partly from the peculiar blessing of God upon the
Jews; he gave them the former and the latter rains, he made the Land in the
sixth year to bring forth fruit for three years, Levit. 25.18, 19, 20, 21. chapter
26.3, 4, 5. Deuteronomy. 11.13, 14, 15. which blessing for their sins God has taken
away, as he threatened, Levit. 26 20. Deuteronomy. 28.38, 39, 40. therefore they are
deceived that think or say, Judea was no fertile place, Rabsakeh who was an
enemy to the Jews, and their God, yet acknowledged their Land to be a fertile
Land, 2 King. 18.31, 32. what ever men's conceits are of it now, it was a land
flowed with milk and honey, which proverbial speech was of use also among
others, to set out plenty and fruitfulness by. (...). Fluit and lacte campus,
fluit vino, fluit and apum nectare. Eurip: in Bac. his.

Mella virescenti conflagrant pinguia canna.
Lac etiam plenis manet potibila rivis.
(...) is decus ornam ntu^ gloria, from (...) intumuit.
Tertul. in poemat. de paradiso.

Which is the glory of all Lands. The Hebrew is, Which is the Ornament of all
lands, the honor, ornament or glory of all. The Septuagint have it (...), the
Honeycomb, F^vus est ultra omnes terras. Symmach. (...) Aqu. (...). Edit.
Prima (...). Edit. Secunda. Theod. (...) Fortitudo Others. (...). Desi lerium
est incolis omnium aliarum regionum. Desiderabilis pre omnibus terris. Calvin.
Kick. in verbo (...)
it was so fruitful and pleasant a land, that it was like an Honeycomb,
wonderful sweet to the inhabitants. Vatablus calls it desiderabilis, the land
to be desired above all lands. Kicker interprets (...) of that which affects
the mind and sense, and invites to the loving of it, affording pleasure and
delight. The Spirit of God calls it the (...)
land of desire, thrice, Psalm. 106.24. Jer. 3.19. Zach 7.14. So the Hebrew is,
and so the margent has it: a (...)
good Land, Deuteronomy. 8.7. an (...)
exceeding good land, Numb. 14.7. it was not only a good land, but a land that
exceeded in goodness. That good land, Deuteronomy. 4.22. the words are very
emphaticall, (...) that land, that good, that. In Dan. 11. it is twice termed
the glorious land, verse. 16.41. (...) the land of ornament, or the land of
glory, yea, that glory which no other land attained unto.

The land is thought to be situated in the midst of the world, being very
temperate, neither too hot, nor too cold. It is computed to be two hundred
miles in length, and not above fifty in breadth. It had thirty one Kings in it
when Joshua smote it, when he brought the Jews to possess it, Josh. 12. and
in David's days there were found in Israel and Judah (for so it was then
divided) 1300000 fighting men, Boemus in the manners and customs of all
Nations. Heylin Cosmogr^. Vide Lyra in Ezekiel. 20 6
besides women, children, and such as were not able to fight, 2 Samuel 24. this
land was the glory of all lands, in regard of the fruitfulness and plenty of
it, of which see Deuteronomy. 8.7, 8, 9. cha. 32.13, 14. Isa. 36.17. a land beyond
Egypt, (though some have affirmed the contrary) for Deuteronomy. 11.10, 11, 12. the
land thou go in to possess, is not as the land of Egypt from whence ye came
out, when thou sowedst thy seed, and wateredst it with thy foot as a garden of
herbs. But the land whither thou go to possess, it is a land of Hells and
Valleys, and drinks water of the rain of Heaven. A land which the Lord thy
God cares for: the eyes of the Lord thy God are always upon it, from the
beginning of the year unto the end thereof. This is a divine Testimony, and an
high praise of it, and does justly entitle it to be the glory of all lands.

What our Prophet says here of Canaan may be suspected, and seems to be
contradicted by Isaiah, chapter 13.19. where he calls Babylon the glory of
Kingdoms, and if that be the glory of them, how can Canaan be the glory of
all lands? He speaks of the City Babylon, which was the head of Chaldea, and
gave denomination to a great part of Mesopotamia and Assyria, the walls whereof
were two hundred foot high, filty Cubits broad, and sixty miles in Compass,
which the Babylonians counted the glory of Kingdoms, and boasted of; if it did
exceed Jerusalem in its greatness, richness, strength, and populousness, yet
it fell short of it in other things, Jerusalem represented the true Church,
Gal. 4.26. Heb. 12.22. Babylon the malignant and false Church, Rev. 17.5.
glorious things were spoken of Jerusalem, and it was the faithful City, Isa.
1.21. the Holy City, Isa. 52.1. the City of Truth, Zach. 8.3. a City of
Righteousness, Isa. 1* 26. the City of the Lord of Hosts, such things were
never spoken of Babylon.

Again, if Babylon be the Glory of Kingdoms, its not said to be of all
kingdoms, it might be the glory of Heathenish Kingdoms, it was not the glory
of Canaan; for there was the Idol Bell, other Images, and abominable Idolatry,
Jer. 51.44, 47. which eclipsed the other glory it had.

Again, if it be granted that Babylon was the glory of all Kingdoms, and so
of Judea or Canaan, yet take Canaan in its latitude, with all its excellencies,
and so considered, it is the Glory of all Lands, and beyond Babylon, taken for
the City or the Country, for besides, its milk and honey, its fruitfulness
and plenty, there was something of an higher nature which made it so. For 1 It
was the land of promise, Heb. 11, 9. 2 A type of Heaven, Heb. 3.11. 3 The land
God chose to dwell in, Ps. 132.13, 14. Exo. 15.17. 4 In it was the Temple,
Worship, Ordinances, and Oracles of God, 1 Kin. 6. and 8. chapt.


Whence it was called the Holy Land; Zach. 2.12. holy Habitation, Exodus 15.13.
the land of the Lord, Isa. 14.2. Ps. 85.2. the land of uprightness, Isa.
26.10. the land of Immanuel, Isa. 8.8. and upon this account, it was the glory
of all lands. For no land besides in all the world was so called as this, or
had such prerogatives.

Obs. 1 Old mercies should be minded, not only by those they were first
bestowed upon, but also by their posterity, who had benefit by them also. In
the former verse. and this God minds them of Old mercies, his choice of them,
his making known himself unto them, his professing himself to be their God;
his bringing them out of Egypt, which were some eight or nine hundred years
before, and his espying out a land for them, which was four hundred years
before that; for it was in Abraham's days, that God took notice of that land,
Genesis 12. get thee to a land that I will show thee, verse. 7. unto thy seed will
I give this land. These Old mercies God would have them to mind, though they
were in Babylon, and deprived of that good land God had given them: Let men be
in what condition they will, Old mercies should not be forgotten, especially
signal great emphatical mercies. When God shall publicly own a people, deliver
them from great slavery, put them into a state of freedom, safety, and honor,
provide all good things for them, such mercies ought not to be forgotten, but
to be remembered from generation to generation. This was done in David's days,
Ps. 44.1, 2. We have heard with our ears, O God, our fathers have told us,
what wor^ thou did in their days, in the times of Old, how thou did drive
out the Heathen with thy hand, Judges 6.13. Fathers told their children of the
miracles God had wrought for them, and how he brought them out of Egypt; and
because men are apt to forget former mercies, when they grow old, they grow out
of mind, the Lord laid a charge upon the Jews that they should not forget
them, Deuteronomy. 6.10, 11, 12. And commanded them to remember the days of Old, and
to consider the years of many generations, and to inquire of the ancient what
he had done for them, Deuteronomy. 32.7. There be no works like unto Gods works, and
they ought to be had in remembrance; David kept them in mind, for he
professes to the Lord himself, I remember the days of Old, I meditate on all
thy works, I muse on the work of thy hand, he looked back to the days of Noah,
of Abraham, of Joseph, of the Israelites, and of Gods dealing with them, and
because the heart is not quickly affected with old mercies, and works of God,
he meditated, and mused on them, and that till his heart was warmed, and
stirred up to praise, as it is, Psalm. 105.5. remember his mavelous works that
he has done, his wonders, and the judgments of his mouth, O ye seed of
Abraham his servant.

Obs. 2 That Lands, Countries, and Habitations of People, are appointed,
ordered, and disposed of by the Lord, he brings them forth of the land of
Egypt, into a land that he had espied for them. All souls, and all lands, are
the Lords, and whom he will he plants where he pleases. He distributes
lands, and habitations, to whom he thinks meet. The earth is the Lords, and
the fullness thereof, Psalm. 24.1. he is the sole owner thereof, the true Lord
of the soil, and all it brings forth, and he has given it to the children of
men; Psalm. 115.16. he has assigned them their several portions, Deuteronomy. 32.8.
the most high divided to the Nations their inheritance, when he separated the
Sons of Adam: the most high God, being Lord paramount, would not have the
Sons of Adam, to live all in one Country, or Land, but appointed them several
lands and Countries, to dwell in, and set them their bounds, and limits, as you
may see in Genesis 10. especially verse. 25. where Eber names his Son Peleg (which
signifies division) because the earth was divided in his days. After the flood
at the building of Babel, God confounded the languages, and dispersed the
posterity of Noah, into diverse Lands, and set them their bounds, Genesis 11.9.
and so when he brought the Israelites into the land of Canaan, he gave them
their bounds according to what you find, Psalm. 78.55. He cast out the Heathen
before them, and divided them an inheritance by line, and made the Tribes of
Israel to dwell in their tents, he drove out and destroyed the Hittites, the
Girgashites, the Amorites, the Canaanites, the Perizzites, the H^vites, and the
Jebusites, seven great and mighty Nations, Deuteronomy. 7.1. and gave the land unto
his people the Jews. If God now will drive out the bloody perfidious and
Idolatrous, out of Ireland, and give it unto others, that the seed of his
servants may inherit it, Martin in the lives of the Kings of England Heylin in
his Cosmograph. Fox in Act; and Monum. Grafton, Speed.
and that those which love his name may dwell therein, who shall fault and
blame him for it, and that England has had right thereunto, not only from
Henry the eighths days, who was proclaimed King thereof, in Parliament here,
and in an Irish Parliament likewise, if Heylin say true; but also from Henry
the Seconds Time, yea, from Edgars, who was long before, appears by English
History.

Obs. 3 The Lord provides and bestows the choicest mercies upon his own people.
If there be a land in the World that flows with milk and Honey, that exceeds
other lands for plenty and ple^santnesse, his people shall have it, he espies
out Canaan for them, that land was too good for Heathens, his people must have
it. When God carried Jacob, and his family into Egypt, he provided the good
and fat of that land for them, Genesis 45.18. yea, they were placed in the best of
the land, chap. 47.11. God fed and filled his with the finest of the wheat,
Psalm. 147.14. Moses mentions seven things together in Deuteronomy. 32.13, 14, 15. as
honey out of the rock; Oil out of the flinty rock; Butter of Kine, milk of
sheep, fat of lambs, and Rams of the breed of Bashan, and Goats, fat of Kidneys
of wheat, the pure blood of the grape; these the Lord provided for his people,
and they had all an excellency in them. When Gods gives honey, oil, butter,
milk, fat, flower, wine, he gives the best and purest, you may read what
choice mercies God bestowed upon this people, Ezekiel. 16.10, 11, 12, 13. they had
goodly pleasant things, Joel 3.5. the Hebrew is goodly desirable things, and
David acknowledges he had a goodly heritage, Psalm. 16.6. God had not measured
out to him a mean portion, but a good, yea a goodly heritage, that which was so
in the eyes of all, even, a wealthy place. Psalm. 66, 12. God provided the best
places in the Court for Esther and her maidens, when in Babylon, Esth. 2.9.16.
so likewise Daniel and the three Children, were set in eminent places, Dan. 2.
and 3. chapter God made his people to ride and tread upon the high places of the
earth, and of their enemies, Deuteronomy. 32.13.33.29.

Obs. 4. Spiritual mercies make a land glorious, yea, more glorious than all
that lands want the same, whatever mercies they else enjoy. Canaan was the
glory of all lands, not so much for its flowing with milk and honey, its great
plenty it had, as for the spiritual mercies it enjoyed. There was the Lords
presence, his Prophets, his worship, his Oracles, and his Ordinances, and these
made it glorious, yea, more glorious then all the Nations far or near, Psalm.
76.1, 2. In Judah is God known, his name is great in Israel, in Salem also is
his Tabernacle, and his dwelling place is in Sion. God was not known in
Babylon, in Egypt, in other Nations, his Tabernacle and dwelling place was not
amongst them; therefore they were not glorious, but see what is in the 4. verse.
Thou art more glorious than the mountains of Prey. Thou Judah, thou Israel,
thou Salem, thou Sion, that have spiritual mercies and blessings, art more
glorious than they, whatever their glory be; have the Nations abroad, goodly
towers? thou have the Temple; have they stately Cities? thou have Jerusalem the
City of God; have they wise men? thou have the Prophets; have they gods of
gold, silver, and stones? thou have the true living God, Jehovah, to be thy
God; have they humane Laws that are good? thou have Divine Laws that excel;
have they temporal excellencies? thou have spiritual; have they the glory of
the world? thou have the glory of Heaven, Psalm. 50.2. Out of Sion the
perfection of beauty God has shined, what made Sion so glorious and beautiful?
it was the presence of God, if he had not been there, Sion had been like other
mountains, and Canaan like other Nations; but his presence was like the Sun,
darting out her beams, and making all lightsome, glorious, and beautiful.
Spiritual mercies are beams and rays of that God, who is ten thousand times
more bright than the Sun, by these he shined in Sion, and made it the
perfection, or universality of beauty, by these he shined out of Sion, and
darkened all the glory of the Nations, what, or how great soever it was, where
God and his Ordinances are, there is glory, and where these are not, there is
no glory, but Egyptian Darkness, a land without the Sun.

In Canaan was spiritual light and glory. There were glorious appearances of
God, glorious praisings of God, glorious conversions of sinners unto God,
glorious sabbaths and assemblies, and glorious beauties of holiness, glorious
types of Christ, and people who were the glory of God, Isa. 4.5. and had
glorious communion with God. There were glorious Truths, Ordinances, and
dispensations of God.

So then wise Counselors, good Magistrates, stout Soldiers, rich Merchants,
industrious Laborers, strong Towns, stately Houses, high Mountains, fertile
Valleys, pleasant Rivers, goodly Cornfieldsd, herds of Cattle, flocks of
sheep, with plenty of all outward things, do not make a land so glorious as
spiritual mercies do; if God, Christ, Gospel, and the Ordinances of it, be in
a land they make it glorious, and glorious beyond all other things, and above
all other Nations. Let us learn to know our true glory, even spiritual mercies,
and prize them highly; though loathed by some like Manna of old, and pray that
such glory may ever dwell in our Land.

Verse. 7 Then said I unto them, cast ye away every man the abominations of his
eyes, and defile not your selves with the Idols of Egypt: I am the Lord your
God. This Verse is a command, wherein you have the Commander, the things
commanded, and the reason thereof.

1 The Commander, Then said I unto them. 2 The things Commanded, which are 1
Casting away of abominations, where 1 You have a specification of these
abominations, they are the abominations of their eyes. 2 The extent of this
act, every man.
2 Non-defilement of themselves, with Egypts Idols.
3 The reason, I am the Lord your God.
Then said I to them.] For Then, The Hebrew is, And I said to them. Where the
Lord said thus to them, we do not find: The words refer to the time of their
being in Egypt, and nothing is recorded in Exodus, that the Lord spoke thus
unto them, before they departed Egypt. They were a long time in Egypt, and
though Moses mention not this passage, yet our Prophet assures us, that the
Lord said so, whence we may take this observation.

Obs. That many things said and done by the Lord, and his Servants, though
omitted in those places, seemed most proper for them in penning the Scriptures,
yet are occasionally given forth in other places, as this verse, spoken by the
Lord, when they were in Egypt, omitted by Moses, and now given out to Ezekiel
in Babylon, and recorded by him in this place. Henochs Prophesy being uttered
in the infancy of the world, was either unknown to, or passed over, if known by
Moses, Jude 14
the Prophets, and Apostles, till Judes time, and then it was recorded upon the
occasion of the scoffing and profaneness of that time. The Names of Jannes and
Jambres who withstood Moses, were not taken into the Text, till Paul's time, 2.
Tim. 3.8. so Moses his refusing to be called the Son of Pharaohs Daughter,
his choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy
the pleasures of sin for a season, his esteeming the reproach of Christ greater
riches, than the treasures in Egypt, and his eyeing the recompense of reward
were not historised by himself, nor mentioned by any other till the Apostle set
them down, Heb. 11.24, 25, 26. these things they had by the Spirit, not by
tradition.

Cast ye away. (...)
Of these words has been largely spoken in the 18. chapter, Septuagint. (...)
v. 31. Cast away from you all your transgressions; the word is there the same.

Every man. (...) vir a (...) deductum quia prior est essentia ipsa sua
viragine Kicker. (...)
In the Hebrew its (...) a man, let man cast away: that is, let every one has
the name or nature of man do so; its from a word signifies essence, or being,
and is often put indefinitely for any man, as Hos. 2.10. none shall deliver her
out of my hand, the Hebrew is, Not a man; that is, (...) abominatio execratio,
Symmach. renders abominations Nauseas, the Vulgar offensiones.
not any man shall do it: and for every man, Psalm. 62.12. thou rendrest to
every man according to his works, the word for every man is (...) to a man,
that is to every man whoever he be.

The abominations of his eyes. Of Abominations formerly. These abominations
were their Idols, things abominable and to be abhorred. They are here called
the abominations of their eyes, because their eyes were lift up unto them,
Rabbi David observat propterea additum esse oculorum quod oculi sint cordis
internuntii atque ideo peccatorum ejus accomplices. Pradus. (...)
as it is chapter 18.6, 12. and went a whoring after them, chap. 6.9. their
eyes were taken with the form, beauty, ornaments, of the Idols, and so let in
that to their hearts which inflamed and provoked them to Idolatry.

And defile not your selves with the Idols of Egypt. Of the word defile, see
chap. 5.11. with the Idols of Egypt, the Hebrew is, in the idols of Egypt, that
is, in the Idolatry of the Egyptians; in their defilements, do not you defile
your selves. The Septuagint renders it, in the superstition of Egypt, Jun. and
Trem. has it, with the dirty, or dunghill gods of Egypt, (...)
and Piscat. with the dung of the Egyptians. They were so addicted to Idolatry,
and superstition, that they made Gods of every thing, In idolis Egypti.
Septuagint (...) in superstitionibus Egypti. Aqui. inquinamenta stercoreis diit
Agypti stercoribus Egyptiorum. Vide Answ. in locum and A Lap.
even of Beetles, that live in, and feed upon Dung, Exodus 12.12. Against all
the gods of Egypt, I will execute judgment: They had many Gods and Idols, Isa.
19.1. they had images of the house of the Sun, and houses of Gods, Jerem.
43.13. These gods of theirs were all thrown down and broken in the night the
Israelites came out of Egypt, say the Jews, which was the judgment executed
upon them.

The Jews living in Egypt fell into their superstitions and Idolatries, as
appears clearly by that you have in Josh. 24.14. Now therefore fear the Lord
and serve him in sincerity, and truth, and put away the Gods which your fathers
served on the other side of the flood, and in Egypt. Their fathers were not
only Idolaters in Mesopotamia, which was beyond the flood, that is, Euphrate
also in Egypt. There they were notorious Idolaters, and no sooner were they
come out of Egypt, but they would have a calf* an Egyptian God, to whom they
might attribute the honor of their Egyptian deliverance, Exodus 32.4.

I am the Lord your God. In the Preface to the Ten Commandments you have these
words, I am the Lord thy God; which is a strong reason why they should have no
other Gods before him, and so here, are the reason why they should cast away
their Idols, and not defile themselves any more with them. The strength of the
argument runs thus* I am the Lord of all creatures, it belongs to me to give
Laws, and command what I please. There is no God besides my self, I allow
none in heaven or earth to be set up and acknowledged for God by any, much
less by you, whose God I am in a more special manner, whom I have chosen for my
people, and made as it were my Temple to dwell in; therefore cast ye away all
Idols, all false gods, defile not your selves with them, but be a holy people
unto me your God, who hate all such things and delight in holiness.

Obs. 1 That the posterity of good men, by living amongst Idolaters, and
conversing with them, do in time drink in their Opinions and manners, and
become like unto them: The Jews who were the posterity of Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, the Holy seed, by living in Egypt, and conversing with Egyptians, they
learnt their opinions, and practices; they delighted in and served the Egyptian
Gods. Their Fathers Piety, Precepts, Lavater says, God suffered them so long
to be oppressed by Pharaoh, because they had learnt the Idolatry of Egypt.
Examples did not antidote them sufficiently against this Contagion.
Superstition, Idolatry, and profaneness, are prevalent things. Solomon
himself the Son of David, was caught in this snare, 1 King. 11.4. it is said
of the Israelites after they came out of Egypt, that they mingled among the
Heathen and learned their works, yea, served their Idols, Psalm. 106.35, 36. by
dwelling amongst them, they were transformed into their likeness, what they saw
them do, they did, what they saw them worship, they worshipped; the Heathens
served Idols, or Griefs; as Montanus has it, because Idols cause grief; and
the Hebrews served Idols, which brought grief and vexation. There is a secret,
but strong power in all wickedness to assimilate, and few who dwell near her
borders, escape subscription to her Laws, and practices. When Dinah went out to
see the Daughters of the Land, she was caught and defiled, Genesis 34.1, 2. and
when men go not only to see, but to converse with, and live amongst the
Daughters of a Land, viz. the corrupt inventions and practices thereof, they
are in great danger to be caught and corrupted. Grace is not communicable from
Parents to posterity, corruption is, and that inclines strongly to conform to
their ways, and worship among whom men live.

Obs. 2 When the Lord shows mercy to a people, does great things for them, then
he requires and expects they should be holy. When the Lord chose Israel, made
himself known unto the house of Jacob, promised them to bring them out of
Egypt, into a land flowing with milk and honey, then he said, Cast ye away
every man the abominations of his eyes, and defile not your selves with the
Idols of Egypt, that is, be ye holy, this I call for, this I look for, Exodus
19.4, 5. ye have seen what I did unto the Egyptians, and how I bare you on
Eagles wings, and brought you unto my self. Now therefore if ye will obey my
voice indeed, and keep my Covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto
me above all people, for all the earth is mine. Here the Lord reckons up the
great benefits he vouchsafed them, 1 His dealings with their adversaries, ye
have seen what I did to the Egyptians, not heard, but seen, seen how I plagued
them in Egypt, and drowned them in the Red Sea for your sakes. 2 His dealings
with them, He bare them on Eagles wings, that is, carried them out of Egypt,
and through the Red Sea, with much speed, strength, and tenderness, as an
Eagle carries her young when in danger, speedily, strongly, tenderly, not in
her talons, as other fowls do, but on her back and wings. He took them unto
himself, having taken them out of the hands of the Egyptian Tyrants, and
Taskmasters, he put them not under the power of strangers, but took them to
himself, he became their Lord and Sovereign, they took not him, but he took
them. Having done such things for them, he expected they should be holy; for
he says, Now therefore, if you will obey my voice indeed, and keep my
Covenant, that is, if you will be holy, and honor me, I will put dignity
upon you, such as no people have, you shall be a peculiar treasure unto me
above all people, as dear, and as much cared for as any precious things are by
Princes. Gods mercies are engagements unto holiness, Levit. 20.23, 24 and
especially the 26. Ye shall be holy unto me, for I the Lord am holy, and
have severed you from other people, that you should be mine, distinguishing
mercies should breed distinguishing qualities, I have severed you from other
people that you should forget their manners, and conform to me a holy God, even
every one of you.

Obs. 3 The eyes are instrumental to, and inlets of much wickedness. Their
eyes behold the Idols, and let in that, stirred their hearts, and them to do
abominably; even to Idolatry: whether more evil, enter by the ear, or eye, may
be questioned, but most certain it is, that abundance of wickedness is let in
to us by the eye. The breach of most, if not of all the Commandments has been
occasioned by the eye.

Of the first, Hos. 3.1. they look to other Gods. Of the second, 2 King. 16.10,
11, 12. Ahaz saw an Altar at Damascus, and makes the like, and sets it in the
place of Gods Altar.

Of the third, Mark 6.22, 23. Herod being pleased at the sight of Herodias
dancing, swears to give her what ever she would ask, unto the half of his
Kingdom.

Of the fourth, Ezekiel. 22.26. they have hid their eyes from my Sabbaths, they
would not see what holiness that day required, they connived at the pollution
and profaning thereof.

Here you see the breach of the first Table, and we may find the second
violated by means of them.

For the fifth, see Genesis 9.22. Ham saw the nakedness of his father, and
discovered it.

For the sixth, see Esther 3.5, 6. When Haman saw that Mordecai bowed not, he
was full of wrath, and thought scorn to lay hands on Mordecai alone, but sought
to destroy all the Jews.

For the seventh, Consult, Genesis 34.2. 2 Samuel 11.2.4. when Shechem saw Dinah,
and David Bathshebah, they were so taken with their beauties, that they
committed folly, and brought evil upon themselves and others.

For the eighth, that in Psalm 50.18. proves it, when thou saw a theif, then
thou consentedst with him.

For the ninth, Consider that in Jerem. 37.13. when Jeremy was going out at the
gate of Benjamin, Jrijah a captain spies him, and accused him falsely, saying,
thou fallest away to the Chaldeans.

For the tenth, take that place in Judge. 7.21. I saw says Achan among the
spoils a goodly Babylonish garment, two hundred shekels of silver, a wedge of
gold of fifty shekels weight, then I coveted them, and took them: by these
instances you see the eyes have been instruments and mediums to further the
breach of all the Commands. The sight is a great mercy, a principal sense, yet
it had been good for some men, if they had been born blind, their eyes
occasioned so much sin, and wickedness; by the eye the heart sends forth and
receives in wickedness, the Eye is the pander between both, and what thing
created is worse than a wicked eye? Oculis proditur peccatum cordis et oculi,
pecc^torum ille cebras animo denuncient. Conciliatorem peccati ocurum Talmudici
nominant Oecolam. Eccl. 11.13.
Solomon advises you to keep your hearts with all diligence, and you had need
keep your eyes with all diligence, both heart and eyes are roveing and
mischieving things if not well kept: God calls for both, Prove. 23.26. My Son
give me thy heart, and let thine eyes observe my ways; if this were done,
multitudes of sins would be prevented, the eye would let in Good to the
heart, and the heart send out good by the eye.

Obs. 4 The consideration of God being our God, should take us off from all
former engagements, sinful conformities, and false confidences, and cause us
to cleave to the Lord, to conform unto, and confide in him: The Jews here were
engaged to Egyptian Gods, conformed to them, and confided too much in them. But
cast them away, defile not your selves with them, I am the Lord your God, you
must engage, conform your selves to me, and confide in me; I am your God able
to counsel, help, deliver you, so are not, so cannot the Idols of Egypt. I am
an holy God, they are abominations; I am for you Israelites, they are for
Egyptians. God becoming our God, is a great condescension, a favor beyond
comprehension, and should knock us off from all false ways, and cause us to
conform to him, Exodus 23.24, 25. Lev. 11.43, 44, 45. chap. 18.2, 3, 4. chapter
19.2, 3, 4. Numb. 15.38, 39, 40, 41. in all these places God uses this argument
why they should conform to him; and be holy because he is the Lord their God,
and an holy God; he made them his Temple, to dwell in and among, and his
Temple must not be defiled, admit of any thing unsuitable to his mind;
therefore he tells them, Deuteronomy. 7.6. that he has chosen them to be a special
people unto himself, special in their holiness, special in their love, special
in their obedience, and special in their confidence, in, and reliance upon him.

Verse. 8 But they rebelled against me, and would not hearken unto me: they
did not every man cast away the abominations of their eyes: neither did they
forsake the Idols of Egypt: then I said, I will pour out my fury upon them, to
accomplish my anger against them in the midst of the land of Egypt. In this
verse you have two things to be considered.

1 Their wickedness, which is set out, 1 In general, they rebelled, they
hearkened not. 2 In particular, they did not cast away the abominations of their
eyes, they did not forsake the Idols of Egypt.


2 Gods purpose hereupon, which was severely to punish them, then I said I will
pour out my fury, etc. which is illustrated from the circumstance of the place
where he would do it, in the midst of the land of Egypt. There is little in
this verse, which has not been opened and spoken of formerly; the word
rebelled, we had chap. 17.15.2, 3.

And would not hearken unto me. The Hebrew is, And have not desired to hearken
to me, (...)
they had no desire that way, but the contrary, Non velle, here is Nolle, their
not willing, was nilling; and Zachary calls it, (...)
refusing, chapter 7.11. they had not an heart inclinable to hearken unto God. Non
cuplerunt audire ad me. Montan. (...).


Th^n I said, I will pour out my fury upon them. The Hebrew is, And I said to
pour out, that is, I purposed, seeing they dealt thus by me, to make them
examples of my fury, and to destroy them. Of pouring out fury, and
accomplishing anger, was spoken chapter 6.12.7.8.9.8.14.19.

In the midst of the land of Egypt. We find not in Moses any thing recorded of
this nature, but here the Prophet delivered what God commanded him, verse. 5.
say unto them, thus says the Lord, he had it not by tradition, that God bid
them cast away the abomination of their eyes, and not defile themselves with
the Idols of Egypt that they rebelled and would not do so, that God purposed
their destruction in Egypt, these things he had not by tradition, but by Divine
inspiration. They were so corrupted with the Idolatry of Egypt, and averse from
hearkening to the Admonitions, Counsels, and Exhortations of God, that he
thought in his heart to destroy them in the midst of Egypt, many of their
children were drowned, and the oppressions they endured were very great, and
long, which Lavater says, was for their Egyptian Idolatry, Psalm 105.25. He
turned their heart to hate his People, to deal subtlely with his people.

Obs. 1 Those the Lord has bestowed great mercies upon, and professed much
kindness unto, they, even they are ungrateful when he calls for reformation
at their hands: This people the Lord chose, made himself known to, promised to
bring out of Egypt into a land he had looked out for them, even a land flowing
with milk and honey, the glory, ornament, desire of all lands, and now calling
upon them to purge themselves from their abominations and Idolatries, and to
conform to him who professed himself to be their God, what do they? rebel
against him, but they rebelled, here was ingratitude, and ingratitude at a
height; God bid them cast away abominations, and they cast away his Counsels;
he bids them eye him, his beauty and glory, and they eye the form, beauty, and
glory of their Idols; he bids them be holy, and they defile themselves with
idols, he bids them cleave to him the God of Israel, and they cleave to the
Idols of Egypt; he bids them forsake all their evil ways, and they forsake
him. This people were very ungrateful, what ever mercies they had from God, he
seldom had any testimony of true thankfulness from them, Neh. 9. see what a
multitude of mercies, great, seasonable, wonderful, God bestowed upon them
calling by his Prophets, for turning to him, and did they turn, reform, and
testify a thankful frame of Heart, to be in them? no, they were disobedient,
rebelled against him, cast his Law behind their backs, and slew his Prophets,
verse. 26. God did choice things for this People all along, but they forgate
him, and provoked him: the 106. Psalm. is a Psalm of Gods mercies, and their
ingratitudes, he tells them they had a multitude of mercies, but they provoked
him at the Sea, even the red Sea, verse. 7. but they lusted exceedingly in the
wilderness, v. 14. but they murmured in their Tents, v. 25. but they mingled
among the Heathen, v. 35. Here be four Buts, testifying their ingratitude.

God has done great things for us, bestowed Israelitish mercies upon us, he
has made himself known amongst us, brought us out of Egyptian bondage, owned
us for his people above any people, and professed himself to be our God, and
hereupon called upon us to cast away our abominations, to reform and become a
holy people, conformable to his mind; but may not the Lord come in with a
reproaching* But, and say, But ye rebel. Your abominations are not cast away,
you do defile your selves with the Idols of England, and notwithstanding all
the mercies we have had, God may come in with many Buts, and say, but you
provoke me by your oppressions, divisions, and bitterness; but you lust
exceedingly after a King, and to be like other Nations, but you murmr
against me, my servants, and dispensations; but you mingle with the Customs,
corruptions, and fashions of the times; but you forsake my truths, and run
into dangerous and damnable opinions.

Obs. 2 Such is the corruption of men's natures, that frequently, the more
mercies and means they have, the worse they grow. This People had variety of
mercies, and every mercy should have led them to repentance, according to that
in Romans 2.4. especially such mercies as they had; but above all, Gods speaking
to them should have done it: how he spoke to them in Egypt we find not, no
Prophets are mentioned to have been there before Moses. Whither he spoke
himself unto them, or by Angels, or by Joseph, or some others, he did speak,
but they rebelled and hearkened not, their corrupt hearts and natures
degenerated more and more. The Jews who had the pleasant land, the Prophets,
Temple, Oracles, and Ordinances of God, grew worse than any of the Nations, see
Jer. 2.10, 11. Ezekiel. 16.47. 2 Chronicles. 36.15, 16. It is observable, that men
living in the Christian world, and where besides a multitude of other mercies,
they have the Gospel to do them good, to draw them to God, to direct and enable
them to work righteousness, and go beyond Heathens in all things, yet in many
things they fall short of them, some of them, and diverse in many things are
worse than the worst of them. If mercies and means prove not the savor of
life, they ripen and perfect men's corruptions, and become the savor of death:
was there heard of amongst the Heathens, such a wretch as Judas was, who
betrayed such a Master as he did? Chorazin, Bethsaida, and Capernaum, were the
more unhappy, and exposed to the deeper condemnation, because they had more
mercy and means.

Obs. 3 Not doing what God commands, is not hearkening, and not hearkening, is
rebellion. They rebelled and would not hearken unto me, they did not cast away
the abominations of their eyes, nor forsake the Idols of Egypt. They rebelled,
because they hearkened not, they hearkened not, because they did not; its like
they heard God commanding, but hearing, and not doing, they did not hearken.
Doing, is knowing of God, Jer. 22.16. and doing is hearkening to God, Deuteronomy.
34.9. but not doing, is not hearkening, and not hearkening is rebellion; hence
not doing is called rebelling against the command of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 1.26.
going backward, Jer. 7.24. rejecting of the words and Law of God, chap. 6.19.
hardening of the neck, Neh. 9.16. Our fathers dealt proudly, hardened their
necks, and hearkened not to thy Commandments, its pride and hardness of
heart, not to hearken unto God and his commands.

Obs. 4 Men's not hearkening unto God, puts him upon thoughts and purposes of
punishing them, and that severely: Then I said I will pour out my fury upon
them, and accomplish consummate, perfect mine anger against them. Then, when
they would not do as I bid them, I had thoughts and resolutions to destroy
them. When the glorious, great, and only wise God, shall speak to the
creature, to do that which tends to its great good, and shall not be heard but
disobeyed and slighed, this provokes God, and procreates thoughts of
destruction, when they hearkened not, but sinned so in the business of the
calfe, it was in the heart of God utterly to destroy them, Exodus 32.10. Let me
alone, that my wrath may wax hot against them, and that I may consume them and
not only them, but their name from under heaven, Deu. 9.14. had not Moses
poured water upon this fire and quenched it, he had done it, they had no
longer been a people, nor had any memorial left of them; of this speaks David;
Psalm. 106.23* he said that he would destroy them, had not Moses his chosen
stood before him in the breach to turn away his wrath, least he should destroy
them. This is spoken of God after the manner of men; when they are offended,
they purpose and resolve to destroy those have provoked them, but some friend
interposes, prevails with them, and prevents them, as Abigail did David; so
Moses here prevented the Lord by his prayers, and entreaties, from destroying
this people; Men's perverse dealings with God, do put him upon intentions of
their ruin, Deuteronomy. 32.16. I said I would scatter them into Corners, and would
make the remembrance of them to cease from among men.

Verse. 9 But I wrought for my name sake, that it should not be polluted before
the Heathen, among whom they were, in whose sight I made my self known unto
them, in bringing them forth out of the land of Egypt. In this verse are set
down Gods last kindnesses to this people being in Egypt, and they are two.

1 His sparing of them for his names sake. 2 His bringing them out of that
condition.
Touching the first, in the latter part of the former verse. God had said he
would pour out his fury upon them, and accomplish his anger against them in the
midst of Egypt; but foreseeing and considering what would be the event
thereof, if he should do so, viz. that his name would suffer and be polluted,
here he provides for the honor of his own name, and spares them.

But I wrought. The Hebrew is, I did or have done, not what I purposed, (...)
feci
but what was most convenient for me to do, what was for the honor of my
name: when I saw that like to suffer, Fr. mais j' eu esgard a mon nom.
I did that which prevented it, I took care of my name, had respect unto it.

For my name sake. Name, in the Scripture, as it referres to God, is sometimes
put for God himself, as Psalm 33.21. and Nehem. 1.11. who desire to fear thy
name, that is, God himself, he is the object of fear, Isa. 8.13. sometimes its
put for Gods Titles, Psalm. 83.18. Exodus 3.13, 14, 15. sometimes for the
Attributes of God, as Exo. 33.19 compared with cha. 34. ver. 6, 7. sometimes
for the glory, esteem, and renown of God, Psalm 8.9. and Psalm 76.1. here its
put for Gods attributes and honor. Three of his attributes had been
questioned, if he should have destroyed this people in Egypt.

1 His Faithfulness, for God had promised and sworn to bring them out of
Egypt, as it is verse. 6. and Genesis 15.14. chapter 48.4. and had he not done it,
Egyptians and others, would have charged God with breach of promise, with
unfaithfulness.

2 His power and almightinesse, for they would have said he was not able to
bring them from under the Egyptian gods and Pharaoh, that their power was
beyond the power of the Jews God.

3 His mercy, that he had a people professed him to be their God, but he was
so merciless, that he destroyed and cut them all off; a thing that the Heathen
Gods never did to any which worshipped them.

Now had the case been thus, how had Gods honor been laid in the dust, his
glory stained, and renown eclipsed.

That it should not be polluted. (...) a (...)
The word to Pollute in Hebrew signifies Originally to grieve, to cut, and
metonimically to pollute, to violate, profane, Dolere secare perforare and cum
dicitur de rebus sacris violare, polluere, prophanare.
which are grievous and cutting. When Gods name is polluted, we are not to
conceive any actual defilement to adhere to it, for Gods name can no more be
defiled than the beams of the Sun. Its said to be polluted.

1 When its not hallowed, that is, not acknowledged, not esteemed to be holy,
honorable, excellent; as the Sabbath, when it was not sanctified, it was
polluted; so here, when the glory due to Gods name is not acknowledged, its a
polluting of his name.

2 When its slighted, and not used reverently, Gods Name is great, glorious,
excellent, holy, and dreadful, and ought to be reverenced, Psalm. 111.9.

3 When Occasion is given to the wicked to speak evil of God and his ways, as
2 Samuel 12.14. David by his sins gave great occasion to the enemies of the
Lord to blaspheme, So Ezekiel. 36.21. the Jews by their sinful carriage, caused
the name of God to be profaned among the heathen.

Had the Lord then destroyed this people in Egypt, according as he purposed,
the Egyptians and other Nations would have slighted him, spoken evil of his
doings, blasphemed his name, and wounded his honor. Therefore though this
people deserved to dye in the way of justice, yet God spared them in the way of
mercy, for the honor of his name.

Quae. Seeing God purposed to destroy them, and did it not, is not his will
alterable and inefficacious?

Ans. The Counsels, Purposes, Decrees of God are unalterable, and do take
place, Psalm. 33.11. Isa. 14.27. chapter 43.13. chapter 46.10. Mal. 3.6. Heb. 6.17. for
that said and done here, its more humano, God saw cause sufficient to move him
to their destruction, but seeing what evil was like to come on it, he would not
destroy them; had the Lord decreed it before the world, it must have taken
place, no change or alteration could have been.

Before the Heathen. The Hebrew is, in the eyes of the Heathen, God would not
have them to see or behold any thing which might occasion them to dishonor
him, he would not slay his people in their sight; but made himself known by
his word and mighty works unto the Jews in the sight of the Heathen, so that
hereby he was known unto both.

Obs. 1 The Lord spares and saves sinners deserving death, even for his name
sake: but I wrought for my name sake: thou for thy Rebellion, Idolatry, and
other sins, did deserve to dye, and I could almost have cut thee off, but
for my mercy and name sake, I spared and saved thee, Jsa. 48.8, 9. I knew that
thou would deal very treacherously, and wast called a transgressour from the
womb; that is, worthy so to be called, seeing as soon as ever thou came out
of the womb of Egypt, in which thou wast shut up as a child in the womb, thou
fellest to Idolatry, here was enough to have caused God to stifle this child:
but what follows, For my name sake will I defer mine anger, and for my praise
will I refrain for thee, that I cut thee not off. Nothing in this metaphorical
child, this Jewish people, moved him to show mercy, but his own Name, his own
Praise, prevailed with him to preserve them from destruction. Gods honor and
glory are strong arguments to move him to show mercy to his people. This the
servants of God have known, and made use of in their streights, when Jerusalem
was in a manner laid desolate, and the jealousy of God burnt like fire, what
argument did the Church use then to move God to show mercy? but his name and
glory of it, Psalm 79.9. Help us O God of our salvation, for the glory of thy
name, and deliver us and purge away our sins for thy Names sake. The Church was
low, weak, beset with enemies and sins at once, and now it would have help,
deliverance, pardon, and upon the account of Gods name, for thy name sake help
us, for thy name sake deliver us, for thy name sake purge away our sins. What
hurt would it be to Gods name if he did it not? it would not be glorious, but
dishonored, for in the next verse its said, Wherefore should the Heathen say,
where is their God? they trusted in their God, and he is a non-helping God, a
Non-delivering God, a Non-pardoning God. This was the argument Joshuah used
when Israel fell before their enemies, Lord what will thou do unto thy great
name; Gods name was precious to Joshuah, but more precious to God himself,
Josh. 7.9. and he did great things for his name sake. When the people forgot
the multitude of great mercies they had in Egypt, and provoked him at the Sea,
even at the red Sea, and deserved to be drowned in it, and that their blood
should have skarletted the waters thereof, what says the Text, Psalm. 106.8.
Nevertheless, he saved them for his name sake. When nothing induced him to do
it, Vide Muscul. in locum.
the honor of his Name did, that he might appear faithful, merciful,
powerful: God did not save them for their prayers, for their faith, for their
fathers sakes, for their righteousness, or for their enemies sakes, being very
malicious and wicked, but for his own Name sake: God does more upon that
account alone than upon the account of all the rest. You may hear the Lord
speak graciously to this purpose, Isa. 4.3.25. I, even I am he that blotteth
out thy transgressions for mine own sake, here is I twice, one I referring to
them, its I that blot out their transgressions, and none besides; the other
referres to God, I blot them out for mine own sake, not your sakes; God does
all freely.

Obs. 2 God's sparing of his people, and preventing the reproaches,
blasphemies, and mischiefs would come by his destroying of them, is an
honoring and sanctifying of his name: I wrought satih God that my name might
not be polluted before the Heathen, that is, that it might be honored and
sanctified in their sight. God does often spare his people being ripe for
destruction, that the enemy might not blaspheme and profane his name, and when
he does so, he honors his name, Deuteronomy. 32.26, 27. God says there, he would
scatter and destroy his people, but why did he it not? he feared the wrath of
the enemy, least their adversaries should behave themselves strangely, and
least they should say, our hand is high, and the Lord has not done all this:
God foresaw what they would say, and do, if he should have used them as
instruments to punish his children, they would have been very outrageous,
bloody, and cruel, and when they had vented all their malice against them, and
done whatever they would, they would have denied Gods hand to have been
therein, and arrogated all to themselves, which had been a great dishonor to
God, he therefore prevents their blaspheming by sparing of his people, and so
provides for the honor of his Name: Moses once and twice put God upon it, to
take heed he caused not the Egyptians to speak evil of him, and his ways,
when he was upon the design of destroying his people for their sins, Exodus
32.10, 11, 12. Numb. 14.12, 13, 14, 15, 16. God deals with his people
sometimes, not after the ordinary rule and course of his proceedings, but in a
prerogative way, he spares them though their sins be great, because their
enemies would be proud, arrogant, bloody, and blasphemous; and has he not
spared England upon this account?

Obs. 3 That notwithstanding the sins of Gods people, he shows them kindness
openly, and in the face of their enemies; though the Jews had rebelled against
God, and the Egyptians would have rejoiced in their ruin, yet, in their sight
God made himself known unto them, in bringing them forth out of the land of
Egypt. God would have the Egyptians see, that he could be kind to his
people, though they were disobedient unto him; that he would not break with
them, though they broke with him.

When the Jews were in Babylon under great displeasure of God for their sins,
yet God did show them such favor, and do such things for them, that their
enemies were convinced, and said, The Lord has done great things for them,
Psalm. 126.2. he made known his salvation, and openly showed his salvation in
the sight of the Heathen, Psalm 98.2. this the Lord does, as to magnifye his
own name, to rejoice the hearts of his people, and to gain upon them, so to vex
and consume the wicked, Psalm 112.10. the wicked shall see it, and be grieved,
he shall gnash with his teeth and melt away: has not this been Gods method
with us? notwithstanding our sins, and ill deserts, has he not openly made
known himself to us? showed us kindness in the sight of our enemies? have they
not seen it, grieved, guashed their teeth, and melted away? they have seen Gods
kindnesses to us, and we have seen Gods vengeance on them.

Verse. 10 Wherefore I caused them to go forth out of the land of Egypt, and
brought them into the Wilderness. 11 And I gave them my Statutes, and showed
them my Judgments, which if a man do, he shall live in them. Having seen and
heard of Gods dealings with them, and theirs with him in Egypt: Now we are led
to consider their mutual dealings each with other in the Wilderness, which
reaches to the 27. verse.

Where he shows in general, 1 What Benefits he had bestowed upon them. 2 What
their sinful deportment was toward him. 3 How worthy they were to perish; if
the Lord had not showed them mercy for his name sake.


In these two verses you have.

1 Their Eduction out of Egypt. 2 Their introduction into the wilderness. (...)
3 The Donation or promulgation of the law.
I caused them to go forth. Eduxi eos in Hiphil feci exire. Vulgar ejeci.
The Vulgar is, I cast them forth, or drove them forth, which shows their
backwardness to leave that land where they were born, had habitations, and
other accommodations. Its like many of them, neither thought of the promise
made to their fathers, nor of the promised land, but thought Egypt a good land,
yea, a Land flowing with milk and honey, as they called it, Numb. 16.13. only
they were troubled at the hard labor the Egyptians held them to; but the word
here imports not any violence, but a powerful bringing of them forth: we will
inquire 1 How the Lord brought them forth. 2 When.


1 How! It was not in an ordinary way, but in a way full of extraordinaries. To
do it, the Lord came down from heaven, Exodus 3.8. that was in the vision of the
burning bush, he prepared Moses, Aaron, and the people, by signs and miracles
to leave Egypt, and because all the power, and wisdoms that Pharaoh and Egypt
had, was employed to retain the Jews there, they being utterly averse from
their departure, the Lord sent strange and dreadful plagues, one after another,
till their spirits were brought off, to let them go, Ex. 12.30, 31, 32, 33.
Pharaoh was resolved not to let them go, (he had so much profit by their
service) unless it were by a strong hand, Exodus 3.19. and God was resolved to
bring them out, and therefore he did arise, put forth his power, and by
strength of hand brought them out, Exo. 13.3. by an high hand, chapter 14.8. by
mighty power, and a stretched out arm, Deuteronomy. 9.29. You have it fully set down
in Deuteronomy. 4.34. (...)
God took them from the midst of another Nation, by temptations, by signs, and
by wonders, and by war, and by a mighty hand, and by a stretched out arm, and
by great terrors. There was great strife between God and Pharaoh, who should
have this people, as there was between Michael and the Devil about the body of
Moses. Pharaoh pulled hard to hold them in Egypt, but God out-pulled Pharaoh,
and pulled them out of Egypt, and so caused them to go forth.

2 When. You have the time punctually set down in Exo. 12.40, 41. where its
said, at the end of the 430. years, River in Exodus
even the self same day they went out: not that they were 430. years in Egypt,
for they were there but two hundred and ten, or two hundred and fifteen, as
Chronologies inform upon good account.

The 430. years are to begin from the time of the promise made to Abraham,
which Stephen tells us, Act. 7.2. was before he dwelt in Charran, even while
he was in Vr, and but seventy years old, from which time, to the going out of
Egypt, were four hundred and thirty years: two hundred and fiftteen, or two
hundred and twenty whereof, were run out before Jacob went down into Egypt from
the promise made to Abraham to Isaack's birth, were thirty years, some make it
but twenty five (they then reckon from his time of departing out of Haran) for
he was an hundred years old when Isaac was born, Genesis 21.5. and from thence
to the birth of Jacob were sixty years, Genesis 25.26. and from thence to Jacobs
going into Egypt, one hundred and thirty years, Genesis 47.9. which summed up,
make 220. at least 215. and so the rest of the 430. they were in Egypt, and at
the just time they were accomplished, the Lord brought them out, to show his
faithfulness, as it appears, Deuteronomy. 7.8.

And brought them into the wilderness. (...) Per antiphrasin sic dictum quasi
locus a sermon remotus.
There is mention made of one Wilderness before they passed through the Red
Sea, Exodus 14.11. and of other wildernesses after they had passed the same, as
the wilderness of Sin, Exodus 16.1. the wilderness of Paran, Numb. 13.3. which
doubtless was but one, though diversely called from the several parts it
bordered upon. A wilderness is a desolate, solitary place, where is no way,
where are no comforts, but where are many dangers, Deuteronomy. 8.15. it was a great
and terrible wilderness, wherein were fiery Serpents and Scorpions, drought
and no water, it had many wild beasts in it, and therefore was called the
howling wilderness, Deuteronomy. 32.10. Jeremy tells you, chap. 2.6. this wilderness
was a land of deserts, and of Pits, but not pits would hold any water, for he
adds it was a land of drought, and of the shadow of death, a land that no man
passed through, and where no man dwelt, while they were in this wilderness,
they were in danger of death, or in such streights, as that they desired death.
The Wilderness here meant was the wildernese of Sin, which was not far from
Sinai, where the law was given, of which the next verse speaks. Into the
wilderness God did bring them to try them, to humble them, and do them good at
their latter end, Deuteronomy. 8.16.

Obs. 1 That God for the honor of his name, shows mercy after mercy to his
people, deserving no mercy, yea, deserving destruction: In the former verse, to
prevent the dishonor of his name he spared them, made himself known to them,
and here he goes on, adding mercy to mercy; wherefore I caused them to go
forth.

Obs. 2 No length of time, no depth of misery, no power, or policy of
adversaries whatsoever, can hinder God from delivering his people when his time
is come. The Jews had been long in Egypt, suffered very hard things for the
space of one hundred and sixteen years, or one hundred twenty one, from the
time of Joseph's death, till their departure out of Egypt that house of bondage,
which was thereabout; they were under heavy pressures, and great tyranny,
Pharaoh that great Dragon, used all his cunning and power to keep them longer
in that condition, but notwithstanding all these, the Lord caused them to go
forth, his time was come. The like did God for this People when they had been
in Babylon seventy years, were as dry bones and out of hope, Ezekiel. 37.11. he
opened their graves, and caused them to come up out of them, and come to the
land of Israel, verse. 12. There is no thing too hard for the Lord to do, he
can and will remove all obstructions, break through all difficulties, and shake
the foundations of heaven, earth, and hell, to bring to pass his good pleasure
in the time thereof. The state of the Jews in Egypt represents men's condition
under sin and Satan; that in Babylon the condition of Gods Servants under
Antichrist. Now let men be never so long in bondage to either or both of them,
suffer never such hard things, let Satan that red Dragon, and Antichrist, that
man of sin, improve all their craft, skill, and power, to hold men in darkness
and ways of false worship, yet when the Lords day is come, he will cause them
to come out of Egyptian bondage, and Babylonian darkness, he will fetch them
off from all sinful practices, all invented ways of worship, and bring them
into his mavelous and glorious light.

Obs. 3 When God does show his people special mercy, in freeing them from old
and special miseries, he does not wholly exempt them from new miseries: though
he caused them to go forth of Egypt, yet he brought them into a Wilderness,
where they met with hunger, thirst, danger, and death; they were freed from
Egyptian miseries, not from wilderness miseries. They thought if once they were
freed from their making brick, gathering straw, and rigid Taskmasters, they
should be happy, but they met with new-hardships, new-miseries, they did ride
upon the back of mercy, out of old miseries into new, out of an house of
bondage into a wilderness; an howling wilderness, a wilderness that made
them howl many a time. Its Gods method often, to mingle water with our wine,
miseries with our mercies, crosses with our comforts, to lead us out of great
streights in much mercy, and to lead us into others for trial. David was
delivered often out of streights, but shortly after he was freed from one, he
was brought into another, and that by the same hand; which made him say, thou
have showed me great and soar troubles, Psalm. 71.20. sometimes he was on the
mount of mercies, and sometimes in the valley of miseries: yea, in the valley
of the shadow of death; take it in a spiritual sense, when men are converted,
do they not meet with hard things, are they not brought out of Egypt into a
wilderness, where are dangers, fiery Serpents, Scorpions, etc.

Verse. 11 And I gave them my statutes, and showed them my judgments. This
people being brought out of Egypt, and freed from great bondage, being in a
wilderness might now phansy a total liberty to themselves, and exemption from
all obedience; to prevent this, some fifty days after their coming out, the
Lord at Mount Sinai gives them out his Law, by which they might be ordered and
regulated.

Of statutes and judgments, has been spoken formerly; by them, both Morals
and Ceremonials are comprehended.

Showed them. (...)
The Hebrew is, I made them to know: that is, I caused them to be written in
the Tables of stone, and proclaimed amongst them, yea, I caused them to be
opened and expounded unto them. The Lord made known his mind unto them, though
not so efficaciously as in these days.

Which if a man do he shall live in them. In eis, or propter ea.
The doing here is man's keeping, observing, and obeying these Statutes and
judgments; and if so, he should not be punished as transgressors are, but
live a long and prosperous life, and not only so, but an happy and eternal
life for if the keeping Gods Statutes and Commands, Hebrei de vita eterna
intelligunt q.d. qui ad impleverit haec precepta credens in Christum ventutum,
vivet vi^a aeterna. Varabl. Hoc modo etiam Chaldaeus paraphrastos. id.
should reach but unto a temporal prosperous life, what benefit had the Jews
thereby above the Gentiles, who by their justice, Civility, and Moral virtues
obtained great prosperity and length of days. The Lord Christ clears it up
unto us, that by life promised upon keeping the Law, is meant eternal life,
Luke 10.25. says a Lawyer to Christ, Master, what shall I do to inherit
eternal life? Christ says, What is written in the Law? how read thou? he
tells him, verse. 27. what he found there, and Christ upon it, tells him, verse.
28. that if he did so, he should live, that is, live eternally. There was a
righteousness of the Law, which if men came unto, the Law conferred life upon
them, Gal. 3.12. Romans 10.5. Lev. 18.5. there was life in them, life by them,
and life from them, but because no man could attain unto the righteousness of
the Law through the weakness of the flesh, Romans 8.3. Therefore the Law was so
far from conferring eternal life upon man, that it excludes him from that
life, Romans 3.20. and takes away the life he has, Romans 7.10. the Commandment
which was ordained to life he found to be unto death; that which in it self
held out life, accidentally and eventially, proved death unto him.

Paul seems to deny any power to be in the Law of giving life, Gal. 3.21. if
there had been a Law given which could have given life, verily righteousness
should have been by the Law. The impotency is not Originally and intrinsecally
in the Law, for that is perfect, and able to give life to a^^^ to all that keep
it, Mat. 19.17. Christ makes the keeping the Commandments the entrance into
life, the fault is in us, not in the Law, which is Holy, just, and good; if we
could keep the Law, it could give us life.

Obs. 1 When God brings his people into streights, he will not leave them
destitute, he will show them some mercy in such a condition. He brought them
into the wilderness, and what then? he gave them his Statutes, and showed
them his judgments. When they were in the wilderness, they had the Cloud, the
Pillar of fire, the Manna, the Tabernacle, the water out of the rock, many
great mercies did God bestow on them whilst they were in the Wilderness: Jacob
by the hand of God was brought into streights, he must leave his fathers house
to secure his life, Genesis 27.42, 43. lie in the open field all night, where the
earth was his bed, and the stones his bolsters, where the wild beasts might
have found and devoured him; but in this condition the Lord appeared to him,
and told him, what he would give and do for him: it was a good night to Jacob,
he met with sweeter, greater mercies, when he lay without doors, than ever he
did by lying in his fathers house. God brought Jerusalem into a straight by
Senacherib, and did he leave it so, and let him sack and spoil it? No, he
prepared an Angel that was both (...) and (...) a savior to the Jews, and a
destroyer to the Assyrians: Christ by the Spirit was led into the wilderness
where the tempter set upon him very fiercely, and ceased not for forty days
together to shoot his fiery darts against him, but did not the Lord mind him in
that condition? yes, he sent Angels unto him, Mat. 4.11. Behold Angels came and
ministered unto him.

Obs. 2 God is the Lawgiver to his people. I gave them my Statutes, and showed
them my judgments. God gave them Laws to govern, and direct them, both in
their worshipping of him, and carriage one toward another. It was no small
mercy that God gave them Statutes and Judgments; for no Nation had the like
mercy. Deuteronomy. 4.8. What Nation is there so great, that has Statutes and
Judgments so righteous, as all this Law which I set before you this day? said
Moses to them. Other Nations had their Statutes and Judgments, but either they
were not righteous, or at best not so righteous as theirs were; if some were
righteous others were not; Here all were righteous, Ps. 119.128. They are
called judgments of righteousness, Psalm. 119.7. and Commands, that are
righteousness, v. 172. They are the judgments, and commands of the righteous
God, they are full of righteousness, and make men righteous. If the Law of the
twelve Tables among the Romans did exceed all the libraries of Philosophers in
weight and worth, as Tully said, what then did the Statutes and Judgments God
gave to this people? they exceeded all the Laws that ever were or shall be;
this made David to value them above thousands of Gold and Silver, Psalm. 119.72.
and to pray unto the Lord to open his eyes, that he might see the mysteries
and depths were in them; verse. 18. and 129. and that he would incline his heart
to keep them, verse. 36. God gave them these Laws to show that he would be
their governor, that they ought to obey him; Isa. 33.22. The Lord is our
Lawgiver.

Obs. 3. The great bounty and wisdom of God in making promise of an happy life
here, and eternal life hereafter, to the keepers of the Law, to those should
observe his Statutes and Judgments.

1 His great bounty: for suppose a man could perfectly in all things keep the
Law, and that perpetually, he deserves nothing thereby, being Gods creature,
its his duty to do what he appoints and commands, man's works do not excel,
nor carry that intrinsecal worth before God as to merit at his hands; the life
therefore attainable hereby is ratione pacti and promissi, not from the nature
of man's obedience but of Gods promise; and so is from his bounty and goodwill;
For God to promise life to man's obedience was great mercy, transcending what
ever possibly, or imaginably could be therein, whereas he might have
commanded all man could do without any promise of life at all; neither let any
say, this Promise was to no purpose, because man was not able to keep the Law.
The fault thereof was not in God, nor in the Law, but in man himself, who had
disabled himself; and here appears,

Secondly, the Great wisdom of God, that made this promise of life to the
keepers of the Law, that so he might draw out their endeavors to the utmost,
and that seeing when they were at the height they fell short of that perfection
the Law required, they might look for life upon another account, viz. the
righteousness of faith, Deuteronomy. 30.12, 13, 14, 15. with Romans 9.30, 31, 32. and
chapter 10.5, 6, 7, 8. Therefore the Law finding us incapable of life through our
sin, directed us unto Christ, where we might have it through his grace, Gal.
3.24. the Law was our Schoolmaster unto Christ, that we might be justified by
faith.

Verse, 12 Moreover also I gave them my Sabbaths to be a sign between me and
them, that they might know that I am the Lord which sanctify them. Here is
another mercy which the Lord bestowed upon this people, namely his Sabbaths,
which were 1 To be a sign between him and them. 2 To Evidence that the Lord was
he which sanctified them.


My Sabbaths. To status upon the second of Genesi, says Quod Deus non dederit
preceptum illud de observatione Sabbati in principio, sed per Mosen datum esse.
And ^eylin in his History of the Sabbath says, no Patriarks before Moses time
did ever observe the Sabbath, and he alleges Justin Martyr, Ireneus, and
Tertul. for it. He also cites Musculus and Hospinian, saying, it cannot be
proved that the Sabbath was kept by any of the fathers before the Law. Vide
Ames. Medul. Theol. l. 2. c. 15. Nam. 9.10. Vide Rivetum in decalog.
The word Sabbath signifies Rest, and such Rest as work has gone before: from
(...) to cease, to be quiet, and give over working; it imports not a sitting
still, or doing nothing, but a resting from what formerly was a doing. Some by
Sabbaths here understand, not only the Sabbath of days, but the Sabbaticall
years also, the seventh, and fiftyeth years, which were years of rest: But its
more genuine to take Sabbaths here, for Sabbatical days. One of which came
every week, and those Sabbaths were the signs between God and them. It may be
inquired whether they had the Sabbath before they came out of Egypt, because
its said, that God brought them out thence into the wilderness, and gave them
his Sabbaths: and there be some of Note, who hold that the Sabbath was not
given at first, but in Moses days.

To this inquiry, the Answer is; that they had the Sabbath before that time of
Moses giving the Law at Mount Sinai, as appears Exodus 16.23, 25, 26. On the
Sabbath day there was no manna to be found or gathered, and Genesis 2.3. God
blessed the seventh day and sanctified it, surely this blessing and sanctifying
of it was for man's use, God needed no day: therefore in that place, Exodus 16.29.
he says, The Lord has given you the Sabbath, alluding to the first
institution: and the word Remember, which begins the Fourth Commandment,
imports that the day was given before, though much forgotten and neglected. And
what if there be no particular testimony, which mentions the patriarchs
keeping of it before the Law? it does not follow therefore, it was not kept.

There is no mention of keeping it in Joshuah, in Judges, in Samuel, is it
therefore a warrantable, or good argument, to conclude that it was not kept?
yea, if it were granted that they did not keep it? does this prove, that they
were not required to keep it? For Justin Martyr, Ireneus, Doceant in preteritum
justos sabbatizasse aut circumcidisse and sic amicos Dei effectos esse. Tertul.
adversus Iudaeos.
and Tertullian: their scope is to show, that none of the fathers of those
times were justified, or obtained salvation by keeping of the Sabbath.

If the Sabbaths were given before, how are they said to be given when they
were in the wilderness? this is answered in the next words.

To be a sign between me and them. The first giving of the Sabbath was to be a
memorial of the Creation* Genesis 2.3. and therefore was observed by the
Primitive Fathers, whom the Creation of the World did most nearly concern, and
was in use before Moses days, who was above two thousand years after: But when
God gave it out again by Moses, it was upon another account, viz. to be a sign
between him and his people the Jews, whom he brought out of Egypt, and that
upon the Sabbath day, as Junius observes.

A sign] The Sabbath was a sign of the true Sabbath, wherein we shall rest
from the labor of this world, So Jerome, a sign of love and reconciliation, so
Vatablus; a sign of Holiness, that by the time dedicated to God, we might
know our selves dedicated to God, So Cajetane; a sign of difference between the
Jews and all other People, who were profane, and derided the Jews for loosing
the seventh part of their time, So Tostat. and Sanctius. They were
distinguished from other Nations by Circumcision, and by meats; but these were
not so visible, observable in the eye of the world as their Sabbaths. A sign
that God had taken this people to himself, separated them from Egyptians, and
others, and would have them in a special manner remember their Egyptian
deliverance, on that day, as formerly the Creation.

It was a sign between God and them, they glorified him, owning him for their
God, and he sanctified them, owning them for his people: So that here was a
second edition, and as it were a new institution of the Sabbath. Because he
brought them out of Egypt with a mighty hand, therefore he commanded them to
keep the Sabbath, Deuteronomy. 5.15.

I am the Lord which sanctify them. Sanctifying as it referres to God, notes
sometimes preparation to some special service, as Jer. 51.27, 28. Prepare the
Nations against them, the Hebrew is, Sanctify the nations against her; that is,
Babylon; preparing of the Nations to the destruction of Babylon, is sanctifying
of them; sometimes it notes separation to an holy use, as Joel 1.14. Sanctify
ye a fast, that is, separate a time from common employments to Religious; So
Christ is said to be sanctified, John. 10.36. Sometimes it notes making holy,
Levit. 21.23. I the Lord do sanctify them, that is, make them holy, so John
17.17. Romans 15.16. we are here to take it in the two last senses.

I have given them my holy days; times separated from all Common use, and
worldly employments; times for drawing near to, and worshipping of me; times
wherein they ought to be holy, and to mind holy things; and so know that it
is I which separate them from others, and do make them holy, a peculiar People
unto my self.

Quest. Whether was not the Sabbath a mutable Ceremony, seeing he calls it a
sign here?

Answ. That proves it not to be so, for Genesis 9.12. the Rainbow is called a
Token or sign between God and man, and that was no mutable Ceremony, but
continues to the end of the World. Besides, its not a sign or type of future
Grace, something to come, but a sign of their deliverance out of Egypt, or of
the Creation, which were things past, or a sign of Gods sanctifying them at
the present, when they met before him on those days. And further, sign here,
by some is put, for argumentum or documentum, its a note of your distinction
from others, of your being my people, and of my sanctifying of you.

Obs. 1 When God is in a way of mercy with a people, he has his moreovers:
Moreover I gave unto them my Sabbaths, Neh. 9. he reckons up many mercies, and
verse. 22. he says, Moreover thou gave them kingdoms and nations, so in
Isa. 30. he tells them of what mercies they shall have, and verse. 26. Moreover
the light of the Moon shall be as the light, etc. God does always perform his
promises, showing his faithfulness, and many times he gives more than he
promises, good measure, pressed down, and running over, to show his
bountifulness.

Obs. 2 That of holy times, and days, God is the Author: I gave them my
Sabbaths: God blessed and sanctified the seventh day, and gave it unto the
Jews, Genesis 2.3. it is his prerogative to make persons, things, or times, holy:
it is not in the power of man or any sort of men, to make days holy. It was no
small sin, in our forefathers, that took upon them to make Lent and other
times holy, and some days more holy than the Lords day it self. The Jews had
no holy days, but at the Lords appointment.

Obs. 3 The Lord gave forth and appointed holy and resting days, upon weighty
and considerable grounds, always after some great mercy, some special thing or
other which he had done; As here, when he had brought them out of Egypt,
drowned Pharaoh and his Host in the deeps, then he gave them out the Sabbath
again. At first it was instituted after that great and glorious work of the
Creation; God would have great works and mercies to be kept in memory; So the
day we keep was appointed in memorial of that great work, man's redemption, by
the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ, and therefore is honored with the
Title of Lords Day, Rev. 1.10.

Obs. 4 The Sabbath is a day of special concernment to God and his people: I
gave them my Sabbaths to be a sign between me and them. As the Rainbow is a
sign of special concernment between God and the world, so is the Sabbath. Its
an argument and evidence that God looks upon them as his People, where his
Sabbath is, and that they acknowledge God their God, who keep his Sabbaths; By
it God keeps alive the memory of his glorious, great, and gracious works, and
by it the people are brought to glorify and magnify his name for those works,
by it he distinguishes his people from the Profane, and by it they
distinguish him from the Idol gods; in it the Lord sanctifies his People, and
they in it do worship him, its the day wherein they meet, visit, and make each
other cheerful and glorious, let us have more honorable thoughts of the
Sabbath, and not think it concerns not us; if we be his people, its still a
sign between him and them.

If we have no Sabbath, or no day answerable to it, we come short of the
Jews, who had it given unto them as a great mercy. I gave unto them my
Sabbaths, my holy resting days.

Obs. 5 Sanctification is the work of the Lord, and specially of the Lord, when
people meet on his day. He gave them his Sabbaths, and they were called holy
Convocations, because on them the people met, Levit. 23.3. and why did he give
them those days? that they might know that he was the Lord which sanctified
them. There is none which can sanctify persons by way of separation or inherent
holiness, but the Lord. He assumes this power and privilege to himself,
Levit. 20.8. Ezekiel. 37.28. and his sanctifying is chiefly when People meet on
his day. Then the Law was read and opened unto them, Act. 15.21. Neh. 8.8. then
did God appear amongst them, and work by the means he appointed for their
sanctification. Psalm. 89.7. God is greatly to be feared in the Assembly of
Saints, there he convinces them of their sinfulness, and sinful practices,
there he beats down their strong holds, and captivates their thoughts, to the
obedience of his will; what was it made David openly to proclaim it, that a day
in Gods Court was better than a thousand; one Sabbath day wherein he had
communion with God, and found him sanctifying his head and heart, was more
esteemed of him than a thousand other days: for the Lord says he is a sun
and a shield, he inlightens me, he strengthens me, and so separates my
darkness and weakness from me, and makes me more holy: Let us therefore
look unto God alone for sanctification, and wait upon him on his days in the
solemn assemblies, and he will sanctify us, those are days of his special
presence, power, and blessing.

Obs. 6 Gods people should observe and take notice what God does in them, on
Sabbaths, when they appear before him: they had the Sabbaths given them, that
they might know the Lord did sanctify them, that they might have experience in
themselves, of the powerful operations of God in them: God observed what they
did that day, and they were to observe what he did that day; They read the Law
and the Prophets, and expounded them, Act. 13.15. Neh. 8.8. they Prayed, Act.
16.13. they discoursed, reasoned, and persuaded men out of the Scriptures, Act.
18.4. they offered Sacrifices, Numb. 28.2.10. they did sing, Psalm 92. the
Title. These things they did, and God observed their spirits in the doing of
them; he observed how they sanctified the day and himself, in the duties of
the day; and they were to observe what he did in the Assemblies, and in their
bosoms. This David did Psalm. 96.6. strength and beauty are in his Sanctuary,
says he, and Psalm 63.2. he confesses he had seen Gods Power and glory
there; the strength and beauty in one place, is the same with Power in the
other; its a glorious beautiful work, when God sanctifies a sinner, its a work
of Power and strength, when he breaks the snares of our lusts, the chains of
unbeleef, and inlarges our hearts, quickens, comforts, strengthens and
inlightens us. Its a common sin, and sickness amongst Christians, that they
heed not what the Lord does in his Ordinances for them, and in them: they
cannot say from experience, we know it is the Lord that sanctifies us, most
can say this from the Tongue, few from the heart; 'twas not without cause, that
Solomon said, Keep thy foot when thou go to the house of God, and be more
near to hear, than to offer the sacrifice of Fools, Eccl. 5.1. some think he
alludes to Exodus 3.5.30.19. and Josh. 5. last. Where is mention of putting off
their shoes, and washing their feet, because they were to approach unto the
holy God, and surely we had need look to our feet; that is, our affection
(foot is put for feet, the singular for the plural) for we approach near to God
when we go to his house; we go to be sanctified, and therefore should take
heed we defile not our selves.

Verse. 13. But the house of Israel rebelled against me in the wilderness:
they walked not in my statutes, and they despised my judgments, which if a man
do, he shall even live in them, and my Sabbaths, they greatly polluted: then I
said, I would pour out my fury upon them in the wilderness to consume them.
Having represented unto them, the mercies he conferred on them in the
wilderness, here he declares what their carriage was toward him therein, and
what his purpose was toward them.

1 Their carriage toward him is laid down.

1 In General, the house of Israel rebelled against me.

2 In Special, and that in three particulars.

1 They walked not in my statutes. 2 They despised my judgments. 3 They
polluted my Sabbaths, and that greatly.
Now all these are aggravated.

1 From the place where they were done, in the wilderness, where they had
special need of Gods protection and provision, where they had and saw his
miracles daily.

2 From the nature of the statutes and judgments given, which were such as if
done, kept, they might have lived.

2 The Lords purpose toward them, was to pour out his fury upon them, and
consume them, and that in the wilderness.

Little shall I speak of this Verse. because in the 8. and 11. verses you have
already had most things in it.

The house of Israel rebelled against me. Of their rebellion in the wilderness,
you may read, Deuteronomy: 1.26.43. Exodus 17.7. with Numb. 20.24.27. chapter 14. Deuteronomy.
9.22. (...)


Reprobavit ex odio, abjecit, contempsit, significat fastidio quodam rem
aliquam aut personam ranquam vilem and contemptam rejicere. The word (...)
They despised my judgments. The Hebrew word for despise notes rejecting,
hating, villifying, they looked upon them as contemptible things, and threw
them away, they did not only refuse to walk in his Law, Psalm. 78.10. but they
despised his judgments, and abhorred his Statutes, Levit. 26.43. it was such
despising as had an abhorrency accompanying it.

My Sabbaths they greatly polluted. Of their Polluting his Sabbaths, you may
read Exodus 16.27. they went to gather Manna on the Sabbath day, one gathered
sticks, signifies cum sputo quasi rejicere.
Numb. 15.32. they carried burdens, and did servile work, Jer. 17.22, 23.
whereas they should have highly prised the Sabbaths, resting from doing their
own ways, finding their own pleasure, speaking their own words, and wholly
have been taken up in the worship of God, and the duties peculiar to the day,

Obs. 1 Such is the corruption of man's nature, that nothing will keep it within
its bounds, but it breaks out against God, neglects, and abuses the Ordinances
and means he has appointed for man's salvation; But the house of Israel
rebelled against me, they walked not in my statutes, they despised my
Judgments, and they greatly polluted my Sabbaths. These God gave them for
their good, life, salvation, but they slighted, perverted, polluted them. God
had done great things for them, he provided for them in the wilderness,
manna, water, shoes, clothes, all in a miraculous way, so that they could not
subsist without him, yet they rebel against him, despise him, Numb. 11.20.
Cast off his statutes and judgments, and profane his Sabbaths to his face.

Thus they dealt with the Lord when he brought them out of Babylon, Nehem.
13.15, 16. they greatly polluted the Sabbaths of the Lord, whereupon says
Nehemiah, verse. 18. did not your Fathers thus, and so bring evil upon us, and
will you bring more wrath upon Israel by profaning the Sabbaths? Neither the
mercies their fathers had, when they were brought out of Egypt, nor the mercies
themselves had, when they were brought out of Babylon, kept in their
Corruptions, but they rose to a great height, and brake out so far as to set
at naught all his counsels, Prove. 1.25. to reject the word of the Lord, Jer.
8.9. to mock and misuse his messengers and Prophets, 2 Chronicles. 36.16. to speak
stoutly against God, Mal. 3.13. yea, so strong grew their corruptions, that
their souls abhorred God, Zech. 11.8. Is it not thus in our days? neither
miraculous mercies, nor wonderful judgments, do keep men within bounds, or
chain up their corruptions, but they break out, greatly polluting the Lords
day, despising all or some Ordinances? do they not set at naught and reject the
whole Counsel of God, the very Scriptures? do they not mock, and misuse the
messengers and Ministers of God? do they not blaspheme, curse and glory in it?
do they not speak stoutly against Christ and God? Do not some turn Jews, and
others Atheists, denying Christ, God? Surely iniquity abounds, and is within
little of its perfection, the harvest is near, sinners are almost full ripe for
judgment, and ere long God will say, thrust in the sickle.

Obs. 2. When men do neglect, despise, and abuse the ordinances of God, and
means of grace, they provoke God even to their destruction: They neglected to
walk in Gods statutes, they despised his judgments, they polluted his
Sabbaths, and what then? Then I said, I would pour out my fury upon them, to
consume them; Men think that neglecting and slighting of Ordinances,
prophaneing of the Lords day, and holy things, is no such great evil, if it be
an evil at all; but there is hardly any thing kindles the wrath of God hotter
than the casting off, despising and abusing the Ordinances and mediums
appointed of God, for his worship, our good, comfort, and salvation. Their sins
here of this nature, put God into fury, which is more than anger or wrath, upon
pouring out of fury, and such pouring out as to consume them, Heb. 10.25, 26,
27. he tells you of some that did forsake the assemblies, cast off the
Ordinances of God, which was a wilful and provoking sin, excluding mercy, and
hastening judgment, and fierce indignation which should destroy; When God in
his infinite wisdom and mercy has condescended to man's weakness, given him
Ordinances and mediums wherein he will be worshipped, and through which he
will do good to the creature, and now the foolish creature to neglect, despise,
or profane them, this pierces Gods heart, and transformes his patience into
fury, and puts him into ways of destruction. Those despised Moses Law were to
dye without mercy, and what will be their portion who despise Christ, the
Gospel, and Ordinances thereof? see Heb. 12.25. Act. 2.23. every soul that will
not hear Christ shall be destroyed, that is, whosoever shall not hearken to
Christ's voice in the Gospel, submit to the Ordinances appointed by him therein,
and worship the Father, the way he has prescribed, he shall be destroyed.
The Corinthians abused and profaned the Supper of the Lord, and were they not
smitten and destroyed for that sin? 1 Cor. 1^.30. Moses had the sword drawn
upon him by the Lord himself, because he neglected the Circumcision of his Son,
Exodus 4.24.

Verse. 14 But I wrought for my name sake, that it should not be polluted before
the Heathen, in whose sight I brought them out. Whilst they were in the
wilderness, and Moses in the Mount, they made a Calfe, and fell to Idolatry,
which exasperated the Lord, so, that he thought to destroy them, and had not
Moses interposed and pressed God with the honor of his name, he had done it,
Exodus 32.12. Wherefore should the Egyptians speak and say, for mischief did he
bring them out, to slay them in the Mountains, and to consume them from the
face of the earth? turn from thy fierce wrath, and repent of this evil against
thy people. God did so, and wrought for his name sake. Of these words was
spoken in the ninth verse.

Verse. 15 Yet also I lifted up my hand unto them in the wilderness, that I
would not bring them into the land which I had given them, flowing with milk
and honey, which is the glory of all lands. 16 Because they despised my
Judgments, and walked not in my Statutes, but polluted my Sabbaths; for their
heart went after their Idols. 17 Nevertheless mine eye spared them from
destroying them, neither did I make an end of them in the Wilderness. In the
15. verse you have mention of Gods swearing, that he would not bring them into
Canaan; in the 16. the reason thereof.

In the 17. his indulgence and pity toward them.

I lifted up my hand unto them, etc. This was, when upon the ill report the
Spies had brought upon the land of Canaan, the Israelites murmured against
Moses and Aaron, as you may see Numb. 14.28, 29, 30. and chapter 26.65.

But here a difficulty arises in the 6. verse. of this Chapter, its said that
God had lift up his hand, and so sworn to bring them not only out of Egppt,
but into the land of Canaan, and here its said, he had lift up his hand to the
contrary, that he would not bring them into the land he had given them; so
that it seems here is one oath against another; and in Numb. 14.34. God
acknowledges his breach of Promise, for he says, ye shall know my breach of
promise. I have promised and sworn to bring you into the land of Canaan, but
you have so sinned against, and provoked me, that I will not do it, yea, have
sworn you shall not enter into my rest, Psalm 95.11.

This difficulty is removed, by considering, that God did not make promise, or
swear to those individual men that were kept out of Canaan, that they should
be brought into it, if it had been so, God had forgot and forsworn himself:
but his Promise and Oath was, that the seed of Abraham, Isaak, and Jacob should
be brought into it, Genesis 12.7. chapter 13.15. chapter 15.18. chapter 26.4. chapter 50.24.
Deuteronomy. 34.4. and their seed was brought into the Promised Land, Josh. 1.2. chapter
4.1. chapter 14.1.24.13. and so Gods Promise and Oath was kept. Those he swore
against, were those that murmured against him, even all from twenty years old
and upwards, except Caleb and Joshua, whose carcasses fell in the wilderness,
as you may see Josh. 5.6.

As for that Numb. 14.34. Gods breach of Promise, the Original is, (...)
Frustrationem meam. Monta. (...) is franget, irritum facere, retracta^e.
Vatablus has it, mendacium meum, i. e. an sermo meus mendax sit. Discetis quid
sit in me esse contumacem. Tossed. (...)
Eth Tenuathi. My frustration, you looked certainly to have entered into Canaan,
but for your murmuring and unbeleef, I have frustrated your expectations: or
thus, you think my oath cannot be true, because of a former Oath, and that the
words I have uttered will prove false, a lie, but you shall know whether my
words and Oath be false or no. Junius and Pisc. read it, abruptionem meam, and
make the sense this, you have broken off from me, and you shall know what it is
to have me break off from you, I will plague you for your murmuring,
ingratitude, unfaithfulness, and unbeleef, so that you shall never come into
the land of Promise. The Septuagint has it, you shall know the wrath of mine
anger.

Flowing with Milk and Honey, which is the glory of all lands. Of these words
has been spoken largely in the 6. verse, they are repeated here, to show the
ingratitude of this people, that were not affected with this land, which was a
second Paradise, but despised it, and raised an ill report upon it: as also to
show what they lost in being kept out of it; And their folly in preferring
Egypt before it.

There is nothing needful to open in the other two verses, because occasion
has been given formerly in this chapter, and others to open them.

Obs. 1 Men's sins disappoint them of choice mercies, yea, mercies Promised,
expected, and near at hand: God had promised them Canaan, they were near unto
it, Numb. 13. expected to go in and possess it, but God would not bring them
into the Land, because they despised his judgments, walked not in his
Statutes, but polluted his Sabbaths.

In Heb. 3.19. its said, they could not enter in, because of unbeleef; and
Psalm. 106.24. they despised the pleasant land, they believed not his word. It
was their sins kept them from so great, so near, so longed for a mercy. Such
is the malignity of sin, that it drives mercys back, when they are at the
door, and blocks up the passage, that none for the future may issue forth
toward us, Isa. 59.1, 2. Behold, the Lords hand is not shortened that it
cannot save, neither is his ear heavy that it cannot hear, God can hear and
help, but your iniquities have separated, between you and your God, and your
sins have hid his face from you, that he will not hear: Your sins stand
like a brass wall, a mighty mountain between him and you, they have crampt his
will, so that though he can, yet he will neither hear your prayers, nor help
your persons. Its sin that keeps mercy from us, Jer. 5.25. Your iniquities
have turned away these things, what things? the former and latter rain, the
Harvest and Fruits of the Earth; they were coming to you, but your sins
turned them back again, and bid them be gone, away rain, away Harvest, away
fruits of the earth, and so the next words import, your sins have
withheld good things from you, they have forbidden good from you, so
Montanus and the vulgar, read the words, Prohibuer^nt bonum a vobis.
our sins do forbid, and withold good from us, see it Matthew. 6.15. if you
forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your father forgie your
trespasses.

Joh. 8.19. If ye had known me, ye should have known my Father also, Isa.
48.18. O that thou had hearkened to my Commandments, then had thy peace been
as a river, and thy righteousness as the waters of the Sea, thy seed also had
been as the sand, etc. see Luke 14.16, 17, 18, 19, 20. Luke 13.34. John 5.40.
Psalm. 81.13, 14. it was their sins which frustrated them of mercies, if the
word profit not us, its sin that hinders the profit, Heb. 4.2. Jam. 1.21, 1
Pet. 2.1, 2.

Obs. 2 When the heart is carried out after unlawful things, then the ways and
Ordinances of God are neglected, slighted, and profaned. This rises from the
words of the 16. verse, they despised Gods judgments, walked not in his
statutes, they polluted his Sabbaths, and why did they so? for their hearts
went after their idols. These had stolen away their hearts from God, these had
their thoughts, desires, affections, and the things of God were of little
account with them; his statutes, judgments, Sabbaths, were laid aside, and
only what their hearts were carried forth unto, that they magnified, Ezekiel.
6.9. they had whorish hearts, and whorish eyes, which went after their Idols,
and made them depart from God, that is, from his judgments, statutes,
Sabbaths, Ordinances. Idols had their eyes and hearts, and as to God and the
things of God, they were eyelesse and heartlesse. When Solomon's heart was
carried out to women and Idols, then he did evil in the sight of the Lord; 1
King 11.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. then the Lords Ordinances were despised, and his
Sabbaths polluted. If once the heart go out to unlawful things, its drawn off
from lawful, so much as it adheres to evil, so much its divided from God and
good, Ezekiel. 33.31. their heart goes after their Covetousness. So much as it
went after riches, so much it was distanced from God, and walking in his ways.
David hereupon advised men not to set their hearts upon riches, Psalm. 62.10.
they will then be their Idols, and make them forget God, and his ways, and do
those things will profane his Ordinances: look well to your hearts, and let
not them carry you away, Job 15.12.

Obs. 3 When sinners provoke God into ways of destruction, he does not
utterly destroy them, but shows some pity and mercy: Nevertheless mine eye
spared them from destroying. God did destroy many of them in the Wilderness,
three thousand upon their making the Calf, Exodus 32.28. twenty four thousand
upon their committing whoredom with the Daughters of Moab, Numb. 25.9. much
People by fiery Serpents upon their murmuring, Numb. 21.6. Corah, Dathan, and
Abiram were swallowed up of the Earth, and all theirs, and the two hundred and
fifty men that offered incense, were consumed by fire, Numb. 16.32, 33, 35.
fourteen thousand seven hundred were destroyed by the plague, verse. 49. and
many by the Amorites in S^ir, Deuteronomy. 1.44. now notwithstanding so many were
destroyed, yet all were not, he did not make an end of them in the Wilderness,
he did not consummate and perfect his wrath upon them, his eye s^ared them;
he was moved to mercy, and had compassion on them.

Though men have sinned much, and God have let out much wrath, yet
nevertheless he has an eye to spare, and an heart to pity. If he should
punish, destroy none, he would be thought to be like unto sinners, Psalm
50.21. if he should destroy all, he would be thought to be cruel; to show
therefore that he is a just God, he cuts off some, and to show he is a
merciful God, he spares some.

In the late powder blow, some were destroyed, It was the 4th of Jan. 1649.
about eight a clock at night.
some were spared, yea, wonderfully spared and preserved.

Verse. 18. But I said unto their children in the wilderness, walk ye not in
the statutes of your fathers, neither observe their Judgments, nor defile your
selves with their Idols. Verse. 19 I am the Lord your God, walk in my statutes
and keep my judgments and do them. In the 18. verse. God dehorts them from
following their fathers ways.

In the 19. he exhorts them to follow his ways, and shows them the reason why
they should do so, because he is their God.

Where the Lord spoke thus unto them in the Wilderness, is not recorded by
Moses, but that he did speak what is in the 18. verse. Our Prophet assures us,
who spoke as he was moved by the Spirit, you have that is aequivalent
thereunto, Deuteronomy. 5.32. You shall observe to do as the Lord your God has
commanded you: you shall not turn aside to the right hand or to the left, not
to your Fathers on the right hand, nor to the Heathen on the left.

The 19. verse. you have Levit. 18.4, 5. I am the Lord your God, ye shall
therefore keep my Statutes and my Judgments. Nothing in these verses requires
explication. Take these observations.

Obs. 1 Children are prone to follow the corrupt decrees, counsels, and
examples of their parents. I said walk not in the statutes of your fathers.
That is, in what they decree, appoint; observe not their judgments, that is,
their Counsels and advisements; nor defile your selves with their Idols, that
is, follow not their examples. They were addicted much to what their sinful
Fathers said, or did. Of the Kings of Israel its said, they did evil as their
Fathers had done, 2 King. 15.9. chapter 23.32. chapter 24.9. and Jer. 44.17. the
Children would sacrifice to, and defile themselves with Idols, as their Fathers
had done. Fathers, Laws, Customs, Traditions, Examples, persuasions, counsels,
are loadstones, and draw them strongly to that is evil.

Obs. 2 Posterity are not tied to the statutes and Judgments of their Fathers
or forefathers. I said walk not in the statutes of your fathers, neither
observe their Judgments, etc. Though there be a strong tie between Parents
and Children, and they bound by the Command of God to obey their Parents, yet
when they shall command or counsel them any thing unlawful, contrary to the
statutes and judgments of God, they are not to hearken, not to observe or obey
them. Here is Divine authority for it, I said.

If it be Gods Command that lead Children to obey Parents, and People to obey
Magistrates in Lawful things, then Gods prohibition must keep them from obeying
in unlawful things: When Masters or Parents are so wicked, as to put their
Servants or Children upon lying or swearing, to put off their commodities, they
should remember what God has said, Walk not in their statutes. etc.

This holds especially in matters of Faith and worship, men's statutes and
judgments must not come in there: what is not Divine, is no matter for my
faith, nor rule for my worship; Men's chafe and bran must not come among Gods
wheat; their weeds and nettles must not come amongst his flowers; It is not
Popes decrees, Canons of counsels, judgments of Fathers, Votes of Synods,
Customs of Churches, Religion of Ancestors, that must tie my Conscience, or
guide my practice in the worship of God. He has said it, who is above them
all, Walk not in their statutes, neither observe their Judgments, and defile
not your selves with their Idols. Men have their Statutes, their judgments,
their inventions and additions to points of Faith, and matters of worship,
which are no other than Idols, and will defile.

Obs. 3 That we are only to walk in Gods statutes, and to keep his
Judgments; Not men's statutes, or judgments, I am the Lord your God, I have
authority over you, I am in Covenant with you, I have given you statutes and
judgments which are right, Psalm 19.8. true and good, Neh. 9.13. therefore
walk in my statutes, keep my Judgments: when the Israelites walked in other
statutes, the statutes of the Heathen, or the statutes that themselves made,
the Lord was wroth with them; and afflicted them for it, 2 King. 17.8, 19, 20.
and commanded them to observe his statutes and Ordinances, and to do them for
evermore, verse. 37. Josh. 24.14, 15.

Verse. 20. And hallow my Sabbaths, and they shall be a sign between me and
you, that you may know that I am the Lord your God. In this 20. verse, the Lord
proceeds in his exhortation of the Children of those rebellious Israelites in
the wilderness^, and exhorts them to hallow his Sabbaths, which their Fathers
had polluted.

Hallow my Sabbaths. Not make holy, but keep holy, the Hebrew word is the same
with that, Exodus 20.8. The hallowing or sanctifying of the Sabbath here,
consists in two things.

1 In resting from labor and work;

Servile work, Levit. 23.7, 8. that is, such work as men may lawfully do on
other days; works, for gain and profit might not be done on Sabbath days:
they were to rest from their own works, words, and pleasures, Isa. 58.13. see
Exodus 20.10. Nehem. 13.15. Jer. 17.22. Exodus 16.29. cha. 31.14.

2 In doing those things which God required on that day, as meditation on the
works of Creation, for which it was first instituted, Genesis 2.23. remembrance of
their servitude in Egypt, and deliverance thence, Deuteronomy. 5.15. meeting in solemn
assemblies, Levit. 23.3. in which the word was to be read, opened, and
reverently heard, Luke 4.16. Act. 15.31. Ec. 5.1. prayer to be made, Acts
16.13. God to be praised, Psalm 92. Sacrifices to be offered, Numb. 28.2, 10.
and they were to exercise works of mercy on that day, Mat. 12.10, 11, 12. John
5.9. and all these duties they were to do with delight, Isa. 58.13.

They shall be a sign between me and you. Of these words you heard in the 12.
verse. besides what was said there, the Sabbath was a sign of the Covenant, God
made with them to be their God, and to own them for his people; for it follows,

That you may know I am the Lord your God. The Sabbath day was the time wherein
God and this people met, God made himself known unto them then, by sanctifying
of them, verse. 12. for whom he is a God unto, he blesses and sanctifies, and
specially on his Sabbaths, then he heard their Prayers, accepted their
offerings, and let out his loving kindness unto them.

Obs. 1 Having and hallowing Gods Sabbaths, is a sign and manifestation that
God is the God of that people. The Jews had the Lords Sabbaths, and he bad
them hallow them, that so being hallowed, they might signify and certify to
them, that God was their God. As Circumcision and the Passover were signs
that the Jews were in Covenant with God; so likewise was the Sabbath, Exodus
31.13. and because it was a sign of the Covenant between them and God, verse.
16. God tells them, they must observe it for a perpetual Covenant, and hence it
was, that when they violated the Sabbath, God accounted it the violation of the
Covenant between them.

Verse. 21 Notwithstanding the Children rebelled against me: they walked not in
my statutes, neither kept my Judgments to do them, which if a man do, he shall
even live in them; they polluted my Sabbaths: Then I said I would pour out my
fury upon them, to accomplish mine anger against them in the wilderness. Here
the successelessenesse of Gods exhortation is evidenced, he pressed them to
be obedient, and dutiful to him, being their God, but they rebelled and would
not walk in his statutes, nor keep his judgments, their Fathers statutes and
judgments they would walk in and observe; they chose rather to be defiled and
dye in their Fathers ways, than to be sanctified and live in Gods ways.
Whereupon God had a purpose to destroy them, as he had formerly to destroy
their fathers. This Verse is the same with the 13. which has been opened, and
the observations given.

Verse. 22. Nevertheless I withdrew my hand, and wrought for my Name sake,
that it should not be polluted in the sight of the Heathen. God having purposed
their destruction, saw that if he should proceed thereunto, the Heathens would
make an ill sense of it, and blaspheme his name, for prevention whereof, he let
fall his purpose, and would not destroy them. This Verse falls in with the
ninth and fourteenth, only this is in it, which they have not.

I withdrew my hand. Vatablus has it, retraxi manum meam, I drew back my
hand. Castalio, revocavi; I recalled it. Jun. and Trem. Reduceus manum meam,
bringing back my hand, I wrought for my name: Gods hand was stretched out, and
he pulled it back again. The Hebrew word is in Hiphil, And notes thus much, I
made to return, I made mine arm come back again, when it was going forth to
destroy them.

Obs. Gods people do often provoke him, both fathers and Children, and so that
they are at the door, brink, point of destruction, and yet he is merciful unto
them, and that for his name sake: When he cannot show mercy for their sakes,
he will show mercy for his own names sake. In the eighth ver. is set down
their BUT, but they rebelled against me, they would not hearken, they would
not forsake their Idols, whereupon God purposed to destroy them. In the ninth
verse. is Gods BUT, but I wrought for my name, etc. in the 13. verse. again is
their BUT, but the house of Israel rebelled, etc. then God was angry again, and
purposed to consume them: in the ^4, verse. you have Gods BUT again, But I
wrought for my names sake, etc. in the 16. verse. you have their BUT the third
time, but they polluted my Sabbaths, in the 17. you have Gods Nevertheless, or
BUT again, for its the same in the Original. Never^helesse mine eye spared
them, etc. in the 21. verse. you have their Notwithstanding, or BUT, once more,
the Hebrew is the same with But before; Notwithstanding, or But the Children
rebelled, etc. and in this 22. verse you have Gods BUT, or Nevertheless
answering thereunto, Nevertheless I withdrew my hand, and wrought for my
names sake: Four times in this Chapter, you have them provoking God even to
their ruin, and as many times his sparing of them: this last time his hand was
stretched out, even at the work, and had he stricken one blow, had broken them
all, but he recalled his hand, he would not let his power fall upon them to
crush them in pieces, but wrought for his name, and their safety. If we have
our Buts and Notwithstandings, importing, rebellion, ingratitude, and
disobedience, the Lord has his Buts, and Neverthelesses, importing mercy,
patience, and loving kindness.

Verse. 23 I lifted up my hand unto them also in the wilderness, that I would
scatter them among the Heathen, and disperse them through the Countries. 24
Because they had not executed my Judgments, but had despised my Statutes, and
had polluted my Sabbaths, and their eyes were after their fathers Idols. In
these two verses you may see, 1 A commination backed with an oath, in the 23. v.
2 The Reason thereof in the 24.


I lifted up my hand unto them in the wilderness. Of this Gesture used in
swearing, you heard before, v. 5, 6. but where it was done, will hardly be
found in Moses writings, that God thus lift up his hand, and threatened to
disperse them, some thing like hereunto, see in Deuteronomy. 4.26, 27. chapter 28.25.36,
37, 64. chap. 31.21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26. Lev. 26.33. in those places the Lord
threatens to scatter them, and David tells you, he lift up his hand to do it,
Psalm 106.26, 27. he lift up his hand against them to overthrow them in the
wilderness, to overthrow their seed also among the nations, and to scatter them
in the lands. Maldonate makes the lifting up the hand here, to be in way of
threatening, not of swearing.

That I would scatter them among, etc. Of their scattering and dispersion, was
spoken in the 5, 6, and 12. chapters.

Because they had not executed my Judgments. Some refer these words, and the
rest in the verse, to the time, after their entrance into Canaan, if then they
should not keep Gods judgments and do them, he having performed his Promise
unto them, he would scatter and disperse them among the Nations, but because
the verse speaks of the time past, we must also look at what was done, as well
as what was to do; The Children before mentioned had rebelled, and did not keep
the judgments of God to do them, they polluted his Sabbaths, and defiled
themselves with their Idols, whereupon God thought to have destroyed them in
the wilderness, but spared them for his Name sake, that the Egyptians and
Nations might not blaspheme and pollute his name; but knowing that when he had
possessed them of Canaan, that their children would do as they had done, he
lifts up his hand, and threatens their driving out of that Land again, and
dispersion in the Countries, and so makes their sin the principium, and
fundamentum of their Posterities ruin.

Their eyes were after their Fathers Idols. In the 8. verse. he mentions the
Idols of Egypt, and they were their Fathers Idols, which the Children minded,
and were intent upon; for when the eyes go after any thing, there is some
affection in the heart unto that thing, verse. 16. and Ezekiel. 6.9. I am broken
with their whorish heart, which has departed from me, and with their eyes,
which go a whoring after their Idols: if the heart did not affect them, the
eyes would not. Fathers Idols affected both the hearts and eyes of their
Children, Rachel stole her Fathers Gods, Genesis 31.19. and said, they should be
her Gods.

Obs. 1 That Parents sins prepare heavy Judgments for their Posterity many
years after. God lifted up his hand in the wilderness, that he would scatter
them among the Heathen, and disperse them through the Countries; because they
were statute-breakers, Sabbath-polluters, and idol-minders, which fell not upon
them, but their posterity many hundred years after. Junius makes it five
hundred; and then they were driven out of the Land of Canaan, and dispersed
into Heathenish Nations, a^ judgment that deprives men of all their own
comforts, and exposes them to all the injuries of others. E^ilium novo^um
molorum initium. Ph lo de Abrahamo.
One calls this judgment the beginning of new evils, and it may be added, of
unknown evils. Let Parents therefore take heed how they provoke God by sinful
and wicked practices, their posterity may smart soundly for it many years
after. Saul's, Jeroboams, and Manasses sins, made their Posterity to feel sad
strokes, long after; and some in our days have suffered for their Fathers
sins, and its just with God they should, when they tread in their fathers
steps, who have rebelled against God.

Verse. 25. Wherefore I gave them also statutes, that were not good, and
Judgments whereby they should not live. 26 And I polluted them in their own
gifts, in that they caused to pass through the fire, all that opens the
womb, that I might make them desolate, to the end that they might know that I
am the Lord. Here is a further progress of Gods judiciary dealings with them,
which lies, 1 In the Statutes and judgments he gave them. 2 In the polluting
of them.


Then you have the end of both, which is, 1 To make them desolate. 2 To bring
them to the knowledge of himself.


In this verse is first a figure called Antanaclasis, which is the
reciprocating the same words, in a diverse sense; in the former verse is
mention made of statutes and judgments, which God gave them, verse. 11. and
were his divine word: here is a mentioning of statutes and judgments, which
he gave them as divine punishments, being the Commands and devices of men.

2 A figure called Meiosis or Tapeinosis which is, when less is expressed, and
more intended; as not good, Cum usur pantur nomina vel verba, leniora pro
vehementioribus. Glass. in philolog l. 5. c. 10.
is a mild expression, but more is intended in it, viz. hurtful, deadly: So
these words, should not live, are moderate, but they include that is grievous,
namely, death, yea, terrible deaths; they should not only have no good by
them, but much evil, sore destruction.

I gave them my Statutes that were not good. The Hebrew is, Statutes not good.

These Statutes were not the Moral Law, though it be a killing Letter, 2 Cor.
3.6. for the Law is holy, just, and good, Romans 7.12. yea perfect, Psalm 19.7.
not the Ceremonials, viz. Sacrifices and Sacraments, Vid. Est. in sent. l. 4.
Sect. 27. p. 26. Col. 1. l. 8.
as Jerome and Estius calls them; for though these were shadows of things to
come, yet they had purifying virtue in them, and led to Christ, Heb. 9.13. Gal.
3.24. and in this Chapter God speaking of the Statutes and Judgments he gave
them, which comprehend both Morals and Ceremonials, he says, verse. 11.13, 21.
that they were such, as if they kept them, they might live in them. Neither
does it advantage to say, these are called not good, because they are less
good, than those of the Gospel, let that be granted, yet those statutes kept,
would afford life, but the statutes here meant, were such as whereby they
should not live. Not the Tributes and Taxes imposed upon them by the Nations,
when they prevailed against them in war, for they were under none in the
wilderness, and these statutes were given when they were there.

By these statutes are meant,

1 Those punishments that befell them in the wilderness, as the sword, Exodus
32.27, 28. fiery Serpents, Numb. 21.6. the plague, Numb. 16.49. the earth
swallowing up Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, verse. 31, 32. fire, ver. 35.
suspension, chap. 25.4. God commanded the hanging up the Heads of the people,
he appointed the fire, the earth, the plague, the sword, to do execution upon
them, these were statutes not good; not good for them, but hurtful, yea, very
hurtful, for so much not good, implies, and the next words prove, being a
further declaration of these Judgments, whereby they should not live; these
statutes and Judgments took away their lives.

2 Those threatenings and curses you find Deuteronomy. 4.26, 27, 28. chapter 27. from the
15. to the end, and chapter 28. from the 15. to the end, Levit. 26. from the 14. to
the 40. these were sentences of death.

3 The Inventions, Laws, Rites, Decrees, Superstitions, of men, which are
called Statutes, Dan. 6.7. Mic. 6.16. the statutes of Omri are kept, and 2
King. 17.8. the statutes of the Heathen. And God is said to give them, in that
he gave them over to these which were not good, but tended to death and
destruction, seeing they would none of mine, I gave them men's.

Obs. When men flight and violate the Statutes and Judgments of God, he does
not only threaten, and punish them with temporal Judgments, but also with
spiritual: because they despised Gods statutes, and did not keep his
judgments, therefore he gave them Statutes not good, and judgments whereby
they should not live. God threatened them with cursings, cut off many of them in
the wilderness, and gave over others to believe errors, to follow the
imaginations of their own hearts, the Commandments and statutes of men, which
was a more dreadful judgment. When men care not for the ways of God, which
have good and life in them, its just with God to give them over to the ways of
men, that have no good, no life in them; nothing but expense, labor,
disappointment, vexation, and destruction, Ezekiel. 24.12. Jer. 2.36, 37. Prove.
14.12. when Gods people would not listen to him, he gave them up to their own
hearts lusts, to the perverse intendments and pertinacies of their hearts, they
intended the statutes and judgments of men, of Heathens and Idolaters, those
they were set upon, and God gave them up unto them, as you may see ver. 39. of
this chap. go ye, serve ye every one his Idol, seeing you will not submit to
me any ways, go to your Idols where your eyes and hearts are, and serve them
according to the statutes and judgments of the Nations whence ye had them; or
if they be of your own devising, serve them according to the ways of your own
hearts, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11, 12. when men receive not the love of the truth that
they might be saved, God sends them strong delusions that they should believe a
lie, and be damned; (...), the efficacy of error; the truth comes with love,
error with efficacy: if truths wooing and love be not entertained, God sends
error with efficacy to seize upon men. Because we have been wanton with the
truths, Ordinances, and things of God, not received the love of them, but
busied our wits, and parts about them, yea, against them, therefore God has
sent the efficacy of error to take hold of men. Is not the efficacy of error
upon them that say, there is no Devil, but holiness; no heaven nor hell, but
what is in a man's own conscience? etc.

And I polluted them in their own gifts. God being most holy, could not
communicate any thing that should defile them; Subtraxi meam gratiam and
permisi eos pollui. Vatablus.
from a holy God comes nothing but that which is holy and good. Some take it in
this sense, that God suffered them to do those things which defiled them, to
prostitute themselves to all abominations.

Sanctius informs us, that one is said to do a thing, when he declares it to
be done, Levit. 13.3. The Priest shall look on him, (...) and shall pollute
him, that is, pronounce, declare him polluted, so verse. 6. he shall cleanse
him, says the Original, that is, declare him to be clean, and v. 44. the
Priest shall by polluting, pollute him, that is, declare him altogether
polluted, and our Ezekiel is said to destroy the City, when as he did but
declare the destruction of the City, Impuro^ esse ostendens, ur impuros
tractans, and a me abdicans. Iun. in annot.
chap. 43.3. so here, God is said to pollute them, in that he did declare them
polluted, and not only so, but in that he dealt with them as polluted ones,
rejecting them, and their gifts.

In their own gifts. Quasi pollutos repuli a me, pollutos judicavi eos and
eorum munera.
The Septuagint reads it, (...), and so does Codex sixti. Complutensis and
Apollinaris says Pradus, in their Opinions and Tenets. When men leave the
statutes of God, and take up opinions of their own, or tenets of the world,
they pollute themselves, God judges them so, will declare them to be such, and
deal with them as such, this by the way.

By Gifts, are not meant all the Sacrifices which they brought unto the Lord,
but their firstborn, which were to be given to God, in remembrance of their
coming out of Egypt, when the firstborn of the Egyptians were all slain, and
the firstborn of the Israelites all preserved, Exodus 13.2, 3.12.

In that they caused to pass through the fire, all that opens the womb. The
Hebrew is, making to pass all opening of the womb, its a periphrasis, the
opening of the womb, for the firstborn, and that of the male kind, which were
to be offered to the Lord; but they offered unto Idols, causing them to pass
through the fire, as it is in the 31. ver. of this Chapter, they were
forbidden, and that upon pain of death, to let any of their seed to pass
through the fire, or to give them unto Molech, Levit. 18.21. chapter 20.2. God
expected they should strictly have observed his Ordinance of consecrating their
firstborn unto him, and they either sacrificed or consecrated them to Idols.
David Psalm. 106.37, 38. tells you, they sacrificed their Sons and Daughters
unto Devils, he calls their Idols Devils, and they sacrificed their Sons,
not only their firstborn, but others, and not only Sons but Daughters, so
corrupt were they in their opinions and practice.

If it should be granted here, as some Interpreters conceive, that they did
not offer their firstborn to Idols, but to the true God, that they did not
cause them to pass through the fire, as the Heathens did, but caused them to
pass from themselves, from under their power, and give them to God, yet because
they despised his statutes, polluted his Sabbaths, minded Idols, and kept not
his Statutes, God polluted them in these gifts, declared them and their gifts
to be such.

That I might make them desolate. The word for desolate is (...) from (...) to
make waste and desolate even to astonishment, some render it here, ut delerem,
that I might destroy them, and then the sense runs thus, I have declared what
polluted creatures they are, that I may thence take occasion to destroy them:
but this suits not so well with what follows, That they may know that I am the
Lord. To keep then to the word as its here. God would make them desolate, by
convincing them of the pollution of their offerings, and by afflicting their
consciences, making them to see, that though they had offered their sons, their
first born to him, or to Idols, yet they had gained nothing at his hands
thereby, but were so far from pleasing him, that they had greatly provoked him,
so that they should be amazed at their desolation.

Obs. 1 That if men alienate from God what is due to him, or bring him his due,
and live in the breach of his commands, he will not respect them, but declare
them to be, and deal with them as polluted ones: They alienated their
firstborn to Idols, which God commanded to be consecrated to him, or brought
them to God living in the breach of his statutes, and hereupon he says, I
polluted them in their own gifts. They thought they did me good service, and
should obtain much favor at my hands, that I would be a great benefactor unto
them, but they were deceived; I look upon them and their gifts as defiled,
loathsome things, and pronounced them to be so: Many think their persons,
prayers, and other duties are very acceptable to God, but they will find them
otherwise. Isa. 1.11, 12, 13.14. Mat. 7.22, 23.

Obs. 2 The Lord would not have men to confide in their sacrifices and
services: He declared them polluted, that he might make them desolate, beat
them off from their hopes and confidences they had upon doing these things, we
are apt to rest upon duties, and to promise much to our selves thereupon; but
when God shall tell men they are polluted things they offer, yea, that
themselves are polluted in those offerings, this will shake their vain
foundations and hopes. When God told them, He that killed an Ox, was as if he
flew a man, he that sacrificed a Lamb, at if he cut off a Dogs neck, he
that offered an Oblation, as if he offered swines blood, he that burns
incense, at if he blessed an Idol, Isa. 66.3. did he not undermine their
strong holds, and make them naked? for he shows that all they did was either
lost labor, as the blessing of an Idol; or abomination, as swines blood; or
dangerous, as cutting off a dogs neck; or deadly, as killing of a man: thus
God polluted them in their own gifts and doings, and made them desolate. Thus
Christ dealt with the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 23.13, 14, 15, 16, 23, 25,
27, 29. they look for blessings, not for woes, but they were polluted, what
ever their confidences were, and Christ declares them to be so, and makes them
desolate.

Obs. 3 The Lord stripes men of their righteousness, and beats them out of
their confidences, that they might come to him, bottom upon him, and find him
a sure foundation: God would make them desolate, to the end, that they might
know that he was the Lord, that they might not trust in their sacrifices, but
in him, the God of them, and their sacrifices; in him that could show them
their errors, and pardon them being shown: when men are deprived of their
supposed comforts, convinced of the falsenesse of their confidences, surrounded
with the guilt and evil of their ways, they begin to look where succor is
to be had, to run from the sand to the rock; from themselves, and all that is
their own, unto the living God, and look at his promises to believe them, and
his Statutes to obey them, and so embracing him for the allsufficient good,
abide with, and build upon him alone.

Verse. 27 Therefore Son of man, speak unto the house of Israel, and say unto
them, thus says the Lord God, yet in this your fathers have blasphemed me, in
that they have committed a trespass against me. 28 For when I had brought them
into the Land, for the which I lifted up mine hand, to give it to them, then
they saw every high hill, and all the thick trees, and they offered there their
Sacrifices, and there they presented the provocation of their offering: there
also they made their sweet savor, and powered out there their drink offerings.
29 Then I said unto them, what is the high place whereunto ye go? and the name
thereof is called Bamah unto this day. Having spoken of the proceedings between
God and this People in Egypt, and the wilderness; we are come now to the
passages, between them in the land of Canaan.

For the Lords part he brought them into the Land, ver. 28. which is the only
mercy mentioned, but it was such a mercy as included a multitude of mercies in
it, for it was a land fl^wed with milk and honey, the glory of all lands, as
twice you have it in this Chapter; and something of the goodness of this Land,
you may see Deuteronomy. 8.7, 8, 9. and chapter 6.10, 11. it was the Land that God had
lifted up his hand, and swear to give them, and he brought them into it,
without the help of any other people, even by his own arm, for he destroyed
the seven Nations in it, Act. 13.19. and he gave them the Lands of the Heathen,
and they inherited the labor of the People, Psalm. 105.44. and why did the
Lord bring them into this Land? the next verse shows, that they might observe
his statutes, and keep his Laws. Which thing they did not, for 1 They
blasphemed him, verse. 27. 2 They fell to Idolatry, verse. 28. 3 They Persisted
in it, verse. 29.


Yet in this your Fathers have blasphemed me. (...)
The Hebrew for yet in this, is moreover this, adhuc hoc. Septuagint (...), even
to this, they sinned and dealt ingratefully, not only till they came to
Canaan, but in Canaan: they were not content with what they had done in Egypt,
and the wilderness against me, but they continued in their wickedness, and
added sin to sin, doing worse and worse daily.

(...) from (...)
Or Moreover in this, and so it notes some heinous and great offense, viz. what
he mentions in the end of the verse.

Have blasphemed me. invectus est in aliquem atrocibus verbis, prebris affecit,
contumeli^si in me fuerunt. Call. (...).
The Hebrew word signifies to revile with words, to reproach, and blaspheme. The
Septuagint is (...), they provoked me, they were contumelious, disgracing me.

The French, others, and our Translation have it blaspheme, which is to hurt
the name or fame of any, and is a kind of evil speaking, derogating from the
glory of God; quantum in ipsa est, Gods glory or name in it self is inviolable,
but blasphemy does what it can to violate it.

Aquinas makes it to consist, Blasphemia est attribuere deo quod ei non
convenit: vel detrahere ab eo quod ei convenit.


1 In attributing to God what is not congruous to him, as to say, he is the
author of sin. He sees not, he has forsaken the earth, Ezekiel. 8.12. he is
like unto man, Psalm 50.21.

2 In detracting from him what belongs unto him, as to deny his providence, his
omniscience, his omnipotence; as can he provide a Table in the Wilderness?
Psalm. 78.^9. if he should make windows in heaven could this thing be? 2 King.
7.2. to which may be added.

3 The doing of such things as cause Gods name to be blasphemed, as Romans 2.24.
the name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles through you, as there is
practical Atheism, Tit. 1.16. so practical blasphemy.

In that they have committed a Trespass, against me. The Hebrew is, In their
prevaricating, (...)
a prevarication against me. The doubling of the word intends the
signification, and notes the greatness of their sin, and progress in their
wickedness.

The Vulgar is, seeing that despising they have despised me; Cum sprevissent me
contemnentes. Quandile sesont desbonche contre moy Fr. Transcensio volens and
contra conscientiam ex contemptu, temerita^e and contumacia Kirk. Inveh^nces in
cultus me^ veritatem.
The word (...) Notes such prevarication, and sinning, as has the will in it:
hence Piscator renders the words here, Prevaricati sunt contra me perfidissime,
they have perfidiously sinned against me. They sinned not ignorantly, or of
common infirmity, but with an high hand. Calvin says it was Del^berata
insolentia, dum ita improbe in deum surrexerunt, ac si conspuerent in ejus
faciem. Jun. says, their sin was speaking against the truth of Gods worship,
for when People fall to false worship, they will disparage, if not wholly
despise the worship they had before; So then here we may understand, both
their speaking against the true worship of God, and practicing contrary
thereunto.

Obs. Wilful sinning is a Reproaching, a blaspheming of God, and provokes him
greatly. In this your Fathers have blasphemed me, in that they have committed
a trespass* against me, they have spoken against my worship, and run out to
other ways which I forbad them, other sins they have committed which I could
have winked at, but when they sin wilfully, despising me, my Laws, my
worship, they reproach, blaspheme, provoke me so, that they shall hear of it.
Son of man go, and speak to the house of Israel, go and tell them how they have
dealt with me, and how I take it. Such sins did deserve death, Number. 15.30, 31.
The soul that does ought presumptuously, whether he be born in the Land, or a
stranger, the same reproacheth the Lord. (...) its the same word is here for
Blasphemed, and may as well be rendered so as reproacheth (for he that
reproacheth the Lord blasphemes him, and he that blasphemes him, reproacheth
him, they are joined together, 2 King. 19.22.) and what then? That Soul shall
be cut off from among his people, because he has despised the word of the
Lord, and has broken his Commandment, that soul shall utterly be cut off.
There was no mercy for those sinned in that manner, Heb. 10.26, 28. many I fear
commit such trespasses in these days, by speaking against Providence,
Ordinances, Scriptures, Angels, Christ, God himself, and so sin away mercy and
their own souls at once. David prayed that God would keep him back from
presumptuous sins, Psalm. 19.13. and we had need do it, for there is that in
our natures which carries us on strongly toward them, as much as they did him;
remember what Solomon says, Prove. 28. Happy is the man that fears always,
but he that hardens his heart, that presumes, that is wilful, pertinacious,
shall fall into mischief; into mischievous sins, into mischievous judgments,
chap. 13.13. Who so despises the word shall be destroyed, but he that
fears the Commandment shall be rewarded; he that sleights the word and
ways of God, destruction is his portion, but he that fears to violate the
command of God, shall be rewarded, (...) he shall have peace, safety, a man
by despising or fearing the word, and command of God, does neither hurt the one
nor advantage the other, but he may, he does hurt or advantage himself* and
that greatly.

28 Then they saw every high Hill, etc. In this verse, you have the Idolatry
they fell into, when they came into the Land of Canaan, with the degrees
thereof.

First, Their Leaving of God, and looking unto the Hills, Iis locis and
arboribus quae prae caeteris erant insignes aliquid divinitatis in esse
purabant Gentes. Ideo ibi idolis sacrificabant Mariana.
yea, every high hill, and all the thick trees, they gave liberty to their eyes
to spy out places, suitable to their Idolatrous thoughts, on hills, and places
beset with thick trees the Heathens worshipped, and their Hearts and eyes were
toward such places.

2 Their making Altars, and sacrificing there, they offered there their
Sacrifices, etc. they should not have sacrificed any where, but in the place
God appointed, which was first the Tabernacle, afterward the Temple: but they
spied out hills, groves, thickets, set up Altars, and sacrificed on them, those
offerings which were peculiar unto God.

3 Their Continuance and expencefulnesse therein, they offered Sacrifices, They
poured out there their drink offerings.

4 Their Content and delight they took therein, there also they made their
sweet savor.

The provocation of their Offering. The Hebrew is, The indignation and anger of
their Corban, (...) Korban omne donum significat quod ad sacros usus offertur,
de pecoribus, frugibus aliisque rebus. Mincha Non tam late patet sed de
frugibus terrae tantum in. elligitur.
that is, their approaching gift, or offering. Jun. has it, irritamentum
oblationis suae, the irritation of their oblation: Piscat. Oblationes
irritantes, provoking oblations, because by them they did provoke God to anger,
to judgments.

There is a figure in these words, called Hyppalage, which is such a
transposing of words, as that is said of one, which should be said of the
other, as here, provocation of offerings, for Offerings provoking.

There also they made their sweet savor. The Original for sweet savor is,
Reach nichochehem, The Odor of their rests, Odores grotos suos, their
acceptable odours, when they had offered these, they thought the Lord smelt a
sweet savor, was well pleased with them, and so rested in them, which phansied
rest was pleasing to them, though it lasted not, neither had reality in it, for
their incense or sweet savor, was a provocation to God.

Obs. 1 That what the Lord promises he makes good, how difficult, or
impossible soever it seems to man: The Lord had promised them Canaan, and how
should they come to it? they were bondmen in Egypt, there is a red Sea, a vast
wilderness between Egypt and Canaan, and beside, Canaan had strong men in it,
sons of Anack, Cities walled and great, several Kings to oppose and keep them
out, but notwithstanding all these difficulties, God having promised to bring
them in, he did it, when I had brought them into the Land, for the which I
lifted up my hand to give it to them; His hand that was lift up to confirm
them, it should be done, was let out for the doing thereof, that hand could
take away all doubts, could also take away all difficulties. There is nothing
too hard for the Lord, he will work, and who shall, who can let it, Isa.
43.13. As he is gracious to Promise, so faithful and able to perform, and
does in due time make good whatever he has promised, though it seem
impossible: he said, a Virgin should bring forth, Isa. 7.14. and was it not
made good? Mat. 1.18. that Abraham who was aged should have a Child; and his
seed be as the stars of Heaven, and were not both made good? Genesis 21.2.
Exodus 12.37. Numb. 11.21. not one word failed of all that God promised Moses, 1
King. 8.56. this should make us believe the promises of God, what ever flesh
and blood objects.

Obs. 2 Men's habitations are given and assigned unto them of the Lord, I
brought them into the Land, I gave it them. If men be removed from place to
place, seated here or there, the hand of the Lord is in it, if they have
commodious, pleasant gainful habitations, if they dwell safely under vines, and
fig trees, as it is 1 King 4.25. its the Lords doing, his providence disposed
it so, and we should be thankful in and for our habitations, and mind the
heavenly Canaan, and those mansions mentioned, Joh. 14.2. prepared for those do
believe, and glorify God, out of which, when once we are possessed of them, we
shall never be removed.

Obs. 3 Circumstances of time and place do aggravate men's sins, and make them
heinous. When I had brought them into the Land, then they saw every high hill,
there they offered sacrifices, there they presented the provocation of their
offerings, there they made their sweet savor, there they poured out their
drink offerings, here be four there is, every one aggravating and accenting
their sins. This was ingratitude with a witness, that the Lord should bring
them into such a land as flowed with milk and honey, and they should bestow the
milk and honey upon Idols, into such a land as was the glory of all lands, and
they should defile it, and make it abominable, as it is, Jer. 2.7. I brought
you into a plentiful Country, to eat the fruit thereof, and the goodness
thereof, but when ye entered ye defiled my Land, and made mine heritage an
abomination, This, this, made their sin exceeding sinful, and the Lord to set
the emphasis upon it. There, in Canaan, the Land I espied out for them, they
sinned; there, in Canaan, where I fulfilled my promise, made to their Fathers
and them, they sinned, There, in Canaan, out of which I drove mighty Nations
for their sakes, they sinned. There, in Canaan, the Land I chose to dwell in,
they set up Altars, and diverted my Sacrifices, Offerings, and sweet savours
unto them. There, where I looked they should have become an holy people unto
me, they became like the Nations, and worse than the Nations round about them.

Sinning after great mercies bestowed, and where they were bestowed, makes
sin sinful above measure.

Obs. 4 When men go out from Gods truths, Ordinances, and ways of worship,
they are restless, and run from opinion to opinion, and from one way to
another: they saw every high hill, and all the thick trees, they ran from hill
to hill, from tree to tree, and were not long satisfied any where, when they
had found an hill pleased them, set up an Altar there, and sacrificed a while,
they grow to dislike of that place, and that Altar, then they must to another
hill, have another Altar, which had its time, and then that was left; and to
the thick trees they go, and there they fall in with the worshippers, and ways
there in practice, and so from Altar to Altar, from place to place, and not
satisfied, Ezekiel. 16.29. and its just with God, that those men who go out from
him, and off from the ways and forms of worship he has prescribed (depriving
him of his legislativenesse therein) should be given up unto restlessenesse of
Spirit. This is abundantly verified among the Papists, where they run from
Saint to Saint, from Altar to Altar, and from one order of Friars and Jesuits
to another; yea, this has been signally fulfilled amongst us, in our days;
wherein many having left and cast off Gods ways and worship, have run into
variety of opinions and practices; they have seen every hill, every tree, every
Altar, every way; and may it not be said as of the unclean spirits in the
Gospel, they have walked in dry places, sought rest and found none? Men's ways,
opinions, intentions, are dry things, and have no rest in them. Only Gods
ways and Ordinances have virtue in them, to moisten, quicken, comfort, and
satisfy us, Mic. 2.7. Do not my words do good to him that walks uprightly?
what ever the sickly phansies of men are, Gods words and ways are good, and
they only do good to the sons of men that walk uprightly, Prove. 10.29. The
way of the Lord is strength to the upright, not to those turn aside to the
whimsies, phansies, and wills of men.

Obs. 5 That may be offensive and hateful to God, which men judge to be
grateful and acceptable. They presented the provocation of their offerings, or
provoking offerings; whom did they provoke? even the Lord, whom they concluded
they greatly pleased; for it follows, there they made also their sweet savor;
They made account their sweet savours would be sweet in the nostrils of God,
but they were stinking, and loathsome, because not offered where they should
have been offered, Suffitum quidebuerat esse benae fragrantiae reddiderint
saetidum suis corruptelis. Calv.
nor as God had appointed, nor came from hearts believing and obedient. They
were at great pains and charges in their sacrifices, offerings, sweet savours,
and what was the issue of it? instead of pleasing, they provoked God. Amos
5.21, 22. I hate, I despise your feast days, and I will not smell in your
solemn assemblies, though you offer met burnt offerings, and your meat
offerings, I will not accept them, neither will I regard the peace offerings of
your fat beasts. 24 Let judgment run down as waters, and righteousness as a
mighty stream; they thought that notwithstanding all their injustice, that
their sacrifices and services should be accepted, but God was so far from it,
he despised and hated them; the like you have in Jer. 6.20. let us take heed
least we provoke God by our sacrifices, while we think we please him. If
they be not from gracious hearts, tendered up in faith, according to rule, and
for his glory, he will say as it is, Isa. 57.6. should I receive comfort in
these?

29 Then I said unto them, What is the high place whereunto ye go? Here the
Lord does reprove them for, and seek to reclaim them from their Idolatry; you
know that place I have chosen where my Tabernacle is, the Altar I have
appointed for sacrifices: what is the high place whither ye go? Signific^t
excelsum alta vel fanum in nemore erectum, Pradus. Aedificium quod cunque a
terra exaltatum aut in loco excellentiori positum ut (...). Shindl. Some search
(...) from (...) or (...), and so make the lews guilty of bringing in this name
and su, erticus practice into the Jewish worship from the Heathens.
what is it for? what do you there? why transgress you my statutes, and keep
not to them? To this effect and purpose the Lord spoke by his Prophets unto
them.

The word for High place, is, (...) that high, or the high place. Some think it
an high Altar, or a Chapel built in a wood, or on an high hill. It was the
practice of the Gentiles, upon hills, and under green trees, to build Altars
with steps, or ascensions to go up by, which the Jews imitated contrary to
command, for God had bid them to make an Altar of earth unto him, and where he
should appoint and if of stone, it must not be of hewn stone, neither might
his Altar have any steps, Exodus 20.24, 25, 26. Neither was the Altar of God
ever called Bama, an high place, but Mizbeach, the Sacrificatory, or the place
of slaying and sacrificing. But the Jews falling to Heathenish Customs, and
practices, learned their names, and imposed them upon their Altars, called them
Bamaes or Bamoths. When God therefore says, What is the high place, or Bama,
he does reprove and upbraid them for their Idolatry; what madness is this in
you, that you have forsaken the Temple and Altar of God, to go to the Bamaes,
the high places, hills and trees of Heathens, that you prefer their ways before
mine? what is it you find there, that you cannot keep your habitations, and
content your selves with what I have appointed you. Are the gods of the
Nations, and their high places, better than the God of Israel and his Altar?

And the Name thereof is called Bamah unto this day. They desisted not from
that Idolatrous name and practice they had taken up, but persisted therein,
they had called those places Bamah, and would call them so still, they were
tenacious of their superstitious opinions, names and ways, The high places
remained till the days of Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 134.3.

Obs. 1 Such is the perverseness of men's natures and spirits, that they are
not context with what God in his infinite wisdom and goodness has prescribed
them in point of worship; what is the high place whereunto ye go? am not I
your God? have not I given you an Altar? appointed Sacrifices, and told you
where and how you must sacrifice? have not I accepted your Sacrifices, when
brought according to my direction? why do you go out from me, and are not
content with what is mine? This is the evil of man's nature, that it often rejects
what is divine, and chooses what is humane, it leaves the Creator's, and chooses
the Creatur's. Jer. 2.13. my people have committed two great evils, they have
forsaken me the fountain of living waters, and hewed them out Cisterns, broken
Cisterns that can hold no water.

Obs. 2 That Superstitious names, ways, and practices once taken up, are not
easily laid down again: They had an high place called Bamah, and that high
place they would go unto, and keep that name, though the Lord had often reproved
them for it, and not only that, but other high places also: when the Altar of
Damascus, the Image of Jealousy, and Tammuz, were once admitted amongst them,
they were not suddenly or easily removed again. Ephraim having taken up the
names of Baalim, would not lay them aside, till God took them out of her mouth,
Hos. 2.17. Are there not names amongst us, kept to this day, which sprung from
gross Idolatry? Vorstegan tells you, that Sunday was so called from the Idol of
the Sun, unto whose adoration it was dedicated; so Monday from the Idol of
the Moon, Tuesday from the Idol Tuisco, Wednesday from the Idol Woden, Thursday
from the Idol Thor, Friday from the Idol Friga, or Frea; and Saturday from the
Idol Scater, not Saturn. These were Saxon Idols, and they who gave the days
their names, and dedicated them unto such Idols, sinned greatly; and its not
excusable that we keep their memory still alive, calling the days by such
names, which are dishonorable to God and Scripture. The Rhemists dis-allow
these names of the days, they say Sunday is an Heathenish calling, as all
other of the week days be, some imposed after the names of Planets, as in the
Romans time; some by the name of certain Idols that the Saxons did worship, and
to which they dedicated their days before they were Christians, which names
the Church used not.

Verse. 30 Wherefore say unto the house of Israel, thus says the Lord God. Are
ye polluted after the manner of your Fathers, and commit ye whoredom after
their abominations? 31 For when ye offer your gifts, when ye make your Sons
to pass through the fire, ye pollute your selves with all your Idols, even
unto this day: and shall I be enquired of by you, O House of Israel? As I live
says the Lord God I will not be inquired of by you. 32 And that which comes
into your mind, shall not be at all, that ye say, we will be as the Heathen,
as the families of the Countries to serve wood and stone. Here you have besides
the Prophets Commission in the beginning of the 30. ver.

1 An imputation of their wretched practices unto them, they followed the steps
of their Fathers, they became Idolatrous like them, offering their gifts to
Idols, they caused their children to pass through the fire, they persisted in
their wickedness.

2 Gods resolution and Oath not to have to do with them, shall I be inquired of
by you? etc. v. 31.

3 His frustration of their counsels and designs. Verse. 32. That which
comes, etc,

Are ye polluted after the manner of your fathers? The Elders of Israel that
were in Babylon came to the Prophet to inquire of the Lord, touching the
affairs of Jerusalem. The Lord commands the Prophet to ask them this question.
Are ye polluted after the manner of your Fathers? intimating that they were,
and therefore, their coming to the Prophet was but a pretense, and should
speed accordingly.

OEcolampad. reads the words thus, do ye not pollute your selves in the way of
your Fathers? An non in via patrum vestrorum vosmet polluitis. An non in via
patrum vestrorum polluti estis. Vos majorum vestrorum moribus polluti.
Vatablus, are ye not polluted in the way of your Fathers? Castalio, has it
without an interrogation, you are polluted with the manners of your Ancestors;
but its best with the interrogation, for interrogationes vehementer affirmant.
Interrogations in Scripture, sometimes serve for admiration, as Luke 1.34. How
shall this be, seeing I know not man? sometimes for demonstration, Psalm. 15.1.
Lord who shall abide in thy Tabernacle, who shall dwell in thy holy hill?
sometimes they are arguments of Doubting, as Luke 1.18. says Zachary, whereby
shall I know this? for I am an Old man, and my wife well stricken in years?
Sometimes they note indignation, as Exodus 10.3. How long will thou refuse to
humble thy self before me? let my people go that they may serve me. Sometimes
they hold out accusation, and exprobration, as Mal. 3.14. what profit is it
that we have kept his Ordinances, and that we have walked mournfully, before
the Lord of Hosts? here the interrogation notes, both indignation and
expr^bration, Are ye polluted after the manner of your Fathers? do ye live in
their sins, and come to inquire of the Prophet, and of me by the Prophet? I am
angry and cannot endure such vile pretenses, and deep dissimulation.

And Commit ye whoredom after their Abominations? By Whoredom is meant
idolatrizing, and wherein Idolatry resembles whoredom, has formerly been
hinted unto you, Chap. 6. v. 9. its a violating the Covenant, between God and
his People, which is called marriage, Jer. 3.14. Hos. 2.2. it is to go out from
the true God to other gods, Deuteronomy. 31.16. it is to Sacrifice to Devils, Levit.
17.7. to mind wizzards, chapter 20.6. to seek after our own hearts, eyes, and
inventions, Numb. 15.39. Psa. 106.39.

31 When ye offer your gifts. The Hebrew is, in elevating your gifts; by gifts
in the 26 v. were understood their firstborn, but here gifts and firstborn
are distinct. When you offer your gifts, when you make your sons pass through
the fire.

These Gifts were those other Oblations appointed in the Law, or what ever they
voluntarily bestowed upon their Idols, as in Ezekiel 16.18, 19.

When ye make your Sons to pass through the fire. Of these words something
has been said before in the 16. Chap. 20, 21. verses. I shall add a little.

The Heathens were wont in times of public Calamity, Apud veteres in more,
positum erat, ut in summis reipublicae calamitatibus, penes quos aut civitatis,
aut gentis imperium esset, ii liberorum carissimi ultoribus daemonibus
jugulati, sanguinum quasi pretio publicum exitium pestemque redinaerent, qui
vero cum ad sacrificium devovebantur, eos mysticis quibusdam ceremoniis
adhibitis jugulabant. Eusebius. de preparat. Evang. l. 1* Lactant. l 1. c, 21.
to sacrifice their Children, says Eusebius. And Lactantius tells of Pescennius
Fertus, saying, that the Carthaginians did Sacrifice men to Saturn, and being
overcome by Agathoeles King of the Sicilians, thinking their God was angry with
them, they offered two hundred Noble men's Sons to pacifye him. Sometimes they
killed them, sometimes they drowned them, and sometimes they burnt them.

This practice of sacrificing their children, to pacify their provoked gods,
some affirm to be taken up from Abraham's sacrificing of his Son, with which God
was so well pleased, that he gave forth a large Eulogy of him for it. But its
not probable that it proceeded thence, for the Lord suffered not Abraham to do
it, and prohibited by a severe law the doing of such a thing, viz. the
sacrificing of their children to Idols, Lev. 20.2. It was more likely from the
Devil in their Oracles, for Plutarch tells of the Lacedaemonians, who being
greatly afflicted with the Plague, In paralellis. c. 66. Cited by Peter Mart.
upon the Kings.
had an Answer from the Oracle of Apollo, that the Plague should cease, if they
sacrificed a Virgin chosen out of the chief of the Nobility. Doubtless it was
Satan put this into the Hearts of men, for he was a murderer from the
beginning, and delights much in shedding of man's blood, especially in honor
to himself, Psalm. 106.37. for such sacrifices were to him and his. Tertul. in
Scorpiaco.
Some sacrificed men to Diana; some to Mercury; some to Saturn, whom diverse
think and affirm to be Molech, the Idol the Jews sacrificed their Children
unto. Vide Petrum Martyr in 2 King 3. Ainsworth in Lev. 18.21.
They admitted the Heathenish Idol, and the Heathenish practice, 2 King. 16.3.
Ahaz made his Sons to pass through the fire, according to the abominations of
the Heathen, and it was to Molech, that he, and others, made their Children
pass through the fire unto, chapter 23.10. This Molech was a great brazen Idol,
having a calves head, and hands to receive whatever was offered, it being
hollow, had seven distinct cavities in it. The 1 For those offered fine flower.
2 For those offered Turtles. 3 For those offered A Sheep. 4 For those offered A
Ram. 5 For those offered A Calf. 6 For those offered An Ox. 7 For those
offered Their Children.


For the Children offered, It is conceived they were burnt alive in that hollow
place they were put into, or upon, or else they were put into the Arms of the
Idol, and roasted to death in them; at the doing whereof, they made hideous
noises with Kettles or Drums, that the screechings and cries of the Children
might not be heard. Tam barbaros, tam immanes fuisse homines, ut particidium
suum, id est tetrum and execrabile humano generi facimus sacrificium vocarent:
quum teneras atque innocents animas quae maxim est aetas parentibus dulcior,
sine ullo respectu pietatis extinguerent, immanitatemque omnium bestiarum, quae
tamen faetus suos amant, feritate fuperarent. O dementiam insanabilem, quid
illis isti dii amplius facere possent si essent iratissimi quam faciunt
propitii? quun^ suos cultores patricidiis inquinant, orbitatibus mactant,
humanis sensibus spoliant? Lactantius de falsa religio. l. 1.


And shall I be enquired of by you O house of Israel? etc. These words you had
in the 3. v. they need not now to be opened, only there is Elders of Israel,
and here its O house of Israel.

Obs. 1 The ways of our forefathers are not always to be trodden in and
followed: are ye polluted after the manner of your fathers? and commit ye
whoredom after their abominations? Here the Lord is angry with them, accuses
and upbraids them for following their fathers. Its not always unlawful so to
do. Josiah walked in all the ways of David his Father, and turned not aside to
the right hand or to the left, 2 King. 22.2. so Hezekiah did according to all
that David his Father did, chap. 18.3. men that are good, and walk in the ways
of God they may be followed. Solomon commends them that walk in the way of
Good men, and keep the paths of the righteous, Prove. 2.20. but when men forsake
the ways of truth, mercy, and righteousness, fall to false worship, unjust,
and unwarrantable practices, Children ought not to tread in their fathers
steps, if they do, they will pollute themselves, and provoke God against them,
as these did here: forefathers are not to be followed in doctrine, worship, or
manners, further than they follow the word and Christ. Paul that great Apostle
would not have any to follow him, further than he followed Christ, 1
Corinthans 11.1. The Thessalonians followed Paul, Sylvanus, Timothy, but they
followed the Lord also, and these men no otherwise than they followed him; if
men will follow their fathers, they must see to it, that they were sound in the
Faith, sound in their worship, and sound in their lives; for the exhortation
is, Joh. 3. Ep. v. 11. To follow not that which is evil, but that which is
good. He that does good, is of God, he that does evil has not seen God, and
Heb. 6.12. Be followers of them who through faith and patience inherit the
promises.

Obs. 2 That Children to uphold the customs and practices of their fathers,
will part with things dear, and do unnaturally; especially if pretense of
religion come in. The fathers of these in Babylon, they were Idolaters, they
sacrificed their children to Idols, under pretense of the more acceptance, and
to uphold such customs and doing of their Fathers; the children part with
their dear and tender infants, do impious, unjust, and inhumane things, cause
their little ones to pass through the fire to be burnt to ashes, in honor of
their fained and false Deities. Superstition and Idolatry make men unnatural.
Beasts, will preserve their young, and venture their lives to save their little
ones; Tantum religio potuit suadere malorum Quae peper it saepe scelerosa atque
impia facta. Nonne satius est pecudum more vivere, quam deos tam impios, tam
prophanos tam sanguinarios colere. Lact.
when men do willingly destroy theirs under pretense of religion; and put them
to such Cruel tortures. The Papists do uphold the sinful ways of their
forefathers at dear rates, and are unnatural in whipping of themselves. If
these, and Jews did part with dear things to maintain the wicked ways of their
fathers, and do unnaturally, unjustly, to keep them up, what condemnation will
it be to us, if we will not part with things needful, do things Christian,
and just to uphold true Religion, and uphold the lawful and godly practices of
our forefathers? If they would part with their children and blood for
maintenance of Idolatry, what should we think too dear for maintenance of the
Gospel: people will part with dear things to maintain their opinions, even
their modesty to uphold a conceit of perfection.

Obs. 3. Hypocrisy so displeases God that he will have nothing to do with
Hypocrites: These Elders, this house of Israel they polluted themselves in
their Fathers sins, they took up ways of false worship, and lived in the
same to the day they came to inquire, and what says God, shall I be enquired
of by you, O house of Israel? you dissemble, act the Hypocrites part, and you
provoke me, not only to refuse to hear you, but to swear against you, As I
live I will not be enquired of by you; you come not in sincerity, but in
subtlety, you pretend to walk in my ways, but you intend to follow your
fathers ways, you make as if you would worship me, but you mean to worship
Idols; Ah you old Hypocrites, painted sepulchers, why come ye to me? I will
not hear, answer, have to do with you. Hypocrites seem to do that they do not,
2 King. 17.33. they feared the Lord, and served their own Gods, that is, they
seemed to fear him, but did not, for v. 34. its said; They fear not the Lord.
Hypocrites would join God and their own ways, or fathers ways together, but
it will not take with him, Mat. 6.24. No man can serve two Masters. The great
Master of truth said this; and when men lean to their Fathers ways, love them
and Idols, they despise God and hate his ways. There is no truth in them, no
Methaphysical Truth, their notions agree not with the mind of God; no Physical
truth, there is no reality in their words or actions; No Moral Truth, their
lives agree not with their professions. John Hus had the Devil pictured upon
his Clothes, but he had Christ within; Hypocrites have the picture of Christ
without, but the Devil within. Satan has their hearts, or the greatest part of
them, Hos. 10.2. Their heart is divided: now shall they be found faulty, he
shall break down their Altars: God will not accept them, nor their Sacrifices,
he will appear against them and their doings.

Labor therefore to be sincere, for the upright are his delight. Those regard
iniquity in their hearts, who ever they be, what every they inquire and seek
for at the hands of God, God will not hear them, but discover them, and give
them the reward of Hypocrites.

32 And that which comes into your mind, shall not be at all. The Hebrew
runs thus, That which ascends upon the Spirit, by being shall not be; That
is, your thoughts, purposes, Counsels, determinations, which are risen up in
your heads, and hearts, and take impression there, have a being in them, they
shall lose their being and come to nothing, you look upon them as having much
essence in them, but they shall all vanish. Vulg. is, Neque cogitatio mentis
vestrae fiet, the thought of the mind shall not be effected.

That ye say we will be as the Heathen. Here the thought of their heart is made
known. These Elders of Israel considering the condition they were in, thought
it best to cast off the God of Israel, and his worship, and to fall to the Gods
of the Nations, and their worship, to cease from their Judaisme, and to turn to
Gentilisme. They thought the Gods of the Heathen dealt better with them, than
the God of the Jews did with them. Or if their God were the God of all Nations,
yet he showed more kindness to them, serving wood and stone, than he did to
the Jewish People, who were tied up by strict Laws; burdened with a multitude
of Sacrifices and Ceremonies, now spoiled, Captives, held under hard bondage,
in danger of being cut off, for Zedekiahs revolt and perfidiousnesse; whereas
the Babylonians and Provinces belonged to them did prosper, were in safety and
peace; and let the best be made of it, they knew that they must abide many
years under the Babylonish yoke, therefore thought it the wisest course to
become like the Heathens, to conform to their worship and manners, whereby they
should be looked upon as of them, and not of Abraham; As men of Babylon, not of
Sion; As Gentiles not Israelites; and so provide for their safety, peace, and
Prosperity.

As the Families of the Country. They made account to cast off the worship of
the God of Israel, which exposed them to reproach, hatred, and hard sufferings,
and to give up themselves fully to their Gods, their worship, and observance of
their Rites; they intended to incorporate and become one with the Babylonish
race and brood, that so they might have a Babylonish happiness, and be free
from the strokes of the God of Israel, under whom they suffered so much.

To serve wood and stone. That is, Gods or Idols made of wood and stone. See
Deuteronomy. 29.7. chap. 4.28. There ye shall serve Gods, the work of men's hands, wood
and stone.

Obs. 1 How cunningly soever Hypocrites do carry their lewd and wicked
designs, yet they are known to God, and he will discover them: These Elders
of Israel were resolved to change their Religion, to be like the Heathen, and
color it over with coming to the Prophet, to inquire how things would proceed
with them at Jerusalem; what Counsel he would give unto themselves, they would
be ready to do it, whereas they never intended it. This the Lord saw, this he
discovers, and uncases these dissembling Hypocrites. Herod pretended he would
go and worship Christ, but his intent was to murder him, Matthew 2.8, 13. which
God discovered.

Obs. 2 There be risings, thoughts in men's hearts which are not of God; what
they had in their heads or hearts, God owned not. Many in these days think,
every motion they have in their hearts, minds, whatever rises up there, is of
God, and his Spirit, and therefore must be obeyed; hence it comes to pass that
darkness is called light, and all vices are practiced under the Notion of
virtue; but corruptions, flesh, old man, Satan, have their operations in the
hearts of the wicked always, and too often in the Godly. Non omnis impulsus and
enthusiasmus, continuo bonus est. Aecolam.
The Earth brings forth weeds of it self, and not corn, unless it be sown.

Obs. 3 Carnal, Politic, men affect Religion as it serves their own interest.
These Elders considering what Zedekiah and their Brethren had done at
Jerusalem, revolted from Nebuchadnezzar; they feared hard measure now would
befall them for their Jewish religion, and they resolved not to venture
liberty, limbs, or life for that Religion, which had been a bondage, and
burdensome unto them, and now might hazard all. They would now revolt from God
and truth, and be as the Heathen, who prospered, were in peace and safety.
Politicians think it weakness^, foolishness, to suffer for Religion. They can
change it at pleasure, and fall in with that has most pomp and applause in
the world. Upon this account many have fallen from Protestantisme to Popery,
and from Christianity to Turcisme. To save their skins they have parted with
their Religions. Many men make use of Religion as Mariners of the winds, merely
to serve their own ends; If Religion once cross them, they can cast it off,
and fall in with those ways of worship do suit their humors and further their
designs. Like children that having been held in by their Parents, bestow
themselves upon any to obtain their own ends. These Elders saw their Law and
worship were differing from the religion of the state where they were, and so
exposed them to many inconveniences and dangers, they would therefore be of
the state Religion, outwardly at least, complying with that, serving wood and
stone.

Obs. 4 God sometimes disappoints the designs and expectations of men, who
intend, and resolve to forsake him, and provide for themselves by sinful and
Idolatrous ways: That which comes into your mind shall not be at all: You
would be as the Heathens, but it shall not be. I will not only deny your
desires, but dash your designs; you seek Heathens favor, and shall meet with
Heavens frowns, and miss of your aims; you would be Babylonians, have the
protection and blessing of Babylonish Gods, but my thoughts are cross to yours,
that is in my mind shall stand, not what is in yours; that happiness you hope
for in the ways and worship of Babylonians you shall not find. Men think by
going out to the world, by conforming to base, vile superstition, and
Idolatrous practices, to get much, but God in his infinite wisdom, and
justice, disappoints them, as Demas and Judas.

Verse. 33 As I live says the Lord God, surely with a mighty hand, and with a
stretched out arm, and with fury poured out, will I rule over you. Having
showed the ingratitude and untoward carriage of this People in Egypt, in the
Wilderness, in Canaan, and their resolution to cast off God in Babylon; here
begins the fourth general part of the chapter, viz. a denunciation of judgment
for their Hypocrisy and other sins, together with promises of mercy extending
to the 45. verse. In the ver. you have.

1 God asserting his authority and power over this people who thought to cast
him off, I will rule over you.

2 The manner of his ruling over them, which is 1 With Power. 2 With Fury.


3 The ratification of both, and that is by oath, As I live says the Lord.

Touching this Oath of God much has been spoken already, in this and former
chapters.

With a mighty hand. The Hebrew is Bejad chazakah, in, or with a strong hand,
with a rigid hand, says Castalio. By mighty hand here, is not simply meant
Gods power, but his power in punishing, so the plagues of Egypt were Gods
strong and mighty hand. God would punish them for their dealings, and to that
purpose, it should be visibly and openly, and therefore it follows.

With a stretched out arm. Sometimes the stretching out of Gods arm, notes
powerful and visible deliverance, Psalm. 136.12. sometimes powerful and visible
punishment, as here. In the inflicting of punishments, men stretch out their
hands and arms, which here, after the manner of men is given to God.

With fury poured out. Of dealing in Fury, accomplishing fury, and pouring out
fury. See before chap. 8.18.5.13.9.8.

Will I rule over you. Ruling imports sovereignty, authority, and power over
others. Here the Genus by a Senecdoche is put for the species; the whole work
of ruling, for punishing; and the sum of the words is this, you think by
withdrawing from me and my worship, and by Babylonizing to secure your selves,
to escape danger and all punishment; but know assuredly, you are my subjects, I
will not suffer you so to revolt from me, I will put forth mine hand, and mine
arm, my fury, punishing you for your rebellions, and idolatries, so, that will
you, nill you, me shall you acknowledge to be your Lord and Sovereign.

Obs. 1 Its a vain thing to think of getting from under the dominion of God,
and impossible to accomplish, these Elders thought. To withdraw from under the
Laws and government of the God of Israel, and put themselves under the
Babylonish Gods, and Babylonian government; but what says God? I will rule
over you, take what course you please; trans, orm your selves into Heathenish
manners, disperse your selves into by-corners, villages, Towns, Cities; plant
your selves in what Province soever, of the King of Babylons, use what policy
you can to cast off my yoke, yet I will rule over you, for you cannot go from
my presence, nor from my power. In the second Psalm the Great ones of the
earth, thought to exempt themselves from the government of God and Christ. Let
us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us, but they were
laughed to scorn and vexed for it, v. 3, 4, 5.

Obs. 2 The untoward carriage of Gods people, causes him to deal more sharply
with them. Rebelliousnesse in them produces rigidnesse in him; Their treachery
bred severity, With a mighty hand and fury poured out, will I rule over you.
They thought to run from under him, and he held a stricter hand over them; They
would not willingly obey as Sons, he made them obey as servants. When
Servants run from their Masters, they bestir them, fetch them back with
power, punish them severely for their fugitivenesse, and hold them harder to it
than ever, so did the Lord by these, and made them know that he ruled in
Babylon, as well as in Sion, and turned his golden Scepter into an Iron rod,
and put a yoke of Iron upon them. This is that the Lord told them in Moses
days, that if they walked contrary to him, he would walk contrary unto them,
and punish them seven times more; that is, rule over them with greater
severity, Levit. 26. he would make his little finger heavier than his loins
had been before.

Obs. 3 God will punish those that shake off his worship to follow false ways,
with visible and irresistible punishments. These Elders were upon terms of
Apostatizing from the God of Israel, about to leave his Tents, and to betake
themselves to the Babylonish Temples; therefore the Lord swears he will rule
over them with a stretched out arm (he would visibly punish them) and with
Fury poured out; they should no more be able to withstand it, than a man can a
great rain or flood. When subjects are upon rebelling, and would fall in with
some other, this kindles his fury, causes him to punish them openly and
irresistibly, Apostasy is a provoking sin. Its a reproach to God his truths,
and ordinances. Its a violating of all former Promises, and engagements unto
God; its high ingratitude and rebellion against God; its a great scandal unto
all the godly, especially the weak; it incourages, hardens, and justifies the
wicked, it ruins souls, it gratifies Satan, and therefore exposes men to
visible and unavoidable judgments. You know how God met with Julian and other
Apostates since his time; that men should cast off God is wonder to heaven and
earth, Jer. 2.12, 13. Be astonished O ye heavens at this, my people have
forsaken me; and because they did so, Lions roared upon them, and laid them
waste, v. 15. Egyptians took the crown from their head, v. 16, 17. It bred
astonishment in Paul, that the Galatians were so soon removed from him, that
called them into the grace of Christ, to another Gospel, Gal. 1.6. they had
Apostatizing Spirits, minding another Gospel, another Christ, another way to
salvation than he delivered to them; And may it not be matter of astonishment
to us, that many are so shaken, that they have cast off our God, our Christ,
our Gospel, our Ordinances, and have found out another Gospel, another Christ,
and another way to salvation than ever; But it is to be feared some remarkable
and unavoidable judgments are near unto them. God has no pleasure in those
draw back, Heb. 10.38. They have cast off the thing that is good, the enemy
shall pursue them, Hos. 8.3. These Elders have purposed to become like the
Heathen, and God swear presently to punish them openly and irresistibly; what
will he then do to those have actually withdrawn from him, and his ways,
surely his wrath will smoke against them. Let us take heed in these declining
times of falling away from God and his ways; Beware of Carnal policy, which
was the thing here put these Elders upon it. Beware of Carnal Relations and
unmortified lusts, which made Spira and Spalato revolt so foulely; beware of
Promotion and greatness, which made H. the fourth of France to turn Papist;
beware of false Teachers, corrupt opinions, which have made many among us to go
so far from God and his ways. Keep innocence, count all the glory and
greatness of the world as nothing: prize truth and the ways of God highly,
cleave fully to Christ, live by faith, prove all things, and hold fast what is
good, so shall there never be an evil heart in you of unbeleef, to depart from
the living God.

Verse. 34 And I will bring you out from the people, and will gather you out of
the Countries wherein ye are scattered, with a mighty hand, and with a
stretched out arm, and with fury poured out. These words do hold out no good
unto them, but declare that what they hoped to be a mercy, should prove a
judgment. They thought that if they were scattered up and down, among the
Babylonians, and quitted the Jewish worship, they should be safe, and live as
happily as Babylonians; but God would not loose his right and privilege, he
would rule over them, and here he shows the manner of it again, and that more
fully, I will bring you out, etc.

I will bring you out from the people. Diverse Expositors, by People or
Nations, understand the Ammonites, Moabites, Tyrians, Egyptians, Idumeans, and
Edomites, and cite the 40. of Jeremy, v. 11, 12. and the 43.7. and so make the
Prophet to mean it of the Jews dispersed into those places upon the siedge,
spoiling and taking of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar in the times of Jehoiachin,
and Zedekiah; but our Prophet and these Elders being in Babylon, he speaks of
the Babylonians among whom these captive Elders and Jews were dispersed, and
sought to be like unto them that so they might be the safer, but God gathered
them out from them, and would not suffer them to become Babylonians. Besides,
this was in the seventh year of the Captivity, as appears verse. 1. of this
chapter, and at that time Jerusalem stood, Zedekiah was reigning, and the
people were not scattered into those Nations mentioned, for Zedekiah reigned
eleven years, 2 Chro. 36.11. and nothing is said of any dispersion, when
Jehoiachin was taken away, and Zedekiah set up. Its also further added here,

I will gather you out of the Countries wherein ye are scattered. He speaks of
those were scattered at that time. There were many Provinces into which they
had scattered, or were upon scattering themselves. Vatabl. sense is thus, I
will gather you out of the Nations, inter quas est is captivi.

Obs. Wherever wicked men hide themselves, or sharke for their own safety,
God will find them out, and bring them forth to punishment. These Elders, and
the rest of the Captives that were wicked, thought by lurking amongst the
Babylonians, and conforming to them in state, and religious affairs, they
should be safe and well, but says the Lord, live were you will, shift for
your selves what you can, be as the Heathen, and carry it as close as may be,
I will find you out, and bring you forth from them with strength, and punish
you to purpose. Gods eyes run to and fro throughout the earth, and he quickly
spies where sinners lie hid, and brings them forth to justice at his pleasure,
Amos 9.2, 3, 4. Though they dig into hell, thence shall mine hand take them,
though they climb up to heaven, thence will I bring them down. Though they
hide themselves in the top of Carmel, I will search and take them out thence,
and though they be hid from my sight in the bottom of the Sea, thence will I
command the Serpent, and he shall bite them: And though they go into captivity
before their enemies, thence will I command the sword, and it shall slay them.
The sense of these words is thus much, that whereas other creatures can shift
and secure themselves from their enemies; the Conies and creeping things by
hideing themselves in the holes of the earth; the birds by flying up into the
clouds and heavens, the beasts by running to the hills and woods, the fish by
sinking down to the bottom of the sea; men that have offended God cannot
secure themselves any where, Gods eyes are set upon them for evil, and his hand
is against them, Isa. 28.15. they were at agreement with death and hell, and
thought the overflowing scourge should not come unto them, but ver. 18. Your
Covenant with death shall be disanulled, and your agreement with Hell shall
not stand, when the overflowing scourge shall pass through, then shall ye be
trodden down by it. Babel ascended above the height of the clouds, yet was
brought down to hell, Isa. 14.14, 15. Jer. 51.53. the high places and hills,
whither the Jews often betook themselves, did not secure them, Jer. 12.12. let
sinners hide themselves in any place, their sin will find them out, Numb.
32.23. they cannot escape the peircing eye, or punishing hand of God.

Verse. 35 And I will bring you into the wilderness of the people, and there
will I plead with you face to face. 36 Like as I pleaded with your fathers in
the wilderness of the Land of Egypt, so will I plead with you, says the Lord
God. These verses tell us, what God did with them after he had gathered them
out of the Countries. He did two things.

1 He brought them into a Wilderness.

2 He pleaded with them there, and the manner of his pleading with them is set
down.

1 To be face to face. 2 So as he pleaded with their fathers in the
wilderness, of the land of Egypt.
Into the wilderness of the people. Not into Babylon which is called a
Wilderness, chap. 19.13. for they were already in Babylon. Wilderness of the
People, does not signify desertum inter populos, but rather desertum a populis,
as Romans 1.4. (...), by the resurrection of the dead, that is, by the
resurrection from the dead: so into the wilderness of the people, imports into
a wilderness from the people. Vatabl. says, there was a wilderness between
Chaldea and Judea, unto which the Lord alludes; as he brought their Fathers out
of Egypt into Arabia deserta; so he would bring them out of Babylon, into that
wilderness. Junius sense of this wilderness is, that God would bring them
into such a place as all men would fly from, propter horriditatem and
difficultatem soli. Others make the meaning of the words to be, that God would
bring them into a most miserable estate; they thought they should be best of
all if they turned Heathens, but this caused God to bring them into a worser
condition than they were. I incline to take the words literally, rather than
metaphorically, because he speaks of bringing and gathering them out from
people and Countries, and bringing them into the wilderness, which notes
motion from place to place; and this wilderness, is paralleled with that of
the land of Egypt, which was real and not metaphorical.

There will I plead with you. Not only dispute and reason the case with you,
Vltionem de vobis sumam J^nathan and R. David.
but also deal with you according to your sins. I will be revenged on you, I
will execute my judgments upon you. As I punished your Fathers when they were
in the wilderness for their sins: so will I punish you for your sins. They
smarted for their murmuring, lusting, whoredom, Idolatry, rebellion,
ingratitude, and so shall you for doing as your Fathers did.

Face to Face. The Rabbis being very propitious to their own Nation, interpret
these words thus: Solus cum solis, sine arbittis, ne gentes videant saevas qua
de vobis sumptu^us sum paenas, and laetentur. Rabb. David.
God alone, having them alone separate from the Nations, would punish them,
that they might not see what punishment he laid upon them, and rejoice
thereat; but the phrase notes, Gods presence and visible manner of punishing
them, so that it should be most evident to be the hand of God.

As I pleaded with your Fathers in the wilderness of the land of Egypt. How God
pleaded with them in that wilderness which belonged to the Egyptians, let us
search a little.

1 He pleaded with them speedily, Numb. 25.1. the people began to commit
whoredom with the daughters of Moab, and v. 4. the Lord bids Moses take all
the heads of the people, and hang them up, here was quick work. So Exodus
32.7.10* Get thee down, the people have corrupted themselves, let me alone that
my wrath may wax hot against them, and that I may consume them, ver. 28. There
fell of the people that day about three thousand men.

2 He pleaded with them severely, Numb. 21.6. The Lord sent fiery Serpents
among the people, these bit them, so, that many dyed. Their venomous bitings
did so inflame them, that they were in a manner burnt to death, which was a
dreadful judgment: before Aaron could take his censer, put in incense, and
make an atonement for the people, fourteen thousand and odd were destroyed by
the plague, Numb. 16 46, 47, 49. which was both sudden and severe pleading with
them.

3 Immediately, he caused the earth to open her mouth, and to swallow up
Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, them and all theirs, he sent fire and consumed the
two hundred and fifty men that offered incense, Numb. 16.32, 33 35. and so were
the fiery Serpents, the immediate hand of God.

4 Openly, Numb. 25.4. Take all the heads of the People, and hang them up
before the Lord against the sun. The Septuagint is, (...), make them examples.

5 Strongly, They could not withstand his pleadings, his judgments, and
strokes were unavoidable. Though Moses and Aaron interposed and pleaded hard
with God for them, yet multitudes of them perished by the sword, plague,
Serpents, fire, and earth. Thus God pleaded with their fathers, and so he
would plead with them. Nothing secured their Fathers from his judgments, and
nothing should secure them; Not Babylonians or Babylonish gods; not their
Prophets or Priests, not Prayers or Tears. Their Fathers fell in the
wilderness, and so should they; if not by the same judgments, yet by those
were not much unlike, there should be an Analogy between them.

Obs. 1 When men seek to avoid straits and dangers by sinful Policy, and ways
unwarrantable, God meets with them, and brings them into greater straits and
troubles. These Elders thought by becoming as the Heathens were, that they
should free themselves from all the troubles and evils were like to come upon
them for Zedekiahs revolting from Nebuchadnezzar, but the Lord told them that
he would bring them into a wilderness, where their condition should be very
miserable, and worse than in Babylon, whatever they had suffered there for God
and their religion: Jeroboam was in a strait about the peoples sacrificing at
Jerusalem; if they went up thither, he feared they would be so wrought upon, as
to return to Rhehoboam, from whom they had fallen, and kill him. To expedite
himself out of this strait, he took wicked Counsel, set up the Calves at Dan
and Bethel, telling the People the journey to Jerusalem was too long, and
tedious for them, they had God nearer to them, and might worship at an easier
rate, 1 King 12. but for this sinful policy, and subtle design, God brought him
into greater straits and difficulties, as you may see chap. 13.4. and the 14.6,
10, 11, 12. his hand was withered, heavy tidings denounced against him, and his
house and his son dyed: Saul was in a great strait when the Philistims had
invaded him, and God would not answer him, he would not wait in this case,
leaving all to God, but runs into an unlawful practice to relieve himself,
he consults with the Witch of Endor, and is brought into greater and worse
straits then before, 1 Samuel 28.17, 18, 19, 20. men in our days have taken
wrong courses to extricate themselves out of dangers and troubles, and has not
God brought them into a wilderness, into greater intanglements and worse
perplexitys than ever before? its good to wait upon God and keep his way, then
if dangers and deaths do come, there is comfort, they find you in Gods way,
but if out of that, they are great evils in themselves, and your being out of
Gods way is worse than all.

Obs. 2 That Gods punishments are his pleadings, when he visits men for their
sins he pleads with them. Every rod of his has a voice, and pleads for God;
Quoties apparent aliqua signa irae Dei, ipse discertat nobiscum. Gods
strikeings are real pleadings, Isa. 66.16. by fire, and by his sword, will the
Lord plead with all flesh. His punishments are arguments he uses to convince
or confound sinners, and whatsoever punishments he inflicts upon any, they are
just and righteous, for he never pleads an ill cause, they are judicia Dei,
he is infinitely wise, and as he judges aright, so he executes judgment
righteously.

Obs. 3 Those be like in sinning, must be like in suffering, like as I pleaded
with your fathers in the wilderness of the Land of Egypt, so will I plead with
you; These Jews were their Children, and did as their fathers had done. Their
fathers shook off the God of Israel, and chose them an Egyptian god, Exodus
32.4. they mingled with the Heathen, and learnt their works, Psalm. 106.35. they
polluted his Sabbaths, caused their children to pass through the fire, ver. 13.
and 26. of this chap. and these their posterity, chose Babylonish gods, became
as the Heathen, made their sons pass through the fire, and trod in their
fathers steps, v. 30, 31, 32.

Verse. 37. And I will cause you to pass under the rod, and I will bring you
under the bond of the Covenant. 38 And I will purge out from among you the
rebels, and them that transgress against me, I will bring them forth out of
the Country where they sojourn, and they shall not enter into the land of
Israel, and ye shall know that I am the Lord. God being in a judiciary way
pleading with this people, here, he proceeds further in the manner thereof.

1 He would examine and reduce them to their former state, ver. 37. 2 He
would make a Discrimination between them, ver. 38.
I will cause them to pass under the rod. The Hebrew word for Rod is (...)
which in this place, may signify either a Scepter, as frequently it does in
Scripture, and is so rendered chap. 19.11, 14. or a Shepherds staff or crook,
which he uses among his sheep, so it is used Psalm 23.4. If it be taken the
first way, the sense is this, that though they scattered themselves among the
Babylonians, and put themselves under Heathenish power, yet the Lord would make
them pass under the Rod, that is, come under his Kingly power, he would rule
over them, they should still be his subjects. But of this he spoke in the 33.
verse. therefore I conceive Rod here, is to be taken in the latter
signification, that God would deal with them more pastor^tio, like a Shepherd
or Heardsman, who were wont to number their Cattle with a wand or Rod, which is
called passing under the Rod, Levit. 27.32. To this purpose is that of Jer.
33.13. In the Cities of the Mountains, in the Cities of the vale, and in the
Cities of the South, and in the land of Benjamin, and in the places about
Jerusalem, and in the Cities of Judah, shall the flocks pass again under the
hands of him that tells them. When the flocks went into the field or fold,
and when they went out, their practice was to tell them by a Rod in their hand,
and so they passed under the Rod. Hereunto Christ alludes, John 10.3. when he
says, he calls his own sheep by name, and leads them out. The meaning
then of the Lord here is, that he would take an exact account of them, tell
them as a shepherd does his flock, and see which were rotten, and which were
sound.

Gods rod, are afflictions and judgments, as you may see Psalm. 89.32. I will
visit their transgressions, etc. Lamen. 3.1.

I will bring you under the bond of the Covenant; You think to break the bond
of the covenant made between me and your Fathers, by becoming Babylonians, and
ceasing to be my people, but it shall not be; I will keep the Covenant, and
cause you to come under the bond of it, and perform that obedience I look for.
The word for bond, is Masoreth from (...) obstringere ad obedientiam or paenam,
to bind unto obedience or punishment; when men are in Covenant they are bound
to obey, or to suffer if they disobey. Vatablus and others carry it thus: that
God would deal with them as he had done with their fathers, that he would
make a Covenant with these as he had done with them, and so make it another
covenant, by which God would bind them up, and refer it to the Covenant made in
Ezraes days, but rather I conceive, the Lord intends the former Covevant,
especially that mentioned, Ezekiel. 16.8. when God in a solemn manner took this
People to be his in Moses's days, wherein he made good his Promise and
Covenant with Abraham, and bound them unto him by the Law; The Covenant bound
them from other gods and ways of worship.

And I will purge out from among you the Rebels. The Septuagint and Vulgar read
the words, I will chase out; the Hebrew (...) signifies both to choose and
purge, God would number them, distinguish them one from another, and then purge
out those were rebellious, they should no longer be in his flock; but be
discovered, and declared to the world what they were.

By Rebels, he means those that cast off God and his works, and turned
heathens.

I will bring them forth out of the Country where they sojourn, and they shall
not enter into the Land, etc. The Hebrew is, Out of the Country of their
sojournings, or peregrinations, I will bring them. Some make these words to
point out those were then in Judea, whom God would bring forth, and not suffer
to return any more, and not only them, but many of those were in Babylon
before, God suffered not to return into the land of Israel: for if we
understand these words of the return after the seventy years, as they must,
long before that time were these Jews with Zedekiah brought out of the Land of
their sojourning, and they with many others, were never suffered to enter into
that land more; for here is a comparing of their return from the Babylonish
Captivity, to that of their coming out of Egypt.

Then they were brought into a Wilderness; where their carcasses fell for
their rebellions, and so never entered the promised Land: so here likewise God
brought them into a wilderness, pleaded with, and consumed many of them, who
by that means never returned to the land of Israel.

Obs. 1 The Lord does not only know, but takes special notice of his, and does
distinguish them from others. I will cause you to pass under the Rod; I will
examine which are sheep, and which are goats, and will sever the one from the
other; Christ knew his sheep, his little flock, from all the goats of the
Mountains, the Bulls of Bashan, and wild beasts of the Forests. And God kn^w
the good figs from the naughty, Jerem. 24. he manifested his love to the good,
and displeasure to the bad. When he is in a judiciary way, he knows, ownes,
preserves his, and will not suffer any of them to perish, Ezekiel. 9. when the men
appeared with slaughter-weapons in their hands, and execution was to be upon
Jerusalem, the Lord made his to pass under the Rod, he numbered them, and set
his mark upon them, that they might not perish in the common calamity. He put
a difference between the precious and the vile, as a shepherd does between
sheep and goats, Mat. 25.32.

Obs. 2 Though Gods People do go out from him, and violate the Covenant, yet he
will not let them so go, but will look after them, and bring them under his
Power. These here had transgressed the Covenant, broken the bonds, cast off the
ways of God, thought to exempt themselves from his Rule over them, but says
the Lord, I will bring you under the bond of the Covenant; You shall be under
my Power and Law; Though I suffer Babylonians, and other Nations to be sui
juris, to wander where they will, to live as they list, yet it shall not be so
with you, who are my People, with whom I am in Covenant, and to whom I must be
faithful, what ever you are to me, and will be known to be your God and
Sovereign. I will have account of you, and make you know you are under my
bonds, and not Babylonish ones.

Obs. 3 Gods dealings with his is very different. He brings them under the
bond of the Covenant, to see what they are, if they be Goats, wicked, he
punishes them, and purges them out; if they be sheep, though they have gone
astray, he pardons them, keeps them under the bond of the Covenant, and
inables them to yield Covenant obedience; when God had made them pass under the
Rod, and brought them under the bonds of the Covenant, made them know they were
his People, though many of them were very wicked, he purged out the Rebels,
and them that had transgressed against him.

He turned the Goats out of the fold, and kept the Sheep in, he purged out
the wicked by judgments and Death, and preserved the others, Mal. 3.17, 18. In
that day when I make up my Jewels I will spare them, as a man spares his own
Son that serves him, etc. so God showed his different dealings between the
Righteous and the Wicked, for chap 4.1, 2, 3. the Wicked being but stubble
should be burnt, and be as ashes under the soles of the feet of the
Righteous. The R^ghteous were Jewels, and therefore spared; the Wicked were
stubble, and therefore destroyed.

Obs. 4 Though the wicked be among the Godly, yet they shall not always be
so, I will purge out from among you the Rebels, and them that transgress
against me. There were rebels, great sinners, that were among the Israelites
in the wilderness of Egypt, Corah, Dathan, and Abiram; others that would have
gone back to Egypt; many that murmured, that fell to Idolatry, and committed
whoredom with the Daughters of Moab; but God Purged them out, from amongst
them, and the like he did here. Its Gods method even here in this world often
times, to separate the wicked from the Godly, to fan out the chafe from the
wheat, to burn the one, and preserve the other. In Sodom God made a
separation, preserving Lot who was wheat, and burning the Sodomites who were
chafe, with unquenchable fire. Isa. 1.25. I will turn my hand upon thee, and
purely purge away thy dross, and take away all thy Tin. The Dross and Tin were
the wicked amongst them, verse. 28.31. whom the Lord would take away, consume
and burn with fire, not to be quenched. Now Gods fan is in his hand, and he
is purging both the English and Irish floor; yea, he is pulling up the
pricking briars, and grieving Thorns, that his may not always be vexed by
them, Ezekiel. 28.24.

Obs. 5 Whatever men's thoughts are of the world, they are but sojourners
therein. I will bring them out of the Land of their sojournings; Were it Canaan
or Babylon. They were no more than sojourners. Wicked men think they are heirs
too, owners and Lords of the earth, Psalm. 49.11. Their inward thought is, that
their houses shall continue for ever, and their dwelling places to all
generations; they call their Lands after their own names. Men set their names
upon what they conclude is their own. Let lands be good or bad, men are only
sojourners in them. Godly men, who are said to inherit the earth, do it but for
a season, they are pilgrims and sojourners here. David though King in Israel,
yet acknowledges himself a Sojourner in Canaan, as all his Fathers were; they
spent a few days therein, and so passed away, and this was his condition. Let
us look so upon our selves, and pass the time of our sojourning here in fear, 1
Pet. 1.17. and mind that City has foundations, out of which if we be once
possessed, we shall never be removed.

Obs. 6 When God brings his into Canaan, he will shut out the wicked, they
shall not enter into the Land of Israel. Others shall be brought in, but as
for those would be as the world, as the Heathen, as Babylonians, they shall
never come into Canaan. Canaan was a type of Heaven, and this exclusion of
these wicked ones, represented the exclusion of ungodly ones out of Heaven.
However good and bad are mingled together in this world, and often in the Church,
yet when God brings his to the heavenly Canaan, no unclean thing shall enter
there, Rev. 22.27. There shall in no wise enter into it any thing that
defiles, neither whatsoever works abomination or a lie. Many may cry and
seek for entrance, as, those Mat. 7 22. and those foolish Virgins, Mat. 25.11,
12. but they shall in no wise, by no means enter; the unrighteous shall not
inherit the kingdom of heaven, 1 Cor. 6.9. Dogs shall be shut out, Rev.
22.15.

Obs. 7 Mercies and Judgments make God known experimentally, ye shall know
that I am the Lord; God would purge out the Rebels from the obedient, there was
mercy; keep them out of the land of Israel, there was Judgment; and by these
God made them know him to be Jehovah, giving life to his promises, and breath
to his threatenings. The Rebels should know and acknowledge him to be Jehovah,
being convinced with the equity of his judgments, and affected with the
severity of them. The Godly should do it, being convinced and affected with the
Nature, greatness, needfulnesse, and freeness of that Mercy. Judgment upon
these Rebels was mercy to the godly; and mercy to the godly, was judgment to
the Rebels; and both were brought to acknowledge the Lord, but specially the
godly. Mercies and Judgments work most affectionately and effectually upon
them; for its said, ye shall know, ye that are purged, ye that shall come to
the Land of Israel.

Verse. 39 As for you O house of Israel, Thus says the Lord God, go ye, serve
ye every man his Idols, and hereafter also, if ye will not hearken unto me:
but pollute ye my holy name no more, with your gifts, and with your Idols. This
Verse speaks fully to the Elders of Israel, that came to inquire of the Lord,
yet were resolved in their hearts to be as the Heathen, and to serve wood and
stone outwardly at least, seeing it is so says God: go, serve every man his
Idols, and pollute my name no more.

Go ye, serve every one his Idols. These words may be taken for an ironical
concession, a yiedling that which the Lord would not have done, which is
frequent in Scripture, as Amos 4.4. Come to Bethel, and transgress at Gilgal,
multiply transgression, Mat. 23.32. Fill ye up the measure of your Fathers,
Eccl. 11.9. 1 King. 22, 15. 1 Cor. 15.32. Jer. 7.21. in all these places is an
ironical concession, which the Scripture uses to affect men's consciences the
more with the wickedness of their ways. So here: Go, serve your idols, God
commands them not to serve Idols, then it had been lawful, but by this Ironical
concession, would affect them more fully with the evil of their Idolatry, and
so take them off therefrom: This is a good sense of the words, but they are
rather a rejection of them, seeing you are such dissemblers, and have your
hearts set upon Idols, go your ways, take your fill of them, and so the Lord
utterly cast them off, and left them to perish.

And hereafter also, if ye will not hearken unto me. Sanctius thinks, here is a
figure called Aposiopesis which is a sudden breaking off the Speech, with
concealment of some special thing expected, as Luke 13.9. if it bear fruit;
here is somewhat kept in, which any hearing the words expect, as if it bear
fruit, it should not be cut down^ so 2 Samuel 5.8. whosoever gets up to the
gutter, and smites the Jebusites, the Lame, the blind, hated of David's soul:
what then; here is no more, the speech is broken off, and something left to
expectation which is given out, 1 Chronicles. 11.6. he shall be chief and Captain.
Here seems something to be concealed, if ye will not hearken unto me, ye
shall be scattered, cursed, or slain. But we may read the words thus,
referring* and hereafter, to the former words, Go ye, serve ye every one his
Idols even hereafter, and then read the other words thus, seeing you will not
hearken unto me, or have not hearkened unto me; and thus diverse Expositors
read them, and the sense lies fair this way, Go, serve your Idols hereafter,
seeing ye will not hearken unto me.

But pollute ye my holy name no more with your gifts, and with your Idols. The
Hebrew is, And Pollute ye, which accords with the reading of the former words
mentioned, you have pretended that by your Idols set up in my stead, and the
gifts you have offered to them, or by them to me, that you have honored my
name, but by joining them and me together you have Polluted my name. I had
rather you should be open Idolaters, then that by your hypocritical practices,
dividing between me and your Idols, you should cause my Name to be polluted,
and disgraced; either be perfect Idolaters, or perfectly for me, give not my
glory to Idols, pretending you worship me.

My Holy Name. (...)
In the Hebrew it is, The Name of my Holiness, so in Amos 2.7. Levit. 20.3.
Ezekiel. 36.20. and in most places where mention is made of Gods Holy Name: by
Name is meant Gods worship, Attributes and Titles, which are holy, or himself,
as Sanctius affirms, who is holiness.

Obs. 1 God does Punish Hypocrites and Idolaters with spiritual judgments. Go
ye, serve ye every one his Idols. The House of Israel, whom these Elders
represented, were Hypocritical and Idolatrous, set upon Idols, and God gave
them over to them. Ephraim was of this humor, thus leavened, and see how God
dealt with him, Hos. 4.17. he is joined to Idols, let him alone: he likes and
loves them, let him live, and dye with them; and chap. 8.11. Ephraim has made
many Altars to sin, Altars shall be unto him to sin, he shall have Altars
enough, he is greedy of them, and his greedy Appetite shall be answered; this
was a spiritual plague, and judgment upon him, to be given up of God to his
own hearts lusts.

Obs. 2 Those that will not hear God, shall be rejected of God, which is
dreadful; go ye, serve every man his Idol. I will have no more to do with you,
my Temple, mine Altar, mine Ordinances, are no longer for you. None of you
shall have my presence, worship, or acceptance; where men will not be
reclaimed, they must be rejected. Here they would not hearken unto God, and
therefore he bids them be gone, 2 King 17.15. They rejected his statutes, and
his Covenant that he made with their Fathers, and his Testimonies which he
testified against them, and they followed vanity, and became vain, and went
after the Heathen, etc. therefore the Lord was very angry with Israel, and
removed them out of his sight, verse. 18. only he left Judah; and because Judah
would not be reclaimed, the Lord rejected all the seed of Israel, and cast them
out of his sight, verse. 20. So in Jerem. 23. when they would not hearken to the
Lord, who forbid them their mocking of the true Prophets, and listening to
false ones; what says the Lord? therefore behold, I, even I, wi^^ utterly
forget you, and will forsake you and the City that I gave you, and your
fathers, and cast you out of my presence, and I will bring an everlasting
reproach upon you. When God rejects, its grievous. No sorer judgment can
befall the sons of men. This David knew, and therefore advised his Son Solomon
to keep close to God, if he did otherwise, God would cast him off for ever, 1 Chronicles. 28.9.

Obs. 3 There is no halving, no dividing between God and idols, God and the
Creature, in matters of Worship and Religion. Pollute ye my holy Name no more,
with your gifts and with your idols. You join me and them together, thinking
that I am pleased, honored thereby, but I am provoked, and my holy name is
polluted, I abhor such doings. Seeing your Idols must have some honor, and I
the rest. I will have none, get ye to your Idols, let them have all. I like it
better that you should be wholly for them, then divide between me and them. I
can brook no partner in my worship, I must have the whole heart, the whole
soul, the whole body, and strength of all, else I will have none, 1 King.
18.21. when the People stood halting between two opinions, and were sometimes
for God, and sometimes for Baal, it pleased neither God, nor Elijah; therefore
says the Prophet, How long will ye halt between two thoughts, or two branches
(for Sagnish signifies ramum, a bow or twigg) how long will ye be like a Bird,
that touches upon one twigg, and then upon another, and settles not upon
either; so how long will ye be, looking one day toward God; another day
toward Baal? do ye not yet see the evil of it? while ye stand thus in binio,
ye provoke God; If God be God, follow him, and him fully, only, constantly,
eternally; and if Baal be God, follow him so: you must follow but one. Christ
has told us, we cannot serve God and Mammon, God and the world, God and our
bellies, God and our credit, God and our lusts. These are Masters command
contrary things, and carry away from God.

Obs. 4 The honor of Gods name is dear unto him. Pollute ye not my holy name.
Take Gods Name for his worship, as it is Exodus, 20.24. 2 Chronicles. 20.8. Mal. 1.6.
or for his Attributes, as it is, Exodus 33.19. or for his Titles, as it is,
Deuteronomy. 28.58. his Name is very dear unto him, which appears.

1 In that he will not endure any mixture with his worship, or tender of any
thing to him has been in Idols service, the Babylonish gods, wood and stone,
and the gifts offered to them, or by them to God, he would not admit.

2 He counted it a disparagement to his name, to have half of them, and not
all, and therefore would rather have them lay out all upon their Idols, than
some upon him.

3 He shows vehement affection and indignation upon this account, get ye to
your Idols, be gone, pollute my name no more, out of my sight, I cannot endure
it.

4 He cares not for the perishing of their souls and bodies, in comparison of
his name, go, ye serve Idols.

Gods name is exceeding dear unto him, he swears by it, Jer. 44.26. he
sanctifies it being polluted, and will not suffer any blot or stain to lie upon
it, Ezekiel. 36.23. he labors and works for the maintenance of it, when it is in
danger, as you have it in this Chapter, verse. 9.14.22. rather then it shall
suffer, he will defer his anger and judgments, Isa. 48.9. if false Prophets
presumed to speak in his Name, not sent by him, he cut them off, Deuteronomy. 18.20.
or laid heavy judgments upon them, Ezekiel. 13.9. who ever takes his Name in vain
any way, he will not hold him guiltless, Exodus 20.7. and no marvail, for Gods
Name is his glory, Isa. 48.11. and men must give glory due unto his Name, Psalm
29.2. not any kind of glory, but that is proportionable to his Glory, even his
glorious name, remembering what a magnificent Temple Solomon built, for the
honor of his Name, 2 Chronicles 6.34.

Verse. 40 For in mine holy Mountain, in the Mountain of the height of Israel,
says the Lord God, there shall all the house of Israel, all of them in the
Land serve me: There will I accept them, and there will I require your
offerings, and the first fruits of your Oblations, with all your Holy things.
41 I will accept you with your sweet savor, when I bring you out from the
People, and gather you out of the Countries wherein you have been scattered,
and I will be sanctified in you before the Heathen. Now we are come to the
gracious promises of God to this People, and here you have, 1 A Promise of
Reduction, which is employed in the 40. v. and expressed in the 41. 2
Acceptance of them, and their services, v. 40. and 41. 3 Sanctification of
himself in them, v. 41.


Antecedent to these promises is a description of the place, whither he would
bring them, and where he would accept them, and that is in his Mountain, which
is described 1 From its Holiness. 2 From its Height.


In my Holy Mountain. The Hebrew is, The Mountain of my holiness, as Verse. 39.
the name of my holiness, so Jonah 2.4, 7. The Temple of thy Holinesst, Isa.
62.12. people of Holiness, Psalm. 89.20. Oil of my holiness, Ps. 51.11. Spirit
of thine holiness, Ps. 43.3. Hill of thy holiness, Ps. 68.5. Habitation of thy
Holiness, in all these places you have the abstract, and its rendered by the
concrete, holy mountain, holy Name, holy Temple, holy People, holy Oil, holy
Spirit, holy Hill, and holy Habitation. By Holy Mountain, he means Mount Sion,
which is called the Hill of his Holiness, Psalm 2.6. There God recorded his
name, set up Christ, and his Kingdom. By a Synecdoche holy mountain is put for
Canaan, which prefigured the Church of God, in the times of the Gospel.

In the Mountain of the height of Israel. Of these words before, chap. 17.23.
This is spoken, not because Sion was so high a mountain (for it was rather
collis than Mons) but because of the honor and glory it had above all other
Mountains, there was the holy City, the holy Temple, the holy Ordinances, and
the holy Gods habitation, Psalm. 76.2.

There shall all the house of Israel. All that were purged from the Rebels and
Transgressors ver. 38. all that were true Israelites, Secundum carnem and
spiritum, for such are described to be the dwellers in Gods holy Hill, Psalm
15. and not only those of the Jewish race, but even Gentiles, that should
become Christians, and be spiritual Israelites, they should come to the
Church, which should begin at Mount Sion, which represented the true Church.

All of them in the Land serve me. That land was Canaan, which being polluted
with blood, Idols, and other Abominations, Psalm 106.37, 38, 39, 40. God
abhorred it, and the People thereof, yea, his Sanctuary therein, Lamen. 2. 7.
which caused him to lay it waste for seventy years, wherein he purged it from
its filth and blood, Isa. 4.4. and them from their iniquities, Ezekiel. 36.33. and
then brought them in to serve him.

This expression is comprehensive, and imports their worshipping and obeying of
God, Exodus 10.7. Let the men go, that they may serve the Lord their God, that
is, worship him. Exodus 20.5. they must not serve Images, that is, worship them,
but worship God; The word (...) and so (...), which the Septuagint do
frequently express it by, signifies totum se addicere servitio alicujus, to
give up ones self wholly to the service of any; so here, they should serve God
wholly, worship him, and not any Idols, and his own ways, not their ways, and
that in spirit and truth, 1 Samuel 12.24. serve him in truth, with all your
heart, and with all humility of mind, Act. 20.19.

It notes also to obey and do what he commands, as Josh. 22.5. Take diligent
heed to do the Commandment and the law, which Moses the Servant of the Lord
charged you, to love the Lord your God, and to walk in all his ways, and to
keep his Commandments, and to cleave unto him, and to serve him with all your
heart, and with all your soul, serving here, extends to all outward obedience,
as well as worship.

They shall serve me, that is, worship me as the only object of Divine
worship, they shall obey me as their only King and Lord.

There will I accept them. The Hebrew is, (...) volam eos se. Montanus renders
it, I will will them, when it referres to God, The Heb. root (...) is benevelle
favere, acceptare.
as here it imports.

1 Pardoning and passing by, whatever formerly offended: 2 Samuel 24.23. when
David would offer a sacrifice for his sin in numbering the People, and for
stopping the Plague, says Araunah, the Lord thy God accept thee, that is,
pardon thy sin, and remove the judgment, Jer. 14.12. When they offer burnt
offering, and an Oblation, I will not accept them, but I will consume them.
Non-accepting, was Non-pardoning, and that appears most clearly, Levit. 1.4.
He shall put his hand upon the head of the burnt offering, and it shall be
accepted for him to make the atonement; The laying his hand upon the head of
the Sacrifice, noted the laying of his sins upon the same, and it God accepted
the Sacrifice, his sins were forgiven, and peace was made, but when he
accepted it not, there was no pardon, no peace. When God therefore says here,
I will accept them; the sense is, he will pardon them.

2 Approving, receiving, with favor and delight, Job 42.8. Him will I accept.
God would hear and regard the prayer of Job for his three friends, Eccl. 9.7.
Eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy Wine with a merry heart, for God now
accepts thy works (...) he is well pleased with thee, and what thou have
done, so Psalm. 149.4. The Lord takes pleasure in his People, and this also is
included here, I will accept them, that is, approve of, favor, and take
delight in them. Vatabl. reads it, Benigniter eos complectar, or benevolentia
prosequar: I will deal kindly with them, and pursue them with favors. The
French is, illec iz seur seray propice, I will be Propitious to them; I will
remember their sins no more, I will show them great kindness.

Some render the words, There will I take pleasure in them. When they are come
to my holy Mountain, to a Church state again, being purged from their sins,
through my Grace; I will take pleasure in them, as a Husband in a Wife, as a
Father in his Children.

There will I require your offerings, Formerly the Lord had refused their
Offerings, and manifested his displeasure against them, and their offering, as
Mal. 1.10. I have no Pleasure in you says the Lord of Host, neither will I
accept an Offering at your hands, see Amos 5.21, 22 Jer. 6.^0. Isa. 66.3. chapter
1.11. but now he would be so far from refusing, hating, and prohibiting of
them, that he would call for them, and accept them.

Offerings. The Hebrew word for Offerings is, Terumah, which notes any Offering
freely given to the Lord, and frequently its put for the Heave Offering, so
called, because it was lifted up unto the Lord. If we take it in this sense,
its by a Senecdoche put for all their Offerings: but we may keep to the words
as they are.

And the first fruits of your Oblations. The Hebrew is, Veeth reshith
mashoshecem the beginning of your elevations. Septuagint (...), the
first fruits of your separations. The Vulg. is, initium decimarum vestrarum,
the beginning of your tenths. Vatab. The first fruits of your gifts. The Jews
say, they were to bring the first fruits of seven things only, viz. of Wheat,
Barley, Grapes, Figgs, Pomegranats, Olives, and Dates; but God was to have
whatever opened the womb first, of man or Beast, Exodus 13.2. which may also
come in amongst first fruits.

Oblations and Sacrifices do differ thus: that is properly an Oblation, which
is offered etiamsi nihil circa oblatum fiat, though nothing be done to it, or
about it; Sacrifices are offered, bur aliquid circa sacrificatum fit, something
is done to it, and about it. The Sacrifice was to be killed, flayed, cut in
pieces, or the like.

By first f^uits of Oblations, we may understand the principal and chief
Oblations, for Reshith notes praecipuum, and prestantissimum, the choicest and
most excellent, as well as primum the first; And Calvin interprets it, Florem,
vel quod excellit in donis vestris, that which was the flower and excellency in
your gifts. So Lavat. primitias munerum optima and pretiosissima vocat, the
best and most precious things they had, he calls first fruits.

With all your holy things. The Hebrew is, In all your Sanctifications, Kodesh
sometimes noted the Temple, or Sanctuary; sometimes their Sacrifices, sometimes
their Festivities, and sometimes whatever was Dedicated to Divine worship. Here
we may take it in the last sense, and so the French carry it, En toutes vos
chooses dediees. Vatab. likewise reads it, in omnibus sacris vestris, in all
your holy things. Calvin expounds it, in toto cultu meo* in all my worship, and
so the sense runs well with that before, I will require your offerings and the
first fruits, i. e. The principal of your oblations, in all your dedications
and holy things, and in all my worship. Some read the words; in omnibus rebus
quas conserva veritis mihi, in all the things you shall prepare, set a part and
conserve for me.

If we read it with all your holy things, the sense is, that the sacrifices,
Temple, Priests, Solemnities, and festivals should be restored.

Verse. 41 I will accept you with your sweet savor. Of Sweet Savor, or Savor
of rest, as the Hebrew is, you heard in the 28. v. of this chapter, and in the
19. v. of the 16. Chapter. They should be pleasing and delightful unto God, as
a sweet savor is unto man. They were wont when at Jerusalem to offer incense
and sweet things unto God, and he accepted the same, and they should do it
again after their return, and be accepted. Both they and their Sacrifices
should be a sweet odor unto God, this and the like expressions in the old
Testament the Apostle alludes unto, in Phil. 4.18. 2 Cor. 2.15. Ephesians. 5.2.

When I bring you out from the People, and gather them out of the Countries,
etc. These words we had before in the 34. v. where they sounded judgment, but
here mercy.

And I will be sanctified in you before the Heathen. The Hebrew is, I will
sanctify my self, when sanctification refers to God, it imports,

1 Vindication of his Name, being polluted and dishonored by the Sons of
men, as Ezekiel. 36.23. I will sanctify my great name which was profaned among
the Heathen, which yet have profaned in the midst of them.

2 Making himself known, and acknowledged to be holy, just, and powerful, so
its to be taken, Ezekiel. 28.22. They shall know that I am the Lord, when I shall
have executed judgments in her, and shall be sanctified in her, so Levit.
10.3. by the fury and judgment upon Nadab, Abihu, God sanctified himself, he
made himself known to be a holy, just, and dreadful Majesty.

3. Gods doing of that which redounds to his honor and praise, Laudabor
propter meam erga vos misericordiam atque beneficentiam Piscator. Gentes
laudabunt me propter liberationem vestram, Vatablus. Cum omnes nationes
viderint vos a me esse liberatos sanctum me justum que judicabunt quod facerim
quod promiseram. Maldon. Glorificabor, sanctus potens mirabilis predicabor.
Pradus. So A Lapide, Pintus. Lavater
and thus diverse interpreters take it in this place. I will bring you out of
Babylon into your own Country, unite you into Church order, give you another
Temple, with all the Ordinances of it, sanctify you by my word, and Spirit,
cause you to worship me with pure worship, bringing me the best you have for
Sacrifices, that so you may praise me for my goodness unto you, and the
Nations, for the great things done for you. The Lords bringing them out of the
countries where they were scattered, was a great work, and filled the Heavens
with admiration, making them to say, The Lord has done great things for them,
Psalm 126.2. and the Jews also to say, The Lord has done great things for us,
v. 3. when the Jews were brought out of Egypt, its said, Psa. 114.2. Judah was
his Sanctuary (...) in Sanctitatem ejus, or Sanctificatio ejus, and so the
French read it, Juda fut sa sainctete, God separated them from the Egyptians,
as these from the Babylonians, to inhabit their praises, and to be worshipped
by them, and so they were his Sanctuary, and Sanctification.

God does Sanctify himself, when he does vouchsafe a people manifestations of
his goodness, wisdom, mercy, love, and faithfulness, and God is sanctified,
when a people does that is pleasing and acceptable to God.

Numb. 20.12. Because ye believe not to sanctify me in the eyes of the
children of Israel; unbeleef is a non- sanctifying of God, and believing is a
sanctifying of him.

Obs. 1 God accounts not Apostates and Idolaters, but those are true
Israelites, to be his people, his Church: for in mine holy mountain there
shall all the house of Israel be: those were Rebels, and would serve wood and
stone, that would not hearken unto him, he purged out, and the house of Israel
purged, must be in his holy mountain. God esteems those who are Godly, true
Believers, Israelites indeed, to be his. There be none but such in the
invisible Church, Romans 11.26. Gal. 6.16. but in the visible, there be tares
and wheat, yet God does not reckon the tares to be wheat; they are Satan's not
the Lords, Mat. 13.38. there be goats and sheep, yet the Lord reckons not the
goats to be sheep, Matthew. 25.33. Psalm. 15.1. Lord who shall dwell in thy holy
hill, he that walks uprightly, and works, etc.

Obs. 2 Wherever Gods people are scattered, he will bring them, and all of
them, into, or unto Sion to serve him. In mine holy Mountain, etc. There shall
all the house of Israel, all of them in the Land, serve me: God would bring
them out of Babylon into Canaan, from Heathenish mountains to his holy
Mountain, from the World and Synagogues of Satan into the true Church.
Wherever God has any sheep, he will gather them, and all of them into his
fold.

These verses do speak and hold out Gods dealing with his People under Christ
and the Gospel, wherein God would bring them from all Nations, to enjoy the
great and good things provided for them, of which the Evangelical Prophet Isay
speaks at large, chap. 60. so Zach. chapter 8.20, 21, 22. and hereof spoke our Lord
Jesus Christ, when he said, John 10.16. Other sheep I have, which are not of
this fold, them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice. When the
Prodigal was in a far Country, did not the Lord order things so, that he
returned to his fathers house? when the sheep was strayed and lost, did not the
Lord seek it out, and bring it home to the fold? Luke 15. and did not Christ
send out his Apostles into all Nations to gathet in those were given him of the
Father? Mat. 28.19, 20.

Obs. 3 The Lord is to be worshipped especially in Sion, in his holy Mountain,
in the solemn assembly. There shall all the house of Israel serve me. Its not
sinful to worship God any where, 1 Timothy 2.8. or alone, Matthew. 6.6. but chiefly
in the Congregation it should be, where his worship is publicly held forth,
and with the harmoniousnesse of many spirits held up, where strangers may come
in, and see, yea, say, God is here, 1 Cor. 14.25. For he is in the assembly of
the Saints, Psalm. 89.7. This made the Prophet say, Isa. 2.23, it shall come to
pass in the last days, that the mountain of the Lords house shall be
established in the top of the Mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills,
and all Nations shall flow unto it, and many people shall go and say, Come ye,
and let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob,
and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths; But in our
days this gracious prophesy has been greatly crossed, for many have said,
Come let us go from the Mountain of the Lord, from the house of the God of
Jacob; Let us go to our own Mountain, follow our own Teachings, and walk in
our own paths, but God has made it evident, that their mounts, are mounts of
Corruption, their Teachings Delusions, their paths crooked and cursed. Let us
therefore take the Apostles counsel, Heb. 10 13, 24, 25. Let us hold fast the
profession of our faith without wavering, and let us consider one another to
provoke unto love, and to good works, not forsaking the assembling of our
selves together, as the manner of some is; Nor let us meet as the manner of
some is, viz. to wickedness.

Let us fulfill the Prophesy, call upon one another to go up to the Mountain of
the Lord, etc. And say, he will teach us his ways, and we will walk in his
paths.

Obs. 4 In the Lords mountain, in the Church, God will show favor and mercy to
his people. There will I accept them, That is, pardon, approve of, and receive
them; when we come to serve the Lord after his own way, in Gospel
congregations, meeting in this name of Christ to know the mind of God, and
glorify him, God is the Master of such assemblies, he dispenses many mercies,
and distributes sweetest comforts therein, Isa. 60.7. they shall come up with
acceptance to mine Altar, is spoken of the Gospel times, men should come from
several quarters to the Christian congregations with acceptance: God would meet
them there, welcome them thither, there he would bless them see Jer. 31.12.
Isa. 66.18. 2 Cor. 6. as every Christian, so every congregation is the Temple
of the living God, therefore he told the Church of Corinth, he would dwell in
them, be their God and father, and they should be his people, his Sons and
Daughters; God would accept of them as a Father does of his Children, take
pleasure in them, and let out choice mercies unto them; When the Disciples were
met, Jesus came to them, bestowed his peace and Spirit upon them. John
20.19.21, 22. and see what mercies they met with, who served him in his Temple,
Rev. 7.15, 16, 17, 18.

Obs. 5 Where the person is accepted of God, there the Actions and Sacrifices
of that person are acceptable also. There I will accept them, and there will I
require their offerings. In Sion God would accept the men, and in Sion he
would accept their services. If Persons or Congregations be not accepted of
God themselves, nothing they do or tender, is welcome unto him, Genesis 4.5. but
if the parties be under Divine favor, their presents and duties are grateful,
Isa. 56.6, 7. those that joined themselves to the Lord, and took hold of his
Covenant. Them says the Lord, Will I bring to my holy Mountain, and make them
joyful in my house of prayer, their burnt offerings, and their Sacrifices
shall be accepted upon mine Altar. They being in Covenant with God, and
offering in Sion unto God, he was pleased with them and their offerings, Mal.
3.1, 3, 4. when Christ the messenger of the Covenant should come, refine them,
and be delighted in by them, then should the offerings of Judah and Jerusalem
be pleasant unto the Lord. God is desirous of the prayers, praises, and alms
of a good man, who is reconciled unto him; they are sweet odours unto him; so
they are called in the next verse. I will accept you with your sweet savor, or
savor of rest; when God has these, his spirit is at rest; being in a manner
troubled when he has them not. Hence prayers of the Godly are likened to
incense, Psalm 141.2. their bounty, to the odor of a sweet smell, Phil. 4.18.
and their praise is preferred before the sacrificing of an Ox, Psalm. 69.31.

Obs. 6 God must have the best tendered up to him in our Sacr^fices and
Service^, he cal^^ for, and expects the best from his people. I require the
first fruits of their Oblations; the chief, principal, and best you have, in
all your holy things. If God have lean, lanke, lame, imperfect Sacrifices
offered to him, its a dishonor, and offends him, Mal. 1.8. if ye offer the
blind for sacrifice, is it not evil? and if ye offer the Lame and sick, is it
not evil? yes, its very evil, its extremely evil; the interrogation it self
portends so much, and being a double interrogation, doubles the evil. What
offer it to me? man wo^ld not accept of such offerings, go try, Offer it now
unto thy Governor, that is brought unto me. Go tender it to him, will he be
pleased with thee, or accept thy person? no, I know he will not, and if man,
sorry, sinful man, like thy self will not accept such things, should I the
great God do it? God is so far from accepting and showing favor in this kind,
that he pours out a curse upon him, that does so, ver. 14. Cursed be the
deceiver which has in his flock a male, and voweth, and sacrifices unto the
Lord a corrupt thing: men think if they do something in religion, give God a
Sacrifice, though it be blind, lame, sickly, they shall have a blessing; but
see how the Lord brands them, they are deceivers* and whom do they deceive, not
God, but themselves; for instead of a blessing they meet with a curse; such
dealings with God, cause him even then when he uses to be most propitious, to
throw forth curses. Suitable hereunto, is that in Hos. 8.13. They Sacrifice
flesh for the Sacrifices of mine offerings, and eat it; but the Lord accepts
them not, now will he remember their iniquity, and visit their sins; if they
did bring the best they had, yet they had no respect to God, but to their own
bellies.

Obs. 7 When the Lord brings his People out of a scattered, Captive condition,
into Church order, he expects they should set up all his Ordinances. I will
require your offerings, and the first fruits of your Oblations, with all your
holy things: Circumcision, Passover, Sacrifices, etc. Their being in Babylon
was a representation of the Churches condition under Antichrist, and as then
they being freed from the Babylonish Captivity, fell into the ways of worship
formerly given out, so now Christians being brought out of spiritual Babylon
should do the like: Neither let any say, those gifts are lost which the
Churches once had, etc.

Ezra 2.63. those Priests that were put from their places, because their Names
were not found in the Genealogies, the Tirshatha or Governor said, They should
not eat of the most holy things, till there stood up a Priest with the Urim,
and with Thummim, that was never.

They lost at the Babylonish captivity, 1 The Ark with the Mercy Seat, and
Cherubims. 2 The fire from heaven. 3 Sheimoh or Divine presence. 4 The Urim and
Thummim. 5 The Spirit of Prophesy.


These all were wanting in the Second Temple, yet they did not forbear to set
up and use the Ordinances of God which formerly were appointed.

Obs. 8 The Lord does those things for his People, which makes him honorable
amongst them and others. I will be sanctified in you before the Heathen; The
mercy and kindness he showed them in bringing them out of Babylon, and
restoring to them their former enjoyments, set them on work to praise the Lord,
and made the Heathens acknowledge that God was faithful to them in keeping his
promise.

Verse 42 And ye shall know that I am the Lord, when I shall bring you into the
land of Israel, into the Country for the which I lifted up my hand, to give it
to your fathers. 43 And there shall ye remember your ways, and all your
doings wherein ye have been defiled, and ye shall loath your selves in your
own sight, for all your evils that ye have committed. 44 And ye shall know
that I am the Lord, when I have wrought with you for my names sake, not
according to your wicked ways, nor according to your corrupt doings, O ye
house of Israel, says the Lord God. In these verses you have the event and
sequel of the Lords gracious dealings with this People, in bringing them out of
their Captivity into their own land again; which is, 1 Experimental
acknowledgement of God and his goodness unto them, v. 42.44. 2 Con^^dera^ion of
their former ways. v. 43. 3 Humiliation and Repentance for them.


And ye shall know that I am the Lord. They knew the Lord by the works of
creation, by the Prophets, by the severe judgments he had executed upon them,
but that knowledge had not affected their hearts and brought them to fear,
worship, and serve the Lord answerably; but now upon that great mercy of being
delivered out of Babylon, which seemed a thing unpossible to them. Ezekiel. 37.11.
and being brought into Canaan, they should have such knowledge of God as should
descend to their hearts, and cause them to hearken to, and honor him; they
should know him practically, do his will; they should know him to be faithful
in performing his Promises, powerful and gracious in doing greater things than
they looked for, and so should set themselves to serve the Lord. Others knew
him by his judgments, v. 38. which knowledge produced no real effects in their
hearts and lives, but these by his mercies and goodness, which knowledge
rested not in their heads, but was operative in their hearts, and extant in
their lives, so knowing is to be taken, 1 Chronicles. 28.9.

When I shall bring you into the Land of Israel, etc. Of these words, or not
much differing, you heard in the 28. verse. Though the Land of Israel were a
fruitful Land, flowing with milk and honey, and so it was a great mercy to be
brought in upon that account, yet that was not all. It was the Land of Promise,
the inheritance of their fathers, and their repossession of it evidenced that
they were their children, their heirs, the people of God.

Obs. 1 Experimental knowledge of God, affects the heart, and makes obedient to
his will* to worship* and honor God, which other knowledge does not; What ever
knowledge a man has of God and his ways, without this, its a form of
knowledge, rather than knowledge it self, 1 John 2.4. He that says I know
him, and keeps not his Commandments, is a Liar, and the Truth is not in him
that is, he has no true knowledge of God in him; for what he says of love,
chapter 5.3. This is the Love of God, that we keep his Commandments, that is true
of knowledge, there is no right knowledge of God if ye keep not his
Commandments. Hence says the Lord, Isa. 1.3. Israel does not know, and Jer.
4.22. chapter 8.7. my people know not the judgment of the Lord; they had the Law,
the Prophets, yet they did not know, and why? they did not keep his
Commandments. Violation of them is an argument men know not God; where works
of iniquity are committed, there the knowledge of God is wanting, Hos. 5.4. the
spirit of whoredoms is in the midst of them, and they have not known the Lord,
and chapter 4.1. when there was no truth nor mercy in the Land, then there was no
knowledge of God in it. When men are disobedient to the Commands of God, they
are ignorant of God in their hearts, deny God in their lives, what ever
knowledge they have of him in their heads; you may find it in holy writ, that
as those do evil, are said not to know God, Jer. 9.3. so those that do good,
are said to know him, Jer. 22.16. and pure religion, which is the right
knowledge of God, is put upon doing, James 1.27. Daniel therefore tells us, that
turning from iniquity, and so walking in the ways of God, is the way to
understand truth, and so to know God, Dan. 9.13. and Christ has affirmed it,
that doing is the way to knowing, Joh. 7.17.

Obs. 2 The Goodness, mercy, and kindness of God begets experimental knowledge
of him in the hearts of men; Ye shall know that I am the Lord, when I shall
bring you into the land of Israel. When God should knock off the Babylonish
yoke, and replant them in Canaan; then their hearts should taste and be
affected with the dealings of God. Great mercies had great operations upon
them, and made deep impressions in them; God teaches men by his works,
experimental knowledge comes in that way; when his word is fulfilled in
Promises or threats, in mercy, or judgment, then men come to know God. He is
known by executing of judgment, Psalm. 9.16. and known by his mercies, Psalm.
19.20, 21, 22. Its one thing to hear of Physic, another to feel the workings
of it in ones bowels. One thing to hear of Wine, another to find the virtue of
it in the stomach. So its one thing to hear of God and his mercies, another to
taste of the loving kindness of God in his mercies, Psalm 34.8. taste and see
that the Lord is good. Gods goodness had bred experimental knowledge in David,
and he could sensibly speak of it, and provoke others to partake of what he
had.

Ver. 43 And there shall ye remember your ways. These words we had in the
16. chap. verse. 61. the word remember notes remembering with affection, so as to
do something thereupon.

And all your doings wherein ye have been defiled. The Septuagint reads the
former words with a part of these, thus, There shall ye remember your ways,
wherein ye have defiled your selves, and leave out these words, all your
doings; but they are in the Hebr^w, and import their Idolatries, and other
abominations. They corrupted Gods worship, fell to Babylonish practices, and
greatly defiled themselves.

And ye shall loath your selves in your own sight. In the sixth Chapter, verse.
9. were these words opened, where they are thus, They sh^l loath themselves for
the evils which they have committed in all their abominations. The Septuagint
is, (...), Aquil. (...) Displicebitis vob^s. Theod. (...) insensi critis. Sym.
(...).
They shall smite their faces. Others you shall be displeased and wroth with your
selves. Symmachus has it thus, you shall be little in your own eyes, for all
the wickedn^sses ye have done; The meaning of the verse is, that they should
seriously consider their ways, be ashamed of them, tru^ly repent of them;
yea, so repent, as to judge themselves worthy to be cut off from being Gods
People, and to be made a curse.

Obs. 1 ^ense of Mercies rather than of Judgments, makes sin bitter, and le^ds
unto Repentance. Their Captivity and sad things they suffered therein, (...)
and excindere and execrari significat. says Maldona.
did not imbitter their sin unto them, and break their hearts, but Gods
kindness in bringing them out of Babylon, into the Land of Israel, that
prevailed with them, when they had received mavelous kindness from God, then
they were marvellously affected, greatly ashamed of their ways, and loathed
themselves. Mercies in Sion produced that which judgments in babylon did not.
Quem vexatio non dat, dat beneficentia intellectum. Pradus.
Great mercies bestowed upon great sinners, do preach the Doctrine of
repentance most effectually, convincing them strongly of their unworthy and
vile carriages toward the Lord

1 Samuel 24. David's kindness brake the heart of Saul, and made him to weep and
say, Thou art more righteous then I, for thou have rewarded me good, whereas I
have rewarded thee evil. If humane favor has such influence into a sinful
heart, what has Divine? Moses by his strokes fetched water out of a Rock,
David by his kindness. God sometimes by his judgments humbles men, and brings
them to repentance, but mostly by his mercies. The sweet influences of the
Gospel have pierced deeper into sinners hearts, than the terrors of the Law.

Obs. 2 When the Lord gathers up his People out of the world, and brings them
into near relation to himself, into Canaan, and Church order, he looks they
should review their former ways, and be much affected with them, and
thoroughly repent for them. There shall ye remember your ways, and all your
doings, wherein, etc. When brought into Canaan, they were not only to eat the
milk and honey, to behold the glory thereof, but they were to remember days of
old, their sins in Babylon, compliances with Babylonians; how they had
polluted themselves, and provoked the Lord, and thereupon to mourn kindly for
their unkindnesses to him, who had showed such mavelous loving kindness unto
them. When God brings men out of the World; now into Sion, gives them the Milk
and Honey of the Gospel, shows them the glory thereof, then they look back,
wonder at their wickedness, and loath themselves for it, saying, who is like
unto us in sin and wickedness, and who is like unto our God in grace and
goodness, in pardon and forgiveness? Micah 7.18 when it shall please God to
bring the Jews out of that Babylon they are now in; unto the true Canaan the
Church of Christ, they will remember their iniquities, their bitter and bloody
doings against Christ, mourn and loath themselves for the same, Zach. 12.10.
Rev. 1.7.

Obs. 3 Where repentance springs from sense of Love and kindness, as it is
real and deep, so its secret and universal, they should, being brought into
Canaan, not only remember their sins, but they should loath themselves, be
displeased so with themselves, that they should smite and abhor themselves,
and that in their own sight, and for all the evils they had committed, when no
eye saw them, they would spread all their sins before them, and in the sight
and sense of them, be vile in their own eyes.

Verse. 44. And they shall know that I am the Lord. These words we had in the
42. v. wherein they were opened and expounded of an experimental knowledge.

When I have wrought with you for my Names sake. Of these words, see verse.
9.14.22. The Vulgar is, Cum benefecero, When I shall have done good to you. The
Hebrew is, When I have done to you, or With you for my Name sake, That is, when
I have dealt graciously and mercifully with you out of my free grace, and for
the honor of my name.

Not according to your wicked ways. Of wicked abominations was spoken chap.
8.9. of wicked counsel, chap. 11.2. of Wicked way and ways, chap. 13.22.18.23.
Those are wicked ways which lead from God, from truth, from just, honest, and
good things. In such they had walked long, but God would not deal with them
according to the wickedness of their ways. Significat aliquid ad imum usque,
and funditus perdere corrumpere depravare quocunque id fiat modo sine medio.


Nor according to your corrupt doings. The word for Corrupt is from (...) which
signifies to Corrupt even to the bottom, thoroughly, and such were they, they
were not a Little corrupt, but totally corrupted, in their judgments, wills,
affections, words and actions, they were like a corrupt spring, that sends
forth nothing but corrupt waters, Ezekiel. 16.47. Thou wast corrupted more than
they in all thy ways.

Obs. 1 The Lord is gracious and merciful unto the Sons of men, deserving ill
at his hands, he deals with them upon the account of his grace, not their
deserts; What did their wicked ways and corrupt doings deserve at his hands?
but that he should have poured out his fury, and accomplish his anger upon
them, as it is chapter 7.8. but he wrought with them for his Name sake, that is,
out of his free grace and favor he spared them, he pardoned them, he
delivered them out of Babylon, and brought them into Canaan. When God sees
nothing in the Creature to put him on to show mercy, he finds enough in his
own Name, to provoke him thereunto; you have it four times in this chapter,
thrice before, and here, that he wrought for his Name sake, whatever mercy
this people had, it was from Divine favor, not their desert.

If it was free Grace brought the Jews out of Babylon into Canaan, what is it
but freeness, fullness, and riches of grace to bring men out of the world into
the heavenly Canaan? Predestination, Calling, Justification, and Glorification,
are acts of mere grace, and favor, Ephesians. 1.5. 2 Timothy 1.9. Romans 3.24. chapter 8.30.
1 Pet. 5.10. All the Sons of men enjoy here, or expect hereafter, is from the
bounty, favor, and mercy of God, Psalm 103.8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Luke 12.32. to
attribute ought to our own wills or endeavors, is to derogate from God, and
darken the glory of his name, and free grace.

Obs. 2 God does therefore deal graciously with sinners, that they may know him
experimentally; Ye shall know that I am the Lord, when I have wrought with you
for my Name sake, etc. God works, and so works, that he makes the hearts of
men affected with his works* and to say, Psalm. 86.8. Among the Gods there is
none like unto thee, O Lord, neither are there any works like unto thy works,
none so full of Glory, so full of grace and mercy, none so influential and
operative upon the heart. Its Gods scope and aim in doing good so freely, and
fully as he does, to make himself known to the hearts of his People, that so
they may be knit to him, provoke them to admire him, and live more fully to
him.

Verse. 45 Moreover, the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, 46 Son of Man,
set thy face toward the South, and drop thy word toward the South, and
Prophesy against the Forest of the South-field. 47 And say to the forest of
the South: Hear the word of the Lord: Thus says the Lord God, Behold, I will
kindle a fire in thee, and it shall devour every green tree in thee, and every
dry tree, the flaming flame shall not be quenched, and all faces from the South
to the North shall be burnt therein. 48 And all flesh shall see, that I the Lord
have kindled it: it shall not be quenched. These verses are the fifth general
part of the chapter, viz. a parabolical Declaration of the destruction of Judea
and Jerusalem.

Some refer these words to the next Chapter, and make the beginning of that at
the 45. v. of this.

The 45. v. sets before us the Divine Authority of this Prophesy against the
Jews, that were yet in Canaan, the Prophet received it from the Lord, it came
from God to him, before it went out from him to men.

In this 45. v. we have, 1 The Compellation, Son of man, of which heretofore.
2 A Command, to declare and utter the word he had received, set thy face, etc.


Set thy Face. Of this Expression in Chapter 4. 3, 7. chapter 6.2. chapter 13.17. Hac
phrasi ostendit strenue precidandum ess^, ita ut nullis minis frangatur, nec so
impediri sinat. Lavater.
dispose thy self to, and be undaunted in what thou art to Prophesy, and them
thou art to Prophesy against: speak then like a man of God, and sent from God,
not regarding the frowns or threats of any.

Toward the South. Babylon was North from Jerusalem, Jerem. 1.14. and our
Prophet being there, and having declared the mind of God against those Elders
came subtlely to inquire of him, he is here commanded to set his face Toward
the South, that was toward Jerusalem and Judea.

Drop thy word toward the South. The word for South, Aecolampad. renders
Theinan. Junius dextram. Others Austrum, meridiem. The Hebrew is, (...) from
(...) the right hand, and Jerusalem lay on the right hand, when in Mesopotamia
they stood with their F^ces toward the East. Natuph est guttatim effundere vel
emittere, 2 Samuel 2^.10. Praeceptum auriculis he instill are memento. Hor. l.
1. Ep. 8. G^^ta cavat lapidem non vi sed saepe cadendo.
In the Hebrew is not thy word, but only thus, drop toward the South. The word
(...) properly signifies the dropping of the Clouds or rain, which falls by
drops, and metaphorically, is put for prophesying and preaching, and Vatablus
says, the Chaldy paraphrase has it, vaticinare, Prophesy; and so it is
expressed in the next words of this verse, Prophesy against the forest of the
South, which are exegetical of what was before, Preaching or Prophesying is
likened to rain or the droppings thereof.

1 In respect of the flowing and succession of one drop after another, Judges
5.4. The Heavens dropped, the clouds also dropped water; So in Prophesying,
there is one word, one truth after another, he that Prophesyeth, effundit verba.

2 In respect of the influence thereof, the drops soak into the earth; so words
have influence into men's ears and hearts, Deuteronomy. 32.2. My Doctrine shall drop as
the Rain, my speech shall distill as the dew, as the small rain upon the tender
herb, and as the showers upon the grass: as the rains and dews insinuate
themselves into the grass and ground, so do words into the heads and hearts of
men, Psalm. 119.130. the entrance of thy word gives light.

3 In respect of the trouble and hurt, that often rains and droppings produce,
Prove. 27.15. A continual dropping in a very rainy day, and a contentious woman
are alike, alike grievous, troublesome, wasting, and wearying; so Prophesying
of judgments and destruction, is grievous and troubles much, its like great
rains and drops, 2 Chronicles. 34.25. my wrath shall be poured out upon this place:
the Original is, shall drop upon this place, there should be a storm; and such
great drops of Gods wrath as should consume it.

Toward the South. The word here for South is, Dorom, quasi habitatio alta,
because the Sun goes high there, and after in the verse you have Negef for
the South, the word signifies a dry place, and metonymically its put for the
South, because of the great heat of the Sun there, Judges 1.15. says Achsah to
Caleb her father, Thou have given me Azatz hannegef, a South Land, that is, a
Land of drought, give me springs of water.

Prophesy against the Forest of the South-Field. That is, against Jerusalem,
and those that dwelt in Judea. The Hebrew for Forest is, (...) sylva a wood,
and Judea or Jerusalem is compared to a Forest or wood.

1 For the number of those in it; in a wood are a multitude of trees, Jer.
46.23. They shall cut down her forest, says the Lord, though it cannot be
searched because they are more then the Grasshoppers, and are innumerable; its
spoken of the People of Egypt; so they of ^udea were many.

2 In a wood and forest, is no order, the trees stand confusedly; so now there
was no order amongst them, all run into confusion, Micah 7.6. The Son
dishonors the Father, the Daughter rises up against her mother, the
Daughter in Law, against the Mother in Law, a man's enemies are they of his own
house.

3 In a Forest, Trees are fruitless, or if fruitful, its wild fruit those
trees bear, they are for the Axe and fire, Ezekiel. 15.6. such were the men in
Judea, trees that bare no fruit, or evil fruit, Isa. 9.17. Every one is an
Hypocrite, and an evil doer, aad every mouth speaks folly, see Mic. 7.3, 4.

4 Forests and Woods are D^uns of Wild Beasts, Psalm 104.20. Jer. 5.6. and
Jerusalem was full of Wild beasts, Zeph. 3.3, 4. Ezekiel. 22.25, 27. Mic. 3.10
Ezekiel. 7.23. The Land is full of bloody crimes, the City is full of violence,
Jer. 7.9, 10, 11. There was Robbing, Murdering, and all Abominations.

Obs. 1 When God calls men to Prophesy or Preach, they are to prepare for it,
and undauntedly to proceed therein; Son of man, set thy face toward the
South, and drop thy word, etc. He must fit himself for that work, and what
ever he met with in the work, he must not be discouraged, but go on as one
sent out, and commissioned by the Lord, thus did Peter and John, Act. 4.19, 20.

Obs. 2 Gods word shall not be in vain, which is given out against hard-hearted
sinners. Drop thy word toward the South, and Prophesy against the Forest.
They would not admit the Dews of the word for their good, they must feel the
droppings of it, for their ruin: Men cannot keep the rain from falling upon
the earth and rocks; Neither can they keep off the threats of God from falling
upon them and theirs; and when they fall they will be terrible unto them, Isa.
55.10, 11. as the rain has its end, when it falls, so has the word he sends
forth and causes to be dropped; if he drop a word of wrath, that drop will
eat into the most stony heart, and consume it at last, Zach. 1.6. Gods words
took hold of their fathers, the Prophets dropped out such terrible drops of
judgment, as consumed them: Let Judea be as a Forest full of trees, and
mighty ones too, if God once drop his word against it, down must these rees,
Hos. 6.5. God hewed them by his Prophets, and slew them by the judgments of
his mouth.

Obs. 3 Gods Threats and Judgments are irrespective, and impartial. Prophesy
against the Forest: The whole Forest and highest trees in it, as well as the
Shrubs, and bushes. Wicked Cities and Countries are no other in Gods account,
than a Forest of wild and fruitless trees, which he lays his Axe unto, to
cut down for the fire.

47 And say to the Forest of the South, thus says the Lord, etc. After a
Command of the Prophet to speak, and the forest to hear, you have the
Parabolical declaration it self, of the destruction of Jerusalem; where you may
take notice, 1 Of the judgment, which is fire. 2 The Author of it, I will
kindle a fire. 3 The Place where, in thee. 4 The effect of this fire, it should
devour every tree, both green and dry. 5 The kind or manner of this fire,
inextinguishable, the flaming flame shall not be quenched.


I will kindle a fire in thee. By fire is meant that warlike invasion by the
Babylonians, who by sword, and what accompanied it, laid all wast.

Every green tree, and every dry tree. Jerome makes these to be Saints and
Sinners; So some others expound the green tree of the Righteous, and dry Tree,
of the Wicked, but Ezekiel. 9.4. the righteous mourned for all the abominations
were in Jerusalem, and were marked that they might not be destroyed. Its better
therefore to understand by green Tree, the rich and wealthy, the young and
lusty, the high and mighty; and by the Dry Tree, the Old, Poor, and such as
were underlings and inconsiderable; Or by them you may understand all sorts of
People; as by green trees, and dry trees, all sorts of trees, in a forest or
wood are meant.

The flaming flame shall not be quenched. The Hebrew is, The flame of flame,
the duplication of the word, notes the intention of it, a vehement flame, such
as should continue, and by no art, power, or policy be extinct, the affliction
should be wonderful, sore, and lasting. The war begat famine, famine the
plague, plague death, here was a flame of a flame. They strove by the Egyptians
to quench that fire, but could not.

All faces from the South to the North shall be burnt therein. Not all
destroyed, or be ashamed only, but all through fear, famine, and diseases,
should appear as dry withered and burnt up, from one end of the land to the
other.

Obs. 1 The Lord sends fierce judgments upon his own People for their
wickedness, which do consume all sorts of them. I will kindle a fire in thee;
In thee Jerusalem, in thee Judea, who gloriest in thy Princes, in thy Nobles,
in thy Soldiers, in thy Privileges, and Church-ship, which shall devour every
green tree, and every dry tree; As a fire devoures all before it, so do Gods
judgments: Let houses be strong or weak, great or small, trees be green or
dry, fire conquers them, and brings them to ashes; So does Gods judgments
ruin People, be they high or low, weak or strong, rulers or subjects, and
dries up the Spirits of those that are living, Lament. 4.8. Their visage is
blacker than a Coal, they are not known in the streets, their skin cleaves to
their bones, it is withered, it is become like a stick.

See Isa. 24.4.5, 6.

Obs. 2 Gods judgments once begun, can not be staid by the skill or power of
the creature: The flaming fire shall not be quenched, they used all their
Policy and Power to divert the Babylonians from coming, to remove them being
come, but nothing prevailed. Gods fires are not extinguishable by the Arts,
Counsels, or strengths of men. As we cannot avoid his judgments threatened, so
we cannot remove them inflicted; if he send a spirit of division among
brethren, who can cast out that spirit; if he Commission the Sword to walk
abroad, who can command it into the Scabberd again? And to keep home? If he
cause a burning heat in the Body, who can quench that heat but himself?

Verse. 48. And all flesh shall see, that I the Lord have kindled it: it shall
not be quenched. All flesh. By a Synecdoche of the genus or the species, flesh
is put for men, and by all flesh, he intends the people in the Regions round
about, and Chaldeans themselves.

Shall see. That is, shall acknowledge, that this war, this destructive
judgment is not humane, but divine; When strange and dreadful things are done,
men inquire into the causes. If Mountains be set on fire, fire and brimstone
come down from heaven, they will see and say this is the hand of the Lord.

It shall not be quenched. God would continue the burning of this fire, till it
had consumed what he had appointed to consumption. Not their Prayers, Tears,
or blood, should extinguish it; he that kindled it, only could quench it,
only he that calls for, and causes war, can cease wars.

Obs. Its one main end of Gods severe judgments upon Cities, Nations, and
People, to make them know and acknowledge that he is the causer and continuer
of them, yea, that they are unremoveable without his hand.

Verse. 49 Then said I, Ah Lord God, They say of me, does he not speak Parables?
Here is the last part of the chapter, viz. a doleful conclusion of the Prophet,
wherein he complains of the course and reproachful usage he had amongst the
People, they mocked, and scoffed at him and his Parables, they told him they
were dreams and phansies of his own; what did he tell them of the South, and
Forest of the South field, of fire, and flaming flame, of green and dry trees,
these were dark things, visions, and divinations of his own head, and as for
them, they would not heed what he said; his words savoured more of man than of
God, setting forth his wit more than any thing else.

Does he not speak Parables? Jun. and Trem. have it, Nonne est artifex
parabolorum iste? Is not he an Artist in Parabolizing? Piscat. Annon
excogitator parabolorum est? is he not a deviser of Parables? he vexes us with
such things, gives us words we understand not.

Obs. 1 The Prophets and messengers of God are subject to scorn and reproach,
even from those they are sent unto, Jer. 18.18. 2 Chronicles. 36.16. Isa. 8.18.

Obs. 2 When the messengers of God are burdened with the revilings, scoffs and
reproaches of men, their refuge is to go unto God, and ease themselves in his
bosom, as the Prophet here does.

Obs. 3 When Prophesies and Preachings are not pleasing to the people, they are
not willing to understand what is delivered. They say, does he not speak
parables? they knew what fire, forest flame, green, and dry trees meant, but
because it was a sad prophesy, and struck at their interests, they would not
understand, they put off all as mystical and aenigmatical.

AN Exposition continued UPON THE PROPHESY OF EZEKIEL.
CHAP. XXI.
Verse. 1 And the word of the came Lord unto me, saying, 2 Son of man, set thy
face toward Jerusalem, and drop thy word toward the holy places, and Prophesy
against the land of Israel. 3 And say to the Land of Israel, Thus says the
Lord, Behold, I am against thee, and will draw forth my sword out of his sheath,
and will cut off from thee, the righteous and the wicked. 4 Seeing then that I
will cut off from thee, the righteous and the wicked, therefore shall, my sword
go forth out of his sheath, against all flesh, from the South to the North. 5
That all flesh may know that I the Lord, have drawn forth my Sword out of his
sheath: It shall not return any more.
IN this Chapter is a double Prophesy.

One against the land of Israel, and what was therein, from the 1. v. to the 28.

2 Another against the Ammonites, from the 28. to the end.

Ver. 1 And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, The Hebrew for Came unto
me, is, was unto me, that is, was put into me by divine inspiration; he spoke
not of himself, but from God.

Verse. 2 Son of man set thy Face toward Jerusalem drop thy Word, and Prophesy.
Of these words see the former Chapter, verse. 46. where they were spoken of.

Toward the Holy Places. The Temple which is put plurally, because of the
several Partitions of it, the Sanctum, and Sanctum Sanctorum, with the
buildings contigual to it, which the Jews esteemed holy.

Here he shows what in the end of the former Chapter, he meant by the South,
Forest of the South, and South-field, viz. The land of Israel, Judea, and the
Temple,

Obs. Holiness of Places will not privilege unholy People. Sanctuaries are no
protections against Divine justice. Canaan was the holy Land, Jerusalem the
holy City, and the Temple, more Holy than both; yet Son of Man set thy face
toward Jerusalem, and drop thy word toward the holy places, and prophesy
against the Land of Israel, and say, thus says the Lord, Behold, I am against
thee, etc. I will bring the Babylonish Army upon thee; which shall utterly
destroy thee.

Verse. 3 Behold I am against thee. Here was sad tidings to hear, that God was
against Jerusalem, see chap. 5.8.

And will draw forth my Sword. By Sword is meant War, and the grievous evils
accompany it, Lev. 26.33.

And will cut off from thee, the righteous and the wicked. The Septuagint reads
the words otherwise, (...), I will destroy out of thee, the unjust and lawless;
The Chaldy has it, I will cause thy just ones to go out of thee, that I may
destroy the wicked; but the Hebrew is, The righteous and the wicked: How this
can be understood of a man truly righteous, I find not, for Psalm 5.12. The
Lord blesses the righteous, and compasses him with favor as with a shield,
if he cut him off, how does he compass him with favor, and favor as a
shield; how does he protect him? Genesis 18.23, 25. Will thou destroy the
righteous with the wicked? far be it from thee, shall not the Judge of the
earth do right? said Abraham to God. He thought it an unjust and grievous evil
that God should cut off the righteous and wicked together; and the truly
righteous were marked, Ezekiel. 9.4. that they might not be slain. Junius.
Piseat. polan.
Diverse Expositors herefore, make the righteous here to be such as were
reputed so, seemed to be so, but were not in truth so. Pradus says, Vatem
justos appell^sse per catachresin, eos qui tales videbantur, cum revera sontes
essent, and supplicium mererentur, and so righteous is taken, Mat. 9.13. Mat
8.12 Luke 2.48.
I am not come to call the righteous, etc. The holy Scripture speaks often
according to the opinions and apprehensions are had of men, or what they have
of themselves, Luke 18.9. the Pharisees thought themselves righteous, and were
reputed so, but fell short of true righteousness. These were less wicked than
others, and so appeared righteous.

Verse. 4 My Sword shall go forth out of his sheath against all flesh, from the
South to the North. This verse is the same for substance, with verse. 47. of the
Precedent Chapter; fire there is the same, with sword here, green tree, and dry
tree, the same with righteous and wicked, the burning up of all faces from the
North to the South, the same with the words, going out against all flesh.

Verse. 5. That all flesh may know, etc. All flesh was to be cut off in Judea,
that all flesh in other lands might know the severe judgments of God.

Obs. 1 That wars are the Lords; They come not without his Commission, he sends
them, orders them, and ends them at his pleasure. I will draw forth my Sword
out of his sheath, My Sword. verse. 4. shall go forth against all flesh, from
the South to the North, and verse. 5 it shall not return any more, i. e. Till it
had accomplished the Lords will; Nebuchadnezzar and his Army was the sword,
Babylon the sheath, God brought them out of their own Country, into the land
of Israel, which he laid waste-from one end to the other, and then having
finished the work of the Lord, he returned.

Obs. 2 Outside righteousness does not secure men from the judgments of God. I
will cut off from thee, the righteous and the wicked: Such righteousness
finds not favor with God. Its no better in his account than wickedness.
Labor for true righteousness; What if Josiah fell in war, and other
righteous ones have been cut off in public calamities, yet know, Mors illis
non poena, sed gloria est.

Obs. 3 From the 4. verse. The Lord is severe in his judgments at last; He bare
long with the Jews, but now he would unsheath his sword, and cut off the
righteous and the wicked from the Land, yea, all flesh, from the South to the
North.

None should escape his stroke, he would find them out where ever hid.

Obs. 4 From the 5. verse. That Gods end in bringing judgments upon a Nation,
is to make known his Power, Justice, and severity against sinners, and their
sinful ways: that all flesh may know, that I the Lord have drawn forth my
sword out of his sheath. There is a knowledge of God by his works, as well as
by his word, and by his judgments, as well as by his mercies; When
Nebuchadnezzar and his Army, the great Sword of God, should come and cut them
down, all men should see and say, God is, etc.

Verse. 6 Sigh therefore thou Son of man with the breaking of thy loins, and
with bitterness sigh before their eyes. 7 And it shall be when they say unto
thee, wherefore sighest thou? that thou shall answer, for the Tidings, because
it comes: and every heart shall melt, and all hands shall be feeble, and
every spirit shall faint, and all knees shall be weak as water; Behold it
comes, and shall be brought to pass, says the Lord God. Here is a Command
laid upon the Prophet, which is to sigh. The manner of it is threefold.

1 With breaking of loins. 2 With Bitterness. 3 Before their eyes.
With the breaking of thy Loins. Sigh as if thy loins were broken; Sigh
greatly. Its suitable to that in Isa. 21.3. My Loins are filled with pain,
pangs have taken hold upon me as the pangs of a woman that travaileth: a Woman
in travail thinks her back broken, her loins loosed, and sighs grievously; yea,
bitterly, as if her self, child, or both, were loosing their lives; So should
the Prophet sigh here, really not fainedly, deeply not superficially, bitterly,
not to ease himself.

Before their eyes. How could this be, when as Ezekiel was in Babylon, and
they at Jerusalem? Its probable there were some of Jerusalem, came to see and
hear how things would go with them there, seeing they had lately revolted from
Nebuchadnezzar, or if it were before the revolt* some might be there to bring
the tribute they paid to the Babylonish King yearly.

In the 7. verse. is the cause of this great sighing, laid down, which is double.

1 Tidings, that is, of the Babylonish Army coming. 2 The effects thereof,
which are four. 1 Melting of hearts. 2 Feebleness of hands. 3 Faintness of
spirits. 4 Weakness of knees.

Such fear should possess them upon the Tidings of the Babylonish Armies
approaching, as should make their rocky hearts melt, as Snow before the Sun,
or fat of Lambs before the fire, and the hands, spirits, and knees, of their
stoutest men to be feeble, faint, and weak; so that they should be inept unto
all services, especially military ones.

Obs. 1 The Goodness of the Lord toward a stubborn, wilful, perishing
People, in that he will have the Prophet to see, what prophetical signs will
do, when Prophetical threats did nothing: Sigh son of man, with the breaking of
thy Loins, and with bitterness, etc. These were Prophetical sighs;
representing unto them the great evils were coming upon them; that so they
might consider: sigh in like manner for their sins, and prevent their
destruction, or else certainly expect the same.

God laid an heavy burden upon the Prophet, to sigh so.

Obs. 2 Ill-tydings sinks the hearts and spirits of Hypocrites and wicked ones;
When they hear of wars and great Forces coming against them, not only does
their mirth cease, but their hearts, hands, spirits, knees, fail them. When
Nebuchadnezzar came, their hands were upon their loins, they knew not what to
do, whither to go, where to hide themselves, Has it not been so in Ireland?

But Psalm. 112.7. its said of a godly man, He shall not be afraid of evil
tidings, his heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord.

Verse. 8 Again, the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, 9 Son of man
Prophesy and say, thus says the Lord, say, a Sword, a Sword is sharpened, and
also fourbished. 10 It is sharpened to make a sore slaughter, it is fourbished
that it may glitter, should we then make mirth? It contemns the rod of my Son
as every tree. 11 And he has given it to be fourbished, that it may be
handled: this sword is sharpened, and it is fourbished to give it into the hand
of the slayer. 12 Cry and howl, Son of man, for it shall be upon my people,
it shall be upon all the Princes of Israel: Terrors by reason of the sword,
shall be upon my people, smite therefore upon thy thigh. 13 Because it is a
trial, and what if the sword contemn even the Rod? it shall be no more, says
the Lord God. The Lord had said before, he would unsheath his sword, and now
orders the Prophet to cry out, a sword, a sword, and shows the approaching of
it, for it was sharpened and fourbished, he drew it out for service, to slay
both people and Princes.

Verse. 9 A sword, a sword. By sword, you may understand all those judgments
came with Nebuchadnezzar and his Army, or more specially, those warlike
instruments, they prepared and brought with them. The word is doubled, propter
vehementiam et certitudinem.

Is sharpened and also fourbished. If it were blunt before, now it was whetted;
if it was rusty, Splendour ensis politi terret Hosts.
now its scoured. Now Nebuchadnezzar was ready with all his military
preparations, sharp and shining, full of terror, and fit for execution.

10 Its sharpened to make a sore slaughter. Hebrew is, Ad jugulandum
jugulationem, to kill a killing, that is, to make a great slaughter, it was
both fourbished, and sharpened, that it might terrify with its glistering, and
cut more sorely with its sharpness.

Obs. When God is bringing judgments upon a people, he will fit instruments
for accomplishing of the same, and that to purpose: He will make that which is
blunt, sharp; that is rusty, glittering; and those are spiritlesse, full of
spirit; he can make one to chase ten, ten one hundred, and one hundred a
thousand, his works shall never fail for want of instruments.

Should we then make mirth? The Hebrew is, (...) vel gaudebimus, shall we
rejoice? Vatablus says, Quomodo gaudebimus, and so Lavater. Piscator, An
gaudebimus, shall we rejoice? no, in no case. So Pradus, O vel quomodo
gauderemus.

Obs. 1 Times of war and judgments, are no times for mirth: The Sword is
unsheathed, its whetted, its fourbished, its approaching, should we then make
mirth? that is as unseasonable as Snow in summer, and thunder in winter; that is
a time for Fasting and Prayer, for Sackcloath and ashes, for judging our
selves, and rending our hearts; that is a time to mourn, and not to be merry,
Isa. 22.12, 13, 14. In that day did the Lord God of Hosts call to weeping, and
to mourning, and to baldness, and to girding with sackcloth, and behold, joy
and gladness, slaying Oxen, and killing Sheep, eating flesh, and drinking wine,
etc. And it was revealed in mine ears by the Lord of Hosts, surely this
iniquity shall not be purged from you till ye dye. It provokes God exceedingly,
that man calls for mirth, when he calls for mourning.

Obs. 2 The Godly and Faithful, both Ministers and People, are affected with
judgments coming upon Church or State, should we then make mirth? Isa. 22.45.
Look away from me, I will weep bitterly, labor not to comfort me, because of
the spoiling of the daughter of my People; for it is a day of trouble and
treading down, and of perplexity; So Jer. 9.1. Oh that my head were waters, and
mine eyes a fountain of tears, etc. So Christ wept over Jerusalem, Luke 19.41,
43, 44. for the evils he saw coming.

It contemns the Rod of my Son, as every Tree, These words are difficult. The
Hebrew stands thus, The rod of my Son contemning every tree.

The word Rod, shebot, some render Tribe, and so make the sense to be the
Tribe of Judah, the Son of God, which Nebuchadnezzar the sword of God, despised
as every tree, but thus Tribe, Son, and every tree, do fall in to be the same.

Others make the sense thus, This sword, the rod of my Son, viz. my people, I
have appointed to punish them withal, and however they have been able to
endure other rods, yet this is stronger than they, and shall not be broken or
frustrated of its end, when I shall use it; this sense is not to be despised.

As if by Son, Nebuchadnezzar be meant, who being armed with power, contemned
every tree, the green tree, and the dry tree, the high and the low tree, all
the men of the land of Israel? if Cyrus who delivered Gods people, be styled
but his servant, it were much that Nebuchadnezzar who destroyed them, should be
called his Son.

Others, Jun. and Pol. interpret the words of Christ, who is meant by Son;
and rod, to be the sword in Christ's hand; he was resolved now to cut down
every tree by his judgment, and to break this nation in pieces by the iron rod
and sword, he had in his hand. The father speaks concerning his son to the
Prophet, and the 11. v. strengthens this interpretation: He has given it to
be fourbished. Who is that he, but the Son? and who gave it into the hand of
the slayer, but he? and that was Nebuchadnezzar.

Obs. 1 Christ has Rods and judgments in his hand, the rod of my Son. Christ
is not all mercy, though full of mercy; the father has committed all
judgment unto him, Rev. 6.16. the Lamb has wrath in him, as well as
meekness, Christ is a Lion to tear in pieces; as well as a Samaritan, etc.
Psalm. 2.12.

Obs. 2 When sinners profit not, but are worse under lesser judgments, this
provokes Christ to bring forth more heavy judgments: The Rod of my Son,
contemning every tree; Though they stood it out against other rods, they should
not be able to do so against this; when the Axe comes to the root of Trees,
they must down; a knife they may despise, but an Ax despises them.

Obs. 3 Some judgments are so grievous, as they sweep away all; This rod
despised every tree, the strongest Oaks, the tallest Cedars, the King,
Princes, Nobles, Counselors, Soldiers, Artificers, etc.

Obs. 4 From the 11. v. Enemies cannot hurt unless they have power and
furniture given them: The Sword was fitted for and given into the hand of the
slayer, Nebuchadnezzar could not have stird, destroyed a man in the Land of
Israel, unless Christ had impoured him. Pilate had no power, but what was given
him. No man or Nation has power against another, unless they be armed from
God or Christ. Had the Jews kept in with them, none should ever have harmed
them.

Verse. 12 Cry and howl, Son of man. The word for Cry is (...) which signifies
to cry out, propter angustiam and compressionem animi, Jer. 30.15. why cryest
thou for the affliction? afflictions straightened and pressed the spirit of Jacob,
so that be cried out; you have the word in Ezekiel. 9.8. chapter 11.13. where it
notes, crying from sorrow and pressure of mind.

Howl. Beasts do howl when pinched with hunger, or suffer some great misery.
The Hebrew word (...) says Abenacius, has affinity with (...) and (...),
words, which signify night, Quando aliquis est in summa augustia ut fere ad
nihilum redigatur and non habet preter noctem and tenebras molestiatum tu^e
incipit ululare and plorare.
and reduction in a manner to nothing; and when men are encompassed with great
calamities, and ready to perish, then they howl, Isa. 65 14. they shall cry for
sorrow of heart, and howl for vexation of spirit: the Hebrew is, for breaking
of spirit; when their spirits should be broken, and they ready to sink, and be
ruined, then they should howl.

For it shall be upon my people. The Hebr. is, Hajetha, it has been upon my
People, its usual with the Hebrew, to put a praeter-tense, for the future, to
signify the certainty of the thing, and so its here. The French is, il est fait
pour mon peuple, The Sword is made for my people, to eat their flesh and drink
their blood.

Upon all the Princes of Israel. In the 11. Chapter 1. you have Princes of the
People. The word there is Sar, whence our English word Sir, which is as much;
as Prince or Lord, here its Princes of Israel, and the word is, (...) Nesiee
from Nasa to prefer, lift up, set on high.

Montanus has it, in cunctis praelatis Israel, upon all the preferred ones of
Israel. The Vulgar, In cunctis ducibus Israel, upon all the Dukes of Israel.
Others, upon all the Princes.

Terrors by reason of the Sword. The word for Terrors is, (...) which is
variously rendered; The Septuagint is, (...), and referres it to all the
Princes of Israel, dwelling or sojourning there.

Theodoret (...), Those that dwell nigh me.

The Vulgar is, qui fugerant, the sword shall be upon all the Princes and
Potentate^ that should fly.

Montan. has it, timores ob gladium, fears by reason of the sword.

The French, Crainte de glaive, fear of the sword shall be upon my people.

Castal. Terrores a gladio imminent populo meo, Terrors from the sword hang
over the heads of my people.

Vatablus, Pavores ingruent ab hoc gladio in Populum meum.

Aecolampad. Formidines ad gladium erunt populo meo.

So Piscat. Formidines propter gladium.

Lavater, Terrores gladii erunt Populo meo.

Junius and Polanus read the word thus, Detrusi in gladium sunt, says one,
erunt, says the other, cum populo meo, and in the margent of your Bibles it
is, So they are thrust down to the sword with my People; that is, the Princes
shall fare no better than the People, but together with them shall be cut off.

The reading we have, I like best, and most Expositors agree in it, and so the
word is rendered, Lam. 2.22. Jer. 6.25. The sword of the enemy, and fear is on
every side.

Smite therefore upon thy thigh. In the 6 Chapter 11. v. the Lord commanded the
Prophet to smite with his hand, stamp with his foot, and here to smite upon
his thigh; which were gestures, to express grief and sorrow, Traxit ex intimo
ventre suspirium, dentibus frendit, icit femur. Plautus in Truculento.
in great and sad calamities, Tundebant faemora palmis, they smote upon their
thighs with their hands.

Obs. 1 The Calamities of wars are matter of great mourning and sad gestures;
cry, howl, smite upon thy thigh, Jer. 4.6, 7, 8. God would bring evil from the
North upon them, Nebuchadnezzar the Lion was coming, for this gird you with
sackcloath, lament, and howl.

Obs. 2 The sword makes no distinction of Persons, it shall be upon my People,
and upon all the Princes of Israel. They should find no more favor than
others, not any, not the greatest of them, should be exempted from the evils of
the sword, Jer. 52.10. the King of Babylon slew the Sons of Zedekiah before his
eyes, he slew also all the Princes of Judah in Riblah. Then he put out the eyes
of Zedekiah.

Obs. 3 Times of war are times of fears, terrors, by reason of the sword shall
be upon my People. The sword drawn is a terrible thing, Josh. 2.9. chapter 10.12.
Jer. 15.8. chapter 46.3, 4, 5. chapter 49.24, 29. The sword is Magor-missobib,
fear round about, it makes families, towns, Cities, Nations, to fear and
tremble; when the sword is without, there is terror within, and such terror
often times as is destructive, Deuteronomy. 32.25. men's hearts meditate such terrors, as
bereave them of their wits, senses, lives.

13 Because it is a trial. The word for Trial is, (...) Bochan, from Bachan to
Prove, examine, Try. By the Septuagint here its rendered, (...), because it is
justified. Aquila, (...), quia scrutatus est, because it has searched out and
examined them.

Vulgar, Quia probatus est, its a sword proved, and will do the work. Pagnine,
qui ad probationem eductus est, it is brought forth to trial. Tygurin, Quoniam
explorator est, because it is a Tryer. Others have it Trial, the sword and
Terrors accompanying it, should be a Trial to them, and such a Trial as they
never had, they had had the sword at their gates before, but had profitted
little by it. Now they should find and feel the sword more glistering, sharp,
and destructive than ever.

And what if the sword contemn even the Rod, it shall be no more. Interpreters
are perplexed about these words, as they are in the Original, and what to make
of them as translated, I know not. Those words, The Sword, and more, are not in
the Text, and puzzle the sense. The Hebrew is thus, And what if also the Rod
despising, has not been, that is, what if the Rod heretofore or hitherto has
not been a despising rod, but rather despised; as Zedekiah and his Nobles
despised the Oath and Covenant made with Nebuchadnezzar, chap. 17.16. yet now
it should be a despising rod, and so it suits with that in the 10. v. The Rod
of my Son, despising every tree: and that in the 12. ver. It shall be upon all
the Princes of Israel; and with that in Habbakkuk, chapter 1.10.

They shall scoff at the Kings, and the Princes shall be a scorn unto them,
they shall deride every strong hold.

Or thus, There is cause thou should cry, howl, smite upon thy thigh,
because the sword shall be a trial, and what also if it shall not be a
despising Rod? if it be a trying Rod, there is cause enough to mourn, but it
shall be a despising Rod, and so there is more cause to mourn. If this Rod
make them not try their ways, repent, and turn, it shall be a Rod to despise
the stoutest of them, and to destroy them.

Obs. 1 That the judgments of God are Trials, they discover and make known
what people are. The fire tries the metals, and declares what is good silver,
good gold, and what is reprobate, Deuteronomy. 8.2. God kept them forty years in the
wilderness, to prove them, and know what was in their hearts; the hard things
they met with there, discovered some to be murmurers, some Idolaters, some
Fornicators, some backsliders, Isa. 8.21. It shall come to pass, that when they
shall be hungry, they shall fret themselves, and curse their King, and their
God: when evil was upon them, then their wickedness appeared, so Jehoram, 2
King. 6.33. belched out his vileness in a time of distress, saying, this evil
is of the Lord, what should I wait for the Lord any longer? he is a cruel God,
destroies the people with famine, and puts them upon eating their own Children,
therefore I Will wait no longer on him: When great winds are abroad, they tell you
what trees are sound or rotten.

Obs. 2 God tryes before he destroys, Rods of Trial, come before Rods of
destruction. When the sword is drawn, fourbished, and whet, the Lord tries men
thereby, whether they will consider their ways, repent and turn unto him,
before he cut and destroy therewith. Tidings and terrors of the sword precede
the strokes of it, Amos 4.6, 9. the Lord sent a famine amongst them, but they
returned not unto him, he tried them what they would do, he looked for their
return, 2 Chronicles. 7.13, 14. If I shut up heaven that there be no rain, or if I
command the Locust to devour the Land, or if I send pestilence among my People,
if my People which are called by my name, shall humble, etc. God tryes his
people by threatenings, by bringing judgments near unto them, by inflicting
lesser judgments upon them, before he makes an utter destruction of them,
that they may learn righteousness, humble themselves, and so either prevent the
judgments, or have them turned into mercies.

Obs. 3 When rods of trial do us no good, then follows rods of Destruction,
when the trying rod has been despised, then comes the despising rod, the rod
that will not regard young or old, high or low, Prince or People: At first God
did lightly afflict Zebulun and Nepthali, but that being in vain, afterward
he afflicts them more grievously, Isa. 9.1. When Dimon profited not by her
first strokes, God laid more upon her, Isa. 15.9. when smiting the lintell of
the Door, and shaking the Posts, did not prevail, then did the Lord cut and
slay with the Sword, Amos 9.1. If fear work not, he has a pit, if that do it
not, he has a snare, Isa. 24.17, 18, when Paternal chastisements profit not,
God has destroying judgments: he will deal then with men, not as peccantes
liberos, but hosts manifestos.

Verse. 14 Thou therefore son of man prophesy, and smite thine hands together,
and let the sword be doubled the third time, the sword of the slain, it is the
sword of the great men that are slain, which enters into their privy Chambers.
15 I have set the point of the sword against all their Gates, that their hearts
may faint, and their ruins be multiplied. Ah, it is made bright, it is wrapped
up for the slaughter. 16 Go thee one way or other, either on the right hand, or
on the left, whithersoever thy face is set. 17 I will also smite mine hands
together, and I will cause my fury to rest, I the Lord have said it. The
Instruments, causes, and end, of the sad judgments coming upon the Jews,
being formerly declared, here the manner and circumstances thereof are laid
down.

Smite thine hands together. The Hebrew is, Smite hand to hand, Caph notes the
concavity and hollownesse of any thing, and so the hollow and palm of the
hand. Whither this smiting of hands imports sorrow or joy is questioned; some
make it to signify joy, prefiguring the pleasure of God in executing judgment
upon the Jews, but when smiting or clapping of hands is referred to the
creature to express joy, other words are used, as Saphack, Job 27.23. Lam.
2.15. Macha, Psalm. 98.8. Isa. 55.12. Takang or Takah, Psalm. 47.1. Nehem. 3.19.
Besides this, the Prophet was in a mourning frame, verse. 10. when the sword is
coming should we then make mirth? and chap. 6.11. smiting with the hand,
imported sorrow, and so I conceive it does here; smite thine hands together,
once, twice, thrice, often, for the evils that are coming.

Let the sword be doubled the third time. The word for doubled is, Caphal,
which signifies also to repeat, iterate, reply. The sense is, let the sword
come the second and third time.

Some read the words thus, iterabitur gladius tertio, The Sword shall come the
third time.

Others, iteretur gladius and tertietur, Let it be iterated and tertiated.
Nebuchadnezzar had come twice before in Jehoiakims and Jehoiakins days, and
after came in Zedekiahs, carrying him away to Babylon, and this is made the
mind of the Lord in these words: but because two of these were past, and the
Lord speaks of the time to come, we may understand them of the sword of
Nebuchadnezzar upon Zedekiah, 2 Chronicles. 36. of the sword of Johanan against
Ishmael, and the Jews, for murdering Gedaliah, Jerem. 41. and the sword of
Nebuzaradan when he laid all waste, carried all away, leaving only a few to
be vine dressers and husbandmen Jer. 52.

The doubling and trebling of the sword, may note the often coming of it, so
Vatablus, non semel, sed iterum atque iterum feriat, Let it come again and
again, striking more de^dly strokes.

The Sword of the slain. A Sword that is ready to slay, to slay the great ones,
and to make great slaughter of them, when many are slain by the sword, that
sword is the sword of the slain, or slaying sword.

It is the sword of the great men that are slain. It is a sword appointed to
slay the great men, in the Hebr. its in the singular number, the sword of the
great man slain, or, of great slaying, l'e spees de grand occision, a sword
that shall spare none.

Which enters into their privy Chambers. The Hebrew is Hachodereth lahem.
Cubiculans eis, Chambering or lodging with them, Cheder is a Chamber, any
secret close place, it notes the inwards of man's heart, or soul, Prove. 18.8.
the Sword should enter into their chambers, into their bowels, and souls, the
fear of it should possess them. The Septuagint express it thus, (...), thou
shall cast them into fear, or amazement; The sword shall first enter into the
secret of your souls, and fill you with terrors, and after enter into your
bodies, and take away your lives.

15 I have set the point of the Sword against all their Gates. The word for
point is (...) which interpreters render, splendour, clamor, terror, slaughter,
and these are all like the point ^f a sword to those are besieged; properly it
notes the point or edge of the sword, which God set against all their Gates,
their public gates of the City round about, and the pri^^re gates of their
several houses, every where should the Sword be -- both in City and Country,
where they had Gates, any rule or power.

That their heart may faint. In times of great fears and dangers, men's hearts
do often faint and fail them, when they have most need of heart, they are
without hearts. God sent and set his sword for to dissolve, and melt their
hearts, so the word (...) translated to faint, signifies all their spirit,
vigor, and courage, should be dissolved, and so they should be faint, feeble,
heartless; the Septuagint is, (...), That their heart might be hurt or wounded.

And their ruins be multiplied. In the Hebrew it is, To multiply offenses, the
Soldiers would offend them, the sword would offend them, their straits would
offend them, the slain would offend them, they met with nothing but offenses,
at which they stumbling fell also. If we take the words passively as they
stand, the meaning is, that their destructions might be many, that multitudes
of them might fall.

It is wrapped up for the slaughter. This expression seems unsuitable for a
sword, and Expositors are put to it to make out the meaning of it. The word is
Meuttah from (...) to Cover, cloth, put on, to hasten, and were better
rendered, it is put on, or hastened for slaughter, then clothed or wrapped up for
slaughter, its harsh to say clothed with the hilt, or wrapped up in the belt,
Sanct. makes the clothing for slaughter, to be the fitting of it thereto.

Verse. 16 Go thee one way or other, either on the right hand, or on the, etc.
Here by an Apostrophe the Lord speaks to the Sword, and under that to the Army
of the Chaldeans, commissioning that and them to go through the Land of Judea,
and to execute his pleasure. The words in the Hebrew run thus, Unite thy
self, right hand thy self, put, or set thy self, left hand thy self.

Whithersoever thy faces are prepared. That is sword, unite thy self to the
Soldiers, Soldiers unite your selves together, go the right hand, or left
hand way, which you have most mind unto, which way your spirits incline you
most to, only see to it, that you execute my pleasure upon all you meet. Be
not afraid at what befell Senacherib when he went against Jerusalem, I was
against him, but I am with you.

17 I will also smite my hands together. In this verse is Gods approbation of
what the Chaldeans sword and Army should do, They should conquer and destroy
the Jewish Nation, and he would rejoice in it. Smiting of hands, before
expressed grief, and here its an expression of joy, so its used chapter 25.6.
It notes not only Gods approbation of the Babylonians undertakings, but his
encouragement of them to that work, that so he might execute his vengeance
upon them, and be at rest; as it follows,

I will cause my fury to rest. Gods fury was stirred against them, and boiled
in him, and when this fury should be poured out upon them by the Chaldeans
Army, then should he be at ease; and comforted, as it is Ezekiel. 5.13. where
these words were spoken to.

Obs. 1 Its no new thing for the Prophets of the Lord to prophesy in
Sackcloth: Ezekiel must Prophesy and smite his hands together, in token of
mourning and heaviness, our Prophet was in sackcloth being a Captive in
Babylon, seeing the sad judgments were coming upon Jerusalem; So Jeremy,
Hosea, Joel, Amos, had mournful spirits, and Prophesied in Sackcloth, they
smote their hands together, and dropped out sad things. The times were black in
their days, they are not clear now, is not the sword coming the third time?
is it not putting on for slaughter? shall not the Prophets mourn and smite
their hands together?

Obs. 2 Where the word prevails not to reform a people, there the judgments of
God will come in, one after another, to the destruction of a People. Prophesy
and let the sword be doubled the third time; He^ had often Prophesied, but there
appeared no Repentance, no r^turning to God, therefore let the sword come again
and again. Had they repented of their sins, God would have repented of the
evils intended, Jer. 18.7, 8. but when People go on in their sins, God will
go on in his judgments even to destruction, See Leviticus 26. 21, 22, 31, 32,
33, Deuteronomy 28.62.

Obs. 3 When God will punish sinners for their wickedness, there is no hiding
place to secure them from the stroke of God, be they great or mean ones; that
is, the sword of the great men which enters into their privy Chambers, what
ever holes, recesses, vaults, hiding places, they had, the sword would find
them out. God knows where men are when hid, and his hand can reach them as well
as his eye see them; when the Syrians fled to Aphek to secure themselves from
the Sword of Ahab, a wall fell upon twenty seven thousand, and slew them, 1
King 20.30. In times of danger men think of shifting for themselves, of hiding
here and there, but what are Cities, Towers, Chambers, secret places? there is
no safety in any of them, or any other place, See Amos 9.2, 3. the only safe
hiding place, is in the secret place of the most high, Psalm 91.1. that is, in
God himself, Psalm 119.114. Thou art my hiding place and shield, be wise then,
foresee evil coming, and hide your selves in this hiding place, Prove. 22.3. A
prudent man foresees evil and hides himself.

Obs. 4 When the Lord intends the destruction of a people, he will order things
accordingly. I have set the point of the sword against all your gates; Hereby
all flying was prevented, and if they thought to stand and fight it out with
the instruments he used, he made their hearts to faint, he threw stumbling
blocks in their way, he multiplied their ruins; When the Lord is against a
Nation, he besiedges them with evils; stops and shuts up all doors of hope,
takes away their hearts, makes those things matter of ruin, they made account
would be their refuge, Jer. 4.9. at that day the heart of the King shall
perish, and the heart of the Princes, and the Priests shall be astonished, and
the Prophets shall wonder, and why? the sword reached unto the soul.

Obs. 5 It is the Lords Commission, encouragement, and Providence, which puts
life into military undertakings, and makes them successeful: Go thee one way or
other, to the right hand or to the left, God bid Nebuchadnezzar, the Army, and
Sword go, had he not bid them go, been with them in their going, and ordered
all their undertakings, they had been vain and fruitless: Armies are but
instruments, and if they do execution upon enemies, if they conquer and subdue,
it is by the hand and power of God.

Obs. 6 Execution of justice upon sinful persons and Nations, is pleasing and
delightful unto God; He put on Nebuchadnezzar to go and destroy the Jewish
Nation, and when he went, he smote his hands together at it, he rejoiced; by
this means the Lord eased himself of his adversaries, as he speaks, Esaias 1.24.
rested from his fury, and comforted himself; they had pleased themselves in
their sinnings, but wearied God thereby. Now God would please himself in
punishing them for their sins, and weary them, yea, waste them with his
judgments.

Obs. 7 That which is matter of mourning unto man, is matter of joy unto God.
This rises from the various sense of the phrase, smiting of hands, because the
sword was come, therefore Ezek^e^ was to smite his hands together, and manifest
mournin^ and because it was to come, God would smite his hands together, and
manifest Joy.

Verse. 18 The Word of the Lord came unto me again, saying, 19 Also thou Son of
Man appoint thee two ways, that the Sword of the King of Babylon may come:
both twain shall come forth out of one land: and choose thou a place, choose it
at the head of the way, to the City. 20 Appoint a way that the sword may come
to Rabbath of the Ammonites, and to Judah in Jerusalem the defenced. 21 For the
King of Babylon stood at the parting of the way, at the head of the two ways
to use divination: he made his Arrows bright, he consulted with images, he
looked in the liver. 22 At his right hand was the divination for Jerusalem to
appoint Captains, to open the mouth in the slaughter, to lift up the voice
with shouting, to appoi^t battering rams against the Gates, to cast a mount,
and to build a fort. 23 And it shall be unto them as a false divination in
their sight, to them that have sworn oaths, but he will call to remembrance
the iniquity, that they may be taken. 24 Therefore thou says the Lord God,
because ye have made your iniquity to be remembered, in that your
transgressions are discovered, so that in all your doings your sins do
appear, because I say that ye are come to remembrance, ye shall be taken with
the hand. These words do treat of Nebuchadnezzars consultation about his
military undertakings, and the way he took to accomplish the same, viz.
Divination, and the event thereof in respect of the Jews.

Appoint thee two ways. In the fourth chapter the Prophet was to pourtray out
Jerusalem upon a tyle, and to lay siedge against it, here he is commanded to
foretell the coming of the King of Babylon, not verbally but typically, by way
of representation, and he must draw out upon the same tyle, or some such
thing, two ways; put before thee, or make unto thee, two ways.

That the Sword of the King of Babylon may come. Much was said before of the
Sword, the drawing, sharpning, fourbishing, and slaughtering of it, and here is
a plain discovery whose Sword it was, the sword of a King, and the King of
Babylon.

Both twain shall come forth out of one land. These Two ways must come out of
Babylon, he must first draw a line, and then branch it out into two, as a river
runs a long tract in one Channel, and then divides it self into two.

Choose thou a place, choose it at the head of the way to the City. The Hebrew
for Place is, Jad, vejad baree, elige manum says Mantanus; Locum, says
Lavater; Latus, say others, Choose you the hand, side, or place, where the King
of Babylon, having mustered up his Forces, may deliberate and consult what to
do, whither to go, which way to take, let it be at the head of the way; where
the beginning of the two ways was, that was the head of the way.

20 Appoint a way that the sword may come to Rabbath. Draw out one way leading
to Rabbath, that so Nebuchadnezzar may see work for his sword there. Rabbath
was the Royal City, and chief City of the Ammonites, 2 Samuel 12.26. who were the
posterity of Ben-ammi the incestuous son of Lot, Genesis 19.38.

And to Judah in Jerusalem the defenced. That the Sword may come not only to
the Ammonites, but also to the Jews which dwelt in Jerusalem, a City well
fortified. Rabbath was strengthened by waters, 2 Samuel 12.27. and therefore was
called the City of waters: but Jerusalem was compassed about with hills, Psalm
125.2. had strong Towers and Bulwarks, Psalm 48.12, 13. and was called a strong
City, Psalm 31.21.

21 For the King of Babylon stood at the parting of the way, at the head of the
two ways. Here is a praeter tense put for the future, the King of Babylon had
not yet stood there, but he shall stand at the parting of the way, El-Em
haderech, at the mother of the way, when a way divides into, or begets two
ways, the Hebrew calls the first way, the mother of the other, and head of
them, as here, the head of the two ways.

To use divination. He being doubtful what to do, whither to go, the right
hand, or left hand way, should make a stand, where the way parted to consult,
he thought it not meet to divide his Army, and to go both ways at once, to
set upon two such great Cities, as Jerusalem and Rabbath, each of them would
require his whole strength, and therefore he would try by divination to which
of them he should go.

The Hebrew is, (...) liksom kasem, ad divinandum divinationem, to divine a
divination. The Septuagint is, (...), to Prophesy a Prophesy. The Vulg. is,
Querens divinationem, seeking a Divination. Vatablus, Vt divinando inquirat,
That by divining he might inquire. Piscat. Ad consulendum divinationem, To
consult a divination. The French, En demandant divination, in demanding a
divination, and three kinds of Divinations are specified here, as its conceived.

He made his Arrows bright. This is the first kind which Expositors call,
(...), seu (...), a divining by weapons, or rods. The Hebrew for Arrows is,
(...) which signifies an Arrow or Knife, so called from cutting or dividing,
for (...) is from (...) to dividiate and cut in pieces. Some render it Arrows,
as the manner of divining by them, was either by writing the names of Jerusalem
upon one, and of Rabbath upon another, and then putting them with other Arrows
into a quiver. The Arrow first drawn out with either of those names upon it,
determined the case. If the Arrow with Jerusalem upon it was first drawn, then
they went thither; if that with Rabbath upon it, then they went to Rabbath.
Some affirm they made the Arrows to leap out of the quiver, by Magic Art, and
that which leaped on the right hand led them to Jerusalem, that on the left
hand to Rabbath. So the Septuagint render the words, (...), ad faciendum
ebullire virgam, to make the Rod spring forth. Others make the manner of this
divining to be, by the Kings throwing up an Arrow into the Air, which if it
fell on the right hand, they went the right hand way; if on the left hand, the
left hand way. Others render the word Knives, and so the sense may run thus;
he made bright his knives, to cut open the birds or Beasts that were to be
Sacrificed; or take the word for Arrows or Knives, he made them bright, he
scoured and polished them, that in the brightness of the Iron or steel* they
might discern something to direct.

He consulted with Images. This is the second kind of Divination which he
used; Shaal batteraphim, petiit in Teraphim, so is the Hebrew, and so rendered
by Montanus, by Aecolamp. interrogavit Teraphim. He asked of, or consulted
with Teraphims. This word Teraphim is often used in the Old Testament, and is
diverse times Translated Images, whereas in the Hebrew its Teraphim, so you have
it, Genesis 31.19, 34, 35. 1 Samuel 15.23. chap. 19.13, 16. Zach. 10.2. 2 King. 23,
24. its fit to inquire therefore what Teraphims were, not instruments of Brass
to distinguish the minutes or parts of hours, nor Astrological Images made to
speak, but as Shindler observes, Erant imagines fastae ad similitudinem
corporis humani, ut in illis videant futura; They were Images made like men, to
this end, that they might in or by them know things to come. So Kirkar says of
Taraph, that it is, Imago in qua futura videntur, and Teraphim hominum imagines
ad suscipiendam virtutem superiorum; They were images of men, made to receive
and communicate intelligence from Heaven about things to come. The Teraphim
Michal laid in the room of David, was like unto a man, 1 Samuel 19. and that it
was a divining Image, may appeat by that you find in Genesis 30.27. I have
learned by experience says Laban, that God has blessed me for thy sake. The
Hebrew is, Nichashti, auguratus sum, I have divined; he had his Teraphims by
which he could do it, and its conceived by the learned, that Rachel stole away
her Fathers Teraphims upon this ground, that he might not divine by them,
which way she and Jacob were gone. The Septuagint, Zach. 10.2. calls the
Teraphim, (...), Loquentes, and Hos. 3.4. (...), Declaratio, which the Targum
renders, Mechoni annuntiantes; all which do show, that men held a divining
virtue to be in their Teraphims, and so Nebuchadnezzar conceived, and
therefore consulted with his Teraphims.

He looked in the Liver. This is the third kind of Divination, which the
Greek word (...), liver-looking, when they sacrificed, they opened the
Sacrifice, and observed the inwards, and entrails exactly, especially the
kidney, the heart, the milt, and the liver, whence they were called Extispices,
and Aruspices, because they did it at the Altar. The Liver as Lavater says,
was Fons vaticinii, from thence they made their chiefest Divinations, if that
were sound and good without blemish, they made successeful Divinations
thereupon, but if vitiated or dislocated, their Divinations were untoward and
unhappy.

Such Divinations as these mentioned, were unlawful, Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11. There
shall not be found among you, any one that uses Divination, or an Observer of
Times, etc. They are Abomination to the Lord, Divining in such ways, was a
grievous sin, 1 Samuel 15.23. Chattath kesemmeri, Rebellion is as the sin of
Divination, which is not countenanced by that Prove. 16.10. Divination is in the
lips of the King; for so the Hebrew is, here the word divining is taken in a
good sense, and is spoken of the King sitting in judgment, whom God would
guide, so that he should find out the truth; for the next words are, his
mouth transgresses not in judgment. When the two Harlots was before Solomon,
pleading each for the live child, and the truth was obscured by their
pleading; God endued the King with a divining spirit, so that he found out the
truth, and gave a divine sentence; but this makes nothing for the wicked
Divinations here mentioned.

22 At his right hand was the Divination for Jerusalem. Here you have the issue
of his Divinations, which determined him, being doubtful before, which way he
should go, viz. the right hand way, and that was to Jerusalem. The Arrows,
Images, and Livers, did all concur, according to their Divinations, that
Nebuchadnezzar should go thither.

To appoint Captains. The word for Captains is (...) Carim, from (...) Car,
which signifies a Pasture, a Lamb, and battering Rams, which were military
instruments, used in siedges, and so it was rendered, Ezekiel. 4.2. and so its
rendered in the latter part of this Verse, where its said, to appoint battering
rams against the Gates; but because the word is twice in the verse. its
rendered in the first place Captains; For the word signifies the heads, and
chief men of an Army, so you have it, 2 King 11.4, 19. The King having
consulted now fell to Action, and appointed Captains to lead the Army to
Jerusalem.

To open the mouth in the slaughter. It may be read to open the mouth to
slaughter, so Montan. Lavater and Vatablus read the words, and the sense is,
the Captains should exhort, and stir them up to kill and slay their enemies; Or
if you will, take opening the mouth here, for making a breach in the wall. For
slaughter. Vid. Junium. The Captains should come close, besiedge the City, make
a breach, enter, and slay, and in their entrance and slaying, should open their
mouths, and make shouting; as follows,

To lift up the voice with shouting. When great exploits are attempted by men
against their enemies, often they shout, and make a great noise, that so they may
daunt and terrify them. Doubtless the Clamor and shouts of these barbarous
Babylonians, did much perplex the Jews, made their hearts faint and hands
feeble; to see the Mounts. Forts, and Battering rams at their gates, could
not ut trouble them; but when they made breaches in their walls, entered and
slew men with shouting, this affrighted them and sunk their spirits. They
afflicted Jerusalem with shouting, and the Lord threatened Babylon in the same
kind, Jer. 51.14. I will fill thee with men as with Caterpillars, and they
shall lift up a shout against thee.

Obs. 1 The Lord knows things to come most certainly, yea, as certainly as if
done already: He knew that Nebuchadnezzar would come out of Babylon, what way
he would come, and where he would make a stand and consult, which he shows
to the Prophet, and speaks of as done already, ver. 21. The King of Babylon
stood at the parting of the way, at the head of the two ways, to use
divination. The Lord sees things afar off, and knows what shall be in ages to
come. Hereby he confounds all Idol Gods, and proves himself to be the true
God, Isa 41.22 23. Let them bring forth, and show us what shall happen, declare
to us things for to come: show the things that are to come hereafter, that we
may know that ye are Gods, if you cannot discover things that lie in the dark,
if ye cannot foretell what shall be many years hereafter, you are no gods; I
can do it, and therefore am God, the true and only God, Isa. 46.9, 10. I am
God, and there is none like me, declaring the end from the beginning, and from
ancient times the things that are not yet done: God had foretold things in
Moses days, that were not accomplished in Isaiahs, and he foretold things in
Isaiahs days, that are not yet all fulfilled; See Isay 60. throughout, Chap.
65.17. Chap. 66.22. In Peter's days, the new Heavens and the new Earth were
expected, 2 Pet. 3.13. and are not yet given out; so, many things has the Lord
foretold in the Revelation which we wait still to see fulfilled.

Obs. 2 That even Heathens when they are in straits, doubtful what to do, and
how to proceed in their undertakings, will not neglect, but use variety of
means for resolution: Nebuchadnezzar uses Divination, he makes bright the
Arrows, consulted his Gods, he looked into the liver; These were such means as
he conceived conducible to such a purpose. though sinful. Heathens have been
forward in their straits, and doubts to get resolution, Dan. 2.1, 2, 5, 6, 9,
chapter 5.5, 6, 7, 8. Its incident to the nature of Man, both Heathens and others,
to run to unlawful means, in their necessities. Gods own People did it, Hos.
4.12. My people ask counsel at their stocks, and their staff declares unto
them, they consulted with their; Images, which in disgrace the spirit of God
calls stocks, and from their staves or rods they took divinations. Such
practices let us abhor, but use those means God approves of, and has
appointed for our resolution in our doubts and straits. Instead of making
bright the Arrows, let us purge and make bright our consciences, and they will
tell us something; instead of consulting Teraphims, Stocks, and Stones, let us
consult with God and his Servants; instead of looking into the Liver of Beasts,
let us look into the book of God, there we shall find light to dispel our
darkness, and to direct our ways; David made Gods Testimonies his delight and
Counselors, Psalm 119.24.

Obs. 3. God overrules the wicked acts of Men, and makes them subservient to
his will and ends; Nebuchadnezzar uses Divinations which God had forbidden, and
the Divination might have been at his left hand for Rabbath or Philadelphia,
which is the same, but God had a purpose to bring him to Jerusalem, to cast up
a mount, to build a Fort there, to set battering Rams against the Gates
thereof, and therefore secretly by his Providence, he ordered the Divination,
that it should be at his right hand for Jerusalem; whatever the Lot is,
wheresoever it be cast, the whole disposing thereof is of the Lord, Prove.
16.33. Providence runs through the evil Counsels of men, and makes use of
them, their Counsels and Actions, to accomplish the good pleasure, and
righteous ends of the blessed God, by the Arts, Policies, Methods, Wiles,
Depths, Designs of the Devil, and devilish men, God carries on his own work;
and nothing puts him or his work out of the way. Divinations of Heathens,
promote the work of Heaven. This is a mystery, but full of truth and
admiration, that God makes the worst Tools and Instruments, all wicked men, and
their ways, to serve his Providence, further his ends, and advance his glory;
the Devil did it in tempting Eve, and Judas, in betraying Christ.

23 And it shall be unto them as a false Divination in their sight. The Jews
at Jerusalem would not believe this Typical Prophesy of Ezekiel, representing
the coming of Nebuchadnezzar, and besiedging of their City, they looked upon
what he said as a false and foolish divination: what, has Nebuchadnezzar made
bright his Arrows, consulted his Teraphims, looked into the Liver? we neither
care for, nor fear him, or his coming. They saw not Gods hand in these things
which ordered them so, however superstitious and wicked that Nebuchadnezzar
was, he was confirmed in his work and way for their ruin.

To them that have sworn Oaths. The Hebrew is, Swearing Oaths to them. Rabbi
David expresses the words thus, Propter juramenta juramentorum ipsis, for the
Oaths upon Oaths made to them. The false Prophets had by many Oaths
confirmed them, that the City should never be taken, whereupon they were
secure as men that keep Sabbaths, who are at rest. The Septuagint turn those
words, (...), and Theodotion, (...), which the Vulgar render, Sabbatorum otium
imitans, but the words properly rendered, should be thus, weeking a week, or
Sabbatizing a Sabbath. This variety rises from the Hebrew word (...) which
signifies seven, and thereupon a Sabbath, and also to swear. In this sense we
take it, and the Jews might be secure upon the Oaths of their false Prophets,
but whither they made such oaths is doubtful, rather because of the Oaths
beween them and the Egyptians, for having violated the Oath and Covenant with
the Babylonians, they entered league with the Egyptians, Ezekiel. 17.15. who
promised them help, horses, and much people, and that against the Babylonians,
if ever they should come.

But he will call to remembrance the iniquity, that they may be taken. The word
He being (...) in the Original, is Hoc, as well as hic, and may make the sense
thus, this thing, viz. their sleighting the Prophesy, as a false Divination,
and their oathing of it with the Egyptians, shall call to remembrance that
iniquity for which they shall be taken: or this thing, viz. this divination
falling on the right hand of Nebuchadnezzar, and leading him to Jerusalem, will
bring to mind the iniquity, that is, the perfidiousnesse of Zedekiah, and the
rest in breaking the oath that they may be taken. If we read it, he, that is
Nebuchadnezzar, he will remember the iniquity of Zedekiah, Hehittaphesh, ut
Capiatur, that he and those with him might be taken.

Obs. 1 That the messages and passages of the messengers of God, are matter of
scorn to profane and wicked men; It will be unto them as a false divination
in their sight: when the Prophet pourtrayed out the way the King of Babylon
should come, the things he should do, the siedge he should make about
Jerusalem, and the effects thereof, all these were reputed by them, lying
things, false divinations. What he told them in the latter end of the
twentieth Chapter, they cried out of as Parables, dark, and obscure things,
which they understood not, and here they account his typical threatenings, as
falsehood and lies. When the false Prophets fed them with lying visions and
divinations, they were honored and believed, 1 King 22.11, 12. Ezekiel. 13.6. but
when the true Prophets told them the mind of the Lord, they were reproached,
as Jeremy, Thou speak falsely, chap. 43.2. they were smitten and imprisoned
as Micaiah, 1 King. 22. their lives were sought, Jer. 38.4. yea, they were put
to death, 2 Chronicles. 24.20, 21.

Obs. 2 That those who break, and make oaths, for their own ends, making no
conscience thereof, God leaves them to injudiciousnesse of spirit, and to
stumble at his word and threats: it shall be unto them as a false divination
in their sight, to them that swear oaths: They swear to Nebuchadnezzar, and
violated what they had sworn, for their own advantages, and then sought for
their security to the Egyptians; but what was the fruit hereof? they were given
over to injudicious minds, and impenitent hearts, so that they discerned not
Gods proceedings toward them, nor the Prophets language to them: perfidious
and injust dealings, do so blind and harden, that the word and ways of God
become snares and stumbling blocks unto them.

Obs. 3 The iniquities of Princes and People, do not always ly hid, but in
time appear for the ruin of those have committed them, but he, or this thing,
will call to remembrance the iniquity that they may be taken. Zedekiah, his
Nobles, and People sinned in breaking with Nebuchadnezzar, and falling in with
Egyptians, they thought that time would bring a veil over those passages, that
they should be buried in the dark, lie still and never see light more: but
those iniquities were brought to mind, when the Divination fell on the right
hand, and drew Nebuchadnezzar to Jerusalem; he called to mind what cause he
had to invade their land, and besiedge that City; he remembered how
perfidiously they had dealt with him, and thereupon rouses up himself, and
forces, to set upon them with all their might. Princes and States iniquities
may be couchant and dormant for a season, but at last they will awake, appear,
and prove Lions rampant. Let not any great or small, flatter themselves, that
their sins are forgotten, because they hear not of them; they will be called
to mind to their detriment, if not their destruction. Saul's sin in slaying
the Gibeonites, was unthought of; but by a Famine it was called to remembrance,
and cost the lives of seven of his sons, 2 Samuel 21.

24 Because ye have made your iniquity to be remembered, etc. In this verse the
Lord gives a definitive sentence concerning the Jews, they shall be taken with
the hand; and lays down the reasons thereof.

1 They did those things which made their iniquity to be remembered, they
gloried they had shaken off the Babylonish yoke, which brought their perjury
and rebellion to remembrance; God remembered it, Nebuchadnezzar remembered it.

2 They went on in other wicked courses, in all their doings, their sinning
appeared, they sinned openly.

You have three words here which seldom meet in one verse, iniquity,
transgression, and sin, the like is in Job 13.23. and in Exodus 34.7.

The word for iniquity is (...) avon, which signifies obliquity, crookedness,
perverseness, injustice, (...) Proprie obliquitatem and torvitatem significat,
and rectitudini oppon^tur. Rivet in Exodus Peccatum quod scienter and
contumacitor committitur. Chattaah or chatah quaevie aberratio a lege divina.
and is contrary to that is right and equal; which our English word Iniquity
imports.

The word for Transgression is, (...) Pescha, which notes Rebellion, Obstinacy,
Maliciousness, scelus and actionem perfidam:

The third word is, (...) which is sin, in a lower degree, any or every going
aside from the Rule, any aberration from the way of God, any failing in duty.
The first of these the Septuagint term (...), the second (...), the third
(...), injustice, impiety, sin, or error. The French, Iniquite prevarication,
peche.

You shall be taken with the hand. By Hand, the Prophet means the Assyrian
Army, which should come, take the City, and them in it.

Obs. 1 Open impudent sinning, brings to mind former iniquities: They had cast
off the Babylonish yoke in an unjust and wicked way: they went on glorying in
their shame, and their latter sins brought to mind their former; their
transgressions, were so open, discovered, their sins so apparent in all their
doings, that they made their iniquity to be remembered; they provoked God to
plague them for their present and former sins. Thieves when taken in some
wicked acts, their former theeveries and villainies come to light. As one sin
begets another, so one sin discovers another. Many having sinned in
prostituting their bodies to those they should not, after make away the
Children had by them; So their sins breaking out, former iniquities are
brought to remembrance, and themselves to punishment; Men discover their
sins, and their sins discover them: Here they made their iniquities to be
remembered, and their iniquities brought them to remembrance.

Obs. 2 Public sins bring public judgments: they had openly broken with
Nebuchadnezzar, they gloried in what they had done, and went on in such vile
courses as were apparent to heaven and earth, and because it was so, therefore
Nebuchadnezzar is sent against them, to take and ruin them. The Lord never
lets in public desolations upon a Church or State, til their sins are become
public and incorrigible. It was so with Jerusalem at first, 2 Chronicles. 36.14,
15, 16, 17. and it was so with Jerusalem at last; Mat. 23.37, 38. Their sins
were public, and God most justly brought public evils upon them.

Obs. 3 That God has hands to apprehend sinners withal: they shall be taken
with the hand: The Babylonish Army was the hand of God, and with it he
apprehended the sinners in Sion, slew many of them, and led the rest Captives
into Babylon, the instruments God uses to punish his people sinning, withal,
are sometimes called Swords, Psalm 17.13. sometimes Axes, Saws, Rods, Staves,
Isa. 10.15. sometimes his Battle-Axe, and weapons of war, Jer. 51.20. sometimes
his Net and Snare, Ezekiel. 17.20. his Pit, Chains, chap. 19.4. all which are the
hand of God, Psalm 17.14. and in the hand of God, he uses them to do that
which hands do; by these he takes plagues, and destroys sinners.

25 And thou profane wicked Prince of Israel, whose day is come, when iniquity
shall have an end. 26 Thus says the Lord God, Remove the Diadem, and take off
the Crown: this shall not be the same: exalt him that is low, and abase him
that is high. 27 I will overturn, overturn, overturn it, and it shall be no
more, until he come, whose right it is; and I will give it him. These words are
an Apostrophe to the Prince of Israel, declaring what should befall him, and the
whole Kingdom of Israel. He should be deprived of his Kingly dignity, the
Kingdom ruined, and abide so, till the Lord should give it to him it belonged
unto.

Concerning the Prince of Israel he is 1 Described to ^e profane and wicked. 2
The Time is intimated of his misery; both which are in the 25. verse.


Verse. 25 And thou profane, wicked Prince of Israel. This Prince of Israel was
Zedekiah, and the titles given him are, not your sacred Majesty, or your
excellencies highness, but thou profane, wicked Prince; his Profaneness and
wickedness doubtless was great, though much be not specified in the word;
yet something is set down therein, 2 Chronicles. 36.12. He did that which was evil
in the sight of the Lord his God, and humbled not himself before Jeremiah the
Prophet, speaking from the mouth of the Lord: he despised the word, and
Prophet of the Lord, and ver. 13. he rebelled against King Nebuchadnezzar, who
had made him swear by God, but he stiffened his neck, and hardened his heart
from turning unto the Lord God of Israel; He profaned the holy name of God:
being perfideous and obstinate, he fell in with Pharaoh King of Egypt, and
sought help of him against Nebuchadnezzar, Ezekiel. 17.15. and so trusted in man,
and not in God; he was like the other Lions which learned to catch the prey,
and devoured men, Ezekiel. 19. and so was cruel, bloody, he did evil according to
all that Jehoiakim had done, Jer. 52.2. and he did abominations, 2 Chronicles.
36.8. and in his days was as gross Idolatry in Jerusalem, and in the Temple,
as ever before, Ezekiel. 8. then was there the Image of jealousy; then did the
Ancients of Israel worship creeping things, abominable Beasts and Idols; Then
did they worship the Sun toward the East; then was Tammuz in the Temple, and
women weeping for Tammuz; so that he upheld the vilest idolatry that ever
Jerusalem had, he was the cause of their total ruin. Its not without cause
therefore, that the Prophet affixes these Titles to the crown, Thou profane
wicked Prince of Israel: and profaneness was not peculiar to the Prince; but
Prophets, Priests, and People were under that denomination, Jer. 23 15. From
the Prophets of Jerusalem is profaneness gone forth into all the Land; the
Court-Prophets, countenanced, and communicated all the Court-prophanenesse; and
2 Chr. 36.14. The chief of the Priests and people transgressed very much, after
all the abominations of the heathen.

Vatablus reads the words thus, and tu ad occisionem damnate princeps Israelis.
And thou O Prince condemned to death, and he cites the Chaldy Paraphrast, in
which its to the same purpose: Tu autem gladio interficiende, O thou Prince of
Israel, who art to be cut off by the sword. Munster differs not from these, Tu
interfectione digne, Thou who art worthy of death. So Castalio. Tu vero, O rei
capitalis damnate, O thou that art condemned of a Capital crime.

The Prophet may seem here to forget himself in speaking so opprobriously of
the Prince which the Law forbad, Exodus 22.28. Eccl. 10.20. they might neither
think nor speak evil of the ruler, nor wish evil to him, and here Ezekiel calls
Zedekiah the Prince of Israel, profane, and wicked; and in so doing he sinned
not; for being a Prophet, he was to give out what the Spirit of God gave in,
and moved him unto. So dealt Jeremy by Coniah, calling him a despised broken
Idol, a vessel wherein was no pleasure, chap. 22.28. they would not flatter
Princes, by being false to truth, -- When its done Ex privato, and pravo
affectu, from a private, and depraved spirit, then its ill.

Whose day is come, when iniquity shall have an end. The words in Hebrew are,
whose day of his is come, in time or season an end of iniquity. O Zedekiah, the
day of thy punishment is at hand, wherein shall be an end of thy wickedness;
thou shall no longer be King, but suffer for what thou have done.

Some by Iniquity understand punishment, and so the sense is, Cujus venit
tempus, quo tempore iniquitas tua finem tibi regni afferet. Rabbi David.
thy day is come when punishment, that is, destruction shall be thy end; thou
and thy Kingship shall be laid in the dust. The Hebrew for when is, (...) eth,
which is of the same signification as (...) is, it notes both time and
opportunity of time, and whether by iniquity, sin, or punishment of sin he
understood, or both, is not much material; God will not suffer thee to go on
any longer in thy profane and wicked courses, the time and season is at hand,
wherein he will punish thee, and so put an end to thy sinning, as before.

Obs. 1 That Princes often times are far from Piety, and justice: And thou
profane wicked Prince of Israel. Of all Princes in the world, the Princes of
Israel had cause to be holy and just, they were seated where the worship of
the true God was, they had the Law of Moses, and were commanded to read it
continually, and not to depart from it, to the right hand or to the left, Deuteronomy.
17.18, 19, 20. they had the Sanedrim, the Priests, and Prophets to counsel and
advise them; yet Princes of Israel were profane, they minded not the Law of
Moses, or the worship of God, they despised Priests and Prophets, they were
wicked, they persecuted good men, and were perfidious to other Princes, both
Johoiakim and Zedekiah were so to Nebuchadnezzar, 2 King. 24.1. and 20. verses.
The Profaneness and perfidiousnesse of Princes has been great. Among all the
Kings of Israel there was none good, they followed Jeroboam and Ahab, who were
profane and wicked. Few among the Kings of Judah were found good. How profane
was Pharaoh, when he said, who is the Lord that I should obey him? Exodus 5.2.
how profane was Belshazzar; when he quaffed in the bowls of the Temple? Dan.
5.2, 3, 4. how profane was Ahaz, that thrust aside the Lords Altar, and set up
the Damascene Altar? 2 King. 16. how profane was Jehoiakim, that cut the roll
of Jeremy in pieces, and cast it into the fire? Jer. 36.23. how profane was
Herod, who mocked Christ? set him at naught, and arraied him in a scornful
manner? Luke 23.11. They were Kings that gave their power and strength to the
beast, and made war with the Lamb, Rev. 17.12, 13, 14. you may read the
horrible profaneness of Antiochus in the 1 Macch. 1.46, 47, 48 49, 50, 51,
52. he sent letters to Jerusalem to forbid what God had appointed; he
commanded them to offer Swines flesh, and unclean beasts; that they should
defile their souls, and pollute themselves with uncleanness; that they might
forget the Law, and change all the Ordinances; and if they would not do so,
they should dye for it. Kings and Rulers have been the greatest enemies to the
ways of God and Christ, they above others have set themselves against them,
Psalm 2.2, 3. Hence they are counseled to be wise and to kiss the Son, ver.
10.12.

Obs. 2 That the Prophets and Ministers of God, are not to fear the faces or
frowns of the greatest, but to reprove them sharply, being evidently guilty:
Thus dealt Ezekiel with Zedekiah, Thou profane and wicked Prince of Israel:
though he were great, yet he spares him not, but brands him with his
wickedness, and sets it upon record for after generations. John Baptist did
the like by Herod, when he was upon taking his Brother Philips wife, he told
him it was unlawful, and would be an incestuous match, Mark 6.18. he was
faithful in his ministry, and would not flatter Herod himself. Neither
Magistrates nor Ministers should fear or flatter the greatest, because they are
Agents for, and Ambassadors of the great God of heaven, in comparison of whom
the greatest on earth are as Pot-sheards.

Obs. 3 That as Princes have their times for sinning, so there be times for
their suffering: Zedekiahs day was come, when iniquity should have an end, he
had his times to show his profaneness and wickedness, and God had his time
to reckon with him for the same. Princes may abound in wickedness, go long
unpunished, but there is a day, a time, coming, wherein they shall smart for
their lewdness. David tells you, the day of wicked men is coming, Psalm.
37.13. that is, the time and season set for their destruction; which Peter
expresses thus, 2 Epist. 2.3. their judgment lingreth not, and their
damnation slumbereth not, its making toward them, and coming on swiftly, and
will be bad to them when it comes, Jer. 50.27. woe unto them, for their day is
come, the time of their visitation. That day is a visiting day; God is the
visitor, and he will so visit them as shall breed amazement, Job 18.20. Bildad
speaking of the calamities should befall the wicked in his day, says, They
that come after him, shall be astonished at his day, as they that went before
were affrighted. The day of Gods visiting those are eminently wicked, as
Princes and great ones, is so dreadful, as that it affrights the living which
behold it, and astonisheth the generations come after it. You may see what he
does at such times, Job 12.17, 18, 19, 21. Psalm. 76.12. Psalm. 110.5. he strikes
thorough Kings in the day of his wrath.

26 Thus says the Lord God, remove the Diad^m, and take off the Crown. This
verse contains a judicial sentence, against Zedekiah, and declaration of mercy
toward Jehoiakin.

Remove the Diadem. The Hebrew is, Hasir hammitznepheth, remove hidarim. The
verb here is infinitive which may be read so, Thus says the Lord, to remove
the Diadem, that is, I am now resolved to take the Diadem from Zedekiahs head,
and to unking him: but its usual among the Hebrews to put infinitives for
indicatives, and imperatives, and therefore some read it auferam, I will take
it away; Others aufer, toll, Take away, remove the Diadem. The word for
diadem, is Mitznepheth, the same with Tzaniph, both from Tzanaph, to wrap, or
compass about, and sometimes its expressed by hoods which compassed the heads
of women about, as Isa. 3.23. Sometimes by Myters which compassed the heads of
Priests about, as Zach. 3.5. Sometimes by Diadem, as Isa. 28.5. which compassed
the head of Kings, as here it did Zedekiahs. Some would have the high Priest
here meant; by the word Mitznepheth, which they render hidarim and belonged to
him, Exodus 28.4. but here is no speech of the high Priest, its spoken of the
King, and notes his Crown, not the High Priests Mytre, and so the next words
import.

Take off the Crown. In Hebrew its, Lift up the Crown, Diadema est (...) a
circumligando.
it now sits close to his head, and because he has strengthened himself by
making a league with the Egyptians, he thinks it so fast, that it shall not
be removed, but lift it up, take it away, it shall no longer rest there. Of
the word Crown was spoken before, chapter 16.12. the word is ghaterah or atarah
from (...) atar to surround, to cover on every side. Kings Crowns do compass
and cover their heads. So did the King of Rabbaths, which Joab took from the
Kings head, 2 Samuel 12.30. the weight of which was a talent of Gold, which the
Annotations say, was sixty pound weight, and Ainsworth on Exodus 38.24. says, a
Talent weighed one hundred and twenty pounds, and Diodate, one hundred twenty
five; whatever the natural weight of the Crown and Diadem was, the metaphorical
weight exceeded it, viz. the Cares, Fears, and troubles of it were exceeding
great. Crowns and Diadems were insignia regalia; and when the Lord says to the
Prophet, Remove the Diadem, take off the Crown; he intends not that the
Prophet should do any such thing with his own hand, but that he should declare
by his Prophesying, that now the time was come, wherein Zedekiah should be
stripped of all his regalities, be unkinged, and made as another man.

This shall not be the same. This, Not this, is the Original. The Septuagint,
(...), This shall not be such. This Crown shall not be this man's any longer;
or this crown shall not be thine, O Zedekiah; or this Crown, viz. this Kingly
government shall not be this, an end of it is now come, thou art the last that
shall be in Judea. Junius reads the words thus, Haec non futura est hujus.
This Diadem, this crown shall be no more. Hujus terrae, Of this land;
Monarchical government shall down, great at axy and confusion shall follow.
This shall not be the same. Thou dreamest, through the delusions of the false
Prophets, that Nebuchadnezzar will not come to invade the Land, or if he do
come, that thou shall vanquish him by the help of Egypt, and so that thou and
thy posterity shall reign still; but this shall not be, all regal power shall
cease from thee, and thy posterity.

Exalt him that is low. The word for Low is, Hasfashaphalah from Shaphal: which
signifies to be humbled, oppressed; and so low, is opposite to Proud, Haughty,
and those are lifted up; it referres to one is like a valley, not a mountain,
and that was Jehoiachin, who yiedling himself, by the Counsel of Jeremy to
Nebuchadnezzar was carried into Captivity, and there imprisoned; Gods eye was
upon him, and him, being depressed, oppressed, and Low, he would have exalted.
Some read I will exalt, some Exalt, the Hebrew is infinitive, and may be read
Indicatively, or Imperatively.

Abase him that is high. The former words and these may be read thus, Heighten
him that is low, and make him low that is high. This high person was Zedekiah,
who through his pride and haughtiness of Spirit, would not endure the
Babylonish yoke, but perfidiously breaking with Nebuchadnezzar, fell in with
the King of Egypt, grew confident, and despised the Assyrian Power. He had
high thoughts, high hopes, high confidences, he was become very mountainous,
but this mountain must be levelled. Jechoniah or Jehoiachin being a valley,
was exalted, Jer. 52.30. 2 King. 25.27. and Zedekiah being a mountain was
abased, 2 King. 25.6, 7. Jeremy 52.8, 9, 10, 11.

Obs. 1 The Lord does strip great ones, even Kings and Princes of their glory,
depose and abase them for their iniquities: Zedekiah was profane, perfideous,
cruel, injust, and what says the Lord? Remove the Diadem, take away the Crown,
abase him that is high; Who ever be the instruments, that take wicked Kings,
that spoil and punish them, its God that commands and commissions the doing
thereof. Nebuchadnezzar and his Army were the hand that did the things here;
they took Zedekiah, they pulled off his Crown, slew his Sons, all the
Princes, put out his eyes, bound him in chains, carried him to Babylon,
imprisoned him there; but they could not have done these things, unless they
had had Commission and power from above; when Kings are pulled down and
removed, its the Lord does it, Dan. 2.21.

Job 12.18. He loses the bond of Kings; Balteum regum dissolvit. Qui solvit
disciplinam regum.
The Vulgar says, the Belt of Kings, that is, their authority and power, say
some Expositors. Vatabl. has it, Disciplinam, that tyrannical Government they
use he dissolves, and casts them into reproach, prison, captivity, and so girds
their loins with a girdle of sackcloath and calamity. Potestatem a tyrannis
auiert and non nunquam populum a tyrannide liberat, a conjecto invincula
Tyranno, Vatabl.
Vulgar is, precingit fune renes little, he girds their loins with a rope; and
Verse. 19. he leads Princes away spoiled, the word is Cohanim, which though
some turn Priests, yet it signifies also Princes and Rulers, 2 Samuel 8.18. and
where our Translation, who were much affected to Priesthood, have put it Priest
in the Text, as Exodus 2.16. Genesis 41.45. chap. 47.22, 26. yet in the Margent
they have put Prince, and such God leads away spoiled; spoiled, of their glory,
their Diadems, Crowns, and Princely robes; spoiled of their power, their
Soldiery, and strong holds; spoiled of their stratagems, and designs; spoiled
of their Territories, Dominions, and Revenues; spoiled of their Friends,
Comforts, and Hopes; and whither does he lead them, in dementiam, says Jun.
and Trem. into madness and Brutishness: and so he led Nebuchadnezzar for his
Pride, and other sins, to bellow and graze amongst the beasts. Into contempt
says Job Job 2.21. being led out of all desirable and delightful, He poures
contempt upon them: that is, he fills them with contempt and scorn, who were
wont to be honored of all, and confer honors upon others, and how grievous
this is you may judge by that of Zedekiah, who chose rather to see Jerus^lem on
fire, than to yield himself into the hands of the Chaldeans, for fear of
mocking, Jer. 38.18, 19. but afterward he had scorn and misery enough, being
roasted in the fire thereof. The Lord throws wicked Princes from their height of
glory and greatness, into extreme misery; you know how Adonibezeck was served,
and in Isa. 22.15, 16, 17, 18. you may read of Shebna, who was a great man,
Behold, the Lord will carry thee away with a mighty Captivity, and will surely
cover thee; and with what would he cover him? with misery and shame; for it
follows, He will surely, violently turn and toss thee, like a Ball, into a
large Country: There shall thou dye, and there the charets of thy glory, shall
be the shame of thy Lords house: The Hebrew for, He will violently turn and
toss thee, is, Tzanoph jitznapheka Tzenephah, Convolvendo, convolvet
convolutione, as Montanus renders i^; and Prad. is, Cidarizando, cidarizabit te
cidari, by crowning or compassing, he will crown, compass thee with a crown or
compass. Vulgar has it, Coronans coronabit te tribulatione, he shall crown
thee with misery; God cast this Shebna who was proud and high, into extreme
mifery and disgrace; he was driven out into a Foreign Land, where he was
either torn in pieces by Dogs, Vide Sanct. in locum.
or buried with the Burial of an Ass.

Obs. 2 The Lord pulls down, and puts an end to Kings and Kingdoms at his
pleasure. This shall not be the same. This Crown shall be no more for thy
head, any of thy posterity, or for the Kingdom of Israel. Here God pulled down
the Kingdom of Israel or Judah, when it had stood near five hundred years, and
put a period to Monarchical Government. Josephus in his tenth book of the
Jewish Antiquity; chap. 10. says, that the kingly government lasted five
hundred and fourteen years, six months, and ten days, from the beginning of
Saul's reign, to the end of Zedekiahs.

Kingship began with them in Gods wrath, and ended in his fury, 1 Samuel 8.
Ezekiel. 19.12. The Assyrian Empire lasted some one hundred and twenty years, and
then God pulled it down, it was the same no more. The Athenian Government by
Kings, was some four hundred and ninety years, and then the Lord said, This
shall not be the same, he changed it into a popular government. The kingdoms
of the earth are the Lords, and he deals with them as he sees good, he breaks
them in pieces, and gives them new forms, at his pleasure; Dan. ^.20, 21.
wisdom and power are his, he changes the times and the seasons, he removes
Kings, and s^ts up Kings: He takes away one form of Government, and sets up
another, he puts down Monarchy, and sets up Aristocracy, After the
continuation of Monarchical government amongst us, near six hundred years, the
Lord has said, Remove the Diadem, take off the Crown, this shall not be the
same, he has put a new form upon us, which must have its time, and period
also.

What the Lord has done here, and did long since in Israel, he is about to do
in other kingdoms of the earth. The Ki^gs generally are so profane and
wicked, that the Lord h^th a controv^rsy with them and is speaking to this
effect, if not by his Prophets, yet by his Providence, remove the Diadem, take
off the Crown. These shall not be the same.

Seeing it is God which makes such changes, let not us stumble at his
Providence and dispensations, we are too apt to look at the tools he does
his work by, and to quarrel upon that account, and not to look at his hand
which uses those tools; if Kings loose their Crowns; if their glory be laid
in the dust, if posterity be excluded, if great alterations be made, its the
Lords doings, and should be mavelous in our eyes, and not matter of murmuring.

Obs. 3 That as God brings down the haughty and proud ones, so he raises the
humble and dejected: Debase him that is high, exalt him that is low; God minds
the oppressed, Jehoiachin lay a long time in Prison, and that in Babylon, even
thirty seven years, but he was not forgotten; God moved Evilmerodach to bring
him out of Prison, and lift up his head, Jer. 52.31. and so made that good, in
Job 12.18. in another sense then you heard before, He loses the bond of
Kings, he brings them out of their disgrace, restraint and misery, and girds
their loins with a girdle of honor, liberty, and comfort, Psalm 138.6. though
the Lord be high, yet has he respect unto the lowly, he advances and honors
them, Job 5.11. he sets up on high those that be low. Mary was low and he set
her among the highest; which made her to sing and say, Luke 1.52. He has put
down the mighty* from their seats, and exalted them of low degree; Let us take
heed of high aspiring thoughts, and remember what Christ has given out, Luke
14.11. Whosoever exalts himself, shall be abased, and he that humbles
himself shall be exalted. Self exaltation makes way for abasement, and self
abasement, makes way for exaltation, Psalm 147.6. The Lord lifts up the meek,
he casts the wicked down to the ground. Those are meekened and sweetened by
their afflictions, the Lord lifts up; but the wicked he casts them off, he
casts them down, and down to the ground, into extreme misery.

27 I will overturn, overturn, overturn it. This Verse is a Threatening of the
destruction of the kingdom, and the time of its continuance in that condition,
which is, till he come who is the right owner.

Montanus renders the Hebrew thus, Perversam, perversam, perversam ponam eam.
Septuagint, (...). Vulg. Iniquitatem, iniquitatem ponam eam. Vatablus,
Obliquam, Obliquam, Obliquam, ponam eam. Tigur. Curvam, curvam, curvam. Fren. A
la renverse, a la renverse, a la renverse, je la mettray. Castal. Ad nihilum,
ad nihilum, ad nihilum, eam ego redigam. Aecolampad. Distorte, distorte,
distorte, ponam eam. Lav. Subversionem, subversionem, subversionem ponam eam.
The Hebrew word is, (...) Affa from (...) which signifies to do crookedly,
perversely, untowardly; all which do diminish the glory of what is done, and so
here, God would diminish the glory of the crown, yea, the crown it self: I will
overturn it, and bring it to nothing (for it referres to the Crown) and that
should fall to the ground and be no more, the kingdom shall be utterly
overthrown, and laid waste.

The word is trebled, I will overturn, overturn, overturn, Perversitatem,
perversitatem, perversitatem ponam eam (coronam) i. e. funditus eversum and
prostratum etit regnum delerumque ex judicio meo iteratis cladibus. per
Babylonium Gles. in Philo l. 3.
to show not only the certainty and evidence of the thing, but the gradation
and continuance of it; for the kingdom of Judah by certain degrees fell from
its height, and was under the dominion of strangers, For after that Zedekiah
was deposed by Nebuchadnezzar; there was no Crown, nor King more in Judah;
After the Captivity, there was no Kings, but Governors, Captains, Rulers, as
Zerub^abel, Nehemiah, and others: after them, the Highpriests had the power,
in whose hands it continued, even to Hyrcanus, who usurping kingly Authority,
says Pradus, was miserably slain. Herod a stranger succeeding.

Sanctius makes this Triplication of the word, to point out, the three great
evils Zedekiah suffered.

1 The loss of his Kingdom and revenues. 2 The loss of his Sons and eyes: 3
His reproachful living in Captivity.
A Lapide, and some others, understand by the trebling of the word, the three
notable destructions that befell the Jews, after this time; The first by
Nebuchadnezzar, the second by Antiochus, the third by Tytus and the Romans.

Others by this Triplication, judge the time of those three, Assir, Shealtiel,
and Pedajah to be meant, in whose days, the Kingdom of Judah was very low,
if not quite overthrown; but began to flourish again in the days of
Zerubbabel, who was the Son of Pedajah, 1 Chronicles. 3.19. but Assir may be read
appellatively, and not as a proper name, (its in the 17. verse. of that 3
Chron.) thus the sons of Jeconiah the bound, for he was then bound, were a
prisoner in Babylon, and so the word is used, Isa. 42.7. to bring the Prisoner
out; the Hebrew is Assyr, and if it be taken so, this triplication is marred.

Chemnitius has another exposition of this Triplication of the words, which
the learned may see in his Harmony upon the Gospel, the first part, third
chapter, the latter end.

Men are various in their thoughts, about the triplicity of these words, but do
generally agree in this, that the overthrow of the Kingdom, and kingly dignity
is designed out thereby.

It shall be no more. In Hebrew thus, Jam zoth lo hojah, even this has not
been, but here the preter tense is put for the future, and so the Septuagint
reads it, Haec scil. mutatio non accidet ante adventum Nebuchad.
(...), Neither shall this be the same. Vatabl. has it, Etiam haec not fuit,
which he interprets thus, This alteration shall not be before Nebuchadnezzar
come, to whom the judgment belongs, and to him will I deliver Zedekiah, so
he. The French is, Et ne seraplus, it shall be no more. The Crown shall be
no more, the Crown of Judah. No King shall reign therein any more.

All the Sons of Zedekiah were slain, Jeremy 52.10. and of Jehoiachin,
Jeconiah, or Coniah its said, Jeremy 22.30. Write ye this man childlesse; a
man that shall not prosper in his days, for no man of his seed shall prosper,
sitting upon the throne of David, and ruling any more in Judah; None of them
shall ever come to kingly dignity.

Until he come whose right it is. Hebrew is, Ad bo asher lo hammishphat, which
Jun. renders thus, Donec venerit is cujus est jus ipsum, till he come whose
right it is. Aecolamp. Donec veniat ei qui judicet, until it come to him who
may judge. Vatab. Donec is veniat cui jure convenit, till he come to whom of
right it belongs. The sense is, the Crown shall neither fit nor be fastened to
any head, till he come that has the true right to it; and that is neither
Nebuchadnezzar, nor Zerubbabel, nor Aristobulus, Alexander or Hyrcanus, who
assumed Kingly dignity to themselves, in time of the Maccabees: but Christ the
Messiah, who is the true heir and successor of David, when he comes, he shall
raise up the Kingdom of Judah, being miserably afflicted, destitute, and lost
to the eye of the world; he changing it into a spiritual Kingdom, shall
restore it to as high, yea, an higher glory than ever it had. The crown here
was reserved, and laid up for the Lord Christ, who was born King of the Jews,
Mat. 2.2. to whom the Angel told Mary, that the Lord should give the Throne of
his Father David, and that he should reign over the house of Jacob for ever,
and have an endless kingdom, Luke 1.32, 33. upon this account it was, that
Nathaniel called him the King of Israel, John 1.49. and that Christ said, The
Father has committed all judgment unto the Son, John 5.22. The Father had
appointed Christ to be King and Ruler, Micah 5.2. gave him power, Isa. 9.6.
he was to succeed David, sit upon his Throne and kingdom to order the same,
verse. 7. and his right thereunto, both Matthew in his first Chapter, and Luke
in his third, do clear up, showing how he descended from David.

And I will give it him. Christ when he comes, shall not be kept off from his
right, I will give it him, and he shall have the Crown, it will fit his head,
and sit fast upon it, though he come in a mean, and low way, yet he shall be
King and reign.

Obs. 1 The Lord does lay the glory of Crowns and Scepters in the dust when he
pleases. I will overturn, overturn, overturn it; There is no Crown so sure to
any Mortals head, no Kingdom so stable, but the Lord can pluck away the Crown,
shake the Kingdom to pieces, throw out the possessors, and dispossess their
Heirs; He pulled the Crown from Zedekiahs head, he brake his Kingdom in
pieces, he threw him out of his Throne, deprived him and his Sons of ever
inheriting more.

Sometimes the Lord does suddenly overturn Empires and Kingdoms as
Belshazzars by Darius the Median, Dan. 5.30, 31. Sometimes he proceeds
gradually, and so he did with the Kingdoms of Israel and Judah, Hos. 5.12. I
will be unto Ephraim as a moth, and to the house of Judah as rottenness: a
Moth eats up a garment by degrees, now it makes one hole in it, and anon
another; so Rottenness enters by degrees into a Tree, first into one branch,
then another, after into the body and root; So God by degrees, eat up, wasted,
and consumed those Kingdoms. But be it suddenly or gradually, he overturns
them when he pleases. God overturned the Persian Monarchy, by the Goat which
had the notable Horn, Dan. 8.5. that was Alexander the Great, King of Greece,
and when he was grown very great, ruled according to his will, his Kingdom
was broken, divided to others, and not to his posterity, Dan. 11.3, 4. the Lord
plucked up his Kingdom, and quartered it among those were not his Heirs. The
Lord made the Scepter depart from Egypt, Zech. 10.11. he cut off him, held the
Scepter from the house of Eden, Amos 1.5. he breaks the staves of the wicked,
and the Scepters of the Rulers, Isa. 14.5. Crowns, Scepters, Kingdoms, he
tumbles down, and lays in the dust.

Obs. 2 When God overturnes Crowns, and Kingdoms, he keeps them in such a
condition while he pleases. I will overturn, overturn, overturn, and it shall
be no more, until he come whose right it is: This was near five hundred
years, for from Zedekiahs deposal to the birth of Christ were four hundred
ninety and two years, which was a long season for his crown and kingdom to lie
in darkness, and a desolate condition. Hosea told us long since, that the
children of Israel should abide many days without a King, and without a
Prince, chapter 3, 4. the Kingdom of Israel was overturned by the hand of God above
one hundred years before the kingdom of Judah, and lies overturned to this
day, and so has been above two thousand years, in a sad, dark, distressed
condition; When Kingdoms, Scepters, and Thrones are once overturned, they are
not quickly raised up again. Their sins were great which caused the Lord to
overturn them, and he lets them lie under the punishment of their iniquity
many days and years. When Kingdoms are down, many struggle to lift them up
again to their former dignity, glory, and greatness; but it must not, it
cannot be, till the Lords time come, till he please to put forth his hand and
do it.

Obs. 3 The Lord Christ, the promised Messiah was the true King of Judah, and
Prince of Sion; Until he come, whose right it is, and I will give it him. The
Father had appointed him to be King, given him the Kingdom, and made it known
long before his coming in the flesh. He was spoken of Genesis 49.10. He was the
Shiloh, the Prosperer, unto whom the gathering of the People should be, he
gathered Jews and Gentiles together. He was spoken of Numb. 24.17. There
shall come a star out of Jacob, and a Scepter shall rise out of Israel. So in
Psalm 45.6, 7. The Scepter of thy Kingdom is a right Scepter, and God has
anointed thee. See Isa. 11.1, 2. ch 42.1, 2, 3. Jer. 23.6. Ezekiel. 34.23, 24.
Dan. 7.14.27. Zach. 9.9. In these places, and many other, the Kingdom of
Christ, his right thereunto, and the Fathers donation th^rof unto him are
spoken of. The Peoples hearts were toward him, and they would have made him a
King, John 6.15. however he appeared to the world, the Apostles beheld glory
and majesty in him, John 1.14. 2 Pet. 1.16 and Pilate writ over his head, This
is Jesus the King of the Jews, M^t. 27.37. Christ was not a contemptible
person, whatever men thought of him, the Father designed him to be a King,
gave him a Kingdom, the Prophets foretold his Kingly dignity, he was born a
King, dyed a King, he lives and reigns at this day King of Sion, and of all
Saints Rev. 15.3. we have no cause to be ashamed of our King, but ought to
honor him as we honor the Father, seeing all judgment is committed to him,
Joh. 5.22, 23.

Obs. 4 The wisdom and goodness of the Lord toward his, that when he tells
them of the severest judgment he mingles some mercy; I will overturn,
overturn, overturn: Overturn the Church, overturn the State, overturn them for
a long time, which was very sad and bitter; yet even now when he is in a full
carriere of overturning, he tells them of the coming of Christ, who should
be their King, wear the Crown, and raise up the Kingdom again. This was great
mercy, in the depth of misery, if they lost an earthly Kingdom, they should
have a spiritual one; if they lost a profane and temporal King, they should
have a King of Righteousness, an eternal King. It is the method of the Lord,
when he is bringing in dreadful judgments upon his People, that have provoked
him bitterly, to lay in something that may support and comfort those have
served him faithfully, Amos 9.8 9, 10, 11. Behold, The eyes of the Lord God are
upon the sinful kingdom, and I will destroy it from off the face of the
earth, saving that I will not utterly destroy the house of Jacob, says the
Lord; There was mercy mingled with judgment, so in the next verse. For Lo, I
will command, and I will sift the house of Israel among all Nations, like as
corn is sifted in a sive, yet shall not the least grain fall upon the earth;
here again is mercy in the midst of judgment. So again in the two next verses.
All the sinners of my People shall dye by the sword, which say, the evil shall
not overtake nor prevent us, and what then? In that day will I raise up the
Tabernacle of David that is fallen, and close up the breaches thereof, and I
will raise up his ruins, and I will build it as in the days of old, here is
goodness with severity.

Obs. 5 That how contrary soever Gods actings appear, yet he will make good his
promises, he is mindful of them, and will be faithful. The Lord had promised
to set up his Son Christ, to be King in Sion, the hill of his holiness,
Psalm. 2.6. that the Government should be upon his shoulder, Isa. 9.6. that he
would cause a branch of Righteousness to grow up unto David, and he shall
execute judgment and righteousness in the land, Jer. 33.15. what likelihood
was there that these things should be, when the Lord overturns the land,
plucks up all by the roots, and lays all in a dead condition, and that for
many days and years? They might have thought and said, surely, This death of
the Crown, of Church and State, will be the death of all those and other
Promises; but it was not so, though a sentence of death was upon the land, upon
the Jews, yet the living God kept life in the Promises, he minded them, and
said, I will give it to him, he shall have this land, the Kingdom and the
crown, he shall sit upon Sion, reign and execute judgment. The actings of God
sometimes are such, that to man's apprehensions they will make void the Promises
of God, Psalm. 77.7, 8. says Asaph, will the Lord cast off for ever? and will
he be favorable no more? is his mercy clean gone for ever? does his Promise
fail for evermore? Gods hand was heavy upon him, his proceedings with him such,
as his soul was greatly afflicted, questioned the truth of his Promises, and
was ready to despair, but what says he in the tenth verse? This was my
infirmity. There was no infirmity in God, he had not forgotten his Promise, it
was not out of his sight, though out of Asaphs; man's faith may fail him
sometimes* but Gods faithfulness never fails him, Psalm 89.33. God will not
suffer his faithfulness to fail. Gods operations may have an aspect that way;
the Devils temptations, and our unbeleeving hearts, may not only make us think
so, but persuade us it is so, when as it cannot be so, for the Lord will not
suffer it, he will not make a lie in his Truth or faithfulness; so the H^brew
is, he is a God cannot lie, he is truth, speaks truth, and not one of his
Promises can or shall fail, which may afford strong Consolation unto all that
are under any promise of God.

Verse. 28 And thou Son of man, prophesy and say, Thus says the Lord God
concerning the Ammonites, and concerning their reproach, even say thou, The
sword, the sword is drawn for the slaughter, it is fourbished to consume,
because of the glittering. 29 Whiles they see vanity unto thee, whiles they
divine a lie unto thee, to bring thee upon the necks of them that are slain of
the wick^^^ whose day is come when their iniquity shall have an end. In these
verses and the rest to the end, is contained the Prophesy against the Ammonites.

Two ways were spoken of in the 19, 20, and 21. verse. One leading to the
Ammonites, the other to the Jews. Nebuchadnezzar using divinations to discover
unto which of these he should go, Divine Providence overruled the Divination,
so that he was to make his military expedition unto Jerusalem. Hence least the
Ammonites should be secure, and insult over the Jews, whose judgments were
now coming upon them. The Lord commands the Prophet to denounce judgment,
yea, the same judgment unto them.

In his Prophesy we have, 1 The judgment, which is the sword, ver. 28. 2 The
Causes of it, 1 Reproach, ver. 28. 2 Impiety, and inhumanity, ver. 29.
3 The place where it shall be, verse. 30. 4 The Similitudes to which the
judgment is likened, verse. 31. 5 The Event thereof, verse. 32. 6 The
Ratification of the Prophesy, ibid.


Concerning the Ammonites. The Hebrew is Ad filios Hammon, To the children of
Ammon. These Ammonites came of the Jewish Race, for they were from Lot and his
younger daughter, Genesis 19.38. who being with child by him, named her Son
Ben-Ammi, who was the Father of the Ammonites, and for Lots sake, who was the
root of them, the Lord showed them kindness long after. Deuteronomy. 2.19. when the
Jews came into Canaan, they must not distress them nor meddle with them: the
Ammonites land was given to the children of Lot for a possession, and so the
Moabites, verse. 9. had their land upon that account; but the Ammonites though
descended from the Jews, were bitter enemies to them, and made war against
them, Judge. 11.4. 1 Samuel 11.1, 2. 2 Chronicles 20.1. They were notorious
Idolaters; they had Molech and Milchom among them, 1 King 11.7. 2 King 23.13.
They were cruel and bloody, Amos 1.13.

Concerning their Reproach. Some would have the words taken passively here, for
the reproach they suffered from the Chaldaeans, but they are rather to be taken
Actively, for the Reproach which the Ammonites put upon the Jews. So Vatablus
understands the words, and other interpreters. A lapide affirms, Opprobrium
sive ignominiam Ammonitarum vocat, quo Israelem affecerant.
that the Ammonites upbraided the Jews, and their God as weak and unwarlike,
because Nebuchadnezzar was coming to them, and durst not meddle with the
Ammonites. Its certain the Ammonites bare the Jews no good will, and were glad
of opportunities, to vent that ancient hatred they had against them; when
therefore they saw that Nebuchadnezzar should come, besiedge their City, lay
all waste, and carry them into captivity, they insulted over the Jews, they
said, where is your God? why does he not appear for you? defend you against
that cruel Oppressor Nebuchadnezzar, and deliver you; we see what your God is,
our Molech, our Milchom does more for us, than your God does for you. Zeph.
2.8. I have heard the reproach of Moab, and the revilings of the children of
Ammon, whereby they have reproached my people, and magnified themselves against
their border. Our Prophet is more plain and full, bringing in the Ammonites
scoffing at the Calamities of the Jews, Chap. 25.3, 4. Say to the Ammonites,
hear the word of the Lord, Thus says the Lord God, because thou said Aha
against my Sanctuary, when it was profaned, and against the Land of Israel
when it was desolate, and against the house of Judah, when they went into
captivity. Behold, therefore I will deliver thee to the men of the East for a
possession, etc.

The sword, the sword it is drawn. By Sword is meant war, all warlike
instruments, and all those evils attend the same. Here is an Epizeuxes, a
doubling of the word; the sword, the sword, which is emphatical, and imports
certainty and progress of it to destroy. You Ammonites think the sword is
drawn only against the Jews, and that when they are slain it shall be put up,
but its not so. The sword, the sword is drawn for slaughter of you Ammonites,
as well as the Jews, you have little cause to insult, reproach, or flatter
your-selves, you shall be secure, your destruction is decreed, its coming,
only the Jews is first, yours after.

The word for drawn is, Pethuchah, solutus est, it was bound up before in the
sheath, now its loosed, Desgaines, says the French, From (...) aperire,
so^vere.
unsheathed; now its at liberty and in readiness to do execution, even among
you Ammonites at my pleasure.

For the slaughter it is fourbished. Not only was it drawn, but it was
fourbished, Merutah, filed, scoured; (...) marat, whence it comes, signifies to
pluck up hairs, or pull out feathers by the roots, to excoriate, or flea off the
skin, and metaphorically, is applied to things which contract rust, and
signifies detergere rubiginem. When swords have been long in their sheaths,
undrawn, unused, they become rusty, that rust is like an hairy, or feathery
skin upon the blades, which must be removed, and that is the fourbishing of
them. The Sword here was not fourbished for sight, but for use, for slaughter.
Letevach, ad jugulationem, says Montanus, Ad occisionem, says Vatabl.

To consume, because of the glittering. The Hebrew is, Lehachil, lemaan,
barack, ad sustinendum propter fulgur, To sustain by reason of the shining, So
Mont. Politus est ut sustineat and propter fulgorem, So Vatabl. and he gives
this sense thereof, it is fourbished, that it may suffice for the slaughtering
of many, and that it may terrify with its glittering, Politus est ut sufficiat
multis interficiendis and ut terreat suo fulgore perdendos.
those that are to be destroyed. The Syriack Exacutus es and fulgens, Thou art
whetted and shining. Lavat. Ut consumat propter fulgur, That it may consume,
because of the brightness or lightening of it. The sword and military
instruments, were so glittering, that like lightening, they should strike
sudden terror into them, and quickly consume them.

Obs. 1 When God is bringing, or brings judgments upon his people for their
in^quities, Then the wicked, then their enemies take advantage and revile them.
The Ammonites understanding that Nebuchadnezzar was marching with his Forces to
Jerusalem, they reproached them, being glad that the day of their calamity and
suffering was at hand. The Ammonites were their Neighbors, they were quasi
fratres, coming from the Brother of Abraham, yet they reproached the Jews, and
added affliction to affliction, Zeph. 2.8. both Moab and Ammon reviled and
reproached the Israelites, and magnified themselves against their border.

The Rabbis say, Quando Chaldaei Judaeos ducebant in captivitatem Babyloniam
and per terram Ammonitarum and Moabitarum transibant flentes, contristabant and
affligebant eos, dicente^ qu^d malum vos, affligitis Iudaei? quid ploratis?
nonne in domum it is patris vestri. R Salom. ut habet Lyra.
that when the Chaldaeans carried the Jews Captive, through the lands of the
Moabites and Ammonites, the Jews wept, and they reproached them, saying, Why do
you afflict your selves? why do you weep? are you not going to your fathers
house? they meant Chaldaea, which was Abraham's Country and habitation. These,
and many other reproachful speeches doubtless they used against the Jews, when
they were spoild and led into Captivity, and magnified themselves against their
border; They said, now their border, their land should become theirs, and they
did take the advantage, and invaded their possessions, Jerem. 49.1. Concerning
the Ammonites, Thus says the Lord. Has Israel no Sons? has he no heir?
why then does their King (that is, the King of the Ammonites) inherit Gad, and
his People dwell in his Cities; that is, seeing Israel has Sons, and heirs
of his own, and I have given the possessions of Gad, being carried away with
the ten Tribes, unto Judah and Benjamin, why do the Ammonites usurp, and take
possession of that is none of their own? Thus they reproached and wronged the
Jews. So likewise did the Edomites, Psalm. 137.7. In the day of Jerusalem, that
was in the day Nebuchadnezzars forces took and plundered it, they cried, Raze
it, raze it, even to the foundation. In reproach of, and despite to the Jews,
they cried out so; when Jerusalem was destroyed, the adversaries saw her, and
did mock at her Sabbaths, they scoffed at all her festivals, religion, and
worship. Where is your God whose days you have so religiously observed? why
did he not defend you from this day of your sufferings? either he was
infirm, and could not; or unfaithful and would not?

Obs. 2 The Lord takes notice of the enemies reproaching his People: He tells
the Prophet of the Ammonites reproachings. Ezekiel was in Babylon, he knew
nothing of it, but God heard and observed it, Zeph. 2.8. I have heard the
reproach of Moab, and the revilings of the children of Ammon: Gods ear is very
open in this case, and though his People hear not, yet he hears, Jer. 48.27.
he says in his indignation unto Moab, was not Israel a derision unto thee?
put it off if thou can, deny it if thou dare? I saw it, I heard it. This is
some comfort to the Church and People of God, that he observes not only the
wrongs wicked men do unto his, but also the reproaching speeches they utter
against his, Lam. 3.61. Jeremy comforted himself in this, Thou have heard their
repro^ch, O Lord, and all their imaginations against me: When we are
reproached, and mischief is imagined against us by wicked ones, let us make use
of this Scripture, and comfort our selves therein, not breaking out into
bitterness and passion.

Obs. 3 Reproaching and reviling Gods people, when they are in affliction,
draws judgment upon the Reproachers and Revilers. The Ammonites reproached the
Jews, when the Babylonish sword came upon them, and here the Prophet must tell
them the sword is drawn, fourbished for slaughter, and consumption of them.
Reproach in this kind is a provoking sin, Gods Name, Truths, Ordinances,
suffer when his People are reproached, for his correcting hand upon them for
their iniquities. Jer. 48.26, 27. Make ye Moab drunken, that is, let the cup
of Gods wrath be given him, let him have judgment after judgment; drink so
deep of divine fury, that he shall not be able to stand: and why was this? he
magnified himself against the Lord, he derided Israel, verse 27. he magnified
himself against their border, Zeph. 2.8. and this is called magnifying himself
against the Lord (for what is done against his People, and their borders, is
done against him) and Moab must be made drunk for it; yea, Moab also shall
wallow in his vomit, he also shall be in derision, he shall be derided and
scorned in his misery, as a drunken man who lys wallowing in his vomit; Moab
for reproaching should be re^roached* yea, grievously afflicted, yea, utterly
destroyed, Zeph. 2.8, 9, Both Moab and Ammon reviled, reproached the Jews, and
magnifyed themselves against their border. Therefore as I live says the Lord
of Hosts, the God of Israel, surely Moab shall be as Sodom, and the Children
of Ammon, as Gomorrah, even the breeding of nettles, and saltpits, and a
perpetual desolation. The meaning is, not that they should be consumed by fire
from heaven, as Sodom and Gomorrah were, but they should suffer extreme and
severe judgments at the hands of the Lord, and be perpetually desolate as they
were.

29 Whiles they see vanity unto thee, whiles they divine a lie unto thee. The
Hebrew is, Bachazoth lack shane, bicksom lack cazab, In seeing to thy self a
vain thing, in divining to thy self a lie. The Septuag. runs to that purpose,
(...), In thy vision for vanity, and in thy prophesying a lie to thy self. The
Ammonites like other Nations, had their false Prophets, Diviners, and
Soothsayers, as you may clearly see from Jerem. 27.3. where the Prophet under
the type of bonds and yoaks, put upon his neck, prophesyeth the subjection of
the Nations unto Nebuchadnezzar, and among others the Ammonites; and verse 9.
he forbids them to hearken to their Prophets, Diviners, Dreamers, Inchanters,
Sorcerers, which told them, they should not serve the King of Babylon. They
held them a sleep by telling them, either Nebuchadnez. would not come to them,
or if he did, they were a strong people, had strong Cities, and needed not to
fear any enemy. But they saw vanity, and divined a lie unto them, and this is
the sense of the words, both according to the Hebrew and our translation.

To bring thee upon the necks of them that are slain. Their false Prophets and
Diviners, put them on, to insult over and trample upon the Jews, when they were
slain by the Chaldaeans; assuring them of safety.

Or thus, To give thee to the necks of them that are slain, so the Hebrew may
be rendered; and then the meaning is, thy false Prophets and Diviners, by their
vanities and lies do subject thee to the sword of Nebuchadnezzar, and make way
for thy destruction like the Jews.

Of the wicked whose day is come. These words, of the wicked, are joined with
the former in the Hebrew, El Tzauvere challe reshaim, To the necks of the slain
of the wicked, and so is the Septuagint, (...). All Translations and Expositors
do join them, and they may refer either to the slain, or slayers, noting their
wickedness, some do refer them to the one, some to the other. In Hebraeo non
est Syntaxis convenientiae, ita ut intellige^di sint confossi improbi, sed
rect^onis ut intel igantur con^ossi ab improbis. Piscat.
Piscator by wicked, understands the Chaldaeans, and reads the words thus,
Eorum qui ab improbis confossi sunt, upon the necks of them who are slain by
the wicked.

Whose day is come when their iniquity shall have an end. The day of the Jews,
that was come wherein Gods judgments should cut them off, and put an end to
their iniquity: of these words, see ver. 25.

Obs. 1 When the Lord threatens sinful Nations with sore judgments, they have
those amongst them which divert them from the truth, possess them with
delusions, and put them upon destructive practices. The Ammonites were
threatened here with the Babylonish sword, but they neither believed Ezekiel nor
Jeremy, who told them the same thing, chap. 27. Their false Prophets, their
Diviners beat them off from it, possessed them with vanities and lies, put them
upon insulting over the Jews, when the hand of the Lord was most heavy upon
them, and so brought them to suffer by the same sword the Jews did. Its just
with God to give men and Nations over to believe lies, and lying Prophets which
shall lead them to destruction, when they have stopped their ears against the
true Prophets. Ahab would not believe Micaiah, but the false Prophets, who
spoke words according to his mind, but they were vanity, lies, and he smarted
for it, 1 Kin. 22.

Obs. 2 Though the Lord forbear sinful Nations long, yet he has his days and
times of reckoning with, and punishing of them: the Jews day was come, and
their iniquity had an end. The Ammonites day came, and their iniquity had an
end. God punished them severely for their sins, Ezekiel. 25. Nebuchadnezzar and
the Babylonians were forborne long, but God had his time for them; Jer. 27.7.
All Nations shall serve him, and his Son, and his Sons Son, until the
very time of his land come: then many Nations, and great Kings shall serve
themselves of him. Babylon and its King, had a time to sin, and a time to
suffer. God staid many days, yet had his day, and came at the day appointed,
Jer. 50.31. chapter 51.13. O thou that dwell upon many waters, abundant in
treasures: thine end is come, and the measure of thy covetousness. Babylon was
insatiably covetous, robbing the Nations of their riches, but all her wealth
could not purchase one days respit from the wrath of God; nor all her waters
preserve her from the fire of his indignation; the fire God sent in his day
burnt up their habitations, and lickt up the water of Euphrates, whereon
Babylon sat; God bare long with us, and the Nations about us, but his day is
come, he is visiting, we, they, have had our times of sinning, and now must
have our times of suff^ring.

Verse. 30 Shall I cause it to return into his sheath? I will judge thee in the
place where thou wast created, in the land of thy nativity. 31 And I will pour
out mine indignation upon thee, I will blow against thee in the fire of my
wrath, and deliver thee into the hand of brutish men, and skilful to destroy.
32 Thou shall be for fuel to the fire, thy blood shall be in the midst of the
Land, thou shall be no more remembered: for I the Lord have spoken it. Some
interpret these words of the Babylonians, as if God would deal with them after
he had done with the Jews, and Ammonites, which he did according to the
Prophesies, in Isa. chapter 13. and Jerem. 25. the 50. and 51. but this Prophesy is
against the Ammonites, whose land the Babylonish King laid waste some five
years after the final destruction of Jerusalem, as Sanctius says, citing the
tenth book of Josephus Antiquities for it.

Shall I cause it to return into his sheath? You Ammonites think that when the
sword has done execution upon the Jews, it will be sheathed, quiet, and
proceed no further: but shall I cause it to return into his sheath? no I will
not give it any such commission, or if I do, it shall be for a short time, it
shall come to you, and slay you as it has done them. Repone gladium in vaginam
suam. Jun. Reduc gladium tuum in vaginam suam. Pis.
The Hebrew, Hoshab is infinitive put for an Imperative, and so is rendered by
some Expositors; Put the sword, or thy sword into the sheath. Thou think to
draw the sword, to defend thy self against the Chaldaeans when I send them upon
thee, but it shall be in vain, thou shall not be able to stand against them.
I will make thy strength and weapons useless.

I will judge thee in the place where thou wast created. That is, I will punish
the Ammonites in their own land, where they were borne, where my hand created
or framed them. They shall not be carried to Babylon, and be preserved there,
but they shall be destroyed in their own Country, at their own door, yet some
were Captives, Jer. 49. of this expression, I will judge thee, was spoken,
Ezekiel. 16.38.

In the land of thy Nativity. The Hebrew is, Mecurothajick, In the land of thy
mansions, or peregrination, In terra negotiationum tuarum, says Piscator, In
the land of thy traffic, where thou have pleasure and profit.

31 I will pour out mine indignation upon thee, etc. Here you have the
resemblances to which Gods judgment is likened.

1 Its compared to a Flood or torrent; to a great rain or water, that runs
swiftly, and bears down all; of which before, chapter 7.8. chapter 14.19. chapter
20.8.13.21.

2 To a wind or storm, I will blow against thee: Aphiash, perflabo, or
perflare faciam, I will make such a wind, such a storm as shall throw down all
the greatness and glory of the Ammonites.

3 To a fire, which where it kindles and fastens, consumes all to ashes; of
this before, chapter 15 7.

I will deliver thee into the hands of brutish men. The word for Brutish, is,
(...) from Baar to burn, and therefore in the margent its burning, God would
deliver them into the hands of the Chaldaeans, who were burning, that is,
Choleric, hasty, furious men, Habbak. 1.6. a bitter and hasty nation. The word
also signifies to be brutish, foolish, Psalm. 73.22. Vaani baar velo edah. I
was foolish, brutish, and knew not, so that baar is adam, shem lo daath, a man
without knowledge, a Barbaraian, and so the Saptuagint speak, Rabbi David.
(...), into the hands of barbarous men.

Skilful to destroy. Charashe maschith, is the Original, Artists of Corruption,
men exercised in caedibus faciendis, in killing men they were very expert; they
had been sundry times before at Jerusalem, slain many Jews, and knew how to
destroy Ammonites.

32 Thou shall be for fuel to the fire. Thou shall be meat to the fire, that
shall eat up thee, and thy habitations, as fire is fed by wood, coal, straw,
turfe, and such combustibles, so should the fire of Gods wrath be fed with
their vineyards, habitations, towns, Cities, persons.

Thy blood shall be in the midst of the Land. Thou shall be slain openly, lie
in thy blood, unpittied, unburied.

Thou shall be no more remembered. This judgment shall deprive thee of life,
and also of thy name, thou shall have no monument to make mention of thee, but
thy memory shall altogether perish, thou shall be so handled, ut ne vestigium
tui relinquatur.

Obs. 1 The Lord often does cross the thoughts, and blast the hopes of wicked
men: the sword came to the Ammonites, when they thought it should not come,
they hoped by their swords to beat back the Babylonians, and God bade them put
up their swords into the sheaths, they should do them no good, the Babylonians
should prevail. Zedekiah and the Jews, thought Nebuchadnezzar would not draw
his sword against them, if he did, they hoped the Egyptian sword would prove
stronger than the Babylonian, but they were deceived in both, see Ezekiel. 17.12,
17. when Princes and States trust in their strong men, and look for help;
deliverance by them, the Lord disappoints them, and makes the pomp of the
strong to cease.

Obs. 2 The Lord punishes sinners in the midst of their conveniences,
pleasures, and profits: I will judge thee in the place where thou wast created,
in the land of thy nativity: There they had most conveniences, delights,
contents, and thither God brings the sword, there he cuts them off. There they
sinned, there they were impious, consulting with false Prophets, Diviners,
there they were barbarous, inhumane, mocking at the Calamities of the Jews when
God visited them, and there God punished them. Thus has God dealt with them in
Ireland, in the land of their Nativity, in the places of their delights and
conveniences, where they sinned, there they suffered.

Obs. 3 Suddenly and easily can the Lord destroy sinful Nations. I will pour
out mine indignation upon thee, I will blow against thee in the fire of my
wrath, and deliver thee, etc. Floods, winds, storms, fires come suddenly,
and blowing is an easy thing, if God do but blow upon a Nation in his wrath,
its undone, Isa. 40.7. The grass withers, the flower fades, because the
spirit of the Lord blows upon it. If the Lord blow with a spirit of
indignation upon a land, or People, they wither away quickly, and come to
nothing, verse. 24. Speaking before of Princes, Judges, and their stock, which
seem to be rooted like mighty Oaks, and tall Cedars, its said, He shall blow
upon them, and they shall wither, and the whirlewind shall take them away as
stubble; Let God blow upon Princes, and their glory fades, their roots dry up,
if God let out the fire of his wrath, who? what is not meat, fuel for that
fire? Princes, People, Cities, Nations are.

Obs. 4 Wicked Nations, and Persons, God takes away the name and memory of
them: Thou shall be no more remembered in way of mercy, or for honor; but if at
all, in way of wrath, and for reproach. Many Nations since the fall of man, for
their sins are defunct, extinct, and buried in the darkness of oblivion,

Obs. 5 Judgments come not upon Nations without the Lord, but because the Lord
has appointed them: The Ammonitish Nation must be fuel for the fire, no more
remembered, and why? For I the Lord have spoken, I that am faithful and will not
falsity my word, I that am able, and can inflict what is threatened. I have
spoken, decreed, and appointed such things, and they must come to pass.

CHAP. XXII.
Verse. 1 Moreover, the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, 2 Now thou son
of man, will thou judge? will thou judge the bloody City? yea, thou shall show
her all her Abominations. 3 Then say thou, Thus says the Lord God, the City
shedeth blood in the midst of it, that her time may come, and makes Idols
against her self, to defile her self. 4 Thou art become guilty in thy blood
that thou have shed, and have defiled thy self in thine idols, which thou have
made; and thou have caused thy days to draw near, and art come even unto thy
years, therefore have I made thee a reproach unto the Heathen, and a mocking to
all Countries. 5 Those that be near, and those that be far from thee, shall
mock thee, which art infamous, and much vexed. 6 Behold the Princes of Israel,
every one were in thee to their power to shed blood. 7 In thee have they set
light by Father and mother, in the midst of thee have they dealt by oppression
with the stranger, in thee have they vexed the Fatherless, and the widow. 8
Thou have despised mine holy things, and profaned my Sabbaths. 9 In thee are
men that carry tales to shed blood: and in thee they eat upon the mountains: in
the midst of thee they commit lewdness. 10 In thee they have discovered their
fathers nakedness, in thee have they humbled her, that was set apart for
pollution. 11 And one has committed Abomination with his Neighbors wife, and
another has lewdly defiled his daughter in Law, and another in thee has
humbled his sister, his fathers daughter. 12 In thee have they taken gifts to
shed blood: thou have taken usury and increase, and thou have greedily gained
of thy Neighbor by extortion, and have forgotten me, says the Lord God.
IN this 22 Chapter, you have three messages of the Lord to the Prophet. The

1 Is from the beginning to the 17. verse. wherein a large Catalogue of
Jerusalems sins are set down, with intermixture, and addition of some
threatenings and judgments.

2 Is from the 17. verse. to the 23. wherein is declared what the house of
Israel is likened unto, and what the Lord will do with it.

3 Is from the 23. to the end, wherein is laid forth the general corruption of
all sorts, both Prophets, Priests, Princes, and people, with certainty of their
destruction:

1 Moreover, the word of the Lord, etc. Prophets stir not till God stirs
them; after God speaks to them, they may speak to others. God has more still
to communicate unto Prophets, notwithstanding he has communicated much;
Moreover the word, etc. besides all delivered, this I have had from the Lord.

2 Will thou judge, Will thou judge the bloody City? The Hebrew word (...)
shaphat, signifies to judge, and because in judging two parties are to be
dealt withal, one wronging, the other wronged, hence the word notes sometimes
to plead for, to defend; sometimes to sentence and punish. In this place, the
former of these is most suitable, Son of man will thou excuse, defend, and
plead for this City? I tell thee its a bloody City, a City that has wronged
me, and must not be pleaded for. Of these words were spoken before, chapter 20.4.

If we read them as Montanus, Aecolampadius, and some others do, thus, will thou not judge, will thou not judge the bloody City? that is, will thou not
reprove, and tell it thoroughly of its iniquities? what, will thou faint, give
over, and wink at the wickedness thou see? is it not a part of thy
prophetical office, to lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and to tell my People
of their transgressions? remember thine office, connive not at their sins,
but cry out against them. In this sense, it affords this note.

That Prophetical men are often discouraged, ready to cease from their work, and
need to be roused, and quickened thereunto by the Lord.

The bloody City. The Hebrew is, The City of bloods. Jerusalem which is so
called, because she had shed much innocent blood, and was become very cruel,
Jer. 19.4. ye have filled this place with the blood of Innocents, and 2 King
21.16. Manasses shed so much innocent blood therein, that he filled Jerusalem
from one end to the other therewith; yea, so bloody was Jerusalem that she
filled the land with blood and bloody crimes, Ezekiel 7.23. chapter 9.9. and how
bloody this City was, appears in the 3, 4, 6, 9. verse. of this chapter.

Obs. The sins of a City and Nation may be such, that God will not have his
Prophets to plead or intercede for them, but to cry out against them. Son of
Man, will thou judge, will thou judge the bloody City: I know thou art very
charitable, and ready to speak for them, but the City is so bloody, and full of
Abominations, that I will not have thee to appear or move for them, but thou
must set their sins in order before them, and thunder out my judgments
against them. When there is a fullness of sin, so that its universal in all
sorts, sinners are grown impudent and obstinate, then the Lord stops his ears,
and the mouths of his Prophets, he will have no pleading for such a people.
This was the case of Jerusalem, sin had spread it self through all ranks of
people, as you shall find in this Chapter, and her Children were impudent and
hard hearted, Ezekiel 3. verse 7.

3 The City sheddeth blood in the midst of it, that her time may come.
Jerusalem shed blood in the midst of her self, so is the Hebr. That is,
public, impune, sine timore, publicly, fearlesly, freely, against law and
light of nature, without all shame.

That her time may come. She fills up the measure of her sins, that so the
time of her destruction may make haste.

And makes Idols against her self. In the former words was a violation of the
second table, and in these is a violation of the first. Of the word gillulim,
Idols, or dunghill Gods, has been spoken in former Chapters: The Septuagint
has, (...), devices, Jerusalem devised Idols, and ways of worship, she
fetched in the gods of other Nations, and devised some of her own, but they
were against her self, she thought they made for her, but they tended to her
destruction.

4 Thou art become guilty in thy blood, that thou have shed. The word for
guilty is, ashamt, and the Original asham, signifies to do wickedly,
shamefully. Jerusalem in shedding of blood, had done wickedly, shamefully, and
so became guilty with a witness, exceeding guilty, she cut not off the
wicked, to take guilt off from her self and the land, but she murdered the
innocent, and multiplied guilt thereby upon her self, and the Nation.

Thou have defiled thy self in the Idols which thou have made. Thou have made
Idols, thinking thereby to please God, and pacify his anger, but they have
defiled thee, made thee hateful unto God, and increased his wrath much more
against thee. God had forbidden them to make to themselves Idols or Images,
Exodus 20. yet they did make them, defiling thereby, both the worship of God,
and their own souls, and so hastened their own destruction.

Thou have caused thy days to draw near, and art come even unto thy years.
Thou have by thy transgressions, broken the thread of my patience, and hastened
judgment to come upon thee, I gave thee time to repent, and prevent my wrath
from breaking out aginst thee, but thou having abused my patience, misspent thy
time, art become worse, and now vengeance is at thy gates, and ready to enter.
The time is come for the sword to visit thee, and that thou shall go into
Captivity.

Therefore have I made thee a reproach unto the Heathen. Jerusalem was the
Habitation of God, Psalm 76.2. the City of the great King. Mat. 5.35. which the
Lord took pleasure to protect and defend, Isa. 31.5. it was the perfection of
beauty, Psalm 50.2. the Holy City, Matthew. 27.53. very honorable; but this
City, and the inhabitants thereof, did the Lord make a reproach unto Heathens.
The word for reproach is, Cherphah, which notes, reproach, disgrace in word or
action; and doubtless the Jews met with reproachful words, and actions from
the Heathen. They were not yet made a reproach, but God intended them to be
so, the preter tense, is put for the future.

A mocking to all Countries. The Hebrew is, (...) kallasah from killez;
subsannare, to mock and jeer, and kallasah is subsannatio vilipendium, or
contumelia cum extenuatione alterius, a vilifying and scorning of a man, its
only in this place, and imports the scorning and vilifying of the Jews, in all
Countries.

The Septuagint has it, (...), in ^udibrium, for a derision and laughing
stock. Its rendered, Heb. 11.36. cruel mockings, such mockings as argue cruelty
and insulting.

5 Those that be near, and those that be far from thee, shall mock thee. The
Nations-round about thee, the Ammonites, Moabites, Idumeans, and those far off,
the Babylonians.

Which art infamous. In the Hebrew its Temeath hashem, polluta nomine, thou art
polluted in thy name. Septuagint, (...), who art named impure. French, qui es
vileine de nom, who art of a base and vile name. Jerusalem the Faithful City
was become an harlot, Isa. 1.21. and like an imperious whorish woman, Ezekiel.
16.30. Jerusalems Idolatry, blood, uncleanness, and profaneness, had made her
infamous, and to be called the filthy, polluted, the oppressing City, Zeph. 3.1.

Much vexed. The Hebrew words are, Rabbath, hamme, humah, multae contritionis,
of much contrition, that is, a City greatly to be broken for thy wickedness.
Septuagint, (...), much in wickedness, which brought her much vexation. The
French is, Grande en affliction, great in affliction. The Vulgar Grandis in
territu, famine, sword, and plague, vexed, destroyed her. Piscat. Rep^eta
tumultuatione, filled with tumult. Lavat. Cum magna turba. Jun. Copiosa
divexatione rich in vexation.

From these 3. verses thus opened, take these observations.

Obs. 1 That when people become Idolatrous, they grow cruel. Jerusalem made
Idols, and shed blood, bloodinesse, cruelty, and Idolatry usually go together,
she had Idols in the midst of her, Ezekiel. 16.24, 25. and she shed blood in the
midst of her, she was a public Idolatresse, and a public murtheresse. The
Babylonians were very Idolatrous, Ezekiel. 20.32. and they were very bloody, Jer.
51.35. so Rome, which is called Babylon, Rev. 17. was idolatrous and bloody,
those she could not make drunk with the wine of her fornications, those she
could not draw to Popery and Idolatry she made her self drunk with their blood,
verse. 26. How bloody Popish Idolaters are, the Parisian massachre heretofore,
and the Irish of late do witness; when men once make gods, and form ways of
worship to themselves, they are zealous for them; will lavish out gold to
maintain them, and be lavish of their blood that oppose them.

Obs. 2 Great sins do accelerate the judgments of God, they put wings unto
them, and cause them to make haste. Jerusalems bloudinesse and idolatries made
her time to come, and days to draw near. Sinners-by their lewdnesses do
abbreviate Gods patience, and swiften his punishments, Psalm 54.23. Bloody and
deceitful men, shall not live out half their days. The length and strength of
their wickedness shortens their days, in Job 22.16. its said, wicked men were
cut down out of time, and chap. 15.32. it shall be accomplished before his
time; a wicked man, his life is gone, cut off before the just time, like a
green tree, cut down before it come to perfection, and so is out of time, and
before his time, he might have lived longer, had he not been so wicked, Eccl.
7.17. be not overmuch wicked, neither be thou fool^sh, why should thou dye
before thy time. The Hebrew is, belo itteco, not in thy time. Many men through
Drunkenness, Thefts, murders Duels, Uncleanness, do dye, Not in their time,
not in the time they might have lived unto, they dye out of time, and before
their time, and what is the cause? their own wickedness, and overmuch
wickedness precipitates their death. Hamans enmity to Mordecai, and
bloudinesse against the Jews, brought the halter about his neck before his
time. Herod's pride caused the worms to eat him up, before his time. The
wickedness of many in our days has brought them to the block, tempore non
suo, out of time, or before their time.

Obs. 3 The sins of Nations, Cities, and People, do expose them to the
Reproachings and Scornings of all sorts, b^th far off and near. Jerusalem and
her people were very wicked; therefore says God, I have made thee a reproach
unto the Heathen, and a mocking to all Countries, those be near, and those be
far from thee shall mock thee, Lam. 2.15. All that pass by clap their hands at
thee, they hiss and wag their head at the daughter of Jerusalem, saying, is
this the City that men call the perfection of beauty, the joy of the whole
earth? All passengers of what Nation soever, when Jerusalem suffered, and was
made desolate, clapped their hands, hissed, wagged their heads, gnashed their
teeth, verse. 16. which were gestures of scorn and insultation, and tip't their
tongues with this bitter sarcasive, Is this the City that men call the
perfection of beauty, the joy of the whole earth? See Jer. 18.15, 16. it was
the Jews sinning against God that made them a perpetual hissing, Lamen. 1.8.
Jerusalem has grievously sinned, therefore she is removed, all that honored
her, despise her: Her sin transformed her honor into shame and despite. One
of her sins was, that the word of God was a reproach to her and hers, Jer.
6.10, therefore God made her and hers a reproach, a proverb, a taunt, a curse
in all places, whither he should drive them, Jer. 24.9. not only the Moabites
and Ammonites mocked them, when they were leading away Captive, Nonne it is in
domum patris vestri, why do you weep? you are going to your fathers house; but
also the Babylonians, Psalm 137.3. Sing us one of the Songs of Sion; you say
Zion is the joy of the whole earth, let us have a song of it, and see how
joyful it will make you here in Babylon.

Obs. 4 Sin makes Cities and Citizens to have an ill name. Jerusalems
wickedness made her infamous: Her iniquities were great and many, and they
caused her to hear ill; formerly Jerusalem had been renowned, Ezekiel. 16.14. for
Beauty the presence, Ordinances, and worship of God, Psalm. 76.1, 2, 3, 4.
renowned for her faithfulness, Isa. 1.21. for her Holiness, Psalm. 2.6. for her
Justice and righteousness, Isa. 1.21. but now through her Idolatry, Cruelty,
profaneness, uncleanness, she had lost her beauty, faithfulness,
holiness, and righteousness, she was become infamous as any strumpet, and
Ezekiel. 24 6.9. has this infamous motto twice written upon her gates, Woe to the
bloody City, woe to the bloody City: and what were the Citizens, Rulers of
Sodom and people of Gomorrah. Jerusalem was Sodom, Gomorrah, and what a brand
was this to that City? and the people were Sodomites, and Gomorrhaeans, and
what an infamy was this unto them? How infamous was Jezabel, Jeroboam, and
Judah for their wickedness? The Spirit of God resembles wicked men to things
that are vile and infamous, as the smoke of a Chimny, Hos. 13.3. which blacks
and infects, to Sepulchers which are stinking and loathsome, Mat. 23.27. to
despised broken Idols, Jer. 22.28. to dogs and Swine, 2 Pet. 2.22. to Adders
and Serpents, Psalm. 58.4. to Dragons, Isa. 51.9. yea, to the Dev^l, John. 6.70.
if men would not have an ill name, be likened unto vile things, let them not
do such things as will make infamous.

Obs. 5 Sin brings sad afflictions upon the Sons of men: Thou art much vexed:
Jerusalems sins multiplied her sorrows: she vexed the fatherless and widow,
verse. 7. she vexed the poor and needy, verse. 29. and she had much vexation
for it. The Ammonites, Egyptians, Babylonians vexed her, yea, the Lord vexed
her with famine, sword, and pestilence. In Deu. 28.20. it was told the Jews,
that God would send upon them cursing, vexation, and rebuke, till he had
destroyed them, and why? because of the wickedness of their doings, because
they forsook God, and Isa. 63.10. They rebelled and vexed his holy Spirit,
therefore he was turned to be their enemy, and fought against them: when God
is an enemy, and fights against a People, they have nothing but vexation.

God makes every creature, every condition vexatious.

6 Behold the Princes of Israel, every one were in thee to their Power, etc.
The Hebrew stands thus, The Princes of Israel every one according to his arm,
were in thee; an Arm, is put for power. Vatablus has it, Quisque pro virili.
suo, every one of the Princes according to his power and place, did put forth
himself to do unjust, and cruel things. The Princes who were set up above
others, and empowered to have done justice impartially to all, they abused their
power and places, to the defilling of Jerusalem with Blood. There was no equity
amongst them, tyranny prevailed.

7 In thee have they set light by Father and Mother. The Law of God, and light
of Nature, teaches men to honor their Parents, but Jerusalem had those in it,
violated both these Laws: Children were come to such an height of wickedness,
that they vilified their Parents, and reproached them: both their Natural and
metophorical Parents. Sep. (...), Is. 3.5. The Child shall he have himself
proudly against the ancient and the base against the honorable; This was now
fulfilled in Jerusalem, and that curse pulled upon them, Deuteronomy. 27.16. Cursed be
he that sets light by his father, etc.

In thee have they dealt by oppression with the stranger. The word for
Oppression is from (...) which signifies to oppress a man by force or fraud,
and though the Law was, that they should not vex or oppress a stranger, Exodus
22.21. yet now was the wickedness of Jerusalem such, that she by fraud and
force did oppress the stranger.

By stranger is not meant, any one of other Nations that came to Jerusalem, but
him, qui adoptione Judaeus factus erat, who being adopted into the Jewish
Nation, became a Prosselyte, Vid. Rivet in Exodus 22.21.
God took special care of such, and so the Septuagint renders the word
strangers, that so more might be encouraged to come into the worship of the
true God; but they oppressed them, and so shut the door which God had opened.

In thee have they vexed the fatherless, and the widow. Orphans and widows
being deprived of those should be their help and strength, God himself has
declared for them, Psalm. 68.5. A father of the Fatherless, and a judge of the
widow, is God in his holy habitation, and therefore peremptorily forbids the
affliction of any widow or fatherless child, Exodus 22.22. and the sense is not
only that they should not harm them, but that they should protect them, plead
their causes, and do them good, Isa. 1, 17. judge the Fatherless, plead for
the widow, but they were so far from this, that they afflicted and vexed them;
the word here for vexed, is Honu from janah, to offer violence, to prey upon,
they offered violence to the widows and fatherless, making a prey of them,
which was a great vexation to their souls.

8 Thou have despised mine holy things. The holy things were all those things
were consecrated and dedicated to God, as the Priests, the Temple, the vessels
of it, the Sacrifices and Sacraments they had, yea, all the Ordinances of God,
which they despised, the word (...) bazah is despising, ex fastu quodam, out of
pride and disdain. So did the Jews of Old, so do many now through pride of
heart, despise holy things. Religion was then vilified.

And have profaned my Sabbaths. Of profaning or polluting the Sabbath, you
heard, chapter 20.13.16. its the same word for polluted there, which you have for
profaned here. God had commanded them to remember his Sabbaths, to sanctify
them, and promised great blessings unto them upon the due sanctification of
them, Isa. 58.13, 14. but Jerusalem profaned them, and made them common, or
worse than common days.

9 In thee are men that carry tales to shed blood. The words for men that carry
tales are (...) for which the Septuagint gives you, (...), theives, robbers.
Sym. and Theod. Viri dolosi, deceitful men. Hyeronim. Viri detractores, men
that are backbiters. Viri fraudulenti, says Lavat. cunning men. French,
Homines rapporteurs, Rachil is one that narrowly observes another words, and
perverts them to the prejudice of him whose they were; Est qui sermones aliunde
acceptos alio tran^fert. Curiosus perscrurator and idem garrulus rimatur
undique quod sit ad occultum calumnium apeum. Aecol. D^latores verborum qui
aliorum dicta, hinc petita alio deferunt, more mercatorum ut aliquod ex ea
vectura lucrum reportent. Prad.
the word is from (...) Rochel a merchant, and so is, alterius famae and
honoris nundinator, One that by carrying tales, sets to sale the fame, liberty,
or life of his Neighbor; it signifies also an Apothecary, who mingles, blends
things together, and sells them for his own advantage, so this carry-tale,
mingles something of his own, with what he heard, and makes his advantage
thereby. Mont. renders the words, Viri delationis, men of carriage, because
they seek out, pick up, or invent matter against another, and carry it to those
be in place, which here made way for shedding of blood. This kind of men are
very pernicious. Solomon tells you, that the words of Tale-bearers are as
wounds, they go down into the innermost parts of the belly, Prove. 18.8. they
make way for the wounding, and spilling the blood of the innocent. There were
wicked Princes and Magistrates at that time in Jerusalem, glad to have
occasions against the innocent, and these murtherous tale-carriers, possess
them with false-hoods to the prejudice of their lives.

In thee they eat upon the mountains. They did eat their things offered to
Idols, in honor to the Idols, otherwise it was not sinful to eat upon the
mountains. Of these words before, chap. 18.6.11.15.

In the midst of thee they commit lewdness. Of Committing lewdness, see chapter
16.43. Zimmah the Septuagint transl^te, (...), unholy things, that is,
villainous things, thou that should be holy, do faeda, filthy things, So
Lavat. And he says Zimmah notes, meditatum facinus, a villenie done not
ignorantly, or out of weakness, but destinato animo, on purpose, therefore the
translation which either is, Vatablusse's, or which he follows, has it,
Scelus meditatum, a plotted wickedness, chapter 11.1, 2. Jaazaniah and Pelatiah did
devise mischief, and such devised mischifes, are called here, Zimmahs,
lewdnesses, Jerusalem had those in her, who made it their practice, Mic. 2.1.
woe to them that devise iniquity, and work evil upon their beds, in the night
season, when their thoughts and spirits were most retired, fittest, and
strongest for meditation, then they devised iniquity, how to root out the
righteous, to take away the Prophets, to pervert the Law, to promote idolatry,
etc. and these were lewdnesses.

10 In thee have they discovered their fathers nakedness: in thee have they
humbled her was set apart for pollution. 11 And one ( or every one) has
committed Abomination with his neighbors wife, and another has lewdly defiled
his Daughter in law, etc. In these two verses are set out, the Incestuous
adulterous and whorish doings of Jerusalem. In her, sons lay with their
mothers, fathers with their Daughter in Laws, brothers with their sisters, and
every one with his Neighbors wife, and being not satisfied with those times
were fit for embracing, they humbled, they forced those were set apart for
pollution, all which things were forbidden in the Law, Levit. 18. and 20. chapter
so filthy was Jerusalem at this time, that they were as sed horses, every one
neighing after his neighbors wife, Jer. 5.8.

12 In thee have they taken gifts to shed blood. There be two sorts of gifts,
first, munera honoraria, such as are bestowed upon friends, and those deserve
well of us, these are lawful, and when given, testify esteem and
thankfulness: and secondly, Munera corruptoria, such as are given to retard,
pervert, and corrupt justice, such were the gifts here, and they were
forbidden, Exodus 23.8. Deuteronomy. 16.19. This gift-taking, was too common in
Jerusalem, Isa. 1.23. Every one loves gifts, and follows after rewards, but
they judge not the fatherless, neither does the cause of the widow come unto
them: the Fatherless and widows, had no gifts to give them, therefore their
causes could not be heard, they petitioned, but petitions without presents
would do no good; for they judged for reward, Mic. 3.11. and said give, give,
Hos. 4.18. if there were no gifts, there was no justice.

Thou have taken usury and increase. Of these words, and this sin, was largely
spoken in the 18. chapter 8. whither you are referred.

And thou have greedily gained of thy Neighbors by Extortion. Montanus renders
the word for greedily gained, Appetebas, fraudabas, Thou did covet or deceive
thy Neighbors. The Hebrew is, (...) which signifies to wound, to cut in
pieces, and to exercise covetousness, Quae tanquam gladius hominem vulnerat,
and ipsius sanguinem exugit, it notes an insatiable desire, which carries a man
out violenter agere contra proximum, to wrest and wring from his Neighbor by
any means, and so wounds him, squeezes, and cuts him in pieces. Forsterus turns
the words thus, Vulnerasti sodales tuos cum injuria, sollicitum significat
hominis cupidi and avari studium rapiendi undequaque aliena; ut ingens compilet
the saurum expleatque insatiabilem pecuniae sitim. Prad.

Obs. 1 That great men the Princes and Potentates of the earth, lay out
themselves to Tyrannize over, and oppress the People: Behold, The Princes of
Israel, every one were in thee to their power to shed blood: They all agreed in
these two things, to oppress, and to oppress to the utmost. This doubtless
made Jerem. say chapter 3.5. of Jerusalem, Behold, thou have said and done evil
things as thou could: Thy Princes which had arms and power, they have put
forth the same, what they could to do wickedly, to oppress and shed blood, what
could they do more than take away the lives of men. This was the way great ones
went of old, see Mic. 3.1, 2, 3. and Zeph. 3.3.

Obs. 2 That forgetfulness of God, is the cause of all the sins in a City, or
People. Jerusalems sins are here reckond u^, Cruelty, Idolatry, slighting of
Parents, oppression of strangers, vexing of fatherless and widows, despising
of holy things, profaning of Sabbaths, tale-carrying to shed blood, eating
upon the mountains, devising wickedness, incest, adultery, bribery, usury,
extortion, and what is the root of all these? thou have forgotten me says the
Lord God; when men mind not what God commands, forbids, what he threatens,
what he approves, when they acknowledge not his eye, his power, his
judgments, the account they must give to him, they fall into all manner of
sins, lewdnesses, and transgressions; when men forget God, they do not, they
cannot fear him, and where the fear of God is not, they will not stick to shed
blood, Genesis 20.11. or do any wickedness. In Psalm. 50.17, 18, 19, 20. many
sins of the Jews are recited, and what was the ground of those sins? they
forgot God, verse. 22. Consider this, ye that forget God. See Psalm 106.19,
Sicut memoria dei excludit cuncta flagitia: ita dei oblivio convehit omnium
vitiorum catervam. Hierom.
20. Jerem. 13.25. chapter 18.15. when men forget God, they forget his Law, which
should regulate their lives, and so they live without God, and without law,
they follow the lusts of their own hearts, and lie exposed to all evils.

13 Behold, therefore I have smitten my hand at thy dishonest gain, which thou
have made, and at thy blood which has been in the midst of thee. 14 Can thine
heart endure, or can thine hands be strong in the days that I shall deal with
thee? I the Lord have spoken it, and will do it. 15 And I will scatter thee
among the Heathen, and disperse thee in the Countries, and will consume thy
filthiness out of thee. 16 And thou shall take thine inheritance in thy self,
in the sight of the Heathen, and thou shall know that I am the Lord. Having
rehearsed Jerusalems sins; here the Lord comes to set down his dislike of
their ways, the judgments should come upon them, and the end of those
judgments.

1 His dislike, in the 13. verse. 2 The Judgments, in the 14. and 1.5. v. 3 The
End of them, in the 15. and 16.
13 Behold therefore I have smitten mine hand at thy dishonest gain which thou
have made. Smiting of hands, is sometime a sign of joy, as chapter 21.17. and
sometimes of grief and anger, as here: God was so provoked with the
heinousness of their sins, that he smites his hands together, both to
testify his indignation against them, and readiness to take vengeance on them;
when Parents smite their hands at the lewd doings of their children, Percurere
manus hoc loco non est exhortari, sed dolere. Mald.

Irascent^ figuram and habitum d^scribit oration Prad.

En sign de dueil. French. Pecuniam v^ and malis artibus quaesitam.


its an argument of Anger, and grief, not of joy. God has no hand, but its
spoken after the manner of men.

The word for dishonest gain, is bitzah from Batzah opened before. Montanus
renders it, avaritiam, Covetousness. Others, money gotten by fraud and force,
such gain is dishonest gain. The French is, avarice, that gain comes in by
overreaching, by forcing or sinking of others; that is dishonest gain, when we
do not as we would be done unto.

And at thy blood which has been in the midst of thee. Here be only two
sins mentioned of all that went before, but the other are intended also. God
smit his hands against them, though Principally, against these. Jerusalem had
shed much innocent blood, which cried to God for vengeance, and caused him to
smite his hands at her.

Obs. Covetousness and Cruelty, are sins, Notavit R David ex majorum
traditione. ^4. sceleta esse numerata in hoc capite, and nulli eorum nili soli
avaritiae tribui eversionem urbis. Prad.
that do sorely provoke God; he smote his hands at their dishonest gain, and
bloody doings; His spirit boiled up against them, and he was coming to be
avenged on them. The Hebrews say, there be twenty four sins reckoned up in
this Chapter, and that God threatens the destruction of the City, only for
Covetousness. The Jews were a people greedy of gain, given to Covetousness,
which makes men cruel, and often bloody, Prove. 1.19. those are greedy of gain,
they take away the life of the owners, they suck their blood, Amos 8.4. they
swallow up the needy. Mic. 3.2, 3. they pluck off their skins, break their
bones, and eat their flesh; and if covetous men be not cruel and bloody, yet
they are abhorred of God for their Covetousness, Psalm 10.3. the wicked bless
the Covetous whom the Lord abhors; the word for Covetous, and that here for
dishonest gain, are both of the same verb, and differ very little. God
abhorres the Covetous, and smites his hands at Covetousness, and so he does at
bloudiness, Psalm. 5.6. He will abhor the bloody and deceitful man; The Lord
abhors them at the present, and he will make it manifest that he does abhor
them. God has done it in the Gospel, 1 Cor. 6.10. Rev. 22.8. there it appears,
that neither the Covetous, nor the bloody shall inherit the Kingdom of Heaven:
let us learn of God to smite our hands against these sins.

14 Can thine heart endure? The Hebrew for endure is (...) which Montanus and
Aecolampad. render stabit, will thy heart stand or consist, when I shall deal
with thee? The Septuagint is, (...), if thine heart shall stand it out? but the
interrogation is more emphatical. Can thine heart stand or endure? and carries
the force of a negation. O Jerusalem thou think that when my judgments
come, thou shall be able to stand under them, but be thine heart never so
stout or strong, my judgments will be too heavy for thee to bear them; when
they come thine heart will fail thee, (...). Hom. Illiad.
fail thee of counsel, that thou shall not know what to do, and fail thee of
strength that thou shall not be able to do what thou know, thine heart will
be in thine heels, thou will be more forward to fly than to consult, or
stand it out upon consultation.

Can thine hands be strong? Thou think to do some great matters if
Nebuchadnezzar draw near to thy gates, thou will call upon thy strong men to
appear and make resistance, but their hands will be feeble, and unserviceable,
not fit to handle or use weapons of war. Jerusalem, thou art deluded, consider
with thy self, can thine hands be strong when I have smitten mine hands
against thee? can thou withstand me, or bear my judgments, when I shall
thunder and throw them upon thee with a strong hand? what ever phansies
possess thine head, thou art not able to do it.

In the days that I shall deal with thee. In the days that men have dealt
with thee, thy Counsel and power have prevailed, but what will thou do? In the
days that I shall deal with thee, I that am wonderful in Counsel, excellent in
working, Isa. 28, 29. I that work and none can hinder, chapter 43.13. I that am
terrible to the Kings of the earth, Psalm. 76.12. I that plead with fire and
sword in my hand, Isa. 66.16. I that make mountains flow, and nations to
tremble at my presence, Isa. 64.1, 2. I that make fruitful pl^ces wildernesses,
and break down Cities, Jer. 4.26. what will thou do then? Those days are
coming upon thee, and they will be the saddest days thou ever mettest with.

I the Lord have spoken it, and will do it. Thou may hope it shall not be,
that I will deal severely with thee, in whom I have delighted, and upon whom I
have bestowed so many mercies; but know, I have resolved, spoken it, and will
do it; I am not man, to repent of what I speak or do.

Obs. 1 Sinful Cities and creatures, are apt to confide in one thing, or other,
in their wisdom, strength, power, r^c^es, friends; Jerusalem thought, she had
wherewith to ke^p ff all j^^gements, or sufficient to enable her to wrestle
with th m ^f they came; Can thine heart endure? can thine h^nds be strong?
Jerusalem thought so, had confidence that way, else the Lord would not have put
these questions to her, Ezekiel ^6.15. Thou did trust in thy beauty, in thy
wealth, in ^hy ^als, in thy Soldiers, in thy Counselors, in thy Temple, in
thy mountains which were thy beauty. In Jeremies dai^s its evident, that the
wise, the rich, and strong men of Jerusalem did too much confide, and glory in
their wisdom, their riches, and strength, chapter 9.23. Zephany says of
Jerusalem, that she trusted not in the Lord, chapter 3.2. her confidence was in
falsehood, Jer. 13.25. that was in things proved false and deceitful, one of
this kind was the Egyptian strength, Isa. 30.2. Ezekiel. 17.17. not only did
Jerusalem confide in falsehoods, but Babylon also, Isa. 47.10. and Rabbah, Jer.
49.4. she once trusted in her wickedness, saying, none sees me? The other in
her treasures, saying, who shall come unto me? Its not good to lean to our own
wisdom, to rest upon our own strength, or strength of others; who ever makes
flesh within, or flesh without his arm, lies under a curse, Jer. 17.5. but he
trusts in the Lord, and in him only he has the blessing, ver. 7.

Obs. 2 God has his times to reckon with sinners, to make them smart for their
evil doings. In the days that I shall deal with thee. God had his day to deal
with Egypt, Ezekiel. 30.9. as in the day of Egypt, he met with Egyptians in the
red sea; he had his day to deal with Midianites, Isa. 9.4. as in the day of
Midian, when God smote them by the sword of Gideon, Judge. 7. that was the day
God dealt with them; men have their days, to sin, and God has his days to
smite. Ahab had his day to do wickedly, and God had his Day to deal with him, 1
King 22 34, 35. Ahaz had his time to transgress, and God had his time to
distress him for his transgressions, 2 Chro, 28.19, 20. Ephraim had his Days
of sinning, and God had his Day of rebuke to lay Ephraim desolate, Hos. 5.9.
the Jews had their Day to make a Calf, and God had his day to cut off three
thousand of them, Exodus 32.28. men sin and think to hear no more of their
sins, but God remembers them, and has his days to visit for them. He has a
day for every one is proud and lifted up, Isa. 2.12. he has a day for those
decree unrighteous decrees, that write grievousnesse, that wrong widows and
fatherless ones, Isa. 10.1, 2, 3. he has his Day to deal with them, and so to
deal with them, that they shall not know what to do: what will ye do in the
day of visitation? to whom will ye fly for help? and where will ye leave
your glory? Men will be thinking what to do; whether to fly, how to dispose
of themselves, and what they have, but the day of the Lord will be darkness
and distress unto them. Whoever takes a time to sin against God, must expect
a time wherein God will deal with him for so sinning, Romans 2.6.9. God will
render to every man according to his deeds, he has his Day, to render
tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man that does evil, he has his Day
wherein he will judge the secrets of men, ver. 16. would you see good Days,
eschew evil, and do good; seek peace and ensue it, 1 Pet. 2.10, 11.

Note 3 Gods judgments discover the vanity and rottenness of humane
confidences. Can thine heart endure? Can thine hands be strong? in the days
that I shall deal with thee: When I shall bring the sword, plague, and Famine,
no, thy heart will faint, thy hands will be feeble. If at the tidings of
judgments their heart melted, their hands were feeble, every spirit faint, and
all knees weak as water, as it is chapter 21.7. what were they at the presence,
sight, and sense of those judgments? they were like men without hearts and
spirits, without hands and legs; Gods judgments are fires which consume men's
confidences, and make them see their own weakness; men think they shall stand
in the evil day: But if they cannot stand against the frowns and fury of the
Creature, how will they stand before the dreadful Creator? if Footmen,
horsemen, the swellings of Jordan, Jer. 12.4. weary, sink men, what will the
Lord of Hosts do? if they cannot bear the lesser judgments, how will they bear
the greater? If Briars and thorns conceit themselves to be Oaks and Cedars,
can they endure the fire? Isa. 27.4. they will be burnt to ashes: what they
said of Jehu, 2 Kin. 10.4. Two Kings were not able to stand before him, how
then shall we stand? He is coming with the sword. May wicked Cities more fully
say of God, the old world could not stand before him, Sodom and Gomorrah could
not stand before him, how then shall we stand? Egypt had men like fatted
bullocks, but when the Northren storm came upon them, they turned back, they
fled away together, they did not stand, because the day of their calamity was
come upon them, and the time of their visitation, Jer. 46.21. you may see what
strong mighty, and courageous men will do, when God deals with them, Joel 2.14
15, 16. their hearts could not endure, their hands, their feet were not strong,
to act or stand, Let us not sin, provoke the Lord by our vain confidences,
for he is stronger than man.

Obs. 4 That the word of the Lord shall take place whatever men's thoughts are:
they Thought Nebuchadnezzar would not come, or if he did, that they and the
Egyptians should be able to deal with them, and prevent those evils were
threatened by the Prophets; but I the Lord have spoken it, and will do it. Where
he has a mouth to speak, he has a hand to do. Its not any power can hinder,
I will work and who shall let it? Isa. 43.13. not Devils, or Men can do it,
neither will the Lord revoke what he has said, and so prevent judgments
intended, Isa. 31.2. he is wise, and will bring evil, and will not call back
his words: Men often speak, threaten, and then after eat their words, call back
their threatenings, saying, they were uttered in passion, inconsiderately, and
so show their folly; But God when he speaks, its in wisdom, his words shall
stand, and not be removed, or called back, Amos 6.11. Hence is it that Jer. 44
28. the Lord says, They shall know whose word shall stand, mine or theirs:
They shall see in a little time, that their words are vanity, foolish, and come
to nothing; and that my words are the words of wisdom, weighty, and stable,
Zeph. 1.6. Did not my words, and my statutes take hold of your fathers? what
God said was accomplished, and they could not but acknowledge it. Like as the
Lord of hosts thought to do unto us, so has he dealt with us.

15 And I will scatter thee among the Heathen, and disperse thee in the
Countries. Of their scattering and dispersing has formerly been spoken. It was
a great comfort to them to have their solemn meetings at Jerusalem, and in the
Temple, and as great an affliction to be deprived of them, and scattered as
dust and chafe among the Heathens, whose language they understood not, and
whose religion was abomination to the God of Israel.

And will consume thy filthiness out of thee. The Hebrew is, I will make thy
filthiness to fail out of thee; so Montanus, I will make an end of thy
filthiness; thou art now so defiled with Idols, blood, and other abominations,
that thou art as an heap and bundle of filthiness, even the filthy City, but I
will throw thee into the furnace of affliction, and cause thy filthiness to
depart from thee.

By filthiness we may understand filthy ones, Purgabo expiab^que supplicii^
scelera tua. Mal.
the abstract being put for the concrete. Jerusalem had many filthy persons in
it, and God would by his judgments consume them.

Obs. The Lord by his judgments does purge out of Cities and Nations the
wicked, and makes them and their wickedness to cease. I will consume thy
filthiness out of thee; that is, thy filthy ones with their filthiness. God
brought the sword, famine, Pestilence upon Jerusalem, and by these did cut off
and consume the filthy ones there. See Ezekiel. 5.12. Jer. 14.15. chapter 16 4. Ezekiel.
13.14. God by his judgments destroyed Jerusalem, and so caused her filthiness
to be at an end, Ezekiel. 16.40, 41. They shall stone thee with stones, thrust
thee through with swords, burn thine houses with fire, and execute judgments
upon thee in the sight of many women, and I will cause thee to cease from
playing the Harlot. The same judgments you have, Ezekiel. 23.47. and by them he
would cause lewdness to cease out of the Land, verse. 48. By his judgments the
Lord consumes the filthy out of the City and land, and filthiness out of the
Saints.

16 And thou shall take thine inheritance in thy self. Hebr. is thus,
Venichalte bach, and haereditabis in te, thou shall inherit in thy self: Thou
shall be thine own inheritance. Heretofore thou wast mine inheritance, but it
shall be so no longer. I will cast thee off, being so filthy as thou art, and
thou shall have no inheritance in me, but in thy self.

Some making the word to be from (...) to wound, (...) est possidere
haeredi^a^re,
to profane, do render it in the first person, thus; vulnerabo te, I will
wound thee. So Symmachus, Contaminabo te, I will defile thee, and profane
thee. So Theodition. The Septuagint, is, (...), I will possess in thee, that
is, I will have a people for my possession among you, when you are scattered
abroad among the Heathens. Its true, God had a people among them when they were
in Babylon; but the Hebrew is not in the first person. Piscator has it thus,
Pr^fana efficieris in te, Thou shall be made profane in thy self; thou shall
be cast off by me into banishment and be no other in mine account, than a
common and profane people, I will account of thee so, and deal accordingly
with thee, so the words are to be understood, Isa. 43.28. chapter 47.6. where the
Lord is said to profane the Princes, and pollute his inheritance.

This sense may well stand with the first, for if God made them a profane, and
common people, they had no inheritance in him, but their inheritance was in
themselves.

In the sight of the Heathen. Heathens shall see that thou art a people cast
off of thy God for thy wickedness, and exposed to reproach, cursing, and as
great miseries as ever any people were.

Obs. 1 That the wickedness of Gods people does dis-interest them in God; it
makes God dis-own them, and leave them to themselves. They might think and say,
they were still the people, the inheritance of God, that they had interest in
him, but thou shall take thine inheritance in thy self, I disclaim thee, I cast
thee off as profane, and look upon thee no otherwise than I do upon Heathens.
In the margent of the French Bible you have these words, je ne seray plus ton
heritage, I will be no longer thine heritage. It was the wickedness of the
ten Tribes which made the Lord to say, Lo-ammi, ye are not my people, and I
will not be your God, Hos. 1.9. In which Prophet you may read largely of their
sins, the 8. chap. ver. 3. tells you, that Israel had cast off the thing that
was good, viz. the worship of God, and verse. 5. thy calfe O Samaria has cast
thee off: that is, thy false worship has made me to cast thee off, to declare
thee to be none of my City, and thy people to be none of mine. In the twelfth
of Jeremy, you have that bears witness fully to this observation, verse. 7, 8,
9. I have forsaken mine house, I have left mine heritage, I have given the
dearly beloved of my soul into the hand of her enemies, mine heritage is to me
as a Lion in the Forest: it cries out against me, therefore have I hated it.
Mine heritage unto me is as a speckled bird: the birds round about are against
her, come ye, assemble all the beasts of the field, come to devour. The
meaning of these words is this, that the Jews were once very dear to God, even
as dear as any wife can be to an Husband, but because like Lions they carried
it stoutly against God and cried out against him, and his Prophets, therefore he
forsook them, hated them, and gave them into the hands of the Babylonians, and
because Jerusalem was as a speckled bird in the eye of God through her variety
of Gods, Altars, Superstitions and Idolatres, therefore God caused the Birds of
all the Nations to hoot at, and hate her, even as Birds do a speckled Bird,
inviting them, and all the Beasts of the field to come and devour her: and why
all this? They dealt treacherously, ver. 1. they were Hypocritical, verse. 2.
they were wicked, ver. 4. The Jews had been a people precious in the sight of
God, and honorable, Isa, 43.4. Jerusalem his habitation, and the people of it
his inheritance and his glory, whom he protected, Isa 4.5. yet by their sins
they provoked God, so as that he gave his strength into Captivity, and his
glory into the enemies hands, Psalm. 78.61.

Obs. 2 That Gods judgments bring People to the knowledge of God. It rises
from the former verse. and this laid together, God would scatter them, consume
them, cast them off, leave them to themselves, and they should know that he
was the Lord, Psalm 9.16. The Lord is known by executing Judgments. His power,
his justice, and sovereignty are known thereby, and so men are made to fear,
and stand in awe of him. When God is silent, and speaks not by his judgments,
men think he is like themselves, Psalm. 50.21. and are imboldened to sin, Eccl.
8.11. but when God thunders by his judgments, they have other apprehensions of
him, 1 Samuel 6.19, 20.

Verse. 17 And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, 18 Son of man, the
house of Israel is to me become dross all they are brass and Tin, and Iron,
and Lead in the midst of the turnace^ they are even the dross of silver. 19
Therefore thus says the Lord God, because ye are all become dross, behold,
therefore I will gather you into the midst of Jerusalem. 20 As they gather
silver, and Brass, and Iron, and Lead, and Tin into the midst of the furnace,
to blow the fire upon it to melt it: so will I gather you in mine anger, and my
fury, and I will leave you there, and melt you. 21 Yea, I will gather you, and
blow upon you in the fire of my wrath, and ye shall be melted in the midst
thereof. 22 As Silver is melted in the midst of the furnace, so shall ye be
melted in the midst thereof, and ye shall know that I the Lord have poured out
my fury upon you. In these words is the Lords second message to Ezekiel, wherein
is set forth.

First, The Degenerate estate of the Jews, under the similitude of dross, verse.
18.

2 Gods judicial peoceeding with them being dross, verse. 19, 20, 21, 22.

1 He would gather them together. 2 Blow upon them. 3 Melt them.
3 The End of his so dealing with them, verse. 22.

Verse. 17 And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying. These words we have
had often, and in the 1. v. of this chapter, God being upon bringing judgments
upon his People, gives them notice thereof by his Prophets. He speaks before
he strikes.

18 The house of Israel is to me become dross. The house of Israel, viz. the
Jews had been of high account with God, they were once his chosen People above
all others; Deuteronomy. 7.6. they were once a Kingdom of Priests, and an holy
Nation, Exodus 19.6. they were once so honorable and precious, that God gave
and destroyed other Nations for their sakes, Isa. 43.4. they were once his
portion; his inheritance, Deuteronomy. 32.9. Isa. 19.25. they were once his vineyard,
and pleasant plant, Isa. 5.7. they were once a people near unto him, Psalm.
148.14. the dearly beloved of his soul, Jer. 12.7. his peculiar people, Exodus
19.5. but now they were become dross, they had degenerated from their former
faithfulness, justice, honesty, sincerity, and purity. Quicquid de a ge^to
^^iove met^llo dum igne e^ quitur, expu^gatur.


The word for dross is (...) sig, which is, whatsoever the fire separates from
any metal. Kirk. says its, Sordes quae de mettallis igni retrocedit quam
scoriam appellamus. Metals have some thing of an heterogeneall nature to
themselves, which being separated by fire or any other way, is that we call
dross. The house of Israel here is not said to be drossy, but to be dross,
its fit therefore to see wherein the resemblance lies between them.

1 The Dross Obscures the luster and glory of the metal, yea, Covers it up,
so that it appears not; rust and filth compass, and hide the gold, so that
neither the nature or luster of it can be seen. So the house of Israel was
such at this time, that no gold, no silver appeared, Jer. 5.1. Run ye to and
fro through the streets of Jerusalem, see now and know, and seek in the broad
places thereof if he can find a man, if there be any that executes
judgment, that seeks the truth, J^r. 9.^. They be all adulterers, an
assembly of treacherous men, Ier. 8.10
Zeph. 3.7. they rose early, and corrupted all their doings, Jer. 6.28. they
are all grievous revolters, walking with slanders, they are brass, and iron,
they are all corrupters. There was no pure metal appeared amongst them,
especially gold or silver. If there were some righteous just, holy, faithful
ones amongst them, they lay hid under the dross.

2 Dross is a deceiving thing, its like metal, but is not metal, the dross of
silver is like it, and so the dross of Gold is like it, but the dross is
neither silver nor gold, so The house of Israel was deceitful, hypocritical,
like Saints, but not Saints, see Isa. 10.6. chapter 58.2. cha 9.17. every one is an
Hypocrite, and an evil doer, and every mouth speaks folly; they professed
themselves to be the people of God, yet were not such as they seemed to be,
Jer. 7.2, 4, 9, 10. they were like potsheards, covered with silver dross, Pro.
26.23.

3 Dross is not bettered by the fire, put it into the fire time after time, it
abides so still, God had often put the Jews into the furnace of affliction, and
heat the furnace sometimes very hot, but they were the same still. They had
been in the Egyptian fire, 2 King 23.33. in the Syrian and Chaldean fire, chap
24.2. and other fires, but none of them did them any good, Jer. 5.3. Thou have
stricken them, but they have not greived, thou have consumed them, but they
have refused to receive correction, and not only did the Prophet complain
thus, but the Lord himself, chap. 2.30. In vain have I smitten their children,
they received no correction, they were nothing the better for all Gods blows
and fires, dross they were, and dross they continued.

4 Dross is a worthless thing, its of no value, base, vile, contemptible, such
was The house of Israel, and chief in it, Jer. 24.8. Zedekiah the King, his
Princes, and the rest of Jerusalem, were as evil figgs which could not be
eaten; the Kingdom was base, Ezekiel. 17.14. the City an Harlot, chapter 16.35. she
changed the judgments of God into wickedness more than the Nations, chap.
5.6. and was more vile than Sodom and Samaria, chap. 16.47.

5 Its useless, and to be rejected. The Jews now were so corrupted, so wicked,
so unprofitable, that the Lord was casting them off, and out, Jer. 6.30.
Reprobate silver shall men call them, because the Lord has rejected them. As
the wood of the vine when fruitless is not fit for any thing but the fire,
Ezekiel. 15. so the dross of silver is not fit for any thing but rejection. The
house of Israel being become dross, the Lord says, Jer. 7.15. I will cast you
out of my sight, as I have cast out all your brethren, even the whole Seed of
Ephraim: the ten Tribes they proved dross, and the Lord cast them away, and now
he would cast Judah and Benjamin out of his sight, and when he did it, they
were the offscouring, and refuse in the midst of Heathens, Lam. 3.45.

6 Dross is an offensive thing, rust eats into the metal, indangers that, and
makes the Goldsmiths to kindle the fire, to separate it from the Gold and
Silver: So wicked men are offensive to God and good men, and cause the Lord to
bring his fiery judgments to separate between the precious and the vile. The
wickedness of the House of Israel caused God to bring the sword, Famine,
Plague, Captivity, and by these to purge out and consume the filthiness of
Jerusalem.

All they are brass, and Tin, and Iron, and Lead. Before he had said they were
Dross, how does he now call them, Brass, Iron, Tin, Lead? These are good
metals. True, in themselves they are so, but compare them with Silver or Gold,
they are but as Dross, base metals, so Tin is reckoned in Scripture account,
Isa. 1.25. so brass, iron and lead are reputed, Jer. 6.28, 29. when pure
Religion, Judgment, and Righteousness were in the house and City of Israel,
then she was Silver, Precious, and good metal, but falling to Idolatry,
Oppression, and Profaneness, her silver became Dross, and her children
became Brass, that is, impudent and hard-hearted, Ezekiel. 3.7. Tin, that is,
hypocritical, being all in show nothing in substance, Eze. 33.31. iron, that
is, Cruel, Bloody, inflexible, so were the great ones, men in place, Ezekiel.
34.24. Zeph. 3.3, 4. Jer. 5.5. Lead, that is, sottish and stupid, Jer. 4.22.
chapter 8.9. they have re^ected the word of the Lord, and what wisdom is in them?
That which should have enlightened them, and made them wise, that they
rejected, and so were foolish and sottish.

In the midst of the furnace. In the eleventh Chapter, 3. and 7. verses, the
City is called a Cauldron, and the People the flesh to be boiled in it, and
here its called the Furnace, and the People the Brass, tin, iron, lead to be
melted in it. God would make Jerusalem a furnace of affliction, and cast the
dross, and base metal into it. The Jews had so degenerated from the golden
and silvery purity of their Fathers, that they had no pretiousnesse in them,
nothing left but Dross, or that which was base as dross.

They are even the Dross of silver. Their Fathers were Tin believers, sincere
worshippers, just dealers; Covenant keepers, and so were like unto silver,
precious, pure, white, desirable; but these their children were dross, even
the dross of Silver, faithless, hypocritical, unjust, perjured. The Nations
were dross, but not the dross of silver, they were never of higher account,
than brass, tin, iron, lead, only the Jews were accounted silver, and now they
were become the dross of silver, worse than the nations, 2 Kin. 21.9.

19 I will gather you into the midst of Jerusalem. 20 As they gather silver and
brass, and iron, and lead, and tin, into the midst of the furnace. The Hebrew
is, I will gather you with the gathering of silver, that is, with such a
gathering, that like as the founder, silver or Goldsmiths, when he would prove
the metals dug out of the Mines, what they are, and separate the dregs and
dross from them, he gathers them together, and puts them into the furnace: So
would the Lord do by the Jews, he would gather them from all parts of Judea
into Jerusalem, which was the furnace; when God brought Nebuchadnezzar with his
Army to besiedge it.

To blow the fire upon it, and to melt it, When the metals are in the Furnace,
then the founder causes the fire to be blown, the heat to be heightened, till
the mettalls be melted, that so the scum and dross being taken away, they may
be malleable and useful.

So will I gather you in mine anger, and in my fury and I will leave you there,
and melt you. The Lord finding his people to be dross, or mingled with base
metals, he was greatly provoked, and so in his anger, and fury, gathered them
into the furnace, and there left them to be melted.

The fire God used in the melting of them was Famine, Plague, and Sword, which
melted many of them, and then the burning coals scattered over the City, Ezekiel.
10.2. which melted the furnace, and them that were left in it.

21 I will gather you, and blow upon you in the fire of my wrath. The word for
blow upon you is, (...) Naphachti, the same with that in the 20. verse. that
like as the founder blows, and gives not over blowing till the metals are
melted, and the dregs separated, so the Lord he would blow upon them, that is,
exercise them with severe Judgments one after another, till they should be
melted and consumed; and the vile separated from the precious. This Expression
of blowing upon them in the fire of his wrath, is the same with that in the
former chap. verse. 31. I will blow against thee in the fire of my wrath; when
God blows against any, he blows upon them, and the breath of his nostrils
burns as fire.

22 As silver is melted in the midst of the furnace, so shall ye be melted in
the midst thereof. Their melting is often spoken of, in the 20, 21. and here God
was serious in the business, and resolved upon it, nothing should now prevent
it, not the intercession of Moses, and Samuel, Jer. 51.1.

And ye shall know that I the Lord have poured out my fury upon you. Though the
greatest part were consumed by those sad and severe judgments God brought upon
them, yet some escaped, some were carried into Babylon, another furnace, to
melt out their remaining dross, and they were made to know, and acknowledge,
that the Lord had poured out his fury upon them.

Of pouring out fury, or fury poured out. See chap. 20.33.

Obs. 1 That Churches or States may degenerate from their pretiousnesse and
purity, into vileness and profaneness. The house of Israel is become dross,
even the dross of silver, it was so degerated, that it went beyond others in
wickedness; which made Isaiah to wonder, chap. 1.21, 22, 23. How is the
faithful City become an Harlot? Quam magna ea facta meretrix. Muscul.
not simply an Harlot, but a great and notorious Harlot; it was full of
judgment, and righteousness lodged in it, but instead of these, now there was
oppression and murder. Thy silver is become dross, thy wine is mixed with
water, thy money is counterfeit, and thy wine corrupt, or thus, whatever was
pure in thee, is now corrupted, the Law is corrupted with false Expositions,
the worship is corrupted with Idols, and humane traditions, justice is
corrupted with bribery, and bloody oppressions; chastity and sobriety are
corrupted with lewd and unclean practices. Jerusalem had lost her excellency,
and was become loathsome, as a filthy Harlot, doing the work of an imperious
whorish woman, Ezekiel. 16.30. Jer. 7.9, 10, 11. She justified her self in her
sinful and shameful practices, and made the house of God a den of thieves. Rome
was once a golden City for her faith and holiness, Romans 1.8. chap. 16.19. but
now is so corrupt in Doctrine, Worship, and Manners, that she is become the
Mother of Harlots, and Abominations, Rev. 17.5. The seven Churches were once
Golden Candlesticks, but through their Corruptions and weaknesses, they soon
degenerated into dross.

Obs. 2 That Men professing godliness, and living ungodlily, whatever others
thoughts are of them, or whatever they think of themselves, they are not
acceptable to God, nor fit materials of a Church, the house of Israel is to me
become dross, they profess my name, and so judge themselves good silver,
precious in my sight, and others accord with them therein, but they live
wickedly, and to me they are no better than dross, than brass, tin, iron,
and lead, too base materials to make a Temple for me to dwell in, or a
Candlestick for me to set a Prophetical light in. Such persons, whatever
profession they make, whatever parts or privileges they have, they are no
silver, but the dross, the excrements of silver, which defile, disgrace the
name, the Church, the Ordinances of God, and must be separated from the gold
and silver, 2 Cor. 6.17. as the Prophet says, what is the chafe to the wheat,
Jer. 23.28. so what is the dross to the silver? Its fitter for the dunghill
than the Temple. Many that appear silver unto men, will be found dross unto
God. The best have some dross in them, they are drossy, but not dross.
Hypocrites and wicked ones are dross, only Hypocrites are the dross of
silver.

Obs. 3 The greatest part of professors, when they come to the trial, will be
found corrupt and naught: All they are brass, and tin, and iron, and lead, in
the midst of the furnace: When they came to be tried, what metal they were
of, they proved all to be base metal and dross. The furnace discovered them.
The Prophets told them what they were, Jer. 6.13. chap. 8.10. chap. 9.2, 3, 4.
viz. Covetous, false dealers, treacherous, Liars, Slanderers, Deceivers, etc.
Isa. 1.4. a sinful Nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of evil doers,
corrupters, etc. But they believed not the Prophets, telling them what they
were, and what judgments would come upon them, for their sins: but
notwithstanding all their wickedness, they cried, the Temple, the Temple, the
Temple, Jerem. 7 4. they worshipped God, and called themselves Citizens of the
holy City, Isa. 48.1, 2. They leaned upon the Lord, and said, is not the Lord
among us? Does not he own us for his people? are not we his portion, and he
our God? none evil can come upon us. Thus they flatt^red themselves, that they
were good metal, and precious; but when the Lord gathered them into the
furnace; he found them dross; they were no better in the account of God than
Sodomites and Gomorrhaeans, Isa. 1.10. Jer. 23.14. the City, and all the
Inhabitants of it were a provocation unto him, Jer. 32.31, 32. and he was
destruction unto it and them. In the City was found much dross, but little
silver, much brass, tin, iron, lead, but little gold! Since the Lord has put
us into the furnace of affliction, have not many been discovered to be dross,
who appeared silver before? Are all those pure metal which make profession
now? Most will be found brazen, tinny, ironny, and leaden; the number of
sincere and silver-like Christians will be few: What Paul said to the
Corinthians, 2 Epistle chap. 12. verse. 20. that may the Lord say to this City,
and professors every where: I fear, least when I come, I shall not find you
such as I would, and that I shall be found unto you such as you would not. Look
to it, that you be sincere.

Obs. 4 In the degeneracy of a people, some do degenerate more than others,
into a worse condition than the rest: Here some were brass, some tin, some
iron, some lead, and some the dross of silver. The house of Israel was
degenerated into base metals, which were one worse than another, yea into
dross, yea dross (for so the word is in Hebrew) of silver. Some were impudent,
some Hypocritical, some murderers, some brutish, some Idolatrous, some
Atheistical, some unclean, and profane: See Ezekiel. 8.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15,
16. Some did great, and others greater abominations; Some did evil with both
hands, and that earnestly, Mic. 7.3. the best of them were briars and thorns,
verse. 4. and the rest were Scorpions, Ezekiel. 2.6. and the iniquity of the house
of Israel was exceeding great, chap. 9.9. when once people do degenerate from
their honesty, their principles, their profession, some go further than others,
Jer. 7.26. they did worse than their fathers, chap. 9.3. they proceed from evil
to evil, they staid not till they became dross, yet one was worse dross than
another. In our days has been great degenerating, and some are degenerated
into brass, some into tin, some into iron, some into lead, some into the
dross of silver.

Obs. 5 Those do degenerate from God and his ways, from principles of honesty
and equity, be it more or less, that they do degenerate from them, they shall
meet with fury and fire from the Lord. Because ye are all become dross, I will
gather you in mine anger, in my fury, into the midst of the furnace, and blow
upon you in the fire of my wrath, to melt you, to consume you: When the Church
of Ephesus decayed in her first love; that of Pergamos, turned aside to
doctrines of Balaam, and the Nicolaitans; that of Thyatira to the teachings and
seductions of Jezabel; when Sardis abated in her zeal, and Laodicea became
lukewarm, the Lord threatened them severely; and at last brake the Candlesticks,
and put out the lights, Rev. 2. and chapter 3. be they States, Churches, Families,
or persons that degenerate, God has no pleasure in them, Heb. 10.38. but will
cast them into great tribulation, Rev. 2.22. and be unto them a consuming
fire, Ezekiel. 21.31.

And David tells you, Psalm. 119.119.
that God will put away all the wicked of the earth from him like dross, at the
last day, this he will do, and be an eternal consuming fire unto them.

Obs. 6 Melting and consuming judgments upon a people are the wrath of God,
whoever be the executioners thereof: Nebuchadnezzar should besiedge Jerusalem,
and make it like a furnace to melt and consume the Jews, and this the Lord
ownes to be his doing, verse. 22. and ye shall know that I the Lord have
poured out my fury upon you; it was not Nebuchadnezzar, nor the Armies fury,
but the fury of the Lord, they were only the vials or vessels by which it was
poured out: and now if fury have been poured out in Scotland, Sept. 3. 1650.
were the Scots routed, four thousand slain, and ten thousand taken.
its not the Army has done it, but the Lord who gathered them together, as
brass, iron, lead, and tin in a furnace, blew upon them in the fire of his
wrath, melted and consumed them as dross, and you must know it was the Lord,
not man that poured out his fury upon them, and those the Lord has made
vessels of mercy unto us, who have been vials of his fury toward them. If you
will mourn for Gods severity toward them, yet rejoice for his goodness
toward us.

Verse. 23 And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, 24 Son of man say unto
her, thou art the l^nd that is not cleansed, nor rained upon in the day of
indignation. Here begins the third message of the Lord unto the Prophet, the
23. verse. is the same with the 17. and 1. and we pass it by.

24 Thou art the land that is not cleansed. In this verse. is laid down the
pollution of the land in general, in the verses following it is more
particularly expressed.

Expurgare a lordibus. Sunt qui putent significare munditiem nitentem Pagnin
Kirker and opponitur verbo (...)
The word for Cleansed is from (...) which signifies to purge from filthiness,
and so to purge as to make shining and beautiful. Judaea the land here meant,
had been often cleansing, but was never thoroughly cleansed. Hezekiah and Josiah
made the greatest cleansings, but all the sin was not purged out in their
days, they took away the Objects and Mediums of sin, viz. the Idols, Images,
Groves, and high places, but the People continued wicked, they did not cleanse
their hands, nor hearts, and turn to the Lord, but returned to their former and
worse abominations, when those good Kings were gone. The Lord had sent them
many Prophets, who dealt with them several ways to draw them to repentance,
sometimes they allured them by sweet promises and invitations, sometimes they
threatened them with sharp judgments, sometimes they pressed them with strong
arguments, Jer. 4.1, 3, 4. Ezekiel. 18.31, 32. Som^times they spoke plainly to
them, sometimes parabolically, sometimes they wept and sighed to the breaking
of their loins; doing strange things to affect them, Ezekiel. 17.2. Jer. 4.19. and
9.^. Ezekiel. 21.6, and 12.5.6. and 4.1, 2, 3. etc. besides these things God often
sent sweeping and fierce judgments amongst them, Isa. 24. Amos 1. and 4. chap.
Famine, sword, Pestilence, and notwithstanding all these they returned not to
the Lord, but the Land, that is, the People of it, did remain uncleansed, they
were like a land wherein was nothing but weeds, nettles, briars, and thorns.

Obj. Isa. 26.10. its called a land of uprightness, and if so, how is it here
said its a land not cleansed?

Ans. The Hebrew is, in terra rectitudinum, in the land where men are taught
right things; right worshipping of God, right dealing with men, right walking
in their several relations, or the land of uprightness, for that they ought to
have done uprightly but in that land they dealt unjustly, and filled that land
with sin Jer. 51.5. or the land of uprightness, for that it had been so, Isa.
1.21.

Nor rained upon in the day of indignation. God had often withheld the former
and latter rain, from them, and afflicted the land with great drought, Isa.
24.6, 7. Psalm. 68.9. 1 King. 18.5. 2 Kin. 8.1. Jerem. 14.4. Amos 4.7. and he
threatened, Vid. Sanctium in Ioelem Prolegomenon.
Isa. 5.6. to command the clouds to rain no rain upon it, and it was so in
Joels days, chap. 1.9, 10, 11. who lived in Manasses time, as the Rabbis
said, and that was a time of indignation, and sorely distressed them, so that
man and beast suffered much. In Jerem. days also, who lived in the times of
Jehoiachim, Jehoiakin and Zedekiah, were the raines denied unto the land, so
that by reason of drought, Judah mourned, the gates thereof languished,
Jerusalem cried, the Nobles, and their little ones were ashamed, confounded,
and covered their heads, Jer. 14.1, 2, 3.

Or thus, we may understand these words, Judaea, thou art a polluted, filthy
land, nothing has prevailed with thee to cleanse thee, and thou shall not be
rained upon in the day of mine indignation, that is, thou shall have no mercy
when the fire of my wrath is kindled, thou shall have no rain to quench it, in
my wrath, I will not remember mercy.

Obs. 1 The Lord takes notice of places what they are, whither cleansed or not
cleansed: Thou art the land not cleansed: Thou art full of Briars and thorns,
full of vermin, and wild beasts, Ezekiel. 2.6. Isa. 9.18. it was full of wicked
and vile men which did defile the land; Ezekiel. 7.23. the land is full of bloody
crimes, the City is full of violence. There is not a land, City, Town, or
family in the whole earth, but the eye of the Lord is upon it, and he sees
what it is, whether it be defiled, and how greatly defiled, he knew what
Sodom and Gomorrha were, before he sent fire from heaven upon them. He knew
how polluted Canaan was by the nations, before he brought the Jews into it,
Deuteronomy. 9.4, 5. he took notice of Ammon, Moab, Seir, Edom, Philistia, Tire,
Sidon, and Babylon, he saw what cages of unclean birds they were, Hos. 6.10. I
have seen an horrible thing in the house of Israel: He saw what the ancients
of Israel did, Ezekiel. 8.11. he saw folly in the Prophets of Samaria, and an
horrible thing in the Prophets of Jerusalem, they strengthened the hands of
evil doers, Jer. 23.13, 14.

Obs. 2 When Lands have had means of cleansing, and are not cleansed, they are
matter of indignation and exprobration unto God. Judaea had the Prophets,
sometimes good magistrates, it had great mercies, great judgments, solemn
fasts, Isa. 58.3. Joel 1.14. but was still uncleansed, therefore says the
Lord, Thou art the land that is not cleansed. The word Thou notes Gods
indignation at them, and his Exprobration of them. When a ground is full of
thorns, briars, nettles, vermin, and wild beasts, and the Husband man's
servants cannot with all their art and pains rid the ground of them, that
ground exasperates the Husbandman, and makes him say, this is the ground will
not be cleansed, that brings forth nothing is good, so was it here with Judea,
Is. 5.4. what could have been done more to my vineyard? that I have not done in
it? wherefore when I looked for grapes, brought it forth wild grapes? it
retained its sowrenesse, notwithstanding all done, Ezekiel. 24.13. Because I have
purged thee, and thou wast not purged, thou shall not be purged from thy
filthiness any more: Seeing I have used means to purge thee, and thou will not
be purged, seeing thou art obstinate, and there is lewdness in thy
filthiness, there shall no more purgative means be afforded thee, but I will
bring my fury, and cause it to rest upon thee.

And when its thus, its dreadful, Jer. 13.27. woe unto thee Jerusalem, will thou not be made clean?

Obs. 3 The Lord has his day and time to judge and punish lands uncleansed,
people unreformed, in the day of indignation: Though the Lord bear long with a
sinful nation, yet he will not bear always, the time comes at last, that his
hot anger breaks out and damnifies. This day of indignation, was when the Lord
called the Babylonish army, to the walls of Jerusalem, Jer. 4.6, 7, 9, 13.
Jerem. 52.4. Zeph. 1.14, 15. The ten Tribes not harkening to the Prophets, and
Seers, but proceeding in their wicked ways, 2 King. 17.12, 13. found the Lord
had a day to send Salmanaser, who spoiled the Land, besiedged Samaria three
years and carried them away Captive into Assyria, which was the verifying of
Isaiahs prophesy against them, chap. 17.4. In that day it shall come to pass,
that the glory of Jacob shall be made thin, and the fatness of his flesh shall
wax lean: The glory and fat of Jacob, were their Princes, Counselors,
Soldiers, wealth, and strong holds, which the Assyrian deprived them of, and
made Jacob thin and lean. God had his day to visit Egypt, by shaking his hand
over it, Isa. 19.16. The Lord had his day to make Tire forgotten seventy years,
according to the days of one King, Isa. 23.15. about that time which
Nebuchadnezzar took Jerusalem, he also took Tire, and the great merchandising
of it was interrupted seventy years, so long as the Jews were in Babylon, which
Isaiah calls the days of one King. The days of Kings, and so other men who
lived at ease, were usually counted seventy years; or thus, according to the
days of one Kingdom, that is, the days of the Babylonian Kingdom, from the
time of taking Tire, for seventy years after, that Kingdom ceased, and Darius
the Median took it, Dan. 5.31.

Obs: 4 When a land and people retain their filthiness, and rest uncleansed
after mercies, judgments, and means used to do them good, God does not only
withold mercy, but deny hope of mercy. Judea was the land uncleansed, and
she should have no rain in the day of Indignation. Her sins kept back the
rain in a litteral sense, Jer. 3.2, 3. and cut off the hope of rain in a
metaphorical sense, Zeph. 1.17, 18. I will bring distress upon men, that they
shall walk like blind men, because they have sinned against the Lord: They
shall see nothing tending to their comfort; but all working against them, for
it follows, Their blood shall be poured out as dust, and their flesh as the
dung; neither their silver nor their gold shall be able to deliver them in the
day of the Lords wrath; but the whole land shall be devoured by the fire of his
jealousy: Gold and silver will do much, but nothing in the day of wrath, Prove.
11.4. that place in Isa. 8.21, 22. is observable, They shall pass through it
hardly bestead, and hungry; and it shall come to pass, when they shall be
hungry, they shall fret themselves, and curse their King, and their God, and
look upwards; and they shall look unto the earth, and behold trouble and
darkness, etc. When Senacherib or Nebuchadnezzar should invade the Land, the
Famine should be so great, and the men of Judea so hungry, that they should
fret, and curse their King, their God; The one, because he prevented not their
misery; the other, because he delivered them not out of it; and they should
look up to heaven, down to the Church, and find help from neither, nor hope of
mercy any where, trouble, darkness, anguish were before them, and they should
be driven to them, they disgrace the true Prophets, verse. 18. they listened to
false Prophets and Liars, ver. 19. they tried not them and their doctrine, by
the Law and Testimonies, ver. 20. therefore God brought evil upon them, yea,
such evil as they were helpless and hopeless.

Verse. 25 Thero is a conspiracy of her Prophets in the midst thereof, like a
roaring Lion, ravening the prey: they have devoured souls: they have taken the
treasure, and precious things: they have made her many widows in the midst
thereof. In this verse. and the 28. you have the sins of the Prophets expressed
which defiled the land, and made it to be called, the land uncleansed, and
they are, 1 Conspiracy. 2 Cruelty, like roaring lions, etc. 3 Murder, and that
of souls, they have devoured, etc. 4 Covetousness, they have taken the
treasure, and the precious things. 5 Inhumanity or impiety, they have made her
many widows. 6 Flattery and lying. ver. 28.


A conspiracy of her Prophets. (...) est ligare, colligare and metaphorice
dicitur de animorum colligatione conjurare, facere ligam.
The Hebrew for Conspiracy is, kesher, which is from a root or word, which
signifies to bind, to tie together, as Jer. 51.63. Isa. 49.16. and
metaphorically is referred to the minds of men combining together, as 1 Samuel
18.2. The Soul of Jonathan was knit with the soul of David, Nick-sherah, ligata
erat, was united, bound to, inleagued with the soul of David, and 2 Samuel 15.31.
Ahithophel is among the Conspirators with Absalom, backsherim in
conspirationibus, his mind with others were united in a conspiracy against
David, so 2 Kin. 12.20. Jehoash his Servants arose and made a Conspiracy, The
Hebrew is, They conspired a Conspiracy, they were all of one heart and mind,
and it was to kill their Master. Here the Prophets had a Conspiracy, its spoken
of the evil Prophets, they met in Jerusalem, they consulted and consented to
prophesy the same thing, that none should Prophesy otherwise; Nequis secu^
doceat quam ipsi and ita uno ore mentiantur utque oppugnent prophetas Dei.
Lavat.
if they did, they would cry them down, and those should follow them, thus they
made a Conspiracy against the true Prophets, and those were truly religious,
opposing God and godliness. You may read how they set themselves against
Jeremy, chap. 26.8. and stirred up the Princes and people against him, ver. 13.
how they prophesyed the same things, Jer. 23.17. chap. 6.14.

Like a roaring Lion ravening the prey. Lions, are fierce and cruel, especially
when hungry, and its observed of them, that they first roar, Vid. Sanct. in
Isa. 31.4.
whereby they scare men and beast, and then hunt after the prey; So these
Prophets did roar against the true Prophets, and their followers, Jer. 26.11.
This man is worthy to dye, not to be silenced, imprisoned, or banished, but to
dye, nothing but death will suffice them, they were greedy of the prey, and
said, he should surely dye. ver. 8.

They have devoured souls. Souls, that is men, Pestilentibus doctrinis
aeternae damnationi bnoxios reddebant.
by a Synecdoche of the part for the whole. They preached dreams and visions of
their own heads, whereby they seduced (...) undid multitudes, Ezekiel. 13.10.
Jerem. 14.13. chap. 23.13. when Prophets do not tell people of their sins,
they destroy them, Ezekiel. 3.18. and so when they present their own phansies
instead of Gods word, Jerem. 23.22. with 32. had they delivered the word of
God, they should have turned men from their evil ways, but by their lies and
dreams they made them to err.

They have taken the treasure and precious things. (...)
The Hebrew word for Treasure is Cosen, which Montanus renders robur, strength,
and so its used, Isa. 33.6. and riches, treasure, robur and gloriam. In iis
robur hominum consistit tempore angustiae,
are called cosen, because men put their confidence in them, and make them
their strength, Prove. 10.15. Psalm. 52.7. the word is used for treasure and
riches, Prove. 15.6. in the house of the righteous, is Cosen rabh, much
treasure, much riches, or much strength, here its treasure, and the French is;
Les richesses. Aecolam. Thesaurum, and others, Opes.

Precious things. Precious things, Jakar notes things much set by, as a good
name, 1 Samuel 18.30. things beloved, Jer. 31.20. Ephraim my dear son, Ben
iakkir, (...), my dearly beloved son, says the Septuagint: Things of great
worth; Prove. 20.15. Isa. 28.16. Jerem. 20, 5. here it notes things of worth,
and dear unto them. These Prophets were false, and would not Prophesy, unless
the people gave them, and gave them choice things. Hence Micah says, the
Prophets divined for money, chap. 3.11. and prepared war for them would not
put into their mouths. They did not take by force, or steal away their
treasures, but they carried it so, that the People must give, and they had
their treasure and precious things. They were not content with what was their
stipends; Varia habeban^ pecuniae aucupia.
But as Lavater speaks, they had ways, arts, devices, to get such things.

The word Jakar signifies also glory, and honor, Dan. 26.37. Esth. 1.20. and
so its rendre^ here by Montanus, Lavater, Aecolamp. and the French Translation.
The sense then is this, that these false Prophets were ambitious, minding high
places, and popular glory.

They have made her many widows. Those men would not be of their minds,
hearken to their Prophesies, countenance and maintain them with their treasures
and precious things, they prepared war for them, they stirred up the powers,
and people who were of their own way, to hate them, and deal unkindly with
them, Isa. 66.5. Hear the word of the Lord, ye that tremble at his word, your
brethren that hated you, that cast you out for my name sake, etc. There were
some trembled at the word of the Lord, the word of the true Prophets, and durst
not side with the false Prophets, their doctrines or practices, these therefore
were hated of their brethren, that were their Disciples, and cast out, so Ezekiel.
11.15. They said get ye far from the Lord, unto us is this land given in
possession. You have nothing to do here in Judea or Jerusalem, here is no
liberty for you, be gone, or dye for it. Now because many did venture to stay,
they prevailed so, that they were put to death, and by this means they made
many widows. They also used to encourage the Princes to war, as 1 King. 22.
the false Prophets put on Ahab to go up to Ramoth Gilead, and promised him
success in that war, but he fell, and many other with him, and hereby they
made many widows.

Obs. 1 In Jerusalem were wicked and false Prophets. Jerusalem was the holy
City, the City of God, the place where Gods name was recorded, a type of the
Church of God in all ages; yet there, even there, were such Prophets, and holds
it out clearly to us, that there will be false Prophets in the Church of God
always. In Christ's time there were such, Mat. 7.15. Beware of False Prophets
which come to you in sheeps clothing. In Paul's time, there were such, Act.
13.6. There was one Bar-jesus a Jew, and a false Prophet. In John's time there
were such, 1 John 4.1: Many false Prophets are gone out into the world; so many
went out then, that there is a generation of them to this day, and that
generation will not cease so long as the Lord has a Church in this world;
there will be found false Prophets, even at dooms day.

Obs. 2 Jerusalems Prophets may be yea, sometimes are against Jerusalem. There
is a conspiracy in her Prophets, in the midst thereof. Those thought themselves
the chief Prophets in Jerusalem, met, consulted, and agreed together to preach
the same things, to set themselves against the Prophets and Professors differed
from them, as being unsafe and unsound, and to stir up authority against them.
The meetings of Prophets are not always for the welfare of Sion; here was a
Council of them, but it was for mischief; That they thought was very lawful,
the Spirit of God calls a Conspiracy. Such was that meeting of the chief
Priests, Scribes and Elders in the palace of the High Priest, where they
consulted against Christ, Matthew. 26.3, 4. and that wherein they agreed, that if
any did confess that he was Christ, he should be put out of the Synagogue,
John 9.22. was not the Council of Trent, a conspiracy of Prophets, who
pretended they were for Jerusalem, but were in truth against Jerusalem; Did not
they agree together, that who ever preached any thing contrary to their Canons
and Articles, should be anathematized? did they not stir up Princes and Powers
of the world, to punish those they judged Sectaries, Schismatics, and
Heretical? Mr. Foxes Acts and Monuments do testify the truth thereof. Have not
the Prophets of our Jerusalem gone too far this way?

Obs. 3 God takes special notice of the sins of Prophets; they are first
mentioned in the general Corruption that was of all sorts; There were Priests,
Princes, Peoples sins, but the Prophets are set in the front, they provoked God
greatly, they did most hurt, Jer. 23.15. From the Prophets of Jerusalem is
profaneness gone forth, into all the land. They were corrupt springs, that
corrupted the whole Jewish earth, with the streams of their false doctrines,
and example of their sinful practices. Their sins are very much spoken of in
the word, and set upon record, they dealt falsely, Jer. 6.13. they belyed the
Lord, Jer. 5.12, 13. they taught rebellion against the Lord, Jerem. 28.16. chapter
29.32. they strengthened the hands of evil doers, so that none returned from
his wickedness; Jer. 23.14. they were light and treacherous, Zeph. 3.4. they
deluded the people, and murdered their souls, Jerem. 8.11. Ezekiel. 12.10. they
were exceeding Covetous and greedy of gain, from every quarter, Isa. 56.11.
Micah. 3 5. they made the people forget the name of the Lord, Jer. 23 27. they
were Foxes, and dealt very su^tlely, Ezekiel. 13.4. They being defiled with such
sins, defiled the land thereby, kindled the indignation of the Lord, and made
him to say concerning them, Behold, I will feed them with wormwood, and make
them drink the water of gall, Jer. 23.15. and would consume them by sword, and
famine, chap. 14.15.

Obs. 4 That the men who should openly declare against sin, do openly commit
sin. There is a conspiracy of her Prophets in the midst thereof: They roared
like Lions, not caring who heard or saw them, they made many widows in the
midst of Jerusalem. They sinned notorious sins, and were not ashamed of them,
Jer. 23.11. Both Prophet and Priest are profane, in mine house have I found
their wickedness, says the Lord, in the Temple, the most public place of
worship, there they set up their Idols, and detestable things, Ezekiel. 7.20. when
Prophets and men in near relations to God are naught, they proceed from sin
to sin, from degree to degree of the same sin, till they become impudent.
These Prophets conspired against those were good in Jerusalem, they were cruel,
murtherous, Covetous, inhumane, and that in the midst of Jerusalem; they
blushed not at any, or all these sins, they proceeded so in their
Covetousness, that they got the treasure and precious things the people had.
Thus was it with the Popish Clergy, they got the best lands, woods, waters,
habitations, Ab Episcopis sanguis in ipsis templis fusus sit propter, loci
dignitatem. Lavater.
they got the treasure and precious things; yea, so covetous were they, that
they occasioned that Proverb, a mortuis tributum exigere, to scrape from the
dead, and so openly wicked they were, that in their Temples and Cathedrals,
they strove so for place, as they shed blood.

Verse. 26 Her Priests have violated my Law, and have profaned mine holy
things: they have put no difference between the holy and profane, neither have
they showed difference between the unclean and the clean, and have hid their
eyes from my Sabbaths, and I am profaned amongst them. In the former verse. you
had the Prophets sins, here you have the Priests, and they are four.

1 Violation of the Law. 2 Profanation of holy things. 3 Neglect of duty,
which is twofold.
1 They did not make difference between the holy and profane, the clean, etc.

2 They Minded not the Lords Sabbaths, but hid their eyes from them.

Her Priests have violated my Law. The Priests were to be men of knowledge,
Mal. 2.7. and to teach the People the true sense of the Law, 2 Chronicles. 15.3.
Deuteronomy: 17.9, 10, 11. (for the Priests taught, and not only the Levites, Mic.
3.11.) but now the Priests were so blind and ignorant, that they knew not God,
Jer. 2.8. so intemperate, that they erred in the things of God, Isa. 28.7. and
rejecting true knowledge, are said to forget the law, Hos. 4.6. and here to
violate it.

(...). Surripuerunt legem meam.
The Septuagint reads it, They have contemned my Law, they set light by it,
Lavater has it thus, they have stolen, or taken away my Law, to which sense
Vatablus agrees; for because they were bound to teach the Law, and did it not,
they are said furtum fecisse legi, to have stolen away the Law. The Hebrew word
chamas signifies, Cum deberent populum legem docere, non fecerunt, i^aque legem
illi quodummodo furati sunt. Maldon. Violenter discerpserunt. legem meam.
Violenter tractant legem. Vim faciunt legi. Ont fait overage a maloy.
to take away, to offer violence, injuste tractare, to handle a thing unjustly.
The Priests did handle the Law, Jer. 2.8. but they handled it unjustly, they
wrested, and forced it to speak their sense, to countenance their practices;
they cared not for the true sense, nor sought after that, but such senses as
would please and suit with the times, and men's humors.

The Law or word of God is violated,

First, When men do wrong point it, and so mar the sense, and alter it; as
those that to make way for the opinion of the souls sleeping, do put the point
after the word day. I say unto thee to day, whereas the right pointing is at
Thee, not at day, I say unto thee, to day shall thou be with me in Paradise,
Luke 23.43. that is, thy soul shall not lie dormant in or with thy body till
the day of resurrection, but shall this very day pass into Paradise. So Rev.
13.8. the mis-pointing causes an error in the sense, its said there, that All
shall worship the Beast; whose names are not written in the book of life of the
Lamb. There is the comma, and then follows, slain from the foundation of the
world, Montanus puts the Comma after, (...).
whereas the Comma, or pointing, should be after slain, which refers to Lamb,
and not to the following words, for those words relate to the names written in
the Book, and the sense stands thus, whose names are not written in the book of
life, from the foundation of the world.

2 When something of man is added to it, or detracted from it; The Scribes and
Pharisees joined their Traditions with the commandments of God, and thereby
offered such wrong unto them, that Christ tells them, they made them of none
effect, Matthew. 15.6. they put so much chafe to Gods wheat, that it rather
choked than nourished the People; they put so much water of their own to his
wine, that there were no spirits at all in it. The Jews had joined the Statutes
of the Heathen with the Statutes of the Lord, 2 King. 17.8. and the Statutes of
Omri were observed, Micah. 6.16. The Septuagint in the 5. of Genesis, have
added one hundred years more to the age of the Fathers, before they begat
Children, than is in the Original; They have also added much to the end of Job,
which the Hebrew has not. The Post-scripts after Paul's Epistles, are not
Canonical, but additions of those writ the Epistles, or of some others, and
they have little truth in them; See Mr. Perkins upon the sixth Chapter of the
Epistle to the Galatians, on the conclusion.

Some Anabaptists in former times, Glassius in phisol. tract. de purit. textus
in N. T. p. 229, 230, 231. Edit. secunda 1643.
rejected all in the last chapter of Mark, from the ninth verse. to the end, and
others have added unto the 14. verse.

3 When the Translation is erroneous. The Septuagint has failed in many
places, and the Vulgar in most. Lindanus a Popish prelate says, It has
monstrous corruptions of all sorts, scarce one Copy can be found, that has
one book of Scripture undefiled and whole. Many points are translated too
intricately and darkly, some improperly and abusively, some not so fully, nor
so well and truly; Sundry places are thrust out from their plain and natural
sense: The Translator possible was no Latinist, but a smattering Grecian. In
our Old Translation there were (...) many errors, as in Mal. 2.16. White, in
his way to the Church p. 29
If thou hate her, put her ^way, says the Lord God of Israel; whereas he
hated putting away; so in 1 Corinthians 12.28. its hel^ers, governors; wh^r^as
its in the Greek, helps, governmen^s, and ou^ last Tra^sla^ion which is the
best extant, is faulty in this place, reading those words thus, Helps in
Government, which was done to countenance all the Assistants Prelates had in
their government, and not only there, but in other places also, as Jer. 33.16.
its thus translated, This is the name wherewith she shall be called, The Lord
our righteousness; Montan. Junius. Vulgar. Vatabl. Mariano.
whereas the Hebrew is, vezeh asher jickra lah, he who shall call her, is the
Lord our righteousness; and the Contents before the 149 Psalm, insinuate that
the Church has power to rule the consciences of men.

4 When the word is constrained to speak that was never intended of God, when a
sense is drawn from it that was never included in it. Tyrabosco Patriarch of
Venice, preaching on the miracle of loaves and fishes, made the sense of
Phillips words, Two hundred pennyworth of bread will not suffice, to be this,
That all the mysteries of the Old and New Testament are not enough to inlighten
the peoples blind and ignorant minds, without the seven Sacraments; which he
made to be the meaning of Andrews words, White in his way to the Church p. 42.
There is a boy here which has five loaves and two fishes: What forced senses
have men put upon those scriptures: Tell the Church, and, This is my body? That
is, the sense of Scripture which the spirit intended, if any other sense be
imposed on, or extracted from the word, its a violation of it, and so it
speaks not the mind of God, but the pleasure and phansies of men.

They have profaned mine holy things. By Holy things, the Lord means the
Sacrifices and Oblations, which they were to order according to the institution
and rules given them from God, Non rite perficiebant quae ad eorum pertinebant
ministerium.
by Moses; but what was holy upon a Legal account, they esteemed common and
slighted, which was a profaning of them. In the 8. verse. God told Jerusalem
she had despised his holy things; and here he tells the Priests they had
profaned them, that is, they had ordinary thoughts and esteem of them, and
handled them, so, as became not holy things. When the holy things were eaten of
out of season, or by persons unfit, under legal uncleanness, they were
profaned, Leviticus 19, 8. chapter 22. from the first to the 16.

They have put no difference between the holy and profane. The Law tells us
what things and persons are said to be holy, or profane, clean or unclean, as
you may see Levit. 11. through out, Numb. 18.11, 12, 13. Deuteronomy. 14. from the 3.
to the 22. Levit. 19.7, 8. chapter 21. and 22. The Priests should have instructed
the people, what meats were lawful for them, what not; what Sacrifices were fit
to be brought to the Lord, and what not, who were worthy, and who not to eat
of the holy things, and to approach unto the Holy God.

This is acknowledged to have been the duty of the Priests, from Levit. 10.10,
11. Ezekiel. 44.23. where mention is made of Teaching; and from Haggai, the 2.11,
12, 13. where they practiced it, and told them what was unholy, and unclean:
but this is not all contained in this Text, for the Hebrew word Badal, rendered
here to put difference, imports power and authority to separate persons and
things one from another, as Genesis 1.4. the Lord divided or separated the light
from the darkness, Deuteronomy. 4.41. Moses severed three Cities on this side Jordan,
2 Chronicles. 2.10. Then Amaziah separated them; and Ainsworth reads those words,
Levit. 10.10. That ye may separate between the holy and profane: by that
power God had put into their hands, they were to keep the wicked and profane
from the Holy things; to separate them from the Congregation, and so the word
is used, Ezra 10.8. The Priests sinned in that they did not teach the people
what was legally holy, and legally profane, and also in that they did not put
forth that power they had, to preserve the holy things of God pure. These
Priests therefore that withstood Vzziah the King, attempting to offer incense
upon the Altar, and thrust him out of the Sanctuary, when the Leprosy appeared
in his forehead, they did their duty, and kept the things of God unpolluted, 2 Chronicles. 26.20. it was unlawful for him to offer incense; unlaw^ull for him being
Leprous to be in that place, where the incense was to be offered, and had not
the Priests had power, it had been unlawful in them to have thrust him out.

Neither have they showed difference between the clean and the unclean. The
Hebrew word for showing difference is (...) fecerunt scire, they did not make
to know, they neglected to teach, and instruct them, which was a sin
inexcusable, but more than so may be gathered out of this word; they did not
make them to know experimentally, by inflicting censures, what the difference
was between the clean and the unclean. They had three sorts of Excommunication;
the lesser called Niddui, the middle sort called Cherem, and the greatest
called Sammatha. He who was defiled with Leprosy was to be removed out of the
Camp of Israel, the Camp of the Priests, and the Camp of God. He was defiled
with an issue, was to be removed out of the Camp of God, and the Camp of the
Priests, but not out of the Camp of Israel. He that was defiled by the touch
of a dead body was only to be removed out of the Camp of God. Weemes in
Christian Synagogue.
Now its like the Priests failed in doing their part in some of these, they
suffered those were legally unclean, to come amongst those were legally clean,
and did not by removal of them, make them to know what a mercy it was to be
clean, and what an evil to be unclean. Its said Judges 8.16. that Gi^eon took
Briars, and Thorns, and with them he taught the men of Succoth, vajioaoh
(...) cognoscere fecit, he made them to know; by what they felt and suffered,
he made them to know; so the Priests should have made them to know by their
removal from the Camp, and holy things of God, what the great difference was
between the clean and unclean. I have met with one Author, who reads the words
thus, Vid. Gillespi in his Aarons rod blossoming. p. 119
Neither have they broken or divided between the clean and the unclean.

And have hid their eyes from my Sabbaths. The Hebrew word for Hid, is, (...)
alam, which properly is spoken of them that have watery, blear, and bloud-shot
eyes; Proprie dicitude oculis limis seu lippis qui non clare vident ob marcorem
vel velamen in illis contractum Avenarius.
that they cannot see well, as Avanerius says, such eyes had those Priests,
that they could not see. The Ordinary acception of the word is, to hide or
cover. The Sept. is, (...), they have covered their eyes from my Sabbaths. The
Vulgar is, averterunt, they have turned away their eyes. This Expression of
hiding their eyes has these things in it.

First, They did not mind the holiness and honor of the Sabbath; That was a
day to be sanctified in a special manner, Exodus 20.8. Levit. 23.3. Ezekiel.
20.20. they should have called the Sabbath a delight, holy and honorable, Isa.
58.13. for it was a day as for honoring of God, so for Gods honoring them
with his presence and blessings, but they minded not the holiness or
honourablenesse of the day, and this was hiding their eyes from it.

2 When men by their sinful practices profaned the Sabbaths of the Lord; they
took no notice thereof, they did not tell them of their sins, convince them of
the wickedness of their doings, but connive and wink at their doings, Jer.
17.27. there were those did carry in burdens at the gates of Jerusalem on the
Sabbath day, which God by Jeremy complained of, and threatened the destruction
of Jerusalem for, but the Priests though they knew and saw these things, yet
they were silent, and this was hiding their eyes from the Sabbaths of the Lord.

3 Themselves d^d those things on the Sabbaths which the law of God did not
justify, Videntes prop^lam Sabbatorum diem contumelia affici and opus leg^ non
permissum perfici in die quietis, at quere nolebant cos, qui delinquere
aud^bant sed veluti c^nniventes ocu^is, d^ssimulabant ea videre quae
continenter cernebant. Prad.
and they having their pretenses and excuses for the same, they did not the
duties of the Sabbath, they did their own pleasure, walked in their own ways,
and spoke their own words, contrary to that in Isa. 58.13. they did wicked
things on that holy day, and profaned the Sabbaths of the Lord, verse. 8. of
this chapter, Jer. 23.11. both Prophet and Priest are profane, they did
profanely, and so they hid their eyes from the Sabbath.

And I am profaned amongst them. The Profaning of holy things, the holy day,
and holy name of the Lord, are often mentioned, Levit. 22.15. Neh. 3.17. Amos
2.7. Ezekiel. 20.9.14.22. but here it goes higher, and comes to God himself, who
says, I am profaned: God in his own nature cannot be profaned, that is
incapable of all profanation, but he is said to be profaned, when his
commands are despised, his worship corrupted, and evil is spoken of him and his
ways. God is sanctified when we fear him in our hearts, Isa. 8.13. and
tremble at his word, Isa. 66.2. worship him according to his own appointments,
preserving his worship pure, and so live as to cause others to glorify his
name, 1 Pet. 2.12. Matthew. 5.16. when the contrary is done, he is profaned;
when men contemn the commands of God, break his Laws, defile his Sabbaths, they
profane the Lord, and by such doings cause his name to be blasphemed by
others, and in that, himself is profaned.

Obs. 1 That Holy things are to be kept holy, they have violated my Law,
profaned mine holy things, put no difference between the Holy and Profane,
etc. This was the evil that holy things were profaned. The Holy Oil, spoken
of Exodus 30. must be kept holy, and none must make or compound any like it;
verse. 31, 32. so for the holy perfume, verse. 37. The Passover was an holy
thing, and the Lord ordered it so, that it might be kept holy, Exodus 12.43,
44, 48. Strangers and uncircumcised might not eat thereof, because that was a
defiling of it; those who were legally unclean, were not to keep the Passover,
till they were cleansed, Numb. 5.2, 3. chapter 9.6, 7. etc. they were put off from
the fourteenth day of the first month, unto the fourteenth day of the second
month, and so for other of the holy things, see what rules God gives and how
strict he was to prevent the profaning of them, Levit. 22.3, 4, 5, 6, 7. God
threatened to cut off such a soul, that should meddle with the holy things,
being unclean. Cut off from Children say some, he should be without
posterity. Cut off by an untimely death say others, or cut off from God, and
having inheritance with his people in heaven. Hence was it that God committed
the Holy things to the charge of the Priests, Vide Goodwin Antiqui. l. 3. ^. 4.
Numb. 3.28.31, 32. and Levites Numb. 18.2, 3, 4, 5. and they kept the door of
the Lords house, 2 Kin. 12.9. and when they were defiled, they were not to
meddle with the holy things, Ezra 2.63. Ezra 44.13.

Obs. 2 When those are near to God are unfaithful, and do not improve their
power and interest to preserve the things of God, and Ordinances holy, its
matter of provocation and complaint. The Priests here who were officers in his
house, they dealt unfaithfully, and did not to their interest and power lay out
themselves to preserve the things of God from profaning, and polluting, and
that offended the Lord, and made him to complain of them, Ezekiel. 44.7, 8. God
complains of them there, that they brought into his Sanctuary uncircumcised in
heart and flesh, and polluted it thereby; that they did eat fat and blood which
were prohibited most severely, Levit. 7.25, 26, 27. and so broke his Covenant,
and kept not the charge of his holy things: When Nadab and Abihu brought
strange fire, that is, unholy fire, such as God commanded not, how greatly did
it provoke God, even so far as to kindle a fire in his wrath, and to consume
them; they were not faithful, they defiled themselves, their censers, and the
worship of God with their unholy fire, Levit. 10.1, 2. you may find the Lord
angry with, and complaining of some of the Angels of the seven Churches, for
their unfaithfulness and faultiness this way, Revel. 2.14, 15, 16. there God
Complains of the Angel of Pergamos, and tells him that he did not keep out
corrupt doctrines, that the doctrine of Balaam and the Nicolaitans, were
suffered amongst them; so for the Angel of Thyatira, that Jezabel was suffered
to teach, and seduce the Church, and to draw the members thereof to commit
fornication, and to eat things sacrificed to Idols. Here the Lord was offended
with the Churches, and complains of them.

Obs. 3 That there is a difference to be made between person and person, when
it comes to communion in, and participation of holy things; It was the Priests
sin here, that they did not put a difference between the holy and profane, the
clean and the unclean; This is to be done both doctrinally and practically.

1 Doctrinally, the Prophets and Priests were by their teachings to make a
difference, Jer. 15.19. 2 King. 13.9]
if thou take forth the precious from the vile, then thou shall be as my
mouth; The Vulgar reads it, if thou shall separate the precious from the vile,
Si seperaveris pretiosum a vili.
that is, says Maldonate, if thou shall by thy word sever the elect from the
reprobate, Pisc. Likewise interprets the words doctrinally, Si tuis
admonitionibus segregari feceris predestinatos a reprob^e.
Si solis piis proposueris promissiones gratiae meae ad consolandum ipsos non
etiam impiis, if thou shall hold out my gracious promises only for the comfort
of the godly, and not of the wicked, then thou shall be as my mouth; I will
own thee for my faithful servant, as having spoken and done what I my self
would have spoken and done, Ezekiel. 13.22. God is wroth with the false Prophets
and Prophetesses for sadding the hearts of the righteous, and strengthening the
hands of the wicked, that he should not return from his wicked ways, by
promising him life, they did not distinguish between the precious and the vile.

2 Practically, When any of the people were ceremonially unclean, they were to
be kept from the clean, and from communion with them in the holy things: No
stranger, no uncircumcised, none that had any running issue, that was leprous,
were to eat the passover, or join with the Congregation in their holy things,
Exodus 12.48. Levit. 22.3. and if Ceremonial uncleanness did exclude Israelites
from the holy things, under the Law, moral uncleanness may justly exclude
Christians under the Gospel, 2 Cor. 6.17. Come out from among them, and be ye
separate, and touch not the unclean thing. Idols and Idolaters are unclean
things, scandalous and ignorant persons are unclean things, and we must come
out from them, if we will have God to receive us, yea, those are unbeleevers,
how civil and fair so ever their lives be, Aversam quod est plus quam devita.
Eras.
are unclean things, Tit. 1.15. those that have a form of godliness, and deny
the power, are also such, and we must turn from them, 2 Timothy 3.5. from such as
well as the others before mentioned, you must turn away and not have communion
with. There is a prophesy in the 52 of Isaiah, ver. 1. that the uncircumcised
and unclean should not come into Sion, or the New-Jerusalem, and it suits with
what you have, Rev. 21.27. There shall in no wise enter into it, viz. the
New-Jerusalem, any thing that defiles. Such must be kept out as will defile:
there were porters at every gate of Jerusalem when the passover in Josiahs
days was kept, 2 Chronicles, 35
and they suffered not unclean or uncircumcised ones to enter, and the
Annotations upon this place in the Revelations say; in the last Church on earth
discipline in likelihood shall be so strictly executed, that no profane
persons shall be found there, only elect persons, so far as men can judge.
There shall be spiritual porters to keep out defilers, dead stones must not be
laid in a living Temple.

Obs. 4 That the profaning of holy things is a profaning of God himself: They
have violated my Law, profaned my holy things, etc. and I am profaned amongst
them: When holy things are not ordered and regarded as they ought, as becomes
them and him, who has made them holy, its a profanation of both. There is so
near a relation between God and his Ordinances, his holy things, that the wrong
done to them, he accounts done to himself, and the profaning of them, the
profaning of himself: When the Priests offered polluted bread upon the Altar,
they polluted God, Mal. 1.7. they brought that was defective, and not according
to the Law, and that polluted the Altar, which God accounted polluting of
himself, and this dealing with God so offends him that sometimes he breaks
out, and smites, yea, destroys persons for the same. When the Bethshemites
irreverently meddled with the Ark, the Lord did smite fifty thousand and
seventy men, 1 Samuel 6.19, it was a profaning of the Lord, so rudely to touch
and peep into the Ark. The Corinthians abused, profaned the holy things of
God, 1 Cor. 11. and for that very cause many were made weak and sickly, and
others were cut off by death, Look to it then that you be holy, if you will
meddle with holy things, and that you handle them holily, least you profane
the Lord, Eccl. 5.1. keep thy foot when thou go to the house of God, and be
more ready to hear than to give the sacrifice of fools.

Verse. 27 Her Princes in the midst thereof are like wolves ravening the prey to
shed blood, and to destroy souls, to get dishonest gain. You had the Propphets
and the Priests sins in the two precedent verses; in this you have the
Princes, which are, Violence. Cruelty. Covetousness.


Her Princes. The Hebrew for Princes is, (...) from (...) principem agere, to
act the part of a Prince, to bear rule. The Septuagint has it, (...), her
chief men, her Rulers, her Princes, that should have been such as feared God,
men of truth hating Covetousness, Exodus 18.21. they were now so degenerated,
that they were become like wolves.

Like Wolves. Historia animalium.
Wolves for their outward shape are like unto dogs, a creature that is strong,
swift, fierce, cruel, and crafty, as Franzius observes; In them are seen
notable resemblances of the Devil, Heretics, Theives, and Tyrants. When
Princes and rulers oppress the people, In lupis propositae sunt nobis insignes
imagines diaboli baereticorum latronum and tyrannorum. id. In lupo tanta est
voracitas and crudelitas ut non solum quod ad ventrem satis est, interficiat,
sed nisi impediatur cotum gregem passim prosternat. Imprimis humanae carnis
solet esse avidus and nihil tam apetit atque cruorem. Franzius. Herba quadam
origano.
they are Tyrants, and in Scripture language Wolves. Now two things in wolves
especially they resemble.

1 Their Subtlety, or craftiness in getting the prey, for the Wolf, animalia
cornuta invadit a tergo ne possint sese defendere contra manifest as injurias,
he comes behind horned beasts, sets upon them unawares, that they may not be
able to defend themselves; So Tyrants deal craftily with the people, take them
suddenly in their stratagems, and spoil them of the benefit of Law, and other
helps, Exodus 1.10. Act. 7.19. Pharaoh that Tyrant, dealt subtlely with the
Jews, so did Haman, Esther, 3.8, 9. so did Ishmael, Jer. 41.5, 6, 7.

2 Their Cruelty, Wolves are very cruel and bloody, they will kill many Lambs,
many sheep, and only suck their bloods, nothing do they desire more, than
blood, and man's flesh, and when they go out to prey, they do sharpen their
teeth with a certain herb they chew. So Tyrants are Wolvish in this respect.
Adonibezeck was not he such, when he cut off the thumbs and toes of seventy
Kings? Judges 1.7. was not Herod a ravenous wolf, who sucked the blood of all
the children in Bethlehem, and the coasts thereof, under two years old, Mat.
2.16. what a she-wolfe was Athaliah, who murdered all the seed Royal? 2 King.
11.1. what a cruel bloody wolf was Menahem, who ripped up all the women with
child in Tiphsah? 2 King. 15.16. and was not Manasses a mighty bloudy-sucking
and ravenous wolf? who filled Jerusalem with innocent blood from one end to
the other? 2 King. 21.16. Jehoiachim and Jehoiachin were Lions and wolves, that
catched the prey, and devoured men, Ezekiel. 19.3, 6. and in Zedekiahs days the
Princes and Rulers were such, as filled the land with bloody crimes, Ezekiel.
7.23. not unjustly therefore are they said to be like wolves, yea to be
wolves, Zeph. 3.3.

Ravening the prey. These words we had in the 25. ver. the Prophets were like
Lions ravening the prey; Tyranni nominabantur Lycaones and portae finxerunt
principes propter saevit^^ mutari in lupos.
and the Princes were like wolves ravening the prey; wolves are more ignoble
than Lions, and the Princes were worse than the false Prophets, they ravened
sorer than they.

To shed blood. Of this sin mention is made in the 4, 6, 9, and 12. verses of
this Chapter. Its a sin in any, but especially in Princes, who should protect
their subjects from violence and blood, and rather venture the sheding of their
own blood, than suffer the peoples to be wrongfully shed; but now the Princes
were so wicked, that like wolves they destroyed and devoured their own sheep;
by breaking Covenants made with other Princes, and so drawing upon them
barbarous Nations. By receiving bribes, and hearkening to tales, they gave way
to the execution of innocent ones, by which sin they destroyed the lives of
men, their persons, and the image of God, for which thing no recompense can be
made, nor ought to be taken if it could be made, Numb. 35.31. he that shed
blood unjustly, was to have his blood shed, whatsoever he were.

And to destroy souls. Souls are not in the power of Princes or other men to
destroy or hurt, Mat. 10.28. They are the Lords, Ezekiel. 18.4. and he only has
power over them. Princes here are said to destroy souls, because they do what
lies in their power to destroy them; or we may take souls here Synechdochically
for the whole man, they shed blood to destroy men; When the blood of men is
spilt, they are destroyed,

To get dishonest gain. (...)
The Heb. is rendered by Mont. ad appetendum concupiscentiam, to desire a lust,
or to satisfy a lust, and in the Margent, he has it thus, ut avare sectentur
avaritiam, that they might covetously, or greedily follow Covetousness: Ut
faciant quaestum, say others, that they might make gain. The French is, Pour
ensuiure le gam en avarice, to follow gain in covetousness. These Princes did
covet the wealth of the People, and found out ways to cut them off, that so
they might enjoy their estates. These words, dishonest gain, we had in the 13.
verse. and therefore shall forbear to add any thing more about them.

Obs. 1 That when Prophets and Priests are corrupt, the Magistrates are not
sound, in the 25. verse. the Prophets were like Lions, they devoured souls; in
the 26. the Priests violated the Law, and profaned the holy things; and here
the Princes were like wolves, shedding blood: When the heads in the
Ecclesiastic estate are evil, those in the Civil estate are seldom good; when
Prophets and Priests do wickedly, Princes will quickly learn to follow them.
They have great influence into the Courts and hearts of Princes.

Obs. 2 When Magistrates and Rulers are covetous, they are insatiably Covetous,
and will be cruel to satisfy their covetous lusts: The Princes were greedy of
gain, and to get it, they like wolves, did ravine the prey, shed blood, destroy
souls. They being Princes had great revenues, but they were not content with
what was their own, they cast their eyes and thoughts upon what the people had,
and let out their desires after the same, and Covetous desires brought forth
oppression in Taxes and cruelty, in making away, and cutting off many rich
ones, under pretense of delinquency, that they might enjoy their lands and
livings. When men are greedy of gain, they will take away the life of the
owners thereof, Prove. 1.19. Ahab and Jezabel took away the life of Naboth for
his vineyard, which they greedily coveted, 1 King. 21.19. Solomon tells you
that a wicked Ruler is like a roaring Lion, and a ranging Bear; he is a great
oppressor, Pro. 28.15, 16. he threatens them, fills them with fears, and daily
is plucking away their estates from them; he rangeth here for a prey one day,
and there for a prey another day, and is never satisfied, till he has
devoured them and theirs. Zeph. 3.3. Her Princes within her are roaring Lions,
her Judges are evening wolves, they gnaw not the bones till the Morrow, they
devour the men one day, and their estates the next day, the flesh will not
suffice them, but they must eat up bones and all. Covetousness is an
insatiable horse-leech, that cries give, give, and will break all Laws, Bonds,
Relations, to enjoy what it desires. There was much in it, when the Lord
forbade Kings to multiply gold and silver greatly to themselves, Deuteronomy. 17.17.
he foresaw that if their hearts were carried out strongly after such things,
that they having power in their hands, would oppress, shed blood, destroy
souls, and all, for to get dishonest gain. Isaiah therefore calls such Princes,
Thieves, chapter 1.23. they robbed, they murdered the people to enrich themselves;
Vespasian was such a Theif to the Roman state, who put in the greatest Offices
the greatest extortioners, whom he used like spunges, to fill them while dry,
and to crush out their liquor when they were full; Sueronius in Vespasiano.
when they were grown rich then he spoiled them. Its needful to pray for
Rulers, that they may fear God, hate Covetousness, and never prove roaring
Lions, nor ravening wolves.

28 And her Prophets have daubed them with untempered mortar, seeing vanity,
and divining lies unto them; saying, thus says the Lord God, when the Lord
has not spoken. Here we have the Prophets brought in again, where besides
those sins mentioned, verse. 25. you have an addition of their flattery and
lying.

Have daubed them with untempered mortar. Of these words see before, cha.
13.10.11. I shall give you the various readings.

Montanus, liniebant eos insulso, they daubed them with that was unsavory.
Sept. (...).

Scholion, (...).

Vulg. Liniebant eos absque temperamento.

Vatabl. Oblinunt eis crustam insulsam.

Jun. Pisc. Obdu^unt eis ineptum t^ctorium.

Lavat. Complanabant eos luto infirmo.

French, Les plastroyent sans est offe.

Munst. Linierunt eis caementum insulsum.

Taphel imports, a thing unseasoned, weak, inept to adhere and cleave to a
thing, and quickly falling off, having no ^enacitie in it. When Plaisterers lay
loam or sand upon a wall, Materiam notat quae ad compingendum inutilis est
quaeque cito decidit.
and there be nothing binding therein, ere long it falls off again, though for
the present it covers deformities, and makes it seem goodly; So these Prophets
flattered the Princes and great ones, and plaistered over their vile practices,
with smooth and fair words, encouraging them in their ways, and promising them
safety; which they did, having countenance and maintenance from them, Mic.
3.11. and upon hopes of greater preferment, but it proved otherwise; for when
the winds and storms of divine displeasure came, both Prophets, Princes, and
the untempered mortar fell together.

Seeing vanity, and divining lies unto them, saying, Thus says, etc. These
words were formerly spoken of, cha. 13.6, 7. they told the Princes and People,
that they had visions from God, that he had spoken unto them, and sent them to
prophesy such things unto them, whereas they saw nothing, neither heard or had
any thing from God, but followed their own spirits, which were vain and lying.
Herein they dealt perfidiously with God and man. Falso mala side and decep^orie.


Obs. 1 Though Princes and Rulers be exceedingly wicked, insatiably covetous,
and cruel, oppressing and destroying the people, yet there be Prophets will
flatter, countenance, and encourage them in those ways. The Princes were
ravening wolves, shed blood, destroyed souls to get dishonest gain, and
Jerusalems Prophets daubed them with untempered mortar. They applauded their
practices, justified their doings, and told them that God did approve of their
ways. It was not the Nobles, Citizens, but the Prophets of Jerusalem which did
this. Princes and great ones, want not false and lying Prophets to bolster them
up, and to bear them out in their vile and detestable courses.

Ahab was a wicked King, and he had a multitude of flattering, daubing
Prophets, 2 Chronicles. 18.10, 11. Go and prosper, for the Lord has delivered it
into the hand of the King, the enterprise is warrantable, will prove
successeful, fear not. There were flattering divinations among the false
Prophets, Eze. 12.24. and with these they be daubed the wicked Princes, and
strengthened the hands of evil doers, Jer. 23.14. when Princes are evil doers,
and encouraged by false or true Prophets, they will do mischief with a witness.
When the King that lately suffered, was upon oppressing designs, to get
dishonest gain, Plus nocet lingua adulatoris, quam manus persecutoris.
did not Englands Prophets, flatter, inc^urage, and daube with untempered
mortar, when they told him, all the people had, was his, that he might do what
he pleased with his subjects, and their estates?

Fla^tery is Evil in any, but worst of all in Prophets, and especially when
they have to do with wicked Princes, whom they harden in their wickedness
thereby, and ripen for destruction. Flattery pleases men greatly, its like
tickling, but there is a tickling unto death, Reproof is a precious balm,
Psalm. 141.5. but flattery is a destructive net, Prove. 29.5. let the true
Prophets abhor it, and so speak the truth, that they may appeal to the
consciences of great and small, as Paul does, 1 These. 2.5. Not at any time used
we flattering words, as ye know. Its good to be free from flattery, and also
from reviling. Many, that they may not seem to flatter, yet will revile and
speak evil of Rulers, both which are evil.

Obs. 2 That what false Prophets give out is unsavory, and unsound weak and
useless: its untempered Mortar: it may stick in men's heads a little, to
strengthen them to do wickedly: but it will not stick in their hearts, to
strengthen them against the day of evil, and to justify their doings, what is
there in vanity and lies to establish? False Prophets see vanity, and divine
lies, which are unsavory and unprofitable things; its truth, and divine truth
which establishes, 2 Pet. 1.19. the vain and lying imaginations of men, do
deceive and disappoint. Pashur prophesyed lies, the things of his own heart and
spirit, which himself and others trusted in, but see how he, and they believed
him, were deceived, and disappointed, Jer. 20.6. The scornful rulers which made
lies their refuge, and hid themselves under falsehood, saying, The overflowing
scourge shall not come unto us, Isa. 28.14, 15. see what the Lord says in the
17. verse. The hail shall sweep away the refuge of lies, and the waters shall
overflow the hiding place; False Prophesies, false opinions, false confidences*
will not advantage in a windy, and stormy time, they are all untempered mortar,
and what men give out from themselves, and not from God, does not profit at
all, Jer. 23.32.

Obs. 3 The subtlety and impudency of false Prophets, to make way for their
vanities and lies, they pretend they have messages from God, and say, thus
says the Lord God, there is their cunning; and to make God author of their
vanities and lies, there is their impudency. They knew their dreams, visions,
vanities, lies, would not take with Princes or people, if not presented unto
them, as from God. The true Prophets told them, thus says the Lord, and the
false made use of his name, and authority, the better to usher in what came
from their own spirits, for whatsoever seems to have the authority of men or
God to back it, has the better acceptance, and greater influence. This was the
constant practice of false Prophets, as you may see Jerem. 28.10, 11, cha.
14.14. chapter 27.14, 15. chapter 23.17. Ezekiel. 13.6, 7. They made God the author of all
their vanities, lies, dreams, and whatsoever came out of their own heads and
hearts, which argued an height of impudency in them. They did not only abuse
men, but they greatly abused God, Jer. 5.12. they have belyed the Lord, and
made that to be the word of God, which was not, they walked in lies, and
strengthened the hands of evil doers; which provoked God so bitterly against
them, Jer. 23.14, 15. that he says, he would feed them with wormwood, and
make them drink the water of gall, and because many Prophets amongst us have
belyed the Lord, in making some Scriptures speak that to maintain their
opinions and tenets which never was the mind of God in them, therefore he is
wrath with them, feeding them with wormwood, and making them to drink the
water of gall.

Verse. 29 The people of the Land have used oppression, and exercised robbery,
and have vexed the poor and needy: yea, they have oppressed the stranger
wrongfully. Having spoken of the Prophets, Princes, and Priests sins, he
comes now to the peoples, they had no cause to insult over and censure them,
for themselves were not free, and their sins were 1 Oppression. 2 Robbery and
Covetousness.


Both these aggravated from the persons they oppressed, robbed; and they were 1
The Poor and needy. 2 Strangers.


The People of the Land. There were four sorts of men in Canaan, Prophets of
J^rusalem, Jer. 23.14. Priests of the Lord, 1 Samuel 1.3. and of the high places,
2 King. 23.20. Princes of the People, Ezekiel. 11.1. and People of the Land, which
were the inferior sort, the vulgar, whom the Prophet terms so, not by way of
disgrace and opposition to the others, who were in places of eminency but for
distinction only.

Have used oppression. The Hebrew is thus, Did oppress with oppression, that
is, did greatly oppress. The word for oppressing, notes oppression by force or
fraud, as has formerly been showed, and is rendered here by Junius, fraudant
fraud, and by Piscat, fraudem exercet sum, This People deals very
deceitfully. Some read the words thus, Calumniabantur calumniam, or Calumniando
calumniati sunt, They did calumniate one another, and so oppress; Vulgar.
Vatablus.
for calumniation, or slandering, is a great wronging and oppression of a man.
Those are given to oppressing will use slander, Fr^a fait extorsion par
violence.
fraud, force, any way to accomplish their wills and desires.

And exercised robbery. These words are the same in the Hebrew, with those
chapt. 18.12. has spoiled by violence. There the verb is in the singular
number, and the substantive in the Plural, here the Verb is in the Plural, and
the Substantive in the Singular number. They did steal and get from one another
what they could, secretly or openly, which was violence and robbery, and this
they did frequently, they were exercised in it.

And have vexed the Poor and Needy. The word for vexed here is, (...) the same
with oppressed or used oppression, of which with the other words Poor and
Needy, was spoken chap. 18.7.12. chapter 16.49. the Poor and Needy should have been
counseled, comforted, not vexed or oppressed.

Yea, They have oppressed the stranger wrongfully. Of Oppressing the stranger
has already been spoken in the 7. verse. of this chapter. The Hebrew for
wrongfully, is, belo mishphat, absque judicio, without right. The French is,
Sans au cune jugement, without any justice or equity. They did injustly
oppress the stranger against all law add right. There was no justice amongst
them, in their dealings with natives or strangers, only fraud and force took
place.

Obs. 1 That People are usually such as those over them in Church and State
are. The Prophets, the Priests, the Princes, were wicked, and the People were
like unto them. The Prophets were covetous, and thereupon oppressed, taking the
treasure and precious things, verse. 25. the Priests violated the Law, and
profaned the name of the Lord, ver. 26. The Princes for dishonest gain, did
dishonest and cruel things, verse* 27. and here the People were like them,
covetous, using oppression, and exercising robbery, Micah 3.11. the heads
thereof, that is, of Sion, judge for reward, and the Priests thereof teach for
hire, and the Prophets thereof divine for money. Here the chief in the state and
Church had their eyes upon the reward, the hire, the money, and to enjoy the
same, they would do, say, any thing. Covetousness is the root of all evil, and
causes all sorts of men in whom its found, to comply with the humors of
others, for its own interest, and to make a prey of those do oppose the same;
and were not the people suitable unto these that were over them? Jer. 5.31. The
Prophets Prophesy falsely, and the Priests bear rule by their means, and my
people love to have it so; the false Prophets by their lies and flatteries, did
strengthen the wicked Priests in their practices, they took into their hands
(so the words may be read) more power than they should, Accipiebant munera ad
suas manus. Mont. in Margent.
and gifts which they should not, and the people love to have it so; they love
to hear the Prophets lies, and to feed the Priests with gifts, to bear them up
in their ways, cha. 6.13. from the least of them to the greatest of them,
every one is given to Covetousness, and from the Prophet even unto the Priest,
The word for profanation is (...) from (...) dissimulare dolose agere, as well
as, profane agere.
every one deals falsely: and how came it to be so? the people learned it of
those in place, Jer. 23.15. From the Prophets of Jerusalem is Profaneness
gone forth into all the Land; the word may be rendered hypocrisy,
dissimulation, deceit, the false Prophets were notorious Hypocrites, Deceivers
themselves, and they infected all the Land with their leaven. It was the
Prophets and Priests principally that made the Kings glad with their
wickedness, and the Princes with their lies; Hos. 7.3. and when a Prince or
Ruler hearkens to lies, all his servants are wicked, Prove. 29.12. Wicked
Prophets and Priests make wicked Princes; wicked Princes make wicked servants,
and wicked Subjects. They tell them tales, lies, accusing unto them those are
contrary to their ways, designs, and interest, or not forwarders thereof;
whereupon Princes set their servants, creatures, agents on work, to obstruct
and pervert justice, to entrap and crush such persons. This was much practiced
in late days. The Prelates possessed the Princes, with their lies and
falsehoods, concerning the book of sports on the Lords day, concerning Altars
and Altar-worship, and they quickly infected all their Servants, and too many
of their Subjects therewith, so that if the Prophets, Priests and Princes be
naught, the people are too like unto them.

Obs. 2 Covetous Practices in deceiving of, or in getting, and griping from
others, is plain thee very; the people of the land have used oppression, or
deceit; as your margents have it, and exercised robbery. When Covetousness
puts men upon deceitful practices; as to use false weights, false lights,
false measures, its robbery, so when corrupt, counterfeit, imbased materials
be put off for sound and good, be it in moneys, clothing, corn, meal, wines,
flesh, fish, any vendible commodity, its in the judgment of God, robbery; so
exacting of Fees, expedition money, taking advantages of men's necessities, of
forfeitures of Bonds or lands; withholding of servants and laborers wages,
altering of wills, forgeing of deeds, warrants, Luke 19.8. Levit. 19.13. thou
shall not defraud thy neighbor, neither rob him, the wages of him that is
hired shall not abide with thee all night until the morning; the word for
defraud, notes wresting and plucking from a man, and is the same with the word
for oppressing here; so that he who oppresses, who wrests any thing from
another by subtlety, he plays the Theif, he robs him; so for the hired man's
wages, when the time agreed upon for payment comes, you must not defer one
night, one day longer, its oppression, its robbery, and cries out against men,
James 5.4 when many for greediness of gain, bought and sold in the Temple,
Christ called them Thieves, you have made it says Christ, A den of thieves,
Mat. 21.13. the Priests for gain, gave way to others to buy and sell doves and
other things which were of use for offerings and sacrifices, and they made them
who bought the same for such purposes, pay dearly for them, and for this they
were called thieves, not simply for being in the Temple, it was their Covetous
practices, their deceiving, their griping, that made Christ brand them with
that name. When men out of Covetousness do grate upon others, defraud, and
overreach them in bargaining, or otherwise, they are robbers, and such doings
is called robbery, Amos 3.10. They know not to do right, says the Lord, who
store up violence and robbery in their Palaces; they were so exercised with
Covetous practices, that they knew not to do right, only they were acquainted
with theevery. Niniveh was such a City, Nahum. 3.1. it is full of lies, and
robbery, all shops, all places in it were full of them; I fear London is too
like Niniveh, full of lies, and robbery; are not men's hearts, tongues, hands,
exercised with covetous practices? is there not much fraud, griping, and
catching advantages in most shops, places, and persons? when will the time
come, that this City may be called a City of righteousness, the faithful
City? If you do find your hearts carried out greedily after gain, and desire
to be rich, consider these places of Scripture.

Prove. 28.20. He that makes haste to be rich shall not be innocent, Lo
jinnakeh, non er^t impunis, he shall not go without punishment, God will
plague him one way or other, send some secret curse into his heart or estate,
if not some outward visible judgment.

Prove. 20.21. An inheritance may be gotten hastily at the beginning, but the
end thereof shall not be blessed. Men may think God blesses them, loves them,
they thrive, they get great estates, but mark the end, the end of an estate so
gotten shall not be blessed; how many get great estates in this City, and their
children spend it shamefully, when they are gone.

Jerem. 17 11. He that gets riches and not by right, shall leave them in the
midst of his days, and at his end shall be a fool; he promises long life to
himself, but he shall soon be plucked away, and be declared to be a fool,
Luke 12.19.20. Soul, thou have much goods laid up for many years, eat, drink,
and be merry; he thought he should live long, but what followed? Thou fool,
this night thy soul shall be required of thee, then whose shall those things
be thou have prov^ded? it may be you think your children shall have what you
get, b^t its more than you know* if you will believe David, Psalm. 39.6. suppose
your heir do, can you tell what he will prove? its more than Solomon could
tell, Eccl. 2.19. who knows whether he shall be a wise man or a fool.

1 Timothy 6.9. read, study, mind those verses well, they have much in them.

Obs. 3 Who are a prey and spoil to the rich and great? its the poor, needy,
and strangers: the people of the land vexed and oppressed them. Those had
States, purses, and power, they dealt wrongfully with others. The Scripture
sets out this evil by various expressions. Men are said to have An Evil eye
against the poor, Deuteronomy. 15.9. To set their eyes against the poor, Psa. 10.8. To
Lie in wait to catch the poor, Psa. 10.9. To devise devises to destroy the
poor, with lying words when he speaks right, Isa 32.7. To shame the counsel of
the poor, Psa. 14.6. To despise the poor, James 2.6. To mock the poor, Prove.
17.5. To hate the poor, Prove. 14.20. To Rule and Lord it over the poor, Prove.
22.7. To bend their bow to cast down the poor, Psalm. 37.14. To grind the faces
of the poor, Isa. 3.15. To turn aside the poor in the gate, Amos 5.12. To take
away the right from the poor and needy, Isa. 10.2. To tread upon the poor, Amos
5.11. To sell the poor for shoes. Amos 2.6. To rob the poor, because he is
poor, Prove. 22.22. To take away his house violently. Job 20.19. To devour the
poor secretly, Hab. 3.14. To oppress the poor, crush the needy, Amos 4.1. To
swallow up the needy, Amos 8.4. To turn aside the stranger from his right, Mal.
3.5. To oppress him, as here. To slay him, Psalm. 94.6.


The Lord takes special notice of the Poor, and men's carriages toward them;
take heed then, that the spoil of the poor be not found in your houses, as its
said, Isa. 3.14. and that their blood be not found on your skirts, Jer. 2.34.
for the Lord will arise for the oppression of the poor, and sighing of the
needy, Psa. 12.5. he will maintain their right, Psalm. 140.12. Let your hearts
and eyes be toward them, let your hands be stretched out to do them good,
for blessed is he that considers the poor, Psalm. 41.1. and who so has mercy
on them is happy, Prove. 14.21. be not of that generation, Prove. 30.14.

Verse. 30 And I sought for a man amongst them, that should make up the hedge,
and stand in the gap before me, for the Land, that I should not destroy it: but
I found none. The Lord having made a large catalogue of Jerusalems sins, and
shown an universal corruption of all sorts of men, what could be expected but
that he should proceed to the destruction of them? But that he might more
fully justify his proceedings, toward these that were already in captivity,
and likewise toward them that were yet remaining, he tells them what he did,
he sought for some one or other to have appeared, interceded, and prevented
judgments. He looked some course should have-been taken, the land being so
guilty, to have kept off destroying judgments, and seeing there was none
minded the public good, doing ought that might occasion God to spare them; the
fault was in themselves, and not in him, that they were wholly ruined.

And I sought for a man amongst them. The Hebrew word (...) signifies to seek,
magno studio and conatu ambulatione and pedibus non verbis, as Kirker observes,
An earnest, diligent seeking, a running up and down to find out a thing. So
here the Lord made a diligent search, he went up and down from Prophet to
Priest; from Priest to Prince, from Prince to People, to see if he could find
out any man. Its spoken of the Lord after the manner of men, and is suitable to
that expression, 2 Chro. 16.9. the eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout
the whole earth; that is, Divine Providence exactly observes all things in the
world, especially what men do, and here, God looked earnestly upon all sorts of
men, to see if any stirred to interpose, and stand in the gap. The French is,
J'aj demandi d' 'entre eux quilque homine.
I demanded some one among them. I called for a man to come forth, and see if
he could prevent those judgments were coming upon them.

That should make up the hedge. The Hebrew is, Goder gader, hedging an hedge.
Vulg. Qui interponeret sepem. The words are metaphorical; and the metaphor is
taken from vineyards, gardens, and places enclosed, which use to have fences
and hedges about them, to preserve them from every thing might harm them, both
men and beasts. The Jews were Gods vineyard, Isa. 5.1. and he had fenced and
hedged them, verse. 2.5. they were Gods garden, and he had enclosed them, Cant.
4.12. The fence, hedge, or wall, about this people was,

1 Gods protection of them, he had a special care of them being his Church and
people, above all others, as the City Jerusalem had a wall about it, Nehem.
1.3. so God was a wall to the Citizens thereof, Zach. 2.5. a wall of fire round
about them. Isa. 27.3. least any should hurt his vineyard, he kept it night and
day, he watched over it continually, and preserved it.

2 Those things and means God had given them to be an hedge, or wall unto
them, as

1 Sound doctrine, which was as an hedge to keep out all errors, corrupt and
heathenish opinions, which they were in danger of, having the Nations round
about them, but God had given them good doctrine, Prove. 4.2. right words, Psalm.
33.4. lively oracles, Act. 7.38. faithful commands. Psalm. 119.86. sure
testimonies, Psalm 93.5. such as they were to try all doctrines and opinions
by, Isa. 8.20.

2 Pure worship, which was as a hedge between them and the Heathens, Deuteronomy.
6.13, 14. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and shall swear by
his name, ye shall not go after other gods, the gods of the people that are
round about you, verse 17, 18. you shall diligently keep the Commandments of
the Lord your God and his Testimonies, and his statutes which he has
commanded thee, and thou shall do that which is right and good in the sight of
the Lord, that it may be well with thee, 2 King. 17.36, 37. God had appointed
them, a pure way of worship, which hedged them in from all false ways of
worship, from bringing in ought of their own and others.

3 Good Laws, Deuteronomy. 4.8. what nation is there so great that has Statutes and
judgments so righteous? No Nation under heaven had such Laws to be governed
by as the Jews had, and those Laws were hedges against all injustice, they
might not wrong one another, nor strangers.

4 God had given them good Prophets, Priests, and Princes, for their safety, to
be an hedge unto them. The Prophets were to preserve the doctrine sound, the
Priests to keep the worship pure, and the Princes to see justice impartially
executed; Elijah a good Prophet was the horseman, and Chariot of Israel, 2
King. 2.12. chap. 13.14. the Priests were mediators between God and the people,
Joel 2.17. the Princes were the strength of the Land, Prove. 29.4. Thus you see
what the hedge was, and if you would have it more briefly, it was the Covenant
made between God and this people, he had promised to be their God, and to
protect them, they had promised to be his people, and to walk in his ways.
Now when they transgressed the Covenant the hedge was broken, and gaps were
made.

The Hebrew for Gaps is bapperetz, in the breach, from paratz, to divide and
break through. They had now broke through the Hedge, and made many Gaps, which
appears thus.

1 The Doctrine was corrupted, there was much chafe mingled with the Wheat,
Jer. 23.28. false prophets gave in that to be divine, which was from their own
hearts, spirits, heads, Ezekiel. 13.2; 3. They prophesied lies, Jer. 14.14. the
providence of God was denied, and his omnipresence, Ezekiel. 8.12. The Lord sees
us not, he has for saken the earth; so his justice, Ezekiel. 18. They said his
ways were not equal, the fathers had eaten sour grapes, and the childrens
teeth were set on edge, verse. 2. and 25. they taught the people to swear by a
false god, even by Baal, Jer. 12.26.

2 For the Worship, That was greatly corrupted. The Sanctuary was defiled with
detestable things, Ezekiel. 5.11. they had brought Images and Idols near to the
Temple, and into the Temple, Ezekiel. 8. they had high places and Altars in every
street, Ezekiel. 16. they burnt incense to other gods, and worshipped the works of
their own hands, Jerem. 1.16. The Statutes of Omry were kept, and the works of
the house of Ahab, Micah 6.16. and the fear or worship of God was taught by the
precepts of men, Isa. 29.13.

3 The Laws were wrested and perverted, so that there was no justice, Mic. 3.9.
They abhor judgment, and pervert all equity; all that was right, equal, just,
they oppressed or suppressed, and would not let it take place; so that
according to Isaiah, judgment was turned away backward, and justice stood
far off; they thrust them out of doors, out of their gates and Cities, and
when they pressed hard to come in, there was no admission, the doors and gates
were locked and bolted upon them, equity could not enter, Isa. 59.14. only
oppression was let in, Isa. 5.7.

4 For The men, who should have been as strong stakes to keep up the hedge,
they were rotten. The Prophets were Lions, Jer. 23.14. the Priests corrupters
and wicked, Lam. 4.13. the Princes were rebellious, and companions of Thieves,
Isa. 1.23. and all of them brake Covenant with God, Ezekiel. 16.59. so that its
evident the hedge was broken, and gaps made.

To make up the hedge, and stand in the gap. What that is, falls in now to be
considered, and it lies in these things.

1 In public opposing those corruptions were crept in, and practiced amongst
them. When of old the Jews had broken down the hedge, by making a Calfe, Moses
appeared for God against this wickedness, he seized upon the Calf, Exodus 32.
burnt it, ground it to powder, made the people drink it, sharply reproved
Aaron, and stood in the gate of the Camp, saying, who is on the Lords side?
let him come unto me, and when the Sons of Levi came to him, he commissioned
them to slay the Idolaters, and this was the beginning of making up the breach;
so when Josiah began to purge Judah and Jerusalem, from the high places, the
groves, images, and Altars, that were therein, then was the hedge making up
which they had broken down, 2 Chronicles. 34.3, 4. In Nehemiahs days, when the
hedge was new made about them, there were some began to tread down the hedge,
and make a gap therein by doing unlawful things on the Lords day, whereupon the
zeal of Nehemiah was kindled; so that he contended with the Nobles of Judah,
who countenanced them, and did violence to the Sabbath themselves: Saying, what
evil thing is this that ye do, and profane the Sabbath? Neh. 13.15, 16, 17,
18.

2 In mourning for such breaches, and deprecating the wrath and judgments due
for the same. When the Calfe was made and the people worshipped it, now the
hedge was down, Gods wrath ready to break in upon them, and to consume them,
Exodus 32.10. but Moses being affected much with what they had done, and with
what God was about to do, he falls to praying and interceding for the People,
Lord why does thy wrath wax hot against thy people? etc. wherefore should the
Egyptians speak and say, for mischief did he bring them out to slay them in
the mountains? etc. turn from thy feirce wrath and repent of this evil against
thy People, and he did so, verse. 14. now this act of Moses was standing in the
breach, and making up the hedge, Psalm 106.23. it kept out the fury of the Lord
from breaking in upon them. The intercession of Gods servants is a strong
hedge, and wall to prevent judgments. Therefore when the Lord was resolved
upon the destruction of the Jews, he forbade Jeremy to pray for them, chapter 7.16.
Pray not thou for this people, neither lift up cry nor prayer for them, neither
make intercession to me, for I will not hear thee. Intercession or deprecation
is an obstructing of God in his way; The Vulgar has it, Ne obsistas mihi, do
not thou stop or oppose me. When an Army is marching to a Town to destroy it,
if there be a strong wall in their way, that puts them to a stand, and often
causes them to give over their attempt. So Prayers against judgments, when
God is marching out to destroy a people, puts him to a stand, and often causes
him to retreat into heaven.

3 In putting things into their primitive condition. When the bushes trod down,
and stakes pulled out, are put into their places again, or new in their rooms,
then is the hedge made up: When Josiah caused the house of the Lord to be
repaired, the Covenant with God to be renewed, the Law to be read, and the
Passover to be kept according to the institution thereof, and all things were
brought to their primitive condition, 2 Chronicles. 34. and 35. chapt. then was the
hedge made up, then was there a man stood in the gap before the Lord. So when
Jehoshaphat brought back the people, from false doctrine, and false worship, to
the Lord God of their fathers, that was to the true Religion and worship, and
set Judges in all the fenced Cities of Judah, and set Levites, Priests, and the
chief of the Fathers in Israel, in Jerusalem, and instructed them to do all
things faithfully, with a perfect heart, and for the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 19.4. etc.
when he brought things to the pattern in Moses's days, then was the hedge
made up, then God was with them, and protected them against those wild beasts,
the Ammonites, Moabites, and these of Mount Seir, chapter 20.

For the Land, that I should not destroy it. By Land, is meant the people of
the land, the inhabitants, and their habitations, which were all shortly after
laid waste by the Chaldaean Army. The Septuagint renders these words, (...).
that I should not destroy it, That I should not leave it for ever.

God by degrees left the Temple, the City, the land, and none of them entreated
him to stay, and when he was gone, destruction came upon them.

But I found none. Was there not Jeremy and Ezekiel, who interceded with God
for this people? were there not many that mourned for the abominations that
were amongst them? Jerem. 9.1. chap. 14.11. Ezekiel. 9 4.8.

Its true, Jeremy did appear for God, he opposed the false Prophets, cried out
of their false and corrupt ways of worship, the perverting of justice, the
iniquities of Priests, Princes, and People, but they would not hearken to him,
Jer. 44.16. they devised devises against him, and slandered him, chap. 18.18.
they sought to put him to death, and cast him into prison, chap 38.4.6. and God
had forbid him to pray for them three times, chapter 7.16. chapter 11.14. chapter 14.11.
and he could prevail with none of them toward making up the hedge.

As for Ezekiel he was in Babylon, and the Lord looked for a man amongst them
in Jerusalem, so the Lord tells Ezekiel here, I looked for a man among them,
not among you.

For the sighers and mourners that were in Jerusalem they did it in secret, and
durst not openly be seen, they had not spirits to contradict the wicked
Prophets, Priests, and Princes, or if they had, yet they saw there was no good
to be done, the times were exceeding and desperately wicked; a man was made an
offender for a word, and a snare was laid for him reproved in the gate, Isa.
29.21. if any appeared openly to speak against them and their ways, they were
made a prey. It was an evil time, and the time for the prudent to keep silence,
Amos 5.12, 13. So then there was none among the Prophets, the Priests, the
Princes, or people, whom he mentioned in the verses before, that minded or
made up the hedge, or stood in the gap.

Obs. 1 That sin makes breaches and gaps; In this chap. the Lord having
enumerated the sins of all sorts in Jerusalem, here he tells them the hedge
was down, and gaps were in it. Their sins brake down the hedge, and made
those gaps, Isa. 30.13. This iniquity shall be to you as a breach, ready to
fall, swelling out in an high wall; as storms, wars, do make breaches in a
wall, so does sin make breaches in a State: Solomon's sins made such a
breach therein, that ten Tribes were rent therefrom; and given to Jeroboam, 1
King. 11.31. whence it came to pass that Ephraim envied Judah, and Judah vexed
Ephraim, Isa. 11.13. Sin made the breach between the Tribes, Isa. 9.21. the
breach between them and other Nations ( Zedekiahs perfidiousnesse did it) Ezekiel.
17.15. the breach between God and them, Isa. 59.2 their iniquities separated
between them and their God, and their sins hid his face from them, that he
would not hear, and set God against them, Ezekiel. 5.8. Sin makes breaches in
Churches, 1 Cor. 1.11, 12. and breaks Churches, Rev. 2.5. it makes breaches in
Cities, Luke 19.14. in families, Ezekiel. 16.38. in men's names, Prove. 6.33. in
men's estates, Deuteronomy. 28.15, 16* etc. Mal. 2.2. in men's consciences, Mat. 27.3,
4. Prove. 18.14, chap. 15.4. and between the chiefest friends, Prove. 16.28.

There be some sins which make such breaches as shake the foundations, Psalm
82.5. all the foundations of the earth are out of course; The Laws were their
foundations, but the iniquity of the Judges moved those foundations out of
place, and the State was like a bowing wall, and tottering fence, Psalm. 62.3.
Religion was a foundation unto them, but they had so corrupted the doctrine and
the worship, made such breaches therein, that God was departing far from the
Sanctuary, and so from them, Ezekiel. 8.6.

Obs. 2 When breaches and gaps are made by sin, the Lord has a purpose to
let in his judgments thereby, and to destroy for the same; They had trod down
the hedge, and God had thoughts to destroy the land, to bring in a flood of
wrath, Ezekiel. 20.8.13.21, you may see how upon their making breaches, upon the
worship, Statutes, and Sabbaths of the Lord, he resolved to pour out his fury
upon them, and to consume them. Isa. 1.23. you have the gaps their sins made,
and verse. 24. the resolution of God thereupon, Ah I will ease me of mine
adversaries, and avenge me of mine Enemies. They had made breaches upon his
Law, and he would make breaches upon them. Therefore Isa. 5.5, 6. I will take
away the hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up; They have trodden down the
hedge of Justice, made great gaps therein, and I will take away the hedge of my
protection, and let in the wild beasts, and boars to tread them down, and eat
them up: which the Lord did quickly after. When lately the hedge was trodden
down here in England, and gaps made in it, did not the Lord let in wild beasts
to devour? were not our Princes roaring Lions, our Judges evening wolves? did
not the Prelates and Priests raven the prey? Devour souls, take the treasure
and precious things? though now the wild beasts be destroyed, or driven to
their denns, yet every gap is not stopped, nor the hedge fully made up.

Obs. 3 When the hedge is down, gaps are made, and judgments ready to come in
upon a people; the Lord looks that one or other should appear, put forth
himself to prevent those Judgments. I sought for a man to make up the hedge,
to stand in the gap before me for the land, that I should not destroy it, Jer.
8.6. I hearkened and heard, but they spoke not aright. God expected they should
have repented, and some at least to have said, what have I done? and what have
I done! Oh, I have trodden down the hedge of Jerusalem, made many gaps therein;
I see Gods judgments coming in thereat, now I will labor to make up the
hedge, stop the gaps, divert Gods wrath, and bring things to their primitive
condition; this God looked for, and would have been glad to have heard. So in
Isa. 59.13, 14, 15. the hedge was down, gaps were made, God was displeased, and
now he looked that one or other should have showed a public spirit, opposed
the sinful practices, and deprecated judgments; he looks in all the gaps round
about, and verse. 16. He saw that there was no man, and wondered that there was
no intercessor, none to meet God to set upon him by prayer, and strong
arguments, to withold his judgments. (...) signifies obviare, occurrere
verbis seu corpore.
The Septuagint is, (...), There was no helper, none to help up the hedge being
down, none to help keep out the floods of Gods wrath; none to help the State or
Church in that tottering condition it was; none to settle their foundations,
and bring things into a right order.

Obs. 4 Making up the hedge, and standing in the gaps, is the way to save a
Land from destruction: Let men oppose the sinful practices in a Land, deprecate
the judgments of God, and reduce things to the primitive condition; to what is
required in the Word, and then the Lord will spare a sinful Nation, a guilty
City Jer. 5.1. run to and fro through the streets of J^rusalem, and see now,
and know and se^k in the broad places thereof, if ye can find a man, if there
be any that executes judgment, that seeks the truth, and I will Pardon;
The hedge of justice was broken down, they had good Laws, but they were
violated by all sorts, now if any man would have appeared against injustice and
falsehood, and seen justice executed, and so made up the breach, the Lord would
not only have withheld judgments, but have pardoned. In such a case one man
may do much; Moses stood in the Gap, and diverted the wrath of God, Psalm
106.23. the hedge of Religion and Worship was broken down by a golden Calfe,
and he made it up, Numb. 16.41, 42. the people murmured, rose up against
Moses, and Aaron, trod down the hedge of authority, whereupon the plague brake
in upon them; Presently Aaron steps into the gap, makes up the hedge, and stops
the plague, verse. 47, 48. That they did was honorable, and they were repairers
of breaches. We through infinite mercy have had some Mosesses and Aarons, to
make up our hedges, raise up our foundations, to stop some gaps, but all our
gaps are not yet stopped. Are there not gaps in the hedge of doctrine? if it
were not so, how come in such erroneous, blasphemous, and wild opinions
amongst us? Are there not Gaps in the hedges of Civil and Ecclesiastical
authority? Do not multitudes trample upon Magistracy and Ministry, all Powers,
both Humane and Divine? Are there not Gaps in the worship of God? Do not too
many tread down all Churches, all Ordinances, yea, the very Scriptures? Are
there not Gaps in the hedge of Justice? through which the Bulls of Bashan
enter, which oppress the Poor, and crush the needy? Amos 4.1. Are there not
Gaps in the hedge of Love? is not that bond of perfection broken? Are there not
bitter envyings and strife amongst us? Do we not bite and devour one another?
Are there not Gaps in the Hedge of Conscience? is not the peace broken between
God and your souls? does not Satan come in often at that Gap, and disturb you?
Are there not Gaps also in your several Relations, whereby he gets advantage?
Surely if our eyes be in our heads, we may see Gaps enough: Let us make up the
breaches, stop all Gaps in the public and private hedges; Otherwise, God will
break in upon us by his judgments, Levit. 26.18, 19. If ye will not hearken
unto me, I will punish you seven times more for your sins, and I will break
the pride of your Power?

Obs. 5 That in times of general corruption in Church and state, its hard to
find a man of a public spirit, to oppose those corruptions, to wrestle with
God for mercy, and to bring things to their Original condition. The Lord sought
for a man amongst them, that should make up the hedge and stand in the gap, but
he found none, Isa. 59.4. none calls for justice, nor any pleads for
truth. The Judges and great ones did oppress the People, and none appeared
publicly for them, to plead their cause, and reprove the oppressors. Many
disliked the carriage of things, but they had no spirit to oppose, they were
not valiant for the truth, as Jeremy says, chapter 9.3. therefore Isa. 63.5. God
says, I looked, and there was none to help, and I wondered that there was none
to uphold. He does not say simply, there were none, but none to help, none to
uphold; the State and Church were sinking, and not a man stepped out to put to
his shoulder, to help support them. God looked for, and sought for such a man,
but could find none, and to convince them of the truth thereof, he bids them
see and seek all Jerusalem over, if there were a man that executes judgment;
Neither God nor men could find. In common corruptions and Calamities, few have
hearts to appear for the public good, against over-spreading evils; sinful
prudence, or fear of crushing makes them silent, and lie hid, Eccl. 4.1. the
oppressions under the Sun were great, the tears of the oppressed many, but
there was no Comforter, none pitied them, none appeared for them, none used
any means to relieve them.

Verse 31 Therefore have I poured out mine indignation upon them, I have
consumed them with the fire of my wrath; their own ways have I recompensed
upon their heads, says the Lord God. Seeing they were guilty of such sins as
are mentioned in the chapter, and so universally corrupt, the Lord in this last
verse, denounces judgments against them. The Verbes are in the preter tense, I
have poured out, I have consumed, I have recompensed. So he had done upon
those in Captivity, but he speaks of those in the Chapter, who were then at
Jerusalem, and its usual in the Hebrew to put a preter tense for the future, to
note the certainty of a thing, and so here, God says he had done so, because
certainly he would do so. The words of this verse we have had before, chap.
21.31. chapter 19.12. and chapter 9.10.16.43.

Obs. 1 When a people is universally corrupt, the hedges of religion and
justice trod down, and none appears to make up those hedges, God will certainly
visit that people with his judgments. Prophets, Priests, Princes, and people,
were degenerated and greatly corrupted, all hedges down, God looked for some or
other to appear against the corruptions were amongst them, and because there
was none, therefore he would pour out his indignation upon them and consume
them with the fire of his wrath, and they found it so shortly after, Lam. 2.4.
chapter 4.11. they and their foundations were devoured.

Obs. 2 That God in his severest judgments is most just, I have or will
recompense their own way upon their head; God did not punish them for others
ways, but for their own; it was their own evil doings, brought his judgments
upon them, he did them no wrong, when sword, famine, plague, fire, consumed
them, what ever dreadful judgments have fallen out in our days, in this or
other nations, let us justify the Lord, he has recompensed men's own ways,
upon their heads; he is righteous in all his works, and holy in all his ways.

CHAP. XXIII.
1 The word of the Lord came again unto me, saying, 2 Son of man, there were
two women, the daughters of one mother. 3 And they committed whoredoms in
Egypt, they committed whoredoms in their youth: there were their breasts
pressed, and there they bruised the teats of their virginity. 4 And the names
of them were Aholah the Elder, and Aholibah her sister: and they were mine, and
they bare sons and daughters: thus were their names: Samaria is Aholah, and
Jerusalam Aholibah.
IN this chapter are contained these generals.

1 A Complaint of, or prophesy against the idolatry and wickedness of the
whole body of the Jews, under the names of Aholah and Aholibah, showing their
several sins, and the greatness of Aholibahs above Aholahs.

2 Denunciation of judgment against them, and their destruction.

1 The Word of the Lord came, etc. This verse shows our Prophet spoke not out
of his own heart or spirit, as the false Prophets did, it was the spirit of the
Lord brought the word of the Lord unto him, and he spoke as he was moved by
the Spirit, which shows the divine authority of this prophesy.

2 There were two women, the daughters of one Mother. The Jews were at first
one people, till the days of Rhehoboam, and then they were divided. Ten Tribes
fell off to Jeroboam, which frequently after were called Ephraim, and Israel,
or the children of Israel, the house of Israel. The other two Tribes were
called Judah, and the house of Judah. One was the Kingdom of Israel, the other
the kingdom of Judah. These two are the two women here mentioned.

The word for Women is, (...) which is from (...) to forget, they are so
called, from their forgetfulness, and these metaphorical women, Israel and
Judah, forgot their God greatly and thereupon are called Nashim, women, or
forgetters.

The Daughters of one Mother. In the Scripture language, the whole of things is
termed the Mother, and the parts thereof Daughters, Ezekiel. 21.21. The King of
Babylon stood at the mother of the way, so is the Hebrew, while the way was
entire, and one, it was called the Mother, and when it divided into parts,
those parts were as the daughters of that mother. The whole body of the Jews
was as the one Mother, and when that body divided into two Kingdoms, those
Kingdoms were as the Daughters of that Mother. When they were in Egypt, and a
long time after, they were as one woman, but in Rhehoboams days this woman
grew big, brought forth Twins, and so became one mother of two daughters, 1
King. 12.

Verse. 3 They committed whoredoms in Egypt. They being in the loins of their
mother, forsook the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and fell in love with the
Egyptian gods, Josh. 24.14. Ezekiel. 20.7, 8.

They committed whoredoms in their youth. This Jewish Nation at her first
beginning, while young and little, played the Harlot, and defiled her self with
the Egyptian idolatry; what she did is set out by way of aggravation, she
sinned in her youth, or these sisters sinned betimes, their spirits were
carried out that way early, and that in Egypt, or house of bondage and
suffering.

There were their breasts pressed, and there they bruised the teats of their
virginity. In this Metaphorical whoredom, Puellae dum vi^gines sunt ubera
solida and turgentia habent, quae simul atque virginitatem amittunt,
comprimuntur and quodammodo franguntur. Maldon.
he alludes to the corporal. When Virgins are defiled, their breasts suffer
also, they are more loose and hanging, whereas before they were erecta,
integra, and virginali pudore stantia, and so natural signs of chastity. The
Septuagint is, (...), There their breasts fell, there they were unvirgined, the
meaning is this, that quickly after the Jews came into Egypt, the Egyptians
prevailed with them by Flatteries, or threats, to embrace their Idolatrous
worship, whereby they lost their chastity, and became like the nations.

4 The names of them were Aholah, the Elder. Here he comes to the Names of
these women, and shows you who they were. The name of the one was Aholah, and
this Aholah was Samaria, the chief City of the Ten Tribes, where the Kings of
Israel had their chief residency. Aholah is from (...) a Tent, or Tabernacle,
and Aholah is Tabernaculum suum, his own, or their own Tabernacle, that is,
Samaria, or the ten Tribes, have not me, or my worship amongst them, they have
devised a worship of their own, set up Golden Calves at Dan and Bethel, they
have forsaken my Temple, and set up their own Tabernacle, and dwell by
themselves, separate from me.

The Elder. The Hebrew is not Elder, but the greater, This woman Aholah, had
ten Tribes, the other, only two; this we had chapter 16.46. where its said, Thine
Elder sister is Samaria.

Aholibah her sister. Thus is the name of the other woman, Aholahs sister was
Aholibah, which signifies my Tabernacle, or dwelling in her, and this was
Jerusalem where the Temple and worship of the Lord were, what was done there
the Lord himself appointed, and that was the place he chose, Psa. 132.13, 14.

They were mine. I tied them unto me by a Covenant, Ezekiel. 16.8. I became their
God, and they became my people, the Hebr. is, They were for me, that is, for
me alone, for no other God, no other way of worship than what I should
prescribe them.

And they bare Sons and Daughters. God blessed them, so that they multiplied
greatly, they had many Sons, and many Daughters, Ezekiel. 16.7. I caused thee to
multiply as the bud of the field.

Obs. 1 That going after false ways of worship, is in Gods account whoredom,
they committed whoredoms: when they bowed to any of the false Gods in Egypt,
they did as basely and vilely, as she that commits filthiness with another.

Obs. 2 The Lord takes notice where and when those are in relation to him do
sin: They committed whoredoms in Egypt and in their youth, they sinned
amidst the grand and bitter enemies of God, among Egyptians, and then when they
were but growing up to be a people. They should have considered what enemies
the Egyptians were to their God, and to his worship, how odious their ways and
worship were to him, that so they might have kept at a great distance from
them, they should have walked circumspectly, that so they might have kept his
name from being polluted, and likewise they being in their youth under bondage,
should have minded Gods kindness in preserving them, and making them to
prosper, but they did not, they sinned in Egypt; and in their youth, two great
aggravations of their sin. When God is beginning to show kindness to a
people in misery, and raising them up to some height and greatness, and then
for them to turn aside to lewdness, to superstitious, idolatrous and
heathenish practices, this God observes in a special manner, and it provokes
him greatly. See how it affected the Lord, that they sinned presently after he
had showed them kindness, in bringing them out of Egypt, Psalm. 106.7. They
provoked him at the Sea, even at the red Sea, I put forth my mighty power to
bring them out to the Seaside, and was ready to divide the Sea to carry them
through, but even then and there they provoked me. When States, Cities,
Families, degenerate in their youth, it sorely displeases God.

Note 3 Wheresoever a devised worship is brought in, there man's Tabernacle is
set up; where true worship is advanced there is Gods Tabernacle. The ten Tribes
had a worship of Jeroboams devising, like unto the worship of Jerusalem in many
things, but this was Aholah, Their own Tabernacle, God owned it not, he was
not in their Assemblies, he accepted not their sacrifices, their incense was a
stink in his nostrils; but Jerusalem was Aholibah, there Gods own worship was
set up, and so long as his worship was there, he acknowledged his Tabernacle
to be in her. Where his worship is, there he dwells, Psalm 68.16. and is to
be seen and inquired of, Psalm. 27.4.

Verse. 5 And Aholah played the Harlot when she was mine, and she doted on her
lovers, on the Assyrians her neighbors. 6 Which were clothed with blue,
Captains and Rulers, all of them desirable young men, horsemen riding upon
horses. 7 Thus she committed her whoredoms with them, with all them that were
the chosen men of Assyria, and with all on whom she doted, with all their
Idols she defiled her self. 8 Neither left she her whoredoms brought from
Egypt, for in her youth they lay with her, and they bruised the breasts of her
virginity, and poured her whoredoms upon her. 9 Wherefore I have delivered her
into the hand of her lovers, into the hand of the Assyrians, upon whom she
doted. 10 These discovered her nakedness, they took her sons and her
daughters, and slew her with the sword: and she became famous among women, for
they had executed judgment upon her. In these verses Aholahs sins and
judgments are set out.

1 Her sins, which were 1 Confederating with the Assyrians, verse. 5. see 2 Kin.
15.19. and those Assyrians are described, verse. 6, 7. 1 From their Garments. 2
From their Titles. 3 From their Age. 4 From the Creatures they used.
2 Entertaining and defiling her self with the Assyrian idols, verse. 7. 3
Retention of her old Egyptian Idolatry, verse. 8. there she had a Calfe, and
under Jeroboam and others, she had golden Calves.
2 Her Judgments, which were 1 Loss of her freedom, verse. 9. 2 Desolation,
verse. 10. in which verses we have also, 1 The Causes of the judgments, 1 The
Principal, God himse^f, verse 9. 2 The Instrumental, viz. the Assyrians.
2 The Event of those judgments, ver. 10. she became famous among women.


Verse. 5 When she was mine. The Hebrew for mine is, Tachti, sub me, when she
was under me, under my Covenant, under my worship, my power, and authority.
Septuagint is, (...), she has gone out from me her husband, and played the
harlot; or pro me, in stead of me and my worship, She has taken in other
gods, and their Worship. The Chaldee is, a cultu meo, she has left my pure
worship, and fallen to the abominable idolatries of the Assyrians.

She doted on her lovers. The Hebrew word (...) notes violent and base love,
and is rendered by the Vulgar insanivit in amatores suos, Insano amore flagrare,
importat turpem and inhonestum amorem. Prad.
she was mad upon her lovers, the Assyrians and other Nations.

Verse. 8 Neither left she her whoredoms brought from Egypt. That
superstitious idolatrous disposition which she had being in Egypt, still abode
with her, she made leagues with the Egyptians, 2 King. 17.4. she had her
calves like the Egyptian calf, 1 King. 12.28.

Verse. 10 These discovered her nakedness. The Assyrians took away her ornaments
and clothing, as ver. 26. and used her shamefully and cruelly, as women often
are, being taken in war, Isa. 47.2, 3.

She became famous among women. Hebrew is, she was a name to women; Septuagint
(...), she was a talk among women: Some talked of her for her whoredoms and
filthinesses. Others for her miseries, judgments, and grievous sufferings, and
so she was famous amongst women.

Obs. 1 That when people go out from God to false ways of worship and
confidences therein, they are violent and strong in their affections thereunto.
Aholah doted upon her lovers, her heart was fired with Babylonish gods, and
confidences in them.

Obs. 2 What evil persons have practiced in their youth, that they affect in
their age. Aholah had loved the Egyptian Idols in her minority, and after she
was grown up, come to her latter days, those Idols were not out of her
thoughts, her Egyptian Lovers were still in her mind, like Harlots that mind
their former lovers long after they are married; what corruption gets in in
youth, grows up and abides. An unclean idolatrous heart in youth, will be so in
age.

Obs. 3 That Idolatry may continue long in a Nation, but shall at last be
severely punished by the Lord. Aholah had been an idolatresse from her youth,
and when she was grown up to some greatness, then she brake out into gross
notorious Idolatry, 1 King 12. in which she continued some two hundred sixty
and odd years, and then the Lord plagued, yea, destroyed her, her Sons and
Daughters. Its wisdom to cleave to the Lord and his worship, not to follow or
confide in other Nations or their ways.

Obs. 4 God makes places and persons remarkable, by the judgments he
executes upon them. Aholah was made famous among women, by those judgments
he brought upon her: Aholah was Samaria, which Shalmanezer besiedged three
years, and then took it, 2 King. 17.5, 6. and after burnt it, as Lavater
observes.

Verse. 11 And when her sister Aholibah saw this, she was more corrupt in her
inordinate love than she, and in her whoredoms, more than her sister in her
whoredoms. 12 She doted upon the Assyrians her neighbors, Captains, and
Rulers, clothed most gorgeously, horsemen riding upon horses, all of them
desirable young men. 13 Then I saw that she was defiled, that they took both
one way. 14 And that she increased her whoredoms: for when she saw men
pourtrayed upon the wall, the images of the Chaldaeans pourtrayed with
vermilion. 15 Girded with girdles upon their loins, exceeding in dyed attire
upon their heads, all of them Princes to look to, after the manner of the
Babylonians of Chaldaea, the land of their nativity. 16 And as soon as she saw
them with her eyes, she doted upon them, and sent messengers unto them into
Chaldaea. 17 And the Babylonians came to her into the bed of Love, and they
defiled her with their whoredom, and she was polluted with them, and her mind
was alienated from them. 18 So she discovered her whoredoms, and discovered
her nakedness: then my mind was alienated from her, like as my mind was
alienated from her sister. 19 Yet she multiplied her whoredoms, in calling to
remembrance the days of her youth, wherein she had played the harlot in the
land of Egypt. 20 For she doted upon their paramours, whose flesh is as the
flesh of asses, and whose issue is like the issue of horses. 21 Thus thou
calledst to remembrance the lewdness of thy youth, in bruising thy teats by
the Egyptians, for the paps of thy youth. Having set out Aholahs sins in the
former verses, here he comes to Aholibahs sins, and the events of them.

Her sins were, 1 Her not taking warning by her Sister to amend, but growing
worse, ver. 11. 2 Her Confederacy and Idolatry with 1 The Assyrians, ver. 12.
who are described, 1 From their nearness, neighbors. 2 From their Titles or
Offices, Captains, Rulers. 3 From their habit, clothed most gorgeously. 4 From
their rank, horsemen riding upon, etc. 5 From their age and comeliness, all
of them desirable young men.
2 The Chaldaeans, verse. 14. which idolatry is set out, 1 From the occasion of
it, viz. pictures or images, which are described, verse. 14. 1 From their
coloring, vermilion. 2 Their form, girded, dyed attire, etc. 3 Aspect, Princes
to look to. 4 Pattern and place, ver. 15.
2 From the haste she made thereunto, verse. 16.17. 3 The Egyptians, verse. 19.
which is aggravated from the violence of her affection, ver. 20.




The Events were 1 Gods displeasure, ver. 13.

2 Alienation of his mind from her. ver. 18. 3 Alienation of Aholibahs mind
from the Chaldae^ns, ver. 17.
Verse. 11 She was more corrupt in her inordinate love than she. The Hebrew is,
Corrupit amorem suum prae illa, she corrupted her love more than she. The
Septuagint is, (...), she corrupted her desire, she was more filthy and vile
in her dotings and violent loves, than her sister. Corruptius exarsit amore suo
quam illa. Pisc. Jerusalem was more addicted unto idols than Samaria.

And in her whoredoms, more than her sister in her whoredoms. In the Original
its, her whoredoms were before, or more than the whoredoms of her sister:
she exceeded Samaria and other places in her idolatries, as you may see Ezekiel.
16.47. thou wast corrupt more than they all in thy ways.

Verse. 12 She doted upon the Assyrians. For Assyrians, the Text says, the
Sons of Assure, this you have verified 2 King 16.7, 8. when Ahaz hired Tiglath
Pilezer King of Assyria with the gold and silver of the Temple to come and help
him.

Clothed most gorgeously. In the Hebrew its Lebushe miclol, clothed with an
absolute garment, with every kind of comely clothing. Junius has it,
clothed most perfectly: with every kind of precious garments.

Desirable young men. Bachure chemed, the elect of desire, says the Text,
such men as desire it self would choose, they were no ordinary men, but such as
were comely, amiable, even men of desires, very desirable.

Verse. 14 Pourtrayed with vermilion. The Hebrew for vermilion is shashar, which
signifies red color, with which any thing is painted. The Rabbis say its
minium, red lead, its but twice used in the holy Scriptures, in Jer. 22.14. and
here. Some render it, Indico, which abounds in those parts, and the French has
it, peints d'azure, painted with blew.

15 All of them Princes to look to. The word for Princes is sholishim, which
Montanus renders Triarii, quasi tertii a rege, Those that were of the third
rank or dignity from the King, 2 King. 7.2. then a Lord on whose hand the King
leaned, answered, the word is, hashalish, one that was a man in place third
from the King.

17 The Babylonians came to her into the bed of love, and defiled her with
their whoredom. This is spoken of Metaphorical whoredom; the Jews sent to the
Babylonians to enter into league with them, and that being done they brought in
their Babylonish Idols, and worship amongst them, and taught the Jews to
sacrifice unto them, and so defiled the Temple and Ordinances, the bed of love.
Ahaz brought in the Altar from Damascus, which did defile, 2 King. 16.

Her mind was alienated from them. In the Hebrew it is, Her soul was removed
from them, the Sept. (...), Her soul departed from them. The French, Son desir
se de partit d'iceux, Her desire departed from them; she grew weary of them,
and fell in with the Egyptians, 2 King. 24. those she had doted upon before,
now she affected no longer. Luxata est anima ejus, her soul was loosed from
them, and as a thing out of joint.

19 In calling to mind the days of her youth. That is, she remembered, and
together with her remembering, exercised her former spiritual whoredom.

20 She doted upon their paramours. The word for Paramours is, Pillagshehem
pilgesh, or pillegesh, is a Concubine, or half wife, one for the bed, not for
the government of the house. Montanus renders the word here, Pellices little,
their harlots. The Egyptians had the neighboring Nations leagueing it with
them, and imitating their idolatry, these were Egypts Concubines, whores. Now
Aholibah or Jerusalem, doted upon these also, or rather thus; she doted above
their paramours, above their Concubines, more than they, she was carried more
strongly toward the Egyptians, than other Nations.

Whose flesh is as the flesh of Asses, and whose issue is as the issue of
Horses. Here Rem inhonestam honest is verbis exprimit. The Egyptians were great
of flesh, Ezekiel. 16.26. they were like Asses and Horses. Quae inter omnia
animalia habent maxima genitalia, burning in lust, given to filthiness and
idolatry, hereby is set out the strength and wealth of Egypt, which provoked
the Jews to make leagues with them. As whores lust after those are strongest
and ablest to satisfy their lust, and pour out their filthiness upon them, so
did Aholibah lust after the Egyptians.

Obs. 1 That when God executes severe judgments upon Cities, he looks that
sister Cities should take warning thereby, and reform in those sins which
brought such judgments upon them. God destroyed Aholah or Samaria for her
idolatry and consederating with heathenish Nations. When Aholibah saw this,
she reformed not, but was more corrupt: God expected that Jerusalem should
hereupon have purged out all idolatry, knocked off her confidences in other
Nations, and cleaved wholly to him, that so she might have been spared, but
she made no good use of his dealings with Samaria.

Obs. 2 That progress in the same sins after judgment executed upon others
for the same, and seen, is a fearful aggravation of sin. Aholahs sins were
the same that Aholibahs were, and Aholibah saw Gods judgments executed upon
her for those sins, and yet she continued and proceeded in the same. When
she saw this, she was more corrupt; when Gods hand is lift up, judgment
executed, men should fear and learn righteousness, but to go on in wickedness
is an horrible sleighting, yea, despising of God, and his judgments.

Obs. 3 That sinful Cities usually grow worser, whatever judgments they see or
hear to be executed upon others. Jerusalem was more corrupt than Samaria, and
abounded in whoredoms more than she did, and doted more upon the Assyrians,
Chaldaeans, and Egyptians. So corrupt is the nature of man, that its not only
the worse, after mercies, but even after judgments. Are not we in this City
and land, worser now after all the judgments, and mercies, we have seen,
felt, and enjoyed?

Obs. 4 The Lord takes notice what ways Cities go, and how they do defile
themselves, verse. 13. I saw that she was defiled with Assyrians, Chaldaeans,
Egyptians, by her trusting in them more than in me; by her Idols she fetched
in from them. Gods eye was upon Sodom, Gomorrha, Nineveh, Babylon, Tire,
Rabbath, and all other Cities, and so its now upon Rome, etc.

Obs. 5 From this 13. verse. That sinful Cities do tread in one another steps;
They took both one way, what one did, that the other did, if Aholah was gone to
Assyria, Aholibah will follow her, if one run to Egypt, the other will run
after her, if one dote upon them both, so will the other, if one pros^itute her
self to corpor^l and spiritual whoredom, so will the other; Simeon and Levi
were brethren in evil, and went both one way: Samaria and Jerusalem were
sisters in wickedness, and went both one way,

6 From the 14, 15, 16. Obs. That the eyes are instruments and occasions of
great evil. When she saw the images of the Chaldaeans in their dresses, with
their belts and aspects, she was taken with them, as soon as she saw them
with her eyes, Heb. is, At the sight of her eyes she doted upon them, the
images affected her eyes, and they conveyed corruption to her heart, or that
which stirred the corruption pre-existent in her heart, which set her on work
to send into Chaldaea, for the men themselves. Adultery and idolatry have their
chief entrance by the eye, and many other sins likewise: if men and women
would have chaste hearts, they must have special care of their eyes; what a sad
thing was it, that Jerusalems eyes should be taken with the painted images of
Babylonians. Some confess there is danger by gazing upon living objects, the
beauties of men and women, but they fear none from dead objects; but Achan saw
a wedge of gold and a Babylonish garment, and they snared him. Aholibah here
saw Babylonish Pictures, and they ensnared her; if you would be safe, keep
your eyes from wandering, and beholding wanton pictures, such sights have cost
some dear, and brought forth much wickedness.

Obs. 7 From the 17. v. For Gods people to confederate with Babylonians, and
admit of any part of Babylonish worship, is to defile the bed of love; for a
woman to make leagues with other men, and to admit any one into the marriage
bed, is to defile it. God is a jealous God, his worship must be pure, and the
heart must be pure; if the worship be mixed, or heart lean upon an arm of
flesh, the bed of love is defiled: in the bed is the love let out to the wife;
in the worship and Ordinances, God lets out his love to the soul, when they are
pure, in the heart, being pure and confiding in God, God lets out himself, and
his love. Let us look to our hearts, that they may be dis-ingaged from all
creature confidences, and to our worship that it be according to God, and then
the bed of love is undefiled, and we shall have communion with, and comfort
from our beloved.

Obs. 8 Wickedness i^ unconstant, Aholibah doted upon the Assyrians, ver. 12.
and again she doted upon the Chaldaeans, verse. 16. and here in the 17. her
mind was alienated from them. Wickedness is violent and unconstant, she was
taken with the very images of the Babylonians, now she cares not for the men
themselves, her soul is dis-joynted from them, but it was to fall in with some
others, and they were the Egyptians, verse. 19. but she held not there long;
which made the Lord to say, Jer. 2.36. why gaddest thou about so much, to
change thy way? Thou also shall be ashamed of Egypt, as thou wast ashamed of
Assyria.

Obs. 9 Impudence and open sinning, causes God to disowne and renounce them do
so. Aholibah, verse. 18. discovered her whoredoms and nakedness; she talked
openly what she had done with the Babylonians, she set up Altars and Idols in
every street, was openly and impudently wicked, even like an whore that should
prostitute her self to any in the streets; Now it being so, says the Lord,
then my mind was alienated from her. The Hebrew for from her, is Mealeah, a
desuper ea, my heart before was fastened upon her, and none could take it off,
but seeing she is become such an whore, so audaciously wicked, I can affect her
no longer; there is a necessity in it, that I should alienate my heart from
her, as I did from her sister Aholah; else I shall be thought not to have
dealt justly with her, especially seeing Aholibahs sins exceed Aholahs.
Jerusalems wickedness alienated Gods heart from her, that is, made him renounce
her for an harlot. Its sad when God renounces. Hos. 1.9. Lo ammi, you are not
my people, and I will not be your God; what more dreadful sound was there ever
in the ears of Ephraim, Samaria, or Aholibah than that? There can be nothing
more dreadful, than to have God disclaim and renounce, then is God turned
against them; he so renounces, and so he was against Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 5.8
Behold, I am against thee, and will execute judgment in the midst of thee. If
we would not have Gods heart alienated from us, and so be dis-owned,
renounced by him, let us take heed of all sins, especially of impudency in any
sin, let us give him our hearts, not alienate them from him, and so he will
not alienate his heart from us.

Obs. 0 From the 19, 20, 21. That fresh sins bring to mind former old sins.
Aholibahs latter trucking with the Egyptians, minded God of her primitive
whoredoms, and Abominations, when she lived in Egypt, which was one thousand
years before, there she had her lovers, there she defiled her self, with the
Idols of Egypt, Ezekiel. 20.7. and her affection now to Egypt, and Egypts
paramours, caused God to mind those sins of her youth, he^ had no pleasure
in doing so, but Aholibah called them to remembrance, by acting the same or
like things again, she called them out of darkness, and presented them to the
view of God.

Verse. 22 Therefore, O Aholibah, Thus says the Lord God, Behold, I will raise
up thy Lovers against thee, from whom thy mind is alienated, and I will bring
them against thee on every side. 23 The Babylonians and all the Chaldaeans,
Pekod and Shoah, and Koa, all the Assyrians with them, all of them desirable
young men; Captains and Rulers, great Lords and renowned, all of them riding
upon horses. 24 And they shall come against thee with Chariots, wagons, and
wheels, and with an Assembly of people, which shall set against thee, buckler,
and shield, and helmet, round about: and I will set judgment before them, and
they shall judge thee according to their judgments. 25 And I will set my
jealousy against thee, and they shall deal furiously with thee: they sha^^ take
away thy nose, and thine ears, and thy remnant shall fall by the sword, they
shall take thy Sons and thy Daughters, and thy residue shall be devoured by
the fire. 26 They shall also strip thee out of thy clothes, and take away thy
fair Jewels. 27 Thus will I make thy lewdness to cease from thee, and thy
whoredoms brought from the Land of Egypt: so that thou shall not lift up thine
eyes unto them, nor remember Egypt any more. 28 For thus says the Lord God,
behold, I will deliver thee into the hand of them whom thou hate, into the
hand of them from whom thy mind is alienated. 29 And they shall deal with thee
hatefully, and shall take away all thy labor, and shall leave thee naked and
bare, and the nakedness of thy whoredoms shall be discovered, both thy
lewdness and thy whoredoms. 30 I will do these things unto thee, because thou
have gone a whoreing after the Heathens, and because thou art polluted with
their idols. 31 Thou have walked in the way of thy sister, therefore will I
give her cup into thine hand. 32 Thus says the Lord God, Thou shall Drink of
thy sisters cup, deep and large: thou shall be laughed to scorn, and had in
derision, it contains much. 33 Thou shall be filled with Drunkenness and
sorrow, with the cup of astonishment and desolation, with the cup of thy sister
Samaria. 34 Thou shall even Drink it, and suck it out, and thou shall break the
sheards thereof, and pluck off thine own breasts, for I have spoken it, says
the Lord God. 35 Therefore thus says the Lord God, because thou have forgotten
me, and cast me behind thy back, therefore bear thou also thy lewdness and thy
whoredoms. In these verses you have a Declaration of Gods dealings with
Aholibah, and the grounds thereof: and herein,

1 Whom God would raise up against her, those had been her Lovers, verse. 22.
and the cause thereof, her defection from them, ib. Now these are, 1 Nominated
and described, ver. 23. 2 The Manner of their coming against, and judging
Aholibah, is set down, verse. 24. 3 Specification of the evil they should do
unto her, verse. 25, 26, 29.


2 What God would do himself.

1 Like an Husband enraged, he would set his jealousy against her, verse. 25. 2
Put her into the hands of those hated her, verse. 28. 3 Bring her to the
condition her sister Samaria was in, she should drink of her cup, and that
deeply, verse. 32, 33, 34.
3 The Grounds moving God thus to deal with her, which are principally two.

1 Her Idolatry, v. 30, 31. 2 Her Forgetfulness of God, v. 35.
4 The Events, which are two.

1 Cessation from her idolatry and confederating with Egypt any more, v. 27. 2
Scorn and derisian, v. 32.
22 I will raise up thy Lovers against thee. The Babylonians were Lovers of
Aholibah or Jerusalem, because she had affected their gods, rites, and sacred
things, and trusted in them for help against others, but being now fallen off
to the Egyptians, God would stir up the Babylonians against her, and so
generally that they should come and compass her round about. As you may see in
Glassius his philol. Part. 3. p. 863.


23 Pekod, Shoah, and Koa. Some make these the Names of great men, but they are
rather the Names of Provinces, which were under the Babylonians, the people
whereof God stirred up with others to come to the siedge of Jerusalem. The
Chaldee makes them Nomina Gentilitia, Vide Junii notas in Bibl. and commentaria
in locum.
Pecodoitas, Soiatas, Koaitas, the Pecodaits, Soaits, and Koaits.

24 I will set judgment before them, etc. Mariana understands the words thus,
I will punish thee O Jerusalem, the Babylonians beholding it. They were the
executioners of Gods judgments, and must needs behold them. We may take the
words thus, I will make known my mind to the Babylonians concerning thy
destruction, and leave thee to them to be punished according to their Laws,
seeing thou have been perfidious and treacherous unto them. I will put thee
into their hands, give them power to punish thee, and they shall do it
according to their Laws and judgments.

Verse. 25 And I will set my jealousy against thee. By Jealousy, Maldonate
understands the Chaldaeans, because they were the instruments of his wrath: but
here the Lord alludes to the practice of jealous Husbands, who finding their
wives faulty, set themselves against them, and turn them out of doors; so would
God deal with this woman whom he had taken to be his, he would drive her out
of the land, for her spiritual whoredom, he would give her a bill of divorce,
and send her away.

They shall take away thy nose and thine ears. This Aholibah did trust in her
beauty, and play the Harlot, chap. 16.15. and the Lord would have her deformed
like a most filthy Harlot, whose nose and ears were wont to be mangled or cut
off: It was a law or custom in Egypt, that if a man were taken in adultery,
he should be beaten with rods, ad mill plagas, to a thousand stripes, and
that a woman found therein, should have her nostrils cut off. And Pradus says,
it was so in many Nations, that for the greater disgrace, they used to cut off
the nose, lips, ears, Caeliu^ ^hod. Lect. Antiq. l. 21. c. 45 Diod. Siculus. 1.
etc.
tops of the toes, and fingers, of their enemies, runagates, and adulterers,
which was shameful to any, specially to women. Hereunto its conceived our
Prophet alludes, but because its doubtful whether any such thing was really
done to Aholibah; Diverse interpret Nose of the King, and Ears of the Judges,
or chief Priests: but we need not allegorize; the meaning is, that God would
bring Jerusalem to suffer open and extreme shame.

26 They shall also strip thee of thy clothing. This Metaphorical woman was
well clad, she exceeded in her apparel, both for the matter, quantity, and
quality, as appeared, chap. 16. she took up the fashions of the Babylonians,
and Egyptians, whom she doted upon, and had confederated with, but what ever
she had when the Soldiers came, they stripped her of all. The Hebrew for strip
is, Hiphshiluc, exuere te facient, they shall make thee to put off, they shall
handle thee so roughly, that thou shall be forced with thine own hands, to put
off thy garments, and give them to them; those garments thou have taken much
pride and pleasure in. Of these words, and fair jewels, was spoken, cha. 16.39.

27 Thus will I make thy lewdness to cease from thee, etc. By my Judgments
upon thee, I Will make thee give over thine idolatry, thou shall mind neither
Egyptians, nor gods, their Idols, thou shall neither adore nor desire help from
them, thou shall be made to mind other things, as food, raiment, habitations.

28 I will deliver thee into the hand of them whom thou hate. In the 16.
chap. 27. God delivered her into the hands of them that hated her, chap. 21.31.
he says, he would deliver her into the hands of brutish men, and skilful to
destroy, and here into the hands of those she hated, there was hatred on both
sides, she hated her lovers, and her lovers hated her, and into their hands
would the Lord put her, she should find it was the Lords doings.

29 They shall deal with thee hatefully. They shall speak evil of thee, do
evil unto thee, they shall show thee no mercy, they shall spare neither thee,
nor thy estate, nor thy name, but shall take away all thou have gotten by thy
labor, and make known to the world, what a filthy strumpet thou have been.

30 Because thou have gone a whoring after the Heathen, etc. Thou have left me
thy Husband and guide, and gone out to the Heathenish gods, and Idols for help,
thou have bestowed thy self and love upon them, and art defiled by taking them
into the bed of love, vide chapter 6.9. where you have the same or like words.

31 Thou have walked in the way of thy sister. Aholah doted upon the Assyrians,
made leagues with them, defiled her self with their idols, manifested her
idolatrous disposition she had in Egypt, to be still living, and thus did
Aholibah, verse. 12, 16, 17, 19.

I will give her cup into thine hand.

32 Thou shall drink of thy sisters cup. Thou shall be punished with the same
punishments Aholah was, she was taken by the Assyrians, shamefully entreated,
and her children carried into captivity, and so shall thou be dealt with. The
same cup she drank of, thou shall also drink of. This Metaphor is very
frequent in scripture, Isa. 51.17.22. Jer. 25.15, 17, 28. Psalm 75.8. Lament.
4.21. Some think this Metaphor to be borrowed a re medica, from Physicians
giving potions in Cups, to their patients, which are troublesome to behold, and
grievous to taste; so Gods judgments are cups of that nature. Others, think it
taken from that practice of giving cups of wine or strong drink to those that
were to suffer, Amos 2.8. which hebetating their senses, should take away the
sharpness of their pain. Others fetch it from the practice at feasts, where
the Master of the feast, singulis convivis suum calicem temperabat pro cujusque
aetate, did temper and proportion a Cup, for each guest according to his
capacity, and those they purposed to make drunk, they would fill the larger
Cups. Let the Metaphor of Cup be borrowed from which you will, it notes out
here, Gods ordering and measuring out of judgments for Aholibah and hers.

Deep and large. It shall not be a Cup to drink off at one draught, or in one
day, but it shall be a Cup, deep, large, containing much, grievous, great, and
long afflictions; a Cup thou shall be seventy years a drinking.

Thou shall be laughed to scorn, and had in Derision. When Whores are punished
for their whoredoms, they become matter of scorn and derision to all. The like
words we had before, chap. 22.4, 5.

33 Thou shall be filled with drunkenness and sorrow. Thy afflictions, thy
punishments shall be such, as shall make thee stagger like one that is drunk,
thy pains and sorrows shall be great, it shall not be a cup of consolation,
but of astonishment to thy self and all about thee, yea, a cup of desolation,
and as the Septuagint has it, of perdition.

34 Thou shall even drink it, and suck it out. Thou may think this Cup shall
pass away from thee, or if not, that thou shall drink only a little of it, but
thou deceivest thy self, it shall not pass from thee, thou shall drink it, and
drink it off all, thou shall suck it out, even the lees and dregs of it, how
bitter soever they be.

Thou shall break the sheards thereof. Not only drink up what is in the Cup,
but as drunkards often break the vessel, and lick the fragments, not suffering
the least drop to be lost; So would God make Aholibah to drink every drop of
his fury, which he had put in this Cup. The greatness of their punishment is
set out hereby.

And pluck off thine own breasts. In time of great afflictions many do strange
things, rend their garments, bite their flesh, tear their hair, and Aholibah
should pluck off her breasts: Before she had let Egyptians and Assyrians,
bruise the breasts of her virginity, and draw her to idolatry, and now she
should scratch and rend them, she should express signs of great grief, and
great misery upon her.

35 Because thou have forgotten me, and cast me behind thy back. Here is the
ground of her wickedness, and Gods judgments coming upon her, she forgate
God, which words we had, chapter 22.12.

And cast me behind thy back. The Hebrew is, Behind thy body, the sense is
this, thou have turned from me to thy lovers, to the Assyrians and Egyptians,
so that thy face and heart are toward them, and thy back is toward me. A
like expression we had chap. 8.16. where its said, Their backs were toward
the Temple of the Lord, and their faces toward the East. Or thus, thou have
dealt by me, as men do by things they throw behind them, they sl^ight them
and mind them no more, Neh. 9.26. they cast thy law behind their backs, and
slew thy Prophets, that is, they slighted the Law, minded it not, it was out
of their sight as a thing behind them, as if there were no such thing. When
Jeroboam slighted the Counsel of the Prophet, 1 King. 11.38. and set up other
gods, then he cast God behind his back, 1 King. 14.9.

Obs. 1 God makes them instruments of our woe and misery, with whom we have
sinned. I will raise up thy Lovers against thee, the Babylonians, Chaldaeans,
Assyrians, I will bring them against thee on every side. Jerusalem had doted
upon, and trusted in them, and by them would God plague Jerusalem. She had often
sinned by her confidence in Egypt, Isa. 30.2. chap. 31.1. and God by the
Egyptians scourged her, 2 Chronicles. 36.3. Parents dote upon their children, and
often God makes them rods to whip them, yea, clubs to break their hearts and
bones.

Obs. 2 When People go out from God to false ways of worship; and put
confidence in arms of flesh, God will deal severely by them. God would put
Aholibah into the Babylonian hands, they should do with her as they pleased,
judge her according to their judgments, God would set his jealousy against
her, thrust her out of doors, and what then? the Babylonians should deal
furiously with her, abuse her body, destroy her children, burn her habitation,
strip her of her vestments, and jewels, take away all she had gotten, lay open
her shame, and do hatefully by her; she should be punished with the same
punishments Aholah was.

Obs. 3 Judgments and afflictions are cups which the Lord gives sinners to
drink of, some more, some less. Thou shall drink of thy sisters cup, deep and
large. Sometimes Gods judgments are called a cup of trembling, as Isa. 51.22.
sometimes a Cup of fury, as Jer. 25.15. and sometimes a Cup of astonishment, as
here, and Aholibah had all these Cups given her to drink, they were deep,
large, contained much, and she was made to drink them all off, yea, to drink
the very dregs of them, as men fill up the measure of their sins, so God
fills up the Cups of his judgments, Rev. 18.6. fill to her double. Babylons
sins were come to the full, and the cup of the Lords fury was full.

Obs. 4 Neglect and contempt of God, and his word, causes him to execute
judgment: because thou have forgotten me* and cast me behind thy back,
therefore bear thou also thy lewdness, and thy whoredoms: That is, bear the
punishment of thy lewdness and whoredoms, thou have made me bear thy sins,
and thou shall bear my punishments. As the fear of God is the beginning of
wisdom, so the forgetting of God is the beginning of Folly, and all evil;
then God is out of sight, behind the back, and what will not men do, when no
awe of God or his word is upon them? Then like Aholibah, they will commit any
lewdness, and because they do so, God lets out his wrath, loads them with his
judgments, and makes them bear the merit of their wickedness.

God had done much for Aholibah, dealt by her like a loving husband, but she
slighted him, went out a whoring from him, did those things which greatly
dishonored him, and so provoked him to mind her, that forgate him; for he
fell upon her with his judgments, and destroyed her; and so will the Lord do
by all that forget him, Psalm. 9.17. the wicked shall be turned into Hell and
all the Nations that forget God: whatever sins the Nations commit, they are
comprehended in their forgetting God, that is the root of all evil; and because
they did forget God, they should be turned into Hell, and bear the burden of
their sins there for ever.

Verse. 36 The Lord said moreover unto me; Son of man, will thou judge Aholah
and Aholibah? yea, declare unto them their abominations; 37 That they have
committed adultery, and blood is in their hands, and with their idols have they
committed adultery, and have also caused their Sons, whom they bare unto me,
to pass for them through the fire to devour them. 38 Moreover, this they have
done unto me: they have defiled my Sanctuary in the same day, and have
profaned my Sabbaths. 39 For when they had slain their Children to their
Idols, then they came the same day into my Sanctuary to profane it, and lo
thus have they done in the midst of mine house. 40 And furthermore, that ye
have sent for men, to come from far, unto whom a messenger was sent, and lo
they came, for whom thou did wash thy self, paintedst thine eyes, and
deckedst thy self with ornaments. 41 And satest upon a stately bed, and a table
prepared before it, whereupon thou have set mine incense, and mine oil. 42 And
a voice of a multitude being at ease was with her, and with the men of the
common sort were brought Sabaeans from the wilderness, which put bracelets
upon their hands, and beautiful crowns upon their heads. 43 Then said I unto
her, that was old in adulteries; will they now commit whoredoms with her, and
she with them? 44 Yet they went in unto her, as they go in unto a woman that
plays the harlot, so went they in unto Aholah, and unto Aholibah, the lewd
women. In these nine verses, Aholahs and Aholibahs sins are further declared
and amplified.

1 Here is a mandate to the Prophet, to declare their abominations, verse. 36.

2 The Declaration of those abominations, which are 1 Idolatry, expressed by
the term of adultery. v. 37. 2 Cruelty, in sacrificing their children, v. 37.
and slaying of them, v. 39. 3 Defilement, of holy things Sanctuary Sabbaths,
which is set out with aggravation, v. 38, 39. 4 Invitation, and alluring men
of other nations to commit lewdness, verse. 40, 41, 42. 5 Incorrigibleness, they
were reproved for their wickedness, warned and counseled to desist, but they
went on, v. 43, 44.


36 Will thou judge Aholah and Aholibah? God being very angry with these two
women for their lewdness and abominations, turns to the Prophet, who being
charitable, was ready to excuse them (for so the words may be read, and are by
Piscator) see thou do it not, they are inexcusable: but take the words as they
are here, Will thou judge Aholah and Aholibah? thou see what they have done,
what vile strumpets they are, how justly they deserve severely to be punished?
what say thou, will thou judge them, will thou reprove and sentence them for
their sins? speak son of man? I see thou art backward to it, thou think
there will no good come of it, thou art discouraged, but rouse up thy spirit,
it is thy duty to do it, and thou shall do it. The French translation is, Ne
jugeras tu pas; will thou not judge? of these words see chap. 22.2. and 20.4.

37 That they have committed adultery, and blood is in their hands, etc. and
have also caused their Sons whom they bare unto me, to pass, etc. For this
verse. see what has been said, chapter 16. v. 16.20, 21, 32. chapter 9.9. cha. 22.3.

38 Moreover, this they have done unto me, they have defiled my Sanctuary in
the same day, and have profaned my Sabbaths. Of Defiling the Sanctuary, see
chap. 5.11. where these words, because thou have defiled my Sanctuary, were
handled: and of profaning the Sabbaths, was spoken chap. 20.13.16. and chap.
22.8.

One thing here is to be considered, viz. the time when they did defile the
Sanctuary, and profane the Sabbaths, its said in the same day, what day that
was, the next verse tells us more fully.

39 When they had slain their children to their idols, then they came the same
day into my Sanctuary to profane it. It was unnatural and barbarous for them
to slay their children, impious to offer them to idols, to Devils, and to do
those things upon the Sabbath days, wherein they were to rest from ordinary
works, how extremely wicked, and abominable was it, and then after such evils
to come into the Temple, and appear before God, as if they had done no
wickedness, but well; what height of iniquity was here? It was as if a woman
playing the whore with another, should immediately come from him to her
Husband, pretending conjugal love. The blood of their children was yet hot upon
their hands, and fresh upon their skirts, and in that pickle they came into the
Temple to have communion with God in his worship.

Lo, Thus have they done in the midst of mine house. They have not only set
up Idols in Hills and Groves, offered their children to Molech in the valley of
Hinnom, but they have set up Idols in the Temple, and have sacrificed their
children to them there. So I find some interpreters to understand these words,
Maldonate says, Etiam in ipso Templo filios suos sacrificaverunt, and he
grounds it upon, Jer. 7.30. Ezekiel. 8.10, 11. which places prove there were Idols
in the Temple, that they sacrificed unto them, but not that they sacrificed
their children there; but rather came with the guilt of their childrens blood
upon them into the Temple, and so polluted it, and the worship of it.

Obs. 1 That wicked ones make little or no conscience of horrible sins, or
holy duties; they do pass from the one to the other immediately. When Aholah
and Aholibah had slain their children to their idols, the same day they came
into the sanctuary and joined in the duties of the place and day; from shedding
of blood and sacrificing to Idols, they step into the Temple, and worship of
God. Had not their Consciences been seared, they would have accused them, and
told them, they were unclean, not fit to meddle with holy things, that they
might look for vengeance every hour, who had done such things, and that if they
came before the Lord, he would be a consuming fire unto them, but they go
boldly and impudently into his presence, not being troubled for what they had
done, nor considering how they polluted holy things: So in Jerem. 7.9, 10. they
did steal, murder, commit adultery, swear falsely, burn incense to Baal, walk
after other gods, and then come presently and stand before him in his house,
and say, we are delivered, they passed from wicked practices unto holy duties,
making no conscience of the one, or the other.

Obs. 2 The Lord takes notice how men draw near to him on his days, in the
duties of his worship: when they slew their Children to their Idols, then they
came to my Sanctuary the same day; they defiled themselves with blood and
idolatry, on my Sabbaths, and in those defilements they came to worship me,
Jer. 7.10. God observed them there, how they came in their sins, and stood
before him, they were notoriously wicked, and thrust into the Temple worship,
and into the presence of God, as if they had been innocent, and as acceptable
to God as any. Men may deceive others and themselves: but they cannot deceive
the Lord, he sees their spirits, knows them intus and in cute, whether they
come before him with bloody, idolatrous, unclean, profane, covetous, proud,
froward, and malicious hearts, or no; whether they come unprepared in the guilt
of former or present sins.

Obs. 3 Profaning of holy things is wronging of God, provokes greatly, and
causes him to set an emphasis thereon: When they had sinned, and so came into
the Sanctuary, and profaned that and the Sabbath, says God, This they have
done unto me. Lo, Thus have they done in the midst of mine house. God takes
the wrong done to his house, worship, and day, as done unto himself, for he
dwelt in the Temple, instituted the worship, and day, had stamped holiness
upon them, and therefore the defiling and profaning of them, he counted the
defiling and profaning of his name, and of himself, and it did so sorely
offend him, that he sets a double mark or brand thereupon.

This have they done to me, Thus have they done in my house.

Three ways especially are holy things defiled, profaned.

1 When men come in their sins, without purging themselves, and preparing for
them, James 4.8. if men draw near to God without cleansing their hands, and
purifying their hearts, God will not draw near them, he will not touch unclean
things, they will defile him.

2 When we mingle ought of ours therewith: Additions of humane things, are
pollutions of divine things: when they brought ought into the Temple which God
appointed not, that was a defiling that, and the worship thereof: when Nadab
and Abihu put strange fire into the censers, they defiled them, the worship,
and provoked God, to their destruction, Levit. 10. and when they set their
threshold with Gods threshold, they defiled his name and worship, Ezekiel. 43.7, 8.

3 When holy things are handled irreverently. The Bethshemites in a rude manner
peeped into the Ark, and profaned it, which caused the Lord to smite them with
sudden death, 1 Samuel 6.19. Hence it is, that Solomon gives Counsel, Eccl. 5.1.
that men should keep their feet, when they go to the house of God; why then?
because they are to be conversant in holy things; and if they look not well to
their affections, they will play the fools; and profane those holy things, and
procure a curse instead of a blessing.

40 And furthermore, that ye have sent for men to come from far, unto whom a
messenger was sent, and lo, they came. They were not content to do wickedly
themselves, but they sent to and invited others, the Chaldaeans, Assyrians, and
Egyptians, These Metaphorical Harlots were wanton with those did provoke them
thereto, and also provoked others a far off to wantonize with them, according
to what you had, Ezekiel. 16.33. the meaning is, they sent for men of other
Nations to make leagues with them, and being come, admitted their idols, and
idolatrous ways of worship, as appeared verse. 7.

For whom thou did wash thy self, paintedst thine eyes, and deckedst thy self
with Ornaments. Here is set forth the practice of whores, they wash, they
paint, they deck themselves for their lovers, and so did these City Harlots,
Aholah and Aholibah, they fitted themselves for the Babylonians and Egyptians,
their courtings and loves.

Paintedst thine eyes. The Hebr. word (...) Cachal, is only in this place, and
signifies to color, to paint, with stibium or Red; Montanus renders the words,
Thou have colored thine eyes. The Septuagint is, (...), Thou have stibium'd
thine eyes. Stibium was a coloring stuff women used to make themselves black
browed withal. Eyes here are put Synechdochically for the whole face; and by
painting their eyes, is meant the painting of their faces, 2 King. 9.30. its
said of Jezabel, She Painted her face, the Hebrew is, She put her eyes in
painting, the eyes are put for the face. Painting of faces was long ago in
practice. Some out of pride painted them, that none might seem more beautiful
than they, some out of lust, that they might please men therewith, and allure
them thereby to folly and wickedness: painted faces are like Sampsons Foxes,
which set the corn on fire. This practice is not warrantable. If women may not
counterfeit and change their habits, Deuteronomy. 22.5. why should they counterfeit
and change their faces? if the body be more than meat, the face is more than
clothes. The Apostle forbids us to take the members of Christ, and make them
the members of an Harlot, 1 Cor. 6.15. Ornamentorum insignia and laenocinia
^uco^rum non nisi prostitutis and impudicis foeminis congruit. Cyprianus de
habitu virginum.
and may we take the faces which are the Lords, verse. 19. and make them the
Faces of Harlots by painting them?

Again, All Hypocrisy is odious in the sight of God, and there is
face-hypocrisy, as well as heart hypocrisy, this painting is face hypocrisy;
women thereby seem that which they are not; Christ calls them Hypocrites for
dis-figuring their faces, that they might appear unto men to fast, Mat. 6.16.
and do not they paint their faces, dis-figure the workmanship of God, that they
may appear unto men beautiful which they are not? Mat. 23.27, 28. by this
painting you say you are beautiful, but you lie both to God and man,
pretending it to be the work of God, when it is not.

And deckedst thy self with Ornaments. Of Ornaments and Decking therewith, was
spoken in the 16. chap. v. 11.13. Aholibah put on her bravery, and trimmed up
her self for strangers, as whores do for their lovers.

41 And satest upon a stately bed. The Hebrew is, Mittah, cebudah, a bed of
honor, or an honorable bed. The Vulgar is, in lecto putcherrimo. Others,
Glorioso, magnifico, honorato, in a bed of state. The Scriptures mention two
kinds of beds: Lecti cubiculares, which men sleep in, Psalm. 6.6. all the night
make I my bed to swim; and Lecti discubitorii, which they did eat and feast at,
Esth. 1.6. Amos 6.4. and these were called Tricliniares, Tables, or beds, with
three feet. Which bed she sat upon is not much material, like the Harlot in
the Proverbs, chap. 7.16, 17. She prepared all things to affect and please her
lovers; she had a Table furnished, and set the incense and oil which were for
Gods worship, in a readiness for idolatrous worship, or to be spent upon the
Chaldaeans, and Egyptians, when she entertained and feasted them; she was
profuse in her expenses upon Idolaters.

42 And a voice of a multitude being at ease, was with her. When the Chaldaeans
and Egyptians came to Aholibah and Aholah, they were feasted, leagues made
between them, and all were at peace; so that the voice of a multitude at peace,
was with her, so the word for ease signifies, being shalef from shalah, to be
at peace and quiet. Peace being made they were at ease, and the voice of
music, singing, and rejoicing was amongst them, they walked, they worshipped,
they feasted together.

With the men of the Common sort, were brought Sabaeans from the wilderness.
These Harlots were not satisfied with the Captains, Rulers, Lords, and Princes
of the Assyrians, Chaldaeans, and Egyptians; but, they invited the baser sort
of people, who thought it a great honor, that they should be entertained by
these famous Harlots, Samaria and Jerusalem, Jer. 27.3. there were messengers
sent from the Kings of Edom, Moab, Ammon, Tire and Sidon, which were
inconsiderable to the Kings of Babylon and Egypt; and as these were drawn in,
so men inferior to them, those of the common sort, yea, Sabaeans, or
Drunkards, as some render the word.

Which put bracelets upon their hands, and beautiful crowns upon their heads.
They brought their presents with them, bracelets and crowns which they bestowed
upon those Harlots, who hired and gave gifts to the great ones, to come unto
them, chapter 6.33, 34. but were cunning here, and received gifts of the meaner and
under sort. Of bracelets and beautiful crowns, the 16. chap. gave occasion to
speak, v. 11, 12.

Obs. Wicked ones are active and expensive to draw others to themselves, and
their wicked ways. These Harlots Aholah and Aholibah sent to Assyria, to
Egypt, to others, to come unto them, they trimmed and decked up themselves, made
great preparations to entertain them, they spared not for any cost whereby they
might please and satisfy them. Thus did the Harlot, Prove. 7. she perfumes her
bed, trims up her self, goes forth, and diligently seeks, finds, and brings in
a prey. Some bad enough, compass Sea and land to make proselites; shall wicked
ones, and wickedness, be active, expensive to draw, and ruin others, and
shall not godly ones, and godliness, be as active and expensive, to win, and
save sinners?

43 Then said I unto her that was old in adulteries, will they now commit
whoredoms with her, etc. What, art not thou yet satisfied, thou art old in
wickedness, art like a dry and dead thing; What, can thy Lovers have any
pleasure in thee, or thou in them? Cease ye Harlots from your wicked and lewd
practices, here the Lord chides and reproves them, upbraiding them from their
long continuance in their sin, Aholah, Samaria, was oldest in her adulteries,
she had continued from the time of Jeroboam, in her idolatrous worship; and
Aholibah had many years lived in that sin. Gods reproof, upbraiding, prevailed
not, for

44 Yet they went in unto her, as they go in unto a woman that plays the
Harlot, etc. Obs. 1 Those are given to corporal or spiritual uncleanness, are
seldom recovered, but go on, and grow old in those sins. These women had
many reproofs, and threatenings, but none prevailed. Such sins are bewitching,
and hold men captive, Prove. 2.19. none that go unto her return again.

Obs. 2 The Lord takes notice of persons beginning, progress, and continuance
in sin: He observed when Aholah began her whoredoms, when the Calves were
set up at D^n and Bethel, how she grew up, and grew old in adulteries. Gods
eye goes along with sinners, from the beginning to the end.

Verse. 45 And the righteous men, they shall judge them after the manner of
adulteresses; and after the manner of women that shed blood, because they are
adulteresses, and blood is in their hands. 46 For thus says the Lord God, I
will bring up a company upon them, and will give them to be removed and
spoiled. 47 And the company shall stone them with stones, and dispatch them
with their swords: they shall stay their sons, and their daughters, and burn
up their houses with fire. 48 Thus will I cause lewdness to cease out of the
land, that all women may be taught not to do after your lewdness. 49 And they
shall recompense your lewdness upon you, and ye shall bear the sins of your
Idols, and ye shall know that I am the Lord God. In these verses the
judgments of God upon those Harlots are further set out, and amplified with
the events thereof.

1 They shall be punished like adulteresses, and murtheresses, v. 45.

2 They shall be carried into captivity, and spoiled, v. 46.

3 They, their Sons and daughters, shall be stoned and slain, v. 47. and their
houses burnt. ibid.

The Events or effects are, 1 Cessation of lewdness, v. 48. 2 Instruction of
other women to take heed of doing the like. ibid. 3 Conviction of the equity of
Gods dealings, v. 49.


45 And the righteous men. The Assyrians and Babylonians who destroyed Samaria,
and Jerusalem, are called righteous or just men, not that they were so really,
but comparatively, they are styled so, in respect of the Jews, they were such,
Ezekiel. 5.6, 7. chap. 16.27, 47. who exceeded the Nations in wickedness, or
because they were Gods instruments to execute his just judgments upon them,
especially for their perfidiousnesse with those Nations.

They shall judge them after the manner of adulteresses, and after the manner
of women that shed blood. Adulteresses were punished with death under the Law,
Lev. 20.10. Deuteronomy. 22.22. and the death was stoning, John 8.5, 7. else Christ
would not have commissioned them to have thrown stones at the woman, if they
had been faultlesse themselves, and as these were to dye for their
uncleanness, so were those that shed blood. Of these words see chap. 16.38.

46 I will bring up a company upon them. I brought up an Army against Samaria,
and destroyed it; and so I will do with Jerusalem, I will bring the
Babylonians, upon her, who shall spoil her, by stoning, slaughtering, burning
and removing her into Captivity. No enemies can stir out of their country to
mischief others, till the Lord call and bring them; and when he does so, sad
effects follow; they lay all waste, making Cities heaps, and pleasant Lands
wildernesses. Of this 46. and 47. verse. see chap, 16.40, 41.

48 Then will I cause lewdness to cease out of the land. When the Lord should
have accomplished his judgments upon these Harlots, when Aholah and Aholibah
should be destroyed, then idolatry should cease, and be no more in the Land;
then sacrificing their children to idols, and shedding of blood should be no
more heard of. Gods judgments will silence wickedness, and take away evil
from the land.

That all women may be taught not to do after your lewdness. By Women here
understand, Cities, Provinces, Nations, which seeing the just judgments of God
upon these whorish women, Aholah and Aholibah, might learn to beware of such
sins, and not to go out from God, having once given up themselves to him,
least they draw such severe and shameful punishments upon themselves.

Obs. Gods Judgments are teaching things; he brought dreadful judgments upon
Aholah and Aholibah, that all women might be taught thereby. Gideon by thorns
and briars taught the men of Succoth, Judges 8.16. and God by his peircing
judgments teaches the Nations; he punishes one City, that others may take
warning. There is no judgment of God upon any City, Nation, or people, but it
speaks and teaches, Micah 6.9. hear ye the rod, it has a voice, a teaching
voice.

1 It Teaches all who are guilty of the same sins, and not visited with the
same judgments, to admire the long suffering, and goodness of God toward
them.

2 It Teaches those presently to consider their ways, turn to the Lord by
repentance, who are guilty of such sins, least the Lord being now in a way of
judgment, should break out also upon them, and make them examples of his
justice.

3 It Teaches others to fear and fly from such practices, as bring such
destructive judgments. When Samaria and Jerusalem shall be destroyed by
dreadful judgments for their confidence in arms of flesh, by confederating
with other nations, for their idolatry, cruelty, profaneness, and
perfidiousnesse, will not other Cities fear to do the like? will not every City
learn to see what is the reward of wickedness, in the sufferings of others.
This Gods judgments teach sinners to do, that so they may consult for their
credit and safety.

49 And they shall recompense your lewdness upon you. The Hebrew is, And they
shall put your filthiness and lewdthinesse upon you, that is, the Nations and
Cities round about, shall concur with the Babylonians to punish you for your
wickedness, to bring upon you the merit of your sins; or thus, they shall
approve of what the Lord does in destroying of you, saying, all is the fruit
and just recompense of your own doings.

And ye shall bear the sins of your idols. Their Idols did not sin, but they
sinned with their Idols, and the fruit of those sins they must eat, the
punishment due to them they must bear: there is a near connection between sin
and punishment, they have the same names, so v. 35.

Obs. Gods proceeding with sinners in judgment righteously, brings them to
acknowledge the equity of his dealing with them: when the just punishment of
your lewdness and idolatry shall be upon you, ye shall know that I am the
Lord God, who observed all your ways, who waited long for your repentance, who
have dealt justly with you in all the evils, I have brought upon you, you
cannot but justify me, and condemn your selves.

CHAP. XXIV.
Verse. 1 Again, in the ninth year, in the tenth month, in the tenth day of the
month, the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, 2 Son of man, write thee the
name of the day, even of this same day: the King of Babylon set himself against
Jerusalem this same day. 3 And utter a parable unto the rebellious house, and
say unto them, thus says the Lord God, set on a pot, set it on, and also pour
water into it. 4 Gather the pieces thereof into it, even every good piece, the
thigh, and the shoulder; fill it with the choice bones. 5 Take the choice of
the flock, and burn also the bones under it; and make it boil well, and let
him sees the bones of it therein.
THis Chapter is conceived to be the last prophesy against the Kingdom of
Judah, before the final destruction thereof, which with the great Calamity
thereof, is set out under the type of a boiling pot, and the death of the
Prophets wife.

In the Chapter is contained a double prophesy.

1 That of the boiling pot, and the interpretation thereof, to the 15. v.

2 That of Ezekiels wife dying suddenly, his not mourning for her, and the
explication thereof, from the 15. ver. to the end.

In the verses before us we have, 1 The Time of this prophesy, v.1. 2 The
Occasion, ver. 2. which was the King of Babylons setting himself against
Jerusalem. 3 The Prophesy it self, in the 3, 4, and 5. ver.


1 In the ninth year, the tenth month, and the tenth day thereof. Our Prophet
being in Babylon, reckons from the ninth year of the Captivity, the time that
Jehoiachin himself, and others were brought into Babylon, Ezekiel. 1.2. chapter 8.1.
and not from the Time of Zedekiahs reign, though it were the ninth year, tenth
month, and tenth day thereof, for that day the one was carried away, the other
was made King. It concerned them in Babylon to keep account of their captivity.

The word of the Lord came unto me, saying. He had nothing of his own to give
out that day, but the word of the Lord came to him, the spirit of the Lord
brought it, and with such power, that he must write and speak.

2 Write thee the name of the day, even of this same day. The Hebrew is, Write
the name of the day, and the body or substance of the same day; it was a day
wherein something considerable and substantial was acting. God would have the
Prophet write the day, not only to add weight to his Prophesy, but to stir
them up to be affected, and to see how the providential hand of God ordered
things at a great distance.

The King of Babylon set himself against Jerusalem this same day. Here was the
Occasion or cause of his writing down the day, and so prophesying upon it;
Nebuchadnezzar was that day sitting down before Jerusalem, as you may clearly
see 1 King. 25.1. Jer. 39.1. chapter 52.4. when Nebuchadnezzar was upon a warlike
expedition, he knew not whether he should go to Rabbath or Jerusalem, chap.
21.21. but he was ordered by a divine hand, to lay siedge to Jerusalem, the
tenth day of the tenth month, in the ninth year, which Ezekiel could not
possibly know, had not the Lord revealed it. This was a business of high
concernment to the Jews in Judea, and those in Babylon. The Hebrew for set
himself, is Samach, which Montanus renders, adjunxit se. Others, Corroboravit
se, fulcivit se, and the French. Est fortify, he joined, strengthened, and
fortified himself against Jerusalem.

Obs. 1 The Lord takes notice of what men do, and can make known the same to
whom he pleases at what distance soever. Nebuchadnezzar and his Forces were in
Judea sitting down before Jerusalem, and this the Lord revealed to Ezekiel
being in Babylon. It was declared to Elisha, whether the King of Syria, would
march, and where he would pitch his Camp, 2 Kin. 6.9, 10. The death of Herod
in Judea was discovered to Joseph being in Egypt, Mat. 2.19, 20. and when Moses
was in Midian, the Lord told him that all the men were dead in Egypt, which
sought his life, Exodus 4.19.

Obs. 2 There be some things and times the Lord would have his take special
notice of, and keep the Chronology thereof: Ezekiel must write the year, the
month, and day, of Jerusalems besiedging: In the ninth year, the tenth month,
the tenth day, the King of Babylon set himself against Jerusalem; that was a
sad business, and a sad time. When God has been upon executing great
judgments, or showing great mercies, the days and months have been recorded.

The day and Month of Noah's entrance into the Ark and of his coming out again,
are mentioned, Genesis 7.11. chap. 8.14, 16. The Time of the Jews going out of
Egypt, you have punctually set down, Exodus 12.41, 42. so the Time of their
passing over Jordan, Josh. 4.19. of Solomon's building the Temple, 2 Chronicles. 3.2.
Of Hamans plot to destroy the Jews, Esth. 3.8, 13. and several other things,
the year, month, and day, stand recorded; Which shows they were providential,
not casual, that the wisdom and power of God were interested in them, whoever
were the instruments, and that being so exactly set down, Posterity should not
forget them. And questionless the Lord expects, that we should keep a
Chronology of the great and remarkable things done by him for us: as the fight
at Marston-more, July 2.1644. at Naseby the 14. of June 1645. at Maidstone, 2
June 1648. Scots routed in England, August 17. 1648. Ormond beaten from Dublin,
August 2. 1649. etc.

3 Utter a Parable unto the rebellious. The Hebrew is, Speak thou parabolically
to the house of rebellion, a parable; That is, speak thou darkely unto them,
that they may the better attend, and make the more diligent inquiry after the
meaning of what thou deliverest. Of Parable and Proverbs formerly have been
spoken, chap. 17.2. and of the rebellious house, chap. 2.5.

Set on a Pot, set it on. Its for Cooks to set on Pots, put in water, then the
meat, Ezekiel he must bid them set on a Pot, a strange work for a Prophet, and
because strange, it would make the People mind it the more, and search out the
mystery.

By this Pot, is meant Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 11.3. This City is the Caldron, Hassin,
its the same word is here for Pot, which notes strength, comprehensivenesse,
and Durablenesse, so Jerusalem was strong, comprehended much, and was more
durable than other places when besiedged. Not Jerusalem simply, but under
judgment was the Pot.

And also pour water into it. When Pots are set over the fire, they put in, and
fill them with water, that so what ever they please may be boiled therein. By
this water is meant the afflictions and Judgments, in which as in water, God
would boil Jerusalem: Now the King of Babylon was set down round about it, had
straightly besiedged it, and variety of Calamities were upon it, and the waters
of affliction, begun to be hot. So Calamities are called, Isa. 8.7.

4 Gather the pieces thereof into it. When the Cook has set on the Pot, filled
it with water, then he takes the several pieces of flesh, which are to be
boiled, and puts them into the Pot, and they are called the pieces thereof,
because they are to be boiled therein.

Even every good piece, the thigh and the shoulder. Here the people or
Commonwealth of Israel, is likened unto a body dissected, as the Levites
Concubine was, Judges 19.29. and they must take the good or principal pieces,
those that were the strength and support of the body and head, as the thighs
and Shoulders, that is, the Nobles, Counselors, Priests, and chief Soldiers
amongst them.

Fill it with the choice bones. The Hebrew is, Electione ossium imple, fill it
with the choicenesse of bones, which Rabbi David interprets, as we do, fill it
with choice bones, that is, with choice pieces, because the pieces says he,
are cut secundum ossa, according to the bones. This Pot must not have a piece
or two, a bone or two put into it; but must be filled with the choicest pieces
and bones were in all the body.

5 Take the choice of the Flock. By the Choice may be understood the King
himself, who is the Head of the flock, or the fat and wealthy ones. The Vulgar
has it, Pinguissimum pecus assume, take the fattest of the Cattle, which
Vatablus calls, opulentos ex plebe, the wealthiest of the People, or those have
the choice offices, and places in the City.

Burn all the bones under it. By Bones here, diverse Expositors understand the
bones of the innocent Prophets, and others, who were slain unjustly; Those the
Prophet bids them to burn under the Pot, and that to manifest the cause of Gods
great wrath against, and just destruction of the City. But this interpretation
of bones, suits not with the scope of the place; Which is not to disquiet the
bones of the innocent, and lay punishment upon them, but to revenge their
death. The bones here are to suffer as well as the flesh; we may understand
these words thus; Let flesh and bones boil together, and when they are so
boiled, that all the flesh and fat is taken from the bones, then burn them;
that is, when all the wealth, places, honor are taken from the rich, then let
them be destroyed by Famine, Plague, or Sword, and that is the burning of the
bones. Let nothing of them or theirs be spared, but let all be consumed; Or
thus, boil the fat ones, in the Pot, and burn the poor under it; they are like
bones without flesh, make them instrumental to consume the rich; and doubtless
in the famine, they were like a fire devouring the flesh in the Pot.

And make it boil well. The Hebrew is, Rattach retacheah, which Montanus
renders, Fas ebullire ebullitiones ejus, make its boilings to boil, boil it
thoroughly, There be old tough pieces in the Pot, which will not easily or
suddenly be boiled, they will require a hot and continued fire, therefore
Buxtorf. interprets the words, fac ut vehementer ferveant, see that the
boilings be very hot. The Chaldaean Army were not the bones, and fire under
this metaphorical Pot, but the bellows rather to blow up and increase the fire.

And let him sees the bones of it therein. The Hebrew is, Let the bones
thereof be sodden in the midst of it, and the stream of interpreters carry the
words plurally, and so it suits best with the words going before, make it boil
well, and let the bones thereof be sodden in the midst of it; that is, let
them be thoroughly sodden. Bones are strong things, they require more than
ordinary seething, especially if old, and there be many old bones in the Pot,
many hardened sinners, many stout spirits amongst the Soldiers, Princes,
Nobles, and others, but let them be soundly boiled, in this Pot of affliction,
and that will make them tender. The Vulgar is, Discoct a sunt ossa illius in
medio ejus, that is, the bones are boiled, till the flesh and they are sundred,
they are thoroughly boiled; and Vatablus makes this the sense of it, Fortissimi
quique conficiantur in ea obsidione, let the strongest and stoutest men be
slain and consumed in that siedge.

Obs. 1 The sinfulness of men has occasioned God to give out much Scripture.
Speak a parable to the rebellious. God took occasion from their
rebelliousnesse, to give forth this Parable and many others. Much of Jeremy and
our Prophet was occasioned to see the world, by the wickedness of the Jews.
Sin accidentally occasions good, Sin made way for Christ, and as for him,
so for much, if not the greatest part of the holy Scriptures.

Obs. 2 Teaching by Parables is warrantable. God sends and commands the Prophet
to utter a Parable. Isaiah, Jeremy, Zachary, were not without Parables. Christ
was abundant in them. The Parables they used were taken from ordinary things,
known, and familier, such as were obvious to the senses, as here from a Pot,
water, pieces of flesh, bones, etc. Hereby the mind and memory are much
inlivened, and stronger impression made upon the heart, chapter 22.18. all they are
brass and Tin, and Iron, and Lead in the midst of the Furnace: and here they
were as flesh, and bones, in the midst of the Pot.

Obs. 3 The judgments of God upon places, makes them Pots, in which he boiles
sinners. Now Jerusalem was a Pot over the fire. The Babylonish Forces were
round about it, dreadful Calamities upon it, multitudes in it, who were like
pieces of flesh, in a boiling Pot; what boiling thoughts, fears, cares,
distractions, discontents, were amongst them? we may judge what boiling was
therein, by the Armies lying near this City, and being in readiness to come
upon it.

Obs. 4 That God at his pleasure commands judgments upon places: Set on a Pot,
pour water into it: make Jerusalem miserable with Plague, Famine, and Sword; if
he speak the word, the thing must be done; whatever he calls for, takes
place, Jerusalem, that was a Paradise, must now become a boiling Pot.

Obs. 5 That when Gods judgments are abroad, he meets with all sorts of men,
the Fat and Lean, the strong and weak, the rich and poor: when the Pot is on
the fire, God will have the choice pieces, and choice ones into it, the
shoulders, the thighs, the choice bones, Prince, Nobles, men in place, of
wealth: as well as the poor and lean ones.

Obs. 6 When God is boiling of sinners in the fire of his judgments, he will
boil them to purpose. Make it boil well, and let the bones thereof be sodden
in the midst thereof. This Pot was boiling not a few hours, days, or months,
but a year and half, 2 King 25.1, 2, 3. So when God made Samaria, a boiling
Pot, 2 King. 17.5. he boiled the sinners in it three years together. God so
boiled them there, and these here, that he made the proudest and stoutest of
them to stoop, yea, all of them to become meat to their enemies.

Verse. 6 Wherefore thus says the Lord God, woe to the bloody City, to the Pot
whose scum is therein, and whose scum is not gone out of it; bring it out piece
by piece, let no lot fall upon it. 7 For her blood is in the midst of her, she
set it upon the top of a rock she poured it not upon the ground to cover it
with dust. 8 That it might cause fury to come up to take vengeance: I have set
her blood upon the top of a rock, that it should not be covered. Here the Lord
comes to interpret the Parable, denouncing a fearful woe to Jerusalem, and
giving the grounds thereof, which are,

1 Her Bloudinesse, with the aggravation thereof, verse. 6, and 7.

2 Her unprofitablenesse under judgments, when she was boiling, her scum
abode with her, went not out of her.

6 Woe to the bloody City. Jerusalem was guilty of much blood, Ezekiel. 22.3, 4,
6, 9, 12, 13, 27. 2 Chronicles. 21.16. Jerusalem was now as bad as Nineveh, which
Nahum 3.1. is called the bloody City, and has the same woe denounced against
it. By blood, not only murder, but also other notorious wickednesses, which
deserved death are to be understood, Ezekiel. 7.23. the Land is full of bloody
crimes. Of such sins for which men ought to be cut off. Vide loc.

To the Pot whose scum is therein, whose scum is not gone out of it. Here its
clear, that by this Metaphorical Pot is meant the City; he calls the City the
Pot, which was not without its scum. Chelatta from Chalah, Aegrotavit; for the
scum is Aegritudo ollae, Avenarius.
the sickness of the Pot. Rabbi Solom. calls it, excrementum, the excrement
and filth of the Pot. The Septuagint is, (...), the poison of it: the Vulgar
is, rubigo, the rust of it. Frosterus has it, sordes, those filthinesses,
which through great boiling do adhere to the Pot, from what is boiled therein.
By scum is meant the sin and wickedness of the City, which is likened
thereunto, in respect,

1 Of its Loathsomenesse, scum and filth are loathsome things, and do nauseam
creare. The sins of this City were loathsome, it was full of abominations,
blood, idolatry, uncleanness, etc. such evils as made it to be abhorred, Ezekiel.
16.25. as made the Philistims ashamed, verse. 27. such sins as were loathsome
afterward to themselves, Chapter 20.43.

2 Of its visiblenesse, the scum and silth is upper most, next to view, such
were Jerusalems sins, they were open, she had an eminent and high place in
every street, Ezekiel. 16.24. she opened her feet to every one that passed by, v.
25. she and her Princes shed blood openly, chapter 22.36. nothing but sin and
wickedness appeared in her.

3 Of its adherency to the Pot. So Jerusalems sins did cleave close to her,
the more she was boiled in the judgments of God, the more faster she held
her sins, her scum and filth stuck to every side of her, Jerem. 8.5. They
hold fast deceit: their sins cleaved to them, as flesh to the bones, as rust
to a pot; though they were often in the fire, or over it, yet their filthiness
departed not from them, their scum, their dross, boiled in, and cleaved fast to
them, Jeremy 6.29.

Bring it out piece by piece. He persists in the allegory of the Pot, and
orders how they should be dealt with who were in the City, they should be
brought out severally, not all at once, but as pieces are taken out of the Pot,
one after another, till there be no more; so it should be done with this
City, one piece of it should be brought out and consumed with Famine, another
piece of it with the Plague, verse. 3. with the Sword, verse. 4. should be
carried away into Captivity; so that it should be emptied of all; so the words
are rendered in Vatablus, Per frusta ejus evacua cum, part by part empty it.
This City was emptied somewhat under Jehoi^chim, when he was carried to
Babylon, 2 Chronicles. 36.6, 7. it was emptied more when Jehoiachin was taken, and
many with him also carried thither, 2 King. 24.15. but it was wholly emptied
when Zedekiah was taken, and carried away, 2 King. 25.

Let no Lot fall upon it. Let it not have that favor or mercy. Among Soldiers
in their military discipline, when they take many enemies worthy all to dye,
they single out some by Lots to suffer, and spare the rest; but Jerusalem
should not have any spared; they should all, young and old, taste of one
judgment or other; we may refer this lotting to the City it self, let it not
come to that, as to cast a Lot, whether the City shall be saved or destroyed.
Such a famous great ancient City might fall into Consultation, whether it
should be ruined or no. Carthage was long in debate in the Senate of Rome,
says Lavater, whether it should be utterly destroyed. But the Lord prevents
such a consultation, and says, Let no Lot fall upon it. I have decreed it to
be ruined, and it shall be ruined, utterly ruined.

7 Her blood is in the midst of her, she set it upon the top of a rock, etc.
The meaning of this verse is, she shed blood openly, did bloody and notorious
things publicly, as if she had done them upon the top of a rock; if blood be
shed there, its dry, hard, drinks not in the blood at all, but it lies to be
seen of all, that come upon the Rock, Whereas if blood be shed upon the earth,
that drinks it in quickly, or it may be covered with dust, that others may not
discern it, Jerusalem did not sin closely, and hide her wickedness from the
world, but so openly, that all Nations took notice of it.

8 That it might cause fury to come up to take vengeance. They did not sin to
that end that God might take vengeance on them, but the nature of their sin
was such, as it provoked God to fury, and to hasten vengeance, their sins were
open, great, and crying for vengeance, their sins ascended, and Gods fury
descended. The Hebrew for, to take vengeance is, Linkom nakom, ad ulciscendum
ultionem.

I have set her blood upon the top of a rock. As she did, so did the Lord,
she shed blood openly, and was not ashamed of it, and I have shed her blood
openly, and am not ashamed of it; She did not cover her sin, but exposed it
to the view of all, and God by his punishments set it on the top of a rock, and
made it known to the whole world.

Obs. 1 That Cities have their filth and scum in them: Jerusalem here is
likened to a, Pot with the scum in it. The poor are not the scum of the City,
but the sin and wickedness of poor and rich that is that scum, Jerusalem was
full of it, Ezekiel. 8.16. and 22. tells you, what scum, and abundance of it was
in Jerusalem. There was much scum in Sodom, much in Samaria, much among the
Nations, but most in Jerusalem. To great Cities, there is a confluence of all
sorts of people, who bring scum and filth with them, and add to what they
find there: what scummy doctrine did the false Prophets teach in Jerusalem,
Jer. 23. what scummy counsel did Jaazaniah and Pelatiah give in that City?
Ezekiel. 11.1, 2. what dunghill Gods did Jerusalem entertain? Jer. 2.28. according
to the Number of thy Cities, are thy gods, O Judah. There was no sin against
God or Man, but it was in Jerusalem. And other Cities are not without their
scum, no not this City.

Obs. 2 Heavy judgments upon sinful places do not work out the wickedness is
in them. Jerusalem was besiedged, suffered hard things, and her scum went not
out of her, it boiled in, she was the worse for all those fiery judgments God
brought upon her, Jer. 5.3. Thou have stricken them, but they have not grieved,
thou have consumed them, but they have refused to receive correction, they have
made their faces harder than a rock, they have refused to return. God did
strike them with Egyptian and Babylonish rods, but there were no tears, no
relentings, no returnings, but grew harder and harder, even to a rockish
hardiness. Ahaz the head of this City, in the time of his distress, sinned the
more against the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 28.22. When Samaria was besiedged by the
Syrians, 2 Kin. 6. did the scum of it boil out? no, Jehoram at that time, sent
to take off Elishaes head, verse. 31. and said, he would wait no longer for the
Lord, verse. 33. His scum boiled in, and boiled up to a greater height. Is the
scum gone out of Ireland? by all the bloody judgments of God have been upon
them? is it gone out of England, or London, by all the sad strokes we have had?

Obs. 3 When judgments prevail not with sinful places to cleanse them from
their iniquities, God threatens, and will certainly destroy such places, and
that without mercy. Jerusalem was as a pot over the fire, her scum went not out
of her, and what then? Woe to the bloody City, bring it out piece by piece, let
no lot fall upon it, because the scum wrought not out, the flesh, the people,
must be brought out to destruction, and the pot be broken in pieces, God said
of Jerusalem, Jer. 32.31. This City has been to me as a provocation of mine
anger, and of my fury, from the day that they buil^ it, even unto this day:
sometimes there were good Kings, and good people in it, but generally the
people were wicked, and therefore, Jerem. 19.11. I will break this people, and
this City, as one breaks a Potters vessel, that cannot be made whole again:
It was bloody, merciless, and now should have bloody judgments without mercy.

Obs. 4 Open impudent sinning provokes to vengeance, and shall be punished
openly. The 7. and 8. verses together yield this observation. Jerusalem shed
blood, not in a corner, or some secret place, she had no care to conceal and
cover what she did, but openly as on the top of a rock, she set up scaffolds
to execute the innocent, this caused fury to rise in the Lord, and hastened him
to take vengeance, and to punish her openly; he called for Nebuchadnezzar to
come out of Babylon, he led him to the gates of Jerusalem, caused him to sit
down there, and visibly to execute his vengeance upon her, so that her
punishment was as open as her sin; she sinned as on the top of a rock, and
God set her blood on the top of a rock. The besiedging, taking, and burning of
Jerusalem, was so known, and famous, as that all the Nations took notice
thereof, and made themselves sport therewith, Lam. 2.15, 16. she would not
cover her sin and shame, and God would not cover her punishment.

Verse. 9 Therefore thus says the Lord God, woe to the bloody City, I will even
make the pile for fire great. 10 Heap on wood, kindle the fire, consume the
flesh, and spice it well, and let the bones be burnt. 11 Then set it empty upon
the coals thereof, that the brass of it may be hot, and may burn, and that
the filthiness of it may be molten in it, that the scum of it may be consumed.
12 She has wearied her self with lies, and her great scum went not forth out
of her: her scum shall be in the fire. 13 In thy filthiness is lewdness,
because I have purged thee, and thou wast not purged, thou shall not be purged
from thy filthiness anymore, till I have caused my fury to rest upon thee. 14
I the Lord have spoken it, it shall come to pass, and I will do it, I will not
go back neither will I spare, neither will I repent; according to thy ways,
and according to thy doings, shall they judge thee, says the Lord God. In
these verses the Lord proceeds, 1 In Threatening of judgments, verse. 9. woe to
the bloody City, as before, v. 6. 2 In a Parabolical declaration of those
judgments, in the end of the 9. v. and in the 10, and 11* ver. 3 In showing
the causes thereof, ver. 12, 13. 4 In sealing up the certainty and
irrevocablenesse of these judgments, v. 14.


9 I will even make the pile for fire great. I will bring a multitude of
Babylonians; a mighty army, which shall besiedge Jerusalem, and be as a great
fire unto it: by them I will execute fiery judgments upon the bloody City. The
Heb. is, I will make a great fire, that is, I will consume the whole City. Here
are a multitude of houses, stately buildings, and they shall be all as a pile
of wood for fire; yea, the inhabitants thereof, shall be consumed by the fire
of my wrath.

10 Heap on wood, kindle the fire, consume the flesh. The Hebrew verbes, in
this verse are infinitive, but rendered imperatively. Vatablus reads them in the
future, I will heap on wood, I will kindle the fire; that is, says he, I will
add spirit and power to the Babylonish forces, to besiedge the Jews, that so
by famine, sword, and plague, they may be consumed. According to our reading
the words, God calls for, and hastens the destruction of Jerusalem.

Spice it well. The Hebrew is, Harkach hammerkachah, which Montanus renders
thus, Condi condimentum aromatibus, season a seasoning with spicery. Rakach
signifies, to make an ointment, sauce, or seasoning, Ex diversis speciebus
aromatum, of diverse kinds of Grocery or sweets, that so it may be the more
pleasing to the nostrils or palate. Cooks spice their meats and sawces, that
so they may be more acceptable to the taste of those feed upon them. The
spicing here, I conceive to be the various judgments which were to be
inflicted upon Jerusalem, which made it as savoury meat both to men and God;
when it was salted and spiced with his judgments, God was at rest and
comforted, Ezekiel. 5.13. Their fears, sorrows, distractions, sufferings famine,
were several spices, they were spiced withal, and it was meat and drink to
the Chaldaeans at last, to destroy them, being made faint, and feeble with a
long siedge.

Let the bones be burnt. Let the strongest Soldiers, wealthiest Citizens, and
principal men of the City, be weakened and consumed in this siedge, or at the
end of it; not only the poor and low ones, but the highest and mightiest ones,
the Chaldee has it, fortes viri ejus insaniant, let her strong men be mad.

11 Then set it empty upon the coals thereof. When the City should be emptied
of the inhabitants thereof, it should be as a Pot, set on the fire without any
thing in it, when it is so, it quickly melts, consumes, and comes to nothing.
This Pot must be set on, 1 That it may be melted. 2 That the filthiness of it
may be separated. 3 That the scum and rust may be consumed.


Obs. 1 That sin and wickedness do defile the places and persons where they
are, as filthy liquors, scum, and rust, do the vessels and Pots in which they
are. This Metaphorical Pot had her filthiness in it; Jerusalem had shed blood,
set up Altars and Idols, oppressed the fatherless, widows, and strangers, and
these things defiled her; not only were the Citizens, but even the City it
self was defiled. The Leprosy defiled the garments and the houses, Levit. 14.
sin is that Leprosy which defiles men, garments, houses, Towns, Cities, and
Lands, Ezra 9.11. The Land which ye go to possess, is an unclean Land with the
filthiness of the people; filthy people make all like themselves.

Obs. 2 Destructive judgments upon sinful places are pleasing unto God; he
encouraged the Chaldaeans to heap on wood, to kindle the fire, Consume the
flesh, and to spice it well. Execution of justice, destruction of sinful
Cities, and persons, its a Sacrifice well pleasing to God, delighting him as
much as any spiced meats do the pallates of men. When Jehu had executed justice
upon Ahabs Sons, and Baals Priests, see what the Lord said, 2 King. 10.30.
Because thou have done well in executing that which is right in mine eyes, and
have done unto the house of Ahab, all that was in mine heart, thy children of
the fourth generation shall sit on the Throne of Israel; was not the
destruction of those wicked ones very pleasing unto the Lord, when he rewarded
it so well?

12 She has wearied her self with lies. Montanus renders the Hebrew thus,
injuriis se afflictavit, she has afflicted or wearied her self with injuries,
that is, with wronging others. Vatablus in his notes has it thus, in mendaciis
laboravit, she has wearied her self, and that aliis inferendo injuriam. Her
self is not in the Original. The words may therefore refer to God, and so both
Junius and Piscator read them, she has wearied me with her lies and vexations;
I often reproved her for her sins, threatened her by my Prophets, visited her
with my judgments, but all was to no purpose, if at any time she promised
amendment, it was hypocritically, she performed it not; or she took those
ways and courses pleased not me, nor profited her self, and in those she
both wearied me, and her self. The word for lies signifies iniquity, vanity,
as lie.

Her great scum went not forth of her. In the sixth verse. the words are, whose
scum is not gone out of it: here, her great scum went not out of her, what
course soever she took to advantage her self: her scum rather increased than
diminished, she pretended often to part with her scum, but never did.

Her scum shall be in the fire. Seeing her scum and rust (for so the word may
be interpreted) will not be gotten out of her, she shall be served like the
unclean vessels that were to pass through the fire, Numb. 31.22, 23. so this
Pot or City should be burnt with fire, and so her scum and rust should be
consumed with her.

Obs. 1 Wicked, vain, sinful practices, do weary God, and those that do use
them: she has wearied me, she has wearied her self with lies, that is,
with her wretched doings; I have often presented mercy to her, she refused it; I
have often called upon her to turn from her idolatry, unjust and bloody doings,
but she has had a deaf ear; I have waited long for her repentance, and she
has dissembled with me, and is grown impenitent; I am weary of waiting any
longer. Isa. 65.2, 3. I have spread out my hands all the day to a rebellions
people, which walks in a way that is not good, after their own thoughts, a
People that provokes me to anger continually to my face, etc. How could it
be but that God should be weary of such people, and such doings? God tells
her, she had wearied him with her iniquities, Isa. 43.24. O Jacob, Israel,
Jerusalem, thine iniquities are so great, many, often iterated, that I am weary
of beholding, of hearing, of bearing them any longer. Others have wearied me
with their words, Mal. 2.17. but you have wearied me with your lying words, and
wicked deeds. When my fury has been kindled in me, so that I have been ready
to pour out judgments upon you, I have been stopped by the Prayers of some
precious ones, and repented me of what I intended against you, but I will do
it no more, I am weary with repenting, Jer. 15.6. God repented, but they
repented not, he would repent no more. And as sinners by their sinful ways,
do weary God, so they weary themselves, Jer. 9.5. They have taught their Tongue
to speak lies, and weary themselves to commit iniquity: Some tire themselves
more in the service of sin and Satan, than others do in the service of God
and Christ, Isa. 5.18. they draw iniquity, and they toil at it as horses in a
cart:

Obs. 2 When the scum will not be got out by the word and lesser judgments,
God will destroy both scum and Pot together. Her scum went not forth of her,
Gods threats by the Prophets did no good, his lesser judgments procured it
not, the scum still boiled in, the rust still cleaved to the Pot: what then?
her scum, her rust, shall be in the fire: when neither wind, nor water will do
it, fire shall.

13 In thy filthiness is lewdness. Thou have defiled thy self with all manner
of sin, with Idols, blood, profaneness, hypocrisy, Covetousness, etc. and
to these thou addest lewdness, that is, obstinacy, thou art settled upon thy
lees, and wilt not be reclaimed; no Counsel, Admonition, reproof, takes with
thee, thou stand out against them all. The Vulgar reads it, immunditia tua
execrabilis, thy Filthiness is execrable. Zirumah notes, destinatum scelus; a
resolved wickedness, which is execrable. Aecolampad. makes the Filthiness to
be pravum consilium, evil counsel: Jerusalem had hearkened to the false
Prophets, taken in their counsel against the true Prophets, and was resolved
to go on in her ways, Jer. 23.14. they strengthen the hands of evil doers,
that none does return from his wickedness.

Because I have purged thee. The Hebrew is, Tihartich, which Montanus in the
margent gives the sense of, Jussi ut mundares te, I have purged thee, that is,
I have commanded that thou should purge thy self. God sent Prophets unto
Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. 36.15. to tell her of her sins, and danger, and to invite
and press her to repentance, as Jer. 3.12, 13, 14. who fully declares
throughout his prophesy, what sad judgments God would bring upon her, if she
did not purge and cleanse her self. See chapter 6.26. chapter 7.14 chapter 9.11. chap.
13.17. God affording them means for purging, as Prophets, reproofs,
admonitions, counsels, exhortations, corrections, is said to have purged them,
he did that which in his wisdom he thought meet to do.

The Purging here meant is from idolatry, injustice, profaneness, etc.

And thou wast not purged. Hebrew, Thou have not purged thy self. Thou did
not entertain and improve the means afforded; when the Prophets came to thee,
and told thee of thy sins and dangers, thou did mock at them, 2 Chronicles.
36.16. and despise the word they brought. When I smote thee with my correcting
hand, thou did revolt more and more, Isa, 1.5. and thy children received no
correction, Jer. 2.30. that is, no benefit by those blows I gave them. Thou
said, I have loved strangers, and after them will I go, verse. 25. and those
in thee said, we are Lords, we will come no more unto the Lord, verse. 31. So
Jer. 44.16, 17. They did not cease from their wicked ways.

Thou shall not be purged from thy Filthiness any more. I will cease from using
means to purge thee, my Prophets shall labor no more in vain about thee, they
have spent their lungs and strength to reclaim thee, but they shall not do it
again, they shall neither reprove, threaten, counsel, or invite thee any more
to turn, but thou shall be left as desperate and incurable. Hebrew is, Thou
shall not purge thy self from thy Filthiness any more, if thou would now go
about it, it will be in vain, its too late, I am resolved upon thy destruction.

Till I have made my fury to rest upon thee. Anger, indignation, wrath, fury,
is ira nunquam, quiescens, donec sumatur vindicta. There is now no purging, but
destruction, I shall spend all my judgments upon thee, consume thee, and
thine, and so my fury shall rest upon thee, these words we had before, chapter
5.13.21.17.

Donec does not imply a purging afterward, Psalm 110.1. Romans 8.22. Mat. 5.26.
until thou have paid the uttermost, etc.

Obs. 1 Obstinacy in sin, provokes God to the destruction of sinners: Her
scum shall be in the fire. Jerusalem shall be burnt, and why? in thy
filthiness is lewdness, thou a^t obstinate, hardened in thy wickedness; all
sin offends, some sins provoke to judgments, obstinacy provokes to
destruction, Jerem. 44.15, 16, 17. in those verses you have the obstinacy of
the Jews in Egypt (they, and others of them had been so obstinate in the land
of Judea, that God could bear them no longer, but laid the Land desolate, and
made it a curse, v. 22.) and see how the Lord threatens them, v. 27. I will
watch over them for evil, and not for good, and all the men of Judah, that are
in the land of Egypt, shall be consumed by the sword, and by the famine,
until there be an end of them: and not only would he destroy them, but
Egypt likewise, where they were, verse. 30. even that should fare the worse for
their being in it. Obstinacy in sin, is worse than the sin it self, many
sins are committed, renitente, voluntate, against man's will and purpose, but
obstinacy in sin, is pleno consensu voluntatis, it has the wilfully in it,
and therefore must needs exasperate the Lord, Nehem. 3.30. many years did
thou forbear them, and testifiedst against them by thy spirit in thy Prophets,
yet would they not give ear, therefore gave thou them into the hand of the
people of the lands, this stubbornness of theirs, made the Lord cast them off,
and put them into the hands of Heathens. Zachary tells you, that for this sin,
came a great wrath from the Lord of Hosts upon them, chapter 7.12. not only wrath
which is destructive in it self, but great wrath, and that not only from the
Lord, but from the Lord of hosts; as if the Lord mustered up all his forces, to
come against obstinate and rebellious sinners, and pour out great wrath and
vengeance upon them. Certainly obstinate sinners are those the Lord will
accomplish his wrath upon, 1 Thessalonians. 2.16. the wrath of God came upon the Jews
to the uttermost, even to perfection.

Obs. 2 In Scripture Language, that is said to be done, which God or men
endeavor to do, though it be not done. I have purged thee: God using means,
and endeavoring by his Prophets, Mercies, Threats, and judgments, to purge
Jerusalem from her sin, is called purging, though Jerusalem were not purged,
Psalm 69.5. They that destroy me; Qui exscindunt me, are mighty. David's
enemies who sought to destroy him are said to do it, Romans 2.4. The goodness of
God leads thee to repentance, that is, its agency and tendency is that way,
Deuteronomy. 26.5. A Syrian ready to perish, Jacob increased and prospered when he
was with Laban, but because Laban did that which tended to his perishing, he
changed his wages, he pursued him returning home, therefore he is said to be
in a perishing condition, 1 Cor. 10.33. I please all men in all things. In the
fourth chapter, he tells you he was reviled, persecuted, defamed, made as the
filth of the world, and the offscouring of all things, how then did he please
all men in all things? he is said to do it, in that he endeavored to do it,
seeking their good, their salvation, Matt. 5.32. whosoever shall put away his
wife, saving for the cause of Fornication, causes her to commit adultery, that
is, this action of putting her away; exposes her to that sin, whether she
fall into it or no, because therefore the man's act in putting away his wife, is
likely to produce such an effect, he is said to do it, to cause her to commit
adultery. Gal. 5.4. Christ is become of no effect unto you, whosoever of you
are justified by the Law; they sought to be justified by the Law, and
thereupon are said to be so, not that the Law justified any, or any could be
justified by it. This should teach us how to understand the like scriptures.
Things may be said to be done, when only there has been means used,
conducing thereunto.

Obs. 3 A people may have the means, and not improve the same for their good.
Jerusalem had Prophets, Ordinances, Sabbaths, Sacrifices, Mercies, Judgments,
by which God would have purged her, and she was not purged; she did not purge
her self, she improved not the same for her good, she did not hearken to the
Prophets, humble her self for her sins, fear the Lord and his threatenings,
observe his Sabbaths, worship him only, and execute justice. God called upon
her often, to purge her self, Jerem. 4.14. O Jerusalem wash thine heart from
wickedness, that thou may be saved; how long shall thy vain thoughts lodge
with in thee? I have given thee water to wash thine heart from all thy vain,
base, destructive thoughts, why do thou not use it? chap. 13.27. O Jerusalem
will thou not be made clean, when shall it once be? my Prophets would cleanse
thee if thou would receive them, and my word by them; mine Ordinances would
sanctify thee, if thou did use them according to mine institution of them; my
mercies and judgments would cause thee to cleanse thy self, if thou did well
weigh them. But thou have means, and do not improve them. Its not the having
of means, but the right use of means will do good. Jerusalem thought her self
clean, not needing to be purged, Jer. 2.23. how can thou say, I am not
polluted? Jerusalem that was more guilty than Sodom or Samaria, justified her
self, and so neglected purging; yea rejected the word of the Lord, which should
have purged her, Jer. 8.9. she gave ear to false Prophets and Priests, Jerem.
23.14. who strengthened her in her wickedness, and defamed the true Prophets,
chap. 18.18. she profaned the means, Ezekiel. 22.26. she idolized the means and
rested in the act done. Jerem. 7.4, 9, 10. chap. 8.8. she went on still in her
own ways, whatever God or man said unto her, Jer. 7.28. This is a Nation that
obeys not the voice of the Lord their God, nor receives correction. God had
spoken to Jerusalem and Judea often, yea, corrected them often, but neither word
nor rod did better them.

Obs. 4 People may so slip the time of repenting, and turning to God, as that
it may be too late for them to go about the same: They may sin away the time
of mercy, because Jerusalem having means, took not the opportunity of purging
her self, she should never be purged, her filthiness should abide with her.
As Judea was the land not cleansed, Ezekiel. 22.24. So was Jerusalem the City not
purged, she passed the time of her purging: she lost the season for mercy.
The Scripture is clear for it, Psalm 81.11, 12. My People would not hearken
unto my voice, and Israel would none of me, so I gave them up to their own
hearts lusts, and they walked in their own counsels; God invited them by means
and mercies which they entertained not so as to profit by them, they stood it
out with God who cast them off, and now it was too late for them to come: O
that they had hearkened! not, O that they would hearken. -- The Foolish Virgins
staid so long before they got Oil, that the door of the Bridegroom was shut,
and no entrance for them, Matthew. 25. they came too late, Matthew. 23.37, 38. O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thy children together,
even as an Hen gathers her Chickens under her wings, and ye would not: I
used all means, but Jerusalem took not her time to do her self good, therefore
her house was left desolate, her Temple, her City, should be emptied of all
means, and mercies, and her Children be left in a desolate condition. God would
have purged the old world, but it slipped the time of its purging, Genesis 6.3. My
Spirit shall not always strive with man, they have been warned, counseled,
reproved, convinced by my Spirit, in the Patriarchs, and in their bosoms that
has been laboring to bring them to repentance, but they grieve, resist, and
vex my Spirit, therefore it shall cease to strive any more with them, to do
them any good. Let us not presume upon hereafters, that we will purge, repent,
and turn to God hereafter; thy hereafter may be too late: Seek the Lord while
he may be found, call ye upon him while he is near, Isa. 55.6. There is a
time when he will not be found, a distance at which he will not hear, Prove.
1.28. Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer, they shall seek me
early, but they shall not find me: They slighted and improved not the means
which God afforded them, thereupon judgments came on them, whereupon they
betake themselves to a more serious use of the means, but it was too late, God
had no ear to hear them, neither would make any appearance for them. Time
present is the acceptable time, 2 Cor. 6.2. Let us cleanse our selves from all
filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God, 2
Cor. 7.1.

Obs. 5 Those have had means and not profited thereby, God will deal most
severely with, there is no mercy, but altogether judgment for them. Jerusalem
had means, but was not purged, and she should not be purged, but Gods fury
should rest upon her. Thou shall not be purged from thy filthiness any more,
till I have caused my fury to rest upon thee, that is, thou shall never be
purged in mercy, but destroyed in my fury; and so it was quickly after, by the
Chaldaean Army. Capernaum. was exalted to Heaven in means, but what said
Christ, Matthew. 11.
she should be brought down to hell; that is, suffer extreme punishment, and
why? she improved not the means; for if the mighty works which have been done
in thee, had been done in Sodom, it would have remained unto this day: Had
Sodom had the Preaching and miracles thou have had, it would have made such
improvement of them, as to have kept off the fire and brimstone fell upon it,
therefore the punishment of the Sodomites should be less than of the
Capernaites, at the day of Judgment. Luke 13.7.
God is severe against those have the means to purge them, and do it not, that
have the Gospel, and impr^ve it not. The Fig Tree in the vineyard had stood
there three years, and was not better at last then at first; the influences of
Heaven, and fatness of the earth had done it no good; and behold the severity
of the owner, Cut it down, why cumbers it the ground? -- He says not, dig it
up, set it elsewhere, but cut it down, its a burden to me, to the earth, and
reproach to all the Trees in the Garden, -- what made the Lord deal more
severely with the Jews, than other Nations? It was because they had the means
to do them that good which others had not, Amos 3.2. You only have I known of
all the families of the earth, I have so known you, as to own you for my
people, as to give you my Prophets, my Law mine Ordinances, my Covenants, etc.
therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities, you shall be made as
exemplary by my judgments, as ever you were by my mercies.

14 I the Lord have spoken it. This verse seals up the Certainty of all
threatened, and cuts off all evasions which Jerusalem might make whatsoever, as

1 She might say, Ezekiel has hard thoughts of me, he speaks these things out
of his own head and spirit, they are his devices, and I weigh them not. This is
answered in these words, I the Lord, I Jehovah, who am of my self, and give
being, life, to all my threats, have spoken. What is said, it is no vain
vision, lying Prophesy, like to what the false Prophets have given out; what
Ezekiel has said, he had from me, I commissioned him to speak, and its not
he, but I that have spoken it.

It shall come to pass. 2 Be it so that thou have spoken it, yet the time may
be long ere these threats against me may take place, such thoughts were in the
breast of Jerusalem, chap. 12.27. this is answered here; It comes (...) venit,
says Montanus, its not a far off, for many days, but its at hand. Others have
it, Eventurum est, Its ready to come, Nebuchadnezzar is upon his march,
hastening to thy gates, and will suddenly sit down before them.

I will do it. 3 What if Nebuchadnezzar be coming, he and all with him are
but men, they may fail of their purposes, sink in their undertakings, and never
be able to perform what they enterprise. This shift is here taken off, I will
do it, I am not man, but Jehovah, I fail not in my purposes, I sink not in my
undertaking, I am able to perform what ever I enterprise, the whole work is
mine, I have called forth Nebuchadnezzar and his Army, I will bring them to thy
gates, and enable them to do all my pleasure, feci, I have done it, so is the
Original, its as certain as done.

I will not go back. 4 Grant it, that the work is thine, and thou have
determined to see it done, yet upon second thoughts thou may change thy
resolutions, when thou shall consider, that I Jerusalem am thy City, and the
only City thou have chosen in all the world; and will thou bring an Heathenish
King, and an Army to destroy me and the Temple where thou dwell, and art
worshipped? surely it cannot be, Lam. 4.12. This conceit of hers is blown away
by these words, I will not go back, thou art a bloody City, thy scum is not
gone out of thee, thou art filthy, and in thy filthiness is lewdness,
obstinacy, thou go not back from thy wicked doings, I will not go back from
doing what I have purposed. The Hebrew is, (...) I will not retract what I have
said and purposed, Non subtraham me, I will not withdraw my self from it.
Avenarius renders the words thus, Non feriabor, I will not make holy day, and
cease to prosecute what I have determined.

Neither will I spare. 5. Jerusalem might yet say, The Lord is merciful, though
he be angry, and in his anger bring the enemy to my Gates, he will not keep
his anger always; when I shall fast, weep, pray, he will be entreated, he
will pardon, spare, and not suffer me to be destroyed. This refuge is here
made useless, Neither will I spare, fasting, prayers, and tears, shall do her
no good. Jerem. 14.12. when Jerusalems children should fast, God would not hear
their cry, no nor Jeremy for them, cha. 11.14. nor Ezekiel, cha. 9.8, 9, 10.
though themselves, their Prophets should importune God, he says, As for me,
my eye shall not spare, neither will I have pity; thou have caused my fury to
come up to take vengeance, and I will be avenged on thee. I will not abstain
from revenge, so the word signifies.

Neither will I repent. 6 Thou have often repented thee, when thou have been upon
destroying designs, Jonah 3.10. Hos. 11.8. Ezekiel. 20.8, 9.13, 14, 17, 22. and I
hope thou will repent thee of what thou art about, if thou do not repent
before my destruction, thou wi^t repent after it, that thou have dealt so by
me. This strong-hold is here battered down, Neither will I repent, what though
I have often repented me of the evil I purposed to bring upon thee, and thy
Children, must I always be upon those terms with thee? No, no, Jerusalem my
repentings have not caus^d thee to repent, my repenting shall now cease, Jer.
15.6. I will stretch out my hand against thee, and destroy thee, I am weary
with repenting: I will neither repent when thou art destroying, nor when thou
art destroyed; it will be an case to me, to see thee and thy children consumed.

Repentance sometimes in Scripture is attributed to God, and then its spoken
(...), after the manner of men, and it must warily be understood, (...), so as
God may not be wronged in men's apprehensions thereby. In men's repentance there
is, grief, change, quia fefellit eventus non antea Previsus, something falls
out they did not foresee; David Repents, of murdering Vriah, defiling
Bathshebah, because that fell out in it he did not foresee, as the blaspheming
Gods name, and the sword it brought upon his house, hereupon he changed his
mind, was affected with grief, these things are not in God; he foresees all
events, he grieves not, he changes not; therefore in this sense he cannot be
said to repent. Theodoret speaks right, when he says, Panitentia in Deo nihil
aliud est quam mutatio dispensationis ejus, it is a change of Gods
dispensation; if God had not destroyed Jerusalem, he should have been said to
repent. His repentance is alteration of things and actions, no change of his
purpose and will. In humane Repentance there is the change of the will, in
divine Repentance there is the willing of a change, and that in the thing, not
in the will or Counsel of God, which are unchangeable: Here God would not
change the thing, I will not repent.

According to thy ways, and according to thy doings, shall they judge thee. 7
Jerusalem might yet say, if it be so, that thou will not repent, and show
mercy unto me, thou will show thy self, a cruel and merciless God. This
imputation is here prevented, According to thy ways and doings, shall thou be
dealt with all, if thy judgments be sharp and dreadful, thou have deserved
them, the equity of my proceedings shall be so conspicuous, that all the world
shall clear me, and say, the fault is thine own, that thou suffer such hard
things, thou have done such wickednesses, lewdnesses, abominations, that God is
righteous in consuming of thee, all is suitable to thy ways.

These words, They shall judge thee. By the Septuagint are rendered in the first
person singular (...), I will judge thee; and so by the Vulgar. By Junius in
the second person, judicaberis, Thou shall be judged. By others, as here, they
shall judge thee, that is, the Babylonians; and these several readings or
rendrings of the word make up but one and the same sense, Thou shall be
judged, that is, by the Lord, and the Babylonians, who are his instruments to
execute his pleasure, Ezekiel. 23.24. I will set judgment before them, and they
shall judge thee. I will make known to them my purpose of utter destroying
thee, and they shall do it.

Obs. 1 Great sinners do not believe judgments threatened, but are apt to shift
them off, and flatter themselves with hopes of mercy. Jerusalem had great scum,
God threatened to consume her, and her scum in the fire, but she believed it
not she shifted off all threatenings, she still expected peace and safety.
Jerusalems Prophets had so bewitched and possessed her with thoughts of peace and
security from evil coming upon her. Jerem. 23.17. that nothing Jeremy or
Ezekiel threatened could be heard; therefore says God here, I the Lord have
spoken it, it shall come to pass, etc. thou think I will not do it, that I
will recall my threats, spare thee, and repent, such vain thoughts lodged in
Jerusalem, Jerem. 4.14 and such vain speeches were uttered by Judah, Thou
say, because I am innocent, surely his anger shall turn from me, Jer. 2.35.
Jerusalem and Judah thought, said, they were innocent, and thereupon shifted off
all was threatened, and flattered themselves with hopes of mercy, but they were
guilty, yea; more guilty than all the Nations and Cities round about them,
Ezekiel. 5.5, 6. and had such judgments coming upon them, as never had any the
like, verse. 9, 10. which they would not believe, though the Lord himself told
them thereof, for Jerem. 5.12. They belyed the Lord, and said it is not he,
neither shall evil come upon us, neither shall we see sword nor famine: We
shall do well enough in this City, and if they should come, we will appear
before him with our sacrifices, and we shall be delivered, Jerem. 7.10.
wicked men do flatter themselves, in their own phansies, shifts, evasions they
have, till their iniquity be discovered, and judgment surprizeth them, Psalm
36.2. that wretched art they have of putting off the evil day, of shifting the
threats and judgments of God, undoes them: and many precious souls are too
well skilled in this wretched art and work of putting off the Promises and
Mercies of God from themselves, which greatly prejudice their Peace and
Comforts, and gratifies the enemy of their souls; Those make conscience of
their ways, that desire to be purged and wait on God in the use of means,
they lie not under these threats, but are under many gracious Promises,
especially that, Psalm 145.19. he will fulfill the desire of them that fear
him.

Obs. 2 Those profess themselves Gods People, may be such sinners, as that
God resolves their destruction, excluding all hope of mercy. Jerusalem which
was the Lords City, and the People of it his, had so sinned, that God would
irrevocably destroy both it and them. I the Lord have spoken it, it shall come
to pass, and I will do it, I will not go back, neither will I spare, etc. God
was fully set upon it, and therefore peremptorily cuts off all hope of mercy,
Jerem. 16.5. I have taken away my peace from this people, says the Lord, even
loving kindness and mercy. Asaphti collegi, I have gone up and down and
gathered up my peace, my kindnesses and mercies, and carried them away from
this people, what hope was then left for them, both the great and the small
shall dye in this land. Gods heart was so against them, that Moses and Samuel
could not incline it toward them, if they should entreat for them, chap, 15.1.
and therefore says God, cast them out of my sight, I have no pity, no mercy
for them, Ezekiel. 9.30. As for me, mine eye shall not spare, neither will I have
pity, if God would not spare them, who would? if he would not have pity on
them, who could? they were hopeless, their case was desperate, chap. 5.8, 11.
Behold, I am against thee, I will not have any pity, Jer. 11.11. I will bring
evil upon them, which they shall not be able to escape.

Obs. 3 When God cuts off hope of mercy, and brings sinners into a forelorn
condition, the fault is in their own, not the Lords. its their own doings,
their own ways, which bring irrevocable judgments upon them, according to thy
ways, and according to thy doings, shall they judge thee, thou have been
irrevocable in thy sins, and I am irrevocable in my judgments, thou have
gone on to commit great iniquities, and I am going on to execute answerable
punishments; I could not prevail with thee to desist from sinning, and thou
shall not prevail with me to desist from destroying; thou by thine obstinacy
made me without hope of thy amendment, and now by my threatenings, I have made
thee hopeless of any mercy. Jerusalem might thank her self, that she was
brought to so desperate a condition. Jerem. 13.22. if thou say in thine heart,
wherefore come these things upon me? why must I be besiedged? why must
Plague, Famine, and Sword, devour my Children? why must I be burnt to ashes
and have no mercy showed me? The Answer is, for the greatness of thine
iniquity, and what that iniquity is, you have specified, cha. 16.11, 12. they
forsook God, worshipped other gods, walked after the imaginations of their own
hearts, and did worse than their fathers, they sinned till there was no remedy,
2 Chronicles. 36.16. Jerusalem with her children provoked God, so that his glory,
his Truth, his Name, his Prophets, must have suffered if they had been spared;
therefore the Lions roared upon Israel, yelled, and made his Land waste, when
his Cities were burnt, and without inhabitant, what said God, Jerem. 2.15.17.
have thou not procured this unto thy self, in that thou have forsaken God.

Verse. 15. Also the word of the Lord came unto me saying, 16 Son of man,
behold, I take away from thee the desire of thine eyes with a stroke, yet
neither shall thou mourn nor weep, neither shall thy tears run down. 17 Forbear
to cry, make no mourning for the dead, bind the tire of thine head upon thee,
and put on thy shoes upon thy feet, and cover not thy lips, and eat not the
bread of men. 18 So I spoke unto the People in the morning, and at even my wife
dyed, and I did in the morning as I was commanded. The second general Part of
the Chapter begins here, being a Prophesy declaring the destruction of Temple,
and City, represented under the Type of the sudden death of Ezekiels wife.
This Type is in the words read, the interpretation is in the words following.

The parts of these verses are.

1 The Divine Authority for this Type, and for what is commanded and done
thereupon, v. 15. 2 The Narration of the Type, ver. 16. Son of man, behold, I
take away from thee the desire, etc. 3 Several Commands laid upon the Prophet,
v. 16, 17. 4 The Execution of the Type, v. 18.
15 The word of the Lord came unto me. The false Prophets ran when they were
not sent, and spoke when they had no word, but Ezekiel was sent, cha. 2.3. and
he had a word from God, when he spoke, he durst not be the mouth of God to
others, until the Lord had opened his mouth to him, the spirit of Prophesy
brought the word to him, and then moved him to utter it to others.

16 Son of Man. He says not, man of God, or Son of God, but Son of Adam
(for so the Original is) that is, son of him was made of the earth, that had an
earthly beginning. Ezekiel, thou art a weak, worthless Creature, that ere long
must away to the earth from whence thou came, see thy heart do not swell with
the Prophetical honor I have put upon thee, the many appearances of my spirit
unto thee, nor be thou refractary, that I put thee upon hard services, or
command thee hard things, when thy Father Adam disobeyed me. I turned him out
of Paradise, obey therefore my voice, and do what I command thee, therein shall
thou show thy self, a Son of God.

Behold, I take away from thee the desire of thine eyes. By Desire of thine
eyes, is meant, Ezekiels wife, v. 18. The Septuagint is, (...), The desires of
thine eyes. This Expression, The desire of the Eyes, Rem charam significat, it
imports a thing very dear to one, and what is dearer to men than their wives?
There be many things to indear a woman to her husband.

1 She was made for man, 1 Cor. 11.9. The man was not created for the woman,
but the woman for the man, she was made an help meet for man, Genesis 2.18.

2 She is a gift of God, Prove. 19.14.

3 She is joined to man, by a divine Ordinance, and is made one with him
thereby, Genesis 2.24. Matthew. 19.5. 1 Cor. 6.16. Ephesians. 5.31.

4 She is the glory of Man, 1 Cor. 11.7. man represents God being his image
and glory, and woman represents man, and so is his image and glory.

5 She is a Crown to her Husband, a great ornament unto him, Prove. 12.4.

6 She is the builder of the house, Ruth 4.11. Rachel and Leah did build the
house of Israel.

7 She is a companion in all conditions, the wife of thy youth, and the wife of
thine age, Prove. 5.18.

8 She is a bosom friend, in whom the heart of her Husband, may safely trust,
Prove. 31.11.

9 She is an heir of the grace of life, together with her Husband, 1 Pet. 3.7.

These things besides beauty, amiablenesse, and sweetness of nature, do indear
wives to Husbands, and so cause them to eye and mind them the more; for Oculos
conjicimus in rem ceu personam nob^s charam, things or persons which are dear
to us, our thoughts, our eyes are upon; where Love is, there will be the eye.
Christ loved his Church dearly, and therefore said, Cant. 2.14. Let me see thy
countenance, the Church was black, chap. 1.5. yet the delight of Christ's eyes,
because she had inward glory, beauty, excellency; so, many wives, though they
be not outwardly so amiable, and beautiful as others, yet they may have inward
virtues, excellencies, and those graces which may make them the desires of
Husbands eyes, if gracious themselves; and if such inward attractives be
wanting, propriety may do it? Every one affects what is his own, a piece of
Land, a House, a Ship, a Child that is ones own, is more delightful to the
owner, then what is another.

Doubtless Ezekiels wife was amiable, virtuous, gracious, indeared much unto
him upon several grounds, so that she was a delight unto, and the desire of
his eyes, else the Lord would not have forbidden him to mourn and weep for her.
His love was such to her, that it would have carried him out strongly
thereunto, if the Lord had not prohibited it.

With a stroke. The Hebrew is, Bemaggepheh, which Montanus renders, in
percussione, in striking, or by a stroke, its from Nagaph, which signifies to
beat, to smite, yea, ad internecionem percutere, to smite unto death, it has
some affinity with the word (...) which is to touch or hurt more lightly, but
this notes hurting more vehemently, and is applied in scripture to Gods
striking with extraordinary judgments, -- as Exodus 8.2. I will smite all thy
borders with Frogs, 1 Samuel 4.2. Israel was smitten before the Philistims, 2 Chronicles. 13.15. God smote Jeroboam, and all Israel, Exodus 12.29. At midnight the
Lord smote all the firstborn in the land of Egypt. Hence the Nowns Negeph and
Maggephah signify a stroke, and the heavy strokes of God, Exodus 9.14. I will
at this time send all my Plagues upon thy heart, and upon thy servants, and
upon thy people; the word for Plagues is the same with that here, the ten
Plagues of Egypt, were ten strokes of God, sometimes the word is put for that
sad stroke of God, viz. the Plague, Numb. 16.46. Hechel Hannageph, the Plague
is begun. Some think the stroke here was the Plague, but whether that an
Apoplexy, Impostume, or Palsy is not set down, this only we have for certain,
that it was sudden whatever it was, she did not lie long with a pining
disease, but was suddenly snatched away from Ezekiel.

Yet neither shall thou mourn. The Jews were wont to honor their dead with
great mourning; when Aaron dyed, they mourned for him thirty days, Numb.
20.29. and so many days they mourned for Moses, Deuteronomy. 34.8. Joseph mourned
forty days for the death of his Father Jacob in Egypt, and seven days after
that in the Land of Canaan, Genesis 50.3, 10. and seven days mourning for the
dead was the ordinary practice, as Ecclesiasticus observes, cha. 22.12. but
Ezekiel is here forbid to mourn at all in a public and solemn manner. The
Hebrew word for mourning is, Suphad, which notes mourning by striking the head
or breast, and refers most Ad Pompam funebrem.

Nor weep, neither shall thy tears run down. The word for weeping in Hebrew is,
Bacah, which signifies weeping cum elevatione vocis, as Judges 2.4. Job 2.12.
They lift up their voices and wept, and herein it differs from (...) which is
to weep also, but silently without noise. Weeping, often is a great ease to the
heart, but Ezekiel must not testify any grief, by voice, tears, or any outward
gesture.

17 Forbear to cry. The Hebrew is, Heaneck dom, tace clamando, hold thy peace
from crying. The Vulgar is, Ingemisce tacens, sigh, holding thy peace, so sigh
as none may hear thee. Others, allow not so much as sighing but read the words
thus, a gemitu tace, let there be no sign of any sigh.

Make no mourning for the dead. The Jews were wont to bewail their dead, 2 Chronicles. 35.24 25. All Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah, Jeremy lamented
for him, and all the singing men and singing women. Abraham mourned for Sarah,
Genesis 23.2. they were wont to cry, Ah my Brother, Ah my Sister, Jerem. 22.18. to
cut and make themselves bald in their Lamentations for their dead, Jer. 16.6.
which was forbid the Priests, Levit. 21.5. though they might mourn for their
near kindred, ibid. v. 23. but Ezekiel must make no mourning, he must not put
on Sackcloath, shave his head, or the corners of his beard, nor cut his flesh
at all, he is forbid all funeral pomp and expressions.

Bind the tire of thine head upon thee. It was in practice among the Jews,
sometimes to cover their heads in their mournings, as being unworthy to see the
light, or any creatures, and sometimes to uncover them, as not being worthy of
any Ornament, 2 Samuel 15.32. David and those with him, had their heads covered,
and went weeping. Levit. 10.6. When Nadab and Abihu were destroyed by fire, and
Aaron with his remaining Sons, had great cause to mourn; Moses commands them
not to uncover their heads, or rend their clothes, clearly demonstrating that
that was their custom in their mournings. They made bare their heads, and laid
ashes or earth upon them, as you may see, 1 Samuel 4.12. Lament. 2.10. This
Ezekiel might not do, he must not throw off his head tire. The word is Peer,
or Pear, which signifies, Gloria, ornamentum, decus, what ever the Prophet did
wear upon his head, he must keep it on, and not lay it aside.

And put on thy shoes upon thy feet. In their mournings and funerals they went
barefoot, 2 Samuel 15.30. David was barefoot when he went up the ascent of
Mount Olivet. Antonius Margarita who of a Jew became Christian, and writ of the
Rites of the Jews, says, that the kindred at the death of a friend do tear
their garments, eat nothing that day in that house, but abroad, that they eat
no flesh, drink no wine, unless it be upon the Sabbath, and that they follow
the Hearse, nudis pedibus. To this agrees what Leo Modena has lately commended
to the world. The nearest kindred of the party deceased, when they are returned
to their house, they sit down altogether upon the ground without shoes upon
their feet, History of the Rites, Customs and manner of life of the present
Jews.
this rite of going barefoot was a token of grief and shame, Isay. 20.24.

And cover not thy Lip. Another Ceremony the Jews used in their mournings, was
the covering of their chin, mouth, all under the nose, which is understood by
the word Lip, Levit. 13.45. the Leper was to put a covering upon his upper Lip,
that so his mouth being covered, his breath might not infect any, or we may by
Lip understand the whole face, and so that in Micah 3.7. may be taken, They
shall all cover their lips, the Hebrew is, Their upper lip, for there is no
answer of God: The Seers and diviners should be ashamed and confounded having
no vision, from being discovered by him to be false Prophets, they should
cover their faces, so the Vulgar reads it, Operient omnes vultus suos, they
shall all cover their faces.

And eat not the bread of men. Jerome and the Vulgar have it, the bread of
mourners, the Hebrew word Anashim signifies men, not simply, but woeful,
sorrowful, miserable man. Enosh as Pradus observes, is not Nomen naturae, a
word signifying the Nature of Man, as Adam, nor nomen sexus, a word to
distinguish the sexes, as Ish, but conditionis miserrimae, it sets out the
miserable condition of men, whose days are few, and full of sorrow. It was a
custom among the Jews at the death and funeral of friends, Cibos ad te missos
a vicinis in solatium. Vatabl. Vide Leo Modena, History of the present Jews. 5
Par. chapter 9
to send in meats and drinks to those were chief mourners, to comfort and
refresh them. Jeremy bears witness to this practice, chap. 16.7, 8. Neither
shall men give them the cup of consolation to drink, for their father or their
mother; they feasted with them as the next verse shows, and sought hereby to
drive away their sorrows. Not only did the Jews make feasts at the funerals of
their dead, but the Gentiles also had it much in practice. They had their
feasts called Parentalia and Silicernia. Sometimes their feasts were ad
mortuorum memoriam, for memorials, and honor of the dead. Sometimes, Ad
Haeredum gratiam, in behalf of their Heirs, which succeeded them; and mostly,
Ad amicorum solatium, for the comfort of their friends, Pro. 31.6, 7. they that
had heavy hearts, were to have wine given them to drink, that being comforted
therewith, they might remember their misery no more; Ezekiel must not mourn,
neither drink of any thing belonged to mourners, nor meddle with any of their
Rites.

18 So I spoke unto the people in the morning. The next morning Ezekiel makes
known unto the people what he had received from the Lord, viz. the parable of
the boiling Pot, the taking away of his wife by a sudden stroke, and how all
mourning and funeral Rites were prohibited unto him; which the Lord therefore
did, that he might provoke the people to make diligent inquiry into the
meaning of the thing being unusual, yea, contrary to custom.

And at even my wife dyed. The Hebrew word for wife is, (...) signifying both
woman and wife, from Ish both man and Husband; the woman was of man, and being
a wife is for man, for man's help and good, some therefore derive uxor from the
Hebrew, (...) auxilium, help. Others from (...) augeo, because she increases
the family. Here was accomplished what the Lord said, v. 16.

I did in the morning as the Lord commanded me. I did forbear all signs of
open mourning, I did not weep, sigh, or cry out, I kept my tire upon my head, I
walked out with shoes on my feet, with my lip uncovered, I ate not with those
that brought panem lugentium, the bread of mourners, I drank not with them that
brought poculum consolationis, the cup of consolation.

Obs. 1 Marriage even in Prophets, and men in spiritual functions is lawful.
Ezekiel a Prophet and Priest, was in that condition. Jehoiadah the High Priest
was married, and had no meaner person to his wife, than a Kings Daughter, 2 Chronicles. 22.11. Moses was a great Prophet, and he had to wife Zipporah, Daughter
to the Prince of Midian, Exodus 2.16.21. Isaiah that Evangelical Prophet, had
his Prophetess. which conceived and bare him a Son, Isa. 8.3. Samuel the
Seer, and man of God, had sons who were Judges over Israel, Judges 8.1, 2, 3.
few of the Prophets lived single lives, 2 King. 4.1. There cried a certain
woman, of the wives of the Sons of the Prophets, that is, one of the Prophets
wives cried unto Elisha, which shows that their calling did not exclude them
from marriage. God took special care about the Priests marriage, ordering whom
they might marry, and whom not, Levit. 21.13, 14. Ezekiel. 44.22. Neither was it
lawful only for Prophets and Priests to marry, but for Apostles and Ministers
of the Gospel also, Peter himself had a Yoak-fellow, Matthew. 8.14. Paul tells
you, 1 Cor. 9.5. that he had power to lead about a sister, a wife, as well as
other Apostles, and as the brethren of the Lord and Cephas; which evidences,
that most of the Apostles had their wives, and that Paul had not done ill, if
he had had his. Its a doctrine therefore of Devils, to forbid marriage to any
sort of men, 1 Timothy 4.1, 3. when marriage is honorable in all men, Heb. 13.4.

Obs. 2 Conjugal affection between man and wife is warrantable and pleasing
unto God. Ezekiels wife was the desire of his eyes, dear and delightful to him,
he took pleasure and content in her, as husbands ought to do in their wives,
Col. 3.19. Husbands love your wives, and be not bitter unto them. God would
have no waters of Marah, no bitter passages to come from husbands, against
their wives, but altogether and always streams of love, their love to, and
delight in their wives, should be not only at first while youth, beauty, and
means do last, but all the time they are their wives, no bitter looks, no
bitter words, no bitter actions, but their looks, words, carriages, should be
full of love and sweetness. God has therefore not only prohibited
bitterness, and commanded love, but given direction for the manner, how they
should love their wives, Ephesians. 5 25. Husbands love your wives, even as Christ
also loved the Church, and gave himself for it. Christ loved the Church,
notwithstanding all its spots, wrinckles, blemishes, sincerely, spiritu^ly, and
strongly; and so should men their wives, no^withstan^i g all infirmities or
deformities, they should love them sincerely, spiritually, strongly, yea, v.
28. So ought men to love their wives as their own bodies, men are great
self-lov^rs, and they should be as great wife-lovers, he that loves not, that
takes not complacency in his wife, does not love nor take delight in himself.
God would have men so love their wives, as to honor them whatever objection
lies in the way, 1 Pet. 3.7. though the wife be the weaker vessel, yet she
must be honored, her weakness must not hinder her honoring; a Venice Glass
is a vessel of more honor in the house than a brass pot. The Husband is to
honor his wife by making known bosom secrets to her, by taking her counsel
and advice, by speaking well of her, as his glory and crown, by trusting her,
by esteeming of her above others, and by taking her part against all others. If
God did not approve of love in Husbands producing such effects, he would not
have said, Let her breasts satisfy thee at all times, and be thou ravished
always with her love, Prove. 5.19. God would have men abound in their love to
their wives, and because they fall short therein, he bids them err in their
love, for so is the Hebrew, Tishgeh Tamid, errabis jugiter, thou shall love thy
wife rather too much than too little. And did Husbands consider besides Gods
command, and Christ's example, how it would further their prayers, prevent
temptations, and honor a married condition, they would love their wives more
conscientiously, sincerely, spiritually, and strongly.

Obs. 3 Our nearest and dearest comforts are in the hand of the Lord, to
dispose of as he please. Behold I take away from thee the desire of thine eyes:
I have let thee enjoy her thus long, I have continued her with thee many days
and years, but now I take her away, she shall abide with thee no longer; a
prudent wife is from the Lord, given by him, he brought the woman unto Adam,
Genesis 2.22. and as he gives, he takes at his pleasure, he took away Sarah
from Abraham, Genesis 23. Elijah from Elishah, 2 King. 2.3. and Rachel from Jacob,
Genesis 35. Wives, Husbands, Children, Friends, are only lent us of the Lord for
a season, and when that season is expired, he takes them to himself, we
should therefore in all such cases look unto the hand of God.

Obs. 4 That God can, and sometimes does suddenly deprive us of our choicest
comforts. I take away the desire of thine eyes with a stroke: There was no
antecedent sickness, no visible symptoms of death, but in a moment was
Ezekiels wife snatched away. How suddenly was the fire kindled that consumed
Nadab and Abihu? Levit. 10.2. There went out fire from the Lord and devoured
them presently; was not Sodom overthrown in a moment? Lamen. 4.6. Did not the
Lord strike fourteen thousand and seven hundred with the Plague in a moment?
Number. 16.44.49. were not all the firstborn of the Egyptians smitten and
destroyed in an hour at midnight? Exo. 12.29. Was not Sisera in a minute
deprived of his breath, and head? Judge. 5.26. God has a scourge, yea, many
scourges to slay suddenly, Job 9.23. he has arrows to shoot, which wound
suddenly, Psalm. 64.8. there is no foresight, no preventing of them, nor cure
of their wound. How unexpectedly was Rachel made childlesse, Matthew. 2.16.18.
when Herod slew the children. God has various strokes, and sudden ones, to
take away us, and our comforts, by gunpowder, by fire, etc. Man's calamity
comes suddenly and he is broken suddenly, without remedy, Proverbs 6.15. The
consideration hereof should cause us,

1 To fear the Lord, that can strike such strokes as to deprive us of our chief
comforts in a moment, we should sanctify him in our hearts, and make him our
fear, that so he may be a sanctuary unto us, to defend us, and not a hammer or
sword to strike or destroy us.

2 Not To promise long continuance of any creature comfort unto our selves, use
them for the present, but expect not much, nor long continuance of them, 1 Cor.
7.29. The time is short, let them that have wives b^e as if they had none, Isa.
3.22. Cease ye from man whose breath is in his, etc.

3 To prepare for death. Men put off the evil day, and are spared in an evil
time, when the stroke falls suddenly upon them, Eccl. 9.12. They spend their
days in wealth, and in a moment go down to the grave, Job 21.13. which is a
sad thing; but if men spent their days in getting grace, laboring to win
Christ, and be found in him, their end would be happy, though their death be
sudden, for blessed are those dye in the Lord, Rev. 14.13. live every day
therefore as your last day.

Obs. 5 Bitter and great afflictions are not always arguments of Gods hatred
and indignation. Ezekiel was a Prophet, a choice servant of the Lords, yet from
him does God take away the desire of his eyes, which was a very bitter and
grievous affliction, if we consider the aggravations were in it.

1 He was now in Captivity among Babylonians, where his wife was a sweet
companion and comfort unto him, in the midst of all the troubles, reproaches,
and difficulties he met withal.

2 She was taken away, not in the common way of men and women, but by a
sudden stroke, such strokes go to the quick, wound deep, and might have sunk
our Prophet had not the Lord given him a little notice of it.

3 That it should be to Type out the destruction of the Temple, and City of
Jerusalem, that God should suddenly strike, and take away his wife thereby, to
represent the sudden ruin of them, could not but be grievous to him.

4 He is forbidden to mourn, weep, or perform any funeral rites for her;
might he have sighed, mourned, wept, that would have eased his heart; might
he have used the Jewish Rites and Customs at her death and burial, that would
have testified respect and love unto her, but he might not do either of them.

So then by these aggravations, you see he had no light affliction upon him,
and whatever they were, in them was nothing of divine hatred and indignation.
Aaron was the Saint of the Lord, Psalm 106.16. and him the Lord gave a bitter
Cup to drink off, he slew two of his Sons at once, both the eldest. Exodus
6.23. and for offering a little kitchen or strange fire, which was not
prohibited, though not commanded, being the first time, and then forbad him and
his other Sons to mourn for them, Levit. 10.1, 2, 6. Christ was more than a
Prophet, than a Saint, he was a Son, the only begotten, the wel-beloved, yet
he had a cup given him to drink, which had more gall and wormwood in it, than
any, yea, than all the cups the Prophets and Saints had before or since.
Afflictions argue not Gods hatred, if we say so, we shall condemn the
generation of the righteous, and falsify the truth, for its said, whom I love,
I rebuke and chasten, Rev. 3.19. Those therefore that have bitter and heavy
afflictions, should take heed how they yield unto the persuasions of Satan and
corruption, saying, surely if God loved you; he would never deal so by you.

Obs. 6 That mourning for the dead is not unlawful. Ezekiel would have mourned,
wept, and used all funeral rites, amongst the Jews, not superstitious, if he
had not been forbidden by the Lord. He was not Stoical without affection,
neither are the people of God now unnatural, they do and may mourn for their
dead, so it be neither excessively nor despairingly. David's mourning for
Absalom, and Rachels for her children were too excessive, and the Thessalonians
too hopeless, 1 These. 4.13. Paul allowed them to sorrow and mourn for their
dead, but not as others which had no Hope; Christianity does not abolish, but
moderate and direct affections. Christ himself wept for Lazarus when he was
dead, his weeping was with moderation and hope. Many forget themselves in this
kind, and give so much scope to their Passions, that they offend God, shame
their professions, and hazard their own health. But we should remember what
Solomon commends unto us, Prove. 16.32. Better is he that rules his spirit,
than he that takes a City, the bridleing our spirits, and keeping our
affections, has a great excellency in it.

Obs. 7 A gracious spirit will deny it self, and obey God in difficult cases,
and that speedily too. No sooner had God made good his word, in taking away
Ezekiels wife, but he did what the Lord commanded. Nature prompted him to
mourn, to weep for his wife, but he denies the dictates of nature, and is
content to seem unnatural for God, his credit and love to his wife called upon
him to show respect unto her dead corpse, as others did in that kind, by
funeral Rites, but he prefers Gods command before his credit, love, and respect
to his wife, and is willing to bear the censures, and reproachings of the
people in this Case, his wife dies in the night, and next morning he appears
in his wonted habit and tire, he sheds no tears, puts off no shoes, covers
not his Lip, eats not the bread of men or mourners, shows no sign of sorrow,
but was in as sweet and settled a posture, as if there had been no stroke in
his family, he was the same, his wife being dead, as he was, she being
living; her death that was so dear to him, that was so strange and sudden,
that was in such a place, made no alteration in him, and upon this ground,
only because God had commanded it should be so. Here is a rare example of
Obedience, and that in a difficult case. Obedience to God is always
commendable, but especially when hard things are commanded. The many
difficulties Abraham brake through, to sacrifice his Son, made his obedience
so acceptable, Genesis 22. Moses refusing the honors, dignities, treasures, and
temptations of Egypt, and Pharaohs Court, his choosing an afflicted condition,
and reproached godliness, indeared him and his obedience unto the Lord, Heb.
11. when servants suffer for well-doing, and go on cheerfully in their work,
honoring the Gospel, this is acceptable with God, 1 Pet. 2.19.

Verse. 19 And the People said unto me, will thou not tell us what these things
are to us, that thou do so? 20 Then I answered them, The word of the Lord
came unto me, saying. 21 Speak unto the house of Israel. Thus says the Lord
God, Behold, I will profane my Sanctuary, the excellency of your strength, the
desire of your eyes, and that which your soul pittieth, and your Sons, and
your Daughters, whom ye have left, shall fall by the sword. 22 And ye shall do
as I have done, ye shall not cover your lips, nor eat the bread of men. 23 And
your tires shall be upon your heads, and your shoes upon your feet: ye shall
not mourn nor weep, but ye shall pine away for your iniquities, and mourn one
toward another. 24 Thus Ezekiel is to you a sign, according to all that he
has done shall ye do, and when this comes, ye shall know that I am the
Lord. Having in the former verses spoken typically and darkely, here he comes
to open and interpret what he had said; and we have before us,

1 The Occasion of his interpreting those hyeroglyphicall passages, v. 19.

2 The Interpretation it self, in the 21, 22, 23, 24.

19 Will thou not tell us what these things are? The People seeing Ezekiels
wife suddenly struck dead, and he not affected with it, which was not only
contrary to the Jewish Custom, but even to nature it self, they are startled
at these things, and set upon the Prophet in a heat, and will know what was in
these strange things; We know there is some mystery in them, they have relation
unto us, and we are unquiet, restless in our spirits, till we know what it
is, will thou not tell us? Ezekiel, hide it not from us, what ever it be, we
must know it. This was the thing God aimed at, in putting Ezekiel upon things
unusual and unnatural, to provoke them thereby to consider and make a special
inquiry into them. Unwonted things do awaken, breed admiration, and cause
examination, men search into the meaning of such things. When Ezekiel sighed to
the breaking of his Loins, chap. 21.7. they said wherefore sighest thou, when
Ezekiel was put upon removing, digging a hole through the wall, and carried his
stuff upon his shoulder, as stuff for captivity, God said to him, Son of man,
has not the house of Israel said to thee, what do thou? chap. 12.9. God
expected such strange doings should affect them, and make them consider verse.
3. and inquire into the matter, ordinary things are slighted, when
extraordinaries have answerable operations.

21 Behold I will profane my Sanctuary. By Ezekiels wife was tiped out the
Temple, and what was desirable; and by her sudden death the destruction of the
same. The Temple was as dear to the Jews as Ezekiels wife was unto him. God
would bring the Chaldaeans into it, and they should profane it with the blood
of those they found in it (for many fled thither for refuge) and then set it on
fire. The Jews had profaned it with Idols and idolatrous worship, Ezekiel. 8. by
coming into it with the guilt of notorious sins upon them. Jerem. 7, 9, 10.
and now Heathens should enter into it, defile and destroy it, the thought
whereof, made the Psalmist long before, to complain, saying, O God, the Heathen
are come into thine inheritance, thine Holy Temple have they defiled, they have
laid Jerusalem on heaps, Psalm. 79.1. The defiling the Temple was grievous to
pre-science, to remote apprehensions, what was it then to those, had the
present sight of it? The Septuagint reads the words in Ezekiel thus, (...), I
will pollute my holy things, that is, I will cause the Heathens to come and
profane the Temple, the Altar, and all the holy things belonging thereunto;
yea, so to profane them, as to lay them all waste.

The Excellency of your strength. The Hebrew is, Geoon uzzechem, superbiam
fortitudinis vestrae, The pride of your strength* Gaon signifies Majesty,
Excellency, Pride; from gaah to be lifted up, to excel, to grow Proud. The
Translation Vatablus follows has it, Gloriam fortitudinis vestrae, the glory
of your strength. The French, L'orgueil de vostre Empire; and so the Vulgar,
Superbiam imperii vestri, the pride of your Empire. The Temple was a strong
place, in which the Jews put so much confidence, as that they thought it
standing, they should for ever be safe, they prided themselves in it, and
cried, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, The Temple of the Lord,
Jerem. 7.4. They thought none able to harm them, and destroy that Temple.

If we read the words, The Excellency of your strength, as Junius, or your
strong excellency, as Piscator, the sense is, That though they had other strong
holds and Towers; yet none like unto the Temple, that excelled all, not only
in strength, but in renown. It was for the struct^re, the wonder of the world,
fifteen hundred thousand having been employed seven years in the building
thereof, 1 King. 5.15. it bare the Name of the Lord, 1 King. 8.29. in it God
dwelt, Psa. 80 1. of it he had a spec^al ca^e, 1 Kin. 9.3. and it was the
excellency of Jacob, Amos 6.8.

The desire of your eyes. Some understand by these words, Their Wives, but most
Interpreters expound them of the Temple, which seems to me to be the truest
interpretation, for Ezekiels wife typed out the Temple; and as she was the
desire of his eyes, so was the Temple of the Jews eyes; and the words of this
verse. do give countenance and life to this sense, I will profane my Sanctuary,
the excellency of your strength, the desire of your eyes. What was the
excellency of their strength? it was the desire of their eyes, viz. the
Sanctuary. By desire of the eyes is meant, id quod amatur, et in deliciis
habetur, that which is affected and delighted in, and such was the Temple or
Sanctuary, Psalm. 96.6. strength and beauty are in his sanctuary, there was
material and spiritual beauty, Psalm. 27.4. there David desired to dwell all the
days of his life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, the Temple was the desire
of his eyes; when he was shut out of it, see how he thirsted after it, Psalm.
63.1, 2. so of Jonah when he was in the fishes belly, he looked toward the
holy Temple, Jonah 2.4. it was beautiful in it self, and had the beauty of
holiness in it, the beautiful Ordinances and worship of God, so that hence
Sion was called the perfection of beauty, Psalm 50.2. and the Joy of the whole
earth, Psalm. 48.2. In Lament. 1.7. its said, Jerusalem remembered in the days
of her affliction and of her miseries, all her pleasant things, the Hebrew is,
all her desirable things, that she had in the days of old, and the Temple was
one of them, yea, the most desirable of all her desirables.

And that which your soul pittieth. Mashmall Naphshechem; that which your souls
indulge and favor, viz. the Temple which they dearly affected, and would not
by any means, that it should be destroyed, or profaned by Heathens. The
Vulgar has it, super quo pavet anima vestra, That for which your souls are
afraid men are jealous of that is dear unto them, least it should be violated.
Isaiah foreseeing by a Prophetical eye, what would befall the Temple, shows
how his soul pitied it, Isa. 64.11. Our holy and our beautiful house where our
fathers praised thee, is burnt up with fire, and all our pleasant things are
laid waste. The profaning of the Temple, which was Holy, full of glory and
beauty, the place of prayer and praise, went nearer the heart of this great
Prophet, than any thing else. So Jeremy, Lamen. 2.7. declares what pity he
had for the house of the Lord, the Lord has cast off his Altar, he has
abhorred his Sanctuary, he has given up into the hand of the enemy, the walls
of her Palaces, they have made a noise in the house of the Lord, as in the day
of a solemn feast. The Temple lay heavy upon Daniels heart, chap. 9.17. These
words by some are referred to their children, whom their souls pitied, and
would have spared, but of them are the words following:

And your Sons, and your Daughters whom ye have left, shall fall by the
sword. When the Babylonians should come, profane, and destroy the Temple, many
of their Children should suffer, and perish, some by famine, some by Plague,
some by other Calamities, and casualties; and those that were remaining, he
tells them they should fall by the sword. The Lord would take from them, not
only the Temple, but all things that were dear unto them, their City, their
Kingdom, their wives, their children.

22 And ye shall do as I have done, ye shall not cover your lips, nor eat the
bread of men. You wonder at me that I mourn not for my wife, being taken from
me by a sudden stroke, but ere long you will cease to wonder at me, and find
the case to be yours; when the enemies shall come, take away the Temple, your
wives and children, what things soever are dearest to you, then you will be so
confounded and amazed, that you will have neither hearts nor opportunity to
change your garments, and accompany your dead to the grave, but rather throw
them out into the streets, and shift for your lives. Then you will remember
me, make no Lamentation for your dead, then you will not pull off your tires
from your heads, nor the shoes from your feet, nor cover your lips, nor eat
the bread of mourners, then you will use no funeral rites or gestures.

23 But ye shall pine away for your iniquities. The word for pineing away, is
from Makak, to dissolve, and melt away, to consume, corrupt, to be filthy,
loathsome; because those things which do corrupt, fiunt tandem foetida, at last
become stinking and unsavory; So these Jews, their spirits, flesh, fat, and
strength, should consume, pine away, till they became even loathsome, and that
for their iniquities, that, is, the punishment of their iniquities, for so the
word is frequently used, as Isa. 53.6. and 2 King 7.9. some mischief will come
upon us, the Hebrew is iniquity, that is, mischief or punishment.

And mourn one toward another. In this ver. he had said, ye shall not mourn
nor weep, and here as with the same breath, he affirms, they should mourn one
toward another. Though the words run so, there is no contradiction in them.
Though they could not mourn openly, and in a funeral way, yet they should mourn
inwardly, and so as to pine away themselves. You here in Babylon, when the
report comes of taking the City, of burning the Temple, and of the spoiling of
all the desirable things in them by Nebuchadnezzars forces, you will be in
such a straight, as that you will not dare to mourn for fear of the
Babylonians, who will endanger your liberties, and lives, if you lament the
successes and doings of their King. So that what with Gods judgments upon them
at Jerusalem, and the fear of the enemies both there and in Babylon, neither
Jews in Jerusalem, nor in Babylon, should dare to mourn, or express any tokens
of sorrow, how full soever their hearts were thereof: But when they were in
secret, a man with his brother (for so is the Hebrew then they should open
their minds, one toward another, and mourn.

24 Thus Ezekiel is to you a sign. The Hebrew is, Lemopheth, in portentum, for
some prodigious thing. Mopheth, it notes a visible sign presageing good or
evil, and so accordingly is pleasing to the sight, or horrible; its that is
unusual, Preter Naturam, fore-shewing somewhat to come. Ezekiel not mourning
for the death of his wife, was a sign to them that they should be in such
perplexity as not to mourn for their Temple, City, and desirable things, which
should be pulled from them by a sudden stroke of God. The Hebrew have Oath and
Mopheth, which coming together are rendered signum and prodigium, as Isa. 20.3.
that is, Oath, or a sign, which is not preter naturam, as to cure the sick,
Martinius in lex. verb. signum.
that is, Mopheth, or a prodigy, which is preter naturam, as to raise the dead,
and do strange things.

According to all that he has done shall ye do. You have beheld Ezekiels
doings and wondered at them, he has but preached what ye are to do, and the
time is at hand, wherein he shall see you acting over the same things.

Obs. 1 The resting in holy things* causes God to remove them, how dear soever
they be unto us. I will profane my Sanctuary, the excellency of your
strength, the desire of your eyes, and that which your soul pittieth: you
confide in the outward means, you are taken with the outward splendour of the
ceremonies, and pomp of the Temple, but the spiritual true worship ye mind
not; the Temple, City, and State; are dearer unto you than I am, they have your
eyes, your hearts, your souls, when I am neglected. I have honored you with my
sanctuary, and all the holy things in it, belonging to it, but you have not
honored me; why is the Temple, and not my self, The excellency of your
strength? why is that the desire of your eyes, and not my self; who fill the
Temple with my glory? why is that the pity of your souls? being troubled, that
it should be laid in the dust, and not my honor, my glory, my name, which are
profaned amongst you, and laid in the dust.

Obs. 2 That sometime men's sins bring them into such streights, that though
they have lost their dearest comforts, yet they dare not outwardly manifest any
sorrow for them. God would take away the Temple, the Excellency of their
strength, the desire of their eyes, the pity of their souls, their Sons and
daughters, and they should not dare to mourn, or weep openly, but should
secretly pine away, and come to nothing. It was sad to loose their dearest
comforts, and more sad that they might not case their hearts by tears, or
sighings, and most sad that they must show no respect to their dead friends, by
any funeral rites. This sad condition had Jeremy told them of, chap. 16.6, 7.
Both the great and the small shall dye in the land, they shall not be buried,
neither shall men lament for them, nor cut themselves, nor make themselves bald
for them, neither shall men tear themselves for them, in mourning, to comfort
them for the dead, neither shall men give them the cup of consolation to drink
for their Father, or for their Mother; they should be in such streights,
through the fury and violence of their enemies (whom their sins had brought
upon them) that they should not dare to mourn for their dead, and the great
evils upon them.

Obs. 3 God may and does put his own faithful servants upon hard and unwonted
things, thereby to declare what shall be the condition of the wicked. Thus
Ezekiel is to you a sign: he has had his dearest comfort taken away by an
extraordinary stroke, he has not been suffered to mourn or weep therefore, and
why so? that he may be a sign unto you; you would not be taught by my
doctrine, now you must be taught by my example, according to all that he has
done, shall ye do. The things are harsh and unnatural, that I have done, but
its for your sakes that I am put upon them, and ye shall do as I have. Thus
Isaiah was put upon it, to walk naked and barefoot three years, which was hard
and reproachful, and why? That he might be for a sign and wonder upon Egypt,
and Ethiopia, Isa. 20.3. Some may think God deals ill with his Servants, in
putting them upon harsh, reproachful, unnatural, ridiculous things: but know,
all souls are the Lords, and he may command them what he please; they have
comfort in their obedience, what ever men think or say of them; when as those,
they are made signs unto, have nothing but bitterness and terrors.

Obs. 4 Signs accomplished, convince men of the truth, and just proceedings of
God: When this comes, ye shall know that I am the Lord God, by the
fulfilling what this sign foretold, ye shall be so convinced as to
acknowledge Ezekiel was a true sign, made so by me, and that I have dealt
justly with you for your iniquities, in bringing you into such streights, as
not to dare to mourn openly for your miseries; if Ezekiel have nothing to
object against me, from whom being innocent, I took away the desire of his
eyes, and forbad him to mourn for her; what can you object against me, being so
guilty as none more? If I rend away your desirable things, and hem you about so
with my judgments and enemies, that you shall not dare to mourn.

Verse. 25 Also thou Son of man, shall it not be in the day when I take from
them their strength, the joy of their glory, the desire of their eyes, and that
whereupon they set their minds, their Sons, and their Daughters. 26 That he
that escapes in that day, shall come unto thee to cause thee to hear it with
thine ears. 27 In that day shall thy mouth be opened to him which is escaped,
and thou shall speak, and be no more dumb, and thou shall be a sign unto them,
and they shall know that I am the Lord. In these words you may perceive,

1 A Repetition of the taking away what was dearest to the Jews, v. 25.

2 The Events thereupon, which are, 1 Tidings thereof brought to the Prophet,
ver. 26. 2 Freedom of prophesying in Ezekiel, v. 27. 3 Conviction of the
People. ibid.


25 When I take from them their strength, What in the 21. verse. he called, The
excellency of their strength, here he calls their strength, that was the
Temple; it was strong, but should not have been their strength, the God of the
Temple should have been their hope and confidence.

The joy of their glory. The word for joy is (...) which is, oblectationem
habere in animo, to have inward delight in the mind, and that without external
gesture. The Septuagint is, (...), sublevationem, the lifting up of your glory.
The Temple was their glory, and that cheared and lifted up their hearts; both
Junius and Piscator have it, gaudium ornatus eorum, the joy of their ornament:
the Temple was their ornament, Ezekiel. 7.20. nothing did so become and adorn
them, as their Temple did, and that worship which God appointed to be in it,
but they corrupted that worship, stained their glory, and joyed sinfully
therein.

The desire of their eyes. They took pleasure in beholding the Temple, which
was a stately building, beautified with precious stones and gold of Parvaim, 2 Chronicles. 3.6, 8. The second Temple took them much, Matthew. 24.1. Luke 21.5. yet
that was inferior to the first Temple. The material Temples were very dear
unto the Jews.

And that whereupon they set their minds. In the Hebrew it is, Veeth massa
naphsham, which Montanus renders, Elevationem animae eorum, the lifting up of
their souls, or minds; id ad quod attollunt an^mam suam, that unto which they
lift up their soul. So Junius. The Vulgar, Super quo requiescunt animae eorum,
That on which their souls do rest. Stephen: in phrasibus Hebraicis, renders the
place thus, In quod elevatur animas eorum, aut onus animae ipsorum, That their
hearts are lifted up unto, or that which is the burden of their souls, and
pressed them most, as the Temple, and their children, they were perplexed about
the loss of these.

This phrase of setting the mind upon a thing, imports,

2 Samuel 18.3
1 Over-prizing of the thing, when the mind is set upon a thing that is valued;
every man values what his lust is set upon.

2 Adhering to it, when the mind is set upon a thing, it cleaves to it, and
fixes upon it, 1 Samuel 9.20. set not thy mind on them.

3 Taking content and delight in a thing, seeking no further, Col. 3.2. set
your affections upon things above.

26 He that escapes in that day, shall come unto thee to cause, etc. The Lord
in his wise providence ordered it so, that some three years after this
Prophesy, there came one who escaped at the delivery up of Jerusalem unto
Nebuchadnezzar, and brought tidings that the City was smitten, Ezekiel. 33.21.
which was half a year after the smiting of it, if you compare this place in
Ezekiel with Jer. 52.6. and 2 King. 25.3.

To cause thee to hear it with thine ears. The Hebrew is, To the hearing of the
ears, not to tell what he has heard, as some Rabbis would have it, but to
tell in the ears of Ezekiel, what he had seen, and been an eye witness
thereof, its not improbable, but that they had heard some rumor of it before,
it being half a year since the taking of that City, and desolation of all
things. This man therefore came to inform Ezekiel of the certainty of all
things had passed.

27 In that day shall thy mouth be opened to him that is escaped, and thou
shall be no more dumb. That Ezekiel was dumb, and prophesied not at all, till
the man brought tidings of Jerusalems destruction, is not the sense of this
place, for in the 26. chapter he says, The Word of the Lord came unto him in
the eleventh year in the first day of the month, the meaning then is this, that
as to the Jews, he ceased Prophesying, and was as a dumb man unto them: God
gave him not the gift, nor called him to speak any more unto them, they
believed not what he had prophesied unto them, but gave ear to false Prophets,
who seduced them, telling them that they should shortly return, and Jerusalem
should not be destroyed: but when the news came to our Prophet, that God had
fulfilled what he had Prophesyed against the City and Temple, then God put his
word into his mouth again, and he spoke freely and boldly.

And thou shall be a sign unto them. As thou have often been a sign unto them,
sometimes representing an Army laying siedge against a City, chap. 4. sometimes
a Barber shaveing the hair, chap. 5. sometimes a man removing his stuff, chap.
12. sometimes representing a mourner, chap. 21.6. sometimes a condition wherein
there must not be mourning, as verse. 16, 17, 18. of this chapter; so here he
must be a sign unto them by his silence, all the time from this chapter to the
day that tidings came of the taking, and smiting of Jerusalem, he was for a
sign unto them.

They shall know that I am the Lord. Those are here in Babylon, those escape
the Famine, Pestilence, sword, shall know that I am the Lord, and sent thee to
Prophesy; that I am the Lord, and have made good what thou did Prophesy; that
I am the Lord, and have punished them justly for their iniquities.

Obs. 1 That our Natures are prone to over-prize, adhere to, and rest in
external privileges, and mercies. The Temple they doted upon; they made it
their strength, their glory, the joy of their glory, the desire of their eyes;
they set their minds upon that, and their Sons and Daughters; these had their
thoughts, affections, and hearts, they ran out strongly unto them, their souls
were lift up unto them, they looked at their Temple, as their strength against
all enemies, as their joy at home, and their glory abroad; so for their
children, they made idols of them, setting them up in their hearts, and their
hearts upon them, Hos. 9.11. their children were their glory, they gloried in
them, their hearts were set upon them; because children are parts of their
Parents, coming out of their loins, because they bear their image, are their
hopes, perpetuate their lives, names, and memories, therefore they let out
their hearts too far toward them, and set their minds upon them; and not only
on these, but on other things also, as riches, Psalm 62.10. If riches increase
set not your hearts upon them; as they increase, usually men's affections and
desires increase toward them, so that they come to trust in them, Psalm 52.7.
He trusted in the abundance of his riches, they were his security against all
dangers, all enemies. There is scarce any thing we have of any moment, but we
are apt to set our minds, and hearts thereon, hence we are commanded to keep
our hearts with all diligence, Prove. 4.23. The Hebrew is, above all keeping,
keep that. The less we set our minds upon the creatures, the longer we are
like to enjoy them; the more we set our minds upon them, the sooner they may be
pulled away. God will not endure any thing to deprive him of his interest in
the heart.

Obs. 2 God has his times to take away mercies, privileges idolized, and
confided in. In the day when I take from them their strength, the joy of their
glory, the desire of their eyes, and that whereupon they set their minds, etc.
God took away the Temple, their children, he had his day for them both, 1 Samuel
4.3. the Jews trusted in the Ark, and idolized that, Let us fetch the Ark of
the Covenant of the Lord out of Shiloh unto us, that when it comes amongst us
it may save us out of the hand of our enemies: But God had a day quickly after
that, to deprive them of it, verse. 11. The Ark of God was taken, the Philistims
took it, and slew thirty thousand footmen. Ephraim gloried in his children, but
God had his time to pluck them away, Hos. 9.11, 12. Their glory shall flee away
like a bird, from the birth, and from the won be, and from the conception,
though they bring up their children, yet will I bereave them, and there shall
not be a man left: their priding themselves in their children and increase,
made the Lord to diminish them, he took his times for that purpose; when Jonas
idolized the gourd, the Lord had his day to smite it, Jon. 4.7. Jacob was over
fond of Joseph, and God had his day to send him far from him, Genesis 37.

Obs. 3 That when God is most angry, executing his severest judgments, then
even then some are spared, some find mercy. When the Lord should take away the
Temple, City, their Sons and daughters, and make good all the dreadful
threatenings given out by Jeremy and Ezekiel against the Jews, by Plague,
Famine, Sword, Wild Beasts, which was as black, and sad a time as ever they
saw, even then some escaped. He that escapes in that day. It was hard for any
to escape, when such an Army of Babylonians, so cruel and bitter, had lain so
long round about Jerusalem, watching as Lions for the prey, yet some did
escape. Jeremy says, Lament. 2.22. in the day of the Lords anger, none escaped
or remained, he does not mean absolutely none, for himself escaped, and diverse
others; his meaning is, that they were few in comparison of those who suffered.
Since the beginning of the World, has it been heard, that God was so severe in
any judgment, executed upon the Sons of men, as to show no tokens of Mercy?
when he drowned the World, he showed great mercy to Noah, and his Family;
when he consumed Sodom and Gomorrah to ashes, he gave Lot and his Daughters
their lives for a prey; and when he made Jerusalem here a spectacle of his
vengeance, he made, an outlet, and escape, for some; he is a God that in
wrath, remembers mercy, and doubtless in that great overflowing, and drowning
made in the low Countries at this time, as he has showed much severity, so he
has not forgotten mercy.

Obs. 4 God at his pleasure puts singular honor upon his faithful servants the
Prophets. He tells Ezekiel that when he shall have accomplished what he had
prophesyed against Jerusalem, that he should be informed thereof, that he
would give some or others their lives for a prey, that they might bring him
tidings thereof, and so lift up his head against all his adversaries, who
looked upon, and counted him a false Prophet. Herein was great honor put upon
the Prophet, he that escapes shall come unto thee, to cause thee to hear it,
etc. So God honored Abraham, in telling him what he was about to do unto
Sodom, Genesis 18.17. Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do? no, he is
a Prophet, a friend of mine, my faithful servant, and he would not conceal the
matter from him, So Amos 3.7. The Lord reveals his secrets to his Servants
the Prophets, he sends a messenger unto them, even his holy Spirit, to
acquaint them with what he is doing, and with what he has done; so he sent
an Angel to Joseph to tell him that Herod was dead, who sought the life of the
young child, Mat. 2.20.

Obs. 5 God has his times of shutting and opening the mouths of his Prophets.
Thou shall speak, and be no more dumb: after this time the Prophet was as a
dumb man toward the Jews, because they believed not his Prophesies,
entertained him not as a Prophet, but slighted, mocked, and scorned him for
those unusual Passages of his, which the Lord put him upon; therefore the Lord
took him off from being a Prophet unto them, he had no more word for them; the
false Prophets went on still, but the true Prophet is silenced, men's sins do
cause the Lord to stop the mouths of his Prophets; their unbeleef,
unprofitablenesse, perverse constructions, they make of what is said and done
by them, their hearkening to lies, errors, and vain visions of false Prophets,
do discourage them and cause them to be silent. Thus Peoples untoward
carriages made Jeremy resolve to be silent, and Preach no more in the Name of
the Lord, Jerem. 20.9. The Prophets then had, and the Prophets now have great
discouragements, and cause enough to be silent, and God may cause them to be
as dumb unto them, removing them into corners, or taking them away; the peoples
sins rob them of spiritual mercies, Ezekiel. 3.26. I will make thy Tongue cleave
to the roof of thy mouth, that thou shall be dumb, and shall not be to them a
reprover, for they are a rebellious house. Their sin deprived them of
Prophesy, and made the Prophet dumb. Let us look to it, that our sins deprive
not us thereof, and make our Prophets dumb. God may in justice make them dumb
to us, and open their mouths to others. If you would still hear the Prophets
speaking unto you, let the Lord see you practicing, what they present unto you
in his name, yea, let the Lord hear you praying for them, and then see what is
written and promised, Isa. 30.19, 20, 21. then your Teachers shall not be
removed into corners, but your eyes shall see them, and your ears shall hear
them.

Obs. 6 That Prophets when they are discouraged, silenced, and become signs
unto the People, they are to be patient, waiting upon the Lord to make good
what they have spoken in his name, and for the opening of their mouths again;
Ezekiel was a sign unto them being silenced, and discouraged, he was patient,
expecting that God should accomplish what he had prophesyed, and open his
mouth again, which he did. In that day shall thy mouth be opened to him that
is escaped.

CHAP. XXV.
Verse. 1 The word of the Lord came again unto me, saying, 2 Son of Man, set thy
face against the Ammonites, and Prophesy against them. 3 And say unto the
Ammonites, hear the word of the Lord God, Thus says the Lord God; Because thou
said, Aha, against my Sanctuary, when it was profaned, and against the land
of Israel, when it was desolate, and against the house of Judah when they went
into captivity. 4 Behold, therefore I will deliver thee to the men of the east
for a possession, and they shall set their Palaces in thee, and make their
dwellings in thee: they shall eat thy fruit, and they shall drink thy milk. 5
And I will make Rabbah a stable for Camels, and the Ammonites a couching place
for flocks, and ye shall know that I am the Lord. 6 For thus says the Lord
God, because thou have clapped thine hands, and stamped with the feet, and
rejoiced in heart, with all thy despite against the Land of Israel. 7 Behold,
therefore I will stretch out my hand upon thee, and will deliver thee for a
spoil to the Heathen, and I will cut the off from the People, and I will cause
thee to perish out of the Countries: I will destroy thee, and thou shall know
that I am the Lord.
IN this Prophesy of Ezekiel, are four things chiefly considerable; The first
is, The destruction of the Jewish state by the Babylonians; which our Prophet
having declared in the 21 Chapters preceding, he comes now to the second
general head, which is, threatening of Judgment to other Nations, for their
Pride, and insulting over the Jews in their misery, and this he does in the
eight next chapters, from the beginning of this to the 33.

In this Chapter our Prophet denounces the judgments of God against four of
those Nations, which were enemies to the Jews, as.

1 The Ammonites. 2 The Moabites. 3 The Edomites. 4 The Philistims.
In these words read, is a Prophesy against the Ammonites, wherein, 1 Their
sins are propounded, verse. 3. and 6. 2 Their judgments, verse. 4, 5, and 7. 3
The End, why God would bring such judgments upon them, v. 5, and 7.


1 The Word of the Lord came again unto me, saying, Being taken off from
prophesying against the Jews for the present, he receives Commission now to
Prophesy against the Gentiles, who accused the God of the Jews, either of
weakness, that he could not defend his City and Temple, or of malice toward
his People, whom if he could deliver, yet he left to the spoil of enemies.
The Lord therefore would have them know, that he is neither weak, nor
malicious, but the great God of Heaven and Earth, who in justice punished his
own people for their sins, and would not spare them being guilty, and therefore
commands Ezekiel now to declare his judgments against them.

2 Set thy face against the Ammonites. In chapter 6.2. God bids him set his face
toward the mountains of Israel, cha. 3.17. against the daughters of his
People. Haec locutio significat fitmum and fixum habere propositum aliquid
faciendi Stephan in Phrasib. Hebra.
In chapter 20.40. God bid him set his face toward the South, cha. 4.3. he bids
him set it against the City, and now to set it against the Ammonites. This
phrase to set the face against one, imports a full and fixed resolution of
doing a thing. Ezekiel must now resolve to look sowerly upon the Nations, and
Prophesy as harsh things against them, as he had formerly done against the
Jews, Jer. 44.11. I will set my face against you for evil, and to cut off all
Judah. God was resolved not to behold them with a countenance, promising mercy,
but with a Countenance, threatening judgment, and utter destruction. So Ezekiel
must set his face against the Ammonites, and prophesy no pleasing things, but
sad, bitter, and destructive. The Ammonites had an incestuous beginning, they
came from Lot and his younger daughter, who named her Son Ben-Ammi, who was
the Father of the children of Ammon, Genesis 19.38. they were bitter and bloody
enemies to the Jews, 2 Chronicles. 20.1. Amos 1.13. 2 Samuel 10.3, 4, 6. their
country was strong, well peopled, and full of Cities, Numb. 21.24. Judge. 11.33.

3 Say unto the Ammonites, hear the word of the Lord God. How the Ammonites
should hear, Ezekiel being in Babylon, and they far off from him, is
inquirable. When he had denounced the judgments of God against them, and lest
this Prophesy upon record by some Babylonians or Jews, it might be convaied
unto them. The words, hear the word of the Lord, import not, that they should
hear it at that instant, when he prophesyed, but that they should in time know
what the mind of the Lord was toward them. And doubtless he was commanded
thus to say and Prophesy, for the Jews sake, that they hearing Ezekiel declare
and denounce such judgments against the Ammonites, who had insulted over them,
might in some measure be comforted thereby.

Because thou said, Aha, against my Sanctuary, when it was profaned. When
the Sanctuary was by the Babylonians taken and destroyed, the Ammonites as one
man or one woman, said, Aha, they rejoiced at it, and scoffed at the Jews. The
Hebrew word for Aha, is Haeach, which is interjectio gaudentis and insultantis,
a note of one rejoicing and insulting, Ps. 35.25. its rendered. Ah, so would we
have it, and Psalm 40.15. Aha, Aha, they rejoiced and insulted in the misery of
David. So these Ammonites that should have grieved at the prophaneing of the
Sanctuary, and the holy things thereof, and at the sufferings of Gods people,
they sported themselves thereat, and said, so would we have it, we are glad to
see this day, where now is your God? what are you the better for all your
sacrificing and worship? who has the true Religion, you or us? Zeph. 2.8. They
reviled and reproached the people of God, and magnified themselves against
their borders, they spoke evil of them in the day of their calamity, and added
affliction to their affliction, Lament. 2.16. All thine enemies have opened
their mouth against thee, they hiss and gnash the teeth, they say we have
swallowed her up, this is the day we looked for. The Septuagint for Aha, is,
(...), ye have been glad: The Latin Expositors turn it, Euge, Euge, they
commended the Heathen for what they did against the Temple, and people of the
Lord. The French, Ha, Ha, they laughed at the profanation of the Temple, and
great miseries of the Jews.

Against the Land of Israel, when it was desolate. The ten Tribes long before
were lead into Captivity by Salmaneser, 2 King. 17.5, 6. and when their land
was overrun by the Heathens, and they carried away, these Ammonites did show
Hostiles animos, then they cried Aha, and not only then, but also,

Against the house of Judah, when they went into Captivity. The House of Judah
went into captivity by degrees, some with Jehoiakim, some with Jehoiachin, and
the residue with Zedekiah, and still when any of them were carried away
captive; the Ammonites were glad of it, but especially at the last, when all
was laid waste, City, Temple, Land; when Zedekiah and the people were all led
into captivity, then they belched out their Sarcasmes, and bitter taunts.

4 I will deliver thee to the men of the East for a Possession. The Hebr. is,
To the Sons of the East. Whom they were, men's thoughts are various. Vatablus
makes them the Medes and Persians, Some think them to be the Kedarites, who
are called the men of the East, Jerem, 49.28. Others judge them to be the
Arabians, which descended from Abraham by Keturah, and were sent Eastward, Genesis
25.6. but there is no sound reason why we should not conceive them to be the
Babylonians, who were not fully North from them, but North-East: And therefore
as they were called sometimes a wind out of the North, Ezekiel. 1.4. so at other
times, a wind out of the East, or an East-winde, chap. 17.10.19.12. and when
Nebuchadnezzar began his military expedition, his eye was upon Rabbath of the
Ammonites, as well as Jerusalem of the Jews, Ezekiel. 21.21, 22. he used
divination to take him off from his indifferency between both, which the Lord
by his overruling providence ordered, so as, first to bring him to Jerusalem,
and five years after unto Rabbath, which he took, subduing the whole country,
Ant. lib. 10. ca. 10.
as Josephus relates, and when the Babylonians had spoiled the Ammonites. And
left their country desolate, its affirmed that the Arabians who were
Shepherds, came and possessed the same.

And they shall set their Palaces in thee, and make their dwellings in thee.
When Countries are conquered, the Conquerors are careful to keep them in
subjection unto them, and therefore place such in them, as they may confide in,
who build them palaces, dwelling places, and strong holds, to secure themselves
and the Country, and so cut them off from hopes of recovering their Liberty.
The word for Palaces is Tirah, which is a Castle or building, suum habens
ambitum, having its compass. Palaces, Castles, and great houses are much in
compass, or because they are built Lapidibus levigatis, aequaliter ordinatis,
with squared stones, set equally, and in order; the greater had their Palaces,
and the meaner sort their Tents or dwellings.

They shall eat thy fruit. What ever fruit thy land bears, they shall have the
benefit thereof; their Land was very fruitful, as may appear from 2 Samuel 17 27,
28, 29. it was near Canaan, the place Lot had chosen, and his Children
possessed for many years; so pleasant and fruitful, that had not God forbad the
Jews to meddle with it, Deuteronomy. 2.19. they would have had it in their possession.
Now strangers should possess, and eat the fruit of it.

They shall drink thy Milk. In those Eastern and hot Countries, they were wont
to drink Milk, Judge. 5.25. Jael gave Sisera milk to drink, and these Ammonites
having much pasturage, and many Cattle, abounded in Milk, by which, great gain
came in unto them, whereupon they are called, (...), Milk-Eaters, by Lavater.
(...), Milke-Drinkers, by Sanctius. Their Land flowed with Milk and Honey, and
now their enemies should eat the one, and drink the other. The Septuagint
renders the word, Chalab Milk, (...) fatness, Strangers should eat and drink
the fat and sweet, they should possess their land and wealth.

5 And I will make Rabbath a stable for Camels. Rabbath was the head City of
the Ammonites, so called because of its greatness and populousness. There was
another Rabbah, or Rabbath among the Moabites, for distinction sake therefore
this was called Rabbath of the children of Ammon, Deuteronomy. 3.11. it endured a long
siedge by Joab, 2 Samuel 12. in after times it was named Philadelphia, by
Ptolomaeus Philadelphus. This great City was taken by Nebuchadnezzar, and made
a stable for Camels; it had been a Palace for Princes, and was called the
Royal City, the City of waters, 2 Samuel 12.26, 27. and it was made a stable, and
that for Camels, which drank the waters thereof. Camels are Creatures made to
carry burdens, they will carry six hundred, Sands in his Travails. Franzius
historia animalium.
seven hundred, yea, ten hundred weight, they kneel down to take their burdens,
and being sufficiently loaded, they will admit no more; they cannot endure the
cold, they are content with little meat, and will travail four days without
water, they being weary in journeying, are not put on by blows, sed solo suavi
cantu, but by their keepers going before them and singing. The Hebrew word is,
(...) gamal whence our English word Camel. This Creature is patient of labor,
and repaies with advantage his Master for keeping.

And the Ammonites a couching place for flocks. By a Metonimy of the adjunct,
Ammonites, are put for their Country, that should be Lemirbatz Tzon, in
cubile gregis, for a bed of the flock, or resting place of the sheep and goats;
for Tzon signifies gregem ovium and caprarum, a flock of sheep and goats. The
Cities, and Towns of the Ammonites should be so wasted, that grass should
grow there, Cattle feed, and lie down there.

And ye shall know that I am the Lord. Now you blaspheme, saying, I was weak
and could not deliver the Jews out of the hands of Nebuchadnezzar, or malicious
and would not, but you shall know that I am a powerful and just God, who dealt
so with them, and you also, for your sins.

6 Because thou have clapped thine hands. He had mentioned their sin before,
verse. 3. and here he sets it out more fully, and that in the several degrees of
it: 1 They Clapped their hands, this gesture chap. 6.11. noted grief, here it
imports Gladness, They clapped their hands for joy, that the Temple was burnt,
and the Jews rooted out of their Land, Job 27.23. Men shall clap their hands at
him. When God should destroy the wicked man, then others should rejoice at it,
and manifest their joy, by clapping of hands, and when God did execute his
wrath upon Jerusalem, all that passed by did clap their hands at her, Lam. 2.15.

And stamped with the feet. This is the second expression of their insulting.
This gesture noted grief, chap. 6.11. but here the contrary. In the Hebrew its
dila^are te in pede, because thou have enlarged thy self in foot, that is,
stretched out thy foot, and stamped with it. The Septuagint is, (...), have
made a noise with thy feet. Their hands and feet were used in an insulting
manner against the Jews in their misery, its like they skipped and danced for
joy, and so made a noise with their feet.

And rejoiced in heart. Here is a third expression, They were not a little
affected, but glad at heart, that Jerusalem was ruined, and the Jews carried
away Captive: they said, in heart, Aha, so would we have it. This was as wine
unto them, it cheared and enlarged their hearts.

With all thy despite against the Land of Israel. This is a further degree and
aggravation of their sin, they insulted, and that with despite, Becol
shatesha, in omni contemptu tuo, in all thy scorn and despite: The word for
despite, is from shaat, which is, spinam ceu aculeum immittere, to thrust a
thorn or pointed thing into one to vex. These Ammonites did so contemn, scorn,
and despise the Jews in their great sufferings, that they were like thorns and
goads in their sides. Avenarius renders the words, in omni flagellatione tua,
in all thy lashing; their scorns and despightings were as so many lashes upon
the backs and sides of the Jews; they said, are these the holy people? Is this
the holy Land? where is your God? why has he not appeared for you? Thus they
reproached Gods People, and magnified themselves against their border? Zephany
2.8.

7 Behold therefore I will stretch out my hand upon thee. Thou have clapped thy
hands against me, and my people, therefore I will stretch out my hand upon
thee, that is against thee. It shall be upon thee to break and destroy thee. I
have held in my hand a long time, but now I will stretch it out, and thou shall
feel the power of it, Zeph. 1.4. I will stretch out mine hand upon Judah, and
upon all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and I will cut off the remnant of Baal
from this place, and the name of the Chemarims with the Priests. After
stretching, followed cutting off, So Ezekiel. 14.9. I will stretch out mine hand
upon him, and will destroy him from the midst of my People Israel.

I will deliver thee for a spoil to the Heathen. In the fourth verse it was
said, I will deliver thee to the men of the East, here to the Heathen. Those
men of the East were Heathens, whom the Jews hated as uncircumcised, Judge.
18.15. as Dogs, Matthew. 15.25, 26. Christ speaks according to the esteem the
Jews had of the Gentiles. To them they should be for a spoil. The word for
spoil is lebag, which Montanus renders, in cibum, for meat, but Piscator thinks
it put for Lebaz, in predam, for a prey, but that is not needful, because the
word Bag it self signifies meat, a Portion, as Dan. 1.5, 8. The Portion of the
Kings meat, bag hammelech. God would deliver the Ammonites to be meat unto
them, they should feed upon them, and what they had, as they had done upon the
Jews, they should eat their fruit, and drink their milk.

And I will cut thee off from the people. Thou art now a Nation among others,
but I will cause thee to cease from being a Nation, either by destroying of
thee, or sending thee into captivity, scattering thee amongst the Heathens. If
thou be a people at all, thou shall be a people without any head, without a
Name, thou shall be removed far from the people thou now borderest upon, and
they shall know thee no more, thou and thy name shall both perish, so much the
next words import.

I will cause thee to perish out of the Countries, I will destroy thee. These
last phrases do interpret the former, causing them to perish out of the
Countries, is cutting them off from the People; and destroying of them, is both.
The Hebrew word for perish and destroy, do signify an utter, and total
destruction (...) says Shidler, dicitur de omnimoda rei perditione, and (...)
says Kirker, significat personam vel rem aliquam ita abolere ut ejus nihil
reliquum maneat. The Septuagint joins them both, (...), I will destroy thee out
of the Countries with a destruction, that is utterly.

Obs. 1 The Lord having contended with his own family, he contends with
others. First, he had a Controversy with the Jews, and now he enters into
Controversy with the Nations, Son of man, set thy face against the Ammonites,
and Prophesy against them; he had formerly set his face against the Jews, and
prophesied sad things against them; which being done, he must set his face
against others, and prophesy not only dura but durissima, the hardest things
against them, even utter destruction. When Gods people have drunk of the Cup,
then it shall be given unto others, Jer. 25.15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22,
23, 24, 25, 26. God began with Jerusalem his own People and Family, and then
caused the cup of his fury to pass unto all Nations and Kingdoms. So Isaiah,
after he had begun with the Jews, and declared what dreadful judgments God
would bring upon them, he turns aside to the Nations, and lays the burden of
the Lord upon them, and that in nine Chapters together, from the beginning of
the 13. to the end of the 21. judgment often begins at Gods house, as Amos 3.2.
you only have I known of all the families of the earth, therefore I will
punish you for your iniquities. God would begin with them, Ezekiel. 9.6. Begin at
my sanctuary, but he ends elsewhere, Psalm 75.8. when Gods people have drunk
the red wine in the Cup, the wicked must drink the dregs, the Cup passes from
place to place till all be drunk off Jerem. 25.29. Lo, I begin to bring evil
upon the City called by my name, and should ye be utterly unpunished? ye
shall not be unpunished, for I will call for a sword upon all the inhabitants
of the earth. Have I begun with mine own City and People, and do you think to
go free? no, the sword is commissioned to come unto you, if that have eat the
flesh of my Sons and Drunk their blood, much more shall it eat your flesh, and
bones, and drink your blood. If Jerusalem go down, other Cities will not stand;
if God spare not his own Temple, he will not spare Satan's Synagogues; when the
green trees are cut down that stood in the garden, the dry trees must expect
the Axe, which stand in the forest.

Obs. 2 That the Lord takes notice what the ways and carriages of Nations are
toward him and his: Thou said Aha, against my Sanctuary when it was
profaned, and against the Land of Israel, when it was desolate: All the secret
consultings, plottings, revilings, attempts that are against the worship,
ways, and people of God, among Heathens, and Heathenish spirits are minded by
the Lord, Psalm 66.7. his eyes behold the Nations, the men of them, their
thoughts, words, and ways; when the Nations gathered themselves together
against Sion, and said, let her be defiled, and let our eye look upon Sion,
Mic. 4.11. God then looked upon them, and observed the workings of their
hearts, heads, tongues, and hands; yea, their rage and imaginations he
animadverts, Psalm. 2.1. Why do the Heathen rage, and the People imagine a vain
thing? He observed how insultingly the Babylonians carried it against his,
Jeremy 50.11. Psalm. 137. they rejoiced, they laughed, they said sing us one of
the songs of Sion, they and the rest of Sions adversaries, mocked at her, and
her Sabbaths; whatever the Nations now do devise, plot, speak, or enterprise
against the people of God, he that sits in heaven beholds the same, and laughs
them to scorn.

Obs. 3 To laugh at, and insult over the calamities of others, is a grievous
and provoking sin: Because thou said, Aha, against my Sanctuary when it was
profaned, and against the Land of Israel when it was desolate, and against the
house of Judah when it went into captivity: Behold, therefore I will deliver
thee to the men of the East for a possession, etc. Because the Ammonites
insulted, clapped their hands, stamped with their feet, were heartily glad at
the sufferings of the Jews, and vented their spite against them, therefore God
was exasperated, so as to threaten the Ammonites ruin, and utter extirpation:
They were the Neighbors bordering upon them, they were their confederates in
league with the King of Egypt, as the Jews were; they were their half brethren
descending from Lot, and upon these accounts should have sympathized with the
Jews, wept with those that wept, Romans 12.15. been sensible of their great
adversities, Heb. 13.3. but they insulted over them, mocked at them, were
despightful against them, and added coals to the fire, weight to their burdens,
and more chains to their bonds. Its not only an uncharitable, but also an
inhumane, an unnatural thing to insult, make sport, and dominere at the
miseries of others; when there be wars in a land, fires in Cities,
ship-wracks at Seas, robberies of houses, inundations of waters, and many
suffer grievous things, by such judgments of God, should we rejoice thereat,
mock and make our selves merry? Surely, if we do so, we offend, we provoke
the Lord, Prove. 17.5. He that is glad at Calamities shall not be unpunished.
The Hebrew is, shall not be innocent; God will deal with him as a person
deeply guilty, he that makes others Calamities the object of his gladness,
stirs up God to be the Author of his destruction. Shimei was glad at the
expulsion of David by his Son Absolon, yea, mocked at, and cursed him, 2 Samuel
16.7, 8. he made David's misery the matter of his mirth, but this kindled such
a fire in the breast of the Lord, that it made him return his wickedness upon
his head, 1 King. 2.44. and cut him off from the Land of the living. Its an
argument of a malicious heart, of an imbittered spirit, to insult over the
miseries of others, and mock at their calamities, yea, its an evidence of a
wicked man that does so, such are Ammonites and Babylonians, Job 31.29. If I
rejoiced at the destruction of him that hated me, or lift up my self when evil
found him. Job professes he did not make the misery of his enemies matter of
music, he had a better principle within, then to put him on to such a
wickedness. So David, though the abjects and base ones rejoiced in his
adversity, yet he durst not do so, but when they were sick, he put on
Sackcloath, he sympathized with them, he humbled his soul with fasting, and
prayed for them, Psalm 35.13, 14, 15. Of such a spirit was Solomon, who gives
wholesome Counsel, Prove. 24.17. Rejoice not when thine enemy falls, and let
not thine heart be glad when he stumbleth. He that rejoices at the misery of
his enemy, will be sad at his good, and both are evil. Some the greater evils
befalls their enemies, the more they rejoice; if they fall into sin, reproach,
or bitter affliction, they are much gladded at it; but thou that do so, have
not only stumbled, but art fallen, both into sin, and into the displeasure of
God, for verse. 18. is a reason, why men should not triumph in the troubles and
afflictions of others, least the Lord see it, and it displease him, and he
turn away his wrath from him; thy so-doing displeases the Lord, and may cause
him to turn away his afflicting hand from thine enemy, and to turn it against
thee. In these times this sin is too much in practice, nations and persons,
rejoicing in the miseries of one another: but we should further consider,

1 That if others be under the heavy strokes of God to day, we may be to
morrow: And therefore should not feast our selves upon others calamities, Eccl.
9.2. All things come alike unto all; There is one event to the Righteous and to
the wicked, what befalls thine enemy one day, whom thou think the worst that
lives, may befall thee the next day, though thou be the best man that lives;
Therefore boast not thy self of to morrow, for thou know not what a day may
bring forth, it may bring forth as much woe and evil to thee, as the former day
did to thine enemy or neighbor.

2 That we deserve as sad things as any others feel: Are not we sinners, and
such sinners as make the time perilous? 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. are not we
lovers of our selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, dis-obedient to
Parents, unthankful, unholy? etc. if we be so, why should not we fear least
the judgments of God should overtake us, and arrest us, as they have done
others, Lamen. 3.22. Its the Lords mercies, says Jeremy, That we are not
consumed: he puts in himself, and it was not single mercy, but mercies, all
Gods mercies were at work to keep them alive; We should wonder we are spared,
being such sinners as we are, rather than rejoice in the miseries of others,
who may be more righteous than our selves.

3 The end of Gods laying his hand upon others, Jam tua res agitur paries cum
proximus ardet.
it is not that we should rejoice, clap our hands, dance and insult over them
that be miserable, but it is to awaken us, and excite us unto Repentance, Luke
13. When God by his Providence brings sudden and sad strokes upon men, it is,
that others should consider and Repent: The death of the Galileans, and those
upon whom the Tower of Silo fell, was for that end; therefore says Christ,
Except you repent, you shall all perish. The miseries of Scotland, Ireland, by
the Sword, and of the Netherlands by waters, is not that men should rejoice,
but sympathize with them, and repent; if others suffer, and we be spared, that
is the goodness of God to us, and his goodness therein should lead us to
repentance.

4 The rule of Christ is otherwise, Matthew. 5 44. I say unto you, love your
enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray
for them which despightfully use you, and persecute you, we must not rejoice at
their miseries, but love them, and manifest our love by blessing them, doing
them good and praying for them.

Obs. 4 For the sins of the People, God lays Nations waste, and disposes of
them to whom he please: The sins of the Ammonites caused God to cut them
off, to destroy them, and their name, and to deliver them for a spoil to the
Heathen; and their Country to the men of the East for a possession, Psalm.
107.33, 34 He turns rivers into a wilderness, and the water-springs into
dry ground; a fruitful land into barrenness or saltness, for the wickedness
of them that dwell therein. He is the Governor among the Nations, Psalm
22.28. and when they do wickedly, he can break them with his Rod of iron, cut
them off with his battle Axe, and give their Countries to whom he pleases. He
set Jeremy over the Nations and Kingdoms, to root out, pull down, and destroy,
Jer. 1.10. which he did in a Prophetical way, chap. 27. many lands are
reckoned up there, and verse. 6. says God, Now have I given all these lands
into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar the King of Babylon; They were wicked, Proud,
Idolatrous, oppressive; and insulted against Gods people, and the Lord brake
them in pieces, and gave them to the men of the East. God that made the earth
gives it to whom it seems meet unto him, v. 5.

Obs. 5 Cities and places which are h^nourable among men, for their sins, God
poures contempt upon, and puts them into base conditions. Rabbath that was a
royal City, he makes a stable for Camels, Isa. 13.19, 20, 21. Babylon the
glory of kingdoms, the beauty of the Chaldees excellency, shall be as when
God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah, wild beasts of the Desert shall lie there,
and their houses shall be full of doleful creatures, Owls shall dwell there,
and Satyrs shall dance there: for Satyrs the Chaldee says, Dragons, Jerome
Devils; So spiritual Babylon, Rev. 18.4. Its fallen, its fallen, and become the
habitation of Devils, and hold of every foul spirit, and a cage of every
unclean and hateful bird. Rome that was so famous, is, or shall be a base
contemptible place, a dungeon for Devils, a prison for foul spirits, a cage for
the worst of Birds. Have not the Palaces of Prelates, and their Cathedrals been
made stables for horses in our days, and Prisons for malefactors?

Verse. 8 Thus says the Lord God, because that Moab and Seir do say, b^hold,
the house of Judah is like unto all the Heathen. 9 Therefore Behold, I will
open the side of Moab from the Cities, from his Cities, which are on his
frontiers, the glory of the Country Beth-jeshemoth, Baalmeon, and Kiriathaim.
10 Unto the men of the East, with the Ammonites, and will give them in
possession, that the Ammonites may not be remembered among the Nations. 11 And I
will execute judgments upon Moab, and they shall know that I am the Lord. In
these verses you have our Prophet denouncing judgments against the Moabites.
Where comes to be considered, 1 Their sin, v. 8. 2 The Judgments themselves.
v. 9, 10. 3 The End of those judgments, v. 11.


8 Because that Moab. The Moabites were brethren to the Ammonites, descending
from Lot and his eldest Daughter, Genesis 19.37. as the Ammonites did from him and
his youngest; they abode not in the ways and worship of the true God long; but
fell to idolatry, Judge. 10.8. were bitter enemies unto the Jews. Balack that
hired Balaam to curse them, was King of these Moabites, Numb. 22.4. they were
men of might, Exodus 15.15. and had the Jews under eighteen years in the days of
Eglon another of their Kings, Judge. 3.14. whom Ehud slew, and after him ten
thousand of the Moabites, all men of valor, v. 21, 22, 29. they infested the
Jews much, and often were there wars between them and the Jews, 1 Samuel 14.47. 2 Samuel 8.2. 2 King. 3.7. 2 Chronicles. 20.10, 11. In their land Moses dyed, and was
buried, Deuteronomy. 34.5, 6. from them descended virtuous Ruth, chapter 1.4. of whom also
Christ came, Mat. 1.5.

And Seir. Seir was a part of Edom, Genesis 32.3. the land of Seir, the Country of
Edom, or field of Edom, it was a mountainous part of Edom, Genesis 14.6. its
called Mount Seir, and that from Seir the Horite Prince of the country as
Bonfrerius observes from Genesis 36.20. The Horites, or Horims were driven out by
Esau, Deu. 2.22. So that he, and his posterity possessed it, having that name
before. Esau was Seir, an hairy rough man, and that place was mountainous and
rough where he sat down.

The house of Judah is like unto all the Heathen. The Jews, said they, have
stood upon it that their God was the only true God, better and mightier than all
the Gods of the Nations; that they were a people so dear to him that he would
defend them and their City, having his Temple, his Worship, his Prophets, Isa.
4.5. chap. 31.5. but we see their Prophets are Liars, they are deluded with
vain considences, and their God has forsaken them; he has not dealt better
by them, than our Gods have done by us; he has exposed, yea, delivered them
into the hands of their bloody and barbarous enemies. So that Judah is like
unto all the Heathen, who have not met with worse usage from the Babylonians,
than the Jews themselves have. Thus Moab blasphemed, and magnified himself
against the Lord, deriding Israel, and skipping for joy, Jer. 48.26, 27.

9 I will open the side of Moab from the Cities, etc. The word for side, is
Chetheph, which signifies a shoulder, and metaphorically the side or strength
of any thing. Here by side is meant, the strong Cities of Moab, the Frontier
towns, which were as the shoulders and sides to the Country. These God would
open, he would break their ribs and shoulders, and make way into the heart and
bowels of their Country, Jer. 48.25. The horn of Moab is cut off, and his Arm
is broken, Moabs horns and arms were his Frontier Towns, Castles, and Forts,
he had to keep out the enemy, but the Lord would break these by the Chaldaean,
and let him into their Land.

The Glory of the Country. The Hebrew for Glory, is Tzebi from Tzabah,
tumescere, inflare, To swell, to be lifted up, because those things, which are
our glory, and ornament, usually do puff us up, and make us to swell. The
Cities here mentioned were the glory of the Moabites.

Beth-jeshimoth. This City was near Jordan, in the plain of Moab, between which
and Abel-shittim, the Israelites pitched their last tents before they entered
into Canaan, Numb. 33.49. it was part of Reubens inheritance at first, Josh.
13.20. and signifies domum solitudinis, The house of solitariness.

Baal-meon. This was another City belonging unto them, its mentioned, Numb.
32.38. 1 Chronicles. 5.8. The Septuagint renders it, (...), upon the Fountain.
Eusebius says, it was a great village, Juxta montem calidarum aquarum, nigh a
mountain of hot waters. Bonfrerius interprets it, Habitaculum Baalis.

Kiriathaim. It was in the Tribe of Reuben, Josh 13.19. formerly possessed with
Giants, Genesis 14.5. rebuilt or beautified by the Children of Reuben, Numb.
32.37. and after the ten Tribes were carried away, who had driven out the
Amorites, the Moabites repossessed it, Vide Bonfrerium.
being formerly expelled thence by the Amorites. The word signifies Occursus,
meetings, or two Cities, because two Cities met together in it.

10 Unto the men of the East, with the Ammonites, etc. God would make way
through Moabs chief Cities for the Babylonians, who were men of the East, that
they should come in, and take their Country in possession. The Hebrew for with
the Ammonites, is, against the Sons of Ammon. God would so deal with the
Moabites as he had done with the Ammonites, The Men of the East, should come
and take possession of both their Countries.

That the Ammonites may not be remembered among the Nations. God would so spoil
and waste the Nations of the Moabites, and Ammonites, that not only themselves
should perish, but the memory of them.

11 And I will execute judgment upon Moab. They think I am a God like the gods
of the Nations, but they shall find my hand so heavy upon them, be so broken,
and ruined, that they shall know I am far different from all the gods of the
Heathen.

Obs. 1 Nations are like one another in sin and wickedness: the Ammonites
insulted over, and scoffed at the Jews in the day of their affliction, and so
did Moab, and Seir. The house of Judah is like unto all the Heathen; Moab
reproacheth, and Ammon reviles them, Zeph. 2.8. Jerusalem was great among the
Nations, and Princess among the Provinces, Lament. 1.1. but they all were glad
of her ruin, and laughed at her suffering, Lam. 2.15, 16.

Obs. 2 The World and men of it, judge untowardly of the Lord, and his people.
What said Moab and Seir, Behold the house of Judah is like unto all the
Heathen, their God is as our gods, and his people is as we are, they have no
more privilege than others. Heathens have heathenish thoughts of God himself,
and those are his, Isa. 36.18. Beware least Hezekiah persuade you, saying, The
Lord will deliver us. Has any of the Gods of the Nations delivered his land
out of the hand of the King of Assyrea? where are the gods of Hamath and
Arphad? where are the Gods of Sepharvaim: and have they delivered Samaria out
of mine hand? Who are they amongst all the gods of these lands, that have
delivered their land out of my hand? that the Lord should deliver Jerusalem out
of my hand? Here you see what the thoughts of Rabshakeh, Senacherib and his
Army were, concerning the God of Israel, that he was nothing differing from
the gods of the Nations, that he was no more able to deliver Jerusalem out of
their hands, than the Idol gods were to deliver the Nations out of them, that
the Jews should presently become like other people; you have it more fully, in
2 Chronicles. 32.14. Who was there among all the gods of those nations, that my
fathers utterly destroyed, that could deliver his people out of my hand, that
your God should be able to deliver out of mine hand? No god of any Nation,
against whom my fathers and my self did ever draw the Sword, was able to
withstand them or me, and so to protect the people; and what do you Jews
think, your God greater, and wiser, better, more able to do for you? you
deceive your selves, I am come against you, and you must fall into my hands,
and become like the Nations.

Obs. 3 Heathens reproaching God and his people, makes may for sad judgments
upon them, ushers in certain destruction: because Moab and Seir said, The house
of Judah is like unto all the Heathen, which was a reproaching of God and his
People; Therefore behold, I will open the side of Moab, I Will break his ribs, his
strong holds, and let in a potent enemy to destroy him and his. When men
blaspheme the name of God, and are inhumane toward his people, albeit they be
Heathens, God is so offended at it, that he will severely deal with them,
Zeph. 2.8, 9. I have heard the reproach of Moab, and the revilings of the
children of Ammon, etc. Therefore as I live says the Lord of Hosts, the God of
Israel, Surely Moab shall be as Sodom, and the children of Ammon as Gomorrha,
even the breeding of nettles, and salt pits, and a perpetual desolation -- This
shall they have for their pride; because they have reproached and magnified
themselves against the people of the Lord of Hosts; Moab and Ammon were near
unto Sodom, and Gomorrha, they could not be ignorant of Gods dealings with
them; and because in their pride they reproached God and his People, they
should be made like unto them; their judgment should have something
extraordinary in it, Gods curse should be upon them, they should breed
nettles, and salt pits, that is, be fruitless and useless, yea, and that for
ever. When Nahash the Ammonite would not make a Covenant with the men of Jabesh
Gilead, unless he might thrust out their right eyes, and lay it for a
reproach upon all Israel, see what the issue was, for intending to reproach
Gods people and himself in them, 1 Samuel 11. God stirred up the spirits of Saul
and the people, so that they fighting with the Ammonites, slew them, and
scattered them, so that two of them were not left together, verse. 11. its ill
to have a reproaching desire toward Gods people, and far worse to do it. If
God do not bring some open judgment upon such, he will secretly consume them,
Isa. 51.7, 8. Fear ye not the reproach of men, neither be afraid of their
revilings, for the moth shall eat them up like a garment, and the worm shall
eat them like wool: Moths and Worms are close hidden things, and do secretly
eat into garments and wool, whereby they are altogether marred; So God has
secret and invisible moths and worms, plagues and judgments to devour those
that reproach his people, him, and his ways. If God be severe against
Heathens doing it, will he spare Christians doing such evil?

Obs. 4 When God is wroth with a Nation, strong holds and Garrisons will not
secure and protect them. Moab had frontire Towns, and those manned with men of
might, but they kept not out the judgments of God, he opened the side of
Moab, he brake in upon them, notwithstanding their Forts, Castles, Garrisons,
and their great strength, Moab is notable for strong Forts, and strong men,
Jer. 48.17, 18, 25, 41. but how strong soever their Cities, their
fortifications, their men were, they could not preserve Moab, Isa. 25.10. Moab
shall be trodden down under him, even as straw is trodden down for the
dunghill, all Moabs strength was no more unto the Lord than straw, straw is a
weak thing, yea, among the weakest of things, the foot of a Child can tread
that down. Look then how easily the foot of a child or man treads down Straw,
so easily would the foot of God tread down all the strength of Moab: So for
Nineveh, the Lord shook down her strong holds, as easily as ripe figgs are
shaken off the fig tree, Nahum. 3.12. as there is no counsel against the Lord,
Prove. 21.30. so there is no force or fort can stand out against him; if he
give out the command, strongholds are destroyed, Isa. 23.11. if he be angry,
they are thrown down, Lamen. 2.2. its lawful to have strongholds, but sinful
and vain to trust in them, that makes what was once profitable, to become
prejudicial.

Obs. 5 Cities, Forts, and strongholds, do adorn and beautify the places where
they are: Moabs Cities, and frontire Towns, were the glory of the Country:
Adullam a City belonging to Judah, Josh. 15.35. near which was the Cave, David
hid himself in, when he fled from Saul, 1 Samuel 22.1: is called the glory of
Israel, Micah 1.15. Piscator interprets it of Jerusalem, and makes that the
glory of Israel, he shall come to Adullam, even to the glory of Israel: be the
words meant of Adullam or Jerusalem, they were the glory of Israel. Babylon,
Isa. 14.4. is styled the golden City, what an ornament was that unto the
Province or place where it was? So Tyrus Isa. 23.8. is named, The crowning
City, it was as great an honor to the Country where it was, as a Crown to a
Kings head. In Canaan were great and goodly Cities, Deuteronomy. 6.10. In Midian were
Cities and goodly Castles, Numb. 31.10. and these were the Ornaments and glory
of those places.

Obs. 6 Strongholds, Cities, Nations, are the Lords, and he gives them to
whom he will; As he gave the Ammonites, so the Moabites Country unto the men
of the East, and that for a possession, Ezekiel. 29.19. Behold, I will give the
land of Egypt unto Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon. What had the Lord to do with
Egypt? was it not Pharaohs? had he any right to dispose of it to another King?
yes, he had more right to it than Pharaoh himself, Jerem. 10.7. he is the King
of Nations, and may take from one and give to another, at his pleasure. He
took the Kingdom out of Rhehoboams, hands, and gave it unto Jeroboam even ten
Tribes, 1 King. 11.35. he took the Land of Canaan from others, and gave it
unto Abraham, and his seed, Genesis 13.12, 14, 15. afterward he took it from
them, and gave it with the great City thereof, into the hands of the
Babylonians, Jer. 32.3. and with it every strong hold, Hab. 1.10. and after
seventy years gave it again unto the Jews.

Verse. 12. Thus says the Lord God, because that Edom has dealt against the
house of Judah, by taking vengeance, and has greatly offended; and revenged
himself upon them. 13 Therefore thus says the Lord God, I will also stretch
out mine hand upon Edom, and will cut off man and beast from it, and will make
it desolate from Teman, and they of Dedan shall fall by the sword. 14 And I
will lay my vengeance upon Edom, by the hand of my people Israel, and they
shall do in Sodom according to mine anger, and according to my fury, and they
shall know my vengeance, says the Lord God. These verses contain a Prophesy
against the Edomites, who are the third sort of enemies to the Jews, mentioned
in this Chapter. Here likewise as before, you have, 1 Their sin, v. 12. 2 Their
Judgments, v. 13. 3 The Efficient and instrumental causes, v. 14. 4 The End of
those judgments, ibid.


12 Because that Edom has dealt against the house of Judah. By Edom, are meant
the Edomites or Idumaeans, who descended from Esau, who Genesis 36.8, 9. is called
Edom, and the Father of the Edomites, which name he had either from his red
skin and hair, Genesis 25.25. or rather from his selling his birthright for
red-pottage, verse. 30. make me to eat, minhaadom, haadom hazzeh of that r^d,
that red: he was cruel and profane, not unlike unto him were his posterity,
the Edomites, who ever bare ill will to the house of Jacob; When the Jews came
out of Egypt, Moses sent to the King of Edom to let them have passage through
their Country, but he refused, and came out in hostile manner against them,
though they were his brethren, Numb. 20.14, 18, 20. It was Doeg an Edomite that
fell upon the Priests, and slew them, 1 Samuel 22.19. That the Edomites
unkindnesse might not lie upon the spirits of the Jews, and beget ill blood in
them, the Lord made a Law, that they should not abhor an Edomite, because they
were their brethren, Deuteronomy. 23.7. he took care that there might be brotherly
love between them, but there was very little.

Edom has dealt against the house of Judah by taking vengeance. What cause the
Edomites had to deal revengefully with the Jews, we must inquire. They being
borderers upon the Jews, Josh. 15.1. and full of enmity against them, did many
times vex and prejudice them; whereupon when Saul was King, he fought against
them, as being their common enemies with others, 1 Samuel 14.47. and David slew
all their Males, lying upon them six months with his Army, 1 Kin. 11.15, 16.
and made them tributary, putting garrisons in all parts of their Country, 2 Samuel 8.14. After this, in Jehorams days they revolted, and made themselves a
King, and hereupon were smitten by Jehoram and his forces, 2 King. 8.20, 21.
Amaziah also in his days slew ten thousand of them, 2 King. 14.7, and other
ten thousand did the children of Judah carry away Captive, and threw them off
the top of a rock, and broke them in pieces, 2 Chronicles. 25.11, 12. these things
together with that ancient grudge they had against them, for Jacobs getting the
blessing and birthright from Esau, their Father, made them splenetive, and to
seek revenge; and therefore when they had any opportunity, they used violence,
and shed innocent blood, Joel 3.19. and when the Babylonians came against the
Jews, carried them away Captive, the Edomites rejoiced at it, encouraged them
against the Jews, and said of Jerusalem. Raze it, raze it, even to the
foundation thereof, Psalm 137.7. they were as the Babylonians, Obad. ver. 11.
Tho^ waste as one of them, look what spirit was in a Babylonian the same was in
an Edomite; did they speak proudly? so did the Edomites, ver. 12. did they
enter the gates of Jerusalem, and lay hands on the prey? so did the Edomites,
ver. 13. did they cut off many? so did the Edomites, they cut off those that
did escape, and delivered up those remained in the day of distress, ver. 14.
Thus they dealt against the house of Judah, by taking vengeance. The Hebrew for
taking vengeance, is in revenging a revenge; Edom was greedy of revenge, and
set upon it, so much the doubling of the word imports.

And has greatly offended and revenged himself upon them. Turpiter se dare ita
ut propter culpam ceu poenam nondum expiatam affletur ceu exibiletur ab
hominibus. Avenar. Vide Kirker in verbo. Asham.
In the Hebrew its vaijeshmu ashom, deliquerunt, delinquendo, they offended in
offending: that is, they greatly offended; Asham signifies to do wickedly,
shamefully, and also to make desolate, Ezekiel. 6.6. because abominable sins do
bring desolation. Junius renders the words thus, and do make themselves guilty,
indesinenter, for ever; they so offended, as that there was no pardon, no mercy
for them. Piscator, Reatum magnum contraxerunt, They contracted great guilt.
Their revenging themselves upon the Jews made them exceeding guilty.

1 The Jews were their brethren. Obadiah 10. Amos 1.11.

2 They were their neighbors, Idumaea and Judaea bordered upon one another,
Mark. 3.8.

3 They were Confederates with the Jews, Jer. 27.3. An Edomitish Ambassador
was at Jerusalem, who together with the Ambassadors of the other Kings there
mentioned, were strengthening themselves with Zedekiah against Nebuchadnezzar,
Obad. 7.

They therefore to revenge themselves for former wrongs done them, upon the
Jews, and that in the day of their calamity this made their sin exceeding
sinful.

13 I will also stretch out my hand upon Edom. In the 7. verse. the Lord had
said, that he would stretch out his hand upon Ammon, that is, he would
severely punish it; so now also, he would stretch it out upon Edom, and make
it exemplary by his judgments, he would stretch out his hand, not to help,
but to destroy Edom.

I will cut off man and beast from it. It was a populous Country, and abounded
much in Cattle, but God would cut them all off, Isa. 34.6. he would make a
great slaughter in the land of Idumaea, his sword should eat the fat, and drink
the blood of Lambs, Goats, and Rams.

And will make it desolate from Teman. Teman was a principal city in Idumaea,
Jer. 49.7. Concerning Edom, thus says the Lord of hosts; is wisdom no more in
Teman^ is Counsel perished from the prudent? is their wisdom vanished? Jerome
makes it to be in Edom, and intimates to us that the people of Teman were
wise, learned, and understanding: the inhabitants hereof were called Temanites,
1 Chronicles. 1 45. and so all that dwelt thereabouts; in Job you read of Eliphaz
the Temanite, Job 15.1.42.7, 9. he was of this City, so called from Teman, the
Son of Eliphaz, which Eliphaz was the eldest Son of Esan, Genesis 36.15. Jerome
tells us, that the Hebrews call all the South Region Theman, and therefore both
he and the Septuagint sometimes do render it the South. Vid. Bonfrerium in
onomasticis.
From this City even to Dedan, should all be laid desolate.

They of Dedan shall fall by the sword. Dedan was another City of note in the
opposite part of the Country to Teman, or a part of Idumaea, Indicu propheta
Theman fuisse in uno Idumaeorum fi^e Dedan autem in alio. Maldonat.
so called from Dedan that descended from Cush, Genesis 10.6, 7. or that Dedan was
from Ioshtan, Deuteronomy. 25. it was a rich and merchandising place or City, Ezekiel.
27.15. the men and merchants of it, God threatened to cut off by the sword.

14 And I will lay my vengeance upon Edom. The word for vengeance is, Nikmath;
In the Septuagint (...), which in 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. is rendered vengeance, which is
a wrathful retribution of evil, Vindicta divina est poena qua u^ciscitur deus
peccata improborum ut eos destruat Polan. in Syntagm.
as Leigh says in his Crit. Sacr. or a punishing of sinners unto destruction;
its peculiar to the Lord, Deuteronomy 32.35. Romans 12.19. The meaning here is,
that God would punish Edom, so as Edom should be destroyed.

By the hand of my people Israel. The word Hand, is taken by some Interpreters
for the Babylonians, by whose hand and power, the Jews were smitten, and
broken, them God would stir up to be avenged on the Edomites, for their
unbrotherly dealings with the Jews. Its true, they were shortly after subdued
by the Babylonians, for God had promised to give Edom and other Nations unto
Nebuchadnezzar, Jerem. 27.3, 6. But notwithstanding this were so, that which I
find in the prophesy of Obadiah, v. 18. The house of Jacob shall be a fire,
and the house of Joseph a flame, and the house of Esau for stubble, and they
shall kindle in them, and devour them, and there shall not be any remaining of
the house of Esau: This Prophesy inforceeth me to understand by hand here, the
hand of the Jews, and not of the Babylonians. God would bring back the Jews
again from their Captivity, and by them plague the Edomites, waste and consume
them by their hands, as stubble by a fire; which was done in the time of the
Macchabees, 2 Maccha. 10.15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. there you shall
find that Judas Macchabaeus flew of the Edomites forty thousand. Vide Joseph.
l. 13. antiq. c. 17
It was prophesied long before, that Edom and Seir should be possessed by the
Jews, Numb. 24.18.

They shall do in Edom according to mine anger; and according to my fury. Mine
Anger and my fury is great against the Edomites, and whatever thoughts Edomites
or Jews have in them, judgments shall be executed upon the one by the other,
according to mine anger, not their anger; according to my fury, not their fury.

And they shall know my vengeance. They shall have experience thereof, they
shall feel the weight of my vengeance, and acknowledge it to be very heavy.
The Septuagint is, (...). The Jews had it laid upon them before, and the weight
of it brake them in pieces, at which they sported themselves, now by their
hand, it should be laid upon the Edomites, and they should know and acknowledge
that the God of Israel was another kind of God than the Gods of the Nations.

Obs. 1 That bearing grudges in the mind, and seeking revenge thereupon, does
highly displease the Lord, and put under much guilt. Edom had former
unkindnesses in mind, and acted revengefully when opportunity served, by this
he contracted great guilt, he greatly offended. Men ought to forgive one
another, and not bag up malice in their hearts, Levit. 19.18. revenge is flatly
against the command, verse. 19. its against the light of nature, which teaches
us to do as we would be done unto, its thrusting God out of his office, and
putting our selves into his place, Heb. 10.30. and these things bring us under
dreadful guilt, and make us great offenders. Though revenge be sweet, yet it
will be bitterness in the end. Therefore let us learn that needful and
unpractised lesson, owe nothing to any man, but to love one another, Romans 13.8.
owe them no hatred, Levit. 19.18. no grudges, James 5.9. no bitterness, nor
evil words, Ephesians. 4.31. but owe love, much love, fervent love, constant love,
yea fruitful love, one unto another.

Obs. 2 Bitter and malicious practices of brethren against brethren, especially
in their misery, causes God to bring in severe and consuming judgments; the
Edomites dealt bitterly and maliciously against the house of Judah, and
therefore the Lord stretched out his hand upon Edom, cut off man and beast from
it, and made it like a wilderness from Teman to Dedan. Their unbrotherly,
their enemy-like carriage to the Jews in their distress, was their undoing,
see Amos 1.11, 12. and take what Obadiah gives you, verse. 10. for thy violence
against thy brother Jacob, shame shall cover thee, and thou shall be cut off
for ever. The Papists in Ireland, those Edomites, how bitter, how cruel and
bloody were they against the house of Jacob, all the Protestants; and has not
their own doings covered them with shame, and caused them to be cut off for
ever? The Edomites in this Land, and those in Scotland, how unbrotherly did
they deal with us in our low estate, how did they insult over us, speak
proudly, and lay their hands upon our substance, and these dealings of theirs
have caused the Lord to bring sharp and consumptive judgments upon them.

Obs. 3 When sore judgments and destructive punishments, do come upon Nations,
its God that does bring them, whosoever be the executioners of them. In this
Chapter God takes it off upon himself, I will lay vengeance upon Edom, and ten
times before, I will deliver Ammon, verse. 4. I will make Rabbath a stable for
Camels, verse. 5. I will stretch out my hand, I will cut thee off, I will cause
thee to perish, I will destroy thee, verse. 7. I will open the side of Moab,
verse. 9. I will execute judgment, verse. 11. I will stretch out my hand, I will
make it desolate, verse. 13. and thrice more in the Chapter afterward. Men are
backward to eye God, when judgments come, they will not see his hand; the
hands of men they see and feel, and thereupon fret, rage, meditate revenge,
disquiet themselves, plot mischief, and attempt changes; but did they see Gods
hand, laying vengeance upon them, they would see also how justly he had done
it, even for their sins, and so humble themselves, be quiet, submit, and
accept the punishment of their iniquities. God has laid his vengeance upon
Nations near us, and farther off, they do not, they will not see the Lord, or
his hand, but they shall see, and be ashamed for their envy at his people;
whatever vengeance is upon any Nation, its the Lords vengeance, not man's.

Obs. 4 Its Gods method to plague and punish the wrongers by the wronged. The
Edomites dealt wretchedly, cruelly, against the house of Judah, they were the
wrongers, the oppressors, and what says God? I will lay my vengeance upon
Edom, by the hand of my people Israel: They were the wronged. The Edomites
thought the Jews should never be able to get up again, or trouble them, but
God had his time to make them instruments to plague and punish those had
entreated them so ill, Obad. 21. The Lord caused Saviors to come up upon Mount
Sion, to judge the Mount of Esau after the Babylonish Captivity, the house of
Jacob grew strong, became terrible as fire, and burnt the Edomites as stubble
and straw. Those they had despised and insulted over, at last they suffered by.

Obs. 5 When God imploies men to be instruments of executing his judgments,
they are carried forth so far as he pleases. They shall do in Edom, according
to mine anger, and according to my fury: God had conceived great anger against
them, had much fury to let out, therefore they should destroy man and beast,
make it desolate from one end or side of the country to the other.

Obs. 6 The vengeance of God is an awakening and distinguishing thing: they
shall know my vengeance: that I am a God of infinite power, most holy and just,
differing from all the Gods of the Nations.

Verse. 15 Thus says the Lord God, because the Philistines have dealt by
revenge, and have taken vengeance with a despightful heart, to destroy it for
the old hatred. 16 Therefore thus says the Lord God, behold, I will stretch
out mine hand upon the Philistines, and I will cut off the Cherethims, and
destroy the remnant of the Sea coast. 17 And I will execute great vengeance
upon them with furious rebukes, and they shall know that I am the Lord, when I
shall lay my vengeance upon them. These verses are a Prophesy against the
Philistines, where you may take notice of, 1 Their sin, they were revengeful,
v. 15. 2 Their punishment, cutting off, destruction, v. 16. 3 The manner of
Gods punishing them, v. 17. with furious rebukes. 4 The End of his punishments,
v. 17. they shall know that I am the Lord.


15 The Philistines. They came out of the loins of Casluhim, Mizraim, and Ham,
Genesis 10.6, 13, 14. Their Country was Palestina, which was West of Judaea, and
bordering upon the Sea, it had five great Cities in it, Ashdod, Gaza, Askelon,
Gath, and Ekron, 1 Samuel 6.17. each of which had its Lord, Josh. 13.3. The Sept.
calls them (...), alienigenae, men of another stock, race, nothing allied to
the Jews. They owned not the God of Israel, but had other gods, Judge. 6.10.
Dagon was a chief God of theirs, Jud. 16.23. they had an house of gods, 1 Chro.
10.10. poor and petty gods, that were confined to, and comprehended in an
house. These Philistims were men of war, they had the Jews under their power
eighteen years together, Judge. 10.7, 8. yea, forty years together, Judge. 13.1.
in Samuels days, they slew thirty thousand footmen at once, and took the Ark
of God, 1 Samuel 4.10, 11. they slew Saul and his three Sons in another Battle,
whereupon they came to possess many Cities of the Israelites, 1 Samuel 31. They
were the greatest enemies the Jews had, and more frequent wars were between
them and the Jews, than any other.

Have dealt by revenge. The Hebrew is, Pro facere in ultione, for that thou
have had to do in revenge, which is an act of an ulcerous mind, repaying evil
for evil. The word Nakam revenge, has affinity with (...) or kam, insurgere,
for ultor in laesorem insurgit. The revenger rises up against him, has
wronged him, be the injury real, or in imagination, and satisfyeth himself for
the same. The Philistims as they had often conquered and kept under the Jews, so
they had often been conquered and held under by the Jews. Sampson in his days,
plagued and slew many of them, Judge. 14, 15, and 16. chapters. So in Samuels
and Jonathans times, they suffered much, 1 Samuel 7.13. and chap. 14. but David,
2 Samuel 5. and 8. and 21. Chapters, was the great Champion that subdued them.
Hezekiah also smote them, 2 King. 18.8. and Vzziah brake down the walls of
their strong Cities, and built Cities among the Philistines, 2 Chronicles. 26.6.
These acts of the Jews lodged in their hearts, rankled, begat malicious
thoughts in them, and made them from Generation to Generation to meditate
revenge; and having an opportunity, upon the Babylonians coming to besiedge
Jerusalem, they fell in with them, furnished them with men, ammunition, and
what they could to destroy the Jews.

And have taken vengeance with a despightfull Heart. The words in the Original
run thus, And have revenged a revenge with contempt in the mind: They
contemned and despised them in their hearts, minds, and were glad they had an
opportunity to be revenged on them. The Heb. word (...) is rendered by
Avenarius, divexatio, flagellatio. Piscator reads the words, Exereuerunt
ultionem ex animo depopulatione, they did from their heart take vengeance on
Jerusalem, by depopulating it: They were very spightful against them and used
them summo and ignominioso contemptu, with the greatest scorn and
spightfulnesse they could, Matthew. 5.44. Pray for them that despightfully use
you, the word for despightful use, is (...) from (...), mars, bellum, because
where there are despightful actions, there is hostilis and veluti bellicus
insultus, an hostile and warlike insulting over others, and seeking their harm,
yea, often their ruin.

To destroy it for the old hatred. Montanus turns the Hebrew thus, Ad
corruptionem inimicitia seculi, to destroy through the enmity of the age, its
like they had great enmity against the Jews at that time; but in the margent
he has it, Inimicitiis perpetuis, the Philistines had perpetual enmity
against them, and upon all occasions manifested it. OEcomlap. Ad destruendum
inimicitias eternas, To destroy the eternal hatreds which were between them:
The Philistims now made account so to destroy the Jews, as that they should
never be troubled or harmed by them more. The French translation falls in with
this sense, whence it is, Pour destruction d'inimitiez immortelles, for the
destruction of the immortal enemies. Our Translation is good, which says, The
old hatred, they hated the Jews from the beginning, Gen, 26.18. the Philistims
stopped the Wells, Abraham had dug, and contended with Isaac when his
Servants dug new ones; so that he named one Esek, the other Situah, that
is, Contention and hatred, ver. 20, 21, and after the Jews obtaining many
victories over them, their hatred increased, and especially for David's slaying
their G^liah, 1 Samuel 17. burning their images, 2 Samuel 5.21. and killing their
four Giants, 2 Samuel 21. and making them tributaries. They knew that the Jews
and Jerusalem had plagued them many years, and now out of that old hatred they
bare to it and them, they would destroy both.

16 I will stretch out my hand upon the Philistines. Of stretching out the
hand, the 7. and 13. verse. gave occasion to speak, God had forborne them
notwithstanding all their enmity and evil doings against the Jews, but now he
would appear and punish them, his hand should bring destruction upon them.

I will cut off the Cherethims. They were a people dwelling near the Sea coast
in Palestina, warlike and fierce, they had been subdued by David, and served
him, 2 Samuel 8.18. chap. 15.18. chap. 20.7. Its conceived they were (...)
Davidis, David's guard. Some derive their name from Carath, excindere, because
they were men of might, able to cut off and destroy. Symmachus and Theodotion,
render the word, Cherethims, (...), destroyers; what ever they were, God here
threatens their ruin, and so in Zephan. 2.5. Woe unto the inhabitants of the
sea coast, the nation of the Cherethites.

And destroy the remnant of the Sea coast. Those that dwelt upon the Coast of
the Mediterranean Sea, in the Hebrew it is, The remnant of the Haven of the
Sea, that is, the Philistines whose bounds were the Sea.

17 And I will execute great vengeance upon them. In the 11. verse. the Lord
said he would execute judgments upon Moab, in the 14. verse. he would lay
vengeance upon Edom, and here he will execute great vengeance upon the
Philistines, and Cherethims. The Hebrew is, Nekamoth gedoloth, great
vengeances, they are such as do destroy, and are without mercy.

With furious rebukes. In the Hebrew its with rebukes of fury. God would lay
aside all mercy and pity, he would not only be angry, but wrathful, hot,
fiery. Chemah which is fury, a calore dicitur, for both jacham and chamam, from
one of which it comes, signify to grow hot; and fury is nothing else, but
fervor irae, the heat and height of Anger, and in such a mood would God rebuke
them, they should not have verbal rebukes, but real rebukes.

Obs. 1 Enmity once bred between Nations, dies not away, but grows up, and
vents it self upon all occasions: The Philistines took the actions done by the
Jews against them so ill, that they hated them, grew in their hatred, and
showed their hatefulness of them, when ever they had opportunity. In the 15.
verse. there be several gradations; 1 They hated the Jews. 2 Their hatred
continued, they would not lay it down, but let it proceed from generation to
generation, it was old hatred, such as had been in their Fathers,
grandfathers, great grandfathers, and their predecessors many hundred years.
3 It was not a secret hatred, but such as put them upon revenge, and brake out
in action. 4 Such as was not content with a few revengeful actions, but carried
them on to trade in such actions; they dealt by revenge, it was their constant
practice. 5 Their Heart was in the same, they were given to it, set upon it. 6
Their hatred was joined with despite, they did insult and dominere over the
Jews in their affliction. And 7 Their end was the destroying and rooting out of
the Jewish nation; they took vengeance with a despightful heart, to destroy it
for the old hatred. They neighboring upon the Jews did often infest them, in
Ahaz days; they invaded the South of Judah, took Beth-shemesh, and Ajalon, and
Gederoth, and Shocho with the villages thereof, and Timnah with the villages
thereof, Gimzo also, and the villages thereof, and dwelt there, 2 Chronicles. 28.18.
their hatred to the Jews was implacable and immortal; when enmity began once
between Judah and Israel, it lasted from age to age. There was war between
Jeroboam and Rhehoboam all their days, 1 King. 14.30. so for Asa and Baasha,
there was nothing between them, but acts of hatred and hostility, 1 King. 15.32.

Obs. 2 Those that hate, oppose, and evil entreat the people of God, he will
be revenged on, and that severely. The Philistines dealt despightfully and
revengefully with the Jews, and therefore the Lord would cut them off, execute
great vengeance upon them, and that with furious rebukes. Gods people are dear
unto him, he that touches them, touches the apple of Gods eye, Zech. 2.8.
because the Ammonites, Moabites, Edomites, dealt injuriously with the Jews,
therefore God laid his vengeance upon them, cut them off, and rooted them out.
The Egyptians tyrannized over them in their minority, and God drowned them in
the bottom of the Red Sea for it. Sooner or later God met with, and plagued
all the Nations round about the Jews, who dealt unkindly and despightfully with
them. The Babylonians were called of God to punish the Jews for their
wickedness, but because they carried it bloudily and insultingly against the
people of God, Ier. 50.11. therefore the Lord destroyed Babylon, and took
vengeance on her, v. 15. even vengeance of his temple, v. 28. God is now at
this time revenging the wrongs of his people, done by Antichrist, and the
Antichristian party.

CHAP. XXVI.
Verse. 1 And it came to pass in the eleventh year, in the first day of the
month, that the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, 2 Son of man, because
that Tyrus has said against Jerusalem, Aha, she is broken that was the gates
of the people, she is turned unto me, I shall be replenished, now she is
laid waste. 3 Therefore thus says the Lord God, behold, I am against thee, O
Tyrus, and will cause many Nations to come up against thee, as the Sea causes
his waves to come up. 4 And they shall destroy the walls of Tyrus, and break
down her Towers, I will also scrape her dust from her, and make her like the
top of a rock. 5 It shall be a place for the spreading of nets in the midst of
the Sea: for I have spoken it says the Lord God, and it shall become a spoil
to the Nations. 6 And her daughters which are in the field, shall be slain by
the sword, and they shall know that I am the Lord.
EZekiel having Prophesyed against the Ammonites, Moabites, Edomites, and
Philistines in the former chapter; here he proceeds in prophesying against the
Tyrians, foretelling their destruction. In the Chapter we have,

1 The Time when this prophesy was, v. 1.

2 The sin of the Tyrians, which caused God here to threaten their destruction,
v. 2.

3 Their destruction, and by whom, with the events thereof in the rest of the
Chapter.

4 The End of Gods dealing thus with them, v. 6.

1 In the eleventh year, the first day of the Month. Its evident what year
Ezekiel had this prophesy given in, viz. In the eleventh year of Zedekiahs
reign, and Jehoiachins captivity, both which run upon the same account, but for
the Month its controverted. Some make it to be the fourth month of the said
year, nine days before the City was broken up, Jer. 52.5, 6, 7. which is not
mentioned hence by the Prophet, because it was such a black and sad month unto
the Jews: but if this were a sufficient reason, why did Jeremy mention it? and
why is it expressed, 2 King. 25.3. Others make it to be the fifth month, which
was the first month after Jerusalem was taken. Between the ninth day of the
fourth month, and the first day of the fifth Month, there being twenty days,
the tidings of Jerusalems ruin came to the Tyrians, who thereupon insulted and
said, she is broken, verse. 2. which was a great affliction to the superviving
Jews oppressed with miseries, and going into captivity, and would be no less
to those were formerly in Babylon, when they should hear of it.

Note hence, That there are remarkable times, when God gives in a word to his
servants. When Jerusalem was taken, broken up, and burnt; when Heathens
insulted over the poor Jews, then the word of the Lord came to the Prophet,
then he must prophesy against their enemies, which was some matter of comfort
unto them, in their great and extreme sufferings.

2 Because that Tyrus has said against Jerusalem. The first mention of Tire in
holy writ, is Josh. 19.29. where its placed within the lot of Asher, and not in
the Tribe of Nepthali; as Jerome and Eusebius affirms. And though it were given
to Asher, yet that Tribe never had possession of it. In Hebrew its called Tzur
or Tzor (which signifies a straight, a rock) because it was built upon a rock.
The Greeks, who could not well pronounce Tzade, turned that into Tau, whence it
was called Tur, and so Tyrus. This City was very ancient; Isaiah tells you the
antiquity of it: It was of ancient days, chapter 23.7. Dionysius, Alexandrinus,
called it, (...), The Ancient City. And Pliny calls it, Mus. in Josh. 19
The Mother of most ancient Cities. It was built above four hundred years
before the Temple, and more, though Josephus says, Lib. 8. Ant. c. 2.
it was but two hundred and forty years; it was no part of the land of Canaan,
but a strong City, in an Island seven hundred paces distant from the Continent.
Junius says, about one hundred. Hyram who loved David, and furnished Solomon
with Cedars for building the Temple was King thereof, 1 King 5. it was a famous
Mart Town, first taken by Nebuchadnezzar, and after by Alexander, Vsh Annale^.
Bonfrerius.
who made it of an Island, peninsula. Tyrus here is put for the Tyrians.

Aha, she is broken that was the gates of the people. Here was the sin of the
Tyrians, they cried, Aha, when Jerusalem was taken, and ruined by the
Babylonians, and so insulted over them in their afflicted estate; they said,
she is broken that was the gates of the people: Jerusalem was a City that had
many gates, Jerem. 17.19. whether twelve or more, it matters not, by these
Gates it had on every side, people of all parts entered into it, so that the
confluence of people to Jerusalem, partly for worship, and partly for trading,
was very great, she was full of people, great among the Nations, and Princess
among the Provinces, Lam. 1.1. and therefore because people of all Nations, had
free ingresse into her, and egresse out of her gates, she is called the gates
of the people; by gates also is noted strength, power, and so Jerusalem was the
Gates of the people: The sense is this, Jerusalem has had all Nations flocking
thither, crouding in at her Gates, but now her strong gates are broken, she is
desolate, no foot shall come thither to worship or trade any more.

She is turned unto me. Now Tyrus shall be Jerusalem, my gates shall be the
gates of the people, all that flocked thither will come unto me, I shall now
have the great trading and commerce with Nations, which Jerusalem had; Tyrus
was a rich City, had great trading, Isa. 23.3. yet rejoiced in the ruin of
Jerusalem, because her merchandising and wealth would be increased hereby.

I shall be replenished. My gates, my streets, my shops, my houses, my
harbors, my places for worship, shall be filled all of them, and that as much
as ever Jerusalems were; now the people, and wealth, of all Nations will come
flowing in to me, so that my greatness, riches, and glory, will equalize, if
not exceed Jerusalems.

Now she is laid waste. The Hebrew is, Hachorabah from Charaf, to dry up, now
all her streams and springs are dried, now she is like the channel of a river
without water, or fish, now the pressing in of people at her gates is ceased,
now her Merchants fail her, now her wealth, strength, and glory are laid in the
dust, now she is dry, desolate, and waste.

3 Behold, I am against thee, O Tyrus. This was sad news for Tyrus, to have God
declare himself against her, was more than if all Nations had done it. The
Hebrew is, I am above thee, thou have lifted up thy self against Jerusalem, and
above other Cities, but I am above and against thee; I that am the great God of
heaven and earth, that shake the foundations of the world, that have all
Nations at my command, Behold I am above thee, I am coming against thee.

And will cause many Nations to come up against thee. Nebuchadnezzar had
diverse Nations and Provinces under his command. God would order it so, that
he should bring an Army made up of those Nations against Tyrus, what cruelty
and violence was wanting in one Nation, should be made up in another.

As the Sea causes his waves to come up. The waves come up thick when the
wind blows, they rise, they roar, they rage, they break the ships in pieces;
so when God should breath out a word of command to the Nations, they should
come like waves of the Sea, rageing, threatening, and ruining all. Armies and
Forces are likened to the Sea, great waters, and their waves, which roar and
destroy, Jerem. 50.42. chap. 51.42. there Cyrus his great Army, is called a Sea
roaring, and covering Babylon with her waves.

4 And they shall destroy the walls of Tyrus. Cities, and Towns of note,
especially upon the Seacoast, use to be well walled, such was Tyrus, being
upon a rock in the Sea, it had strong walls, but they should be destroyed, and
the towers thereof broken down.

I will also scrape her dust from her, and make her like the top of a rock. God
would so destroy Tyrus, that no monument of her shall remain, there shall not
be any piece of an house, tower, or wall, not one stone left upon another, I
will raze her foundation, and that dust which comes by so doing, I will take
away, there shall be nothing visible but the top of a rock, such as that place
and rock was before Tyrus was built, such should it be again. God would
exceedingly, yea, utterly deface that City. The word for scrape is from (...)
Sucha, Purgare scopis ab radere ilutum a pavimento.
to sweep or pare off dirt from the pavement. Septuagint is, (...), I will fan
her dust from her.

It shall be a place for the spreading of Nets in the midst of the Sea. It
shall serve for no other use, but the Nets of fishermen, when they have done
their fishing in the Sea, they shall come thither, and spread their nets there
for drying and mending; where now are pleasant Gardens, Orchards, walks,
stately Palaces and buildings, where none but Merchants, and men of quality
come, even there shall poor fishermen come, and spread their nets.

For I have spoken it says the Lord God. You think this impossible, that a
City upon a rock in the Sea, strongly built, strongly walled, and Towered, that
has stood many hundred years, should be brought to nothing, and made as a
plain or flat, for fishermen to spread their nets on; but I have spoken it
says the Lord, and I am a God of truth, and able to make good my word.

It shall become a spoil to the nations. It has great store of merchants
goods, of ware, and wealth, its a rich City, and shall be lebaz, for a prey to
the nations, they shall come, take and carry away all that is in it.

And her daughters which are in the field, etc. Tyrus had many Towns, and
Cities upon the land, under her command, and these are here called her
Daughters in the field: Solomon gave Hyram in his days, twenty Cities in the
land of Galilee, for the Gold, Cedars, and Firr-trees, he furnished him
withal, 1 King. 9.11. and its without dispute that he being King of Tire, had
other Towns and Cities belonging to him, all which are called Daughters. Tyrus
being the metropolis and chief City. Great Cities had Towns belonging to them,
1 Chronicles. 7.28, 29. 2 Chronicles. 28.18. and these were called Daughters, Jer. 49.2,
3. Lament. 3.51. Ezekiel. 16.46, 48, 49, 53, 55. If we take Daughters here for
the women of Tire, widows, wives, and Maids, who walked out into the fields,
Lavater will join issue with us. understand it of which you will, its certain
both were destroyed by the judgments of God.

Obs. 1 That when Gods people are severely dealt with by the Lord for their
sins, others do impiously and inhumanely scoff at, and insult over them. When
Jerusalem was sacked by the Babylonians, the Tyrians cried, Aha (vox gaudentium
and insultantium) she is broken; So the Ammonites, chap. 25.3. they had their
Aha against the Sanctuary, and land of Israel, so Ezekiel. 36.2. the enemy said,
Aha, against the Jews. Nature teaches men to sympathize with those are in
misery, not to multiply their miseries by scoffs and mocks; but the Nations
showed themselves impious and unnatural in dealing so with the Jews; the like
may Gods people expect now from the world, if they meet with breaking for their
sins, the men of the world will say, Aha, so would we have it. Others
mourning is their music; Others tears are their wine.

Obs. 2 That merchandising Cities, through their envy and Covetousness, are
glad at the ruin of other Cities, expecting to enrich themselves thereby.
Tyrus was a City of Merchants, Isa. 23.11. had great trading, was rich, yet
she envied Jerusalem, saying, she is the gates of the people, she has the
great concourse of all sorts from all Nations, entering into her, and
merchandising with her, but now she is broken, she is turned unto me; all
that traded with, and enriched her, will come to me, and I shall be
replenished; thus she manifested her Covetousness, and hope of being enriched
by the breaking of Jerusalem. When a City flourishes, and has great trading,
other Cities envy them, and if mischief befall them they are glad, gaping then
to be made by their miseries. This is the disposition of Merchants, and
merchandising places, they look too much at themselves, and so they may gain,
it matters not who are loosers: Let Jerusalem go down, so Tyrus may go up. To
rejoice in the ruine^ of others is wretched, but to rejoice therein, that we
may be enriched, is accursed. Some are glad when their neighbors houses are
on fire, when they break, they think thereby they shall be made, have the
greater trading, be replenished, etc. Let tradesmen and Merchants look to it,
this was the sin of Tyrus, and did not a little displease the Lord.

Obs. 3 Rejoicing in, and desire to be enriched by the harms of others,
provokes God, so as to bring destruction upon Cities and Citizens. The Tyrians
did so, therefore says God, Behold, I am against thee, O Tyrus, and will cause
Nations to come up against thee, and they shall destroy thy walls, thy Towers,
thy Daughters, and thou shall be a spoil unto them. (...) and (...), to insult
over others in their miseries, and to make a prey of them through
Covetousness, are dangerous sins; God looks we should pity and help men
suffering, by our prayers, counsels, estates, not that we should add to
their afflictions, and make their furnace hotter, such doings, heat Gods fury,
and cause it to break out unto destruction; upon this account, the Ammonites,
Moabites, Edomites, and Philistines, were destroyed. Let us then not sport our
selves at the sufferings of others, nor expect raising from their ruins.
Covetousness is the root of all evil; it emptied Tire of its wealth and
Citizens, yea, helped on its utter desolation.

Obs. 4 The Lord has the command of Nations, and calls them forth, when and to
what service he pleases. I will cause many Nations to come up against thee:
He is King of nations, Jerem. 10.7. Governor among the nations, Psalm. 22.28.
and if he call, they come, Isa. 5.26. he will lift up an ensign to the
nations, he will hiss unto them, and behold they shall come with speed; and
let the Lord make known his mind by word or sign, by any acts of his
providence, and the nations come presently, and are ready to do what he will to
assault Cities, even Jerusalem, Rabbath, Tire, or Babylon it self, Jerem. 50.9.
I will raise and cause to come up against Babylon, an assembly of great nations
from the North Country, and they shall set themselves in array against her.
God has the Command of great nations, and can cause them to come out of their
Countries, and do him service, where he please. Let us then fear this God, who
has such command, and say; Who should not fear thee O thou King of Nations!
for to thee does it appertain.

Verse. 7 For thus says the Lord God, Behold, I will bring upon Tyrus
Nebuchadrezzar King of Babylon; a King of Kings, from the North, with Horses,
and with Chariots, and with Horsemen, and companies, and much people. 8 He
shall slay with the sword, thy Daughters in the field, and he shall make a
fort against thee, and cast a mount against thee, and lift up the buckler
against thee. 9 He shall set Engines of War against thy walls, and with his
Axes he shall break down thy towers. 10 By reason of the abundance of his
Horses, their dust shall cover thee, thy walls shall shake at the noise of the
horsemen, and of the wheels, and of the Charets, when he shall enter into thy
gates, as men enter into a City, wherein is made a breach. 11 With the hoofes
of his horses shall he tread down all thy streets, he shall stay thy people
by the sword, and thy strong Garrisons shall go down to the ground. 12 And they
shall make a spoil of thy riches, and make a prey of thy Merchandise, and they
shall break down thy walls, and destroy thy pleasant houses, and they shall lay
thy stones, and thy timber, and thy dust in the midst of the water. 13 And I
will cause the noise of thy Songs to cease, and the sound of thy harpes shall
be no more heard. 14 And I will make thee like the top of a rock, they shall be
a place to spread nets upon, thou shall be built no more, for I the Lord have
spoken it, says the Lord God. In these verses, 1 is set out what Instrument
the Lord will use in this great work of destroying Tire, and that is
Nebuchadrezzar, with his forces, v. 7.

2 A Narration of his doings, from the 7. v. to the 13.

3 The Events following thereupon, v. 13, 14.

7 I will bring upon Tyrus, Nebuchadrezzar King of Babylon. This name
Nebuchadrezzar we had not in our Prophet before, most often its written
Nebuchadnezzar, yet its thirty one times in Jeremy, and Ezekiel Nebuchadrezzar.
Its a compound name of Nebochad and netzar or retzar, which are proper and
simple Chaldee names, serving to distinguish the Chaldee King from the
Assyrian, Vid. Martin. Lexicon.
Nebo according to their account, is one, Chad twenty four, and netzar seven.
Nebuchadnezzar, some make to signify gemitum judicii, pressuras, the bewailing
of that judgment, which is a pressure. Nebuchadrezzar, gemitum generationis
angustiae, the mourning of the generation of straitening, Levater.
he was a man did oppress and straiten the Nations much, and made them to
mourn. This man was King of Babylon, and not only so, but King of Kings, that
is, either the chiefest of all Kings, or one that had many Kings under him, he
was an universal Monarch, Dan. 2.37, 38. and as appears by Jerem. 52.32. left
many Kings under the power of Evilmerodach, who succeeded him.

8 He shall make a fort against thee, and cast a mount against thee. He shall
besiedge thee, and use all warlike instruments to batter and break thee. This
undertaking of Nebuchadnezzar was very difficult, Tyrus was so situated and
fortifyed, that it was thought impregnable, and had not Nebuchadrezzar been a
man tenax propositi, exceeding resolute and obstinate in his designs, he had
fainted in this business, for the siedge lasted thirteen years, Ushers Annals
p. 133.
as Junius observes out of Josephus, and he out of Berosus, Philostratus and
other Phaenician writers. I^hobalus then reigning there. Hence Ezekiel, chapter
29.18. says, that Nebuchadrezzar caused his Army to serve a great service
against Tire; for an Army to lie thirteen years before a City on a rock in the
Sea, was a great service, which he and his Army endured, and went through.

9 He shall set Engines of war against thy walls. The Hebrew is, Mechi ravollo,
The blow of his stings or battering Rams shall he give against thy walls; the
words properly sound thus, percussio adversi sui, the smiting of her adversary;
The walls being over against these Engines (which some call Helepoles, others,
tormenta expugnatoria) they were their adversaries, and them they did smite and
batter.

10 By reason of the abundance of Horses, the dust shall cover thee. The Horses
employed in the service were so numerous, that they raised great clouds of
Dust, which fell upon their Habitations, Orchards, and Gardens, like Snow, and
covered them.

The Walls shall shake at the noise of the Horsemen, etc. Such should be the
rattling and noise of horses and charets, that the earth, and things founded
upon it should shake, or such fear should the inhabitants be stricken withal,
that they should apprehend all to be tottering and shaken.

As men enter into a City wherein is made a breach. Hebrew, According to the
entrance of a City which is broken up: When the walls of a City are broken
down, there is great shouting, and men enter with great noise, triumphing and
tumult, which makes the earth to ring, and fills all with trembling.

11 Thy strong Garrisons shall go down to the ground. The Hebrew for strong
Garrisons is, Mazeboth uzzech; The Statues of thy strength. Tyrus being upon a
rock in the Sea, its probable had many Arches and pillars to support it. The
Septuagint is, (...), the subsistence or underpropping of thy strength, or what
ever thou have gotten to bear thee up. Some by Mazeboth, Statues, lead us to
their Tutelar gods, Hercules and Apollo, whose statues says Pradus, the
Tyrians kept bound with chains, Ne forte hostili carmine avocari possent, aut
indignati descederent. The Vulgar has it, statuae tuae nobiles, thy noble
statues, that is, those statues were erected for those men had done great and
heroical exploits. Their Idol gods, their statues should be thrown down to the
earth, and what ever they had considerable in the City. Rabbi David renders the
words, Turres fortitudinis tuae, the towers of thy strength, or strong Towers,
which suits with our translation, Thy strong Garrisons, even those wherein the
Tyrians did much confide, should be levelled with the ground.

12 They shall make a spoil of thy riches, etc. They should take and carry away
all was profitable and portable, and as for other things, they should break
them down, and throw them into the Sea, their walls, houses of desire, the
stones, timber, and dust of the City, should be thrown into the waters. Such
should be the ruin of this strong and famous City, that the dust of it should
not remain.

13 I will cause the noise of thy songs to cease, etc. and the sound of thy
Harps, etc. The Tyrians being a rich people were jovial and merry, Ezekiel. 28.13.
they had their Tabrets, and Pipes, their Harpes, and Songs, they so abounded in
mirth and music, that their City was called the joyous City, Isa. 23.7. is
this your joyous City? they were given to delights and sensuality. God would
cause their mirth to cease, Jerem. 5.10. he would take away the voice of mirth,
the voice of gladness, etc. God would turn their mirth, into mourning, their
Songs into howlings; they should be for a long season in a darksome, and
suffering condition.

14 Thou shall be built no more. These words we must not take simply and
absolutely, for then they will contradict, Isa. 23.15, 16. where its foretold,
that after seventy years, Tire should be again, and sing. The mind then of
the words is this, thou shall be built no more to be the metropolis of a
Kingdom; or thou shall be built no more with that strength and glory thou
wast before; or thou shall be built no more to enjoy the same name; for that
City built afterward in the same place, was called Palatyrus; or thou shall be
built no more, that is, for a long time: the word (...) notes a Jubilee, or
long time.

Obs. 1 Things difficult and impossible in the apprehensions of men, are
accomplished by the Lord, Tyrus was a strong City, upon a rock in the Sea, had
strong walls, Towers, Garrisons, endured a siedge of thirteen years, yet was
taken and levelled with the ground, which to men seemed incredible and
impossible; Therefore let not Princes, Merchants, Citizens, confide in their
strong holds, abundance of wealth, or any humane foundation.

Obs. 2 The Lord makes places of renown contemptible, and subjects them to
Vulgar, and inconsiderable uses, Tyrus was a famous City the Mart of Nations,
her Merchants were Princes, her tr^ffiquers the honorable of the earth, Isa.
23.3, 8, and God made her like the top of a rock, a place for fishermen to
spread nets upon.

Obs, 3 Wealthy Cities, are usually given to mirth and sensual delights which
God will make to cease. Tyrus was rich, and she had her songs, music, and
sinful delights, which God made in time to cease.

Verse. 15 Thus says the Lord God to Tyrus, shall not the Isles shake at the
sound of thy fall, when the wounded cry, when the slaughter is made in the
midst of thee? 16 Then all the Princes of the Sea shall come down from their
thrones, and lay away their robes, and put off their broydered garments: they
shall cloth themselves with trembling, they shall sit upon the ground, and
tremble at every moment, and be astonished at thee. 17 And they shall take up
a lamentation for thee, and say to thee, how art thou destroyed, thou that wast
inhabited of Seafareing men, the renowned City, which was strong in the Sea,
she and her Inhabitants, which cause their terror to be on all that haunt it?
18 Now shall the Isles tremble in the day of thy fall, yea, the Isles that are
in the Sea, shall be troubled at thy departure. 19 For thus says the Lord
God, when I shall make thee a desolate City, like the Cities that are not
inhabited, when I shall bring up the deep upon thee, and great waters shall
cover thee. 20 When I shall bring thee down, with them that descend into the
pit, with the people of old time, and shall set thee in the low parts of the
earth, in places desolate of old, with them that go down to the pit, that thou
be not inhabited, and I shall set glory in the land of the living: 21 I will
make thee a terror, and thou shall be no more, though thou be sought for, yet
shall thou never be found again, says the Lord God. In these verses the
Prophet proceeds in laying down events and consequences of Tyrus destruction.
As, 1 The shaking and trembling of the Islanders, verse. 15, 16, 18, 21. 2 Their
mourning and Lamentation for Tyrus, v. 17. 3 Desolatnesse of the place, v. 19.
4 Oblivion, she should be forgotten, v. 20, 21. so destroyed as not to be found.


15 Shall not the Isles shake at the sound of thy fall. They look at thee as
impregnable, being fortified by art and nature, beyond all other Cities and
places, but when they shall hear of thy fall, they shall tremble, fearing that
ruin will be their portion, if the enemy shall besiedge and assault them;
shall not the Isles shake? its an interrogation, which imports they will shake,
and shake greatly.

When the wounded cry, when the slaughter is made in the midst of thee. When
great Cities are taken, often many are slain, and many are sorely wounded, and
when the men in the neighbor Islands should hear of their sufferings, cries,
and fall of the City, they should be troubled and stand amazed. The Hebrew for
slaughter is double, Behareg hereg, In interficiendo interfectione, in
slaughtering with a slaughter. The slaughter was great.

16 Then all the Princes of the Sea shall come down from their Thrones. Tyrus
was upon the Mediterranean Sea, and that had many Islands. Lavater tells us of
eight, viz. Rhodes, Cyprus, Crete, Sicilie, Melita, Sardinia, Samos, Chius, and
others are mentioned, Act. 27. in some of these were Princes, and they should
bewail the fall of Tyrus; or these were the principal Islands of the Sea, and
had many principal Mariners which sailed from Port to Port, and were as
Princes and Commanders of that Sea, both they, and the Governors of the
Islands shall be straitened and affected with the condition of Tire, there was
wont to be great trading between them and Tyrus, which now should cease.

And lay away their robes. The Hebrew for their Robes is, Meileehem, pallia
sua, (...) Meil, by the Septuagint is rendered sometimes (...), a coat, Exodus
28.4. sometimes (...), Exodus 39.22. Sometimes (...), 2 Samuel 13.18. Sometimes
(...), 1 Samuel 15.27. Sometimes (...), Job 2.12. Sometimes (...), Job 1.20.
Sometimes (...), Isa. 61.10. and here (...), however the Septuagint express it
by various words, it signifies such a garment, quo superinduebantur
honoratiores, as men of quality did wear.

And put off their broidered garments. Kirker in verbo (...) French,
Desuestiront seurs vestemens de brodery.
In the Hebrew its, Their garments of broidery, and so runs the French of the
word, rickmah, broidery was spoken Ezekiel. 16.10. these they should put off,
pashat, which is the word for putting off, notes, vim and impetum, a forcible
putting off, they should through anger and grief pull off their rich coats,
with a violence, and throw them aside, when the news of Tyrus ruin came unto
them.

They shall cloth themselves with trembling. They shall be greatly afraid,
trembling shall take hold of them, they shall tremble and tremble, the word is
in the plural number tremblings, from (...) which signifies open and visible
trembling, the downfall and desolation of Tire, that strong place, should fill
them with such astonishment and fear, as they should openly tremble, or be
clothed with tremblings, that is, put on such garments as testify grief and
fear.

They shall sit upon the ground. They that sat in the Throne a little before,
shall sit on the ground. Sitting on the ground, implies a sad and troubled
condition, Job 2.13. Job and his Friends in the time of their sorrows and
trouble, sat upon the ground. So Isa. 47.1. Babylon is called to sit on the
ground, that is, to a mourning condition, for the judgments should come upon
her. So the evils came upon Jerusalem, made her to sit upon the ground, Isa.
3.26. and her Elders, Lamen. 2.10.

And tremble every moment. They should have a continual fear upon them, least
Nebuchadrezzar should come, and deal by them, as he had done by Tyrus, if that
could not resist him, much less could they; The word for every moment is, Lir
jaim, a moment, is a little fragment of time, (...) is disrumpere findere,
thence regayn or regah, a moment, and it may here note the moment past, as
thus, they shall tremble for the moment, the sudden surprise and ruin of
Tyrus, or the moment to come; they shall tremble from moment to moment, fearing
there will be such a moment for them. The French is, Seront estonnez de moment
en moment.

And be astonished at thee. When they shall hear that thy walls and strong
garrisons are broken down, that thy pleasant houses, stones, and timber, are
laid in the water, that thou art made like the top of a rock they will be
astonished at thee, at thy desolation.

17 And they shall take up a lamentation for thee. When great judgments and
changes fell out, many who were concerned therein, did not only grieve, but
took up lamentations, and made a formal business thereof, Jer. 31.15. so
Rachel lamented for her children. So Ezekiel for the Princes of Israel, Ezekiel.
19.1, 14. So the Kings of the earth for Babylon, Rev. 18.9, 10. and so the
Princes of the Sea took up a lamentation for Tyrus.

How art thou destroyed? How have thou perished? so is the Original, its a
question full of admiration, they wondered that such a strong City, seated in
the Sea, that had stood so long inviolable, should now be destroyed; its a
question full of Lamentation, how art thou destroyed? O it grieves us at the
heart, and troubles our souls that thou art thrown down, and laid in the
water, we cannot believe, it was by an ordinary power that thou art destroyed
for.

That was inhabited by Sea-fareing men. Here is one argument, which made the
Princes of the Sea to say, How art thou destroyed? we wonder at it, we mourn
for it, but cannot tell how it should be, seeing thou had a multitude of
Seamen from all parts, who were able to fetch in provisions upon all occasions
to releeve thee, and sufficient to have kept out any enemy from entering into
thee. The Hebrew here is, Noshe bah mijammim, inhabited by the Seas, that is,
by Merchants and Mariners, which dwelt in other Sea-towns, and came thither by
the Seas, to sojourn and Trade.

The renowned City. This was a second Argument, which begat astonishment, and
grief in them for the destruction of Tire, she was a renowned City. In Isa.
23. she is called the joyous, the crowning, the Merchant City, and here the
renowned City. (...) Civitas laudatissima, The City most praiseable, being a
City of Merchants, and these Princes and her traffiquers the honorable of the
earth, Isa. 23.8. she must needs be renowned, and of great fame abroad, which
made her friends wonder at her ruin, and mourn, that she should be a place
for fisher men, and spreading of nets.

Which was strong in the Sea. Tyrus was a City upon a rock in the Sea the
waters compassed it about, and made it an Island, so that it was hard to come
at the waters, the rock, the walls were choice protections to it, so that the
Princes of the Sea, thought it inaccessible, and if attempted, yet impregnable,
and this made them to say, how art thou destroyed?

She and her inhabitants, which cause their terror on all that haunt it. Tyrus
was so seated and fortified, that she was dreadful to all that knew her, to
all the Islands far and near. She was rich in shipping, furnished with all
things needful for a Naval expedition, and had the command of the Seas, which
caused the Princes of the Sea to wonder at, and greatly to lament for her
unexpected ruin.

18 Now shall the Isles tremble in the day of thy fall? When some great Tower
or house is blown up by powder, or fall by an earthquake, it shakes all the
houses and parts adjacent. So should the fall of Tire be, it should make all
the Islands and Islanders, to tremble openly and visibly, for so (...) is
interpreted by Kirker.

Yea, the Isles that are in the Sea, shall be troubled at thy departure. The
word for Troubled is from (...) which is, subito terrore percelli, to be
stricken with sudden fear and trouble, when they hear of thy departure or
going out, that thou art laid waste and become no City, they shall immediately
be troubled and perplexed, fearing their own desolations and deaths, or
captivities.

19 When I shall make thee a desolate City, like the Cities that are not
inhabited. A City without people, is like a field without Cattle, Corn, or
grass, a very wilderness, solitary and dangerous, by reason of Serpents and
wild Beasts which lurk in it, Cities broken down, and uninhabited are no
better; such would the Lord make Tyrus.

When I shall bring up the deep upon thee, and great waters shall cover thee.
In the 3. verse. he had said, he would cause many Nations to come up against
Tyrus, that was a mighty Army of Nebucharezzars, which here he calls Tehom,
The deep, and hamanjim harabbim, many or great waters. Great Armies are like
waters of the Sea, which breaking into Countries, Cities, and Towns, do
multiply their Calamities, and lay them desolate.

20 When I shall bring thee down with them that descend into the pit. By Pit is
meant the grave, Psalm 28.1. Like them that go down into the pit, that is, like
them which dye, and go down into the grave, (...) signifies a pit, a prison, a
grave. Tyrus should become like one dead and buried.

With the people of old time. The Hebrew is, (...) ad populum seculi, to the
People of old time. God had caused many by the flood, many by the sword
formerly to descend into the grave, and so should the Tyrians. The Vulgar
translation is, ad populum sempiternum, To the everlasting people, that is, to
those that lie from generation to generation in the dust, and must lie there
till the day of judgment, to those that sleep a perpetual sleep, as the phrase
is, Jerem. 51.57. that place in Lamentation 3.6. he has set me in dark
places, as they that be dead of old, gives light unto this, those that were
dead long ago, lie in the dark, are unseen, unknown, forgotten, and Tyrus with
her people should be like unto them.

And shall set thee in the low parts of the earth, in places desolate of old.
Thou shall be made like Cities that were ruined long ago, and have no
vestigiaes of them remaining; now thou art high, seen far at Sea and land, but
thou shall shortly come down, and be as deep under water and earth, as thou
art now above them; the words are beeretz Tachtijeth, in terra inferorum.

And I shall set glory in the land of the Living. The land of the living was
Canaan, which is frequently so called by David, as Psa. 27.13.52.5.116.9.142.5.
by Isaiah, Isa. 38.11.53.8. by Jerem. 11. chap. 19. and by Ezekiel here it was
so called, because there Lively God was known and worshipped, Psalm 42.2. with
Psalm 76.1, 2. because there were the living Oracles, Act. 7.38. the Living
Waters, and wells of Salvation, Isa. 12.3. because there were the living
Saints, and only there; in other lands though the people had wealth, honor,
greatness, natural excellencies, yet as to God they were dead, but in Canaan
they were quickened and made alive.

For the setting glory therein, understand it of restoring Canaan, or Judaea
unto its former condition. Tyrus thou judge Canaan now a land desolate
without Temple, Cities, people, and think it shall for ever be so, but thy
glory shall down, descend into the pit, and I will set glory in the land of the
living again. Jerusalem shall live, and be glorious, but Tyrus shall dye, and
be ignominious. By Glory, Piscater understands the People, who being carried
into captivity, the Tyrians and Heathens thought should never return, but God
would bring them back, being his glory, into that land where they should enjoy
the lively Oracles, drink the living waters, and have the special presence and
protection of the living God.

21 I will make thee a terror. The Hebrew is, Terrors, thou shall be matter of
terror to every Island near or far off, when they shall hear of thy downfall,
it shall terrify them. The word for terror, may be rendered Consumption, being
from (...) to wax old, to consume. I will so consume thee as that thy
consumption shall be terrible to all others.

Thou shall be no more, though thou be sought for, yet shall thou never be
found again. Thou shall be so demolished, as that a stone upon a stone shall
not be left in thee, thou shall be brought to a nothingnesse, how bushy and
strong soever thou art now; and when thou shall be sought, and inquired after,
thou shall not be found by this generation. The Hebrew is thus, non invenieris
ultra in seculum, thou shall not be found any more for ever, that is, for a
long time, so Leolam is often used, as Exodus 21.6. Psalm 89.1. Prove. 29.14. and
so here, for ever, is not absolute, but for a long time. After seventy years
Tyrus was built again, or Palatyrus near unto that place, but not by the
Tyrians who were either all slain, or carried so away captive, that they
perished in their Captivity; it was built by strangers.

Obs. 1 God by his destructive judgments upon strong Cities and great states,
being sinful, makes others to tremble that were secure: Shall not the Isles
shake at the sound of thy fall, when the wounded cry, when the slaughter is
made in the midst of thee? Gods destroying of Tyrus should awaken and affright
all the Isles and Islanders who were secure, and laughed at the attempt of
Nebuchadnezzar against Tyrus, they thought it impossible that ever he should
take it, but being taken and ruined, shaking seized upon them; when the sound
of Gods judgments come to men's ears, they startle them, and trouble them,
Ezekiel. 30.3. the sword shall come upon Egypt, that is, wars shall lay waste
the Egyptians, and great pain shall be in AEthiopia, their fear shall be such
as shall pain and torment them, and verse 8, 9. God would set a fire in Egypt,
destroy all her helpers, and then messengers should go forth from him in ships,
to make the careless Ethiopian afraid, God destroies wicked Cities, States,
and people, that he may beget fear in others, who were careless. When the
Lord drowned the Egyptians in the red Sea, it caused the Nations to fear, Exodus
15.14. when Sihon King of Heshbon, and Ogg King of Bashau, they, and their
people were destroyed by Joshuah, and the Jews, then Balack and the Moabites
were sore afraid, Numb. 22.2, 3. when God brought destruction upon Babylon, it
made all hands faint, all hearts melt, they were as full of fears and pains as
a woman in travail, Isa. 13.6, 7, 8.

Obs. 2 There is that dreadfulnesse in the judgments of God, as will drive the
greatest out of their Thrones and Glory, make them tremble continually, put on
Sackcloath and lie in the dust. Then all the Princes of the Sea, be they never
so great, so stout, shall come down from their Thrones, lay away their Robes,
and put off their broidered garments, etc. When Tyrus, her streets were trodden
down with the hoofes of Nebuchadrezzars horses, her People slain, her strong
garrisons thrown down to the ground, her riches become a prey to the enemy; Her
stones, timber, and dust, laid in the water, then should fear seize upon these
Princes; the dreadfulnesse apprehended in that judgment of God, should make
them forget themselves, their glory, and greatness, and to sit upon the ground
trembling, and fearing their own destruction from day to day. Gods judgments
make great changes, those sat in the morning like Princes in their Thrones,
commanding at Sea and Land, in a little time, sit on the ground trembling. When
the Syrians besiedged Samaria, and the famine increased amongst them, it made
Jehoram the King to fear, and wear Sackcloath next his flesh, 2 King 6.30. and
did not Ben-hadad the King of Syria, and all his men of might, fearing the
noise of Charets, Horses. and a great host, fear, flee for their lives, and
throw away their garments, 2 King. 7.6, 7, 15. When the hand of God was
stretched out for the Israelites, and against the Egyptians, the Dukes of Edom
were amazed, and the mighty men of Moab trembled, Exodus 15.15. When Saul beheld
the Army of the Philistines, he was afraid, and his heart greatly trembled, 1 Samuel 28.5. When God brought the destroyer of the Gentiles, viz. Nebuchadrezzar,
to execute his judgments upon Judaea and Jerusalem, then did the heart of King
and Princes perish, then they laid aside their Robes, girded themselves with
Sackcloth, lamented, and howled, Jer. 4.7, 8, 9.

Obs. 3 That great Cities have their periods, they abide not for ever. As they
have a time to come into the World, so a time to go out of it; as they have a
time to get up on high, so a time to descend low. Tyrus had her day to fall,
her day of departure, verse. 18. she descended into the pit with people of old
time, verse. 20. Jerusalem formerly called Jebus, 1 Chronicles. 11.4. and Salem, Genesis
14.18. as it had its time for building, so its day for burning, Jerem. 52.12,
13. The like end had Jericho, a walled and strong City, Josh. 6.24. Babylon had
its time to begin, Genesis 11.8. and its time to cease, Isa. 14.4. So Damascus
stood long, but at last it became a ruinous heap, Isa. 17.1. You may read of
Ninevehs raising, Gene. 10.11. and of her Desolation, Nahum. 3.7. Zephany 2.13.
Hence we may see the instability of humane things, learn not to trust in
strong holds, neither think it any great privilege to be Citizens of such
perishing Cities, but labor to be Citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem, which
is the City prepared of God, and has Foundations shall never be rased,
Hebrews 11.10, 16.

Obs. 4 Gods People are dear unto him, they are glorious, and the Glory of a
land. That which is the Glory of any is dear unto them. Gods People are his
Glory, Isa. 4.5. Zach. 2.8. In both those places, Gods people are called his
Glory. They bear his Image, 2 Cor. 3.18. they show forth his virtues, 1 Peter
2.9. they Worship him in the Spirit, Philip. 3.3. they are formed for himself,
Isa. 43.21. they be his vineyard, his pleasant plant, Isa. 5.1, 7. his Jewels,
Mala. 3.17. his peculiar treasure, Exodus 19.5. his pleasant portion, Jerem.
12.30. his Spouse, Ezekiel. 16.8. they are near unto God, Psa. 148.14. anointed
ones, Psalm 105.15. Trees of righteousness, Isa. 61.3. a Congregation of
Saints, Psalm 89.5. They have the Law of God in their hearts and keep the same,
Isa. 51.7. so that they are dear unto him, and his Glory, and not only so, but
the glory of a Land, Joseph and the Jews were the glory of Egypt, Dan. 7. they
were the glory of Babylon, and the godly ones were the glory of Sion, Isaiah
6.13. The holy seed shall be the substance thereof. Saints, a holy seed, is
the substance and glory, of any Nation. Let men take heed how they wrong them,
for in so doing they wrong the glory of God, and the glory of the land.

Obs. 5 There is a difference of lands in the world, all are not alike, there
is the land of the Living. Canaan differed from all other lands, there dwelt
the living God, there were the living waters, the Ordinances and means of grace
and salvation, which other lands had not, that land once flowed with spiritual
milk and honey, and was the glory of all lands, Eze. 20.6. Egypt, Chaldaea, and
the other lands round about, were as dry and dead lands unto that, they had
gods in them, but they were Idol gods, they had worship, but it was false
Worship, they had waters, but they were bitter waters, such as Gods people
could not drink, they killed those that drank of them: where Gods name is
recorded, his Ordinances set up in purity and power, he worshipped in Spirit
and Truth, there is life, and the land of the living. David judged himself even
among the dead, when he was shut out from the people, presence, worship, and
ordinances of God, Psalm. 84.2. his soul fainted, and he was almost gone. Most
lands are lands of darkness, dryness, and death, they have neither the light
nor waters of life in them. Let us bless God that we are in the land of the
living.

Obs. 6 Gods people may be deprived of their privileges and comforts for a
season, but he will in due time restore them to the enjoyment of the same. I
shall set glory in the land of the living. Gods glory, his people, were in
Babylon, but he would not loose nor leave his glory there, he brought them
back again, and set them in the land of the living, he gave them another
Temple, all those ordinances and privileges they had before, Isa. 46.13. I
will place salvation in Sion for Israel my glory.

CHAP. XXVII.
Verse. 1 The word of the Lord came again unto me, saying, 2 Now thou son of
man take up a lamentation for Tyrus. 3 And say unto Tyrus, O thou that art
situate at the entry of the Sea, which art a Merchant of the people for many
Isles, Thus says the Lord God, O Tyrus, thou have said I am of perfect beauty.
4 Thy borders are in the midst of the Seas, thy builders have perfected thy
beauty. 5 They have made all thy ship-boards of fir-trees of Senir, they have
taken Cedars from Lebanon to make Masts for thee. 6 Of the Oaks of Bashan have
they made thine Oars, the company of the Ashurites, have made thy benches of
Ivory, brought out of the Isles of Chittim.
IN this Chapter the Prophet is commanded to take up a Lamentation for Tyrus;
wherein is set out.

1 The Dignity, glory, and excellency of Tyrus, from the 2. v. to the 26.

2 The irrecoverable fall and destruction thereof, from the 26. to the end.

1 The word of the Lord came again unto me. The Hebrew is, And there has been
the word of Jehovah to me, the word of him who is being, has had being in
me. God is essence, or being unchangeable, and such is his word, which shows
the certainty of the word, he had twice before received the word to Prophesy
against the Nations, and now again he is put on by the same, God commissioning
him thereunto.

2 Take up a Lamentation for Tyrus. The word Nasa, to take up, signifies to
take up that which is heavy, burdensome; and Lamentations are such things; the
Lord would have the Prophet sensible of the great misery coming upon Tyrus,
and to bewail the same. -- Jeremy, bewailed the condition of Jerusalem when
destruction was coming upon it, Jerem. 4.19. chap. 9.1. God would not have
Prophets give out judgments and threatenings with bitter spirits, not when they
are against Heathens, Tyrians; he would have his Servants to compassionate
others.

3 Say unto Tyrus, O thou that art situate at the entry of the Sea. Here he
begins to set out the dignity of Tyrus, which first he does from her situation,
she was seated at the entry of the Sea; she was not only upon a rock, and so
eminent for sight, but by the Sea, yea, the entry of the Sea, and so was
commodious for trading. The Hebrew for entry, is Mevooth, Insignis erat
tutissimis portubus Tyrus Vilalpandus. insula erat multorum portuum. Vatablus.
entries or Ports, from (...) Venire, to come in. Tyrus was famous for Ports,
so that ships might come in, and ride there safely, and go out again at
pleasure. It was in an Island, and Islands have many Ports or Harbors.

Which art a Merchant of the People for many Isles. Tyrus did Merchandise with
the Isles far and near, she did send out to them, and they brought into her
what commodities were Merchantable. She was a Merchant City, Isa. 23.8. the
Merchants of Zidon traded with her, ver. 2. The Hebrew is, to many Isles, the
people prepared many vendible commodities, which the Isles took off their
hands, so that hereby her wealth was greatly increased, and her Merchants like
Princes, Isa. 23.8. and this was another dignity of Tyrus.

Thou have said I am of perfect beauty. Chelilat tophi, of universal beauty, I
am so built that I want nothing to add unto my beauty, its perfect. What God
said of Sion, Psalm 50.2. that she was the perfection of beauty, the same said
Tyrus of her self, which was her sin; that she war neatly and strongly built
was her glory, but that she was proud hereof, was her sin and shame; for who
can say, I am of perfect beauty, but the Lord?

4 Thy borders are in the midst of the Seas. Some Cities border upon Hills;
Valleys, Woods, Rivers, but Tyrus had no such borders, her borders were in the
midst, or as the Hebrew is, In the heart of the Seas. None could come to her by
land, being half a mile, or seven hundred paces from the Continent; but
Alexander in his time, made a passage into Tyrus, by filling up the Sea. This
was the glory of Tyrus, that she was compassed about with the Seas, and sat as
a virgin City, and Queen regent in the deeps.

Thy builders have perfected thy beauty. Who were the Builders of Tyrus we
find not in Scripture, but Adrichomius following Berosus, and the Traditions
of the Ancient, tells us, that one Tyrus the seventh of Japhets Sons, built
it, a little after the flood, and that from him it was called Tyrus. This seems
very probable, because it was before Joshuahs days, as appears Josh. 19.29.
But whether he or the Sidonians built it, is not clear, but who ever were the
Builders, they were Masters of Architecture, and nothing was left undone; quod
ad ornatum and munitionem urbis pertinuit. The Sidonians were men of skill,
Artists in hewing and building, 1 King. 5.6.

5 They have made all thy ship-boards of fir-trees of Senir. Having showed the
dignity of Tyrus from the situation, structure, and trading; now he comes to
set it out from the shipping of it. The Tyrians abounded in ships, and are
thought to be the first Authors of Navigation. Pliny says, Lib. 5. c, 12.
the Phenitians were famous for the invention, navalium and bellicarum artium,
of the navigatory and military art, and Tybullus says, that Tyrus first
committed a ship to Sea. Lib. 1. Eleg. 7. primo ratem ventis credere docta
Tyrus. Vide Sands Relat. 3. Editi. 1627. l. 3. p. 214 Vide Quister prim. in loc.
Tyrus was the Metropolis of Phaenicia.

Thy ship-boards. Luach is a table or plank, and Col luchocam is, all the
planks on both sides of the ships, there must be thick and strong planks to
make a ship. Some render the word traustra, that is, seats, whereon rowers sit
in ships, boats, or galleys.

Of fir-trees of Senir. The word Beroshim for Fir-trees, some render it Cedars,
but 1 King. 5.8. Isa. 37.24. Fir-trees and Cedars have distinct names (...) is
a Cedar, and Berosh the fir tree, which is a tree tall and strong, therefore
great men are likened unto it, Nahum 2.3. the fir-trees shall be terribly
shaken, that is, the men in place and honor. Planks of fir, its observed are
smooth, will cleave close together, and so were counted then fittest for
shipping; these fir trees were taken from Senir, a Mount, which had many names,
Deuteronomy. 3.9. Moses called it Hermon, the Sidonians Shirion, or Syrion, the
Amorites Shenir. Others Hor and some Sion. Stephanus in Onomast. interprets it
dormiens lucerna, the Chaldee calls it, the Snow Mount, because the snow used
to continue upon it. Our Prophet here makes it a mount of Fir-trees.

They have taken Cedars from Lebanon. This Mountain is partly in Canaan, and
partly in Syria, or Phaenicia. Solomon sent to Hyram to hew him Cedar Trees out
of Lebanon, that was from that part of the Mount, which run along in Syria,
and Phaenicia. Some make it a Mount in Syria, so high, that in the midst of the
summer, it preserves the snow on the top of it, which is fetched thence to
Tyrus, Mart. Lexic.
made use of to cool their summer cups, and sold to others for the same
purpose. Its called Lebanon, the learned conceive, because of its snowy
whiteness. Laban in Hebrew is White, thence Lebanon, Jerem. 18.14. Can a man
leave the snow of Lebanon? It abounded with Cedars, which are strong, durable,
and tall, Ezekiel. 17.22. they are said to be high, and men in high places are
compared to high Cedars, exposed to winds, storms, shakings, and ruin, more
than others, by reason of their tallnesse and strength, they were the fitter
for shipping.

To make Masts for thee. The Mast is arbor navis qua vela sustinentur, the tree
in the ship, which bears up the Sails. In Greek (...), because it stands
upright in the ship. Hesyc. calls it, (...), the right or strait wood of the
ship. In Hebrew (...) from (...) as it signifies a Merchant, quasi arbor
mercateria.

6 Of the Oaks of Baeshan. Bashan was a land beyond Jordan, which bred mighty
men, and was called the land of Giants, Deuteronomy. 3.13. Og was King thereof, whose
bed-stead of iron, was nine Cubits in length, and four in breadth, verse. 11.
this country was large, and fell partly to Manasseh, verse. 14. and partly to
Gad, 1 Chronicles. 5.11, 16. it was a rich soil, and fruitful, the Lambs and Rams of
it are set out in scripture with an emphasis, Deuteronomy. 32.14. the breed of Bashan,
it bred lusty, strong, and fat Cattle, hence great ones, and rich men are
likened to the Bulls of Bashan, Psalm 22.12. to Kine of Bashan, Amos 4.1. the
mighty ones and Princes of the earth, are called fatlings of Bashan, Ezekiel.
39.18. This land as it bred Men and Beasts of strength and stature, so Trees
likewise; especially Oaks, which are set out by way of distinction from
others, as Oaks of Bashan, Isa. 2.13. by which strong and great men are set
out, Zech. 11.2. The Hebrew for Oaks, is Allonim, which some have rendered
Pine-trees, some Chesnut-trees, some fir-trees, but most Oaks: for Bashan was
a woody Country, and did abound with Oaks, and Allon signifies an Oak, Josh.
24.26. Isa. 6.13. Callonim, as Oaks.

Have they made thine Oars. The Tyrians made their ships, so, that when the
wind served not, or not sufficiently, they might row with Oars, and so make
the more speed upon occasions. Their Oars were made of choice Oak, which was
firm and lasting, Mishshotim Oars, its from Shut, which signifies discurrere
cursitare. The Oars helped on the motion of the ship, and served to tow her
in, where winds would not suffer.

The company of the Ashurites have made thy benches of Ivory. In the Hebrew its
Bath ashurim, the Daughter of the Assyrians. Vatablus has it, Congregatio
Assyriorum, The Congregation of the Assyrians, which he interprets thus, the
best Assyrian Artists, have made thy benches of Ivory. The Septuagint has it,
(...), domunculas nemorosas, Dark houses, quasi beth asherim. Lyra, interprets
the words, Domunculas in navibus ad reponendum necessaria, Cabbins to lay up
things necessary. Others have differing conjectures about the words. Which in
the Original stand thus: They have made thee benches of Ivory, the Daughter of
Ashurim. that is, the Daughter of Tradings, or goings; to this purpose Junius
and Piscator interpret the words, one has it, Ex eb^re tritissimo, the other,
Ex ebore been attrito, of Ivory well worn, or trodden, and thus does Buxtorfius
render the word, Shen bath ashurim, Ebur, filius or filia gressuum, i. e.
Gressibus tritum. The word Ashur signifies going treading, and Pliny says,
that Ivory, which has been long in the earth, Vid. Buxtor. verbo. Ashur.
and much trodden upon, is the only Ivory. The word for Ivory is Shen, a
tooth, which by a Synecdoche is put for the tooth, or teeth of Elephants;
whereof Ivory is made. Some calls them the Elephants horns; because they are
large and like unto Horns. These teeth or horns they shed every ten years,
and being shed defodiunt and reponunt, they hide them, and lay them up.
Theophrast. and Pliny speak of Ebur fossile, Martinius in Lexic.
Ivory dug out of the Earth, white and black, which may be the Teeth or
horns of the Elephant, hid in the earth, and trodden into it.

Of Ivory the Tyrians made them benches.

The word for Benches is, (...) which signifies a board, a table, or plank,
that which may be joined to other things, and may be rendered the decks or
hatches, but because their ships had Oars, its like there were seats or
benches.

Brought out of the Isles of Chittim. In the Word is mention of the land of
Chittim, Isa. 23.1. The coast of Chittim, Numb. 24.24. the ships of Chittim,
Dan. 11.30. and here, of the Isles of Chittim. Some make it Italy, the Vulgar
has it, De insulis Italiae. Melancthon thinks it to be Macedonia. Bonfrerius
says, Cyprus was first so called, and after, this name Chittim was given to
other Islands, as Italy, Greece. A Lapide names Cyprus, Crete, Sicily, the
Islands of Apulia, and Italy, which he comprehends under the Isles of Chittim.
They were so called from Chittim, one of the Sons of Javan, who descended
from Japhet; the son of Noe, Genesis 10.45. and he with his brethren divided the
Isles of the Gentiles, after their Tongues and Families.

Obs. 1 The men of the world are wise, choosing the fittest places for their own
advantage and interest. Tyrus was situate at the entry of the Sea, was a
Merchant of the people for many Isles, the Tyrians seated themselves, where
they might have great trading at Sea, and access unto them, from all parts,
and so grow great and rich; the Canaanites dwelt by the Sea, and coast of
Jordan, Numb. 13.29. places fit for exportation and importation. Babylon was
seated upon many waters, Jer. 51.13. the great river Euphrates ran through it,
by means whereof, it grew rich; for it follows, abundant in treasures: Those
Cities or Towns, that are built upon rivers, navigable, and Sea coasts, where
be Ports commodious for shipping, they draw the wealth unto them, and abound
in treasure. Let us learn so much of the men of the world, to be wise for our
spiritual interest, and seat our selves near the waters of the Sanctuary, that
so trading with God and Christ, we may abound with spiritual treasure.

Obs. 2 Outward excellencies lift up men's hearts, beget vain confidences, and
cause them to boast. Tyrus was built upon a Rock, situate at the entry of the
Sea, did Merchandise with many Isles, whereby she gate the Riches, and Rarities
of other places, and hereupon she sweld, and said, I am of perfect beauty, I
want nothing conducing to essence or ornament, to being, or well-being; I and
mine are complete every way. Great Cities which have outward advantages of
enriching themselves, are full of pride, confidence, and sinful boastings.
Babylon was a great and rich City, and Isa. 47.7. she said, Ehjeh gevareth, I
shall be a Lady or mighty woman for ever: She took upon her the name of God,
verse. 8. I am, and none else besides me, I shall not fit as a widow, I am the
golden, the beautiful, the strong City, none is comparable unto me, none is
able to deal with me, to deprive me of my glory, wealth, greatness, and make
me desolate, and sit mourning like a widow. These were the confidences and
boastings of Babylon. The like you may read of Rome, which is spiritual
Babylon, Revel. 18.7. She said in her heart, I sit a Queen, and am no widow,
and shall see no sorrow. I have great command, and power, I ob^y none. Nations
and Kings are under me, I am no widow like other Cities, I abound with
delicacies and delights, in this condition shall I continue, I shall see no
sorrow. This is the great wickedness of Cities enriched by God, that they
forget him, and glory in external excellencies.

Obs. 3 No situation, strength, or outward advantage can secure proud Cities.
Tyrus borders were in the heart of the Seas, she was compassed about with
great waters, judged by all to be impregnable, but Gods design was to ruin
Tyrus for her pride, and he found out a way and means to do it. Let Cities be
built where they will, in the deeps, on rockie mountains, wheresoever, if they
glory in their strength, beauty, situation, God can bring destruction upon
them. Nothing shall hinder in nature or art. He will work, and who shall let
it, Isa. 43.13. he will work, and what shall let it, not seas, not rocks, not
walls, not strong towers, nor multitude of ships. -- Babylons, many waters
could not secure her, when the Lord had a device to destroy her; her pride, and
insolency, caused him to dry up her waters, and make her heaps, Jer. 51.36, 37.

Obs. 4 Artists will put forth themselves to the utmost to show their skill.
Thy builders have perfected thy beauty, they concealed not their art, what
skill soever they had in Architecture, they strove to manifest the same.

Verse. 7 Fine linen, with broidered work from Egypt, was that which thou
spreadest forth to be thy Sail, blue and purple from the Isles of Elishah, was
that which covered thee. Having spoken of the substantials, he comes now to the
Ornament of Tyrus shipping, viz. their sails.

Fine Linen, with broidered work from Egypt. Egypt abounded with Flax, which
was very fine, white, and precious, whereof the Egyptians made fine linen,
which for the Excellency and distinction sake, was called the fine linen of
Egypt, Prove. 7.16. which was so fine, that diverse interpreters have rendered
the word, Shosh byssum, silk; it was such as Philostratus says, Solis
Nobilibus licuisse bysso indui, that is, was lawful only for Noble men to wear.

Notwithstanding this Linen was so fine, they did imbroider it, which as it
made it more strong, so far more costly. The Hebrew Berichma is from (...) acu
pingere, to picturise by the needle, and rochem is, Quivarias formas and
figuras multis coloribus effigiare novit, sicut acupictores vel qui varia fila
diversorum colorum intexentes rerum omnium imagines imitantur. V^l 2 lp.
Such an Artist as can draw the form and figures of things in diverse colors.
Linen of Egypt imbroidered with the forms and figures of several things had
the Tyrians to make sailing for their ships.

Which thou spreadest forth to be thy sail. The word for Sail is Nes, which
some derive from Nasah, to exalt, elevate, for sails are on high. Others from
Nasas, which is vexillum erigere, to set up a banner, to which the Soldiers
gather, and to the sail when its hoysed up, as to the banner of the Ship, the
winds gather. In Latin its called velum quia distantum in navi instar alae
ventum excipit, and so helps on the motion of the ship.

Blue and Purple. These might be rich colorings, which they used to beautify
and adorn their ships withal, or to color their sails with. In Jer. 10.9. its
said blue and purple is their clothing; their Idols were clothed with cloth
of those colors, and so here, its probable they migh cover their heads with
blue and purple clothes to keep off the heat, or deck and cover their ships
with clothes so colored.

From the Isles of Elisha. In Genesis 10.4. Elisha the Son of Javan was one of
them that divided the Isles of the Gentiles, and those Isles he had, were
honored with his Name. Theodoret makes them to be the Islands of Greece.
Jerome the Islands in the Ionian Sea, Junius makes Elisha to be Author of the
Aeolians, who were of note for purple. Tyrus had much purple of its own, yet
being a Mart Town, from all places where it was, both that, Vid. Jun. not^s in
Genesis 10.4
and other rich Commodities were brought unto Tire.

Obs. 1 The wisdom of God in bestowing several mercies upon several places. No
one place has all his blessings, and hardly any place but has some distinct
blessing. In the 5, 6, and 7. verses, you may see that Senir has fir-trees,
Lebanon had Cedars, Bashan had Oaks, the Isles of Chittim had Ivory, Egypt
fine Linen, the Isles of Elisha, blue and purple. All these places had
distinct Mercies, and Tyrus was beholding to them all. The Scripture speaks of
Gods assigning distinct mercies to diverse places, as Balm and Myrrh to Gilead,
Genesis 37.25. Gold to Ophir, 1 King. 9.28. Brass to Tibhah and Chun, 1 Chronicles.
18.18. Vines to Sibmah, Jer. 48.32. and wines to Lebanon, Hos. 14.7. which sets
out the manifold wisdom of God, making way thereby for the Merchandising of
Nations, Civilizing of men by commerce, communicating of intelligence,
providence, the Truth, and Gospel of Christ. The Indies have sweet spices,
Silks, Cotton, Indico, Cutchineale. Constantinople, Smyrna, the Mediterranean
Islands, and other parts have their Commodities. Norway, and those parts, have
something peculiar. Our Nation has Lead, Tin, Fullers Earth, wools, and
clothes, for which Forrainers have been beholding to us.

Obs. 2 Proud spirits spare no cost to satisfy their humors and lusts. The men
of Tyrus were rich and proud, they built ships, and beautified them with costly
materials, their shipboards were of Fir-trees of Senir, their Masts were of
Cedars from Lebanon, their Oars were of Oaks of Bashan, their Benches, holds,
or decks, were of Ivory, out of the Isles of Chittim; their sails were of fine
Linen from Egypt, and that imbroidered; they colored and covered their ships
with blue and purple from the Isles of Elishah. Men's Lusts are costly things,
to gratifye them, they will lavish out gold and silver. When Sea-Towns are
fatted with the wealth of Sea and Land, they become proud, and pride in
whomsoever it is, is expensive. Plutarch tells of a ship which Cleopatra had,
saying, In vita Antonii.
Erat aurea puppis, vela purpurea, pandebantur remi argentei, ipsa regina sub
tentorio aurato requiescens. Where God gives in great supplies, great means,
they are seldom laid out for the honor of that God, but frequently both among
Heathens, and Gods people, are laid out to maintain state, pride, some
wretched, some base lust, or other. So Jerusalem being enriched with Gods
blessings, and trading from all parts, Ezekiel. 26.2. being the gates of the
people, she made of her Jewels, gold, and silver, Idols covering them with
broidered garments, Ezekiel. 16.17, 18.

Verse. 8 The Inhabitants of Zidon, and Arvad were thy Mariners: thy wise men,
O Tyrus, that were in thee were thy Pilots. 9 The Ancients of Gebal, and the
wise men thereof were in thee, thy calkers, all the ships of the Sea, with
their Mariners were in thee, to occupy thy merchandise. Having spoken of the
Materials, Fabric, and rich Ornaments of Tyrus shipping, in these two verses
he treats of the officers and persons employed therein, and multitude of
Trafiquers with Tyrus.

8 The Inhabitants of Zidon and Arvad. Zidon was a famous City of Phaenicia
says Jerome and Eusebius, it was more North than Tyrus, in the North-West of
Canaan, at the utmost borders thereof. It was built either by Sidon, the
firstborn of Canaan, Genesis 10.15, 19. or by the Sidonians, who descending from
him, built it in honor to his name. It was a great City, Josh. 19.28. assigned
unto the Tribe of Asher, but the inhabitants thereof were not driven out by
that Tribe. Judge. 1.31. It was more ancient than Tyrus. Strabo makes it two
hundred furlongs from Tire, Bonfrerius some five or six mile.

Arvad or Arad, the Vulgar reads it, Aradii, the Aradians were thy Mariners;
it was not Arad, a City in the South, Numb. 21.1. For the men thereof were no
Mariners, it being an inland City. The Hebrew is Arvad which OEcolampadius
takes to be Damascus. Jerome makes it an Island, and so does Vilalpandus, and
tha^ not far from Sidon, but Junius makes it rath^r, a Town in the sea, seven
furlongs long, and two hundred paces from the Continent, And Pliny tells us,
that the Tyrians, Sidonians, and Aradians dwelt near together, and were very
skilful in Navigation, especially the Sidonians, Vide Plinii naturalem
historiam. l. 5. c. 20.
and Arvadites. Of these were their Mariners.

Thy wisemen, O Tyrus, that were in thee, were thy Pilots. The Tyrians took
Mariners from other places, but set men of their own over them, such as were
wise and fit for that employment; inferior places, they called strangers to;
the honorable and places of trust, they reserved for their own. The Tyrians
were wise and skilful in Sea-affaires, 1 King. 9.27. Hyrams ship-men were such
as had knowledge of the Sea, they knew the several parts, what rocks and sands
were in the way to them, they knew how to steer the ship in all winds and
weathers, and to order all in the ship for the best advantage. Such were their
Pilots. The word for Pilot is, (...) chobel, which signifies the Master,
Captain, or Governor of the ship, which OEcolampadius derives from (...)
funis, because by them the sails of the ship are extended or contracted at the
pleasure of the Pilot or Governor, but rather its from (...) parturire, like
one in travail, who has many fears and sorrows before she bring forth, so
has the Pilot or Master of the ship.

9 The Ancients of Gebal, and the wise men thereof. Gebal was a Province or
City in Syria, or Syrophaenicia near unto Sidon, the men thereof confederated
with others against the people of God, Psalm 83.7. These Gebalites were men
skilful in he wing of stones, 1 King. 5.18. that is, stone-squarers. The Hebrew
word is, Gibhlim, the Giblites, or Gebalites, they with others, were the hewers
of the stones and Timber wherewith the Temple was built. Among these also were
ancient wise and able men for building and calking of ships.

Were in thee thy Calkers. The Hebrew is, Machazikee bidkec, which Montanus
renders roborantes scissuram tuam, Strengthening thy clefts, or ruptures, in
the Margent you have it, stoppers of chinks. Calkers are those that drive in
the Okum in the Clefts, Chinks, or distances between the planks of the ship,
and then with Pitch, Rozen, and Oil, does pay the same, that so no water may
enter. The French is, Reparans tes crevasses, repairing thy crevices.

All the ships of the Sea with their Mariners were in thee, to occupy thy
merchandise. Ships from all places and parts came to Tyrus, bringing in their
Commodities thither, and carrying out what Tyrus afforded, glass, purple, and
other Commodities. The Hebrew word for Ships is, Onijoth, being the plural
Number from (...) which sometimes is rendered a Navy, as 1 King. 10.11, 22. 1
King. 9.26, 27. but mostly a ship, as Prove. 30.19. Jonah 1.3, 4, 5. Isa. 33.21.
A ship is an hollow vessel, made to swim or sail upon the waters, and carry
burdens. Which Plautus calls, Equum ligneum. Lucretius, the Chariot of the
winds. August. A Sea Wagon. Ships are at Sea, what Carts, Chariots, or Wagons,
are at land; and as those are drawn by horses, so are they driven on by winds
and sails. Curvum ventorum vehiculum marinum.
The word (...) being from Anah, impellere, quia impetu ventorum navis
impellitur. It is the wind which causes the ship to move.

The word for Mariners in the 8. v. is shatim, and in this 9. v. its
Mallachim, the first is from Shut to move, go up and down from place to place,
and so Mariners do, carrying the ship from Port to Port; the latter word is
from Melach, salt, quasi, salt-men, because they row and sail in the Salt Sea.

To occupy thy Merchandise. The Hebrew is, Ad negotiandum negotiationem tuam,
to negotiate thy negotiation, or to buy thy buying, thou have played the
Merchant in buying diverse Commodities, (...) Mis. cuit and mercatu, est nam
mercatores in emendo and vendendo miscent unum cum alio.
and Merchants come to thee to fetch away those Commodities. Vatablus his sense
of the words is so, Ad distrahendas merces tuas, to take off thy wares.

Verse. 10 They of Persia, and of Lud; and of Phut, were in thine Army, thy men
of war: they hanged the shield and helmet in thee: they set forth thy
comeliness. 11 The men of Arvad with thine Army were upon thy Walls round
about, and the Gamadims were in thy Towers: they hanged their shields upon thy
walls round about, they have made thy beauty perfect. Having spoken of their
gallant shipping, their Pilots, Mariners, Calkers, and Naval-affairs, here he
comes to the Military, they had considerable Forces, from other parts, and of
their own, both which are touched in these two verses.

They of Persia. The Persians were good Soldiers, Cyrus the Persian conquered
the Chaldaeans, Lib. 31
and set up the Persian Empire. Ammianus says of the Persians, Pugnandi sunt
peritissimi, they are expert in warlike affairs. The Hebrew for Persia is
parats, which signifies to divide, to this Dan^el alludes, chap. 5.28. Peers,
thy Kingdom is divided, and given to the Medes, and Persians. Martinius in
Lexico.
But the name of Persia was before, and upon another account, from one Perseus
a King.

And of Lud. In the tenth of Genesis, there is mention of Ludim the Son of
Mizraim and Ham, verse. 13. and of Lud the son of Shem of the first its
conceived came the Lubims in Africa, who were enemies to the Jews, 2 Chronicles.
12.3. Of the second the Lydians, a people in Asia, who were skilful Archers,
Lydes intel gentes r^b^stissimos reputatos eorum que regem Croesum a Cyro
captum esse. Hyer^nimus.
as appears, Jerem. 46.9 and Jerome says, they were counted the strongest
among the Nations.

And of Phut. Phut was one of the sons of Ham, Genesis 10.6. from whom both
posterity and country were so named, Ezekiel. 38.5. Phut is translated Lybia, and
Lybians, Jerem. 46.9. and the Greek Scholiast here turns Phut, Lybias, the
Lybians. So vulgar; and these were Celebres in praelio pugnatores, famous
warriors, and therefore hired to be Tyriae urbis defensores. These joined with
their own men, made up their Army, fighting for them at Sea when occasion was,
and constantly guarding their City. The word for War is Milchamah from Lacham
to eat, and to fight, because wars do eat up men, and their estates; hence the
sword is said to devour, and that from one end of the land to another, Jerem.
12.12. and to be drunk with blood, Jer. 46.10. war is bloody, consuming, and
devouring.

They hanged the shield, and helmet in thee. The Hebrew for shield is, Magen to
protect, quia ferentem protegit, because it protects and defends him that bears
it. The Lord said to Abraham, Genesis 15.1. Anachi magenlak, I am a shield to
thee, that is, I that am the great God, am thy Protector; Hence great men, who
ought to protect the people, the places and Cities they dwell in, are called
Magin^e erez, the shields of the earth, Psa. 47.10.

The word for Helmet in Hebrew is, Covah, in Greek (...), that piece of Armor
which covers the head. Of Old they made Helmets of the skins of Beasts,
afterward of metals, as brass, iron, silver. Martin.


In time of peace, they hanged up their shields and helmets where they might be
seen, that so both strangers and others might see they were well provided for
wars upon all occasions, or rather, it was to set forth their glory and
greatness. Its like they had some public Armory, where their Arms were laid
up. The Jews stored up theirs in the house of God, 2 Chronicles. 23.9.

They set forth thy comeliness. This added much to the beauty and glory of
Tyrus, that it had strong men in it, who were expert warriors, and store of
Arms hung up orderly. Solomon tells you an Armory is very comely, where there
hangs shields and bucklers of mighty men, Cant. 4.4. such hangings become an
Armory, as well as Tapestry or Arras do any room.

11 The men of Arvad with thine Army, were upon thy walls round about. Of the
Arvadites was touched before, they with the Tyrians, and those they had hired
for military services, kept watch upon the walls of Tyrus continually. Though
it were a strong City, seated upon a rock, in the midst of the Seas, yet they
thought it wisdom to have a watch on all sides, not knowing but enemies might
come by Sea, and do them mischief. Chomah, est murus quasi muniens robur, a
defensive strength; these Tyrians trusted not only to their Walls, a livelesse
strength, but had watches of their Soldiers, which were living strengths.

The Gammadims were in thy Towers. There is some dispute among interpreters,
who these Gammadims were. The Vulgar renders the word Pigmies, and so does
Shindler, whom authors affirm to be, a people of three Cubits or Spans in
stature, but its impossible the Tyrians should employ such, who had sought the
strongest and skilfullest of men in other Nations, to be an ornament and
defense unto them; what glory was it, to have such dwarfes among their valiant
men? Some make them to seem Pigmies, and little ones, because they were in high
Towers; this favors more of phansy, than of truth; why should not the Tyrians
have stout men in their Towers, as we^l as on their walls? The Chaldee reads it
Cappadocians. The Septuagint, (...), Keepers, and Jerome though he renders the
word Pigmies, yet he adds quasi bellatores, (...), a lucta and certamine,
because they were forward to fight, and were notable fift-fighters. Gammadim is
from Gomed, a Cubite, which occasioned many to think them to be Cubit-men; but
Gomed may note the arm, wherein man's strength lies, and hence they are called
Viri brachiales, quod brachio potentes and robusti essent, because they were
men of their arms. And Junius calls them, viros lacertosos, Buxtor. in verbo
Gammadim Vid. de Dien. in locum.
men of arms and strength, fit to defend what they undertook. Doubtless they
were men of stature and strength. Otherwise what should they have done with
shields, they would have been burdensome to little and weak men. Quistorpius
says, these Gammadims were a warlike people, not inferior to the Persians,
Lydians, or Arvadians, so called from a region of that name. A Lapide
conceives, Gammadim may be from (...) stare, and so these Gammadims to be
milites stationarii, standing Soldiers, a standing garrison in the Towers of
Tyrus.

They hanged their shields upon thy walls round about. The word for shields
differs from that in the former verse, there its magen, and here its (...)*
Shelet. Whence our English word shield comes; its from shalat, dominari, posse,
because those used shields, were like men of power, and enabled to encounter
their enemies.

They have made thy beauty perfect. The French is, Ils to ont fait parfaite en
beauty, they have made thee perfect in beauty. The Vulgar is, Compleverunt
pulchritudinem tuam, they have filled up thy beauty; the Sidonians, Arvadians,
Gebalites, Persians, Lydians, Lybians. Gammadims, every one added something,
which made up the beauty of Tyrus. You may confine it to their shipping and
arms.

Obs. 1 That even amongst Heathens, were wise and experienced men. Zida, Arvad,
Tyrus, Gebal, were Heathenish, yet had they their wise men, and ancients.
Chacamim and Sekenim, all wisdom and experience were not shut up in Judaea,
the Lord gave gifts unto Heathens, so that many of them excelled in wisdom,
and had great skill in natural and humane things. The word Chacam imports
knowledge, and wisdom, in divine and humane things. Heathens fell short in the
first, but went beyond most in the second. Solomon acknowledged, that there was
none among the Jews, that had such skill in hewing of Timber, as the Sidonians,
1 King. 5.6. and you may read how skilful a Tyrian was, 2 Chronicles. 2.14. He was
Ish Chacam, verse. 13. its a cunning man in our translation, but rather it
should be a man of wisdom, a man of skill, he was so skilful* as to find
out any thing put unto him. There were wise men in the Nations, Jerem. 10.7.
Edom had hers, Obad. 8. So Babylon, Dan. 5.7. Egypt had the like, Exodus 7.11.
and Tire, and Sidon, had not only wise men, but those were very wise, Zech.
9.2.

Obs. 2 Matters of importance are to be committed to men of wisdom and
experience. Tyrus put her Naval affairs, in the hands of wise men and ancient;
she would not trust young, raw, unexpert men to be her Mariners, Pilots, or
Calkers. she looked not to kindred, friends, and relations, as states now do;
but unto those were fit, and able, wise, and experienced in the affairs they
were to be employed in. Wisdom directs Eccl. 10.10. wisdom builds up and
establishes, Prove. 24.3.

Obs. 3 Wise States as they will make use of Forrainers to advance their
affairs, and secure themselves, so especially they will promote their own unto
the principal places. Thy wise men, O Tyrus, that were in thee were thy Pilots,
Sidonians, and Arvadites were her Mariners, the Gibalites her Calkers, but
Tyrians themselves were her Pilots. So Persians, Lydians, and Phutians were in
the Army of Tyrus, but they were not the Commanders thereof. Tyrus was careful,
and showed her great wisdom in placing men of her own; Those were Natives, in
the chief places of her Navy, and of her Army.

When strangers are set in chief places, it discontents the Natives, causes
envy, grudgings, and animosities, so that those under them, often plot against
them, and so the work they are in, is made unsuccesseful. Solomon set his own
people over the work, 1 King. 5.16. and Pharaoh set Egyptians over the Jews,
and Jewish Officers, Exodus 1.11, 5.14.

Obs. 4 The glory of a State and City is made up of, and set out by external
things. Ships, soldiers, shields, helmets, they made up the beauty of Tyrus,
they made it perfect, they became her, and set forth her comeliness. Such
Comeliness, such beauty, have heathenish States and Cities, but there is
another beauty, another Comeliness, which would far exceed these, and make
States, Cities very glorious, viz. True Doctrine, pure worship, holiness of
life, execution of justice, and provision for the Poor; these things would make
the beauty of a City perfect, and set forth the comeliness thereof unto the
life. Sion that had these things in her, was the Perfection of beauty.

Verse. 12 Tarshish was thy Merchant, by reason of the multitude of all kind of
riches: with silver, Iron, Tin, and Lead, they traded in thy fairs. The glory
of Tyrus, being pencilled out from its structure, Navy, and Militia. Now the
Prophet proceeds to amplify, the same from the great Merchandising it had,
Isaiah tells you, chap. 23.3, that Tyrus was a Mart of Nations, and Lavater
says, it was quasi emptorium totius mundi, as a Market or Fair for the whole
world, which was an exceeding great honor unto Tyrus. This amplification
extends unto the 25. verse. and in the several verses are set out the diverse
sorts of Merchants, and their wares.

Tarshish was thy Merchant. This word Tarshish has greatly perplexed
Interpreters, and their thoughts about it are various. Jerome in most places,
and many others that follow him; make it to be the Sea; some the
Mediterranean, others the Ocea; but this Munster likes not, because as the
other sons of Javan divided the Isles of the Gentiles, and gave their names
unto them, so its probable that Tarshish being his Son, did the like, Genesis
10.4, 5. besides Psalm 72.10. mention is made of the Kings of Tarshish, which
imports it was Land, and not Sea. In this place the Septuagint has (...).
Jerome, and the Vulgar Carthaginenses, the Carthaginians, so that they all
understand by Tarshish, Carthage. So Mariana likewise, who says, that Tunis
being near Carthage, was called in the Arabic Tongue Tharsis, which he has
from Leo Africanus: and in these two places, Isa. 23.1. Ezekiel. 38.13. The
Septuagint has Carthage, and the Carthaginians: Pliny makes it a Colony of
Tyrus: Lib. 5. c. 19. Q Curt. l. 4.
and Curtius says, the Tyrians built Carthage; and were honored by the
Carthaginians, Parentum loco. Some make Tharsis, here to be Tarsus, a City in
Cilicia, that which Jonas fled unto, Jon. 1.3. the City whereof Paul the
Apostle was, Act. 21.39. but this Boeti. in his sacred animadversions likes
not, because Tarsus was not a Sea, Lib. 4. c. 6.
but an Inland-Town; and he cites Pliny for proof of it, saying, that the river
Cydnus does divide Tarsus far from the Sea; Lib. 5. c. 2.
and moreover, Cilicia had not such metals, as here are mentioned. Others
therefore make this Tarshish to be Tartessus a Sea-Town in Spain, which
abounded with these metals here mentioned, viz. silver, iron, tin, and lead,
which were brought to Tartessus: but what ever probabilities are alleged for
this opinion. The Prophet Isaiah confounds them all, when he says, chap.
23.10. that Tyrus was the Daughter of Tarshish. Tyrus was very ancient, yet not
so ancient as Tarshish, which was some Mediterranean Island, with the City
thereof, so named from Tarshish the Son of Javan, Genesis 10.4, 5. How then can
either Carthage, or Tartessus, be Tarshish? when they were daughters of Tyrus,
as Pliny, l. 5. c. 19. and Sanct. upon Isa. 2.13. do affirm, and though both of
them were ancient, yet must they not compare with Tyrus or Tarshish for
antiquity.

The men of Tarshish, what Island, City, or place soever it was, they came to
Tyrus, and Merchandised with her, The Word for Merchant is (...) Socher, from
sachar, to go from place to place, in a trading way, transporting commodities,
which is the work of Merchants; they themselves, or by their factors, do cause
goods to be carried from Port to Port, and transported beyond Sea. Either
Tarshish had such Mines, as yielded the metals spoken of in the verse, or they
were brought unto it, and so transported by the Merchants thereof to Tyrus.

With Silver, Iron, Tin, and Lead. Ceseph is the word for silver, which comes
from Casaph, to desire, for silver is that which all men covet and desire, yet
are not satisfied therewith. Hujus desiderium omnes homines tenet. Avenarius.
So strongly are some carried out in their desires after it, that they venture
limbs and life for it, yea, pierce themselves through many cares, and drown
their souls in perdition, 1 Timothy 6, 8, 10.

Bazreh is Iron, bertz is a Chaldee word, signifying transfigere perforare,
from whence it may be derived, because Iron is that which peirceth through,
and fastens things togegether, it is of great use, and could not well be
wanted in any state, its frequently put in scripture, Scalig. Exert. 10.6.2.
for that is made of Iron, as 2 King. 6.5, 6. that is called the Axe, in Hebrew
is Iron, and Psalm 105.18. he was laid in iron, that is, in Chains made of
Iron, so Psalm. 107.10. being bound in affliction, and Iron, that is, in fetters
or chains, therefore metaphorically it notes hard things.

Tin, that is, Bedil, from Hiphdell, which is to separate, because its
separated not only from silver in the fire, but other drossy materials, some
call it white lead. Our pewter has much of it mingled with it.

Lead, the Hebrew is, (...) Ophereth from Aphar, pulvis, dust, because it has
much earthinesse in it, not because its fetched out of the dust of the earth,
so are other metals which are more noble.

They traded in thy fairs. The Hebrew runs thus, dederunt subsidiis tuis,
they have given in these to thy aid. Faires are aides and helps to places,
where they be kept. Others read for fairs, in derelictionibus tuis, in thy
leavings they have traded, in the place where all things are left for sale and
exchange; the word isbon, or isbonim notes the place whither wares are brought
and left, from (...) asab to leave, and also to help.

Verse. 13 Javan, Tubal, and Meshech, they were thy Merchants, they traded the
persons of men, and vessels of brass in thy market. Javan was the son of
Japhet, Gen, 10.2. from whom came the Jonians, afterward called the Grecians,
Dan. 8.21. the rough goat, is melech Javan, the King of Grecia, and the
Septuagint here has it, (...), which is Greece: Joel 3.6. jevanim is rendered
(...) by the Septuagint, and Grecians by our translators.

Tubal. Tubal was the Son of Japhet also, Genesis 10.2. and as Junius in his notes
upon the place, observes, from him came the Iberians, and Albanians. The
Iberians were a people in Asia, near the Cuspian, and Euxine Seas, and the
Albanians were their neighbors, between Colchis and Armenia. Some expositors
do tell us, there were Occidental Iberians as well as Oriental, and by them
they understand the Spaniards, who were so called from the river Iber, and they
make Tubal, Vid. Vilalp.
the father and founder of Spain; the first City whereof they affirm to be
called Thubal.

Meshech. Some make him being the Son of Japhet, Genesis 10.2. the father of the
Muscovites: others of the Cappadocians, who formerly were called Meschines, or
Meschates. Josephus in his first book of Antiquities chap. 7. which is of
Nations deriving their names from the Authors, says, Meschus was the author of
them called Meschates, who were lately named Cappadocians: for they show even
at this day, a token of their ancient name, to wit, the City of Masaca.

They were thy Merchants. The word for Merchant here, differs from that in the
precedent verse, its (...) rochel, which properly is a Merchant dealing in
Grocery, Spicery, and sweet things, in the 1 King. 10.15. they be called
Spice-Merchants, harocelim, There be two words more in the verse. for
Merchants, Tor (...) because they search into the nature of things; and Socher,
because they send their goods up and down from place to place; but Rochel is
used for those that Merchandise in other things, as follows.

They traded the persons of men. The Hebrew is, Benephesh adam, in the soul, or
souls of men, So the Septuagint, (...). The Vulgar is, Mancipia, slaves. The
Fren. is, Les ames des homes. Junius and Piscator, reads it hominibus, They
traded in men, either they brought men to Tyrus to sell them there, or brought
men in to Tyrus to carry else where. This was a frequent practice among
Hea^hens to buy and sell men. If it be thought lawful to sell those are taken
in war, from whom the Conqueror might take their lives, what warrant there is
to buy and sell other men like beasts in a Market, I see not. The Scholiast
says, God here does accuse their great in-justice, qui homines per vim
vendant. The Merchants that dealt with the whore of Babylon; they traded, Rev.
18.^3. in the bodies, so is the word slaves in the Original, and Souls of men.
They traded in the soul of man, that is, says Vilalpandus, cum ingenti vitae
periculo, with the great hazard of their lives, according to that, Lament. 5.9.
we gate our bread, benaphshenu in anima nostra, that is, with the hazard of our
soul, or life, because of the sword of the wilderness.

And vessels of brass in thy market. All kind of Brazen vessels, were brought
thither, and sold into other parts. The word for Market is Maarab from (...) to
mingle, because in Markets there are mixtures of all things; in Tyrus, were
men, brass, lead, tin, iron, silver, and a multitude of other things to be had.

Verse. 14 They of the house of Togarmah traded in thy fairs, with horses, and
horsemen, and mules. Togarmah was the son of Gomer, the son of Japhet, Genesis
10.2, 3. and the Chaldee paraphrast makes his Country Germany. The Jews
understand by the Thogarmaeans, the Turks, and by Togarma, Turkia. Others by
the house of Togarmah mean the Phrygians who abounded in horses, and Horsemen,
which were skilful in horsemandry. What house, that is, people, or Nation
soever they were, they possessed the Northeren parts, Eze. 38.6.

Horses, horsemen, and Mules. Susim notes common horses; Parasim, or Pharasim,
horses for war; Peradim, swift horses, such as Kings and Princes used, says A
Lapide; but Parash is a horseman, quod equum calcaribus pungat, 2 Chronicles. 1.14.
and Pered is a Mule, from Parad to separate, because the generation of mules is
differing from other beasts.

Verse. 15 The men of Dedan were thy Merchants; many Isles, were the merchandise
of thy hand: they brought thee for a present, horns of Ivory and Ebeny. Dedan
was a City in Idumaea, belonging to the posterity of Esau, Jerem. 49.8. of it,
see what was said chap. 25.13. those in that City, who were Merchants, did
merchandise with Tyrus.

Many Isles were the Merchandise of thy hand. Isles in the Ocean, or
Mediterranean Sea. Sanctius thinks they could not be the Mediterranean
Islands, because they yielded not such Commodities as are here spoken of. They
brought their wares into Tyrus, bargaining with her Merchants and Inhabitants,
which bargains were confirmed by striking hands: or, by the Merchandise of thy
hand, may be understood, their bringing wares to her hand, and taking wares off
from her hand.

They brought thee for a present, horns of Ivory and Ebeny. Elephants have no
Horns; but because their Teeth grow something like Horns, therefore they are
called Horns, and horns of Ivory, for that the Ivory is made of those teeth or
horns.

The Heb. word for Ebeny is hoben, hobenim, or hobnim, Jonathan in Targum
Pagnine French.
which some have interpreted Peacocks; but the word for Peacocks, is tuccljim,
1 King. 10.22. Ebeny is black, solid, and shining wood, so heavy, that it swims
not in water, Sola India nigrum fert hebenum. Virg.
but sinks even like a stone, Eben in Hebrew is a stone, and Ebeny differs not
much from it. India is the Parent of it.

For a present, not that they gave the Tyrians their Ivory and Ebeny, but
presented them for sale unto them. Therefore Pisca. reads the words thus, With
horns of Ivory and with Ebeny they have made, or rendered thy price; they have
given thee these, for other commodities, and so the French, Ils ont change pour
ton payement les deuts d'yvoire and des paons.

Verse. 16 Syria was thy Merchant by reason of the multitude of the wares of thy
making: they occupied in thy Fairs, with Emeraulds, Purple, and broidered work,
and fine Linen, and Coral, and Aga^e. The word for Syria in Hebrew is Aram,
Genesis 10.22. Aram (...) the Son of Shem, and from him came the Aramites, or
Armenians, who possessed Armenia; so called from Aram, which signifies high;
and in Armenia, its conceived was the highest part of the earth, Genesis 8.4. the
Ark first rested upon the Mountains of Ararat, which were in Armenia.
Vilalpandus tells us, that from (...) Sur a Province therein, it afterward was
called Syria; Josephus Antiq. l. 1. c. 7. says, of Aram, Vid. Martin. in verb.
Syrus.
came the Aramaeans, whom the Greeks called Syrians. These Syrians were the
Merchants of Tyrus; but whither the Syrians of Damascus, 2 Samuel: 8.5. or the
Syrians of Beth-Rehob, or those of Zoba, 2 Samuel 10.6. or the Syrians of
Padan-Aram, Genesis 10.20. or all of them, is uncertain.

For the multitude of the wares of thy making. In the Hebrew its, for the
multitude of thy works. Tyrus had many Artists, which made and multiplied
wares for other parts. She employed her people, who filled her with Artificial
things.

They occupied in thy Fairs with Emeralds. E Genere gemmarum nigri coloris.
Drusius. Vid. Rueum de gemmis. l. 2. 3. 4
The word for Emerald is Nophech, which Rabbi David says is a kind of precious
stone, of black color. Jerome, and Santes make it a Carbuncle, and so the
French, and Vatablus. Others the smarag'd Emerald, or Green-stone, with which
color the eyes are greatly pleased, and delighted.

Purple, and broidered work, and fine Linen. These were rich commodities which
the Syrians traded in; for Purple, the French is scarlet, l'escarlate. Of these
before.

Coral. This grows in the sea, whilst its under the water, its green, being
got above the water, Rueu^. l. 1. c. 19. Fosterus renders it, Unicor^u.
it becomes red, its called Arboreus lapis, the tree-stone, or stony-tree,
because it brancheth out like a tree. The Hebrew Ramoth is from Rum to elevate
or raise up, and so does Coral spring up out of the rock or Sea.

Agate. The Margent is, Chrysoprafe chad Shod. Jerome professes he knows not
what this word means. The Hebrews affirm, that by it are meant all precious
wares. Its rendered by Interpreters, a Carbuncle, a Pearl, a Crystal; and here
an Agate, which is a stone well known. Plini. l. 37. natural hyst. c. 10.
It had its name from Achates a River in Sicilia, in which, or near to which,
it was first found, but afterward in other places.

Verse. 17. Judah, and the land of Israel, they were thy Merchants, they traded
in thy market, wheat of Minnith, and Pannag, and honey, and oil, and balm. The
posterity of Judah, and the inhabitants of Canaan, they abounding with wheat,
honey, oil, and balm, exported them to Tyrus, for Tyrus was victualled by
Judea, Act. 12.20. and Hyram King of Tire had twenty thousand measures of
wheat, and twenty measures of oil yearly from Solomon, for his household, 1
King. 5.11. what then had all his people from the Merchants of the Jews?

Wheat of Minnith. Bechitte Minnith. Chittah quasi chintah from chanat to bring
forth, to thrust out, because the wheat thrusts it self, Ex folliculis out of
the hose or stalk, and appears above the same. Canaan was Erez chittah, a land
of wheat and barley, a land of oyle-olive, and honey, Deuteronomy. 8.8. Minnith was
some principal place in it for wheat, it is mentioned only in the 11 of
Judges, 33. and here.

Pannag. Some translate it Balsome. some a Fig, but Aquila Symmachus, and
Theodot. do make it a place, as Minnith, which yielded choice wheat. Juniu, and
Piscator, calls it Phaenicia. And so Buxtorfius.

Balm. Some render it Rozin, which is a humor or juice flowing out of certain
trees; but Balm its rendered here, and Genesis 37.25. Jerem. 8.22.46.11.51.8.
which is the principal of oils, or liquids, that flow out of trees, quasi
(...) Dominus Olei, the Lord or King of oils.

Verse. 18 Damascus was thy Merchant in the multitude of the Wares of thy
making, for the multitude of all riches: in the wine of Helbon, and white wool.
Damascus was a famous City of Syria, rather than Phaenicia, which Julian called
the eye of the East, between Lybanus and Mount Hermon. Isaiah tells us it was
the head of Syria, chap. 7.8. that is, the head or principal City thereof:
Merchants came from thence to Tyrus, and traded in her wares, and Tyrians went
to Damascus, and traded in hers.

For the multitude of all riches. Tyrus abounded with the riches of Sea and
land, having Commodities fitting for all places.

In the Wine of Helbon. Helbon or Chelbon signifies milk, or Fatness, and
metaphorically, it signifies the best of any thing; here its conceived to be
the name of a place in Syria, Buxtorf. in verbo Halab.
where grew choice grapes, of which the best wine was made. Wine as pleasant as
milk, if not like unto milk in color.

And white wool. The Septuagint and Jerome have it wool, from Miletus a City
in the borders of Jonia and Caria, but the Hebrew word is (...) which is
candor, whiteness, so that the words are wool of whiteness. In the Eastern
parts are arbores laniferae, trees that bear wool or Cotton, which is very
white, and sheep that bear wool of whiteness, or white wool. The word Tzachar
has affinity with (...) Tzahar, which signifies light, and all light has a
whiteness, and brightness in it.

Verse. 19 Dan also, and Javan going to and fro occupied in thy fairs: bright
Iron, Cassia and Calamus were in thy Market. Dan the posterity of the Patriarch
Dan, who inhabited the City Dan near Jordan, both which had their names from
him, Josh. 19.47. that City Dan in Christ's time was called Caesarea Philippi,
and in Jeromes Paneas, Bonfrerius. Masius in Josh. 19.
from hence being some thirty five miles from Tyrus, came the Danites to trade
with the Tyrians.

Javan going to and fro, Of Javan before, verse. 13. The word for going to and
fro, is Meuzzal, which some make the name of a place. Meuzzal from uzal; so
Aquila, as if the Danites and Grecians did bring Commodities from Uzal to
Tyrus; but Meuzel is a participle from (...) Ezal, which is to go, Avari erant
Graeci and quaestus causa live illuc vagabantur per mare.
to move. Vatubl. turns it vagabunda, for the Greeks being covetous did sail,
and move to all places for gain.

Bright Iron. The Hebrew is, Iron made, defecated from all the dross, and made
pure, or made into bars or plates.

Cassia. Its a kind of a sweet cane, or shrub, in Hebrew Kiddah, from kadad,
inclinare vertice, to bow with the head, or top; so this Cassia, grows with the
top, inclining or bowing; its mentioned only here, and in Exodus 30.24. where
its reckoned among the principal spices, for the holy anointing. The word for
Cassia in Psalm 45.9. is kezioth from (...) to shave, Vid. Plin. Nature. Hyst.
l. 12. c. 19.
unbarke; for Cassia, is odorata arbuscula cujus cortex abraditur, an
odoriferous Shrub, whose bark shaved off is very useful.

Calamus. It is a kind of sweet Reed, or Cane, full of knots, growing in
India, Isa. 43.24. its called sweet Cane, and Jerem. 6.20. Sweet Cane from a
far Country, which was India, says Jerome. Maldon. in locum.
Of it, and other spices, was made the incense.

Verse. 20. Dedan was thy Merchant in pre^ us clothes for Charets. The Hebrew
for Precious clothes, is Bigde Chophesh vestimentis ingenuitatis, garments of
Ingenuity, or liberty; such Garments as Noble and Freemen used for their horses
and charets. Men of quality adorn their horses and charets with rich and
precious ornaments, rich saddles, trappings, and coverings.

Verse. 21 Arabia, and all the Princes of Kedar, they occupied with thee, in
Lambs, and Rams, and Goats, in these were they thy Merchants. The Arabians
dealt much in sheep and Goats, they brought thousands of them to Jehoshaphat. 2 Chronicles. 17.11. Arabia petraea, and deserta, bred multitudes of them.

The Princes of Kedar. Kedar says Jerome is a region in the wilderness of the
Saracens, so named from Kedar the son of Ishmael, Genesis 25.13. in it was a City
also of that name, which had diverse Princes; the Kedarits and Arabians, as
they were not far from one another, so not far from Tyrus, because such castle
could not be driven far: in these they traded with the Tyrians.

In these were they thy Merchants. The Hebrew is, the Merchants of thy hand,
that is, Merchants near at hand: they were near, and always ready to furnish
them with Lambs, Rams, and Goats.

Verse. 22 The Merchants of Shebah and Raamah, they were thy Merchants: they
occupied in thy fairs with chief of all spices, and with all precious stones
and gold. In the 10. of Genesis 7. we read of Seba, with Samech, and Seba, with
Shin; this Seba with Shin, was the Son of Raamah, who inhabited the upper
Tract, Coast, or part of Arabia Foelix, and from him that region was named
Sheba: the other Seba with Samech, was the Son of Cush, and Nephew of Ham, who
possessed that region in Aethiopia, called from him Saba, of which Isaiah
speaks, chap. 43.3. I gave Egypt for thy ransom, Aethiopia and Seba, or Saba,
for thee. You have them both Psalm, 72.10. The Kings of Sheba, and Seba shall
offer gifts. The first is with the letter shin. The second with Samech. The
Queen that came to Solomon, was of Sheba, not Seba, or Saba; Sheba, in Arabia
the happy, Bonfrerius.
abounded with those things she presented unto him.

Raamah. Some make this word an Epithet of the former, the Merchants of
Shebah, even Raamah: or thus, the Merchants of Shebah, even thunder or
thunderers; for Raam and Ramah, or Raamah, signify thunder, Job 39.19. have
thou clothed his neck with thunder? speaking of the Horse; Have thou made him
terrible? The Sabaeans were Commotores seu turbantes omnia. But I rather
conceive with Junius, Vid. Iun. in Genesis 10 7. Regma est civitas Arabiae
felicis. Maldonat.
it was some place in Arabia the happy, near unto Sheba; its most probable the
father and the Son pitched in those parts were near one another.

With chief of all spices, and with all precious stones, etc. Arabia Foelix did
abound with choice spices, Jer. 6.20. Incense came from Sheba, and not only
incense, but gold, Isa. 60.6. the Queen of Sheba she brought spices, much
gold, and precious stones unto Solomon, 1 King. 10.2.

Verse. 23 Haran, and Canneh, and Eden, the Merchants of Sheba, Ashur, and
Chilmad, were thy Merchants. Haran or Charran, was a City in Mesopotamia, where
Abraham some time dwelt, Genesis 11.31. Act. 7.4. Canneh is no where mentioned,
but in this place, and its thought to be some City or region nigh to Haran.
Junius makes it the same with Calneh, Genesis 10.10. Eden is spoken of 2 King.
19.12. and Isa. 37.12. where its said to be in Thelassar. Vilalpandus makes
Eden to be a most pleasant Region in Syria. Others in Mesopotamia. Junius in
Chaldaea.

Shebah. Some make this Shebah the same with the former. Jun. and Piscator
difference it from the former, placing it in Arabia deserta, and think it that
Sheba Job speaks of, chap. 6.19. The companies of Sheba waited for them.

Ashur. He was the son of Shem, Genesis 10.22. of him came the Assyrians, who were
a scourge and plague to the Jews, Isa. 10.5.

Chilmad. It is from Lamad to Teach, and the words may be read thus, The
Merchants of Sheba and Ashur, quasi d cti, being versed and skilled in thy
wares and affairs, they were thy Merchants; but its more suitable to look at
Chilma^ as the proper name of a place. Its by the learned made a Province of
the Medes, between Assyria and Parthia. Targum Hierosolim. Junius. Polanus.
Quae gens esset clam est Mariana.


Verse. 24 These were thy Merchants in all sorts of things, in blue clothes,
and broidered work, and in chests of rich apparel, bound with cords, and made
of Cedar among thy merchandise. The Men of Shebah, Ashur, and Chilmad, they
brought the Commodities here mentioned unto Tyrus, and sold them in her markets.

In all sorts of things. The Hebrew is Bemachluhim, in perfectionibus, its from
Calal. to perfect, and notes variety, and multitude of perfect wares, such as
were no ways faulty.

In blue clothes. Baglome Tecelech, in involucris hyachinthi, says Montanus,
in the wrappings of Hyacinth. Symmachus, in pretiosis involucris, in precious
coverings. The French, En habillemens de hyacinthe, that is, in clothes died
blue, the word galem is a cloak or covering, in which a man does wrap and cover
himself.

In chests of rich apparel bound with cords. Beginze in the Cases, or chests,
ganaz is that in which gold, silver, clothes, and desirable things are laid up
in, they put up rich Apparel in clothes, and bound them with cords, yea, with
cords of silk says Vitalpandus.

The word for rich Apparel, is beromim only in this place, and it notes
precious, Desirable Garments. The septuagint turns it, (...), Choice treasures.

Made of Cedar. Cedars are well sented, durable, but brittle, of them they made
Chests for their precious things.

Verse. 25 The ships of Tarshish did sing of thee in thy market, and thou wast
replenished, and made very glorious in the midst of the Seas. The ships of
Tarshish were thy Princes. So Montanus, and others, They were the chief of all
the ships came to thee. The Hebrew is, Sharothajick, which the Hebrews derive
from (...) to play the Prince, but ours from (...) shur to sing, and so the
Merchants, or men of Tarshish, that came and traded with thee, they did magnify
thee, and thy wares, they praised thee above all places, and thy wares above
all wares.

Thou wast replenished and made very glorious. Thou wast filled with the wares
and Commodities of all the Islands and Nations near and far off, so that
nothing was wanting in thee, and hereupon thou becamest famous abroad; thou
had all precious and rare things: whatever was the glory and excellency of
other places, was brought to thee, being in the heart of the Sea, so it is in
the Original.

Obs. 1 That Merchandising is Ancient and lawful. Tyrus was of great Antiquity,
Isa. 23.7. and the mart of Nations, verse. 3. In Jacobs days there were
Midianitish Merchants. Genesis 37.28. in Abraham's time there were such, Genesis
23.16. Neither is the calling of Merchants unlawful, though Chrysostom be
against it. He says, Christ cast the buyers, and sellers out of the Temple,
signifying that a Merchant can hardly or never please God, and therefore no
Christian ought to be a Merchant; or if he will, let him be thrown out of
the Church of God, he cites that in Psalm 70. v. 16. according to the Vulgar,
Because I have not known merchandising, I shall enter into the powers of the
Lord (but this is otherwise in the Original, in our translation being in Ps.
71.15, 16.) and he gives his reason hereof, because Merchandise can hardly be
exercised without lying and perjury. Vilalpand. p. 12 col, 2. let. E.
This is an hard sentence against them, its much to be feared that many of
them are covetous, deal in bad wares, corrupt those are good, by mixtures of
worse with them, set prizes too high, do lie, swear, and forswear themselves,
in their much dealings, yet all these do not make merchandising unlawful, Prove.
31.24. the virtuous woman sold her fine linen and girdles, unto the Merchant,
had Merchandise been unlawful, she would not have done it. Lot Merchants take
heed of Covetousness; the evils are insident to buying and selling, do in all
their tradings, with domestiques or forrainers, as they would be done unto,
and so their calling will not only be warrantable, but of singular advantage
unto Commonwealths and Cities.

Obs. 2 Great trading makes places rich and famous. Tyrus had Merchants from
all parts, and they brought in all sorts of precious Commodities, so that she
was replenished and glorious. She was full of wealth, and famous in all parts.
Babylon had trading with many Nations, and she abounded in treasures, Jerem.
51.13. When Jerusalem was the gates of the people, when all Nations came into
her, then she abounded in wealth and fame.

Obs. 3 True happiness lies not in the abundance of outward things. Tyrus h^d
what the world could afford; men of wisdom, skill, and strength, choice
helmets and shields, horses, horsemen, and mules; horns of ivory and ebeny,
gold, silver, precious stones, Emeralds, Agates, Coral; the choicest wheat,
honey, oil, and Balm; she had precious clothes r^ch apparel, the m^ltitude of
all riches in her; yet heathenish, and near unto destruction, Isa, 23.11. The
Lord has given a commandment against the Merchant City, to destroy the strong
holds thereof, outward things make not happy, Psalm 144.15.

Verse. 26 Thy rowers have brought thee into, great waters: the East wind has
broken thee in the midst of the Seas, 27 Thy Riches, and thy Fairs, thy
Merchandise, thy Mariners, and thy Pilots, thy Calkers, and thy occupiers of
thy merchandise, and all thy men of war that are in thee: and in all thy
company, which is in the midst of thee; shall fall into the midst of the Seas,
in the day of thy ruin. 28 The suburbs shall shake at the sound of the cry of
thy Pilots. 29 And all that handle the Oar, the Mariners, and all the Pilots
of the Sea, shall come down from their ships, they shall stand upon the land.
30 And shall cause their voice to be heard against thee, and shall cry
bitterly, and shall cast up dust upon their heads, they shall wallow themselves
in the ashes. 31 And they shall make themselves, utterly bald for thee, and
gird them with Sackcloath, and they shall weep for thee, with bitterness of
heart, and bitter wailing. 32 And in their wailing, they shall take up a
lamentation for thee, and lament over thee, saying, what City in like Tyrus,
like the destroyed in the midst of the Sea? 33 When thy wares went forth out of
the Seas, thou filledst many people, thou did enrich the Kings of the earth
with the multitude of thy riches, and of thy Merchandise. 34 In the time when
thou shall be broken by the Seas, in the depths of thy waters, thy merchandise,
and all thy company in the midst of thee shall fall. 35 All the inhabitants of
the Isles shall be astonished at thee, and their Kings shall be sore afraid,
they shall be troubled in their countenance. 36 The Merchants among the people
shall hiss at thee, thou shall be a terror, and never shall be any more. Having
shown the great wealth and dignity of Tyrus, here the Prophet comes to the
second general part of the Chapter, viz. to show the irrecoverable fall of
Tyrus.

In these words we have, 1 The distinction it self of Tyrus. 2 The Effects and
events that follow.


This distinction of Tyrus is set out,

1 By way of Metaphor, or similitude, which is implied in the 26. v. Tyrus is
likened unto a ship at Sea, that suffers by the winds and waters, and so
perishes, being laden with rich Commodities.

2 From the moving cause thereof, viz. her Rowers, ibid.

3 The Instrument or means, the East wind.

2 The Effects. 1 Loss of all, v. 27.34.

2 The mourning of Pilots, and Mariners, v. 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33. with the
manner thereof.

3 The influence it had upon forreiners, astonishment, fear, trouble it
produced in some, v. 35. and hissing in others, verse. 36.

26 Thy Rowers have brought thee, etc. This verse is wholly Metaphorical; by
Rowers are meant the Great men that ruled and governed Tyrus, who were to the
City as rowers to a ship; They by their Pride, wicked counsels, and wretched
lives, caused God to bring a long siedge upon her, and ruin at last, which are
called great waters.

The East wind has broken thee. That was Nebuchadnezzar, who came with a
great Army from the East, besiedged, took, and ruined Tire, he dealt with that
Metaphorical ship, as a rough East wind does with a ship at Sea, breaks it, and
sinks it.

27 Shall all fall into the midst of the Sea, etc. The Hebrew is, The heart of
the Sea, all the wealth, greatness and glory of Tyrus should be drowned in the
Sea.

28 The Suburbs shall shake. The word for Suburbs is Migresheth; and Migrash,
says Pagnine, is a village out of the City. By Suburbs here, you understand
all the villages and Colonies belonging unto Tire, when the Pilots, the Prince,
and Governors thereof, should cry for the ruin of it, then should all the
Towns, Villages, Colonies, were under her command, be troubled and shake for
fear.

Obs. 1 Nothing humane can protect a sinful City and People from the judgments
of God. Tyrus was as strong a place as the world had, her walls, towers, ships,
wise, strong men, could not do it. Tyrus was as rich a place as any under
heaven, she had a multitude of all riches, yet these kept her not from being
brought into great waters; what power or art of man can keep off the wind from
a ship, when it is at Sea? Its not in the power of all the Seamen or Mariners
in the world to do it; neither can any number of men, or all men keep off a
judgment of God when it is coming upon a sinful place. Let us not confide in
humane things.

Obs. 2 The ruin of Cities and States is chiefly from the Princes and
Governors in the same. Thy Rowers, they sit in the chief places, they have
brought thee into great waters, they brought War, Famine, desolation upon
Tyrus. Zedekiah and his Nobles breaking with Nebuchadnezzar, brought Judaea,
and Jerusalem into great waters, Pharaohs sin brought all the plagues upon
Egypt; when Governors are wilful, covetous, weak, ignorant, careless, given
to their lusts and pleasures, they may quickly overthrow all. Rhehoboams folly,
caused that rent in Israel, as never was made up again. It was Ahaz sin that
brought Judah into deep waters, 2 Chronicles. 28.19. The Lord brought Judah low,
because of Ahaz King of Israel, for he made Judah naked, and transgressed sore
against the Lord.

Obs. 3 That Cities and States grown rich and renowned, have their periods.
Tyrus was replenished with the rarities of the world, she had all excellent
things in her, and was very glorious, but what became of her, and all she had?
were not her riches, her glory, laid in the Seas in the day of her ruin, v.
27. she h^d her days for rising, and a day for her ruin; all the glory,
bravery, and wealth, of this great, strong, and beautiful City, was on a
sudden in a day, buried in the deep Sea.

Obs. 4 When the Lord brings his judgments upon sinful Cities and States,
when he makes great changes in them, or utterly ruins them, then some lament,
and some laugh. When Tyrus was besiedged, stormed, taken, and ruined; then the
Rowers, Mariners, and Pilots, cried, wept, and wailed bitterly, lamenting her
destruction; then the Merchants laughed, and hissed at her.

When Jerusalem was taken, burnt, and nothing left but rubbish, and ashes, then
Jeremy and many others lamented greatly, for the ruin thereof, and then the
Ammonites, Moabites, and Edomites, laughed thereat, as you may see Ezekiel. 25.
such is the condition of humane affairs, and corruption of humane nature, that
what is matter of mourning and humiliation to one, becomes matter of rejoicing
and insulting to another, but wisdom has said, he that is glad at calamities,
shall not be unpunished, Prove. 17.5.

Obs. 5 The righteous God does sometimes recompense sinners in the same way
they have sinned. Tyrus laughed at the destruction of Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 26.2.
and here in this chapter v. 36. The Merchants of the people shall hiss at thee.
Hissing, as it sometimes notes astonishment, so sometimes gladness and
insulting, Lament. 2.15, 16. all that pass by clap their hands at thee, they
wag their heads, and hiss, and say, this is the day we looked for, etc. at
first these Merchants might be astonished, at the tidings of Tyrus her ruin,
and after rejoice, clap their hands, and hiss at her. Agag by his sword had
made women childlesse, and by Samuels sword his mother was made childlesse, 1 Samuel 15.33.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Verse. 1 The word of the Lord came again, unto me, saying, 2 Son of man, say
unto the Prince of Tyrus, thus says the Lord God, because thine heart is
lifted up, and thou have said I am a God, I sit in the seat of God, in the
midst of the Seas, yet thou art a man and not God, though thou set thine heart
as the heart of God. 3 Behold, thou art wiser than Daniel, there is no secret
that they can hide from thee. 4 With thy wisdom, and with thine understanding,
thou have gotten thee riches, and have gotten gold and silver, into thy
treasures. 5 By thy great wisdom, and by thy traffic have thou increased thy
riches, and thine heart is lifted up because of thy riches. 6 Therefore thus
says the Lord God, because thou have set thine heart as the heart of God. 7
Behold, therefore I will bring strangers upon thee, the terrible of the
Nations, and they shall draw their swords against the beauty of thy wisdom,
and they shall defile thy brightness. 8 They shall bring thee down to the pit,
and thou shall dye the death of them that are slain in the midst of the seas. 9
Will thou yet say before him that slays thee, I am god? but thou shall be a
man, and no God, in the hand of him that slays thee. 10 Thou shall dye the
deaths of the uncircumcised, by the hand of strangers: for I have spoken it,
says the Lord.
IN this Chapter you have these general parts.

1 A Prophesy against the King of Tire in these 10. verses.

2 A Lamentation for him, and the spoiling of his glory, from the 10. v. to the
20.

3 A prophesy against Zidon, from the beginning of the 20. to the 24.

4 A Prophesy of mercy unto the people of God, from the 24. to the end.

In the Prophesy against the King of Tyrus, you have

1 The Authority of the prophesy, in the 1. v.

2 The sin that brought destruction upon him, which was his Pride, v. 2.
occasioned from his seat, ibid. his wisdom. v. 3, 4. and his wealth, v. 4, 5.

3 The Instruments the Lord would use in his destruction, and they were
strangers, v. 7. the manner of whose dealings with him, is set out in the 8, 9,
and 10. v.

1 The word of the Lord came again, etc. Being to speak unto the King of Tyrus,
he mentions his Commission, that the Lord spoke to him, and sent him, one
greater than the King himself: Hereby the Prophet made way for himself, and his
message to have the better entertainment; had he come of his own head,
delivered things from his own spirit, he had rendered himself contemptible;
what he had to declare unto the King, and against him, was not humane, but
Revelation from the Lord.

2 Son of Man. The Son of Man, must utter the words of God. Heavenly treasure
is put in earthen vessels, and makes them honorable; Ezekiel though he were
the Son of Man, yet herein he was the servant of God. He sent him, and put
his own words in his mouth, full of Majesty, and to be believed,
notwithstanding his meannesse and frailty. This Son of Man, is made a Son of
Thunder against a proud and haughty Prince.

Say unto the Prince of Tyrus. Some of the Fathers do make this Prince of Tyrus
to be the Devil: but they were much mistaken in so conceiting; for here be
many things which are incompetent to him, especially what is said in the 7, and
8. ver. The words are to be taken literally of Ethbahal, or Ithobalus, who
was at that time Prince of Tyrus, unto whom this Prophesy was directed, being
in his glory and height; whereas Satan was cast out, and cast down into greater
misery then here is mentioned long before.

Thus says the Lord God. Prophets being subject to the same infirmities and
passions as others be, are little regarded in the world, especially by
Princes. Ezekiel therefore must not speak his own words, but say, Thus says
the Lord God. The Hebrew, Adonai, Jehovah, are very significant words: Jehovah
imports Gods being, and giving being unto all things. Adonai, his supporting
all in their beings, for its from (...) a Pillar, or foundation. Thus says
he, who has his being of himself, and has given being to heaven and earth,
and all creatures therein, that upholds all by his power, even thee thy self, O
Prince of Tyrus, thus says he unto thee.

Because thine heart is lifted up. By heart understand not that little part of
flesh in man wherein is seeds vitae; the seat of life but the Thoughts,
Counsels, reasonings, Designs, Wisdom, Workings, and Contrivances, of the
heart, so Heart is often to be taken in scripture, and its lifted up: when its
carried out after high and great things, Psalm 131.1. Lord mine heart is not
haughty, nor mine eyes lofty, neither do I exercise my self in great matters,
or in things too high for me; Here you may see what it is to have the heart
lifted up, or to be haughty, its Javah in both places, and it is to have
aspiring thoughts, to mind high things, to be designing and reaching after
them, to have a high conceit of ones self, as this Prince of Tire had, who
thought himself above the condition of mortal men, and so the Counsels,
reasonings, designs, and workings of his heart were to become a God, and he
blushed not to say it.

Thou have said I am a God. Not thou have thought so, which had been too much,
but thou have said it. The word (...) sometimes notes purposing, determining,
as in 2 Chronicles. 2.1. Solomon determined to build an house, vajomer, he said,
that is, he purposed in himself to do it; but here its more than purposing,
and determining, the Prince of Tyrus said, he spoke it out, what he thought
in his heart, he uttered with his lips. I am a god, El any, I am the strong
one, I give being to this City and State, I uphold the same on me they all
depend, from me they have counsel, comfort, and protection, I do what I list,
my power extends far and near, I open the door and ports, for all the Isles and
Nations to trade with thee, O Tyrus, and I can prohibit them at my pleasure: I
have filled thee, with the riches and rarities of all the Nations, I have done
great things, I am beyond others, mighty and powerful, a god, and worthy of
such honor as becomes the gods.

I sit in the seat of God, in the midst of the Seas. As God is in the Heavens,
which are inaccessible, none being able to come thither, to wrong or harm him,
so am I in Tyrus, seated upon a rock, in the heart, or midst of the Seas, none
can come at me to do me prejudice, I am without fear, I am in the Seat of
God, not subject to the malice or power of any Mortal whatsoever. All the
Merchants bring presents unto, and adore me, I have power, wealth, honor, and
all things glorious and delightful, my Seat is no other than the seat of God;
here was the great pride of this Prince, who arrogated to himself a Deity, and
affected divine honor.

Yet thou art a man and not God. The Hebrew is, Thou art Adam, and not El, thou
art of earth, and not of heaven, thou art a weak sinful man, that can do
nothing for others, or thy self; what thou El, the strong God? no, thou forgets
what thou art; he that is El will break thee in pieces, like a potters vessel,
and make thee know, thou art man, and not God, that there is no difference
between thee, and other men; if they be infirm, and feeble things, subject to
changes, sorrows, sicknesses, and death, so art thou.

Though thou set thine heart as the heart of God. Thou have had such thoughts
of thy strength, thy glory, thy wisdom, that thou have persuaded thy self,
thou art become a god, another god, or as god. The thoughts of Gods heart, are,
that he is strong, glorious, great, and wise, and thou take up his thoughts;
by heart, the thoughts, imaginations, and devices of it are meant. This Prince
of Tyrus, dreamed, that he was as fit and able to rule in the Seas, as God was
in heaven, and that his wisdom, strength, and government, made him as
honorable and glorious, as the Lords made him, that he was invincible, like
God himself.

Obs. 1 The Lord takes notice of men's hearts, in what frame they are: Thine
heart is lifted up: Men cannot look into the Heart, being shut up in an house
of clay, but the eyes of the Lord peirceth through our mud walls, and beholds
our hearts and workings of them, 1 Samuel 16.7. the Lord looks on the heart,
we look upon actions, faces, outward appearances, but God looks inward, and
fixes the eye upon the heart, and so, that he knows what is in his heart, and
how it works, he understands all the thoughts thereof, and the imaginations of
those thoughts, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. not only the rude drought, but what
imaginations are thereupon. He knows men's inwards exactly, and can tell you
whose hearts are proud, and whose are humble, whose are froward, and whose are
meek, whose are chaste, and whose unclean.

Obs. 2 Princes and great ones are prone, not only to be proud, but to deifie
themselves. The Prince of Tyrus, his heart was lifted up, and he said, I am a
God. This is the height of Pride, to make ones self a God, to arrogate that
which is due unto the Lord, God had said it, I am God, and there is none Else;
I am God, and there is none like me, Isa. 46.9. now what Pride, what blasphemy,
was it for this Prince to say, I am a God. There be two things which God
challenges to himself, vengeance, Deuteronomy. 32.35. and God-ship, Isa. 44.8. This
Prince robbed God of one, making himself God. Sundry of the Heathen Emperors,
would either be called or worshipped as Gods. Caligula made himself a God,
erecting a Temple, with his image in it, ordaining Priests, and most costly
Sacrifices to be offered there to himself. Domitian, by a public edict
ordained, that in all writings wherein he should be mentioned upon any
occasion, Fitz her bert. 2 Par. chapter 12. Vilalp.
he should be called Dominus Deus, Lord God. A mad humor of deifying
themselves also invaded Alexander the Great, and Julius Caesar. Such is the
frame of Antichrists spirit, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. He as God sits in the Temple of God,
showing himself that he is God.

Obs. 3 Haughtiness and pride of spirit, do precede and presage the
destruction of men. This Prince was near unto utter ruin, and before it, his
heart was lifted up, he said, I sit in the seat of God, I punish, and I spare
whom I please, but quickly after he was thrust out of his seat, and made an
example of divine vengeance, for his Pride and presumption; Edoms heart was
proud and high, even before the Lord threw her down, Obad 3. and 4. verses. The
hearts of Samariaes inhabitants, were greatly swollen with pride, and
tympaniz'd, when the Lord threatened to bring the adversaries of Rezin against
them, Isa. 9.9, 10, 11. Herod's pride bred the worms that did devour him, Prove.
16. Pride goes before destruction, and a haughty spirit, etc.

Obs. 4 Whatever thoughts and conceits Princes or others have of themselves,
yet they are but dust and ashes, poor inconsiderable things in respect of God.
Thou art a man, and not God, though thou set thine heart as the heart of God:
he was a worthless, despicable thing, notwithstanding he deified himself;
men phansye themselves Elohims, Jehovahs, when they are but Adams, and Enoshes.
Jehoiakim made his neast in the Cedars, when he was but earth; a despised
broken Idol, Jer. 22.23, 28, 29. Great men have great thoughts, ranking
themselves among the Gods of the earth; but as David expresses it, among the
gods there is none like unto the Lord, Psalm. 86.8. they are earthen, proud,
foolish, dying gods, Psalm. 82.6, 7. but God is in heaven, holy, wise,
everliving: the greatest and best of the Sons of men, is no better than a
bryar or thorn to him, Isa. 27.4. he is a consuming fire, and what is a bryar
or thorn to such a fire. In Isa. 31.3. its said the Egyptians are men, and not
God; they had high thoughts of themselves, and the Jews had higher, they looked
at them, and not at the Lord, they thought every Egyptian was El, a strong God;
but the Egyptians were Adams, not El, men, and not god, the highest of them;
their Pharaohs were men, worms, grasshoppers, nothings, to that God they
neglected, and that they should know, when he should stretch out his hand. Gods
thoughts, and men's do differ exceedingly, they think themselves some-bodies, as
Simon Magus did, Act. 8.9. Gods, as the Prince of Tyrus here did, but, Psalm
62.9. men of high degree are a lie, not lying, but a lie, and you know a lie is
that has no truth in it, no substance, no weight, they think themselves solid,
substantial, massy pieces, but they deceive themselves, and others, not God;
who tells them they are a lie, false, vain, and empty things, and not only
some men, but even all men are so in his eye, Isa. 40.17. all Nations before
him are as nothing, and they are counted to him less than nothing, and vanity,
that all are as nothing before him, who is infinite, easily will be granted,
but that they are less than nothing, in his account, this seems strange and
questionable. How can all the Nations be less than nothing? the sense is, they
are extremely inconsiderable. The words in the Original are rendered thus by
Mont. pro nihilo and inani reputatae sunt ei, Fr. Luy sont reputees comme chose
de ^eant and vain.
for nothing and emptiness, they are reputed or accounted to him, or he reckons
them as a thing of naught and vain.

3 And behold thou art wiser than Daniel. The Tyrians were wise men, Zech. 9.2.
Ezekiel 27.8. 2 Chronicles. 2.14. and its probable their Kings were wise, well seen
into Sea, military, and political affairs, and that the Prince of Tire, here
spoken of, was one of the wisest of them, but puffed up with a conceit of more
wisdom than he had, therefore here the Lord in an Ironical way, as Expositors
conceives, gives him a check, saying, behold thou art wiser than Daniel; thou
make thy self a God, as if thou knew all things, which Daniel did not.
(...). Estu plus sage que Daniel.
The Septuagint reads the words by way of Interrogation, Art thou wiser than
Daniel? and so does the Fr. Perstringeing, the folly of the Prince thereby. The
words by some are taken by way of Concession, thou say thou sit in the
seat of God, and have a heart as the heart of God, be it so, behold then thou
art wiser than Daniel; He knew some secrets, thou know all, Daniel was very
wise, he would not defile himself with the Kings meat, or wine, Dan. 1.8. he
revealed and interpreted the Kings dreams, chap. 2. and 4. he read and
interpreted the writing upon the wall, which none of the wise men could do,
chap. 5. he had an excellent spirit in him, and was chief President over the
one hundred and twenty Princes that were set over the whole Kingdom, and when
the two other Presidents, and all the rest of the Princes, envied him, and
sought occasion against him, he had carried things so wisely and well, that
they could find no occasion against him, chap. 6. Daniel had natural,
political, and spiritual wisdom, insomuch that it grew into a Proverb, wiser
than Daniel. Vid. Dan. 1* 17, 20.
His wisdom was great, dispersed far, and known to the Eastern, and other
parts of the world, and even to Tyrus, which had trading from all parts; and
because the Prince of it was so wise in his own conceit, the Lord gives him a
notable twitch here, Behold, Thou art wiser than Daniel.

There is no secret that they can hide from thee. Thou art so possessed with
opinion of thy wisdom, that thou conceivest nothing can be kept secret, or
hid from thee. The Hebrew word for secret, is (...) Sathum, which signifies a
thing shut up, and what is so, is secret and hidden from others, as Dan. 8.26.
shut up the vision, for its for many days. The vision being sealed and shut
up, it was not knowable for a season, men could not tell what was therein, it
was hid from them; but this Prince of Tire took upon him to know secrets, and
things shut up from the Vulgar, and wise also. In the Original, the words stand
thus, Omne absconditum non abscondunt tibi, every hidden thing, they do not
hide from thee; here an Active is put for a Passive Verb, (...) Vid. Gloss.
Phil. sacr. l. 3 tractat 3. de verbo can. 23.
and carres this sense, every hidden thing is not hid from thee, thou art so
wise, as that thou piercest into secrets, dark, and deep things.

Thou art a God, and what can men hide, or what can be hidden from thee? The
words are spoken ironically, or according to the opinion men had of him.

Obs. 1 Wisdom makes men honorable and famous. Daniel was wise, and his
wisdom begat such an high esteem of him, that it became a Proverb, wiser
than Daniel. Nebuchadnezzar honored Daniel much, when he acknowledged Daniels
wisdom to be ten times better than the wisdom of all the Astrologers, and
Magicians that were in his Realm. Dan. 1.20. but God honored him more, when
he made his wisdom exemplary, and proverbial throughout the world. Wisdom is
from God, a principal thing, Prove. 4.7. it makes men of an excellent spirit,
Dan. 5.12. Prove. 17.27. directing to do like unto God, hence it is, that men
endued with it, are honorable, and renowned. David was wise, and his wisdom
is recorded in holy writ for his honor; 1 Samuel 18.5.15.30. he behaved himself
wisely, very wisely, more wisely than all the Servants of Saul; The widow of
Tekoah compared his wisdom to the wisdom of an Angel, 2 Samuel 14.20. Solomon
was wise, yea wiser than all men, than Ethan, the Ezrahite, and ^eman, and
Chalcol, and Darda, these were wise men, and honored for their wisdom; but
Solomon above them all, his wisdom spread into all Courts, and unto all Kings
of the earth, 1 King. 4.31, 34. This made Solomon to say, The wise shall
inherit glory, Prove. 3.35. a Son of wisdom is an heir to glory, he shall not
have flitting glory, but fixed, such glory as shall be his inheritance.

Obs. 2 Men know not what themselves are; thou art wiser than Daniel: Thou
think thy self to be very wise, whereas thou art ignorant, and foolish, and
do manifest it to the full. The Irony in the words speaks this out unto us,
for an Irony is a trope, putting one contrary for another, here wisdom is
mentioned, and by it the Princes foolishness is declared: It was so in him to
think himself a God, that he knew every secret; he did not know himself, that
is an hard lesson. The Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 8.2. that if any man, be he
Prince, or of what condition soever, thinks that he knows any thing, he
knows nothing yet as he ought to know: when men conceit they know something,
this puffs them up, makes them despise, and neglect others, and they know
nothing rightly; for right knowledge of things would make men humble, and
direct them to use their Talents to the good of others, the glory of the giver,
considering they must give account thereof ere long. The doctrine of
self-knowledge, is out of practice, men study to know other men, other
Countries what news? but are strangers to themselves: Hazael knew not himself,
when the Prophet told him what strange things he should do, he was conceited
that such cruelty could not harbor in his nature, 2 King. 8.12, 13. the
Pharisee knew not himself, when he justified himself so above the Publican,
Luke 18.11. Its the common evil of the world, that men do not know themselves,
what in truth they are. Laodicea knew not her self, she said she was rich,
increased with goods, and wanted nothing, she knew not that she was wretched,
poor, blind, and naked.

Obs. 3 That ironical speeches are not unwarrantable. Thou art wiser than
Daniel, thou know all secrets: They have some tartness in them, yet are
frequently used in the word, both by God himself, and his holy servants.

1 By God himself, Genesis 3.22. Behold the man is become as one of us, to know
good and evil. God had made man after his own image, but he by believing
Satan, telling him he should be as God, knowing good and evil, if he eat of
the forbidden fruit, lost that image, and here God upbraids him for it, Behold,
Adam is become as one of us: The meaning is, he is now altogether unlike us,
he is deluded by the Serpent, and become abominable like the Serpent himself,
in this expression God laughed him to scorn for his folly. In the 10 of Judges
you have another Ironical passage of the Lords, its v. 14. Go and cry unto the
gods which ye have chosen, let them deliver you in the time of your
tribulation. Here God cuts them to the quick for their wickedness, Idolatry,
and blindness: you have been weary of me, better gods have you spied out,
chosen, and served, gods that can do great things for you; why come you to me
in your streights, go get you to your new gods, let them who have had your
worship, arise, appear, act for, and deliver you. Such is that of Christ, Mark.
7.9. Full well ye reject the commandment of God, that ye may keep your own
traditions, did they well to reject Gods commands, and set up men's traditions?
no, they did exceeding ill in it, and that is the mind of Christ, when he
says, full well, he speaks, ironically, and intimates they did extremely evil,
most wickedly.

2 By Men, that were precious in the sight of God, Micaiah being demanded of
Ahab, whither he should go up to Ramoth Gilead to battle, said, Go, and
prosper, for the Lord shall deliver it into the hand of the King. Take the
words as they seem to sense, it here is good encouragement, but so they
contradict, v. 17. and 28. they are therefore a bitter irony, or sarcasme; all
your Prophets encourage you to go, and you expect the same from me, well, go,
and prosper; his meaning is, go and perish, that is, the spirit, and true sense
of the words, Job 12.2. no doubt, but ye are the people and wisdom shall die
with you. Jobs friends thought him a silly man, compared to them, no better
than a beast, chap. 11.12. but here he hits them home for it, No doubt you are
the only people in the world for wit and wisdom, you are the only knowing
and all knowing men, and when you dye, there will be a death of all wisdom,
the world left in a sad case, having not a wise man in it. Qui scipsum haber
pro sapiente habent eum deus and homines proignaro, Said the Arabic.
Hoffi^gerus.
Job by an holy irony batters the conceit they had of their own wisdom.

4 With thy wisdom, and with thine understanding, etc. The King of Tyrus was
expert in civil affairs, and by that skill he had therein, he got unto
himself much wealth. The Spirit of God calls the cunning and craft he had in
worldly affairs, wisdom and understanding. It cannot be meant of spiritual
wisdom, for Prove. 3.13. that makes blessed, and this Prince was under the
curse and judgments of God. He was worldly wise, and set his wisdom on work
to get riches.

Thou have gotten thee riches. The Hebrew is, Thou have made to thy self
riches; the word for riches is, (...) which the Septuagint renders (...) power.
The Vulgar, fortitudinem, strength, and ours, riches; for riches to rich men's
apprehensions, do add strength and power to them. This King made himself Rich,
and so strong and powerful by his riches. He had all sorts of Riches, chapter
27.

And have gotten gold and silver into thy treasures. The Hebrew for Treasure
is, (...) Otzar, from Atzar, to gather together, to lay up, and it notes both
the treasure, and the place were the treasure is laid up, and so it may do
here, the King of Tire had gotten gold and silver into his Treasures, that is,
among his other treasures he had them, or they were in his treasury.

5 By thy great wisdom, and by thy traffic thou have, etc. Thou art very
wise in thine own opinion, and thou art grown exceeding rich, by thy trading
and Merchandising with other nations, but thou attributest all to thine own
wisdom, and industry, nothing is given unto me, no mention is made of me. --
This King was a great merchant, did mightily increase in wealth, was reputed
wise, but was really foolish as the next words declare.

Thine heart is lifted up, because of thy riches. He had a mountain of wealth,
and that made his heart mountainous, his riches puffed him up, he should have
been the more humble, having much to answer for, but he was the more haughty,
confident, secure, and fearlesse of danger; he thought being so rich and great
as he was, that he could do any thing, yea, all things,

Obs. 1 That by skill and industry men grow wealthy. The Prince of Tire, had
insight into trading, which he employed, and so made himself rich. Solomon
tells you, chap. 10.4. That the hand of the diligent makes rich, there is much
in diligence to advance a man's estate, especially when diligence and skill go
together, when a diligent hand is ordered by a wise head; if there be actings
without skill, little will be produced, if skill without acting, nothing comes
thereof. Where these go together, often they bring in great wealth. Some
besides their skill, use craft and cunning, and so suddenly get great estates.

Obs. 2 Great men are prone to covetousness, and lay out themselves to get
wealth. Thou, even the Prince of Tire have gotten thee riches, by thy
traffiques have thou increased thy riches. He was Covetous, and traded with the
Isles and Nations to feed his Covetous humor. Princes are forbidden to
multiply gold and silver to themselves, Deuteronomy. 17.17. they may lose the hearts
of their people by it, yea, they may lose themselves also thereby; but this
Prince made it his work to increase wealth. Which is the practice of most
Princes, and people in the world. Men's corrupt natures, and carnal wisdom
carry them unto it, Prove. 23.4. Labor not to be rich, cease from thine own
wisdom. Men's wisdom put them on to be rich, it heartens them thereunto, but
it is such wisdom as the Scripture condemns. The Arabian Proverb is, Hoffing
Historia orientali.
Non est justicia cum avaritia, justice, and covetousness dwell not together;
a just man covets not what is another, but a covetous man will have the prey
wherever he finds it, and violate bounds to satisfy his lusts. Ahabs
sickness, was not cured, till he had eaten Naboths vineyard, and drunk his
blood.

There is a story among the Arabians, of one that had the world presented to
him in the shape of an Old woman, whom he asked, how many husbands she had?
she said innumerable, the party asked what was become of them? she said, she
had killed them all, then it was replied by the party, I wonder that other men
are so foolish, that seeing how thou have used thy former husbands, they should
still be in love with thee.

Obs. 3 Prosperity makes men proud and insolent. Thine heart is lifted up
because of thy riches. They begat great thoughts in him, and swelled his heart
above his brethren. Its hard to keep the heart low in prosperity. Its a common
saying, and too true, as rises my good, so rises my blood. Beggars having
gotten estates, account themselves Princes; and Princes being rich, think
themselves gods. When Amaziah prospered in his war against the Edomites, his
heart was lifted up, and being but a thistle, he accounted himself a Cedar, 2 Chronicles. 25. Prosperity begets Cedarish spirits, Hos. 13.6. They were filled, and
their heart was exalted, when they had plenty, then they grew proud, and forgot
God; there is an aptness in men to dote upon the creature, when they have
much, and to magnifye themselves. This Agur knew when he prayed that God would
not give him riches, lest he should be full and deny God. Men are ready to
attribute their riches to their wisdom, industry, favor of their friends,
etc. hereby they exclude and deny God, they allow him no hand, o interest
therein, they say, who is the Lord, that we should be thankful unto him? we
are not beholding at all to him, or very little, and thus they deny, and belie
the Lord too, s^heword Cathash signifies; you that prosper in this world, take
heed to your hearts, least being drunk with this wine, you discover your
nakedness.

Verse. 6 Therefore thus says the Lord God, because thou have set thine heart
as the heart of God. 7 Behold, Therefore I will bring strangers upon thee. Here
the Lord tells the Prince of Tyrus, what he must look for at his hands for his
sins, especially his Pride, because he magnified himself, and would be as
God, therefore he must expect destruction.

Because thou have set thine heart as the heart of God. The Hebrew is, Have
given thine heart as the heart of God, Thou have given liberty to thy heart, to
think high and great things; yea, to think thy self equal with God, he
thought the infinite glorious great God, had not other thoughts in him, or
vaster than himself, and this was setting his heart as the heart of God.

7 I will bring strangers upon thee. That is, Nebuchadnezzar with his Forces
gathered up out of several Provinces, Ezekiel. 26.7. they were men of a strange
language, of strange manners, and out of strange Countries, they were strangers
to the Tyrians.

The terrible of the Nations. The word for terrible is, (...) aritze, which
Montanus renders robustos, the strong. The Vulgar, robustissimos, the most
mighty. Vatab. Tyrannos gentium, the Tyrants of the Nations. French, Les plus
hideux, the most hideous, Septuagint says, (...), Pestilentes, pestilent men,
that should be as a Plague or pestilence is to a Town or Country. Ours the
terrible, (...) aratz, signifies fortem and violentum se exhibere, through
power to be formidable to others, so should the Chaldaeans be to the Tyrians.

They shall draw their swords against the beauty of thy wisdom. By Beauty of
wisdom, understand what ever beautiful things the Prince had gotten by his
wisdom, as beautiful shipping, beautiful Army, beautiful treasure and riches, a
beautiful City, a beautiful throne, etc. The Chaldaeans should come, and
destroy all the beauty of his wisdom, all that by his policy and craft he had
gotten. Or thus, thou think by thy Counsels, art, and devices, to prevent
the taking of the City, and thy self, which could thou do, it would make thy
wisdom beautiful and glorious; but they shall draw their swords, and prevail
against all thy counsels, machinations, plots, and attempts to secure the City,
and thy self.

They shall defile thy brightness. Thou art now in a glorious Kingdom, and
shinest upon thy seat and throne, all the Isles and Nations behold thy
splendour, but the Chaldaeans shall come and cut thee off, and defile thy
brightness with thine own blood; they shall take away thy kingly dignity and
life also. The French read the words, Savilleront ton excellence.

8 They shall bring thee down to the pit. The word for Pit is, Shachath, which
signifies corruption, and also a Pit, or grave, because that is the place of
corruption. Men in their Graves do see corruption, they turn to dust. Its a
Proverbial speech noting death, Prove. 28.17. a man that does violence to the
blood of any person shall fly to the Pit, that is, be cut off, and thrown
into the grave: so here, the strangers should cut off the Prince of Tyrus, and
cause him to perish.

Thou shall dye the death of them that are slain in the midst of the Seas. Thou
art in a City upon a rock, well walled, fortified, and manned, thou think
thy self secure, invincible: but thou shall be like those are slain at Sea,
and thrown overboard, or sunk into the depths thereof. For Kings to be slain
by forreiners is dishonorable; when slain, not to be buried as Kings, is a
greater dishonor, to be cast out, and drowned as common men, is a height of
dishonor.

9 Will thou yet say before him that slays thee I am God. Thou have said thou
art a God, but when the enemies shall be before thy gates, when he shall
seize upon thee, and be ready to thrust thee through, what will thou then say?
Will thou say thou art a God? no, thou will show thy self a man, thou will be
full of fears, and at thy wits end.

Thou shall be a man and no God, in the hand of him that slays thee. Then
shall the vanity of thy thoughts appear, thou shall see thy self a man, and not
God, thou have thought thy self El, the strong, powerful, and stable God, but
thou shall find thy self Adam, weakness, misery, instability.

10 Thou shall dye the deaths of the uncircumcised. These words may be taken
two ways, rither thou shall die by the hand of those that are uncircumcised;
thou shall not have the honor to dye by the hand of the J^ws, who by
Circumcision are distinguished from all other, thou shall dye by Chaldaeans, a
profane and barbarous people; or thou shall dye the death of the
uncircumcised, that is, thou shall so dye, as to perish soul and body for ever;
thou have exalted thy self to be a God, and thou shall be cast into hell. The
Nations who were uncircumcised were without God, without Christ, Ephesians. 2.12. and
so perished.

For I have spoken it says the Lord. Thou may contemn this Prophesy, and
think there is nothing in it but know its not the voice of man, like thy self,
but the voice of God who will fulfill it, and make thee know that thou art man,
and not God, that thou have sinned greatly in comparing thy self with God.

Obs. 1 Haughtiness and Pride of Spirit, provokes God to deal severely with
men; Because thou have set thine heart as the heart of God, Therefore will I
bring strangers upon thee, the terrible of the Nations. God stirred up, led
out, the most terrible of the Babylonians to punish the Prince of Tyrus for his
Pride and insolency. Theudas boasted himself to be some body, drew followers
after him; but he and they were all slain by the just judgment of God, Act.
5.36. Zeba and Zalmunna said, let us take to our selves the houses of God in
possession, Psalm 83.12. they had aspiring spirits, but the Lord cut them off
by the hand of Gideon, Judge. 8.21. proud spirits the Lord will meet with, and
break in pieces, he has said it, Isa. 2.11. The lofty looks of man, shall be
humbled, and the haughtiness of men shall be bowed down. Ne ascend as cacumen
montis cum fueris ornatus, ne forte cad^s. Hoffin^ geru.
Let those that have much, look to it, that they be not lifted up, least they
fall, be broken, and rise no more.

Obs. 2 That which is the glory and delight of men, is subject to spoil, and
profanation; They shall draw their swords against the beauty of thy wisdom,
and they shall defile thy brightness: they laid all the glory of Tyrus, and of
the Prince thereof in the dust, there was beauty and brightness in the Court,
in the City, in the Navy, in the Armory, in the treasure; but when the
Chaldaean came, he spoiled, he stained all, it was not the wisdom of the
Tyrian, nor the beauty or brightness of the things that could keep off the
enemies from plundering and prophaneing; they minded not beauty or brightness,
wisdom, real, or pretended, but they lay all waste, cut off the Prince, and
make a beautiful glorious City, as an heap of rubbish, or as nothing.

Obs. 3 Approachings of death will make men know themselves: When this Prince
of Tyrus should be in the hand of his enemies, and at deaths door, then he
should see that he was no God, but a poor, miserable, mortal man, vexatio dat
intellectum, when death comes, and strikes upon our walls, then we understand
our selves, Psalm 9.20. Put them in fear, O Lord, that the Nations may know
themselves to be but men. When Nations prosper, have all things as heart
desires, they judge* themselves more than men, they are quasi dii minores,
petty gods; but let the Lord send in some sore judgments, that carry death in
their foreheads, then the Nations will know themselves to be but men; that is,
sorry, fading, perishing things, though death shut all men's eyes, yet the
approach of death opens them often to see more of themselves than ever before.

Obs. 4 That wicked Princes and others, how ever they may flourish in the world
for a season, yet their ends will be miserable, Thou shall dye the death of
the uncircumcised: a temporal death here, eternal death hereafter, therefore
envy not great ones, who flourish here in the world for a season, and after go
down to the pit, where they shall suffer sufficiently for their demerit.

Verse. 11 Moreover, The word of the Lord came unto me, saying; 12 Son of Man,
take up a Lamentation upon the King of Tyrus, and say unto him, Thus says the
Lord God, Thou sealest up the sum, full of wisdom, and perfect in beauty. 13
Thou have been in Eden the garden of God, every precious stone was thy
covering, the Sardius, Topaz, and the Diamond, the Beril, the Onix, and the
Jasper, the Sapphire, the Emeraud, and the Carbuncle, and gold: The workmanship
of thy tabrets, and of thy pipes was prepared in thee, in the day that thou
wast created. 14 Thou art the anointed Cherub that covers: and I have set
thee so; thou wast upon the holy mountain of God, thou have walked up and down
in the midst of the stones of fire. 15 Thou wast perfect in thy ways, from the
day that thou wast created, till iniquity was found in thee. Here begins the
second general part of the Chapter, viz. a Lamentation for the Prince of Tyrus,
and the corrupting of his glory. Besides the Lamentation and authority of it:
in the 11, and 12. ver. you have,

1 The State of this Prince, set out from his power, wisdom, wealth, delights,
and greatness, v. 12, 13, 14, 15.

2 The Cause; that his state and glory were destroyed, v. 15.

12 Take up a lamentation upon the King of Tyrus. In chap. 27.2. the Lord bade
him take up a lamentation for Tyrus, and here he bids him take up one for the
King of Tyrus, bewail his condition, for he should suffer as well as the City,
and though he were an Heathen King, yet the Lord would have him to be
lamented; the Prophet must weep over him. The French is, Eslene la plainte
contre le roy.

Thou sealest up the sum. The Hebrew is, Attah chothem tachnith, which Montanus
renders, Tu sigillas dispositionem. Septuagint, (...). The Vulgar, Tu
signaculum similitudinis. Junius, Tu obsignas summam. Piscat. Tu obsignator
summae. Lavat. Tu sigillas summam. Vatabl. and the Trigurine, Tu es omnibus
numeris absolutum exemplar. The Fren. is, Tu accomplis le tout, or tu es venu
an comble de perfection.

Ours is, Thou sealest up the sum: Thou having power over all the Commodities
to be carried out, or brought in, say, how much, and how little shall be
exported and imported; Thou sealest up the sum, thou put the last hand to
the business, and do complete it, thus some expositors interpret the words.
Others, considering Tachnith, is from Tachan, to weigh, to measure, and notes a
thing measured, secundum omnes ejus dimensiones, according to all its
dimensions, they make the sense this: Thou art an absolute and complete King,
whatever is wanting in others, is found in thee. Thou sealest up the sum,
others want wisdom, riches, power, friends, thou have all that conduces to
the greatness and happiness of a Prince. When bags have all the money in them
they should have, and writings, all things inscribed should be there, then
they are sealed; so this King, in his own conceit, or apprehension of others,
had all a King should have, Tu es omnibus numeris absolutum specimen, Castal.
and therefore the seal is set upon him, Thou sealest up the sum, thou art
(...), a picture, and pattern for all Kings.

Full of wisdom. This Prince seemed very wise, having his head filled with
Cunning, and skill in Naval, mercatory, and political affairs. When Princes
know a little in any thing, they are applauded, and magnified for knowing men,
but if they have got some deeper insight into things than others, then they are
deified.

Perfect in beauty. This perfection of beauty lay in his buildings, shipping,
riches, laws, government, soldiery, Court, etc. in all, which appeared much
beauty and glory, the 27. chap. sets out the beauty and glory of Tyrus, which
was also the Kings.

13 Thou have been in Eden the garden of God. Genesis 2.8. its said, God planted a
garden Eastward in Eden, This Eden was a Region in Mesopotamia, or Babylonia,
which was a most pleasant place. The word Eden, signifies delight, and
pleasantness. In it God made a Garden, which is a place enclosed, separated
from what is common, began, hortus, a garden, is from ganan to protect, or
compass about, because its fenced in, and so protected from violence and spoil.
This garden being planted by God, in so pleasant a place, as Eden was, exceeded
it far, and was such a Paradise as never eye saw since. Pleasant and delightful
places are likened unto the same, and called Edens, and the gardens of God,
Genesis 13.10. Joel 2.3. Ezekiel. 36.35. So Tire though situate upon a rock, was by
the art and industry of man made an Eden, as the garden of God, very pleasant
and delightful: The Prince of it was in a Paradise, wherein he had all things
desirable.

Every precious stone was thy covering. The Merchants of Syria, of Shebah, and
Raamah, brought precious stones of all sorts unto Tyrus, chap. 27.16, 22. the
chief whereof were set in his Crown, Canopies, Tents, Garments, Beds, Hangings,
and other utensils. Princes spare not for cost; if any stone be more precious
than others, they will have them; and beautify themselves and theirs with the
same.

The Sardius. In Heberew (...) odem from (...) which signifies to be red, for
it is of a fleshy or blood color, its called Sardius because the best of them
are found in Sardinia. This stone was the first in the breast plate of Aaron,
Exodus 28.17. The Chaldee calls it Samkan, which Shindler interprets the Ruby,
or Sardius. The Romans of Old, used this stone, Timorem pellere, audaciam
prestare, a veneficiis maleficiisque gestantem adserere, sanguinem enaribus
fluentem compescere, animo laetitiam, ingenio quoque acumen invitare perhib^tur
Rueus de gemmis l. 10. c. 6 Martinius in Lexico. v. Sardius. Plin. l. 37. c. 8
being hard and firm for Seals. Much virtue is attributed to this stone, as to
drive away fear, to make confident, to preserve from witchery and poisoning,
etc.

Topaz. The Hebrew word is, (...) pitdah, which the Septuagint renders (...),
and so its called Rev. 21.20. This stone for color is of a greenish yellow, or
yellowish green, aureus color per viridem relucet, such a color, as is in
fern, yellow, and green together. Some make two sorts of them, one very green*
and clear, called prasoides, another like pure gold, called Chrysopteros. Its
the greatest of all precious stones, says Pliny, and it is so named a Topaz
from Topazon, an Island in the red Sea, yet there were Topazzes from other
places, Job 28.19. The Topaz of Ethiopia shall not equal it. Though those
Topazzes were very precious, yet not comparable to wisdom.

The Topaz is commended for that virtue it has, to stop eruptions of blood, to
restrain passion and wanton lusts, Martinius in Top. Rueus de gemmis. l. 2. c 9
to help against melancholy, deliriums, phrenzies, falling sickness and
sudden death.

And the Diamond. Vejahalom; which some render the Jasper. Others better, the
Adamant, or Diamond, for jahalon is from (...) contundere, Shindl. in v. (...)
Pu^lla, tametsi mole ignibus vastissimis injectus medius pertinax atque
illaesus ita permanet and nullam prorsus ignis actionem admisisse (etiamsi
multos dies ibi persev^ret) palam ostendat unde and indomitam antiquis votari
Gemmam invenire est. Rueus de gem. l. 2. c 15 Vid. Rueum loco predicto.
Berillut gemma est quae aquae marinae colorem refert ex viridi caeruleum
Boethius in historia de Lapid. Rucus l. 2. c. 8 Sudines dicit in gemma esse
candorem ungui^ humani similitudine. Plin. l. 37. c. 6 Adversus venerea pollet
and animi fustum, item nocuos effectu^ arcere creditur, Rueus
to break in pieces. The Adamant is of that hardness, that it breaks all other
precious stones, and continues unbroken it self; Adamas quia ictibus domari non
potest. In Arabic its Diamah from (...) dim, durare, perseverare, because of
its durablenesse. It is not so clear as the Crystal, but sparkles and sends
forth fiery or bright beams, like the sun, Philosophers say, the Diamond is of
great use against poisons, and enchantments, that it prevents madness, vain
fears, and skarings in the steep. It pacifies fury and enmity between parties,
and maintains love in the nearest relations; at its presence, the Lodestone
loses his attractive virtue.

The Berill. Some have it the Hyacinth, some the Chrysolite. The Hebrew is
Tarshish; which is the Sea-Beril, quia mar is virorem refert, because it
resembles the greenness of the Sea. Berillus quasi virillus a virore. Of this
stone was spoken, chap. 1. v. 16. Some make it to be of a bluish color. There
be several kinds of them, the best are of a Seagreen color. Watery eyes,
sighing, liver-griefs, dullness are helped by the virtue of this stone, its
beneficial to the brain, and also to married Parties.

The Onyx. It is a precious stone like the nail of a man's hand for whiteness.
The Hebrew is (...) shoham, translated sometimes a Sardonix, sometimes an Onyx,
but Rueus makes a difference between them. The Septuagint is very uncertain in
the Translation of this word shoham, the Onyx, as you may see in de Dieu. upon
Exodus 28 p. 76. and in Martinius in the word Onyx.

The Jasper. The Hebrew being (...) Demonstrates no other stone can be
admitted here, but only the Jasper, which is a stone of much worth and glory,
Rev. 4.3. the glory of God and Christ upon the throne in Heaven is likened
thereunto, as also the light and glory of the new Jerusalem, Rev. 21.11. yea,
they were Jasper stones which made the first foundation in the walls thereof,
verse. 19. Isidore calls it, viridem gemmam, the green gemme, or precious stone.
There be many kinds of Jaspers, green, blue, aerie, white, ruddy, purple,
spotted. Onkelus turns the word, Jaspeh, in Exodus 28. Pantree: and Jonathan in
this place of Ezekiel, Panterin, a panthera bestia, because the Jasper is
spotted like the Panther. The green Indian Jasper is the chiefest of them all.
Pliny affirms, he saw a Jasper so great, that it weighed eleven ounces. Lib.
37. c. 9
They are preservative against all poisons, dropsies, feavours, restrain blood
and sweat, and refresh the eyes with their greenness. Rueus lib. 1. c, ^


The Saphir. Of the Saphir was largely spoken, chap. 1. v. 26. Caerulae^ color
pellucida est, for its color its like the Heavens, azure, or blue, and
transparent. There be some Saphirs white, others blue, these are the males,
the other females, Vid. Martinium in verb. Saphirus.
says Boethius in his second book of Gemms. The best of this kind of stones
come from the Medes. The virtue of this stone is much. Its a friend to
chastity, Venereos profectus compescere creditur ideoque castis precipuo usui
esse perhibetur. Contra iracundiam, invidiam, frauds and tristitiam pollet.
Corporis incremenrum moliri, solidas principesque fovere, and asservare parts
cordis, oculorumque vires reficere, horum excrescentias and pustulas inhibere,
ruptas quoque membranas cogere. Galenus and Diascorides autores sunt. Addunt
and adversus ictus scorpionum and intestinas exulcerationes bibi, venenis etiam
pestiferis resistere and contra veneficia omnia, add etiam and incantamenta
presidio esse, febrientes cordis venis pulsantibus ad mota juvare, iudorem
arcere, sanguinem continere carbunculis abscessibusque calidis, pestiferis,
presertim mirum in modum adversari tradunt, Rueus de gemmis. l. 2. c. 2.
its powerful against anger, envy, deceitfulness, sadness. Its good against
poisons, ruptures, etc.

The Emeraud. Nophlich in Hebrew. Montanus makes it the Carbuncle. Shindler the
Smarag'd. Others the Chrysopraze, and so its termed here in the Margent, and so
in the 27. chap, v. 16. The margent is Chrysopraze. Its for color a golden
green, like a leek, inclining to yellow green.

The best sort of Emerauds, or Chrysoprazasses, are those which aureis guttis
conspergantur, which have golden drops or spots on them. The true beauty and
glory of these stones is seen only in the dark. They are comfortable to weak
eyes, Rueus l. 1. c, 10
refresh the heart, and vires tribuunt contra sacram auri sitim.

The Carbuncle. Its a precious stone, so called from the shining of it: The
name of it in Hebrew is Bareketh, from Barak, which signifies lightening,
shining. De Dieu. says, its Lapis fulguris coruscationem imitans, a stone that
shines like lightening. Some would have it to be the Smarag'd, but Mercer and
Shindler, judge Bareketh to be the Carbuncle, and so Danaeus who says, the
Smarag'd, does not resemble the brightness of lightening, but the Carbuncle;
and at midnight, velut sol quidam illustrat sibi vicina loca, like the Sun it
inlightens dark places, near unto it. In Chaldee its called (...) Barkan, which
by a transposition of letters is (...) Carban, whence Carbunculus. De Dieu. in
28. Exodus Marrin, in Lexi.
Of all flaming gemms, its counted the chief, and called Carbuncle, quod sit
ignitus ut carbo, being like a burning coal. Some call it approtus, because no
fire will hurt it. Those write of it say, it comprehends the virtues of all
other precious stones. Vid Rueum l. 2. c. 14.


And Gold. The Hebrew for Gold is, (...) Zahab or zahaf, which has affinity
with (...) Tzahab, which signifies yellow, and its called aurum ab aura, as
Isidore observes, because its shining or pure, as the air, and Zahaf
metaphorically, is put for that is pure shining, Job 37.22. Fair weather
comes out of the North. The Hebrew is Zahaf, Gold comes out of the North, the
meaning is, clear and pure air like gold, comes out of that part of the world,
So Zech. 4.12. the golden pipes are said to empty gold; for so is the Original,
the meaning is, oil which is pure, and in color and brightness like gold.

The workmanship of thy Tabrets, and of thy pipes was prepared in thee, in the
day that thou wast created. In the day of his birth, or of his being made King,
there was great rejoicing, all instruments of music were used. Tabrets and
Pipes being put for all the rest, by a Synecdoche. The Tyrians delighted in
music, Ezekiel. 26.13. and upon such occasions as the birth and coronation of
Princes, they greatly rejoiced, and made use of their choicest instruments.

The work-man-ship of thy Tabrets, The word for work-man-ship is (...)
melecheth, melachah signifies, says Kirker, any thing is for the service or
use of man, whether arts, cattle, or any thing gotten by industry, here it
notes that artifice was in their Tabrets and pipes, they were curiously made
and wrought, they were not common ones, but the choicest the Art of man could
produce.

And of thy Pipes. The Vulgar reads the words thus, Foramina tua, thy holes,
which Maldonate and some others do interpret Pipes, because they are full of
holes. For Nekavim the Hebrew for Pipes, is from (...) to boar through, and
pipes are so.

Was prepared in thee. How they were prepared in the King, is hard to conceive,
Piscator renders it apud te, with thee, or before thee, at the time of thy
creation.

[In the day that thou wast created. Creation is proper to God, and is the
production of an entity or creature out of nothing, as Genesis 1.1. and sometimes
its called creating, when of pre-existent matter a thing is made new, that it
was not before, as man out of the earth, Genesis 2.7. with Genesis 1.27. he is said
to be created, and metaphorically its applied to men, when they are made that
they were not, those make them so, are said to create, and those made so, to
be created. Hence when men are raised by others, they are called their
creatures.

Obs. 1 When men have natural, or acquired excellencies, beyond others, and
abuse them, its matter of mourning. Take up a lamentation upon the King of
Tyrus: he had more wisdom, beauty, blessing, prosperity, and abundance than
others, but he abused all; his heart was lift up, he honored not God, with
what he had, and therefore Ezekiel must lament; So Ezekiel. 17.1. he must lament
for the Princes of Israel, who abused their power, places, parts, and
blessings, they had.

Obs. 2 Choice accomplishments with outward glory and greatness, are no
Arguments of Gods grace, or Gods special favor toward men. Heathens, and the
worst of men have had these, the Prince of Tyrus, who blasphemously said, he
was a god, he sealed up the sum: he was a complete Prince, he had choice
indowments, he was full of wisdom, perfect in beauty, he had outward glory
and greatness as much as any, he was seated in a Paradise, he glistered with
Pearls, and precious stones, he had as choice Music as was to be had, yet
notwithstanding all these, he was a wretched man under the curse of God, and
was to dye the death of the uncircumcised. What vanity is it therefore to pride
our selves in any humane excellencies, to set our hearts upon, or confide in
any outward glory or greatness.

14 Thou art the anointed Cherub. Here the Prince of Tyrus is compared unto an
Angel. Angels in Scripture are called Cherubims, Genesis 3.24 The resemblances
between him and them, take in these particulars.

1 They are full of knowledge and wisdom, 2 Samuel 14.20. and its said of this
King, that he was full of wisdom.

2 They are beautiful and glorious creatures, Luke 9.26. Christ shall come in
the glory of the Angels, so this King was perfect in beauty, and full of glory,
being adorned with such precious stones as he was.

3 They are high exalted about others, having great power and command, Dan.
10.13, 20. 2 King. 19.35. they are called, principalities and powers, Ephesians.
3.10. So this King was exalted above others; he had great power and command,
so that he was dreadful, as the Cherubims that kept the way into Paradise.

Anointed. The Cherubims above the Arc or mercy seat, were anointed with
oil, Exodus 30.26. to which, here may be an allusion, thou art the anointed
Cherub, or thou think thy self so; or it may be spoken in reference to the
Kings of Israel and high Priest who were anointed, and so had many
prerogatives thereupon, and this man being made King of Tyrus, had great
privileges and prerogatives.

That covers. The Cherubims had wings which covered the Ark, Exodus 25.20. and
this King had wings of power, stretched out at Sea and land to cover and
protect his people. The Hebrew word is Hashochech from Sachach, which is to
hide, Kirker.
super-ponendo aliquid, a Hen hides her chickens by putting her wings over
them, it notes also to protect, when things are covered, they are protected.

I have set thee so. Thou wast made King, had great honor, privileges, and
power, thou wast above others, and how came thou to all this? it was not by
any other than my self? I have set thee so. The Hebrew is, I have given thee,
that is, into such dignity and greatness.

Thou wast upon the holy mountain of God. Some refer this to Hyram, furnishing
Solomon with materials to build the Temple, but this sense of the words is in
no wise entertainable, for Hyram was dead long before, and here the Prophet
speaks of one that was then to be destroyed. Piscator, senses the words thus,
Thou have been so gorgeously attired, as if thou were the High Priest of my
people, when he is in his robes. Others make this the sense, Thou wast as one
upon the holy mountain of God. Tyrus is likened to Mount Sion, the King to a
Cherub in the Temple, thereupon its called the holy Mountain, by way of
resemblance, or because Tire belonged to the Tribe of Asher, it was within
their lot, Josh. 19.24, 29. and therefore belonging to Gods people, and being
on the borders of Canaan, it might be called holy: If any should question
whether Tyrus were on a Mountain? know, that in the Scripture, Cities for their
high buildings, and strong defenses, are called Mountains, though they be not
on Mountains, as Jerem. 51.25. Behold, I am against thee, O destroying
Mountain, its spoken of Babylon, which was not upon a Mountain, but in a plain,
upon many waters, v. 13. So Tyrus for its high buildings, strong walls, and
defenses, may be called a Mountain, but Tyrus was upon a rock, which was high
above the waters, if not above the rest of the earth. Some tell us, Tyrus was
upon a great Mountain, Tyrus supra montem excelsum exaedifica^a fuit. Vilal.
and things which are great and goodly to see unto, are said to be the Lords.

Thou have walked up and down in the midst of the stones of fire. What these
stones of fire are, has exercised the heads of men to find out. Some make
them the Angels, who Heb. 1.7. are called a flame of fire. Some will have them
to be the two Tables of stone given at Mount Sinai in fire. Some assert them
to be the people of the Jews* who for their holiness, zeal, and love, are
called stones of fire. Some tell you they were the precious stones in the Temple
at Jerusalem, or the common stones gilded over. Others by these understand men
of excellent parts, spirits, and abilities, with whom the King of Tire
conversed, but these have overlooked the truth lying near at hand; for these
stones of fire, are the precious stones, mentioned in the former verse. and are
so called for their shining and glistering like fire, especially the
Carbuncles, and Diamonds, which sparkle and seem to cast out fire. Sanctius
says, he walked in the midst of the stones of fire, because his royal Palace
shined with such stones, as might well be called stones of fire.

The Jews at this time were not so holy, Puta Tyri regem in medi^ ignitorum
lapidum ambulare quia regium conclave undique collucebat his lapillis qui suo
jure vocantur igniti.
as to be called or counted stones of fire, they committed adultery with
stones and stocks, Jer. 3.9. and were stones of darkness, Job 28.3. rather
than stones of fire.

15 Thou wast perfect in thy ways. The Septuagint has the words thus, (...),
Thou wast faultlesse, or spotless in thy days: thou keptst thy self free from
those pollutions, which Kings usually are defiled with. The Hebrew is, thou
wast perfect in thy ways, not in a moral sense; as if he were without sin,
but in a political sense, he prospered in what he did, in his Naval, Military,
Court, and State-affaires; he was successeful; he wanted nothing pertaining
to Kingly greatness, he had all things which might make him complete and
glorious.

From the day thou wast created. From the time of making thee King. In the day
he was created, all sorts of music were used then, verse. 3. and from that
time he had all things conducible to Royal greatness.

Till iniquity was found in thee. There were some sins in this Prince, which
were very provoking.

1 His Insulting at the destruction of Jerusalem, which you have chap. 26.2.
Tyrus has said, Aha, She is broken that was the gates of the people. Tyrus
that was the King of Tyrus; and the people, they insulted over the Jews in
their misery.

2 His excessive pride in making himself a god, or as God. These were
iniquities, and whilst he was free from them, he prospered, his actions were
commendable, but when these sprung up and were discovered, then the Lord
threatened him with destruction, and hastened his ruin. The words are spoken of
God, humano more; as men search and find out things, so God is here said to do,
his finding out is making known things.

Obs. 1 Princes, and men in supreme power, are honorable, they are Cherubs, or
Cherubims, next unto God. In whose word they have many honorable Titles given
them. They are called shields, Hos. 4.18. the word for Rulers, is shields in
the Hebrew, and shields of the earth, Psalm 47.9. they protect the state where
they live, Ezekiel. 17.3. they are named Eagles and Cedars, Psalm. 82.6. they are
termed gods, and children of the most high, God ownes them for his children,
and calls them Gods, which is an height of honor.

Obs. 2 That Kings and potentates have their places, privileges, and power,
that they may be protectors of the people: Thou art the anointed Cherub that
covers: he was on the throne, that he might spread his wings of protection
over his subjects, both at Sea and land. Magistrates should be as Hens to the
Chickens, as fathers to their children, they are called not only Fathers, but
Nursing fathers, Isa. 49.23. the word in Hebrew is Omenajick, thy Nursers, or
Nourishers, and notes faithful nursing, they should make it their business to
preserve and provide for their people, as Nurses do for their Nurse-child,
seeing daily that it be kept from dangers, and want nothing; such a
Nurseing-father was David, Psalm. 78.72. he fed them according to the integrity
of his heart, and guided them by the skilfulnesse of his hands: David's heart
and hands were at work, for the good of the people. Such a Nursing Father was
Moses, whom the Lord would have to carry the People in his bosom, as a Nursing
father bears the sucking child, Numb. 11.12. God would have Kings, Princes,
Magistrates, to deal tenderly with the People; they should be as Cherubs unto
them, spreading the wings of protection and justice over them, and when they do
otherwise, he is wroth with them, Zeph. 3.1, 2, 3. Mic. 3.1, 2, 3, 4. when
instead of fathers they are Lions, instead of Angels, they are Devils to the
people. God is sorely displeased, and will destroy them.

Obs. 3 That Princes are exalted by God, and depend upon him. I have set thee,
so its God that raises them, and clothes them with honor and Majesty, Prove.
8.15, 16. By me Kings reign, and Princes decree justice, by me Princes rule,
and Nobles, even all the Judges of the earth. Here is mention of Kings,
Princes, Nobles, Judges, what Power soever any, or all of these have, the
highest or subordinate, they have from God, who is the fountain of all power,
as well as of being; He is Lord of heaven and earth, he is chief governor
among Angels and men, Psalm 22.28. and he sets up in Tyrus, and in Babylon, in
Egypt, and in Jerusalem, whom he pleases. They should consider who sets them
up, on whom they depend, and serve him with fear, ruling for the Lord; Which
because they do not, they grow proud, insolent, tyrannical, and therefore the
same hand that set them up, throws them down, Dan. 2.21.

Obs. 4 God minds the places were Princes dwell, and the pomp they live in:
Thou waste upon the holy Mountain of God, thou have walked up and down in the
midst of the stones of fire: Thine habitation has been in a strong fortified
City, thou have lived in great state and glory, having thy Palace glistering
with Carbuncles, and other precious stones, 1 King. 22.39. God took notice of
the Ivory house, which Ahab built for his state. Solomon's house, throne,
overlaid with the best gold, his Pomp, and State God observed, and caused to
be recorded, 1 King, the 7. and 10. chap. and because great ones pride
themselves in their seats, and Palaces, God threatens to smite their winter
houses, and their summer houses, and tells them that their ivory houses shall
perish, and their great houses have an end. Amos 3.15.

Obs. 5 Princes and States are prosperous and successeful in their
undertakings, whilst they are free from iniquities. Thou wast perfect in thy
ways from the day thou wast created, till iniquity was found: So long as thou
keptst thy self from unjust and wicked acts, thou did speed well in all thy
enterprises at Sea and Land. The Lord blesses Heathen Kings, while they do just
things. Its righteousness exalts a Nation, even any Nation, Prove. 14.3, 4.
David told Solomon what was the way for him, and his Kingdom to prosper, 2.
Chron. 22.13. he must fulfill the Statutes and judgments of the Lord; and then
he should prosper in all that he did, and whither soever he turned himself,
1 Kin. 2.3. Hezekiah was free from iniquities, unjust, and cruel acts, and hear
what the Spirit of the Lord says of him, 2 Chronicles. 32.30. he prospered in all
his works.

Ob. 6 Great and grievous sins may be in Princes and States undiscovered, but
the Lord will search them out, and make them known: Till iniquity was found in
thee. The Prince of Tyrus his sin was secret, and hidden from the world, kept
within doors, in his own chamber, Palace, City, or Territories, but the Lord
found it out, and made discovery of it to the Prophet, and the Prophet to the
world. The great ones of Judah thought themselves innocent, yet God found the
blood of innocents upon their skirts, and he found it not by secret search, by
digging, that is, by taking much pains, to find it out, but so soon as he
came, he spied it upon their skirts, and made it known, Jerem. 2.34. men plot
mischief, do works of darkness, and think they shall not be seen, Isa. 29,
15. but the Lord sees, will find it out, and bring it into the light; David
sinned in secret, but the Lord saw it, and proclaimed it to the world.

Obs. 7 Wickedness blasts prosperous Princes, and flourishing States: Thou
wast perfect in thy ways, till iniquity was found in thee: That caused all to
wither. His exalting himself to be as God, his insulting over others in their
misery, and his injust actions, caused the Lord to threaten and bring
desolation. Iniquity, is the canker and plague of prosperity. Many Princes and
States which were fat and flourishing, have been made lean thereby. Jeroboams
iniquities lost him five hundred thousand men at once, 2 Chronicles. 13.8 9, 17.
When iniquity was found in Zedekiah, breaking with Nebuchadnezzar, and relying
upon the King of Egypt, what said the Lord, shall he prosper, or shall he
escape that does such things? Ezekiel. 17.15. no, he shall never prosper more. Its
said of Jotham that he became mighty, he prospered greatly, and what was the
cause, 2 Chronicles. 27.6. it was because he prepared his ways before the Lord, or
established them before him; he looked to it, that he did nothing, but what
God commanded and approved, he would not defile his heart or hands with
iniquity, therefore he grew mighty, and left a flourishing Kingdom; But when
Ahaz his Son came to it, who did wickedly, you may see how the Syrians,
Israelites, Edomites, and Tiglath Pilezer, did waste and consume his kingdom,
2 Chronicles. 28. would Princes, Rulers, States, Cities, families, persons, prosper,
let them take heed of wickedness, and remember Malachy 4.1. The day comes
that shall burn like an Oven, and all the proud, and all that do wickedly shall
be as stubble: and the day that comes shall burn them up, and leave them
neither root nor branch.

Verse. 16 By the multitude of thy Merchandise; they have filled the midst of
thee with violence, and thou have sinned: therefore I will cast thee as
profane out of the mountain of God, and I will destroy thee, O covering
Cherub, from the midst of the stones of fire. 17 Thine heart was lifted up
because of thy beauty, thou have corrupted thy wisdom by reason of thy
brightness: I will cast thee to the ground: I will lay thee before Kings, that
they may behold thee. 18 Thou have defiled thy Sanctuarys by the multitude of
thine iniquities, by the iniquity of thy traffic: therefore will I bring
forth a fire from the midst of thee, it shall devour thee: and I will bring
thee to ashes upon the earth, in the sight of all them that behold thee. 19 All
they that know thee among the people, shall be astonished at thee: thou shall
be a terror, and never shall thou be any more. In these verses you have the
Kings sins, which are 1 In-justice or violence, ver. 16. 2 Pride or vain
confidence, v. 17. 3 Profaneness, v. 18.


2 Gods judgments, or punishments of him for his sins, which are, 1 Casting
out, and destruction, v. 16. 2 Casting down and making exemplary, v. 17. 3
Burning, and that to ashes, v. 18.


3 The Events of Gods so dealing with him, and they are, 1 Astonishment, 2
Terror, v. 19.


16 By the multitude of thy Merchandise. Tyrus was a City of the greatest
merchandising, as chap. 27. appears, and the King of Tire himself, was of the
Merchants company, Isa. 23.8. and countenanced their trading greatly. This drew
Merchants from all places thither, they brought in commodities, and carried out
Commodities, and there was great trafficking between the Tyrians and them; and
what followed thereupon?

They have filled the midst of thee with violence. The Hebrew word for violence
is, (...) Chamas, which notes, that wrong which is a violation of justice.
These Merchants seeking themselves, minded not what was just and equal, but
made a prey of one another, and so filled the City with injustice, iniquity,
and violence. The Septuagint is, (...), that is, with illegality,
transgression, unrighteousness. The French is, de rapine, they did catch and
snatch one from another; yea, oppress, and undo one another.

And thou have sinned. Thou who should have looked to it, that no unjust
things should have been done in the City, that there should have been no
violence, even thou have sinned, either by doing as other Merchants did, or by
being lifting up by the abundance of those things, thy self, and Citizens
possessed; or rather thou have sinned, in suffering those have done violence to
go unpunished; thou have connived at them, and so given them encouragement to
their wickedness. The word Chata, signifies to err from the way, scope, mark.
He should have had justice in his eye, and neither have done unjust things
himself, nor have suffered his Citizens to have done them.

Therefore I will cast thee, as profane, out of the Mountain of God. The
Hebrew is, I will profane thee from the mountain of God. Some understand the
words thus, I will blot out the memory of thee from Jerusalem, and from amongst
my people. Delebo memoriam tuam bonam de Jerusalem and de medio populi sancti
mei.
But its better to understand it of his own City and Kingdom, out of which God
would cast him; he was an anointed Cherub, set up by God in great honor and
dignity, v. 14. but he not doing answerable to his place, God would pull the
crown rom his head, take away all his power and greatness, and profane him,
that is, make him as a common person, or cast him out as profane, as one that
has profaned the place of Majesty. Of the Mountain of God you heard in the
14. v. where this King was said to be upon the holy Mountain of God.

And I will destroy thee, O covering Cherub. The word for destroying is, (...)
abad, which notes an utter destruction, and God would utterly destroy this King
for not protecting his people from violence and wrongs. He was as an Angel for
place and power over others, and should have covered them with the wings of
protection and justice.

From the midst of the stones of fire. The stones of fire were those precious
stones, himself and Palace were adorned with all, so called because of their
glistering and lightening, of which before. v. 14.

17 Thine heart was lifted up because of thy beauty. In the 5. v. its said,
Thine heart is lifted up because of thy riches, and here, because of thy
beauty; he was rich, great, honorable, strong in men, ammunition, shipping, and
fortifications, all which had a glory, a beauty, and that lifted up his heart,
made him swell with pride, and think himself more than a man, to imagine that
he was a petty god.

Thou have corrupted thy wisdom, by reason of thy brightness. This King was
in repute for wisdom, v. 5. and 12. by which he attained to great wealth and
glory, which here is expressed by brightness (for glory is a bright and
shining thing.) The glory, beauty, and brightness of his condition, begat
such pride in his spirit, that his wisdom was corrupted, and lost, as the
Vulgar reads it. His Pride did obscure his understanding, and dis-figure his
wisdom. True wisdom consists in the knowledge of a man's self, and carrying it
humbly when he is highest; but he knew not himself, that would be as God, and
make all bow unto him.

I will cast thee to the ground. Thou art in great glory and honor, eminent
and renowned, lifted up above other Princes, sitting, as thou fanciest, in the
seat of God, but I will strip thee of all thy glory, and greatness, bring thee
down from thy height, and cast thee to the ground, it imports violent and
extreme misery.

I will lay thee before Kings, that they may behold thee. I will make thee a
public example to the Kings of the world, thou shall be so debased, cast
down, and trampled upon, that Kings shall mind, and wonder at thy condition;
be terrifyed and acknowledge the just hand of God upon thee for thy
wickedness. The Septuagint is, (...), I have given thee, or will give thee to
be an example before Kings. The French is, Je te donneroy de vant la face des
rois a fin que i will te regardent.

18 Thou have defiled thy Sanctuaries, by the multitude of thine iniquities, by
the iniquity of thy traffiques. By Sanctuaries or Sanctification, some here
take to be meant the Kings virtues. Others his Oaths and Covenants; but his
Royal Palace and City, or the Palaces where he and his did worship, and that
Religion they had, chiefly are intended. Their traffic was great, and the
iniquities adhering thereunto were great, as deceit, covetousness, pride,
injustice, violence; by which the Palace, City, and Sacraries, were defiled,
and the Religion they had, whatever it was. Piscator makes the Sanctuaries to
be the Kings Palaces only, which for their magnificency were answerable to the
Temple at Jerusalem, and the King by his iniquities had given cause to God, to
bring in the Chaldeans to defile and destroy them. This sense and the former
stand well together; for being formerly defiled with sin, it was just with God
to defile them with blood, and utterly to destroy them.

Therefore will I bring forth a fire from the midst of thee, and it shall
devour thee. That Tire was consumed by fire is probable, if not, its to be
considered what is meant by fire. Some make it to be the plotting of his own
Citizens to destroy him; discontented ones should fly to the King of Babylon,
besi^dging the City, and betray him; this Maldonate likes not, but says, its
sine causa divinare. Others make this fire to be the judgment of God upon
Tire. She sinned, and the King also in a special manner, and God from those
sins would cause punishment to spring up, which should consume them and him,
as a fire kindling in a house, eats it up, and consumes it.

And I will bring thee to ashes upon the earth. These words do hint unto us,
that the judgment of God upon Tyrus, after it was taken by Nebuchadnezzar was
fire. What they could not spoil by their Axes, and other warlike instruments,
that they set fire unto, and so turned into ashes, the stately and goodly
buildings thereof, the glorious Palaces of the King, were made ashes; fire is
a consumptive transforming thing, and so are Gods judgments. Or if we take
the words not in a litteral, but a metaphorical sense, ashes note a
contemptible and base condition, Job. 30.19. He has cast me into the mire,
and I am become like dust and ashes; When Job was stripped of all his honor and
glory, set upon the dunghill, then he was as dust and ashes.

In the sight of all them that behold thee. The word to Behold, is Raab, which
notes not only seeing with the eye, but with the mind also, Jerem. 2.31. O
Generation, see the word of the Lord: that is, hear, consider, understand, they
could not see it with the eye; and here, not only those that saw with their
bodily eyes, but those that heard of it, even the Isles which were afar off are
included.

19 All they that know thee among the people shall be astonished at thee. All
thy subjects, and all Forreiners, with whom thou have Traded, and have heard of
thy wisdom, beauty, glory, greatness, they shall be astonished at thee; they
shall wonder, to see thee the anointed Cherub, brought to so low and
despicable a condition. Some conceive that as they were astonished at the
destruction of Tyrus, and the Prince thereof, so they were glad, hissed, and
mocked thereat, but chapt. 26, 16, 17. they should be astonished, and take up a
lamentation.

Thou shall be a terror. In the Hebrew it is, Thou have been terrors,
ballahoth hajitha, thou with thy power, greatness, majesty, have been terrible
unto others. The Septuagint is, (...). Thou have been destruction. The French
is, Tu seras en frayeur, Thou shall be for a fear or terror, so we have it,
and it suits well enough with the Hebrew, which often puts a preter tense for the
future, and so the sense is, all those that see to what a desolate condition
thou art brought unto, shall be terrified, chapter 26.21.23.36. you have this word
terror.

Never shall thou be any more. Thou shall never be King more, nor Tyrus ever
be built more, in such state as formerly it was, nor any King or form of a
Kingdom be ever seen therein more; for Junius tells us, it was upon the
re-building of it made a Commonwealth. These words we had formerly, chapter 26.21.
and 27.36.

Obs. 1 That in much trading there is much sin; by the multitude of thy
merchandise they have filled the midst of thee with violence; The Merchants of
Tyrus were covetous, fraudulent, unjust, violent, speaking unlawful words, and
doing unlawful things, and that so commonly, as that they filled the City and
Palace with the guilt thereof, Prove. 10.19. In the multitude of words there
wants not sin, that is, there is much sin, many of them are sinful; so in
much trading and merchandising, there wants not sin, it abounds; sinful
thoughts, desires, idle, evil, false, flattering, lying words, adhere to them
are busied therein, and many unjust, yea, oppressing acts are done by them: an
heart they have exercised with covetous practices, and many of them do love the
wages of iniquity, as Balaam did, 2 Pet. 2.15. and like Judas, purchase fields
with the reward of iniquity, Act. 1.18. In Mart-Towns, where there is much
Trading, there is much sinning, much lying, swearing, whoring, drunkenness.
Merchants bring the vices of their countries, as well as the wares and
Commodities thereof, and it may be questioned whither the vices brought in,
Vbi magna sunt empotia and magna negotiatio, ibi raro absunt imposturae and
frauds. Au haec magnam vitae licentiam mercatores sibi vendicant, neque tam
merces quam vitia, cum a civibus tum ab aliis ex omnibus nationibus
importantur. Lavat.
do not more harm than all the Commodities do good?

Obs. 2 God takes notice of men in place, whither they connive at, or punish
sin; The Merchants filled the City and Palace of the King with injustice,
violence, and all manner of wickedness, and he punished them not, but
connived at them; and so besides his great neglect which was very evil, he
contracted the guilt of their sins upon himself. Governors are sent by God
says Peter, 1 Epist. 2.14. For the punishment of evil doers, and for the
praise of them that do well: being sent of God, and set up by him, as this
Prince of Tire was, v. 14. Gods looks after them, observes strictly how they
act, whether they encourage men that do well, and punish such as do evil; if
they do not, the Lord will charge their sin upon them, Thou have sinned, thou
have filled all with violence. Not to punish sin, is to encourage men in sin,
and so Rulers bring a world of guilt upon themselves, they must answer for the
sins of the people, Malum qui non impedit cum potest, facit.
when they prevent not, nor punish what they might.

Obs. 3. Doing of unjust things, and non-execution of justice, undo the
Princes and Rulers of the earth, they cause God to thrust them out of their
Thrones and Kingdoms, and to lay their glory and greatness in the dust. Thou
have sinned, that is, done unjustly, and neglected justice, therefore I will
cast thee as profane out of the Mountain of God, I will destroy thee O
covering Cherub, from the midst of the stones of fire. Nebuchadnezzar and his
Army were the instruments to do this, but God was the chief Agent, I will cast
thee out, I will destroy thee, and it was for his wicked acts, and want of
doing justice. When Princes do just things, punish evil doers, countenance them
that do well, then they establish themselves in the mountain of God, in their
thrones and greatness; but when they fail therein, they undermine themselves,
and hasten their own ruin. The Arabians say, firmitas regni est justitia,
justice is the sinews, and strength of a Kingdom, in^ustice then must be the
dissolution of it, Justice and equi^e sont l'establishment de ^on throne.
Psalm. 89.14. Justice and judgment are the establishment of Gods throne, it is
habitation in your books; but the margent has it establishment, and so the
French reads it, and the word Mecon signifies a basis or foundation; justice
upholds the very Throne of God, should he not execute justice, or do unjust
things, his Throne would shake, his glory, and greatness come down; would
Rulers and great ones be established in their places, let them keep justice,
and judgment, and do wrong to none. Saul spared Agag, when he should have
hewed him to pieces, 1 Samuel 15. he caused to be slain eighty five Priests of
the Lord, 1 Samuel 22. and shortly after for his unjust acts, and want of doing
justice, he was thrust out of his throne, cast out as a profane Prince from
the Mountain of God, and destroyed from being a covering Cherub, and from all
his glory and greatness.

Obs. 4 The abundance and glory of outward things, occasions men to forget God
and themselves: Thine heart was lifted up because of thy beauty: he had
abundance of all things, and they, with the glory and beauty of them, swelled
his heart, made him proud, forget God, the giver of them, and himself who was
to give account for them. Its hard to keep the heart in a right frame, when we
are compassed about with creature-plenty, glory, and beauty. Pride, disdain,
and violence, are the brats and bastards of plenty. Its harder for Princes or
any to regulate their spirits in prosperity, than in adversity. A man under
pressures, is seldom puffed up with Pride, overcome with luft, drowned in
covetousness, overtaken with surfeiting, and drunkenness, or tickled with
worldly glory; all which and many other evils, are incident to them that dwell
in the midst of abundance, see Deuteronomy. 31.10. chapter 8.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. in their
fullness, men forget, and forsake God, when in their adversity they seek and
sue unto him, Hos. 5.15. In their affliction they will seek me early, or
diligently. Manasses in his greatness and fullness forsook God and his
worship, did violent acts, but when he was in fetters in Babylon, and in
affliction, then he besought the Lord his God, and humbled himself greatly, 2 Chronicles. 33.12. his heart was lifted up before, but now humbled, and that
greatly. Affliction pricks the bladders prosperity has blown up, and filled
with pride.

Obs. 5 Men's priding themselves in an outward glory, does prejudice them in a
greater excellency: Thou have corrupted thy wisdom because of thy brightness:
his wisdom was of an higher nature, than all his greatness and glory, than
his shipping, soldiers, buildings precious stones, and whatever other external
excellencies were in Tyrus, but by his pride, in these he marred that. Sin is
the smoke of the soul, and what smoke is to the eye of the body, that sin is to
the understanding, which being darkened, men's wisdom is corrupted. If there
be a drop of ink or poison, in milk or wine they are corrupted; so if sin,
especially pride be found in a man, his wisdom is corrupted, and he will
think, speak, and do corruptly, Prove. 11.2. When Pride comes, then comes
shame, but with the lowly is wisdom. When men are puffed up with their parts
and enjoyments, then comes shame: Then they will carry themselves so, as
others will be ashamed of them, their wisdom is corrupted, and they do
foolishly: but when men are low and humble, they are wise, and do things
commendable; true, sound, uncorrupted wisdom, dwells with the lowly, and is a
stranger to the proud.

One says upon these words of our Prophet, That all proud men are fools, their
pride has darkened their foolish hearts. Let us take heed of priding our
selves, in any externals or internals, thereby we shall corrupt our glory, let
us be lowly, so shall we have wisdom unspotted, humble, so God will give us
more grace James 4.6.

Obs. 6 The end of Gods dreadful judgments upon sinners is, that they may be
examples, and warning pieces unto others. I will cast thee to the ground, I
will lay thee before Kings that they may behold thee, and so take heed of thy
ways and practices. God is terrible unto Kings, he cuts them off, and makes
them exemplarie unto others; they are often blasphemous, proud, unjust, violent,
Tyrannical, and God by the thunder of his power, cuts them down, and by their
fall sets them up to be lights unto others, that they tread not in their
steps, least they come to their ends. Pharaoh is drowned in the Sea, the
Princes of the People hung up before the Sun. Herod is eaten up with vermin,
the King of Ai, banged on a tree, Josh. 8.29. Adonizedeck and other Kings,
their necks were made footstools to the Jews, Josh. 10.24. Agag was hewn in
pieces, 1 Samuel 15.33. Joash was slain in his bed, 2 Chro. 24.25. Jehoram was so
smitten with sickness, that his bowels fell out, 1 Chronicles. 21.19. Zedekiah had
his eyes put out, was bound in fetters; and carried to Babylon, Jerem. 52.11.
and made a prisoner all his days; the Kings of Sodom and Gomorrah were
roasted in the fire, and burnt to ashes, and why were these things done to
Kings? that they might be examples to others, both Kings and people, 1 Cor. 10
11. All these things happened unto them for ensamples, and they are written for
our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come; had they not been
written, they would have been forgotten, but God in his great wisdom would
have them written, that all that read or hear of them may be admonished by
them, and learn to avoid those sins they were guilty of, least they partake
of the same or parallel judgments.

Examples in holy scripture are used diverse ways.

1 For Arguments in prayer, as Psalm. 83.9, 10, 11. 2 As matter to strengthen
our faith, Deuteronomy. 3.21, 22. Isa. 51.9, 10. 3 As Presidents for God to proceed
by, Jerem. 7.12.14. Ezekiel. 20.36. 4 As Motives to repentance and turning unto
God, Luke 13.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Amos 4.11. 5 For Cautions and Admonitions unto us,
that we do not commit such things as they did, 2 Pet. 2.6.
Such an example did God make the King of Tyrus, he was a Sea mark to direct
Kings and others who sit at the stern, that they sail not that way he did,
least they suffer shipwreck. Thus God makes men serviceable after their death,
who were sinful and mischievous in their life time.

Obs. 7 Sinful practices defile men's chiefest excellencies and glories, and
expose them to defilement. Thou have defiled thy Sanctuaries by the iniquity of
thy traffic. Covetousness, lying, deceit, violence, pride, luxury, and such
like sins, attended their trading, and these sins defiled the City, the
Court, the Crown, their Temples, their worship, and what ever was precious unto
them. Sin is of a spreading nature, defiling us, and all we have; yea,
exposing all to ruin and destruction, see Ezekiel. 5.11. the 7.24. the Jews
defiled Gods Sanctuary with sin, therefore God would expose them to be defiled
by Heathens.

Obs. 8 Men's own sins do breed their woes, bring them into contemptible
conditions, and to utter destruction. This Princes sins kindled the fire of
Gods indignation in the midst of his City, Palace, and Sanctuaries, and such a
fire as devoured him, and brought him to ashes. Wood breeds the worms, which
eat it up, Garments the moaths which consume them. Men by their follies
contract those distempers, and diseases, which rend them from the land of the
living, and enfranchise them among the dead. Its the sin of a Nation, that
tears out the bowels of it, and lays all the pleasant things therein waste.
Its Princes sins which shakes the Crown from their heads, their injustice,
Tyranny, covetousness, profaneness, throws them out of their Thrones, leads
them with scorn, and causes the Lord to pour his indignation upon them. There
is no Nation, City, or family, roasted in the fire of divine dreadful
judgments, but themselves do bring the same upon themselves. Israel destroyed
her self, Hos. 13.9. that was by her Calves and idolatrous worship. Ireland
has destroyed it self by her treachery, and bloody doings, and search into it,
you shall find that Scotland has destroyed it self by its own iniquities. So
Worcester by its own acts has brought woes upon it self, etc. Many are brought
to ashes at this time, to bondage; base and contemptible conditions, because
they fed upon ashes, made lies their refuge, doing dishonorable things, Isa.
26.11. the fire of their enemies shall devour them, their sins were the
material fire that they brought, etc.

Obs. 9 Gods judgments upon wicked Princes and places, often are such, as that
they become matter of astonishment and terror to others. All that know thee
among the People shall be astonished at thee, thou shall be a terror.
Whosoever should hear what God had done to Tyrus, and the Prince thereof,
should be amazed thereat, and tremble, chap. 26.15. he is terrible to the
Kings of the earth, Psalm 76.12. and makes them terrors to others.

Verse. 20 Again, The word of the Lord came unto me, saying, 21 Son of Man, set
thy face against Zidon, and prophesy against it. 22 And say, thus says the
Lord God, behold, I am against thee, O Zidon, and I will be glorified in the
midst of thee, and they shall know that I am the Lord, when I shall have
executed judgments in her, and shall be sanctified in her. 23 For I will send
into her pestilence, and blood into her streets, and the wounded shall be
judged in the midst of her, by the sword upon her on every side: and they shall
know that I am the Lord. In these words you have a Prophesy against Zidon,
which is the third general part of the Chapter; the authority of it is in the
20. v. and the Prophets Commission in the 21. v. the Prophesy it self, in the
22. and 23. where destruction is threatened to Zidon, by Pestilence and Sword,
and the Ends of Gods judgments declared.

21 Set thy face against Zidon. The word for to set, notes a setting on
purpose, not carelessly, Art cura studio. Vilalp.
but composedly, intensively, Amos 9.4. I will set mine eyes upon them for
evil, and not for good. Though formerly I have seriously, and purposely, set my
self to do them good; yet now I will with as much seriousness, and
resolvednesse, set mine eyes upon them, or against them for evil, I will look
sowrely upon them; So the Prophet must fix his face upon Zidon, and look
severely, suitable, to the judgment he had to threaten against it.

Zidon. Of Zidon was spoken, chap. 27.8. it was seated at the foot of Mount
Libanus, and terminated the bounds of Canaan, in the North-west. Justin says,
it was built by the Phenicians, and called Sidon, from the multitude of fishes
were there-abouts: for they call a fish Zidon. It was a rich and potent City,
having its King; for Ethbaal, the father of that wicked woman Jezabel, was King
of the Zidonians, 1 King. 16.31. They were idolaters, for Ashtoreth was the
goddess of the Zidonians, De Diis Syris Syntag, 2.6.2.
1 Kin. 11.5. and Seldom judges those four hundred Prophets of the groves,
which did eat at Jezabels Table, to be the Prophets of this goddess. These
Zidonians were for their manners, and wickedness like to the Tyrians; no
better than Thorns and Briars unto the Jews, and hence Ezekiel is commanded to
Prophesy against them, as Jeremy was Chapter 25.15.22.

22 Behold I am against thee. Some read the words thus, Behold I come to thee,
not to show thee kindness, not to protect or comfort thee; but I come to
punish, to destroy thee. The words may also be read, Behold, I am above thee,
or over thee, thou art strong, wise, wealthy, secure, but I am above thee; and
thou can not escape my hands. But to take the words as here they are, I am
against thee: thou have me thy enemy, hitherto I have been thy friend, caused
thee to grow great and prosper, but now I am against thee, its not men or
Angels, but I the Lord of all in heaven and earth, that have the command of all
creatures in my hand, that shake the foundations of the earth, and lay waste
Kingdoms, Cities, at my pleasure, even I am against thee.

And I will be glorified in the midst of thee. Montanus reads the word
glorified, actively, I will glorifye my self in the midst of thee, thou have
dishonored me by thy sins, given mine honor unto Idols, but now I will punish
thee severely for what thou have done, and so vindicate my name, make thee know
that I am a God, differing from thy false Gods, and goddesses. The Septuagint
reads the word passively, (...), so we, and many others, I will be glorified,
and the sense is this, I am against Zidon, I will fight her, get the victory
over her, by executing my judgments upon her, and so I shall be glorified by
all that see my hand upon her. God is glorified when he punishes evil doers,
and cuts them off, Exodus 14.4. I will be honored upon Pharaoh, and all his
host, v. 17. upon his Charets and his Horsemen, and how was this done? by
drowning them in the midst of the Sea, v. 27, 28, and God is glorified when
others take notice of his power, justice, judgments, and praise, and fear him,
as it is Exodus 15.1.14. When men do conquer others, all the friends of the
Conqueror do rejoice, and triumph with him, they go or send to him, as 2 Samuel
8.10. and give him thanks for what he has done, which is an honoring of him,
and it is no less that his enemies fear him.

And they shall know that I am the Lord, when I have executed Judgments in
her. The End of Gods judgments is to bring men to a right knowledge of him.
When Zidon should receive the punishments due to her sins, then she would
know, that is, acknowledge God to be above all Idol gods, that he only was
worthy to be feared, adored, praised, and obeyed.

And shall be sanctified in her. In chap. 20.41. we had these words, I will
be sanctified in you, where they were opened: They may be taken here
actively, or passively, I will sanctify my self in her, that is, I will do that
in Zidon, execute such judgments in her, as shall declare to all Nations that
I am an holy God, hateing all sin, that my name is holy and reverend, in this
sense they are taken actively: passively, thus, whereas my name has suffered
by the Zidonians, and many have thought me no better than the Idol gods, that
I take little care of the world, wink at men in their wickedness, and am like
unto them, when my judgments are upon Zidon, it will be otherwise, then they
will have high and honorable thoughts of me, then they will declare me to
be a just and righteous God, and so the holy God shall be sanctified in
Righteousness, as it is Isa. 5.16. that is, made known to be holy for his
righteous judgments.

23 For I will send into her Pestilence. These are the judgments with which
God would visit Zidon. The word for Pestilence is, (...) deber, which
Interpreters make to signifye speech, death, and order, as well as the Plague,
and that to have all these in it, for the Plague is a speaking judgment, it
speaks out Gods severity, it speaks unto us to repent presently. Its a dreadful
judgment, few escape that have it, and it has order in it, for that it goes
from house to house, City to City, and often sweeps away all.

And blood into her streets. The Babylonians should besiedge Zidon, and after
the Pestilence had devoured many, they should take the City, stay the Citizens,
and fill the streets with blood, dead, and wounded bodies.

And the wounded shall be judged in the midst of her. When Towns and Cities are
besiedged, many from within, make attempts to raise the siedge, or break
through, whereupon they come to be wounded, if not slain; so here, many were
wounded upon such attempts, and after the City was taken they were judged to
death. The Hebrew is veniphlal chalal, cadet vulneratus, the wounded man shall
fall in the midst of her, and so the Septuagint, (...).

By the Sword upon her on every side. There should neither be any articles or
terms of peace offered them, nor any way of escape be left them. The
Soldiers should compass her about on every side, so that whoever attempted to
fly and get away, should fall into their hands.

Obs. 1 That great, flourishing, and strong Cities may have God their enemy,
and so their enemy, as to declare and proclaim war against them. Son of man,
set thy face against Zidon, tell that great City what the Lord says, Behold, I
am against thee, O Zidon. I am coming in a martial way against thee, and will
consume thee to ashes.

Obs. 2 Gods aim and end in his judgments, is to make himself known, what a
dreadful, just, and holy God he is, and that he may be declared by men to be
so. God would destroy Zidon by pestilence and war, that he might be
glorified, and sanctified in her, she would not give glory to God, before; the
Lord would therefore fetch his glory out of her by his judgments, and cause
others should see the same, to confess him to be a God of power, justice, and
holiness, Psalm 9.16. The Lord is known by the judgment he executes. There
be characters of his power, justice, and holiness in them, that men must
needs take notice of them, if they be not Atheistical. If others will not
fear, praise, worship, adore the Lord, whose hand has lately been lifted up so
eminently, yet let us do it. God must be glorified and sanctified one way or
other. Let us therefore say, Great and marvailous are thy works, Lord God
Almighty, just, and true are thy ways, O thou King of Saints, who shall not
fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name?

Obs. 3 What judgments soever come into or upon Cities and persons, its the
Lord that sends them thither, that brings them upon them. I will send into her
Pestilence, and blood into her streets: Its the Lord gives commissions as to
the Prophets to prophesy judgments against a City, so to the judgments
themselves, to come to, and upon them. If in Worcester dead bodies and blood
filled the streets, if all houses were plundered, if armies be routed,
thousands slain, its the Lords doing; let none stumble by looking at the
instruments, they are the sword in Gods hand, he causes it to wound, and to
kill.

Verse. 24 And there shall be no more a pricking bryar unto the house of
Israel, nor any grieving thorn of all that are round about them, that despised
them, and they shall know that I am the Lord God. 25 Thus says the Lord God,
when I shall have gathered the house of Israel from the people among whom they
are scattered, and shall be sanctified in them in the sight of the Heathen,
then shall they dwell in their land, that I have given to my servant Jacob. 26
And they shall dwell safely therein, and shall build houses, and plant
vineyards, yea, they shall dwell with confidence, when I have executed
judgments upon all those that despise them round about them, and they shall
know that I am the Lord their God. These verses are a Prophesy of grace and
mercy to the Church of God, being the last general part of the Chapter, where
first you have the things prophesied of, which are, 1 Freedom from
molestations by enemies, v. 24. 2 Collection of the Jews, out of the places
they were dispersed into, v. 25. 3 Habitation in the land given to Jacob, v.
25. 4 Safety and Prosperity, v. 26.


2 The Time when these things shall be, v. 26. after judgments executed upon
their enemies.

3 The End of this comfortable Prophesy, and sweet Promises in it, and that is
the knowledge and profession of God, ver. 24. and 26.

There shall be no more a pricking bryar. The word for Bryar in the holy
language is Sillon, a thorn, a sting, a bryar, and metaphorically its put for a
Thorny man, Hence is, (...), says Avenarius, which signifies, Maledictis
lacerare, to scratch a man's name with ill words. Sillon is no where else used,
but in Ezekiel chap. 2.6. and in this place. The Septuagint turn it, (...),
which in 2 Cor. 1.2.7. is rendered a Thorn, and by the Vulgar, offendiculum, an
offense.

Pricking. Mamir is from Maar, which signifies dolorem infer, to cause
grief, Spina dolorem inferens. says Jerome.
to make the heart ache, so do thorns and briars, when they prick a man, they
pain and grieve him.

Unto the house of Israel. By a Synechdoche of the whole for a part, he
understands the house of Zidon.

Nor any grieving thorn. The word for Thorn here is, (...) kos or kotz from
(...) to be afflicted, to be in streights, because thorns do afflict and
streighten men. Some make it to differ from others in quantity, and to note a
greater thorn, but it signifies any thorn, thistle, or grieving thing. Macib,
grieving, is from Caab, to make sad; when a man is pricked with a thorn, it
makes him sad.

Of all that are round about them. These words show who were the Briars and
thorns, viz. those who dwelt near unto the Jews, on every side, the Tyrians,
Sydonians, Philistims, Moabites, Ammonites, Idumaeans, and Egyptians. These
were subdued by the Chaldaeans much about that time Jerusalem was taken, and
after their return out of Babylon, those Nations were brought under by the
Macchabees.

That despised them. In Hebrew Hashshatim, which is from Shaat, signifying to
provoke one, by contemning and spoiling of them. Its again in the 26. verse.
rendered in the margent that spoil them.

Wicked men are likened to thorns and briars.

1 Thorns and briars are of little worth or use; what serve they for but to
make an hedge, stop a gap, or burn in the fire, they are inconsiderable things,
and such are wicked men, they are vile, Jerem. 15.19. Godly men are precious,
but wicked ones are vilis pretii, little worth, Prove. 10.20. Isa. 10.17. the
Assyrians were thorns and briars, and should be burnt up in a day.

2 They change not their nature: wherever you set or plant them, they
continue the same, in the wilderness, garden, or Orchard; so wicked men, do
what you will to them, they change not, neither can thunder, lightening,
sunshine, winter or summer, change the one or the other. Pharaoh was a great
Bryar, no miracles altered him. Saul was transplanted, and made a King, yet
honor and favor altered not him. Jeroboam what sweet Promises had he from God
himself, 1 King. 11.37, 38. but they turned not that thorn into a vine.

3 They pester the earth where they are, they suck away the fat, moisture, and
sweetness of it, from better plants, corn, and grass; so wicked men they
pester the earth, they get the chief places of power, honor, they get the
Lord-ships, and Manors, Psalm 12.8. the vilest of the Sons of men are
exalted. Abimelech the bramble, is made King by the Shechemites, and slaies his
seventy brethren whose right it was to have had the Crown before him, and what
a plague he was to the Shechemites, see Judge. 9.

4 They are low things, creeping upon the earth, and inclining toward it; They
are not like the Oaks and Cedars, which mount up to heaven; So wicked men are
base, low, earthy, minding the things of this world, they incline unto them,
they savor the things of the flesh, and what is suitable to their lusts; such
a base bryar was the fool in the Gospel, and Dives also.

5 They are dangerous things to meddle withal, they are pricking and grieving.
Numb. 33.35. the inhabitants remaining were pricks in their eyes, and thorns
in their sides, and vexed them. Nabal was very churlish to David, and not
overkinde to Abigail, he was a pricking thorn to the one, and a grieving
bryar to the other.

Quest. Wherein are wicked men pricking briars, and grieving thorns?

Ans. 1 In their Tongues, they are often full of prickles, their words are
pungent.

1 They have calumniating and lying words, Nehem. 6.6. Jer. 18.18. 2 Scoffing
words, Nehem. 4.2, 3. the Nations scoffed at the Jewish Sabbaths, Sacrifices
and worship, Lam. 1.7. 3 Threatening words, Act. 4.17.9.1. 4 Dis-gracing,
undervaluing words. The Scribes and Pharisees said of Christ, he was a
wine-bibber, a Samaritane, that he had a Devil. Tertullus said, Paul was a
pestilent fellow, Act. 24. 5 Provoking words. 2 Chronicles. 25.17. Neh. 6.2.
2 In their countenances, and looks. Wicked men look so big and fiercely often
times upon the godly, that they prick and grieve them to the heart, Dan. 8.23.
Antiochus was of a fiery countenance, terrible to look unto; how sowrely did
Ahab look upon Elijah, when he said, art thou he that troubles Israel? etc.
Wicked men's frowns are sharp thorns in the sides of the godly.

3 In their actions, 2 Pet. 2.7, 8. Lots righteous soul was vexed, etc. Dalilah
tempted, and urged Sampson, so that his soul was vexed unto death, Judge. 16.16.
Josh. 23.12, 13. The daughters of Heth were such thorns unto Rebecca, that
she was weary of her life, Genesis 27.46. Psa. 37.14

Some General observations from hence, that wicked men are thorns.

Obs. 1 Their acquaintance is not desirable. Familiarity with them is
dangerous, Prove. 24.1. Be not envious against evil men, neither desire to be
with them; be they great, honorable, eminent, yet if wicked, we should
neither envy them, nor affect their company, and why? For their heart studieth
destruction, and their lips talk of mischief, they are the seed of the Serpent,
and cannot cordially close with the seed of the woman; there is enmity between
their seeds, Micah 7.4. The best of them is a bryar, the most upright is
sharper than a thorn hedge; if the best of them be so, what are the Rest? One
time or other you will find them so. David chose those for his companions who
feared the Lord, Psalm. 119.63.

Obs. 2 Answerable fruit is to be expected from them. Thorns and briars must
bring forth fruit suitable to their natures. Some make no difference between
men, but will trust wicked ones as soon as godly ones, but they have been, or
may be deceived; for can good fruit grow upon an ill tree? Christ has taught
us otherwise, Mat. 7.16. Do men gather grapes of Thorns? etc. he makes it an
impossibility, v. 18. a corrupt tree cannot bring forth good fruit; wickedness
proceeds from the wicked, its natural to them to do wickedly, and nothing
else: fire comes out of brambles, and devoures the Cedars of Lebanon, Judge.
9.15.

Obs. 3 It is rather matter of rejoicing than mourning, when wicked men are cut
off, and taken away; They are but thorns and briars, worthless things,
cumbering the ground, and bearing ill fruit, Prove. 11.10. When it goes well
with the righteous the City rejoices, and when the wicked perish there is
shouting. Unprofitable, hurtful things are taken away; Husbandmen and Gardiners
are glad, when the briars and brambles are pulled up from the corn, flowers,
and plants among which they grew. The loss of good men is a great loss, as of
Josiah, a good King; but the loss of wicked Kings is no loss, its gain to a
State, and matter of rejoicing, they are great brambles, and there is much a do
to pull them up, but being up and perishing, multitudes shout for joy; who were
scratched and oppressed by them.

Obs. 4 Those be the Lords Deputies and Rulers under him, should see to it,
that briars and brambles overrun not all the field and vineyard of God. They
do grow high, great, spread, and are like to endanger much if they be not
dealt withal. There be thorns and briars in all places. There be State-
brambles, City- Thorns, and Church- Briars; such were in the Church of
Galatia, which Paul wishes were cut off, Gal. 5.12. because they scratched and
troubled them; and David's resolution was, to thrust away as thorns, all the
Sons of Belial, who troubled the State and City of Jerusalem, 2 Samuel 23.6.
and Psalm 101.6. he says, I will early destroy all the wicked of the land,
that I may cut off all wicked doers from the City of the Lord. Here was a man
after Gods own heart, that would not suffer pricking thorns, and grieving
briars.

Some more particular observations from the words of the verse.

Obs. 1 The Church and people of God live amongst thorns; They dwell in the
midst of wicked men. All that were round about them were pricking briars, and
grieving thorns. The Church is a Lilly among thorns, Cant. 2.2. Jerusalem was
amidst heathenish Nations; Christ and his Apostles were among Scribes and
Pharisees, whose spirits were thorny: Hence take these inferences.

1 Then Gods people ought to take heed how they walk. Men who live, and walk
among briars and thorns, had need have their eyes in their heads, they may
otherwise be quickly entangled in the briars, and miserably scratched, Matthew.
10.16. be wise as Serpents, etc. they live among thorns.

2 Then it is not strange if Gods people be scratched sometimes by wicked men,
They will tear and rend their Names, states, Comforts, peace, privileges, etc.
David, Jeremy, Paul, were sufficiently scratched by such briars and thorns,
who so touches them, had need be fenced with iron, and the staff of a spear.

3 Then see a reason why the people of God cannot carry on the work, and things
of God with more speed, they dwell amongst thorns; and when thorns are in the
way, things move slowly. When good seed was sown, the thorns hindered the
growth of it. When Joshuah went about taking Ai, there was Achan a great thorn,
in the way; When Nehemiah was in the work of the Temple, Tobias and Sanballat
were thorns in the way. The motions of Parliament and Army, were not so
speedy, because they met with great thorns and brambles in their ways.

Obs. 2 The Church and people of God shall not always be among briars and
thorns: They shall have a time of freedom, There shall be no more a pricking
bryar and a grieving thorn, Ezekiel. 34.28. They shall no more be a prey to the
Heathen, etc. this was made good to the Jews in the letter after their return.
The Nations which had been thorns to them; the Lord destroyed. This Promise
referres also to the Gospel times, the Lord is making way for it now. When
enemies have power, strength, Counsel, are active and successeful, then they
are thorny and grievous; but the Lord is dis-appointing his Churches enemies,
and consuming them as briars and Thorns, Isa. 27.4.

This is matter of Comfort to the Church, that although she have been long
among briars, thorns, and has been much offended by them, yea, wounded, yet
there is a time she shall be freed from them, it is approaching and makes
haste, Luke 18.7, 8. the Israelites were freed from the Egyptians, and Lot from
the Sodomites, who were thorns, yea, terrible ones unto them.

This should draw out our spirits in Prayer unto the Lord, to hasten the time,
and that he would make good what he has promised, Isa. 55.13. Instead of the
thorn shall come up the fir tree, and instead of the bryar shall come up the
Mirtle-tree. Let us Pray earnestly, that God would give us fir-trees and
mirtle-trees, in the room of our briars and thorns. Good Magistrates, and good
Ministers, instead of those have been no better than thorns and briars unto us.

Obs. 3 Wicked men have ill thoughts of Gods people. They slight them. These
Briars and Thorns, the wicked, round about the house of Israel, despised them,
and scorned them, Psalm. 79.4. We are become a reproach to our neighbors, a
scorn and derision to them that are round about us. Wicked men are proud, the
ways of God are contrary unto them and their ways; Hence they despise his
ways, and those walk in them.

Verse. 25 Thus says the Lord God, when I shall have gathered the house of
Israel from the people among whom they are scattered, etc. This people of God,
the Jews, were scattered into the Eastern Countries over several Provinces of
the King of Babylon, and here the Lord promises to gather them out thereof, and
to return them to their own land.

And shall be sanctified in them in the sight of the Heathen. Of Sanctifying
was spoken in the 22. v. The Hebrew is, When I shall sanctifye my self, that
is, make known my self, by my judgments upon them for their sins, by seventy
years captivity, and cause the Heathen to confess that I am a just and
righteous God, which will be, when they shall see me gather them up again,
and bring them out with a strong hand, then they will say, he has not utterly
cast them off, though he has severely punished them. The words may be taken
passively, as here they are read, when I shall be sanctified in them, or by
them; when they shall see me remembering my Promises made unto them, and begin
to make way for their deliverance, then shall they praise my name, and rejoice
in me their God, and tell the heathens, God has not forgotten them.

Obs. 1 Gods people have no fixed, certain habitation in this world, but are
subject to scatterings; They were removed out of their land, carried into
Babylon; so the Church, Acts 8.1. was scattered throughout all the regions of
Judaea and Samaria. Heb. 11.37. They wandered about in sheeps-skins and
goat skins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented.

Obs. 2 When ever Gods people are scattered abroad in the world, he has a
care of them, and will sanctify his name in bringing them into a safe and happy
condition; they shall be brought into Canaan, that is, into the Church which
Canaan represents. As the Jews were gathered out of Babylon, and the Provinces
thereof, into their own land; so shall all the Elect be brought into the
Church of God, where is peace, safety, and confidence; where they shall find
God, an habitation, a vineyard, Isa. 11.10. The root of Jesse shall stand for
an Ensign of the people, to him shall the Gentiles seek, and his rest shall
be glorious, and v. 12. he shall set up an Ensign, etc. the Lord Christ was a
great gatherer, Luke 11.23.14, 16, 17, 21, 23.

Obs. 3 The End of Gods gathering his people out of their scattered condition
is, that they may sanctify him, and that he may be sanctified by them. Gods
power, faithfulness, and goodness, appear in his gathering and bringing them
out of enemies hands, and so way is made for his praise and honor* and that
before their enemies.

26 And they shall dwell safely therein, and shall build houses, and plant
vineyards, yea, they shall dwell with confidence, when I have executed
judgment upon all those, etc. The word for safely, and with confidence is the
same, Labetach, it notes safety, freedom from danger, fear, and inward
confidence, boldness. The Septuagint is, (...), which is somewhat short of the
meaning. The French is, Searement, surely, which is better, and reaches the
sense more fully.

Whether this was made good unto them at their return from Babylon is
questionable, for they were troubled with Sanballat, Tobias, and Geshem. The
workmen had a trowel in one hand, and a sword in the other, Nehem. 4.
Afterward Alexander the Great came, and filled all with fears, and they were
necessitated to admit him into their City. After this also, many of them were
carried away into Egypt by Ptolomy the Son of Lagus. In the Maccabees times,
they had as sharp and miserable wars as ever, and at last were brought under
by the Romans. Though sometimes they had quiet rest, as in the days of
Ptolomaeus Philadelphus, yet they had much trouble, great fears, wars, and
ruins. Some therefore understand this Prophesy of a spirtiual restoration by
Christ; who when he came in the flesh, made way for the coming in of all
Nations, to enjoy perfect peace in himself, according to Genesis 50.10. Unto him
shall the gathering of the people be, Nations shall flock to him. Hereupon said
the Lord Christ, Joh. 10.16. Other sheep I have which are not, etc. This
restoration began in Christ's days, and shall be perfected at his next
coming.

Obs. 1 The Lord will meet with, and cut off the enemies of his Church and
People, yea, all of them shall fare alike, when I shall have executed my
judgment upon those that despise them round about. Those that despise, contemn
and trouble the servants of God, judgments are their portion, they are thorns
and briars, and fire shall consume them. See Numb. 24.8. Isa. 41.11, 12.

Obs. 2 When God separates his people from the wicked, and plagues them for
their wronging his people, then shall they have Glorious times: they shall
dwell safely, build houses, plant vineyards, dwell securely, have confidence,
etc.

Obs. 3 The Lords scope in comforting his people with sweet Promises, in
delivering them from their enemies, and bestowing choice mercies, is, that they
should acknowledge, profess him to be their God, and praise him for his
goodness to them: They shall know that I am the, etc.

CHAP. XXIX.
Verse. 1 In the tenth year in the tenth month, in the twelfth day of the
month: The Word of the Lord came unto me, saying, 2 Son of Man, set thy face
against Pharaoh King of Egypt, and Prophesy against him, and against all Egypt.
3 Speak and say, Thus says the Lord God, behold I am against thee Pharaoh King
of Egypt, the great dragon that lies in the midst of his rivers, which has
said, my river is mine own, and I have made it for my self. 4 But I will put
hooks in thy chaws, and I will cause the fish of thy Rivers to stick unto thy
seals, and I will bring thee up out of the midst of thy rivers, and all the
fish of thy rivers shall stick unto thy scales. 5 And I will leave thee thrown
into the wilderness, thee and all the fish of thy rivers, thou shall fall upon
the open fields, thou shall not be brought together, nor gathered, I have given
thee for meat to the beasts of the field, and to the fowls of the heaven. 6
And all the Inhabitants of Egypt, shall know that I am the Lord, because they
have been a staff of reed to the house of Israel. 7 When they took hold of
thee by thy hand, thou did break and rent all their shoulder, and when they
leaned upon thee, thou brakest and made all their loins to be at a stand.
EZekiel having Prophesied against the Ammonites, Moabites, Edomites,
Philistines, Tiryans, and Sydonians, in the four Antecedent Chapters; in this,
and in the three following, he Prophesies against the Egyptians. In this
Chapter take notice.

1 Of an Inscription or preface, v. 1, 2. 2 Of a Commination against the King
of Egypt, the Land, and people thereof, from the 2. to the 13. 3 A Promise of
restoring Egypt again, v. 13, 14, 15, 16. 4 A Prophesy of giving the land of
Egypt unto Nebuchadnezzar, from the 16. to the 21. 5 A Promise of mercy to the
Jews, v. 21.
1 In the tenth year, in the tenth month, in the twelfth day of the Month.
This Prophesy was given to Ezekiel in the tenth year of Jehoiachins captivity,
six months and odd days before the final destruction of Jerusalem, Jerem.
39.2. In the 26. chapt. Our Prophet tells you of a Prophesy he had in the
eleventh year of Jehoiachins captivity, for he reckons upon that account,
Ezekiel. 1.1, 2. and here he mentions one he had the year before, so that the
order of time is not observed, but inverted. The reasons hereof are made by
some to be these, 1 Because Tyrus and Zidon was nearer Jerusalem than Egypt
was, and therefore the Prophet respected the place rather than the time. 2
Because Tyrus and Zidon were to be destroyed before Egypt. 3 Because the
Prophet had another Prophesy concerning Egypt in the seven and twentieth year
of the captivity, v. 17. and therefore thought meet to join them together.

2 Set thy face against Pharaoh King of Egypt. Of setting the face toward or
against places or persons, occasion was given to speak, chap. 28.21. chap.
25.2. chap. 20.46. and chap. 6.2. by this posture he declared whither his
Prophesy tended. He was far from Egypt being in Babylon, but looking toward
it fixedly, was an argument he had something to say concerning it.

Pharaoh. This was a name common to the Kings of Egypt, as Caesar was to the
Roman Emperors, and signifies a King, Shindl. in verbo (...)
in the Old Egyptian Language as Josephus, says. Some make it to signify
denegans eum, denying him, because Pharaoh denied God. Martinius Leigh.
Others interpret it free, because he was absolute of himself; but rather it
was nomen dignitatis, a name of honor, given unto them. In the Word you have
mention of Pharaoh-Necho, 2 King. 23.29. that is, Pharaoh the lame, and of
Pharaoh-Hophrah, Jerem. 44.30. whom Herodotus calls Apries, and is the Pharaoh
here meant.

Egypt. It is a famous Region of Africa, so called either from Aegyptus the son
of Belus, or from the blackness of the river Nilus, which formerly was called
Sichor, that is, black. The Grecians understanding this, they in their
language, called it, (...), which signifies black, whence in time the land came
to be called Egypt. Martinius.
In the Old Testament, it is always called the land of Misraim, from Misraim
the son of Ham; for of this Misraim came the Egyptians. It is a land very
fruitful, Publicum orbis horreum, The Granary of the world. Macrobius gives it
this honor, to be the mother of Arts, it had famous schools; especially at
Alexandria, but abounded with superstition and idolatry. The Egyptians were the
first, says Polydore Virgil, that set up Altars, Temples, Images, Lib 1. de
rerum inventione. c. 5.
and sacrificed to idol gods, and taught strangers to do so.

Prophesy against him, and against all Egypt. These words show the latitude and
extent of his Prophesy, it was not to be against the King alone, or his
Nobles, but against them, and all the people. He was to Prophesy against great
and small.

Obs. 1 The Lord would have men mind the time when he sets his Prophets on
work, and that punctually; the year, Month, and day, are here recorded when he
gave out his word to Ezekiel, that the same might be observed by all it
concerned. The Jews trusted much to Egypt, and the Kings thereof. The Egyptians
were haughty, and self-confident; now God records the time of his Commissioning
Ezekiel to Prophesy against the King of Egypt, and the Egyptians, that the Jews
hearing of their ruin, destinated from such a time, they might rely no longer
upon them, and that the Egyptians might consider what to do being in such
eminent danger, for their treachery to the Jews, and confidence in what they
had.

Obs. 2 That the servants of God must impartially dispense the word committed
unto them. Set thy face against Pharaoh King of Egypt, and prophesy against
him, and against all Egypt: He must neither fear nor flatter any, of what
condition or rank soever, but declare the mind of God, and denounce his
judgments indifferently toward all. When Prophets, and the Sons of Prophets
have to do with great ones, they are apt to be discouraged, and to faulter in
their work, which they ought not to do, considering God who sends them is
greater than the greatest. Jeremy had something of this nature in him, and
therefore see how God rouses him, and steels his spirit, chap. 1.17, 18. Gird
up thy loins and arise, and speak unto them all that I command thee, be not
dismayed at their faces, least I confound thee before them; for behold, I have
made thee this day a defenced City, and an iron pillar, and brazen walls,
against the whole land, against the Kings of Judah, against the Princes
thereof, against the Priests thereof, and against the people of the land, and
they shall fight against thee; Jeremy had high and low, all sorts of men, yea,
all men against him, yet he must dispense the truth, and all the truth
impartially, not fearing the faces of any, least he should be confounded.

3 Behold, I am against thee Pharaoh King of Egypt. The words may be read,
Behold I am above thee: thou art above others, and think none to be above
thy self, but I am above thee, and being above thee in power and greatness, I
am against thee for thy wickedness. I that am God, the King of Kings, that
shake heaven and earth at my pleasure, that tumble down Kings from their
thrones and seats, I, even I, am against thee.

The great dragon that lies in the midst of his Rivers. The Hebrew word for
Dragon, is Tannin, which Lamen. 4.3. is rendered a Sea Monster, in Job 7.12. a
whale, in Isa. 51.9. a Dragon, and so here, it notes monstrous, and great
creatures in the Sea or at Land, and according to the subject matter, it is to
be understood of the Whale, Dragon, or Crocodile. The Septuagint, Montanus,
Vulgar, Vatablus, and our English, have it Dragon. Junius, Piscator, and
Lavater, a great Whale. Some Interpreters make it the Crocodile, which is like
a Dragon or Serpent, and lives in the Egyptian fens and waters, chiefly in the
river of Nile, and may not unfitly be called the Whale or Dragon thereof.
Pharaoh is likened unto this Dragon or Crocodile.

1 The Crocodile is the chiefest and greatest of all that moved in the Egyptian
waters, no fish, no Serpent, comparable to it, so Pharaoh was the chiefest and
greatest among all the Egyptians.

2 The Crocodile is cruel and ravenous, seeking his prey both in the waters,
Dentium and unguium immanitate armatum est animal. Franzius.
and on the land, being armed with sharp claws and teeth, and some of them can
swallow an entire heifer, as Sands reports in his travailes: So the Egyptian
Pharaohs were cruel and ravenous; Did not Pharaoh command the mid-wives to kill
all the Males of the Hebrews at their birth? and when they would not do it, did
not he charge his people to drown them? Exodus 1. and did he not seek his prey
in the red Sea, when he pursued the Israelites, going through it.

3 The Crocodile is subtle, and uses cunning ways to get his prey; he will
lie as if asleep and dead, with his mouth open, to deceive the birds, and
passengers. Sometimes also he fills his mouth with water, and spouts it out in
the way, where beasts and men do pass, that so it being slippery they may fall,
Franzius in Historia animalum.
and become a prey to him. So the Egyptian Pharaohs were subtle and used much
cunning to make a prey of the people, especially, the Jews, Exodus 1.10. Come
let us deal wisely with them, and how cunning was he in calling forth his
Magitians, to dis-credit the Miracles of Moses and Aaron? chap. 7. and 8.

That lies in the midst of his Rivers. The Hebrew for Rivers is jeorim, and
notes such as are made by the Art and help of man, cut out of some great river
for to water the land. In Egypt they had seldom any rain, but cut Rivers out
of Nilus, by which the land was watered according to that, Deuteronomy. 11.10. where
Canaan is said not to be like Egypt, where they sowed their seed, and watered
it with the foot, that is, they dug trenches and little rivers, and so
watered Egypt, by the help of their feet, but Canaan was watered from heaven.
The Dragons or Crocodiles, lay lurking in these securely, and so did Pharaoh in
his Kingdom, which was full of artificial Rivers.

My River is mine own, I have made it for my self. The words in the Hebrew
sound thus, Mihi fluvius meus, and ego feci me, To me is my River, and I have
made my self. The Septuagint is, (...), Mine are the Rivers, and I have made
them: that is, mine is Nilus, and all the aquaeducts, or rivulets, cut out of
it; but if we take the words as they be in the Original, the sense may be
this, To me is my River, its instead of clouds, rain, heaven, God. I have
Nilus, which makes my land as fruitful, comfortable, and beneficial unto me,
as all those do the lands of others; if they owe ought to them, I owe as much
to Nilus. If we take the words as translated, My River is mine own, that is,
its so mine that none can take it from me, or hinder me of the benefit of it;
here he showed his Pride, Arrogance, and vain-confidence, for God had in a
former Pharaohs time, made Nilus useless unto them in Egypt, Genesis 41.55. when
the seven years famine was, and he could do it again.

Those words, I have made it for my self, must not be sensed as if he made
Nilus, for that had its being and flowings many hundred years before, and the
spring of it lay unfound out: but the meaning is; I have by my power, wisdom,
and industry, made it advantageous to my self and people. I have enriched them
and my self thereby, and so furnished and secured my Kingdom, by means of it,
that I shall neither stand in need of, Apriae hec dicitur fuisse sententia ne
deum quidem ullum posse ipsum de regno suo dejicere adeo firm sibi ipsi
constabilivisse illud videbatur. Herodot. in Euterpe.
nor fear any. Herodotus says of this King, whom he calls Apries, that it was
his usual saying, no God could move him out of his Kingdom, he had so
established it.

Obs. 1 God is an open and professed enemy unto wicked Kings; He proclaims war
against them, be they never so great, Behold, I am against thee Pharaoh King
of Egypt. Few are the Kings which abuse not their authority, they lift up
themselves, oppress the people, oppose the interest of God, and therefore he
is a declared adversary unto them, Jer. 25.18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26.
You may see, what a multitude of Kings the Lord sends the cup of fury unto, and
draws out the sword against; there was scarcely one good King at that time upon
the face of the earth. God was against them all. Its a dreadful thing for any
King to have God denounce war against him, he must needs be conquered, and
brought to nothing; for God is the Lord of Hosts, armed with such power and
Majesty as that there is no withstanding him, Isa. 40.10. He brings Princes
to nothing; when they are wicked he will not spare them, though they be as
great as Whales, as Cruel as Dragons, and as cunning as Crocodiles.

Obs. 2 Wicked Kings are resemblances of Satan. Pharaoh is here called the
Great Dragon, and so is Satan, Rev. 12.9. The Great Dragon was cast out, that
old Serpent, called the Devil, and Satan. Dragons are dreadful, subtle, and
cruel; so are Tyrants, so is the Devil. The former Pharaohs were Dragons, and
so called, Psalm. 74.13. Isa. 51.9. they were enemies to the people of God, so
are all wicked Kings, so is Satan. What were all the persecuting Emperors, but
Dragons? they were lively representations of the Devil, that Great red Dragon;
and so are all that tread in their steps.

Obs. 3 Princes abounding with outward things, grow secure, arrogant, and
confident. Pharaoh lay as a Dragon in the midst of his Rivers, he was secure,
fed upon the prey, and said arrogantly enough, and with too much confidence, my
River is mine own: I have water sufficient in Nilus for the watering of Egypt,
I need beg no rain of God, let him give his rain to whom he will, and I am so
well fortified by my Rivers, that I fear no power to dispossess me thereof, I
am happy, and who can make me miserable? Here you have the true picture and
character of this Egyptian Pharaoh, and in him of all wicked Kings, who in
their prosperity forgot God, promise much safety to themselves, and trust in an
arm of flesh.

4 But I will put hooks in thy Chaws. Here begins Gods judgments upon this
confident King. God would deal with him, as men do with some great fish, when
the hook is in his jaws, they draw him out of the waters to the dry land, where
he dies: So God would by an occasion, draw Pharaoh out of Egypt into another
land, and with him a great Army of the Egyptians, where they should all perish.
The occasion was this, as Junius relates it, out of Herodotus, Adiciam or
Ariciam King of the Lybians, had put himself under the protection of the King
of Egypt, because the Cyreneans had invaded some part of Lybia, and had spoiled
King Aricranes of his Government, hereupon Pharaoh was provoked to lead out an
Army, in Agrum Cyreniacum, which was the hook God put in his chaws.

The word for Hooks is Chachim from Choach, a Thorn, and metaphorically an
hook, such as men bait to catch fish withal, Job 41.1. Can thou draw out
Leviathan with an hook? the whale was too big to be taken with such an Hook,
though other fishes were not. God had a hook to take and draw out the Egyptian
Dragon.

I will cause the fish of thy River to stick unto thy scales. Pharaoh being
likened unto the Crocodile, or Sea-Dragon, here his Princes, Nobles, and
people, are called fish, and likened unto them for their multitude and
dispersion into all parts, and aptness to be devoured one by another. These
should adhere unto Pharaoh as the scales do unto a fish. He had called Nilus
his River, and its said here, The fish of thy River. The word for scales is
kaskkesheth from kashah, which signifies difficult, and the radical letters are
doubled, propter vehementem geminationem squamarum, which do so tenatiously
cleave together, Avenarius.
that its very hard to pierce them. The scales of Pharaoh were the Arms that
he bare, 1 Samuel 17.5. the coat of male which Goliath had, on was shiron
kaskassim lorica squamarum, a brigandine, or coat of scales, that is, made like
the scales of a fish. Such an one its probable Pharaoh had on, and all his
people in their arms suitable followed him.

I will bring thee up out of the midst of thy Rivers. He thought himself so
secure in Egypt, as that no danger, no mischief could befall him. Egypt is so
fenced by nature, having the Sea on one side, the vast desert on the other, on
the right hand such craggy mountains, and on the left such Fennes, as that its
judged inaccessible, but however it was in it self, yet God says here, I will
bring thee up out of the midst of thy Rivers, I will draw thee out into thine
enemies land, and there thou shall fall.

5 And I will leave thee, thrown into the Wilderness. The Hebrew is, I will
leave thee in the wilderness. Natash signifies to cast off; so to leave, as to
have no care of what is left. God would bring this proud confident King into
the Cyrenean wilderness, and there leave him to be a prey unto the enemy,
when he and his Army were spread over the wilderness, then they should be
deserted of God, and left to spoil.

Thee, and all the fish of thy Rivers. As a fish drawn out of the water, left
upon the land, dies, and becomes a prey, so should the King of Egypt, and the
Egyptians.

Thou shall fall upon the open fields, thou shall not be brought together, nor
gathered. Thine Army shall be so beaten, routed, and overthrown, as no one
part of it shall be joined to another, there shall be no rallying, no
recruiting; no gathering up for burial, but all shall be meat for the beasts
of the field, and for the fowls of Heaven. Some fishes when they are drawn out
of the waters, are taken up, much use is made of them; others are thrown away,
Mat. 13.48. but here they were so bad, that all should be thrown to the
beasts, and birds of prey.

Obs. 1 When God is wroth with Princes and people, he makes and takes occasions
to execute his judgments upon them. Pharaoh and his people, had sinned greatly
against God, and he stirred up the Cyreneans to invade their neighbor
country, the Lybians. Whereupon, he and his are drawn out to war, and fall
thereby. He and his thought to live securely in Egypt, but God had hooks to
draw them out, and judgments to inflict upon them being so drawn out. The
Elder Pharaoh in Moses days, having greatly provoked God, by deteining the
Jews in Egypt, God made an occasion, by dividing the waters of the red Sea, for
him to follow them, and then he, and his being in the red Sea, took occasion
to be avenged on him, by causing the waters to swallow up him and all his
host, Exodus 14. God drew Zerah, with his huge host of one thousand thousand and
three hundred Chariots, out of Ethiopia unto Maresha, which was a City in the
Tribe of Judah, Joshuah 15.44. and there he smote the Ethiopians, and
overthrew them, 2 Chronicles. 14. God made Ramoth in Gilead an hook to draw out
wicked Ahab, to war against the Syrians, and when he was there, he was slain,
and his army wholly routed, 1 King. 22. God wants not hooks to draw Leviathans,
Dragons, and Crocodiles, out of their holes, fens, or rivers, nor swords to
pierce them when they are drawn out. He had hooks for Hamilton, and the late
King of Scots, to draw them into England, and judgments to inflict upon them
being come forth, for their iniquities. Let great and small take heed how they
offend the Lord, he has hooks enough, and can make new if he want them, to
drag sinners out of their lurking holes, and vials of wrath to pour out upon
them, being haled out.

Obs. 2 In those actions men do freely, the wise providence of God, acts
powerfully, and accomplisheth his designs. Pharaoh and his subjects, go out
freely to war against their enemies, yet God had a hook in their chaws, and
drew them toth at work. Rhehoboam freely refused the counsel of the wise men,
and freely followed the counsel of the young men, yet Gods hand was in these
actions, his hook was in his chaws, 1 King. 12.15. The cause was from the Lord.
Rhehoboam carried on freely his own design, and God powerfully carried on his,
though Rhehoboam discerned it not, neither aimed at it. God sent the Assyrians
against the Hypocritical Jews, he charged him to take the spoil, and tread
them down like mire in the streets. He came freely, though Gods hook were in
his nostrils, he came to do his own will, not Gods, that he aimed not at, for
he meant not so, his heart did not think so Isa. 10.6, 7. yet Gods providence
overruled so, that he did the work of God. This is a great mystery, all wicked
men act freely, drive on their own interests, yet God powerfully moves in these
actions, brings to pass, his own purposes, and counsels, and that without sin.

Obs. 3 The Counsels and strength of Princes and Armies, comes to nothing,
where God does not assist but desert. I will leave thee thrown into the
wilderness, thee and all the fish of thy River, thou shall fall. Pharaoh was a
great Dragon, wise, and subtle, he had wise Counselors, strong Soldiers, a
great Army, but neither their Counsel nor strength stood them in stead; when
God had drawn them into the field, he left them, and they fell. Humane wisdom
and strength, can do nothing without God. Saul had a great Army, all Israel
were gathered together, to fight against the Philistims, but did they prevail?
no, they fled, and fell down before their enemies, and what was the reason?
Saul tells you, 1 Samuel 28.15. The Lord is departed from me, he is neither
with me, nor mine Army, all Israel can do nothing against uncircumcised
Philistims, when God had forsaken them. Jeroboam had an Army of eight hundred
thousand men mighty men of valor, Abijah meets him with an Army of four hundred
thousand, even half so many, and slew of Jeroboams Army five hundred thousand.
They were strong men on that side, and two to one, yet more fell by an hundred
thousand than Abijahs Army consisted of. And what was the cause hereof? 2 Chronicles. 13.3, 12. The cause was, God was with them, Behold God himself is with
us, for our Captain, he guides us, and girds us with strength said Abijah.
Jeroboam by his golden Calves, had driven God from him, so then, where God is
not, there can be no success, 1 Samuel 2.9. by strength shall no man prevail;
Let men have strong horses, strong Arms, strong bodies, strong Counsels,
strong Armies, strong treasures, if they have not El-shaddai, the strong
Almighty God with them, all their strengths will prove weakness, we have seen
this made good in our days most eminently.

Obs. 4 God in his just judgments brings Princes and Armies who confide in an
arm of flesh, to open shame and utter ruin; Thou shall fall in the open
fields, thou shall not be gathered nor brought together, thou shall lie
unburied and be meat for beasts and fowls. This Egyptian great Dragon, and all
the fish of his Rivers were such as God cast out for naught, and gave to be
meat to Kites, Crows, Vultures, Dogs, Swine, and wild beasts, their shame was
open, their end was miserable. Pharaoh that entreated the Israelites so
cruelly, did not God bring him to open shame, and his great Army? did he not
drown this Dragon, and all adhered to him in the deeps? did he not give their
Carcasses to be meat to the Sea-Dragons, and Sea-Leviathans? Absalom and his
Army met with shame, scorn, and misery enough, 2 Samuel 18. Jehoiakim was buried
with the burial of an Ass, Jerem. 22.19. that is, he had no burial, but was
cast out, to shame, scorn, and feeding of birds, and beasts.

6 And all the inhabitants of Egypt shall know that I am the Lord. In this
verse the Event of the former judgment upon Pharaoh and his Army, is laid
down, together with the cause thereof; the Event is this, the Egyptians shall
see, that the Counsels and confidences of Princes are vain, that they are not
Masters of designs, to carry them on, and make them successeful according to
their minds and wills, but that the great God of heaven and earth overrules
all, blasting or prospering, the greatest undertakings at his pleasure, and so
shall acknowledge him to be the Lord.

Because they have been a staff of reed to the house of Israel. Here the cause
is rendered of Gods so dealing with Pharaoh and his Army, viz. because they were
unfaithful to the house of Israel, and prejudicial. The word for staff is,
Mishneneth, from (...) to lean upon, because men that are weak, do lean and
rest upon their staves, and metaphorically its put for stay, hope, confidence,
2 Samuel 22.19. The Lord was my stay, its Mishan, or Mishgnan, my staff, that
is, my stay, my hope, my confidence.

The Jewish state being feeble in its latter days, entered into Covenant with
the Egyptians, and leaned upon them, as on a staff, for help against its own
weakness, and others violence, but Egypt proved a staff of reed.

The word for Reed is (...) kaneh, whence our English word, a Cane; Egypt did
abound with reeds and Canes, especially the banks of Nilus, where its probable
the little Ark which contained Moses was laid, for its said, Exodus 2.3. she
laid it in the flaggs by the rivers brink. Flaggs and reeds did grow there. The
Egyptians here, and in other places, are compared unto them.

1 Reeds have nothing solid or substantial in them; They are hollow, empty
things, or some slight matter in them, if you trust to them they will deceive
you. Such were the Kings of Egypt, and the Egyptians, they had no solidity in
them, Isa. 19.11. Surely the Princes of Zoan are fools, the Counsel of the
wise Counselors of Pharaoh is become brutish: their Counsels were not solid,
they had no faithfulness in them, they often promised to help the Jews but did
not, they failed them, Isa. 30.2. all the strength of Egypt, was but as a
shadow, their help was vain, and to no purpose, verse. 7. and its said Pharaoh
King of Egypt is but a noise, Jer. 46.17. like a hollow Cane without substance.
The Jews expected help from Egypt, they leaned upon Pharaoh and his forces as
on a staff, but he and they deceived him; so that they complained at last,
saying, Our eyes failed for our vain help, in our watching, we have watched for
a Nation that could not save us, Lamen. 4.17. they earnestly waited for help,
they relied wholly upon Egypt, and Egypt did wholly fail them.

2 A Reed is a weak thing and blows this way and that way as the wind blows;
Mat. 11.7. Baculus fuit in premissione sed arundimens in solutione, Pintus.
What went ye out into the wilderness to see? a reed shaken with the wind, an
inconstant, weak, flexible thing; John was no such man, but the Egyptians were,
Isa. 31.3. The Egyptians are men, and not God, they are mutable, uncertain,
turning every way for their own advantage, they made leagues with the Jews,
held correspondence with them, and at their pleasure violated them again.

3 A Reed Easily breaks, and when it breaks, it indangers those that lean upon
it: The splinters and shivers run into the hand and shoulder, verse. 7. and so
non solum deludit, sed etiam laedit, it not only deceives, but damnifies; such
were the Egyptians, they drew the Jews into sinful leagues with them, and by
that means to sinful Marriages, and sinful Worship with them. Lavater tells us
that the Egyptians persuaded Zedekiah to break with Nebuchadnezzar, unto whom
he was tributary, promising him help to recover former liberty, which Zedekiah
attempting, proved ruin to him, and the whole Nation; so that the Egyptians
were a piercing reed unto them. Rabshakeh knew what the Egyptians were, when
he said to Hezekiah, Behold, thou trustest upon the staff of this bruised
reed, even upon Egypt, on which if a man lean, it will go into his hand, and
pierce it; so is Pharaoh King of Egypt unto all that trust in him, 2 King. 18.21

7 When they took hold of thee by thy hand. When the Jews looked toward Egypt,
and sent their Ambassadors thither for help, Ezekiel. 17.7, 15. they took them by
the hand, and the Egyptians promised to do great things for them, and they came
with an Army out of Egypt to help them against Nebuchadnezzar, Jer. 37.5. from
whom they had solicited the Jews to revolt, but what was the issue? it follows
in the next words.

Thou did break and rent all their shoulder. Nebuchadnezzar being before
Jerusalem, raised his siedge, and hasted to encounter with the Egyptian Army,
which returning back into Egypt, caused Nebuchadnezzar to return to the siedge,
which he continued without any further interruption by the Egyptians, till he
took and burnt the City, and carried away the Jews to Babylon, Jer. 37.5, 7, 8.
they leaned upon Pharaoh and his Army, to secure them against Nebuchadnezzar,
but he failed them, and so brake and rent their shoulder, that is, did them
much harm, and grieved them exceedingly; as a man that leans upon a staff, and
it breaking runs into his flesh, shatters his shoulder bone in pieces, he is
much damnified and grieved.

And when they leaned upon thee thou brakest. The Hebrew word for breaking
here, is, Tishshaber, the former terutz from razaz (...) which signifies to
shake, bruise, or break, but not altogether. Shabar notes a total breaking, a
fragmentation, breaking into pieces, the sense is, the Egyptians did utterly
fail, and disappoint the Jews, who relied altogether upon them.

And made all their loins to be at a stand. The Septuagint translate the
words thus, (...), thou have broken all their loins. The Vulgar is,
Dissolvisti omnes renes eorum, thou have loosened all their loins, thou have
filled them with fears and faintings, and caused their strength to fail, but
our Translation is according to the Hebrew, if we read the words thus, and
made all their loins to stand, thou have made them to withdraw their
confidence in thee, finding thee a broken staff, and to trust unto their own
strength, and stand upon their own legs, they gird up their own loins, look
to themselves, and trust no more to thee.

Obs. 1 God by his judgments makes himself known to Heathens, and to
acknowledge him to be another kind of God, than their Idol gods. And all the
inhabitants of Egypt shall know that I am the Lord; That I rule, and overruled
all actions, and do whatever I please in heaven or earth.

Obs. 2 The ruin of Princes and their Armies, is their sins and wickedness.
Pharaohs pride and perfidiousnesse, caused the Lord to leave and overthrow him
and his in the wilderness, to give them to be meat to the beasts of the field
and fowls of heaven; he thought no power could overpower him, he was
unfaithful to the house of Israel, and deceived them, trusting to him for aid,
and because of these things, the Lord poured out vials of wrath upon him.
Zedekiahs perfidiousnesse brought sword and fire upon Jerusalem, blindness,
captivity, and chains upon himself.

Obs. 3 Its neither pleasing to God, nor safe for Gods People, to rely upon
Heathens, and wicked ones for help in their straits and fears. The house of
Israel relied upon the Egyptians, and this pleased not the Lord, neither was
safe for them, Isa. 31.1. Woe to them that go down to Egypt for help, and stay
on horses, and trust in Charets, because they are many, and in horsemen because
they are very strong: but they look not to the holy one of Israel, neither seek
the Lord; the Jews looked to the strength of Egypt, and not to the strength of
God, and therefore a woe is denounced against them, God was provoked thereby,
and he would bring evil upon them, and says, that the helped and helpers
should both fall and fail together* verse. 3. yea, he tells the Jews, chap.
30.3. that the strength of Pharaoh should be their shame, and their trust in
the shadow of Egypt, their confusion. When Asa relied on the King of Syria,
and not on God. Hanani the Prophet told him he had done foolishly, and that
thence forward he should have war, 2 Chronicles. 16.7, 9. Gods people should trust
in God alone, who is all-sufficient for them, and not in an arm of flesh.
Idolaters, profane, and wicked ones, are seldom cordial to Gods people, how
can they help the Church of God in earnest, which they hate most heartily. The
Egyptians loved not the Jews, and therefore they smarted, for seeking their
help, and trusting to them for help.

Obs. 4 That those mediums men expect comfort and help from, do often wound them
and prove their ruin. The house of Israel leans upon Pharaoh and the Egyptians
for relief and aid, against the Babylonians, and what did they? break and rend
all their shoulder, and dissolve their loins; they failed them, and this
proved the renting of the Jewish shoulder, the breaking of them in pieces, and
total dissolving of their Kingdom; they were to them as a staff, to a weak,
infirm man, he leans hard upon it; that suddenly breaks, runs into his arm
and shoulder, and so falling down wounded, he rises no more, that he trusted
to, wounded and ruined him. This falls out often, that men's confid^nces are their
confusions. The things they trust to, and lean upon, are thorns unto them.
Ahaz places his hope in Tiglath-pilnezer; when the Edomites invaded Judah, he
is sent for, comes, and what then? he distressed him, and strengthened him
not, 2 Chronicles. 28.20. he was baculus arundineus unto him. Benhadad had great
confidence in Hazael, but he proved his ruin, 2 King. 8.8, 15. he made a prey
of him and his Kingdom at once. In Obadiahs prophesy, v. 7. its said, the men
of thy bread have laid a wound under thee, that is, those Edom was familiar
with, confided in looked for much comfort from, even they, wounded her, they
laid snares, and traps for her, they became instruments of her ruin.

Obs. 5 Dis-appointments by, and harms from others, do make men wary, and look
to themselves. When the Egyptian reed brake and wounded the Jews, then their
loins were made to stand, then they recalled their spirits from the Egyptians,
and set themselves to secure themselves against the Babylonish forces. While
men trust to others, they are usually negligent in their counsels and actions,
but when they see others fail them, and feel they have wounded them, then they
muster up their spirits, then they consult, watch, and act more vigorously.

Verse. 8 Therefore thus says the Lord God, behold, I will bring a sword upon
thee, and cut off man and beast out of thee. 9 And the land of Egypt shall be
desolate and waste, and they shall know that I am the Lord: because he has
said, the river is mine, and I have made it. 10 Behold, Therefore I am against
thee, and against thy rivers, and I will make the land of Egypt utterly waste
and desolate from the tower of Syene, even unto the borders of Ethiopia. 11 No
foot of man shall pass thorough it, nor foot of beast shall pass thorough it,
neither shall it be inhabited forty years. 12 And I will make the land of Egypt
desolate, in the midst of the Countries that are desolate, and her Cities
among the Cities that are laid waste, shall be desolate forty years, and I will
scatter the Egyptians among the Nations, and will disperse them through the
Countries. In these verses you have clearly laid before you these particulars.

1 The judgment God would bring upon Egypt, viz. the sword, v. 8.

2 The Effect or Event of this sword, utter vastation, v. 8, 9. and dispersion,
v. 12.

3 The Extent of this vastation, v. 10.

4 The Duration of the same, v. 11, 12. which is forty years.

5 One special cause thereof repeated, v. 9. which is the pride of the King of
Egypt.

8 I will bring a sword upon thee. Sword in Scripture, imports sometimes power,
as Exodus 18.4. God delivered me from the sword of Pharaoh, says Moses, that
is, from the power of Pharaoh: sometimes, great sorrows, as Luke 2.35. a sword
shall pierce through thine own soul, that is, the Mockings, reproaches, and
evil usages; Mary and Christ should meet with in the world, should be as a
sword in the heart of Mary, and fill her with sorrows: sometimes its put for
the word of God, as Ephesians. 6.17. the sword of the spirit, which is the word of
God, which in the Grammatical construction, may refer to spirit, but then the
sense is not so clear, for what then shall be the sword? its better therefore
to read those words, (...), which thing, is the word of God: sometimes for
division, as Matthew. 10.34. I came not to send peace but a sword, that is,
division, so Christ expresses it, in Luke 12.51. and sometimes war, and the
Evils attend it, so its to be taken here. God would bring the Babylonian Army,
Nebuchadnezzar with all instruments of war, upon Pharaoh, and his land.

And cut off man and beast out of thee. God would deal severely with Egypt, not
only man should be cut off, but even the beasts also. They had not sinned, and
God did not punish the beast in destroying of them, Dum jumenta tolluntur, non
tam ipsa puniuntur; quam homo little privatione plectitur. Paraeus.
but he punished their owners, in depriveing them of their beasts, who had made
them serve their lusts. Egypt abounded with men and Cattle, and the Egyptians
being wicked, and given to luxury, God brought that sad judgment upon them,
viz. the sword, which spared neither man nor beast.

9 The land of Egypt shall be desolate and waste. Egypt was a fruitful and
pleasant land, flowing with Milk and Honey, Numb. 16.33. but here the Lord
threatened to make it desolate, and waste. The Hebrew is, it shall be for a
desert, and a reproach, the wars should consume all, Cities. Villages, men,
beast, so that it should be a reproachful wilderness? stripped of all its glory
and ornaments.

And they shall know that I am the Lord. When I shall have brought in a potent
enemy upon them, and laid all waste, then they shall know there is one greater
than Pharaoh, and the Egyptians, to whom belongs the right of lands and rivers.

Because he has said the River is mine, and I have made it. Here the Cause is
specified, why the Lord would deal so severely with Egypt, because Pharaoh was
so proud and arrogated so much to himself, he challenges Nilus to be his, and
that he by his Art and industry had made it so beneficial to all Egypt. These
words were spoken to in the third verse.

10 I am against thee, and against thy rivers. In the third verse its said,
Behold I am against thee Pharaoh King of Egypt, and here I am against thee, and
thy Rivers, he was proud of, and confident in his rivers, that they would
fertilize his land, and secure him from enemies, but God was against him and
them, and disappointed his confidences.

I will make the land of Egypt utterly waste. The Hebrew is, Lechorvoth choreu,
The solitudes of solitariness, or the wastings of waste, that is, exceedingly
waste, there shall be nothing considerable left therein, it shall be as a dry
wilderness.

From the Tower of Syene, even unto the border of Aethiopia. Solinus makes
Syene to be in the front of Egypt, between Nilus and the Red Sea, but others
find it to be in the utmost parts of Egypt Southward, five thousand furlongs
above Alexandria. Pliny reports, under the Tropic of Cancer, where, at midday
of the Solstice, bodies have no shaddows. Sands also in his Travailes, Pliny
nature. histor. l. 2. c. 73
places it above Thebes, and under the Tropic of Cancer, affirming that there
was a Well of marvailous depth in it, which was filled with light at the summer
Solstice. Sands trav. l. 2 mihi p. 111.
Its now called Asna. Bonfrerius says, its a City of Egypt, in extremitate
Thebaidis and confinio Ethiopiae, in the utmost part of Thebais, and in the
borders of Ethiopia. In Hebrew the word is, Seuneh, in the Septuagint Sune,
therein was a Tower to defend from enemies they bordered upon, or for other
uses.

Even to the border of Ethiopia. These words will not afford good sense, so we
take Ethiopia as it is commonly taken, for if the desolation were but from
Syene to Ethiopia, that was inconsiderable, they being near together, yea, so
near that Syene disterminated them. Its improper to say, England shall be
destroyed from Barwick to Scotland. The word in Hebrew for Ethiopia, is Cush,
which in sacred Scripture does not always note Ethiopia in Africa, though
frequently it does, for Genesis 2.13. The name of the second river is Gihon, which
there is said to compass the whole land of Ethiopia, or Cush, this cannot be
the African Ethiopia; for Gihon ran not that way, it was the Oriental Ethiopia,
of which Moses wife was, Numb. 12.1. Miriam and Aaron spoke against Moses,
because of the Ethiopian woman whom he had married. The Hebrew is, the
Cushite, this woman was Zipporah, the daughter of Jethro, the Son of Revel the
Midianite, Exodus 2.15, 18.21. chap. 3.1. so then the Midianites were the
Oriental Cushites, or Ethiopians of Asia, of this sort its probable were those
Ethiopians that came against Asa, 2 Chronicles. 14.9. Zerah the Ethiopian came with
one thousand thousand, it had been too far a journey, for so many to have
marched out of the African Ethiopia. Tostat. upon the place says, the
Ethiopians dwelt not only in Africa, but in Asia also. Torncellus and others,
make this Ethiopia out of which Zerah came, to be the land of Midian. The word
Cush says Junius upon the second of Genesis, comprehends the three Arabiaes,
both the Ethiopiaes, and all the Meridian coast. The sense of our Prophet is,
that all Egypt should be laid waste, even from Syene, in the borders of the
African Ethiopia, to Arabia and Midian, which are Cush, viz. the Oriental
Ethiopia.

11 No foot of man shall pass thorough it, nor foot of beast shall, etc. By
these and such like speeches, great desolation is set forth unto us, we must
not take the words so strictly, as if no man or beast should be found or left
in Egypt, but it should be so wasted, that trading should cease, there should
not be such markets, fairs, and merchandiseing in her as was before, men
should not mind coming to Egypt, nor have occasion to pass thorough it, few
men or beasts, yet some should be there.

Neither shall it be inhabited forty years. After the taking of Tyrus by a long
siedge, Nebuchadrezzar had Egypt given him for that service, which was in the
seven and twentieth year of the Jews captivity, verse. 17. shortly after he
made war upon it, spoiled it, of man, beast, and all its glory, and so it
continued till the Babylonish captivity ceased, which was some forty or three
and forty years after. There be different opinions among Expositors concerning
the beginning of these forty years, and their ending. Vid. Junium.

12 In the midst of the Countries that are desolate, Nebuchadrezzar made many
Countries desolate, according to the word of Jeremy chapter 25.9. and among those,
Egypt was one, so the words in the midst are to be understood.

And her Cities among the Cities, that are laid waste. As Egypt was fertile, so
populous, and abounded in great Cities, Lavater informs us, that in the time
of King Amasis, it had twenty thousand Cities. How many, or how great soever,
they were laid waste by the Babylonian Army, and that forty years.

I will scatter the Egyptians among the Nations. Where wars come, many are
consumed by the sword, some are famished, some devoured by the Plague, and
other diseases, and doubtless though many Egyptians perished by such means,
yet some escaped, and those God scattered, and drove into other Countries.

Obs. 1 Wars and the dismal effects of them are the just judgments of God upon
perfidious Princes. Pharaoh had deceived the Jews, they leaned upon him for
help, but he was a broken reed unto them: Therefore behold I will bring a
sword upon thee, and it shall be sharp, I will cut off man and beast out of
thee: Thou occasionedst my people to be cut off, through thy unfaithfulness,
and I will cause thee and thine to be cut off through my fury. Wars are
dreadful, but they are appointed, sent, and ordered by God, wherever they
come.

Obs. 2 Such is the efficacy and severity of Gods judgments, as that nothing
can stand before them* or secure against them. Egypt had strong Cities, great
Rivers, was well peopled, abounded in horses and charets, Isa. 31.1. yet the
land of Egypt shall be desolate and waste. Gods judgments would cut off man
and beast, destroy her Cities, and in effect dry up her Rivers, they should be
made useless. Egypt strugled to defend and secure her self, but it availed
not, Jerem. 46.11. Go up into Gilead, and take balm, O virgin, the daughter of
Egypt, in vain shall thou use so many medicines, for thou shall not be cured.
Egypt was yet a virgin, unconquered, and she is bid to go to Gilead, where the
most precious and sovereign balm was, and to take thereof, that is, to use the
best means she could find out, to prevent her ravishing and destruction, and
when she had tried one means, and another, many medicines, all were vain, her
wound was incurable, she had dealt deceitfully, with the Jews, and lift up her
self against the Lord, robbing him of his glory, whilst she said, The river is
mine, I have made it for my self. Gods judgments were of that power, and so
severe, as Jerusalem with all her art and means could not prevent them, or
protect her self from them, Jer. 2.22. Though thou wash thee with nitre, and
take thee much soape, though thou have many excuses, shifts, pretenses, for
what thou do, though thou send to Egypt for help, though thou fast and
pr^iest, these things shall do thee no good, thine iniquity is marked before
me, and my judgments must come, and lay thee waste, yea, utterly waste.

Obs. 3 Gods judgments are often universal and sweeping. God would lay Egypt,
universally waste, and desolate, and that from one border to another, from the
Tower of Syene to Arabia, within which bounds all Egypt was comprehended, Jer.
12.12. The spoilers are come upon all high places through the wilderness, for
the sword of the Lord shall devour from one end of the Land, even to the other
end of the Land, no flesh shall have peace; The Chaldeans were Gods
instruments, he put the sword in their hand, which did eat and devout from one
extreme part of the Land to another, no place so strong, so secret, but the
sword found it out and spared neither things nor persons, the judgment was so
universal, that no flesh had peace, that is, none of the Jewish nation, the
terror of the sword was every where, Zeph. 3.6. I have cut off the Nations:
their towers are desolate, I made their streets waste, that none passes by:
Their Cities are destroyed, so that there is no man, that there is no
inhabitant. God swept away from the Heathens, their Towers, their streets,
their Cities, their men, expecting his people would have learned to fear him,
received instruction, and prevented an universal judgment at least, v. 7. but
they rose early and corrupted all their doings, as Gods Mercies had not, so his
Judgments did not do them good: Therefore he complains thus; Jerem. 44.7, 8.
wherefore commit ye great evils against your souls, to cut off from you man and
woman, child and suckling out of Judah, to leave you none to remain, in that
you provoke me to wrath with the works of your hands; they put God upon an
universal judgment, by their universal wickedness.

Obs. 4 That the times of Kingdoms flourishings, and Kingdoms desolations,
are in the hand of God, he sets the bounds and periods, for their Prosperity,
and their Adversity. He said, The land of Egypt shall be desolate, he put an
end to its glory and greatness, he set the time how long it should prosper,
and when that time was come, and it brought to desolation; he determined the
time how long it should lie in that desolate condition. It shall not be
inhabited forty years: the Cities of it shall be desolate forty years, Isa.
23.15. Tire, as it had its time for reigning, so its seventy years for
suffering: the same proportion of years, the Lord allotted unto the kingdom of
Judah, and to diverse Nations; Jerem. 25.11. God put an end to their dominion,
and determined the time of their subjection, which was seventy years service
unto the King of Babylon. The life and death of States is in the hand of the
Lord, to lengthen and shorten at his pleasure. Some states flourish, four
hundred, some five hundred, some six hundred years, and then they are made
desolate, for their forty, their seventy years, or more, as seems good unto the
Lord, Dan. 2.21. He changes times and seasons, he removes Kings from their
glory and greatness, and throws them into obscurity, what time he has
determined for them.

Obs. 5 In time of wars people are driven from their friends, habitations, and
countries. When the sword came upon Egypt, the Egyptians were scattered among
the Nations, and dispersed through the Countries. God made use of them abroad,
to declare their own misery, and his justice. Its a sad thing to be amongst
strangers, whose language is not understood; to be exposed to the scorns,
frowns, and harsh usage of enemies, the smoke of ones own country, is better
than the fire of another. Many in our late wars, have met with this great
evil, and can experimentally tell you, what it is to be driven out of their
own Country and habitations, into foreign ones.

Verse. 13 Yet thus says the Lord God, at the end of forty years will I gather
the Egyptians from the People whither they were scattered. 14 And I will bring
again the Captivity of Egypt, and will cause them to return into the land of
Pathros, into the land of their habitation, and they shall be there a base
kingdom. 15 It shall be the basest of the Kingdoms, neither shall it exalt it
self any more above the Nations: for I will diminish them, that they shall no
more rule over the nations. 16 And it shall be no more the confidence of the
house of Israel, which brings their iniquity to remembrance, when they shall
look after them: but they shall know that I am the Lord God. These verses are a
Promise of Mercy to the Egyptians, where comes into consideration, 1 The Time
when this mercy shall be, at the end of the forty years. 2 The Mercy it self,
which is double, 1 Revocation. v. 13. 2 Restitution of their Kingdom, v. 14,
15. where the nature of the Kingdom is set forth, it shall be base, etc.
3 The End and aim of God in so doing, which is twofold. 1 That Egypt may be
no more the confidence of the Jews. 2 Acknowledgement of God, v. 16,



13 At the end of forty years will I gather the Egyptians. The Egyptians being
notorious idolaters, confiding in their own strength, were scattered among the
Nations, where they wandered, and lived without hope of seeing their own
Country, and becoming a people or Kingdom again; but the Lord out of his
abundant goodness, beyond theirs, and others* expectation, promises, that
after forty years expired, he would gather them, where ever they were
scattered. Forty years, he would exercise them wi^h captivity, and those hard
things accompanied the same, No vocab^^^r olim ca c^^^^s Egypti qua^ postea ab
A^^xandro magn^ restaurata, ^jus nomen accepit. Maldonat.
but at the end thereof, he would show them mercy. This is that Jeremy speaks
of, chap. 46.25, 26. The Lord of Hosts, the God of Issael says, behold, I will
punish the multitude of No, that was a great City in Egypt, afterward called
Alexandria, and Pharaoh, and Egypt, with their gods, and their Kings, even
Pharaoh, and all them that trust in him; that was Johanan, and all the Jews who
fled into Egypt for safety, contrary to the mind and counsel of Jeremy, chap.
42.19, 20, 21, 22. and I will deliver them into the hand of those that seek
their lives, and into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar King of Babylon; and into the
hand of his servants, here you have the judgment of God upon Egypt, Egyptians
and the Jews trusting in them, but now what follows? And afterward it shall
be inhabited as in the days of old, after forty years suffering, Egypt should
receive her scattered ones, and become a Kingdom again.

14 And I will bring again the captivity of Egypt. Here the abstract is put for
the Concrete, Captivity for Captives; so you have it Jerem. 48.47. I will bring
again the captivity of Moab, and Ezekiel. 39.25. I will bring again the captivity
of Jacob, that is, the Captives of Jacob, the Captives of Moab, and the
Captives of Egypt, or Egyptian Captives.

And will cause them to return into the land of Pathros. Maldonate makes
Pathros a City, toward the South borders of Egypt, furthest off from Chaldaea.
Bonfrerius judges it to be that City in Egypt called Babylon, but here its
called, The Land of Pathros, and Jerem. 44.1. The Country of Pathros, where the
Jews which fled into Egypt dwelt; and though it were distinct from Egypt, Isa.
11.11. for its said there, God shall recover his People from Assyria, from
Egypt, and from Pathros, yet it was in the land of Egypt, Jerem. 44.15. The
Jews dwelt in the land of Egypt in Pathros. Junius conceives this Country to
be near unto Arabia Petraea, and by Jerome it was reputed formerly to be Nemus
Arabiae, a wood of Arabia. Pathros its most probable, was so called from
Pathrusim, the Son of Misraim, Genesis 10.14. as all Egypt was called Misraim from
the father, so might some part be called Pathros from the Son, viz. that part
lay between the Red Sea, and the Mediterranean Sea, and as God had carried them
out that way, so he would bring them again the same way.

Into the land of their habitation. The Hebrew for Habitation, is Mecuratham,
Negotiationum tuarum, the land of thy tradings, where they did buy and sell,
for the word is from Machar to sell, and deliver wares to others. Piscator has
the words thus, into the land of their commerce. The Egyptians dealt in fine
linen, broidered works, flax, silk, and other rich commodities, now God would
bring them into the land of their trading again.

Obs. 1 The goodness and mercy of God extends to heathens, he has a care of
them in their Captivity, and after they have suffered his appointed time, he
will show kindness to them: The Egyptians after forty years scattering, shall
be gathered, Isa. 19.23, 24, 25. In that day shall there be an high way out
of Egypt to Assyria, and the Assyrian shall come into Egypt, and the Egyptian
into Assyria, and the Egyptians shall serve with the Assyrians. In that day
shall Israel be the third, with Egypt, and with Assyria, even a blessing in
the midst of the Land, whom the Lord of Host shall bless, saying, blessed be
Egypt my People, and Assyria the work of my hand, and Israel mine inheritance;
The Assyrians, Egyptians, and Israelites, had their days, and times of
suffering, and God had his days and times of showing mercy to those Heathen
Nations, as well as to Israel. Its blessed be Egypt my People, and blessed be
Assyria, the work of my hand, and blessed be Israel mine inheritance.

Obs. 2 The afflictions of nations and Persons, may be long, yet not without
end; they may suffer seven and seven years, yea twenty, thirty, forty years
together, which is a long time, and then see an end of their sufferings. At the
end of forty years, will I gather. etc. the Egyptians were Captives forty
years, to the King of Babylon, the Israelites were in bondage to the Philistims
forty years, Judge. 13.1. and then there came an end of their slavery; they, and
many other Nations, were captives to the King of Babylon seventy years, which
was a long time to sufferers, but when they were run out, their captivities
ended, Jerem. 25.11. God sometimes lengthens out the afflictions of people,
very much, for ends best known unto himself, as Genesis 15.13. God said unto
Abraham, know of a surety, that thy seed shall be a stranger in a land that is
not theirs, and shall serve them, and they shall afflict them four hundred
years; here was a long season to be afflicted, but then it had an end.
Jehoiachin was thirty seven years a prisoner in Babylon, but in the twelfth
month of that year he was set at liberty, Jerem. 52.31. the man in the Gospel
had been afflicted thirty eight years with an infirmity, Joh. 5.5. and then he
was delivered from it. Though wars, famines, plagues, Captivities, diseases,
and other afflictions, may be long, yet they are not, they shall not be for
ever, they must have an end.

Ob. 3 That God sometimes deals more favorable with heathens, than with his
own people. At the end of forty years will I gather the Egyptians: but it was
the end of seventy years before he gathered the Jews out of Babylon: his own
people were thirty years or near upon longer under the Babylonish yoke, than
the Egyptians. There was just cause for this, Gods people had sinned worse than
the Heathens, and so provoked him above them, Ezekiel. 5.6. Jerusalem has changed
my judgments into wickedness more than the Nations, and my statutes more than
the Countries round about her, there were no people near or far off, who did
like unto the Jews, they forsook God the fountain of living waters, and trusted
in Pharaoh that great Dragon, and in his rivers of waters.

Obs. 4 Nothing is too hard for God, or can hinder the fulfilling of his will:
The Egyptians were scattered among the nations, here a family and there a
family, and that forty years together, so mingled with the people of other
Countries, that they had well nigh forgotten Egypt, and had so drunk in the
manners and customs of the places where they lived, that they were naturalized
thereunto, they were so rooted among the Nations, that it seemed impossible to
pluck them up, and plant them in their own Countries; yet notwithstanding these
things, says God, I will gather the Egyptians from the people whither they
were scattered. Its like the Babylonians, and other Nations that had them, held
them under, and made advantage of their labors, made laws against their flight
or departure, and struggled hard to detain them, as they of old in Moses days
did to retain the Jews, but whatever opposition was made, or difficulty
appeared in the way, God said, I will bring again the Captivity of Egypt. Had
they bound them all in fetters, laid them in dungeons, set guards of soldiers
to have kept them, all these should not have hindered the reduction of them;
for as Jehoshaphat acknowledged in his prayer, God rules over all the Kingdoms
of the Heathens, and in his hand there is power and might, so that none is able
to withstand him, 2 Chronicles. 20.6. no King, no Counsel, no Country, no Army, no
created power is able to withstand him. The Jews who had laien longer in
Babylon, and were like dry bones in the grave without hope, Ezekiel. 37.11. but
God made good his word, he brought them out with a strong hand, breaking in
pieces gates of brass, and cutting insunder bars of Iron.

Obs. 5 Its the same hand, the same God, that drives men out of their Countries
and comforts, into deep and long afflictions abroad, and brings them back out
of the same, to enjoy their countries and comforts. God scattered the Egyptians
among the Nations, he threw them forty years into Captivity, and he brought
them out again from the Nations, and from their Captivity, into the land of
Pathros, into the land of their Commerce. God lead them out, and he brought
them in, he afflicted them, and he comforted them. God conducted them outward
and inward; as the loss of their Country, was a great affliction unto them,
so the repossessing of it was a greater consolation unto them. God threw the
Jews into Babylon, those deep and brackish waters, they were so long pickled
in, and he brought them out again to the sweet waters of the Sanctuary. Long
afflictions have comfortable ends, the Jews seventy years sufferings ended in
everlasting kindnesses, Isa. 54.8.

They shall be there a base Kingdom. The word for Base is, Shephalah, which
the Septuagint render, (...), and Montanus, humile, a vile, base, low Kingdom.
Martinius says, humile, is, quod non est elevatum a terra, it should be like a
low Shrub, that is, little above the earth, such as that Kingdom, Ezekiel. 17.6.
of low stature. Some Kingdoms are great, high like Cedars of Lebanon, and
oaks of Bashan. Others are small, like vines and Shrubs, that creep upon the
earth. Such a Kingdom should the Egyptians be.

They were not free, but in subjection to the Babylonians, Persians, Alexander
the Great, to Ptolomy, the Romans, who made Egypt a Province, after that it was
under the Saracens, and Turks.

15 It shall be the basest of Kingdoms. Not only shall it be base as many
Kingdoms are, especially after wars, but it shall be the basest of
Kingdoms. It should have less power, dignity, and liberty, than other
Kingdoms.

Neither shall it exalt it self any more above the Nations. It had got power
and Dominion over other Nations, the Pharaohs of Egypt had power, over the land
of Judaea, and the Kings of Judah, 2 King. 23.33, 34, 35. and other Nations;
but after this it became an underling, and nothing remarkable is mentioned
about it in the word of God, here God put a band of iron and brass, upon this
Kingdom to keep it from rising again; it shall not exalt it self any more
above the Nations.

For I will diminish them, that they shall not rule over the Nations. I will
make the Egyptians few, and the Kingdom little. The Hebrew for Diminish is,
(...) Maat, to make little, or few in number. When either or both of these are
done, there is a diminishing. Their number might increase, yet they be
diminished in power, liberty, and dignity; so that other Nations should look
upon them as contemptible.

Obs. 1 When Kingdoms are ruined, brought to utter desolation, and have lain
so a long time, God is able to raise them up again. Egypt was made desolate,
from one end to another, man and beast cut off, the Egyptians scattered into
remote parts, yet what says the Lord? They shall be there a Kingdom, Egypt
shall be possessed again, inhabited, become a Kingdom, after forty years
desolation. God can raise up great structures, out of heaps and ruins. When a
Kingdom is brought to ashes, the Lord can out of those ashes bring forth
another. The Lord causes Kingdoms to cease, Hos. 1.4. he plucks them up, Dan.
11.4. Jer. 1.10. and he plants, and builds them up again, Jer. 18.9. Judea and
Jerusalem, lay waste seventy years, and then God returned the Jews from
Babylon, built their City, planted their land, made them a people again.

Obs. 2 The wise providence of God in restoring and ordering of Kingdoms,
mingles judgment with mercy: They should be a Kingdom, but a base Kingdom,
they should want that dignity, power, and Liberty they had formerly: So the
Kingdom of Judah after Josiahs days, was low and base, Ezekiel. 17.6, 14.
Pharaoh and Nebuchadrezzar kept it under; Its from the Lord, what condition
Kingdoms shall be in, they shall be honorable or base, as he pleases.

Obs. 3 Those that lift up themselves above others, shall proportionably be
brought down beneath others. Egypt exalted it self above the Nations: they were
proud, haughty, insolent, but Egypt exceeded them therein, and what came
thereof? it shall be the basest of the Kingdoms, consider what Kingdoms is
basest amongst them all, and Egypt shall be baser than that; it as was the
highest in pride, so it should be the lowest through baseness, and most
contemptible. The Lord poures out contempt upon Kingdoms and Kings.
Nebuchadnezzar was a Son of pride, and did not God drive him out from among
men? and make that proud King graze among the beasts? and abase him
proportionable to his Pride, and cause him to say, those that walk in pride he
is able to abase, Dan. 4. and in his time he will abase all such, he has
abased Kingdoms, Kings, and Potentates in our days, who sweld with Pride. The
learned Jews tells us what God says of every man whose spirit is lift up, Ego
and ipso non simul possimus habitare in mundo. Buxtorf. Apoth. Hebr.

16 And it shall be no more the confidence of the house of Israel. Whilst Egypt
flourished, abounding with men, horses, and charets, the Jews had an eye unto
them, and leaned much upon them, Isa. 30.2.31.1.36.6, 9. Ezekiel. 17.15. but the
Lord laid it waste, brake the pride of its power, made it base, and kept it in
that condition, that the Jews might not confide in it; for when they hung so
upon the Egyptians for help, that drew them on to their Idolatrous practices,
and to break the leagues they had made with others.

Which brings their iniquity to remembrance. The Hebrew is, Mazcir, gnavon,
or avon, which Montanus renders, Commone factor iniquitatis, the remembrancer
of iniquity. The Vulgar has it, docentes iniquitatem, teaching iniquity, and
so refer it to the Egyptians, who being familiar with the Jews, taught them to
do evil; but the words refer to confidence, which brought their iniquity to
remembrance, viz. that they should forsake God, trust in an arm of flesh
hearken unto Idolaters, etc.

When they shall look after them. Had the Egyptians been restored to their
former glory and power; the Jews would have been looking after them, trusted
in, and expected help from them, but being low, base, in subjection to others,
they would neither look at them, nor lean upon them, but leave them, as men do
a broken staff.

Obs. 1 Gods own people are apt to confide in an arm of flesh. The house of
Israel made Egypt its confidence. Asa relied on the King of Syria, 2 Chronicles.
16.7. The Jews were very prone to this sin; sometimes they trusted in their
fenced Cities, as Jerem. 5.17. sometimes in their land of peace, as Jer. 12.5.
Sometimes in their multitudes of men, as Hos. 10.13. Sometimes in their own
glory and greatness, as Ezekiel. 16.15. Sometimes in their privileges, as Jer.
7.4. Sometimes in their own wisdom, Jerem. 8.8. and sometimes in others, as
the Assyrians, 2 Chronicles. 28.16. and the Egyptians as Ezekiel. 17.15. this showed
their trust in God was little, and made him say, Jerem. 13.25. Thou have
forgotten me, and trusted in falsehood. Bachshater is a lie, in things that
promise help and safety, but cannot make them good, they will deceive you, be
a lie and falsehood unto you. This practice of theirs, made the Lord to say,
Jer. 2.36. Why gaddest thou about so much to change thy way, thou also shall
be ashamed of Egypt, as thou wast ashamed of Assyria; They had formerly
trusted to the Assyrians, who instead of helping, distressed them, 2 Chronicles.
28.20. and so should the Egyptians, for it follows, thou shall go forth from
him, and thine hands upon thine head, that is, lamenting thy disappointment,
for the Lord has re^^cted thy confidences, and thou shall not prosper in them,
that i^, thou shall fail of them, and be undone by them. Let us take heed of
bottoming upon any thing beneath the Lord, for Jer. 17.5. a curse is pronounced
upon the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, and whose heart
departs from the Lord, his heart is gone from the Lord who trusts in any
creature.

Obs. 2 Creature confidence brings former sins to remembrance. When the house
of Israel looked to Egypt for help, that is, trusted in them, then their former
iniquity was brought to mind, that occasioned God to remember other sins.
When a wife leaves her husband, or a Soldier his Commander, this remindes them
of former miscarriages; and so when Gods people leave him for an Arm of flesh,
this revives the memory of old iniquities, Ezekiel. 21.24. its said, they made
their iniquity to be remembered, and how came that? by discovery of their
transgressions, some new sins appeared, and they caused the former to be rem
mbred. New sins are editions of the old. Bankerupts by some latter acts,
bring former debts into question; and men by some new latter sin, occasion
God to bring their former sins into view.

Obs. 3 That the Lord for the good of his people brings down proud Nations, and
keeps them in servile conditions. Egypt lifted up it self above the Nations;
but God brake it in pieces, made it base, yea, the basest of Kingdoms,
decreeing it should not be exalted, but abide so, and why? that the house of
Israel might not confide any more in it, that their iniquity might not by so
doing be brought to remembrance, that they might know the Lord to be above
all Nations, Princes, and Powers whatsoever, and trust in him. Here was
wonderful goodness in God toward his Church and people, that he would keep
under Egypt to prevent their sinning and punishing, and to draw them to trust
in himself. Had Egypt been set in its former power, glory, and greatness, the
eye and heart of the house of Israel would have been looking that way, iniquity
been brought to mind; and their confidence taken off from God; now rather than
such things should be, Egypt shall be made base and contemptible, and kept in
that condition. There was a time when we confided too much in Scotland, God
has broken that nation in pieces, and will keep it in a low condition, that we
may learn not to depend upon Nations, but the God of Nations.

Verse. 17 And it came to pass in the seven and twentieth year, in the first
Month, in the first day of the month, the word of the Lord came unto me,
saying, 18 Son of Man, Nebuchadrezzar King of Babylon, caused his Army to serve
a great service against Tyrus: every head was made bald, and every shoulder was
peeled: yet had he no wages, nor his Army for Tyrus, for the service that he
had served against it. 19 Therefore thus says the Lord God; behold, I will
give the land of Egypt unto Nebuchadrezzar King of Babylon, and he shall take
her multitude, and take her spoil, and take her prey, and it shall be the wages
for his Army. 20 I have given him the land of Egypt for his labor, wherew^th
he served against it, because they wrought for me says the Lord God. These
verses comprehend the fourth general part of the Chapter, which is a Prophecy
of giving Egypt unto Nebuchadrezzar King of Babylon, wherein is set down, 1 The
Time of this Prophesy when it was, v. 17. 2 The cause why God gave Egypt to
Nebuchadrezzar, v. 18, 20. 3 The Donation it self, v. 19, 20. Egypt and the
wealth of it are given him to pay his Army.


In the seven and twentieth year in the first month, in the first day of the
month. This Prophesy was sixteen years and upwards after the former, but being
of the same nature, is here conjoined with it, though he had many others
between them. It was in the twenty seventh year of Jehoiachins captivity,
sixteen years after the destruction of Jerusalem, and shortly after the taking
of Tyrus. The punctual time is here set down, that so the Chronology of things
done, might be known and observed.

18 Nebuchadrezzar King of Babylon caused his Army to serve a great service
against Tyrus. Tyrus was a strong City upon a Rock in the Sea, well walled and
towred; seven hundred paces from the Continent, abounding with ships to supply
all things needful, and to secure her by Sea, so that in the eye of man it was
invincible. Nebuchadrezzar besiedged this City with a vast army thirteen years,
Joseph. Antiq. l. 10. c. 10. at the end of the Chapt. Spatium illud quod erat a
littore ad Tyrum usque constravit aggere reddiditque solidum Nebuchadrezzar ut
ad ipsos usque muros milites pedesti itinere procurrerent. Sanct.
which Josephus confirms from other Historians. Diocles in the second book of
his Persian History, and Philostratus in his Phenician and Indian History, make
mention of this King, saying, that he overcame the City of Tire at the end of
thirteen years, at such time as Ithobald reigned over the Tyrians. In this time
he filled up that space of the Sea which was between the shore and Tyrus,
with solid materials, so that the Soldiers might foot it even to the walls of
Tire, which cost much sweat and labor, and was a great service, besides all
the rest of their labor, watchings, and sufferings of heat and cold. To lie so
many winters, and Summers there, doing ordinary and ex^raordinary things, was a
great service, especially their filling up the Sea, which the Tyrians laughed
at, and thought impossible.

Every head was made bald. The Hebrew for bald, is, Mukrach, from karach, to
pull off the hairs, and it notes natural baldness as well as accidental, the
shedding of the hair, and the plucking off the hair. The Soldiers by continual
wearing their head-peices did shed and wear off their hairs. Some through
sickness, and upon other occasions might become bald.

And every shoulder was peeled. By the daily carrying of stones, timber, earth,
and other things necessary for the siedge and taking of Tyrus; their shoulders
were peeled. Cethepth, signifies not only the shoulder, but the side also; and
Piscator renders the words, omne latus, every side, was made naked, their
garments were worn out, and their sides bare, worn, and peeled.

Yet had he no wages, nor his Army for Tyrus. This long siedge cost
Nebuchadrezzar dear it exhausted the Babylonish Treasure greatly, insomuch,
that had he taken Tyrus with all the wealth of it, it would hardly have
recompensed his vast expenses; but the Tyrians, when they saw themselves in
danger, conveyed away by Sea their choicest things to Carthage, and
neighboring Islands, as Lavater insinuates, and when they could hold their
City no longer, threw their remaining substance into the Sea, so that when it
was taken, Nebuchadrezzar and his Army found little or nothing considerable
therein, therefore its here said, he had no wages, nor his Army.

For the service he had served against it. The King and Soldiers having lain
thirteen years before Tyrus, which showed their resolutenesse, and looked for
answerable recompense, for so long, difficult, dangerous, and expensive
service; but because they were disappointed in Tyrus, therefore the Lord
thought upon them, and provided for them elsewhere.

19 Behold I will give the land of Egypt unto Nebuchadrezzar. Egypt was a rich
Country, abounding with Corn, Cattle, and wealth of all sorts, this Country
did the Lord give unto Nebuchadrezzar and his Army, for that they had done him
service in executing his judgments upon the Tyrians.

He shall take her multitude. Multitudes of men were worn out and consumed in
the long siedge of Tire, and therefore God would give the King of Babylon,
Egypts multitude; she was populous and her multitude must serve him forty
years. The Hebrew word Hamon, signifies multitude of people, and multitude of
riches. Nebuchadrezzar should take both.

And take her spoil. The Hebrew is, Shalal Shelalah, spoliabit spolium ejus,
he shall spoil her spoil. Spoil is, whatsoever may be removed, taken, or
driven away, as Corn* Cattle, housholdstuffe, garments, Jewels, plate* plants,
ware, etc. The Babylonian should strip Egypt of all her glory.

And take her prey. In Hebrew its bazaz bizzah, praedabitur praedam ejus, he
shall prey her prey. The Septuagint is, (...), he shall captivate her
Captivity. The French is, Ravira but in, he shall take away the booty or prey.
The words being doubled before, and here, import that Nebuchadrezzar should
thoroughly spoil and prey upon Egypt.

It shall be the wages for his Army. Seeing his Army had so little in Tire, it
shall have enough in Egypt, nothing here shall be conveyed away, imbezelled or
kept from him and his Army, the whole wealth of Egypt shall be theirs.

20 For his labor. The word (...) Peullah, sometimes signifies the thing
produced, by work and labor, as Psalm 17.4. but here, and in other places, it
notes ipsam operationem, the very working and efficiency it self, 2 Chronicles.
15.7. your work shall be rewarded, that is, your labor and pains.

Because they wrought for me. They looked at their King, who commanded and
carried them forth to that work, not unto Jehovah the Lord of heaven and earth,
who set both him and them on work to execute his judgments threatened against
Tire, and in that they did fulfill them, they are said to work for God.
Materially they did serve his purpose and providence in the destruction of
Tire, but formally and intentionally they did serve their own wills and lusts.
God had a righteous end, and attained it by them, they had an evil end, and
obtained it vitioso modo, Vid. Aquin. 1. 2 q. 114.
in an ill way, Isa. 10.6, 7. the ssyrians had one meaning, God another, yet he
wrought for the Lord.

Obs. 1 That men in misery keep account exactly of their sufferings. Ezekiel
was in Captivity and many other Jews, who diligently heeded how the years
passed; in the 27 year, that was of the Captivity. Ezekiel, and the rest,
forgot not how long they had been under the Babylonish yoke. Men are best
Chronologers in adversity.

Obs. 2 When God is upon doing great things, usually he does make them known
unto some of his servants one way or other. When he was upon destroying
Sodom, he made it known unto Abraham, Genesis 18.17. when about to destroy Elies
house, he revealed it to Samuel, 1 Samuel 3.11, 12. the strange things befell
Nebuchadnezzar were revealed to Daniel, chap. 4. and the Lord showed John
things to come, Rev. 1.1-and here he hides not from Ezekiel that he will give
all Egypt to Nebuchadrezzar. This was so frequent of old, that Amos said,
surely the Lord will do nothing, but he reveals his secret to his servants
the Prophets, Amos 3.7. hardly did God ever any considerable things but he
gave some hints of it to his servants. The drowning of the world, the Jews
Captivity in Egypt, their coming out of it, their suffering by Nebu^hadnezzar,
their return out of Babylon, etc. were all hinted and made known to Noah,
Abraham, Moses, Isaiah, Jeremy, and others.

Obs. 3 Princes have power to lead out, and employ their subjects against
forrainers, when there is cause of warring with them: The King of Babylon
caused his Army to serve against Tyrus, and before that against Jerusalem, many
hundred of miles did he bring out his Army to do him service against the Jews
and Tyrians. Had he no particular cause, this was cause enough, that God
stirred up his spirit to execute his judgments upon those had desperately
provoked him.

Obs. 4 That Heathenish soldiers have undergone very hard things, yea,
hazarded their lives to please their heathenish Commanders, and all for a
temporal reward: Nebuchadrezzars Army served a great service thirteen years
together, to lie before a City was hard, their heads were made bald, their
shoulders were peeled, they labored hard, carried heavy burdens, they watched,
they suffered heat and cold, and all this for hope of good plunder in Tyrus. If
Heathens would do and endure so much for their Commander, who was an Idolater,
an enemy to God and his people; how much more should Christians do and endure
any thing for Christ their King, and heavenly Commander? if he say go, we
should go, if come, we should come, if pluck out your right eye, cut off your
right hand, or right foot, we should do so; if he calls us to endure
affliction, and suffer hard things we should not stick at them, no, though it
be the jeoparding of our lives; knowing he has a spiritual and eternal reward
for us. Seeing men have done and suffered so much for heathens, how can we do
or suffer too much for Christ? Scipio Africanus had three hundred Soldiers,
who would clime a Tower if he bid them, or throw themselves from the top of a
Tower at his command; what dishonor will it be to Christ, if his soldiers
will not do as much at his command, as others have done at their Lords Commands?

Obs. 5 Armies with their Generals and Commanders, may serve long, labor
so^ely, suffer hard things, and after all these be dis-appointed of their
expectations. Nebuchadrezzar caused his Army to serve a great service thirteen
years, so that their heads, shoulders, sides, were bald, and peeled, and what
then? yet had he no wages, nor his Army, they expected great matters in Tyrus,
which was so rich, and full of all sorts of Commodities, but found nothing
considerable, nothing answering their expectation, or sufficient to recompense
their charge and suffering. This undertaking could not be without millions of
money, hopes they had, that Tyrus being now the Mart of Nations, would repay
them with advantage, but Tyrus wealth, was dispersed, and there was no money in
Cash. Sometimes armies find rich spoil, and fat prey in the Towns and Cities
they take, and sometimes they find empty houses.

Obs. 6 Nations, Lands, Kingdoms, are the Lords, and he disposes of them to
whom he pleases. Behold, I will give the land of Egypt unto Nebuchadrezzar:
He would take it from Pharaoh King thereof, and give it to another. Neither
did the Lord do any wrong unto Pharaoh, because he was tenant at will, and held
upon these terms, quam diu se been gereret, to be King, while he carried
himself well; but he grew proud, insolent, and like a Dragon lay in the midst
of his rivers, saying, my River is mine, and I have made it for my self; God
therefore took away his Kingdom from him, and gave it to the King of Babylon,
he loses the loins of King, and dis-misseth them from their Kingdoms. He
rejected Saul, 1 Samuel 15.23. and gave his Kingdom to David, chap. 16.1.13. he
rent ten Tribes from Rhehoboam, and gave them to Jeroboam, 1 Kin. 11.31. he
cast out many Kings, and gave their lands to Nebuchadrezzar, Jerem. 27.3, 7.
and v. 5. you may see upon what ground he does so, I have made the earth, the
man, and the beast that are upon the ground, by my great power, and by my
stretched out arm, and have given it unto whom it seemed meet unto me, and now
I have given all these lands into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar; he made the
earth, he may give it to, and take it from whom he please; its his, not ours,
no man is owner of the earth, or any part of it, its the Lords, therefore if
he break in pieces mighty men without number, and sets others in their stead,
he wrongs, he oppresses none, Job 34.24. Let not us be troubled, that God
has done such things in our days.

Obs. 7 God in his holy and wise Providence makes use of Heathens, or any
instruments to do his work. Nebuchadrezzar and his Army wrought for him, they
were his servants, he set them on work. though they knew it not. When Armies
of Heathens, do plunder Towns, take Cities, lay waste Kingdoms, they are
working for God, they are executing his judgments, though they mind it not.
God carries on his work, let instruments be what they will. He can make use of
the worst of men, as well as of the best. He can promote his interest by an
Army of heathens, as well as by an Army of Christians, and let Armies be what
they will, good or bad, when they are at work, they work for God: they wrought
for me, says God. Its good therefore not to stick upon the instruments which
work, but to look at the hand in which they are, how that directs and regulates
them, look at him whose tools, whose servants they are. This will quiet men's
spirits, and keep their tongues within compass.

Obs. 8 The Lord suffers not any, no not heathens and Infidels to labor for
him in vain. He gave the land of Egypt, with all the wealth of it to
Nebuchadrezzar and his Army, who were the worst of the Heathen, Ezekiel. 7.24.
because they served and wrought for him. God is just, not like those Masters,
who set men on work, and then will give them no wages; whosoever works for God
shall have his penny; when the mid-wives would not destroy the male children of
the Jews, but save them alive, because they feared God, ^e dealt well with
them, and gave them houses, Exodus 1.17, 20, 21. he gave them habitations, and
blessed their families. They were Infidels, yet God rewarded their work. Jehu
was wicked, yet because he did the work of the Lord in rooting out Ahabs
Family, in destroying Baal with all the Priests and Temple of Baal, therefore
the Lord rewarded him, and that largely, 2 King. 10.30. Because thou have done
well in executing that which is right in mine eyes, and have done unto the
house of Ahab, according to all that was in mine heart, thy children of the
fourth generation shall sit on the throne of Israel, which was made good in
Jehoahaz, Joash, Jeroboam, and Zachariah, who came out of his loins, and
reigned after him, 2 King 13, 14, and 15. chapters. How should this stir us up
to do good and serve the Lord; if Heathens shall not labor for him in vain,
much less shall Christians, who know how to act from a right principle, in a
right manner, and for a right end; if they meet with hardship in his service,
he will remember and reward it fully, not with a temporal Kingdom, but with
an eternal; the land of Egypt, shall be given to Babylonians, because the
kingdom of Heaven shall be given to Christians, Luke 12.32. Fear not little
flock, it is your fathers pleasure to give you the Kingdom, let us therefore
be steadfast and immovable; always abounding in the work of the Lord,
forasmuch as we know our labor shall not be in vain. A cup of cold water,
two mites cast into the treasury, a sigh, a tear, laid out for God, and his
interest, shall not be forgotten; what Paul told the Hebrews, I may tell you,
that God is not unrighteous, to forget your work, men may forget, or reward
poorly, but God will not forget because he cannot be unrighteous, nor reward
poorly, because he deals bountifully with his servants, Psalm. 116.7.

Obs. 9 Execution of judgment upon proud Princes, and wicked people, is
pleasing unto God: He set Nebuchadrezzar and his Army on work to besiedge
Tire, to raze it to the ground, he paid them their wages for it, which
convinces that the work was pleasing unto him; when men are at great cost and
charges, in setting many a work, its argument they take pleasure in such work,
so was it here, the work the Babylonish Army did, was a pleasure unto God, he
gave them all Egypt for that service. God delights as well in executing
judgment, as in exercising mercy, therefore Jerem. 48.10. he curses those
should be negligent in. or backward to the slaughter of the Moabites. God sent
the Chaldaeans, to destroy the Moabites, and his heart was so much in this work
that he would have it done thoroughly, and to quicken up the Chaldaeans to it,
he pronounces a curse upon them, if they should forbear to do it, or not do it
to purpose; So that Jerem. 50.25. The Lord has opened, his armory, and has
brought forth the weapons of his indignation, for this is the work of the Lord
God of hosts in the land of the Chaldaeans, come against her from the utmost
border. These words the Lord speaks concerning the destruction of Babylon,
which was a work very pleasing to him, he opened his Armory, brought forth his
weapons, called men from all parts to come and take those weapons, and employ
them against her; like some mighty Prince, the Lord does here, who when he will
war against some strong place, opens his armory and magazin, bringing forth all
his warlike instruments, his ammunition and artillery, he calls his Soldiers
to take them, saying, Come this is the work, I have called thee to, viz. to
storm this Castle, to destroy this Town, this is the work I take pleasure to
see done.

Ver. 21 In that day will I cause the born of the house of Israel to bud forth,
and I will give thee the opening of the mouth in the midst of them, and they
shall know that I am the Lord. This Chapter according to Junius, ended at the
17. ver. where he begins the thirtieth Chapter; but according to our
Translation, this is the last verse of this Chapter, and its a precious Promise
of Mercy, to the house of Israel, and to the Prophet. In the words you have, 1
The things promised, which are, 1 Restitution of power, to the tribe of Judah,
I will cause the Horn, etc. 2 Liberty of Prophesying to Ezekiel, I will give
thee the opening of the mouth.
2 The End of his so doing, they shall know, etc. 3 The Time when, in that day.


21 In that day. When the Egyptians were subdued, and the Babylonish Monarchy
quieted, and settled in peace, as shortly after Nebuchadrezzars return from
Egypt it was; for he dying, Evilmerodach came to the Throne; and then was the
day. Day notes not only twelve hours, or four and twenty, but frequently a
short time, as Deuteronomy. 9.1. Hear O Israel, thou art to pass over Jordan this day,
that was shortly, within some few years or months, for they passed not over
Jordan till Joshuahs days (when Moses was dead) and he governed, Josh. 3. so
here, day is put for some space of time, after the destruction of Egypt.

Will I cause the horn of the house of Israel to bud forth. Horn is proper to
a beast, but metaphorically is applied to men, and in holy write signifies
sometimes dignity and glory, as Job 16 15. I defiled my horn in the dust, what
ever made me glorious, honorable, and respected amongst men, that have I laid
aside, and counted no more of than the Dunghill or dust I sit upon. Sometimes
Kings and Kingdoms, as Dan. 8.21. The rough goat is the King of Grecia, and the
great horn that is between his eyes, is the first King, viz. Alexander the
Great, and Psalm 132.17. There will I make the horn of David to bud; the Horn
of David, was the Kingdom of David: Sometimes strength, and power, Jerem.
48.25. The Horn of Moab is cut off, and his army is broken, that horn, of Moab
was the strength of Moab, Lam. 2.3. He has cut off in his fierce anger, all
the Horn of Israel, that is, all the strength, and power of Israel: Sometimes
it notes also outward felicity, liberty and plenty, Psalm. 148.14. He exalts
the horn of his People, that is, he makes them happy* he gives them freedom
and plenty of all things, and therein exalt their horn. Here, all these senses
may be taken in, God would make the horn of the house of Israel, that is, the
King and Kingdom to rise up again to dignity, strength, and happiness. This
was in part made good in the three children and Daniel or when Jehoiachin was
brought out of Prison, and his Throne set above the Thrones of all the Kings,
who were with him in Babylon, Jeremy 52.31, 32, 33, 34. then doubtless had the
Jews some Liberty and Privileges granted them, which caused matter of
rejoicing: more fully in Zerubbabel, when he brought them out of Babylon, but
chiefly in Christ, and the Gospel times. This Horn is budding still, and shall
bud, to the end of the world. The Kingdom of Christ shall flourish and grow
stronger; as the Horns of a beast do yearly.

I will give thee the opening of the mouth in the midst of them. Ezekiel had
been silent and dumb twice before, chap. 3.24. and chap. 24.27. and here again
its employed, God would give him the opening of the Mouth, or an open Mouth.

By Opening the Mouth, we may understand, 1 Libertatem loquendi, Freedom of
Speech; Thou speak things darkely now, Timida and titubante voce. But when
these Prophesies are fulfilled, and the Horn of the house of Israel begins
to bud, then shall thou have more freedom of speech, and be troubled no more
at the false Prophets, which sought to disparage thee.

2 Materiam loquendi, Matter of speaking. When Jechoniah or Jehoiachin should
have his Prison Garments changed, and be set above other Princes, some freedom
granted the Jews, here would be matter for praise and rejoicing.

3 Occasionem loquendi, Opportunity of speaking. When an Occasion is given unto
man to speak; The Rabbis call that pitheh peh, The opening of the mouth. Grot.
c. 6. 15
Thou shall come openly into the Assemblies, having matter, freedom, and
opportunity to praise me.

They shall know that I am the Lord. They, referres not only to the house of
Israel, but to the Babylonians also, when they should see the things Prophesied
of, done, then they should acknowledge the Lord. The Horn of Israel budded in
the midst of the Babylonians, and the Prophets mouth was opened in the midst of
them, therefore they should as well as the Jews, know that I am the Lord.

Obs. 1 That after the destruction of enemies, God shows mercy to the Jews:
Egyptians were no friends to the house of Israel: When Egypt therefore should
be spoiled, and brought under the Babylonians, then would he make the Horn of
Israel to bud. In that day, or after that time, when his justice had fallen
upon Egyptians, then his Mercy should be extended to Israel, Jerem. 50.4, 5.
when the Medes and Persians should have laid Babylon waste, and made her land
desolate; what then? In those days, and at that time, says the Lord, the
Children of Israel shall come, they, and the children of Judah together, going
and weeping: that is, for gladness, for the mercy vouchsafed them, they shall
go and seek the Lord their God, they shall ask the way to Zion, with their
faces thitherward. When the Babylonians were brought into bondage, then God
gave the Jews their liberty, Isa. 10.26, 27. when the Assyrians should be
destroyed, then should the Jews be eased of their burdens.

Obs. 2 How low, weak, afflicted, soever the Church be, God is able to raise
it up, to bring it to glory, strength, and to a flourishing condition. The
house of Israel was low, and much afflicted, the Horn of it weak, and hardly
visible, yet God caused the Horn thereof to bud; When we look upon some beasts
they have no horns, but in a short time their heads do bud, and bring forth
horns, which are their strength: So God in a little time would cause the
glory, strength, happiness of his Church and People to appear, though at that
time they lay in the dust. The Church of God looks often times like a dry and
dead tree, but his divine influences makes it bud, blossom, and flourish, Isa.
35.1. the desert shall rejoice and blossom, as the rose, it shall blossom
abundantly. When Sion was turned into a wilderness, he made it like Eden, and
her desert like the garden of God, Isa. 51.3. when the Church was in the most
desolate and hopeless condition, he made it glorious, beautiful, and strong;
when the Tabernacle of David was quite fallen, nothing but ruins and breaches
discernable, what said the Lord, in that day will I raise up the Tabernacle of
David that is fallen, and close up the breaches thereof, and I will raise up
his ruins, and I will build it. This was done literally after their return
out of Babylon, when the second Temple was built, and the two Tribes of Judah
and Benjamin grew up into one body, but spiritually in Christ's time, not in the
resurrection of his body from the grave, but in bringing in the Gentiles after
his ascension to make up all the breaches and ruins were made in the Jewish
state, so its applied, Act. 15.16. God that gives being to things, that are
not, can give more glorious and excellent beings to things that are.

Obs. 3 When God shows kindness to his Church, he gives his Prophets and
Servants, matter, freedom, and opportunity of speaking, and professing the
true faith publicly. When the Lord caused the horn of the house of Israel to
bud, when he showed favor to his people, then he gave Ezekiel the opening of
the mouth. In the times of enemies prevailing, Prophets are silent, or prophesy
faintly, if they have matter to utter, they want freedom, they whisper,
mutter, and speak as it were clauso ore, and often have not opportunity to do so
much, Amos 5.13. they are necessitated to be silent; but when times grow
better, and God shines upon his people, then the Prophets are full of matter;
free to speak, and want not seasons to declare the goodness of God, then they
are not afraid or ashamed openly to profess the Truth, and to praise the Lord.
The opening of the mouth is the gift of God the illness of the people and
times may shut the mouths of Prophets, but none can open them but God. Since
God began to show mercy to his people in this land, has he not vouchsafed the
opening of the mouth to his Prophets, their mouths were shut in the Prelates
days, but now there is a great opening, Blessed be the Lord for it.

Obs. 4 The end of Gods showing kindness to his Church, and opening the
mouths of his Prophets, is, that he may have honor and glory thereby from
all sorts. And they shall know that I am the Lord: They Babylonians, they Jews,
shall acknowledge that I have done these things, and that I am the Lord.

FINIS.
A Table containing the Principal things in the precedent Expositions.
A
ABomination of the Eyes, what. Page 31, 32. Abundance, happiness lies not in
it. 479. Dangerous. Page 525 Abstract, often rendered by the concrete. Page 121, 122
Accepting, what it imports. Page 123, 124 Action, Actions of men are overruled
by the Lord. 175. see youth. Page 554 Adultery, The Punishment thereof. Page 307
Adonai, what it notes. Page 486 Affliction, God has times to show mercy in
them, 18. he reveals himself by one way, means, or other to the afflicted, 19.
what brings sad afflictions, 218. may be long, yet are not endless, 571. in
them persons do strange things, 311. they are cups, 312. bitterness, argue not
hatred. Page 365, 366 Aholah, what. Page 291 Aha, what it notes. Page 386
Aholibah, what. Page 292 Agate; whence named. Page 471 Alienate, what Alienates
God. Page 303 Altars, high places. Page 89 Affections, Conjugal, ple^sing to God.
Page 363 Ammonites, their Original. 198, 386. Enemies to the Jews, ibid. they
reproached them, 199. insulted over their miseries, 387. how called, 389. their
despite. Page 391 Arm, stretching out of Gods arm, what it notes. Page 101
Army, nothing, without Gods assistance, 554. it and its Commanders, may labor,
serve, and suffer much, and yet be disappointed, 584. they are Gods
instruments, Page 585 Apostates, their punishment, and evil of Apostasy, 103.
God accounts not them his. Page 127 Aram, who descended from him. Page 469, 470
Arvad, a City, and where, Page 455
B
BAbylon, a description of it, Page 25. Babylonians how called. Page 388 Bamah,
what. Page 89 Baalmeon. Page 401 Bashan. Page 448 Blasphemy, wherein it consists.
Page 83 Balm. Page 472 Best, God must have the best sacrifices and services. Page
130 Bed, the bed of love, what. 299. when defiled, 302. two sorts of beds. Page
322 Bethie Shimoth, a City, and where. Page 401 Boiling-pot, 329, 331. sinners
boiled in it to purpose. Page 333 Beauty of wisdom, what, 498 subject to spoil,
501. perfection of beauty, in what 50^. marred by what. Page 525 Briars, who are
such. Page 534. 535, 536.
C
CAlamus, what. Page 474 Calamity, sudden, and what it should work, 365.
laughing at Calamity grievous, 395. why we should not, Page 396, 397 Chronology
of some things and times, specially to be ^oted, 330, 546. best kept in
adversity. Page 582 Carim, what it signifies. Page 173 Camels, their strength and
nature, Page 390 Captivity, what the Jews lost then. Page 132 Cassia, what. Page
473 Chittim, and the Isles thereof, Page 450 Canaan, upon what account said to
flow with milk and honey, 22, 23. of what length and breadth, 24. Commendations
of it, ibid. wherein it excelled Babylon, 25, 26. what sorts of people in it,
271 differenced from other lands, 443. Godly shall be brought in to it. Page
541 Christ, he has rods in his hand, 155. he is the true King of Judah. Page
195 Cherethims, who and where. Page 416 Charran, where. Page 475 Church, whom God
accounts his Church, 127. those are his, shall be brought into it, 128. there
mercy is shown, 129. Churches may degenerate, 240. who not fit matter for a
Church, 241. degenerating will suffer, 242, 243 she is amongst thorns, 538.
how low soever, God can raise it, and make it flourish. Page 590 Children, they
are prone to follow Parents in what is evil, 68. they are not tied to the ways
of their forefathers, 68, 95. sacrificing of children, whence, 93, 94. they
part with dear things to uphold their fathers ways. Page 96 Circumstances, much
aggravate sin. Page 87, 292, 301, 315 City, the sins of it may be such as it
must not be pleaded for, 212. God eyes Cities what they are, 245. they grow
worse for judgments, 301. like one another, 301. have their scum in them, 336.
one glad at the ruin of another, 425. renowned, made contemptible, 431.
wealthy ones given to sensuality, ibid. they have their periods, 442. 482. grow
proud, and whereupon, 451. nothing secures them, 452, 482. may have God against
them. Page 532, 533. Confidence, what we must not confide in, 80. why God beats
men out of their confidences, 81. we are apt to confide in one thing or other,
227. we are prone to confide in what we have, 549. vain confidences
discovered, 229. what begets them, 451, 550. in the flesh, shamed, 555 prove
hurtful, 560. we are apt to trust in arms of flesh, Page 576 Conforming to God,
what should engage to it. Page 36 Comfort, our comforts in Gods hand, at his
dispose, 364, 365. suddenly taken away. ibid. Cleansing, 244. Of the not
cleansed, 246. Of clean and unclean. Page 258 Cloth precious clothes, 474.
rich. Page 477 Concubine. Page 300 Coral. Page 470 Covenant, bond of it, 112.
those in covenant looked after, and dealt with, yet not all alike. Page 114
Conscience, no conscience of sin in the wicked. Page 316 Crocodile, its nature.
Page 548 Crown, whence, 185. Crowns are at Gods dispose. Page 189, 194 Creation,
how used. Page 509, 510 Covetousness, it provokes God sorely, 225. it makes
cruel, ibid. 226. its insatiable, 267. Root of evil, 273. Covetous practices,
thee very, 274, great men prone unto it, Page 496. Conspiracy, what. Page 248
Cup, sisters cup, what. Page 309 Cutting off, what it notes. Page 260
Commodities, not all in any one place. Page 454
D
DEath, approachings of it make men know themselves. Page 501 Daniel, of his
wisdom. Page 491 Dan, how called. Page 473 Daughter, in what sense used
sometime. Page 424 Day, how taken sometimes, 14. 588. of making holy days, 57
names of our days, whence, 91. days of reckoning, 228 246. God has his day.
Page 247 Deliverance, nothing can hinder it, when Gods time is come. Page 49
Damascus, a chief City of Syria. Page 472 Degenerate, some do more than others,
242. they degenerate shall smart for it. Page 242, 243 Dedan, a City, and where.
Page 409, 468 Desire, of the eyes, Page 356, 371 Despising, what it notes. Page
60, 391 Doing, and not doing the commands of God, what they are, 40. Doing, the
way to knowing, 134. what said to be done though not done. Page 345 Designs,
sinful ones disappointed. Page 100, 208 Differencing, between holy and profane,
257. clean and unclean, 258. between persons, Page 261, 262 Diadem. Page 185
Dominion, no getting from under the dominion of God Page 102 Divination, several
sorts of Divining, 170, 171. sinful Page 172 Destruction, where intended, all
things are ordered accordingly. Page 166 Disappointments. Page 560, 584 Dross,
the nature of it, and wherein men are likened to dross. Page 235, 236
E
EGypt, how called in scripture, 22. very Idolatrous, 32. how God brought his
people out of it, 47. how long they were in Egypt, ibid. whence so called, 546.
a reed, Page 556. East, men of the East, who. Page 388, 401 Ebeny, what. Page 469
Elders of Israel, their policy in coming to the Prophet. Page 3, 4 Eden, what
and where. Page 504 Election, how taken in scripture, 14. of Gods electing or
choosing Israel. Page 15, 19 Enmity, bred once, dies not, Page 417 Emerald. Page
470 Enosh, what it signifies. Page 361 Expectation, see Design and and
Disappointment. Edom and Edomites, 406. enemies to the Jews, 407. revengeful.
Page 408 Excellencies, lift up, 451. abused, matter of mourning, 511. argue not
grace, 510. marred by sin, Page 525. Excommunication, three sorts among the
Jews, Page 258 Example, the use of Examples, Page 527 Eyes, they are the inlets
of sin, and have occasioned the breach of every command, 35. hiding eyes from
the Sabbath, what, 259. desire of them, what, Page 356 Enemies of the Church,
their end, Page 542 Ethiopia, there be two of them, the Affrican and Oriental,
Page 564
F
FAce, setting the face against, what it imports, Page 385, 592, 545 Faires, Page
465, 466 Family, God begins with his own Family, but proceeds to others, Page
393 Fathers, ways of forefathers, not always to be walked in, Page 95 Feet,
stamping with feet, Page 391 Fish, Princes and people likned unto them, and
wherein, Page 551 Flattery, in whom worst, Page 269 Forgetfulness, the cause of
sin, 223, 224. of judgment, 312. what makes forgetfulness of God, and our
selves, Page 525 Funerals, rites used then, Page 359, 360, 361 Forest, Jerusalem
liken'd to it, and wherein, Page 141 Fury, what, Page 344, 417
G
GAmmadims, what they were, Page 460, 461 Gapps, see Hedge. Gebal, and
Gebalites, Page 456 Garden, what, Page 504 Glory, 439. who the Lords glory, 442.
glory of a State, 463. outward glories are not grace, Page 510 Gifts, of two
sorts. Page 222 Ground, sitting on it, what it implies; Page 434 Gold, Page 508
Godly, they shall be brought into Canaan, not others. 116, 541. put upon hard
things, 375. their wrongs shall be revenged, 418, insulted over in their
misery, 425. they are the glory of God, 442. despised by the wicked, Page 540
Glorify, how God is glorified, Page 530 God, he minds how long his suffer, 6,
7. the time of men's doing things, 7. your God, what it imports, 18 he
condescends to man's weakness, 20, 21. upon what account he shows mercy, 48,
138. he is the Lawgiver, 52. God has his Butts, 72. takes special notice of
his, and distinguishes them from others, 113. experimentally made known by
mercies and judgments, 116. no halving between God and Idols, 119. he knows
things certainly, 174. he makes wicked acts serve his ends, 175. he will deal
with sinners, 228, 246. when sanctified, when profaned, 259, 260. notes men's
carriages on his day, 316. knows what men do, and reveals it, 330. his people,
his glory, 442, 443. he knows and eyes the heart, 488. two things he
challenges to himself, 489. observes Princes whether they connive at, or
punish sin, 524. he drives out, and brings in. 573. he reveals what he is
doing to his servants, 582, 583. he uses what instruments he pleases, 585.
he rewards any work for him, 585, 586. he destroys his peoples enemies, and
then shows them mercy, Page 590 Grace, all we have is from free Grace, 138. why
God deals graciously with sinners, Page 138
H
HAbitations, are assigned to men by the Lord, Page 27. 86 Hearing, Those will
not hear God, are rejected of God, Page 119 Hand, lifting up of it, what it
notes, 15. smiting of hand, 161, 165. God has a hand to apprehend sinners,
180. clapping of the hands, Page 390, 391 Heart, if running after other things,
it sleights the things of God, 66. no halving, 119. what knowledge affects it,
133, 134. what lifts it up, 451. what meant by heart, 486. it will fail when
judgments come, 226, 229. God takes notice in what frame, 488. what lifting up
of it is, 486. what does it, Page 520 Holy, what should engage us to be so, 34,
36. holiness of places privilege not unholy people, 148. holy things what,
and when profaned, 256. to be kept holy, 260. when profaned, 317. it is
wronging of God, ibid. resting in them, causes removal of them, Page 374
Hypocrisy, a close and unsuspected sin, Page 8 Hatred, 415. degrees of it, Page
417 Hypocrites, cannot deceive God, 10. they get nothing of God at his
ordinances, 10, 11. they may deceive Prophets, 11. are not to be pleaded for,
12. God will not have to do with them, 96, 97. he discovers their designs,
how close soever carried, Page 99 Hook, Gods Hook, Page 551, 553 Horn, how
taken, Page 588 Heathens, wise men amongst them, 462. not safe to rely upon
them, 559. God shows them mercy, 571. sometimes more favor than his own
people, Page 572 Harms, rejoicing at the harms of others, 426. they make wary,
Page 560 Humble, such are respected and exalted by God, Page 190 Helmet, made of
several things, Page 459 Horses, difference of them, Page 468 Hope of mercy, when
denied, 247. hopeless condition, who is the cause of it, 354. things hoped for
disappointed, hurt, Page 560 Hedge, what it was hedged the Jews, 278, 279. gapps
in it, what, 279, 280. making up the hedge, what, 280, 281, 282. when broken,
judgments are coming in, 284. God expects some to make up the hedge, 285. so
doing prevents judgment, saves a people. ibid.
I
Iavan, who came of him, Page 466 Idolaters, it is dangerous for the children of
good men to live amongst them, 33. cruel, Page 215 Idolatry, may last long, but
shall be punished. Page 296 Jehovah, what it notes, Page 17, 486 Impossible
things seem so accomplished by the Lord, Page 431, 452, 572 Jews, Idolaters in
Egypt, 32. what once they were. Page 235 Interrogations, what they denote, Page
92 Ireland, Englands right to it, Page 28 Ungrateful, those have had much
kindness from God, prove so, Page 38, 39 Iniquity, transgression and sin, what,
178, 179. what the Prince of Tyrus his iniquity was, Page 513, 514 Ithobald,
King of the Tyrians, Page 579 Judging, in Scripture taken for pleading, Page 6
Insulting, evil, Page 387, 395, 396, 425 Judgments, what brings spiritual ones,
77. who punished with them, 118. Gods judgments are impartial, 142. fierce
ones upon Gods people, 144. not to be stayed by man, ibid. severe at last, 150.
end of them, ibid. when heavier judgments come, 155. some judgments are
sweeping, ibid. they are trials, 159. trying judgments and destroying ones,
160. easily, suddenly brought, 209. what hastens them, 216. they discover men's
hearts, 229. they make the Lord known, 233. when they come in, 288. Just, ibid.
they are Cups, 32. they teach, and what, 326. they make places boiling pots,
332. they fall upon all sorts. 333. work not out wickedness, 337. irrevocable,
354, 355. some mercy under severest judgments, 381. God brings them 412. they
are to make others tremble, 440. dreadful, 441 Cause Lamentation, and Laughing,
483. for examples, 526. end of them, 533. no standing against them, 566.
sometimes universal Page 567 Ironies in Scripture, 117. used by God himself and
others. Page 493, 494 Iron, what put for. Page 465 Justice executed is pleasing
to God, 167, 586, 341. it upholds, neglect of it ruins, Princes and Kingdoms.
Page 524, 525 Jerusalem, her praise and reproach, 214, 212. bloody, cruel, 215.
renowned, for what 217. infamous, ibid. Prophets in her against her, 251, 252.
likened to a Pot, 329. when emptied, 335. sinned openly, 336. the gates of the
People. Page 421 Impudence in sinning. Page 303 Ivory, 449, 450. horns of Ivory,
what. Page 4^9
K
KEdar, and Kedarites, Page 474, 475 Kindness, prevailing. Page 136 Keriathaim,
a City, and where. Page 401 Kodesh, what it notes. Page 125 Knowledge, what
breeds experiment all knowledge of God. Page 116, 133, 134, 138 Kingdoms, their
time of flourishing and desolation in the Lords hand, 567, 568. base. 573. God
can raise desolate ones. Page 574 Kings, deposed by the Lord, 187 he puts an
end to them and their Kingdoms at his pleasure, 189. Kingdoms kept desolate,
194. like Cherubims, 510, 511. have honor and power, that they may protect the
people, 514. God an enemy to wicked Kings, 550. they resemble Satan. ibid
L
LAnd, habitations, Lands, disposed and ordered by the Lord, 27. what makes a
land glorious, 28, 29, 30. noted by the Lord what they are, 245. not cleansed
by means, provoke God, 246. denied mercy, 247. what saves a land, 285. land of
^he living, 439. there is a difference of Lands. Page 443 Lamentation, when
taken up, Page 435 Labor, none labor for God in vain. Page 585 Law, whether
keeping of it would have availed to eternal life, 50, 51, 53. Lawgiver, who,
52. how violated, Page 254, 255, 256 Lebanon, where, and what it signifies, Page
448 Lewdness, what, Page 221, 343 Lead, Page 465 Likeness in sinning, has a
likeness in suffering, Page 110 Linen, fine Linen, Page 452 Lust, men's lusts
are costly things, Page 454 Lifting up, those lift up themselves shall be
abased, Page 575
M
MAtters, those of importance, to whom to be committed, Page 462 Merchants, 458,
464, 465, 467. merchandising of the hand, 469. whether men may be Merchants,
Page 478, 479 Meshech, who came from him, Page 464, 467 Magistrates, usually such
as the Priests and Prophets are, 266. covetous and cruel, ibid. 267. how to
deal with the people, 514, 515. should not connive at, but punish sin, 524.
not suffer briars and thorns to overrun the field. Page 538 Malice, malicious
practices, what they provoke to, Page 411 Market, Page 468 Marriage, lawful for
men in spiritual functions, Page 362 Maresha, where, Page 553 Mast, what, Page 448
Mariners, Page 457 Man, he is only a sojourner here, 115. men's evil acts
overruled by God, 175. of trading for men, 467. men know not what themselves
are, 492. they are conceited, ibid. Means, not neglected by heathens, 174. if
cleanse us not, it is dangerous, 246. may be had, and not improved, 346. such a
case dangerous, 348. prove hurtful, Page 560 Mercy, old mercies are to be
remembered, 26. choicest mercies are for Gods own people, 28. mercies oblige to
holiness, 34. they worsten men, 39. upon what account showed to ill-deservers,
48. mercies do not exempt us from miseries, 49. mercy has its moreovers, 56.
of sparing mercy, 66 67. all enjoyed is mercy, 138. its mingled with judgment,
196. times of taking away mercies, 380. judgment mingled with mercy, Page 575
Milk, what meant by it and honey, 22, 23. milk-drinkers, Page 389 Mind, setting
the mind upon a thing, what it imports, Page 378 Moabites, their descent and
enmity to the Jews, 399. Moabs side, what, Page 400 Mocking, Page 214, 215, 425
Mourning for the dead, 358. some rites thereabouts, 359 360. it is not unlawful,
367. not dare to mourn, Page 375 Molech described, Page 94 Mopheth, what, and
how differing from Oath, Page 374 Mother, in what sense sometimes used, Page 290
Mouth, opening of it, what, Page 589 Mountain, holy mountain, what, 112. there
God shows mercy, 129. the mountain of God, Page 512 Mortar, untempered, 268. who
daub with it. Page 269
N
NAme, how taken, as referring to God, 41, 118. when said to be polluted, 42.
sinners spared for Gods names sake, 43. how sparing sinners, is sanctifying of
Gods name, 44. God shows mercy after mercy to such deserve ill for the honor
of his name, 48, 72. Gods name, dear to him, 120. name ^f wicked taken away,
209. what makes an ill name, Page 217 Nations, what makes Nations glorious, 29,
30. their carriages are observed by the Lord, 394. laid waste, and why, 397.
like one another in sin, Page 402 Nataph, what it signifies, Page 140 Nature,
abuses mercies, Page 39. ordinances and means, 61. worse for judgments, Page 301
Nations, they have their times for suffering, 205. easily and suddenly
destroyed. 209. when God is wroth with Nations, nothing secures them, 404. they
are his, and he disposes of them, 405, 584. enmity between Nations, 417. they
are at the Lords call, 426. proud Nations brought to, and kept in a servile
condition, and why, Page 577 Nagaph, what it signifies, Page 354 Nakam, opened,
Page 414 Nebuchadnezzar, what it signifies, Page 428 Navigation, who first
Authors thereof, Page 447 Nilus, Page 549
O
Oars, Page 449 Oaks of Bashan, Page 449 Obedience in difficult cases, and
speedily, argues grace, Page 367, 368 Oath, ill breaking and making oaths for
our own ends, Page 177 Occasions, God makes occasions to meet with wicked ones,
Page 553 Oblations, how they differ from Sacrifices, Page 125 Obstinacy in sin,
Page 345 Old mercies ought to be minded, 26. old sins brought to remembrance,
179, 303. old hatred, 415. what brings former sins to remembrance, Page 577
Oppression, Page 271 Olam, taken for a long time, Page 440 Ordinances despised
provokes God greatly, 62. how they come to be slighted, 66. men leaving Gods
ordinances are restless, 87, 88. all ordinances to be set up, Page 131
Overturning, Page 194
P
PArents sins prepare judgments for their posterity long after, 74. Idolize
children, Page 380 Parables, warrantable. Page 332 Paramour, Page 300 Pathros,
what and where, Page 570 Painting of faces not warrantable, Page 318, 319 People,
the taking of them to be the Lords is mere mercy, Page 19. the Lords people have
the best mercy, 28. they have their Butts, 38, 39 72 notwithstanding their si^s
they have mercies in the face of their enemies, 45. they are distinguished from
others, 113. looked after, 114. Gods dealings with them different, ibid. they
are such as their Rulers, 272, 273. begins with his own first, then with
others, 393. their enemies destroyed, then they have mercy, Page 590 Person, he
being accepted, all done is acceptable, 130. difference to be put between
persons, 261, 262. made remarkable, 296. those we have sinned with, instruments
to punish us, Page 311 Pilots, 456. who to be, Page 462 Pit, what, Page 438, 499
Pharaoh, what it signifies, 545, 546. like the Dragon, or Crocodile, 548. his
pride and confidence, Page 549, 550 Philistines, whence they were, and what, 413.
how dealt with, 4^4. their hatred, Page 417 Place, holiness of places privilege
not, 148 no hiding place from Gods strokes, 166. place of sinning, place of
punishment, 2. 8 God notes where men sin, 292. how made remarkable, 296.
several mercies, Page 454 Plague or Pestilence, Page 532 Politicians, how they
stand affected to Religion, Page 99, 100 Polluting of Gods name, see Name, what
the word for pollute signifies, 42. how God is said to pollute, 78. whom God
will deal with as polluted ones, Page 80 Posterity, it should mind the mercies
predecessors had, 26. good men's posterity living amongst Idolaters degenerate,
33. not tied to the ways of the Fathers, and forefathers, Page 68, 95 Poor,
how dealt withal, Page 276 Pot, the properties of it, 329. what makes places
Pots, Page 332 Practice, sinful practices, what they do, Page 342, 411, 527
Precious, Jakar, what it notes, Page 250 Priests, what to be and do, 254. they
violated the Law, ibid. their not preserving holy things from polluting, is
matter of provocation and complaint, Page 261 Pride, what makes men proud, 451.
spare not cost when for lusts, 454. it precedes ruin, 489. provokes God to
severity, 501. corrupts men's excellencies, Page 525 Princes, their sins lie not
always hid, 177, 178. often they are far from piety and justice, 183. great
enemies to God, and his ways, ibid. they have tim^s of sinning, and shall have
times of suffering, 184. deposed for their iniquity, 187. they are tyrannical,
223. wherein like Wolves, 264, 265. like Priests and Prophets, 266. by them
Cities and States are ruined, 482. they are proud, 487, 488. apt to deifie
themselves, ibid. they are but dust, 489. have honorable Titles, 514. should
protect the people, ibid. they depend on God, 515. their places and pomp minded
by God, ibid. how long prosperous, 515, 516. their sins shall be made known,
516. what blasts them, ibid. 524. made examples, 526. their own sin undoeth
them, 528. their counsel and strength nothing without God, 554. they may lead
the subjects abroad to fight, Page 583 Privileges, apt to over-prize, and rest
in them, 379. if taken away, shall be restored, Page 443 Professors, what ones
are not matter for a Church, 240, 241. greatest part will be found naught, Page
241 Profaning of God and holy things, Page 256, 259, 263 Prophets, consulting
with them ancient and warrantable, 9. they are to give out the Lords mind in
his name and words, not their own, 9, 10. being inquired of, they must not
humor men, but speak and do the Lords pleasure, 13. must be undaunted in their
work, 142, 547. no new thing for them to prophecy in sackcloth, 165. their
prophesies, slighted, scorned, 127. they are not to fear, but reprove the
greatest being guilty, 184. false Prophets in Jerusalem, 251. Prophets sins
specially noted, 252. daubing with untempered mortar, 269. false ones their
subtilty and impudence, 270. God honors his Prophets, 381. he shuts and opens
their mouths at his pleasure, 382. when fell to speak, 591. false conspire
against the true, Page 249 Prophecy, wherein likened to rain, Page 140 Promise,
how Gods breach of promise is to be taken, 64. he makes good his promises, how
difficult or impossible soever they appear to us, 86. he seems to act against
the promise, 196, 197. nothing hinders the making them good, Page 572 Persians,
soldiers, Page 458 Prosperity, see riches, wealth. Providence runs through, and
overrules sinful actions, Page 175, 554 Punishments, they are Gods pleadings,
110. though he forbear long, yet he has times of punishing, 205, 246.
punishes where men sin, 208. Gods method in punishing, Page 412 Purging, evil
ones shall be purged out, 114, 115, 231, 343, 344
R
RIches, 495. make proud, Page 497 Rich, who their prey, Page 276 Raamah, what,
Page 475 Rain, withheld, Page 245 Rebukes, Page 417 Retaliation, vexers vexed,
218. their blood openly shed, who shed blood openly, 336 wrongers punished by
the wronged, 412. mockers mocked, Page 483 Reckoning, God has times of
reckoning, Page 228 Rivers, artificial in Egypt, Page 548 Rowers, who meant by
them, Page 481 Reproach, Jews reproached, 199, 201. God takes notice of his
peoples reproachings, 202. punishes for it, ibid. what exposes to reproach,
216, 217. reproaches bring judgments, Page 403 Rabbath, 169. hew called, and
what made, Page 389 Rachil, an Hebrew word, what it signifies, Page 220, 221
Righteous, how taken, 149. outside Righteousness secures not. Page 150 Reed,
the nature of it. Page 556, 557 Repentance, what leads to it, 135, 136. When God
specially expects it, ibid. that from sense of Love, is deep, general, etc.
137. it may be too late, 347. How in God. Page 352 Rebellion, what, 40. It
makes God more severe, 102. Rebels how dealt with, Page 115 Robes, Page 433
Religion, false Religion makes men unnatural, 96. Its mad to serve men's
interest. Page 99 Revenge, see Vengeance. Rods, how taken, 111. rods of trial
come before rods of destruction. Page 160
S.
SAbbath, whether it were before the Law was given, 54. In what sense a sign,
55. not a mutable ceremony, 56. Its of special concernment, 57. prophaneing it,
220. hiding eyes from it, 259. what was done on that day, 58, 5^ 70. Of
Hallowing it. Page 69 70. Sacrifices, services not to be confided in, 80. those
may be hateful to God, we judge grateful, 88. they differ from oblations,
125. best, must the Lord have. Page 130 Sanctifying, what it notes, 56. its Gods
work. 58. its chiefly on his own day, ibid. 70. of sanctifying and profaning
God, 260 what Gods sanctifying himself is. Page 126, 127, 540 Scripture, some
parts thereof omitted in the place seemed most proper for them, yet are
occasionally given forth afterward, 31. that is the sense of it which the
spirit intended, 256. occasioned by men's sins. Page 332 Scum, 334. when it boils
in, its dangerous. Page 337, 343 Seba, and Sheba. Page 475 Seeking, what it
notes. Page 277 Seir, what. Page 399 Serving God, what it implies. Page 123 Senir,
variously called. Page 447 Shebna, his misery and end. Page 188* 189 Sighing,
151. a Prophetical sign. Page 152 Sign, 374. godly for signs, 375 379. what
signs do. Page 376 Sion, in it God is specially to be worshipped. Page 128 Sin,
it dis-appoints of mercies promised and near at hand, 65. wilful sinning
provokes greatly, 84. Its greatly aggravated by circumstances, 87, 292, 301.
what makes it bitter, 135. It lies not hid always, 178. former sins brought
to remembrance and how, 179. public sins bring Public judgments, ibid. sin
hastens judgment, 216. brings sad afflictions, 218. it makes gaps, 283. open
and impudent sinning causes God to renounce, 303. its scum, 334. open sinning
provokes to vengeance, 338. It defiles places and persons, 340. It makes Cities
base, 398. sins of Princes shall be searched out, 516. spreads, defiles, 527.
own sins undo, 528. It ruins Princes, Page 559. Sinners, upon what account
spared, 43, 44. how its honoring Gods name, 44. Gods People may be such
sinners, as no hope of mercy may be left for them. Page 354 Silver. Page 465
Shaphat, what it signifies, and how taken. Page 211 Ships, with oars, 449.
sails 453. what, 457. metaphorical ships. Page 481 Shiftings answered, 349,
350, 351, 352. shifting of judgments, 353. shield, 459. whence. Page 461
Spicing, what. Page 339 Statutes, not good, what not, and what. Page 76 State,
the glory of it, in what. Page 463 Stranger, how taken, 219. sad to be amongst
strangers. Page 568 Soldiers, suffer hard things to please men, and for little.
Page 583 Sufferings, God keeps account exactly of his Peoples sufferings, 6, 7.
after sufferings comes mercy, Page 571. Streights, Gods People not left in them,
51. sinful evasion of them brings into greater, 109. means to be used in them,
174. may be such as men dare not show sorrow. Page 375 Stones, of the Sardius,
505. the Topaz, ibid. Diamond, ibid. Beril, Onyx, Jasper, 506. Saphir, Emerald,
Carbuncle, 507, 508. of fire, Page 512 Superstition, places, names, and ways,
superstitions once taken up, are not easily laid down. Page 90 Sword, what it
notes, 199, 561 furbushing of it. Page 200 Sy^ne, where. Page 563, 564 Syrians,
several sorts. Page 469, 470
T.
TEraphim, what. Page 171 Tannim, what it signifies. Page 548 Terumah. Page 124
Tarshish, what. Page 463, 464 Tabernacle, man's, Gods. Page 293 Tale-bearers. Page
220 Thoughts, there be such in the heart, are not of God. Page 99 Teman, and
Temanites. Page 409 Time of men's doings, something is specially noted, 7, 330.
there be times of showing mercy to the afflicted, 18. when Gods time is come,
nothing can hinder deliverance, 44. holy times are such, not by man's, but Gods
appointment. 57. they are upon weighty and special occasions, 57. times of war,
not times of mirth, 154. but of fears, 158. times of punishing nations, 205.
reckoning with sinners, 228. 246. sin dis-interests in God. Page 232 Trees, what
by green and dry trees. 143. Fir Tree, 447. Cedars. Page 448, 478 Trembling. Page
434, 441. 528. Tidings, evil ones what they do. Page 152 Tyrus, ancient, strong,
etc. 420, 421. insultive, 421. Tyrians jovial, 430. a renowned City, 436. her
situation, 445. by whom built, 446. her men skilful in Sea affairs, 456. who
was Prince of it, 488. His Pride. Page 487 Threatenings not believed, Page 204
Theevery, what is so Page 274 Tin. Page 465 Treasure. Page 495 Temple, Profaning
of it, 369 excellency, 370, desirable, Page 371, 377 Tubal, who descended from
him. Page 466 Togarmah, who from him, Page 468 Thorns, wicked men are such, and
wherein, Page 535, 536, 537 Trust, apt to trust in an arm of flesh, 576. See
Confidence,
V.
VEngeance, what. 409. its ill to seek revenge. Page 411 Unfaithfulness, in the
things of God provokes. Page 261 Unwonted things awaken, 369 Godly put upon
them. Page 375 Unbeleef, makes Prophets dumb. Page 382
W.
WArning, we should take warning by others sufferings. Page 300 Wars, they are
the Lords, 150, 566 his sword, ibid. They are matter of mourning, 158,
distinguishes not of persons, ibid. who makes them successeful, 166. They eat
up, 459. they drive from all, Page 568. Ways, wicked ways, what. Page 137
Waves. Page 423 Wearying, what wearies God and man. Page 342 Weakness, God stoops
to humane weakness. Page 20, 21 Wheat of Minnith. Page 471 Whoredom, spiritual,
what it is. Page 93 Wine. Page 472 Wilderness, what it is, 48. 107. how God
pleaded with the Jews there. Page 108. Wicked, let them hide where they will,
God will find them, and bring them out to punishment, 105 shall not always
be among the godly, 115. what likened unto, 218 make no conscience of sin,
316. active to draw others, 323. their end miserable, 502. they are thorns and
briars, 535, 536. and inferences from thence, 537, 538, etc. Wickedness,
unconstant, 302 it blasts Princes designs. Page 516 Wise, to be entrusted with
matters of importance, 462. wise states whom they are to employ. ibid. Word, of
dropping the word, 140 not in vain, 142. if it prevails not, judgments will,
165. God w^rd shall take place, what ev^ ^^^on think. Page 230 Worship what must
not lead there, 68, 69. what must. ibid. men are not content with the worship
God has prescribed, 90. false worship costly, 96. public worship, 128. false
ways of worship, whoredom; 292. right worship, Gods Tabernacle, 293. his
worship must be pure, 302. carriage in it observed. Page 316 Wolves, their
natures or qualities, Page 264 Wool. Page 472 Wisdom of God, seen in bestowing
his mercies, 454. it makes famous, 492. beauty, 498. true, wherein, Page 520
Woman, indearing considerations, Page 357 Wife, Page 362 World, men of it judge
untowardly of God, and his people, 402. wise for their own advantages, 450.
worlds usage, Page 496 Wealth, how men grow wealthy, 496. puffs up. Page 497
Y
YEar, when the Jews begun theirs Page 2. Youth, what is practiced in youth will
be affected in age. Page 296
Z
ZEdekiah, his title. Page 181, 182 Zimmah, Hebr. what it signifies, Page 221,
343 Zidon, a great City, and by whom built. Page 455, 529
A Table of those Scriptures which are occasionally cleared, and briefly
illustrated in the foregoing Expositions. The first Number directs to the
Chapter, The second to the verse, the third to the page of the Book.
Chap. Verse. Page Genesis. 2 3 54 9 12 56 27 42, 43 52 30 27 171 34 12 33 10 13
458 0 6 459 15 1 459 10 2 466 0 3 468 0 22 469 0 7 475 3 22 493 Exodus. 6 8 16,
17 3 6, 7, 8 17, 47 4 23, 24, 25 1^ 12 12 32 19 45 34 32 10 40 16 29 54 22 28
182 0 22 220 9 14 358 14 11 48 16 1 48 32 10 281 Leviticus. 1 4 123 20 26 34 21
23 56 23 3 58 0 7, 8 70 13 3 78 1^ 6, 44 78 13 4^ 361 ^ 3 260 10 12 261 19 13
274 10 12 366 19 18 411 Numbers. 13 3 48 12 1 564 14 34 64 0 46 358 15 30 84 21
6 108 Deuteronomy. 32 13, 14, 15 28 7 6 36 32 26, 27 45 4 34 47 0 8 5^ 32 2 140
17 17 26^ 26 5 346 11 10 549 Joshua. 7 9 44 22 5 123 Judges. ^ 16 258 10 14 493
1 Samuel. 17 5 552 15 23 172 16 7 488 18 2 248 2 15 8 0 9 555 2 Samuel. 5 8 117
12 30 186 22 19 556 15 31 248 16 7, 8 395 1 Kings. 10 15 467 14 9 311 18 21 119
22 34, 35 208 0 15 494 2 Kings. 6 56 465 6 33 160 ^^ 4 229 ^ 30 586 7 33 97 9
30 319 1 Chronicles. 3 17 192 2 Chronicles. 2 13, 14 462 26 20 267 341 25 140
15 7 582 36 12, 13 181 18 10, 11 269 14 9 564 32 14 403 2 1 487 22 13 516 27 6
517 13 3, 12 555 Ezra. 9 11 340 Nehemiah 3 30 345 9 26 311 Job. 27 9 11 13 16
12, 13 18 20 184 12 18 187, 190 0 19 188 0 21 ibid 15 32 216 22 16 ibid 21 13
365 31 24 396 12 2 494 37 22 508 30 19 522 41 1 551 16 15 588 Psalm. 5 6 226 10
12 16 ^0 3 226 106 26 16 0 23 286 103 7 17 24 1 27 76 1, 2, 4 29 50 2 29 62 12
31 106 36 33 79 23 40 0 9, 10 44 106 8 44 71 20 50 119 7, 52 0 128 52 63 2 59
106 37 97 34 8 135 86 8 138, 490 37 13 184 147 6 190 77 7, 8, 10 197 89 33 197
73 22 207 54 23 216 0 3 217 9 4 228 82 5 285 9 17 313 69 5 346 81 11, 12 347 96
6 371 62 10 380 66 7 394 75 8 ibid 22 28 398 28 1 438 47 10 459 105 18 465 107
10 ibid 72 10 475 131 1 486 82 6, 7 490 62 9 ibid 9 20 501 0 16 533 17 4 582
132 17 588 ^48 14 ibid Proverbs. 2 20 95 10 29 11, 88 23 20 36 13 13 88 27 15
140 16 10 172 0 33 175 15 6 250 28 15, 16 267 0 20 275 29 12 273 20 21 275 1 28
348 5 19 364 16 32 367 17 5 395 24 17, 18 396 3 35 492 23 4 496 28 17 499 10 19
523 11 2 526 0 10 538 Eccles. 4 1 287 5 1 59, 318 7 17 216 9 7 124 0 2 396 10
20 182 Cant. 4 4 460 Isaiah. ^ 25 115 49 22 16 3 7 ibid 48 10 18 30 26 ibid. 56
14 34 19 13 19 25 48 8, 9 43 43 25 44 0 13 230 59 12 65 66 3 80 0 16 110 60 7
129 56 6, 7 130 55 10, 11 142 41 22, 23 174 22 17, 18 188 10 3 228 31 2 230 1
21, 22 240 26 10 244 17 4 247 23 15 ibid 8 21, 22 ibid. 248 66 5 251 1 23 267,
284 28 17 270 29 21 283 5 5 284 59 4 287 63 5 ibid 43 24 342 51 7, 8 404 25 10
404 5 26 426 47 7, 8 451 13 13 452 0 3 475 7 8 472 27 4 490 40 17 ibid 49 23
514 5 16 531 55 13 540 40 10 550 19 11 557 30 2 ibid 31 3 ibid 0 1 559 35 1 591
51 3 ibid Jeremiah. 2 22 567 2 6 48 0 7 87 4 22 134 5 25 65 8 7 134 14 12 123
46 11 566 33 13 111 0 16 256 51 27, 28 56 9 3 134 22 16 ibid 0 30 192 50 27 184
48 26 202 27 7 205 51 13 ibid 3 5 220 13 25 228 12 4 229 44 28 230 12 7, 8, 9
233 2 30 236 26 11 249 23 15 252, 273 2 8 254 15 19 261 5 12 270 0 13 273 17 11
275 5 1 285 7 10 317 5 3 337 32 31 ibid 4 14 346 13 27 347 16 5 354 13 22 355
16 7, 8 361 16 6, 7 375 1 10 398 17 91 421 51 21 513 13 25 577 2 36 ibid 27 5
585 48 10 587 50 25 ibid 48 25 588 50 4, 5 590 Lament. 1 8 217 2 15, 16 ibid 0
22 381 3 22 397 ^ 6 4^3 5 9 467 4 17 557 2 3 588 Daniel. 2 21 189, 568 8 5 194
0 21 466, 588 Hosea. 2 10 31 4 17 118 8 11 ibid 0 13 131 10 2 97 4 1 134 5 4
ibid 4 12 174 5 12 194 3 4 195 8 35 232 1 9 303 4 18 514 Joel. 1 14 56 3 6 466
Amos. 3 2 349 5 21, 22, 24, 88, 89 0 13 591 9 2, 3, 4 105 0 4 529 Obadiah. 0 11
^^ 0 18 410 Micah. 2 7 88 0 1 222 3 11 250 0 9 280 0 7 361 Nahum. 2 3 447
Zephaniah. 2 8 202 3 3 267 2 8, 9 403 Zechariah. 1 6 142, 230 7 12 345 4 12 508
Malachy. 1 8 130 0 14 131 3 4, 13 130 3 17, 18 114 2 16 255 Matthew. 22 16, 17,
18 89 23 13 13 19 17 51 26 34 252 27 37 195 15 6 255 21 13 274 5 32 346 23 37,
38 348 11 7 557 10 34 562 Mark. 7 9 494 Luke. 2 35 562 14 11 190 12 32 586 23
43 254 John. 10 3 111 0 36 56 14 2 86 Acts. 3 23 62 15 16 591 Romans. 2 4 346
13 8 411 1 Corinthians. 8 2 493 10 13 346 12 28 255 10 11 527 2 Corinthians. 6 17 262
12 7 534 Galatians. 3 21 51 1 6 103 5 4 346 Ephesians. 2 12, 13 19 5 25 363 0
28 ibid 6 17 562 Collos. 3 19 363 2 Thessal. 2 11 77 2 Timoth. 3 5 262 Titus. 1
15 262 Hebrew. 10 25, 26, 27 62, 84 1 Peter. 3 7 364 1 John. 2 4 133 4 1 251
Jude. 0 14 31 Revelation. 13 8 254 18 7 451 0 13 467

FINIS.

