Vox Coeli, Containing Maxims OF PIOUS POLICY: WHEREIN Several Cases of
Conscience are briefly discussed; As
I. In what subject the Supreme power of a Nation does reside. II. What is the
extent of that power, and in what causes it does appear, with the due
restrictions and limitations thereof according to the Gospel. III. What
obedience is due unto that power from all persons, superior and inferior,
with other Cases of great weight, very necessary to reconcile our late
differences judiciously stated and impartially balanced in the scale of the
Sanctuary.


By ENOCH GRAY Minist::

It is a light thing that thou should be my servant to raise up the Tribes
of Jacob, and to restore the preserved of Israel, Esaias 49. 6. They that be of
thee shall build the old waste places, thou shall raise up the foundations of
many Generations, and shall be called the Repairer of the breach, the Restorer
of paths to dwell in, Esaias 58. 12. London, Printed for Tho: Williams at the
Bible in Little Britain, 1649.

To the Supreme Authority of this Nation, the Representative of the People in
Parliament Assembled.
Right Honorable,
REligion when established in Power, in Purity, is the walls, and Bulwarks of a
Nation; a Isay 26. 1, 2, 3. Erek 21. 30, 31.
Breach therein unrepaired, exposes a People to the greatest judgments. Next
Religion, Justice takes place, as the most grateful Sacrifice to God, service
to a Commonwealth, causing the light of a Nations tranquillity to break forth
gloriously as the Morning Sun. In respect hereunto, I am bold to present your
Honors with these ensuing considerations, (most humbly submitting them to your
Honorable censure,) excusing my presumption, by my affection to Your Honors,
with whose Eminency is conjoined such clemency, that I may truly speak in the
language of the Orator to Caesar, qui apud vo^ ^^dent dicere magnitudinem
ignorant vest^^^ qui non audent, humanitatem. Your Honors are Prudent, (and
wise with the Wisdom of God) to improve your opportunities, and valiant to act
with the highest resolutions against the greatest difficulties, (the tallest
Cedars being fallen before you) that you need not counsel so much as Prayers,
and our God Praise in you, who has honored you to be the Repairers of our
breaches, the restorers of Paths to dwell in. There is but one thing lacking
(which I humbly beseech your Honors to supply,) a sympatheticall commiseration
of the condition, and tender sense of the crying necessities of Poor men (as of
your own,) whose causes depend upon you, that such do not suffer by you, who
have suffered the utmost for you. Sad was his complaint who said, Heu! Pereo in
medio amicorum. Livius makes mention of certain Governors, called Aequi, to whom
the Roman Legates Petitioning in cases of concernment, they received this
unworthy answer, Se alia interim acturum, jussit cos ad quercum dicere: to whom
these Petitioners worthily replied, Et haec Sacrata quercus audiat foedus a
vobis violatum. For the stone out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber
will answer in the behalf of such, says the Prophet. Your Honors are the most
wise, and faithful* Physicians of State, to whom should the diseased Paetie nt
have recourse for remedy, if not to you, by whom they expect every cure ^ito,
tuto, and jucunde? You want neither Power, nor will, having been accustomed to
help the necessitous, when all means in other Courts be ineffectuall; and where
you want opportunities to give seasonable, and speedy Audience to all desiring
it, you want not Authority to furnish others fearing God with such Power as to
hear and determine, at least to examine and report their opinions, (with humble
submission to your Honors judgment) whereby you may comfortably further your
account in the day of Christ, procure to your selves Honor and affection from
the Lord and good men, with the blessing of the Poor and needy: Prevent those
Punishments upon your persons, or Posterities, the sadconsequents of such a
sinful neglect: you remember the story of Dion, and cannot forget how often
the Lord, has alarmd you by the Soldier, (his rod upon the Isa. 58.
backs of such Princes, and States who break not the yoaks of the oppressed,)
which I hope you respect as a divine monition to attend this duty.

Your Honors are not ignorant of the necessities of times, and how
prejudicial it is to those who have suffered and lost much, to expend time,
and means in travels, attendance, and al in vain. (...) the Public suffers
alittle, there private ^uch (...) Gospel, and your selves most of all, by the
disability of your friends, for them to live in bonds, who had they but Justice
might he free, in their minds, from cares, Bodies from restraint, and Purses
from want: to live in reproach, whose upright intentions are impeached, whose
confidence in your Justice is shamed, as if you were to your friends a brook
whose streams are failing, such instruments may be needed in future, whose
bypast services are forgotten at present; such persons who complain with
silence, with patience, with expectance, deserve in reason, and in respect
audience before those (who yet have gained it) who vilify your Persons, traduce
your Authority, render your Acts dishonorable to the world, because they
obtain not their own ambitious ends; Oh force not the Sovereign Lord of Heaven
and Earth, the Judge of all the World to whom they commit their cause, to do
that Justice which I tremble to Remember, but hope that you will piously
consider, to divert the stroke thereof: for the A^e^ 8. the whole.
Lord has sworu by the Excellency of Jacob, that for this the Land shall
tremble, and the Inhabitants thereof shall mourn; that the Judgment thereof
shall be sudden, and unexpected, a devouring, desolating judgment, after the
greatest hopes of happiness, even because ye make the Poor ofthe Land to
fail: that is, their hearts to fail, their lives to consume with cares, with
griefs, I swear by my self says Ier. 22. the whole.
the Lord, that this House shall became a desolation: If you do not deliver the
spoiled out of the hands of the Oppresser, If you do not judge the cause of
the needy, Ier. 21. 1^, 13.
in the morning, (preventing the expectance of the period.) My fury shall go
forth like fire, and burn that none can quench it; I am unwilling in respect to
disappointment to munif^st to the world my particular complaint and condition,
these who knew me when resident in the City, and who know me new, know my
afflictions for, and affection unto the Public in all vicissitudes unto this
day, and that weak service which without respect to any recompense, I tendered
to the State, Tempore Reipublicae Paroxysmi, (in open Parliament acknowledged
then to conduce to the Preservation thereof, of the City, and the Commonwealth
in apparent peril of death,) upon which I was promised it, as but a small and
reasonable favor, Justice, in a cause that concerns my whole outward estate, a
cause incapable of final determiniation in any other court of judicature, a
cause having no reference to any Member of Parliament, or to any Person
indempnified thereby for any demer it since this Session, or to any receipts of
money out of the Public Treasure; A cause as much your Honors as mine, (...)
Jesus Christ's rather then either yours or mine, (...) might be finished in four
hours time in a select C^^mittee if once appointed for Audience thereof, which
in 8 years space I never could obtain, although some Honorable Members have
expressed their deep se^s^ of the extremity of my oppression, that prejudice
which I have sustained by this delay, and therefore I believe it impossible
that so just a cause should miscarry in the hands of so just a Parliament* My
earnest prayer for your Honors shall be that the splendour of this
Representative, may by the highest Acts of sincere Reformation of Religion, of
impartial Administration of Justice, dazzle the eyes of all Europe, that your
Power and greatness thereby may be rendered formidable to all your
adversaries, Domestic and Forain, by Sea and Land, in England, and Ireland,
that the people of these Nations by your Pious Prudent, Righteous, and Resolved
endeavors may be assured, ut Pacem summam obtinebimus in Patria, cum ipso Deo,
and nobis inter not, ubi nullum erit bellum nulla contradictio, which is the
hearts desire of

Your Honors in all humility devoted in the highest Services for the Gospel,
ENO. GRAY.

To his Excellency THOMAS Lord FAIRFAX, Lord General of all the Parliaments
Forces, in England and Wales* And the Right Honorable OLIVER CRUMWELL, Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland, Commander in chief of all the Parliaments Forces there,
With the General Council of War; Grace, Mercy, and Peace be Multiplied;
Right Honorable, and Honorable,
THe hearts of such who truly fear the Lord in this our Israel, cannot but be
toward you, who have jeoparded your lives to the death, in the high places of
the field: what Titus acknowledged in his success against Jerusalem, the same
may we in yours, De^s vobiscum in liberand^ hoc regn^ pugnavit, he who has
called you unto, fitted you for this service, has united your spirits mutually
to affect, to effect one end, that you are ut manus ut men's Angli^, as Hector,
and Aen^^ of Troy, whereby the Public has gained much, both Peace, and
Liberty, although your selves as yet little, for magis mor^^, quam mummorum
causa, do you engage* England unworthy the affections of such Worthies, (this
Generation much degenerating) that should you respect the opinions of man
concerning you, more then the affection of God, unto you, who observes all men,
all things, (a heathen but a speech becoming a Christian) you would repent of
all that good afforded them: But whatever is the estimation of the world, you
are the glory of God in his Churches, (apud deum major est qui melior, and ille
melior qui in virtutib^^ praestat). The Crown of his Saints, yea Sanctorum amor
and delici^. Luther tells us there be Miracula, Ocularia and Auricularia: Ages
to come will admire our mercies in such renowned instruments: should we
unworthily forget you, or your acts, which deserve to be had in eternal (...)
not we of this Nation variable in our affections, (...) in our judgments, we
could not but honor (...) your Physical Prescriptions, (upon the Prudenti^^^
Observance of the Causes* (...) and P^ognost it is of the Malady of this State,
(for spent by the Kings evil) administered in the most desperate Paroxysm of
our great Body Politic, effectual (through the Lords blessing) to the
absolute cure of the Nation, the Remedy being powerful not only to remove what
at present does distemper this State, but to prevent what in future may
occasion a Perilous Relapse, ut ^^hil defi^it, quod ad salutem sufficit. These
acts of your do publish your Honors, your Humilities do crown your Graces,
thereby you deserving rather then desiring the praise of your virtues, your
virtues. And because your Prudence, as well as your Courage, the wise and
Omnipotent God has prospered to the healing of the Nations, I shall humbly
beseech you* to improve both for the advance of Religion in the power and
purity thereof, and maintenance of Justice amongst us ^^^gal the evils
threatening this Nation in the deformation of the one, or in the Non or
Mal-administration of the other, may he prevented and removed.

The Lord beat your enemies as small as the dust, and stamps them as the mire of
the street, give you courage to pursue them, and not to turn again until you
have consumed them: the Lord be the shield of your help, the Sword of your
Excellency, that by his strength you may run through a Troup, by his help you
may scale a wall, that your feet may be (...) Hinds feet, and a how of Steel be
broken by your Arms: the Eternal God be your refuge, and underneath you be his
everlasting Arms: that the Enemy may be thrust out from before you in England,
in Ireland, that he may say destroy them, that you may return from Ireland with
as many victories by your Armies, as good security to your persons, as much
rejoicing to your friends, as great confusion to your Enemies as you did from
Scotland, that all there, all here, all elsewhere, that do conspire against you,
(even the multitudes of the great and ^ervible ones) may be as chafe that
passes away, and perish^^^ in an instant, suddenly: as the Lord has said, so
prays

Your Honors humble Servant in the service of the Lord Jesus Christ, Eno. Gray.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
THe Health of our Body Politic is preserved by our Laws, (the ligaments of
all civil Societies) when grounded upon the infallible Principells of Equity,
the intention of Parliament, and Army, in their late transactions. I know many
that fear the Lord, and conscientious of their ways, are much dissatisfied in
their judgments about the proceedings of both, yet I fear self-love, and
self-interest perturbates the minds, distempers the affections of too many, who
demurre and scruple against apparent reason, unto public prejudice. Had we a
sense of the last years judgment in our punishment from Heaven by unseasonable
weather, (the effects of which we are like to feel many years) upon the Land,
and cry of 1 Samuel 12. 17.
the People for a King, we would now hold our peace at the presence of the great
God, and suffer our lips no longer to sin, nor our mouths to speak foolishly.
It is our duty to stand upon our Watchtower, to observe the motions of Divine
Providence in the mutati^^s it the (...) in this last age, wherein all promises
and Prophecies shall be accomplished; the integrity of Noah consisted in his
sidelity, in his Generation when degenerate* and our sincerity is discerned by
a pious temporizing. I hate these ^.
who have lascivientia ingenia wanton wits, and mercenary souls, who Mancipate
their judgments to the opinions and Errors of others, because great in person
and power: As I would abhor to justify the wicked, so would I fear to condemn
the righteous; But the only question will be who shall be the Judges? For those
Persons, those acts evil in the opinion and sense of one, are good and
justifiable in the Reason and Rule of another, both Divines, and Lawyers. One
says there is the greatest violation of Faith, the deepest wound given in
Religion by Parliament and Army in their late Acts, as never the like was in
any Age before Joh* 7* 61, 66. 67 verses.
us: Another says Offenses are Passive, as well as Active, and taken when not
given, and the best men in their upright intentions, and honest executions are
most obn^xious to humane censure, even to the censure of good men bya^sed by
particular Interest: That these Acts conduce to the most hopeful, happy
plantation of the Gospel in Parity and Liberty in this State, to the most
certain and perpetual establishment of Righteousness and Justice amongst us
throughout all Generations; now certainly the Jus Regni must be the umpire in
this case, which is the bond between King and Parliament, betwe^ the
Representative, and the Represented. To speak unto particulars objected: 1*
Object.


Answ.
For that of the change of Government by King, Lords, and Commons, contrary to
former Declarations: the reason of every alteration is to be respected,
Parliaments are not bound up by their own Votes or Acts, though others be: they
alter them upon reason: those given are these: 1 The treachery of the Peers in
concurrence with the perfidious Scots, if not acting with them, yet abetting
their Design in the last invasion.

2 The great obctruction of Justice by their Negative Voice, the last year,
when the Commonwealth was in hazard, had not the Commons acted without the
Lords, we had been as Sodom and as Gomorrah ere this day: the designs of that
year so countenanced by them, that the Grand Incendiaries should have been
discharged with a venial punishment, had not the Army interposed.

2. Object.
But what call, what warrant had the Army to intermeddle? had not they the being
from, and shall they assume Authority over Parliaments?

Answ.
The Army acts not in way of Authority, but duty, from necessity: from charity:
If a servant in such a case should Job 31. 13, 14.
contend with his Master, Reason will justify, Religion will defend, that
servant who to save his Masters adventured his own life. But again the Army
Officers by Law, were the Vindices Regni, raised by Parliament to defend our
Laws, and Liberties, and above all the Supreme Law, the safety of the Nation,
(as all know). Now what the Parliament had declared of as just and safe, the
Army grounds upon, and first they Remonstrate the State of affairs, which
taking no effects, (and the life of the State in peril, if not speedily
prevented, (for that case would admit of no delay in that time,) God, and
Nature enforced them to an act above, yea against all Law, as it did Hester to
adventure into the Kings Presence, although she perished. The Parliament had
declared never to Treat with the King, charging Him with the blood of his
Father collaterally: the blood of four Kingdoms besides; England, Scotland,
Ireland, and the Rochellers in France: his correspondence with the Pope,
compliance with Papists: his Treachery, Tyranny, and Hypocrisy, beyond al men
that ever were, so as no confidence could be reposed ^n him: yet the Majority
of the Commons Vote a Treaty with him, (to gratify the treacherous and bloody
designs of Royalists, who thereby only sought their revenge upon all active
in, and faithful to this Parliament and Republic, and in their hopes to carry
on their Diabolical plot as deep as hell, they rage (as if Satan had been let
loose) against all who had the Image of God shall I say? nay but the face of
civility, that had not the Lord arose, and this Army awakened, we had been
swallowed up quick) and that Treaty ended, they Vote the Kings answers
satisfactory, and a good Basis or foundation for the establishment of Religion,
and Righteousness thereupon, (which before was declared non-satisfactory) they
resolve to set him upon his Throne in Honor, Peace, Freedom, and safety, who
^ad no remorse for England or Irelands blood, nay who in the very time of this
Treaty, had plotted, and contrived against his return to Westminster, a second
design in England paralle^^ to that of Ireland: and this was that Armies (whom
God miraculously had armed with power and courage, honor and success a little
before) this was their necessity, the Salvation of the State, upon the
Parliaments decleusion their former Declarations, Principles, and resolutions
grounded upon reason and safety.

3. Object.
But they have destroyed the foundations: have left no visible Power, or Legal
Authority remaining.

Answ.
We must in all Laws look at the double sense, the Gramm^ticall, and the Moral,
or equitable, contained in the Preface to the Law, where the equitable sense of
the Law is maintained, that Law is preserved, and the same distinction may I
observe in the constitution of Authorities* there is the essential, and there
is the Integral State thereof. As (...) s^^ the great Counsel of the Kingdom is
a Parliament without the Kings Presence, because his power is virtually
inherent there; yet the i^^egrall State thereof if his presence be wanting is
defective, but the essential (...) even when such Integrall Parts are
abolish^* a man is still a man wanting an eye, a hand, a leg* the Commons only
stand in the nearest relation to the People, being called by them, representing
of them, acting for them, and such is that present Authority now sitting at
Westminster, the only S^pream and visible Authority of this Nation.

4 Object.
But in all these confusions and contrary motions, have we not broken Covenant
with God, faith with men, v^^ing and promising before God, to set the King upon
his Throne, *t^ preserve the Privileges of Parliament?

Answ.
Why the Maj^rity of the House was re^^rain^d, pro tempore, is formerly
expressed and intimated: For the breach of Covenant in these particulars
objected: we must know, that future contingencies intervening a Covenant, and
the performance of that Covenant, do disoblige the conscience from duty, or
that penalty ensuing a ^iolatio^ in s^^^ a case: as if a man Covenants to take
such a woman in marriage, if this woman before the time* of the Celebration of
this Nuptial be found unchaste and (...) all D^vines will tell ^s, (...) ^^is
(...) i^ not b^^^d in Conscience to perform his Cov^^^^t made with this ^^man,
she was bound in faithfulness to him, as well as ^e in affecti^^ to her, and
although this condition, was not expressed, (if that you re^ain faithful and
conjugall in your affections to me, ^ will take you unto my wife) yet was it
necessarily employed, and the bond in this case, without just offense to God, or
man is violated. Vows, Covenants* Premises and oaths of things unlawful,
impossible, beyond (...) power and Liberties: and wherein such consequences
(...) happen) as are forementioned, in these cases Co^s^ience is dis-ingaged
before God and man: and what was our case, and what the peril of State when
the King whom (...) bonds would have bound, as Oaths before had not, his Paroll
now did not, who in treating for his Liberty, plots our destruction: let all
that are impartial judge, if under restraint, he acted against our lives, and
the life of the whole, (yet seceretly, and subtilty, upon the pretense of
Peace, of condescension) what would he have done, if at liberty; who lived, who
dyed the same? I hope this will satisfy men of unprejudiced minds; he was a
wise Statesman, who said, England is a strong body which can never dye, unless
it kills it self: to d^vide among our selves will produce infallible ruin: in
folly and fury we may wound the Nation, but its beyond our Art, or the skill of
Angels and men to heal it, such may the contusion be: I could not in Honor, in
affection, but own their persons, whose ca^se I plead, who are the supports
each of others Power, and dignity, the Crown, and Glory of this Nation, by whom
next under God we enjoy our Liberties, our Tranquillities, and in hope that thy
duty to them, will answer their affection to thee: and that the unworthy Author
(not worthy to be numbered with the Saints, and the least of all Gods mercies)
shall enjoy one blessing hereby, I include thee in an Epistle with them, and
conclude my self

Thine in and for the Lord, and his Service, ENO. GRAY.

Vox Coeli.
Containing Maxims of Pious Policy.
RELIGION is the best reason of State, the strongest pillar of a Commonwealth:
and must be the rule of all Government, Divine and Civil, the Word is the
mensura mensurans* There is the measure of a man, which is Angelical, (a)
Apostoll* 21 Rev. 17. Ephesians. 2. 30. Rev. 13. 17. 1 Timothy 4. ^. 2 Pet. 1. 20.
call (a) There is the number of a man which is Traditionall (a) Diabolical,
(a) because it is besides, or against that rule, which is Theopneumaticall (a)
If States rule by measure, and not by ^mmber, then do they order their ways so
as to please the Lord, and thereupon may expect their enemies to be as peace
with them. Pure worship is the sanctuary of strength, and Saints Pro. 16. 7.
Den. 11. 31.
the strength of Governors. In the deformation thereof, the earth mournes, a
curse devoureth the Land. The transgression Zach. 12. ^. Esa. 24.
thereof being heavy upon the inhabitants, by Sword, Famine, and Pestilence (a)
In the Reformation of Religion, from the very day it begins, all curses are
turned into blessings, (a) ^^^ggai 2. 2 Chr. 13. 1^. 2 Ch^o^. 15.
how (...) against Jer^boam, (a) how Asa, (a) Jeh^s^phat (a) H^^^kiah, (a) and
Josiah, (a) upon the ground prospered Divine Histories manifest.

2 Chronicles. 17. the whole. 2 Chr. 31. 10, 21. 2 Chr. 34. 24.
In the advance of Reformation, Christian Magistrates should be the chiefest
instruments, being furnished with power from heaven, with a foursold authority
to that end.

1. A Restrictive authority, a power of restraint in things Judge. 18. 7.
pertaining to the outward man; (a) (the word signifies a possession of
restraint) all great and gross sins against nature, Tim. 9. 10. 1 Samuel 3 13.
against Gods Law, the Magistrate must restrain: what the sin and punishment of
Ely was is not unknown (a). Whatsoever is apparently sinful in the worship of
God, to provoke the eyes 1 Chr. 5. 12, 13, 15.
of his glory (a), is prejudicial unto the external Communion, to the civil
peace, and to the peculiar liberties of Churches, such offenses the Magistrate
may inhibit; he must restrain (a) and without the exercise of this power, all
sin, all misery; 1 Timothy 2. 1.
all confusion would fall upon Churches, upon (...) inevitably. (a) Parents, (a)
and Masters, (a) have this power granted Judge 19. 1, 2. Pro. 29. 15. Prove. 29.
19 Deuteronomy. 21. 1^.
them of God. Therefore Magistrates have it much more, they (a) being the
Fathers and Masters of all Families, under their civil jurisdiction.

2. A Vindictive authority, a power to inflict civil censure or due punishment
suitable to the violation of Gods Law, in cases momentall and prejudicial to
the honor of heaven. Thus Idolatry, a sin against the first Table, is to be
punished by the Job 3: 26, 27, 28 Verse 9. 10.
Judge, (a) as well as Adultery a sin against the second Table, (a) thus also
blasphemy (a) against God, this also Sabbath breaking, all these sins are to be
punished by him, (a) and without the exercise of this power, the wrath of God
cannot be Neh. 1^. 17, 18, 21.
kept off Kingdoms or States. This argument is ^^ged by Nehemiah, who tells
us, that a meet external and Political observation of the Sabbath, does
prevent, or divert the wrath of Rom 1^. 34.
the God of heaven. (a) The Magistrate has the Civil sword committed unto him
from heaven, to punish, and to be a terror to evil works. All evils
indifferently, whether Moral, or Theological, Civil or Sacred, which are
gross and apparent evils against the glory of God; for so far as he is to
encourage good, he is to discourage evil, but he is to encourage all, and to
be a terror to no good works. And therefore so for is he to (...) 13, 4
discourage all evil, and to encourage ^o evil works, (...) (a) and Masters (a)
have received this authority from Christ in 1 P^t. ^. 18.
their families, he that is over all families has not less power then he that
is confined to one.

3. A decretive or mandative authority, a power of commanding civilly what God
commands in matters of Religion, appertaining to the outward man, (a) The King
of N^^ive^ did Jonah ^ 7.
not respectively command the duty of Fasting and Prayer, as convenient and
profitable (leaving the people to their liberty of practice therein, to obey or
disobey that command which suited best with their own judgments or consciences)
but he^ does positively decree it, and that as an absolute necessary means to
turn away the wrath of God from that Kingdoms, and therefore he bound them in
obedience to that decree, by ^ Tim. 1. 9, 10, 11. ^^l. 5. 19, 20 21* Zac. 13.
2, 3, 4
the force of civil authority, upon a sacred ground^so in matters of says
as well as practice, (a) the Magistrate may command what the Word commands,
either expressly, or by clear inference, and natural deduction, (a) An Act if
it be good in it self, cannot be evil upon his order; the nature of the thing
is not altered upon his command, neither is the obedience given thereto,
thereupon unwarrantable: (a) nay rather those that 2 Cor. 30. 5, 8, 10, 12.
obey the command of the King and Nobles, are said to obey the word of the Lord,
those that disobey are branded as scorners of God and godliness. Abrah^^^ ^
Prince amongst the people (a) as well as a Father to his Children, as a Master
to his Servants, Genesis ^3. 6.
is commended by God, for imposing the force of a command upon his household to
keep the way of the Lord, (a) Genesis 18. 18, 19. John 24. 15.
What should I speak of Joshua? (a) What of David? a Ruler says he, whether in
an occonomical or political State must rule not only in justice to men, but in
the f^ar of God, and be as the sun for refreshing light, and life unto his
family or Kingdom. Ezra's hands were strengthened in the service of the Lord by
the command of the King, for which he blesses the Lord, (...) 7. 21.
and yet this King a Heathen. Religion does not at all diminish the Civil
authority of Magistrates, in causes sacred, but rather strengthens that
authority, by sanctifying the same, defining the end, the means, and ordering
the use, the exercise of ^ha^ power by and according unto the rule of the Word,
and to the honor of God only* (a) ^^der the Gospel Magistrates (...) nursing
fathers to take care that no saving administrations b^ wanting Esaias ^9. (...).
to the people, and what is destructive to their spiritual and eternal good,
rather then what is prejudicial to their corporal or temporal, (The soul
being of infinite value beyond the body) they are to inhibite and restrain. As
fathers they are to encourage those which are obedient to the will of the Lord,
and those that are apparently rebellious and disobedient, they are to censure.
Job was a King amongst his people, a Father and a Master in his family, and he
left not his family to choose their own way to walk therein, at their own
liberty, but he chose out their way for them, and appointed the same unto them
positively, ^ Chr. 30. 4. ^ Chr. (...) 31.
and determinately, that they might walk therein: (a) I might instance in Moses
(a) As^, (a) Jehosap^at, (a) Hezekia^, (a) and J^^ia^; (a) besides these
forementioned. If it be said these were types of Christ, I answer, that it is
true in their persons, rather then in their power; for why they should be types
in that power which is sacred, rather then in that which is Civil, some reason
must be given, or else both powers being then (though typically) equally
inherent in them, by this argument must now determine in Christ's person; and
then no humane authority is to be improved under the Gospel to any end, either
sacred or eivil, which is against all scripture and reason; and by this
argument, and such like produced, all occonomicall rule must also end with
political, and if so, the world would soon be involved in all profaneness
and wickedness. And besides, neither Job, nor Moses, nor Cyrus, nor
Artaxerxes, nor Nehemiah, were types of Christ, yet these improved this civil
authority in causes sacred, and without sin.

4. It is an Accumulative authority, the power of a Magistrate is to strengthen
and encourage Churches, and the Saints the members thereof, in their due
Liberties, powers and privileges; to the preservation of them in peace, and
order, (the end 1 Timothy 2. ^.
of all magistraticall authority) (a) so far as any matters of Religion (coming
under cognizance of the Civil Magistrate) (as a public officer of the State)
do further or hinder that peace, so far the Magistrate may use his civil
power, and if matters of Religion be pertinaciously, and tumultuously upheld to
the disturbance of the public peace, he may censure such persons, and acts in
reference thereto, and without the exercise of this power, Churches would
as soon decay as States. That vast authority that some Sycophants (against all
reason and rule) have attributed unto Magistrates, has much prejudiced their
due power in the opinion of some, (whose affections are good, but grounds
weak) wanting the serious and judicious consideration of these four
subsequent limitations, the qualifications of that fourfold forementioned
Authority.

1 This power is not absolute, the Magistrate may not do quod libet, nor quod
expedit, but quod lic^t: (a) he may not appoint 1 Cor: 10. 23.
what form of Doctrine, Worship, and Government in Churches he pleases, not
what he judges to be sound, and Orthodoxall, nor what others advise him unto
as regular, nor may he dispense with any divine command, nor can he alter the
nature of things to make that absolute which the Lord Christ has left
indifferent, that lawful which is scandalous, that expedient which is lawful,
neither must he be obeyed in any such commands, (because contrary to divine
Acts 4. 19. Acts 15. 28, 29.
authority,) the word only being his rule, (a) the Apostles had no such power,
(a) therefore Magistrates much less.

Secondly, this power is privative, it is not a power to infringe the Liberties
of the Saints, the due privileges and 1 Timothy* 27, ^
power of Churches, but rather a power to strengthen the immunities thereof: he
may not forbid any thing, but what is forbidden by the word directly, or by
express consequence: (a) Pray (says the Apostle) that you may live under his
government, 1 In all godliness, 2 In all honesty, 3 In both peacably: he does
not say, pray that he may not meddle in matters of Religion and godliness,
that being sacrilegious usurpation: but pray that in using this authority in
things sacred, as civil, pious, as just, you may peaceably exercise all Acts
of Religion under such a Magistrate, that by his improvement of his authority
against those that should disturb you in the profession and practice of
Religion, as well as of honesty, you may live in godliness peaceably, in all
godliness in the highest degree* as well as in all honesty. 2. He does not
say, pray that the Magistrate may not hinder you in a contrary practice to
godliness, (if according to the light of your conscience) no more then he
says, pray that he may not restrain you in any course of dishonesty, (though
to your conscience a supposed case of honesty) which cases may be incident
sometimes to godly men, for this were to pray that we may be left to all
ungodliness and dishonesty, if we E^^k 14. 4, 5.
understand the Scripture in the genuine sense thereof, and do not wrest it unto
our own destruction, if we set not up an Idol in our hearts and put the
stumbling block of our iniquity before our face, when we come to the word to
require the will of the Lord therein.

Thirdly, this power is not ecclesiastical, the Magistrate can force no Order
or Ordinances upon Churches, contrary to divine Order, no person to become a
Member of a Church who is unworthy, no Church to do any Act against the will of
2 Chronicles 26. 16. 1 Samuel: 1^. 12, 13.
Christ, nor may he intermeddle in Church affairs to administer officially, the
word, the seals, or censures, but he must leave Church Officers to discharge
their duty therein, as called thereunto Esaias. ^9. 23.
by God, and himself as a Member thereof must humbly submit thereunto, in fear
and reverence to the KING of Nations.

Fourthly, This power is not wholly spiritual, neither in respect of the
object, nor secondly, in respect of the subject.

First, Not in respect of the object*

The Magistrate cannot restrain or censure the inward lusts of the heart, nor
the corruption of the judgment. When acts are external, do infringe liberty,
do violate the public peace, and become pernicious and destructive to others;
then do they fall under the civil jurisdiction of the Magistrate. Such things
as appertain to the outward man, such things only are within the cognizance of
the civil Magistrate.

Secondly, The Magistrate cannot constrain to the inward exercise of religion
with spirit and power; he cannot compel any man to bel^eve, or yet to repent,
that being the especial gift of grace, and work of divine power. The
Magistrate Jo^^ 3. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
(as the King of Nineveh did) may make use of his coercive authority to compel
his subjects to the external means of faith, and repentance, as to the
hearing of the word by which such may be saved, as are enemies to Christ and to
their own souls, in opposing, or neglecting the same, he may press^ them 1
Kings 21. 29.
to the frequent use of these means, without which they perish; and therein he
may urge them to the external acts of humiliation, and reformation: which acts
materially are grateful to God, successful to men, and powerful
isntrumental means, not only to remove a judgment from such persons, but also
from a Nation.

And if Magistrates should want such power in these cases, and at times of
divine judgment imminent, or incumbent, Ez^* 7. 23, 26, 27.
they should want isntrumental and physical means to remove the wrath of God
from their dominions. Natural worship being due to God from all men naturally
as their Rom: 1. 21. Jer: 10. 25.
C^eatour; and that neglected, or denied, procures both guilt and punishment
inevitably, irrecoverably upon States or Kingdoms.

Secondly, This power is not wholly spiritual in respect of the Subject.

The power of the Magistrate is not a compulsive power over the conscience, to
destroy or infringe that liberty purchased by Christ. Conscience is bound to no
other Lord, or Lawgiver then Christ, to no other rule then the Word. My liberty
of Conscience is then infringed when the Magistrate compells me to do that
which God forbids, or has not commanded, or ^ath left indifferent, or when he
does press me to any thing besides or against that which he who is Lord and
Lawgiver prescribes, who only has dominion over my faith and conscience; and
this is usurpation. To command religion coercively without due information of
the judgment and conscience by clear Scripture, and sense of divine reason, is
Tyranny over that conscience which the Word, and not the Sword, must convince,
must reduce. Notwithstanding if a Magistrate press me to that faith which he
that (...) dominion over prescribes, and provokes me unto that duty, which in
conscience, and by divine command I am bound to perform to him who is the
Supreme Sovereign of Hea^e^ and Ear^^, and Lord over my Conscience; this i^ ^o
reason can (...) called oppression of conscience, because this tends not to the
suppression, but to the advance of Truth: Shall the word and the due obedience
thereof, when urged by men, be the cause of persecutions? The Magistrates
pressing to the obedience of truth is no cause, it is the error of his
judgment, his mi^^^k^ of the rule, his pressing that upon the conscience of
another, which is an error in it self, condemned by the word, and this is the
sole ground of persecution: As the erro^^ of the Judge in causes civil, is the
ground of his injustice. Now to recl^^^ this error, we must not take away the
lawful use, but regulate the abuse of this Authority. If Magistrates should
disuse their power in Non-administration, or abuse it in Maladministration,
Psalm 8^ 5, 6, 7. (...)3.
they shall not be so much respondent unto men, as they shall to God therein,
from whom they received the Sword, by whom invested, for whom entrusted with
all their power and authority.

Upon these premises three or four Deductions or Conclusions will necessarily
arise from thence: 1 That what

1 Laws have been, are, or may be insnaring (not only to the Liberties, Lives,
and Estates, but also) to the consciences of such as are truly conscientious
and pious, would speedily be repealed. By such Laws at first enacted,
Antichrist ^^ept 2 Thessalonians 2. 4.
into his seat of ambitious usurpation, of tyrannical persecution; (as all
Historians know) the foundation of that blood spilt, and all those miseries
felt, in England these bypast years was laid in the blood of our precious
Worthies, not only in M^rian days, and under the black cloud of Papacy, but
since in the light of the Gospel, under the late government by Episcopacy, in
the sufferings of deprived, imprisoned, and banished ones, the loud cry whereof
pierced the ears of Heaven for justice in the total and eternal supplantation
of that Plant which the Lord never planted. The experience of former sufferings
hereby may produce fear in our hearts in future.

Such who would represent the Congregationall way (in the purest practice
thereof) as the root of Schism, Error, Heresy, and a breach of Covenant with
God and Man; Destructive to the peace of Churches, and of the Nation: What do
they but open a back door to usurpation, tyranny and blood, at least a wide
and effectual door to the suppression of truth, the advance of Traditionall
error? should this be far from their own intentions, they are not acquainted
with the hearts of others, whose principles at present are bad enough, and
succeeding ages rather degenerate.

Phil. 3. 15, 16.
To put in practice the Apostles precept, and observe his golden rule, his
Apostolical Canon, in those matters of Faith and Practice, wherein we are
agreed mutually to combine in love, and join in fellowship, in those
circumstantials wherein we differ to forbear each other in love, and meekness
until the Lord reveal it unto both.

The difference is of no great latitude between the Presbyterian and
Independent party, especially where either are furnished with able guides and
judicious and pious Officers to govern them, and to go before them: such as
are Orthodoxall, and Moderate, Pure, and Peaceable on both sides, may soon
accommodate, being agreed in all the fundamentals, and substantials of
Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government. Both acknowledge a Government
Ecclesiastical to be Essential to the being, at least, to the preserving of a
Churches being: both hold Church Government to be Presbyteriall also, within
the particular Congregation, with the yiedling of Appeals to other Churches, by
way of counsel, judgment and censure, negative: (and we challenge no more
authority over the Church of Rome.)

They do seriously defend diverse Parochical Congregations, and Ministeries,
with whom they hold communion in Ordinances, to whom they are helpful in the
establishment of the Doctrine of the Gospel, and the Worship of Jesus Christ,
against all novell opinions, and practices of the times, and is the toleration
of these intolerable?

As for errors feared and heresies supposed to spring from this Root, it is
answered, A total exemption from such evils 1 Cor. 11. 19*
no Church or Churches can expect until the tares be gathered from the wheat,
until then there must be schisms, errors, heresies. No Churches abounded,
were more afflicted therewith then the best and purest under Heaven, those
planted by the hands of the Apostles, even those whilst the Apostles were
pr^sent with them, and shall we expect immunity? and therefore that breach also
of Covenant suggested hereby will appear to be as ungrounded as the former
apprehensions. O that all violence, and envy, bitter invectives, reproachful
languages, and uncivil carriages on both sides each toward other, might be
censured, and condemned, that the unity of the spirit may be maintained in the
bond of peace. And this reconcillation will frustrate the expectation of foreign
enemies, and render their design upon our domestic differences, vain and
fruitless, which still continuing is the saddest omen of confusion, and Zech.
11. 16.
desolation, if we believe the Scriptures. Woe unto us, when the Lord would heal
the breaches of this Nation, and we will Jer* 51. 9. Jer* ^0. 13, 14, 15.
not be healed; what may we fear but judgment advanced to the skies? which the
Lord prevent, for the fall will be heavy on those who procured, and who
continued this wound.

Thirdly, What Laws or Liberties have encouraged the hearts of wicked ones, or
strengthened the hands of ^inners by 2 Chronicles* 19 5, 6, to the end.
too much lenity, or indulgence, those Laws must be reformed, and established
with greater severity, and with due authority: ordaining such laws, such
executioners, superior, or inferior, in every place, as may be faithful in
the discharge of their duties in conscience, in obedience unto God ultimately.

Many Laws are without life, whereby profaneness increase, and the land
mourns under the pressure of the sins of the inhabitants thereof; what
Adulteries? what Inc^sts? what Pride? what Oppression? yea, what Pagan
Ignorance? what gross Profaneness? what secret Idolatry? what contempt of
divine Worship, Sabbaths, Ministers, Saints? ^ad symptoms of a declining
State, and prognostics of irrevocable ruin without speedy prevention, and
remotion by a blessed, and effectual reformation. This we have promised to
God, and the world, we have prayed for: but oh that we were tender and
observant of our duty, conscientious (...) vigorous in our endeavors to
suppress all sin, to advance all godliness in the highest degree, in our
selves and in all others: Zech 5. 3, 4.
lest the flying roll of vengeance, (...) in upon the Nation. There are mighty
crying sins, the sin^ of S^do^, yea such as are not named among the Gentiles,
to be found in England, for which the Lord has smitten us (although we have
not returned to him that smit^^h us,) that his an^er i^ Esaias 9. 12. 13.
not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still: he a^^lic^^ us in our
choicest comforts, the very supports of life* the field is wasted, the land
mourns, the fruit trees are withered, the Joel 1.
beasts groan, the flocks of sheep are desolate; that a faithful Land is made
barren for the wickedness of those that dwell Psalm* 107. 14.
therein. The Lord has been, is still hewing at the root of this Nation, this
Parliament, his compassion has r^wled within him, unwilling he has been to
make England as Ireland, as Germany.

Oh that the sins of this preserved remnant create not a new controversy,
that our overthrow be not like the overthrow of Sodom: who would have thought
in so fair a morning Genesis 19, 23, 24.
a Storm should have risen? but a Tempe^^ of fire and Brimstone, who could have
feared? and yet it came in an instant suddenly. No privilege will exempt a
sinful Nation from the punishing hand of a divine justice; no greatness can
secure it against heaven, no wisdom can establish it, if sin be found in Je^.
14. Ier: 15.
the skirts of it. Not the presence no^ prayers of the Saints* not the Oracles,
nor the Ordinances of God: no humiliation without reformation can divert that
reproach which sins bring upon a Nation, those judgments which they procure.
Every man begin with himself, with his Family, le^t the Lord first visit there:
many a Princely, and Noble Family in this State has fallen, by the sword of the
Lords indignation, such who thought themselves too great to be good, who were
unwilling to be informed, who hated to be reformed, these have drunk the wine
of the Lords fury and were moved, and ^^d, Ier: 25. 15.
they have spued, and are fallen never to rise up more. These things happened
unto them for examples unto (...) if we ^^ake 2 Cor. 10. 11. Ier* 25. 31.
off God, God will shake off us; the Lord has a controversy with the Nations,
he will plead with all ^le^^, he will give them that are wicked to the sword:
the Lord is now upon that work which others are grieved at, are unwilling
unto, that is reformation, which will cost fire and sword: (two Zech 13. 8, 9.
Esaias ^. 1^, 13.
parts shall dye, the third shall pass through the fire) he is upon Reforming
Parliament, Army, Nation, the hand of the Lord shall be upon the Cedars of
Lebanon, the Oaks of Esaias 19. 2, 14.
Bashan, that himself alone may be exalted. The Lord is dashing the son against
the father, brother against brother, neighbor against neighbor; has mingled
a perverse spirit in the midst of England, and no wonder the greatest part of
men professing Religion, are without Religion, are against Reformation,
Christians in name, but worse then heathens in nature, all crying, pleading for
reformation, but few subjecting, submitting unto the power, and the authority
thereof. the potion that should heal us, makes us more sick, the humors of
this Nation are so far from evacuation, that they are now more enraged: (...).
God would have healed Israel, and the iniquity of Ephraim discovered it self,
a sad presage of judgment, and ruin. But if after all this we begin with
personal reformation: if those who are the reformers of others do especially
reform themselves; Persons, Families, Parliament, Laws; then shall the light
of this Nation break forth as the morning, the darkness thereof shall be as
noone day, and the health thereof shall spring forth speedily. When the Lord
hides his face, who then can Jo^ 34. 2^.
behold him? but when he gives quietness, who then can make trouble? Oh that
England may be the glory of the earth, the emulation of Jew and Gentile!

Fourthly, and lastly, as a faithful Magistracy, is the support 2 Chronicles. 17.
9, 10 2 Chronicles* 13. 9, 10. 2 Chronicles: ^1. 13, 14. ^er 33. 17. Psalm: 77. 20. Exodus*
4. 14, 15, 16, 27.
of Law; so a learned, pious, painful, and soul-saving ministry is the best
support of Religion, and without the conjunction of these their mutual
concurrence in Counsel, in authority, no State can prosper. Thou leddest thy
people like a flock by the hand of Moses and Aaron. The power of Magistrates
and of Ministers are diverse one from another, the power of the one being
Ecclesiastical, of the other civil, yet in respect of the exercise of this
power, they ought not to be divided the one from the other, because they are
powers to confirm, not to prejudice the being or wel-being each of other.

The Harvest is great, the laborers are few: Many there are amongst us whom
the Lord has fitted with graces, with gifts, and choice abilities, able and
understanding men in the Lords Ezra 8. 15, 16. Neh. 13. 10, 11. 2 Chronicles. 17 7*
2 Chr. 30. 32. 2 Chr. 31. 4. 2 Chr. 35. 2.
work; It was Ezra his care, Nehemiahs, Jehosapbats, and Josiahs, who did also
encourage in the work of the Lord, all who were faithful in their
ministration, providing for them a comfortable and honorable maintenance.
Christian Magistrates, or the supreme authority of a Nation, has the power of
Christ in them, to depose and deprive in case of unworthiness (as Solomon did
Abiat^ar) all such as are ignorant, erroneous, and 1 Kings 2. 27.
scandalous; as be profane or formal, for from such a ministry tolerated,
ignorance, error, formality, and profaneness 2 Chronicles. 11. 14, 15. Jer: 23. 15
Ezekiel. 22. 26.
flows into a Land, or Nation. And if a faithful soul-saving Ministry decay,
the greatest glory and blessing in a Nation, yea the security, and tranquillity
of that State is departed from it, without which no State can expect such a
people their friends, 2 Kings 13. 13. 2 Chronicles: 13. 9, 10. 2 Chr: 36. 16.
they willingly allowing them to be Christ's foes, to live in ignorance,
darkness, and error, without means, and remedy to inform, to reform their
deluded, seduced souls, ready to perish, to be destroyed unto all eternity. The
dark corners of England, pity, and remember those whose souls cry aloud for
bread, who inhabit the shadow of death, unto whom Jesus Christ is no more known
then unto poor Indians, who have no love unto, no delight in knowledge; nay,
who deride the means of grace, who have been your enemies hitherto, but such as
have been Christ's? Papists and Atheists? improve your power which God has
given you over them, to gain their souls to the knowledge and love of the truth
and ways of Jesus Christ.

False Religion has been carried on by fire and faggot, by force and strength;
but pure Religion by the arm of God, by the spirit of the Lords mouth speaking
from heaven, by contemptible instruments against the strongest opposition,
without the help of the Princes and Monarchs of this world, nay against all
their fiery opposition, and fierce persecution, by the travells of a few poor
Fishermen. Some may question the authority, and dispute the Call of such, but
those who are truly judicious, and humbly pious, can distinguish between the
subject, and the adjunct, such persons being thoroughly manifest unto God, and
to the consciences of good men. It is the grand design of Satan, 2 Cor: 5. 11.
it ever was, ever will be, if has cannot pluck these (...) to darken the light
in heaven, to prejudice that divine (...) that powerful operation which the
word should find ^o the hearts of the hearers, by some pretended error in the
person, in the Call. This plot (as old as N^a^,) was (...) one thousand six
hundred years agone, and then carried on (...) Heb. ^. 10. Mat. 11 18, 19 2
Cor. 10 10. 2 Cor. 13 3, 6. 2 Cor. 11. 6, 7. 1 Cor. 4. 15. ^al* 4. 14, 15.
on purpose to prejudice the work in the very time of Reformation. They
questioned the Call of John to his Ministry, of the Lord J. Christ to his.
They despised the Person, contemned the power of the Apostle Paul, even those
who were his children, begotten by his Ministry, to whom he had been thoroughly
made manifest in all things; such as had formerly received him as an Angel of
God, yea as Christ Jesus, who would ha^^ plucked o^t their eyes to have done
him good, yet these, even these injured the Apostle, stood in a kind of enmity
and opposition unto him, vilified his Ministry, preferred a weak, ye^ ^ corrupt
Ministry, beyond that which the Lord had (...) blessed and sanctified, to the
converting and saving of theirs* with the souls of many others. Verily every
man at his (...) state is altogether vanity.

Jer. 22. 15, 16. Amos 88, 9, 10 Amos 5* 12, 13, 14, 15.
2. Justice is the support of Religion: Is not this to know me, says the
Lord; to do judgment and justice, to judge the cause of the poor and needy?
The neglect of justice is punished with the greatest judgments from heaven,
procur^th certain and sudden misery after the fairest hopes of mercy, (...)
sunset even at noon day; and is numbered amongst the might^ sins of a Nation,
which the Lord will not pardon* when (...) Eccle. 5 8 Deu. 1^ 7, 8, 9
is a cry in the hearts, in the families of the oppressed, this cry is loud in
the cares of God; if the yoke of cares of griefs, by the loss of the estates,
of the lives of oppressed ones* ^f the heavy burdens, pressing the minds,
oppressing the families of poor men, be not broke off speedily, this hastneth
the desolation, Esaias 5. 7, 9, 10
the devastation of great families, and of Nations also* a^ honor, no parts, no
power, can secure the greatest from Divine justice, or from humane hatred, in
case of such neglect: If (...) Jo^ 34. 17, 18, 19, 2^, 29, 30.
be tyrannical, the Soldier shall do that justice for an oppressed people,
which they could never obtain from Sycophantical Royallists: if States abuse
their power, betray their trust, the same God has ordained the same nod for
(...) Ier. 6. 4, 5, 6. ^ King^ 3. 2^. Psalm. 85. 9, 10. Esa. 32. 17, 18.
which renders the persons, the actions of (...) (...) honorable, in the
hearts, in the eyes of God, of good (...) procures a Nation mercy, and peace, ^
sp^^dy, a (...) establishment to the greatest prosperity thereof to all (...).

1. Justice Restrictive in restraining the exorbitant power of some, in calling
others to due account, entrusted with the affairs of the public. The Romans
not only often changed their Magistrates, but instigated the people to accuse
such (...) they found perfidious and self-seeking in their Offices, whereby
their Common wealth flourished, Queen Elizabeth when her great Officers of
State at any time complained, that it was to her dishonor to hear and receive
so many accusations against her great Counselors of State as she did, they
tending to their discouragement, because to their disparagement, she replied,
that she was Queen of the small, as well as of the great, and therefore she
would hear the meanest subject, and if the charge were unjust she would censure
the accus^r, i^ just, ^he would not protect the greatest from justice* Samuel
when the people (...) discontent with Aristocracy, and do^ted upon Monarchy*
(they 1 Samuel 12. 3, 4^*
would have a King and Judges no longer) he instigated all men that could justly
do it, to accuse him of injustice (...) the Lord, and before the King, a
singular example of (...) and justice, a president to all persons, at all
times, in all place^, to act so righteously, that they stand ^l^er before God,
in their consciences, and against the censures of the wholeworld.

2. Justice Vindictive in punishing the nocent, and not permitting the guilty
to go free* justice must be impartial, without respect to persons, even the
highest acts of vi^diction justice^ It is Deuteronomy. 10. 17. Deuteronomy. 13. 9, 10, 1^.
said of Levi, that he regarded neither father, no^ mother, nor brethren, nor
children, and the blessing of peace w^^ upon him. What should I speak of the
act of (...) of Samuel, upon Agag K. of (...) of Jeb^jadab upon (...) Jebijad^^
it the declining State of Judah, falls upon an act very irregular, yet in that
case truly justifiable, he contri^^^ the deposition of (...) Infinuates to that
and into the ^ffections of the Soldiers, and 2 King^ 11. 14, 15.
to strengthen himself he ingageth them in this design* (...) proclaims a new
King, in the Kings minority modells the (...) swears the people to submission
to those Laws enacted by ^^^self; makes a decree, that whosoever should break
into the ranges should die although it were the Queen, and accordingly commanded
her execution in the Royal City, near to the Court, (the place of her sin
ordained to be the place of her suffering) before all the people, yet this was
not without blessing and success from heaven, says the Text; the neglect of
(...) 1 Kings 20 42.
upon B^nhadad King of Assyria brought a sword upon Aba^: the neglect thereof
upon the house of Saul, by the Princes of 2 Samuel* 11. 1, 2. Eccle: 8. 11. Esaias
59 11. Deuteronomy: 1. 17. Deuteronomy: 17. 8. Levit. 19 15. Deuteronomy: 25. 1.
Iuda^, procured three years famine upon Israel: the want of impartial justice
imboidens the wicked in sin, disheartens the godly in rightcousnesse.

As justice must be impartial in respect of persons, so of ^^ses criminal, or
civil, administered with due respect to the truth of the Cause, to the
justification of the righteous, to the condemnation of the wicked, a more
grateful service to God Prove: 28. 21.
then sacrifice: It is recorded by Solomon to be the character of a person very
ignoble, to respect persons in judgment* for a (...) of bread (says the Text)
such a man does transgress; only such acts must be performed.

1. With sincerity; Jeb^ did materially what God commanded, 2 Kings 10. 30.
and commended, against the house of Aba^, yet because he did it not formally,
with respect ultimately to the Lords honor, but respectively to establish his
own estate, honor and greatness; therefore not only Jeb^ is found guilty of
all the Hos: 1: 4, 5.
blood so spilt by him, but all Israel is plagued for that depraved 2 Chr: 1^.
10.
act, in respect unto the sinister end. If judgment be not administered in the
sear of the Lord, with sincerity, with faithfulness, 2 Samuel: 24. 1.
it procures wrath from heaven against the persons ex^^^ting, and the Nation
wherein it was executed; the sins of Public persons reflect upon the
Republique.

2. With Prudence; it was the prayer of Solomon, that the Lord would give him a
wise and understanding hear^ 1 Kings 3. 7 Prove: 17. 15. 2 Samuel: 14. 33. Judge:
21. 15. Hos. 12. 6. ^s. 106. 32. 3^.
to judge his people; Wisdom is requisite to distinguish causes and persons,
wisdom to inflict censures in proportion to demerit. Too much Lenity animates
the person, justifies the facts too much severity renders the most righteous
cause, in respect unto that act, dishonorable: judgment must be te^per^d with
mercy, the (...) be afforded that person in whom we punish o^r (...)
inclinations, lest a distemper in them (...) vocation to the Almighty, (...)
with respect to former merit is (...) and the (...) of mercy over the severe
stroke Justice is honorable (...) extent of mercy as much inflaming the
affection of Love, (...) the restraint of or rigor in the execution of
Justice, will (...) it.

1 Kings 2. 2^.
This rule we may learn of the holiest, (...) Politician, that ever the sun
shined upon, Solomon. (...) is requisite to determine the time and season of
judgment, for if the 2 Samuel* 3. 39. with 1 Kings 2. 31.
blood of one nocent, should hazard the lives of many (...) cents, there may b^e
a suspension of the act to a (...) opportunity, (...) David did in the case of
Joab.

3. Justice Remunarative, in the due requital of friends who have been
faithful servants to the Public: for (...) only to complement with their
friends is dishonorable but to be just toward all, ^el Prami^, ^il Pava, is
truly noble* The Gr^ians observed, that this stain ever remained upon the
garments of Princes, upon the raiment of Court^^^s* variable in their
affections, slow in their Compensations; (...) tells (...) that it is an ill
sign of a declining State, an ill pr^sa^^ of the decay thereof, when such as
deserve well from it, shall ^^^d no other recompense by it, then the (...) of
their own consciences; it is yet worse, when such as are best (...) to (...)
welfare of it, shall find no more favor from it, then if they (...) Prove. 1^.
24.
been acters against it; benefits are sometimes acknowledged, very rarely
required: Solomon tells (...) of a poor wise (...) Eccle 9. 15.
saved a City, yet no men remembered that poor man (...) some men forget, God
will (and those like God for goodness Host. 6. 1, 2. 2 Samuel 17. 27. ^ Sam. 19.
32.
dare not but) remember the acts of such* divi^^ power procured M^rde^^l's
advance, David re^^^bred the kindness of B^^zillal; Heathens will rise up
against such as (...) called Christians, in the day of Christ, what (...) 1
Kings 2. 7.
what others did in the like cases, for such eminently active for the public,
moral Histories record; (...) dixisti (...) says (...) we know what a brand
of (...) Genesis 40 23.
the scripture sets upon Phara^hs Butler, who though in his distress he was
comformed by Joseph, was obliged to show him kindness, to release him from his
bonds, yes (says the Texe) he ^os. 9 4, 5, ^.
remembered him not. 2. Less friendship cannot be afforded, then to secure
friends from the rage of enemies, this justice Joshua afforded the Gibeonites;
it is an Argument of an ill governed State, which afford^the justly accused,
opportunity to seek revenge upon the acouser, to expose the persons, or (...)
of those who have served most faithfully to the violence of malicious enemies.
The wisest States therefore have ever kept the strictest eye upon suspected
en^^ies, because revenge is ever active, and malice longer lived then either
love or thankfulness, A^. 11. Rich 2.
There was a Parliament in England, called the wonder-working Parliament, had
they been as wise to have kept, as they were potent to gain their just right
and liberties, (...) times had not lost them their honor, nor they i^oparded
their own, with the lives of their friends, as they did by their imprudence,
improvidence, self-seeking, and Treacheri^.

4. Justice Commutative in all acts and contracts, preferring the good, the
profit, the ease, the liberty of others, no of Esaias 60 17, 18. Ezekiel. 45. 11.
Nehem 5.
our selves, In all Impositions, and Taxations to afford the people all possible
case and freedom^ with reason and respect unto public safety; The act of
Nehemiah is worthy the practice of Public Statesmen, (in such cases and
times,) which act (...) Lord remembered for good to him, because of that good
which he had done to that State and People thereby: such acts are the means to
prevent popular discontent, as being most pleasing to the people, whose lawful
defires must be satisfied, unless reason, and love can captive their Spirits.
How Agrippa Captain General of the Army of the Romans against the (...)
^ppeased the Commons of Rome tumultuously assembled against the Senate, because
oppressed with unnecessary taxations ((...) they apprehended) is not unknowns*
he declaring the (...) of those wars, which could not with honor be recalled,
(...) concluded, the peril of the peoples conspiracy, being alike, (...) if
the members of the natural body should conspire against the stomach and belly,
unwilling to allow those parts food, because idle, when as each member of the
body is nourished* and the whole preserved by those parts: so says (...) the
Senate and the Commons of Rome being one body Politic, concord will cherish,
but discord will destroy this body, and every part in the whole, which this
Sen^te represents. The advantage of obedience out of love is infinitely (...)
that of fear, and such States who want the first, are neither happy, not safe:
unhappy the chiefest Royalty of Staces, consisting in the Peoples loyalty,
without which as Henry the fourth said to his son, he must never repute himself
King, nor his person, nor his honor secure; unsafe, having no confidence in the
fidelity of such who love only for fear, not fear in love.

Prove. 1^. 14. Prove. 18. 23. Prove. 19. 7. Prove: 14. 20. Hab: 1. 4.
2. Justice in the righteous, and seasonable consideration of the causes of the
poor and needy: It is a sad symptom of a declining State, and that the power
thereof shall not be prolonged, nor the stability thereof remain, when the
necessities, when the intr^^tie^ of poor men can neither procure them favor
or justice, when the law is slack, and due judgment proceeds not, when such
whose necessities require relief, who come to the ga^^ for Justice, are tu^^ed
aside, are sent away unheard; and this is numbered amongst the mighty sine, and
provoking Amos 5. 12, 13 Prove. 29. 7.
wickedness of a Nation; he who is righteous confidereth the cause of the
Poor, but the wicked regards not to know it (says Solomon) the wickedness
of such is great, and their Job 22. 5, 9, 10: Prove: 31. 7, 8, 9. Psalm: 82. ^,
4, 5, 6, 7. Deuteronomy: 10. 18.
sins infinite, says Job. Open thy mouth for the dumb, (that is, the patient
expectance of the poor) does plead the cause of the needy (says the Lord)
that he may forget his Povarty, and his misery no more, least the dumb sig^es
cry aloud to heaven for justice, upon those who would not afford them justice:
the complain of such pieroeth the heavens, (...) the heart of the (...) in the
walls, the timber of the house, proc^teth Heb:. 11, 12. Jam: 5. from the 1 ver:
to the 12. Job 29. 11, 12. Job 30. 25. Job 31. 16, 22.
judgment men^ilesse to those who showed no mercy. Job tells us that his soul
was grieved for the necessities of the poor, to whom he was a father, from whom
he never withhold their desire, never caused their eyes to full: that he
searched out their cause for them, whereby the blessing of those ready to
perish came upon him: says he, if ever I failed them when I might have helped
them in the gate, (that is, in the right of their cause by a speedy
administration of Justice, them et my arm fall from the shoulder blade, and let
it be broken from (...) bone; and he gives this for the reason* this I did,
because I feared the Almighty, destruction from the Lord was a terro^ to me, by
reason of his highness, I could not endure, that is, he knew that the Lord
would be very angry with such neglect, and how unable he was to bear divine
displeasure, and therefore he durst not but judge their cause speedily, with
respect to their necessity, to their importunity.

J^r. ^1 12.
The Lord speaking to the Governors of Israel commands them to execute judgment
in the morning, (that is, early, speedily, in the greatest necessities, and
extremities of his people* (...) 22, ^, 4, ^5, 16, 17.
without tedious attendance and circumstance) lest (says he* my fury go forth
like fire, and there be none to quench it: shall thou reign because thou
closest thy self in cedar? did not thy father do judgment and justice, and then
it was well (...) him? he judged the cause of the poor and needy, and then
(...) was well with him: was not this to know me, says the Lord? but thine
eyes and thy heart are not but for thy covetousnes^^, (says he unto Jehoi^kim)
therefore thou shall be buried with the burial of an Ass* the neglect of
justice hastens divine displeasure, procures humane hatred. Such cannot plead
want of opportunities to afford every person, in every cause audience, (the
weightyest and important affairs of State depending upon Ex. 18. 13, 14. Deuteronomy.
1. 12, 13.
them, they not wanting power (as J^^bro counseled in the li^e case) to ordain
Commissioners in Hundreds or Counties (men fearing God) to hear and determine
such causes as can ^e determined in no other Court, but by such Authority, were
such cases their own, did their persons, or their relations suffer by such
neglects, they would find time and friends to serve themselves* ^ Sam. ^3. 3, 4.
he that rules over men must be just, and ruling in the fear of God, as the
light of the morning when the sun rises, even a morning without clouds.

I shall conclude this head with three or four Corollaries as the foundations
of Justice.

1. Measure every civil action by a divine rule. There is an Acts 4. 19.
eternal justice in the divine law, and every humane constitution no further
binds any soul to obedience active then it has sympathy and agreement
therewith. Every Legislator ultimately intends obedience active, rather then
passive, in cases weighty and momentall tending to the necessary constitution
and preservation of Societies, and Commonwealths, but no law can give
satisfaction to the conscience, (with which I am bound to obey) if it be not
primitively grounded upon the 1 Per. 2. 13, 29. Romans 13. 4.
word, either directly, or by necessary inference. The power of the Magistrate
is not absolute, his authority is ministerial, his jurisdiction is
restrictive, his power limited to the word, as his rule, which only makes his
command lawful, and he commanding what God commands, a witting and wllfull
breach thereof with a disloyal mind, is a double sin; against God
commanding, against the power ordained by God. All posi^ive constitutions
tending to civil peace, to common good, are generally commanded by God in his
word, and to be obeyed upon pain of judgment, and humane laws, urging those
acts morally good, do but enjoine what God requires, these lawmakers therein
being the Lords extentors, administrators, or assigns to execute what he
prescribes. The necessity of all law does arise from the necessity of the end
thereof, and proportionable to that end, (which is public good, profit,
safety, and liberty,) so great is the necessity of constitution, and
observation; for any to impeach, or prejudice the power ordaining, to obstruct,
or interrupt the end Ezekiel. 17. 13, 14, 15, 16, 1^.
for which that power or law is ordained, such an act is usurpation,
presumption, and rebellion in that person whosoever he be, and is a fi^ue not
only against man, but God, whose word enacts that law to such an end in
general terms.

Secondly, The moral Law (the ground of justice) under the Gospal, does not
only bind us Gentiles to the rules of justice commutative, or distributive,
but the very same penalties Mat. 5. 17, 1^* 1 Timothy 1. 8* (...) 10. 1 Timothy 5* 1^.
primitively imposed by God upon the Jews in the same cases, do as well oblige
us to the same punishments, because the moral equity of those laws remain.
Hence from the equity of that Politic law, the spirit of God argeth the
necessity of maintenance of ministers under the Gospel. This is an everlasting
Maxim, that what law was given to the Jews and not as Jews, (i. e.
respective, as a people in Covenant with God above all other Nations, as a
people redeemed from bondage, preserved in the Wilderness, delivered from the
deeps, possessed of Canaan,) but as mortal men subject to the like infirmities
with those of the Nations, alike bound to the observance of the laws of
nature, dictates of conscience, and principles of religion, reason, and
justice, with others naturally, the same law is as binding to us as to them.

If prudent Philosophers, or wise Statesmen for the preservation of Societies,
Families or Commonwealths by natural reason and conscience judge that
necessary and just for, and in their own State, which the Law of God
determines such in the Polity of the Jews, (as death in cases of murder,
adultery, etc.) this law cannot be said to be peculiar to the Stars of the
Jews, the same reason binding all Nations to the sa^^ observance, which did
bind them to obedience.

Upon this ground the Lord inforceth the judicial law upon Levit. 20. 22, 23.
the Jews, forbidding them to walk in the manners of the Nations, because for
such sins the Lord abhorred those Nations. Every judicial Law has the same
moral reason to enforce obedience, the same common equity inherent in it if it
upholds the State, or intends the establishment of any of the three States of
the world, i. e. Families, Churches, or Commonwealths.

Thirdly, The best men in making Laws are subject to humane frailties, to
error, to ignorance, to misinformation, Matthew. 19. 7, 8.
to prejudice, and mistake, and when they have made laws as near as possibly
agreeable to divine equity, in their own apprehensions, yet they cannot assure
themselves or others that they have not failed in one circumstantiall
thereabouts* wherefore it is against all justice, and reason, that humane laws
subject to defects and errors should bind absolutely as divine commands do;
we see all Lawmakers are (...) in their acts to impose their Laws with
restrictions, or amplifications, to interpose interpretations, and
modifications, their laws being subject to ambiguities. Hence humane laws
should be administered with indulgence, to those that (...) in some especial
case or ambiguity of conscience, and (...) reason may allow a dispensasion, as
in case the end of the law be not violated; in case such breach be without just
offense to any: and lastly, in case it be without contempt of that authority
prescribing and ordaining that laws in such cases the Magistrate may, yea must
indulge, or he is Tyrannical. Suppose a Magistrate commands in time of War
that no man upon pain of death open the Gates of a City to any person: if
after this strict order, some eminent and well affected Citizen should desire
admission, and the Gate should be opened to let in such a person, no danger
being eminent, and no peril like to invade the whole by the security of this
part of the body, here is a violation, a breach of the latter and Grammatical
construction of the law, but without the breach of conscience, without the
contempt of authority, without just offense or damage to any* without breath
of the equity, the sense, and the end of that law; which was, that the City,
and every part and member thereof, be p^rserved in safety, in which case such a
person cannot in justice suffer.

Fundamental laws respect punishment only (...) because so good, so just a
law is disobeyed, and that end thereby intended, is frustrated.

Obedience only is (...) and ultimately respected therein, because without it
the foundations would suddenly be out of course, wherefore those commands of
the magistrate that tend to the necessary good, to the absolute preservation of
humane societies i^ peace, pi^ty, and justice, those commands are primitively
divine, formally good, finally lawful, and cannot be violated without sin,
although the Magistrate should define no penalty, impose no punishment upon
such transgression* the law in these cases respecting due obedience in full
satisfaction to the justice thereof, rather their submission to the censure,
subjection to the punishment inflicted, in case of wilful disobedience, and
obstinace violation*

Fourthly* That the Grounds, Rules, and Foundations of Justice must be of
things lawful, possible to be observed within our power, and tending to general
good, to order, and peace, to liberty and stability. Hence those acts in some
persons cases, and Numb* 30. 3, 4* 5, 6, 7, 8, ^3.
times unlawful and unjust* the same in other cases and thries may truly be
proved just, e contra, (...) acts in some persons cases and times just, may in
others be unjust: Shines who cursed Mat: 12. 4.
2 Samuel 16. 7, 8. 2 Samuel: 19. 18, 19, 20, 23. 1 Kings 2. 8, 9. 1 King. 3. 44, 46.
and abused David, his act was treasonable, an act (...) ^^serving death, by
the law of God and man, yet upon his submission, David not only promised him
pardon, but by (...) and covenant solemnly engaged before God to pass by the
fault, to take off the punishment of this sin, which (...) upon better
consideration, and more serious thoughts, he (and that without perjury) broke,
giving an absolute charge and command to Solomon his son to put Shimei to
death, and hold him no longer guiltless; which decree Solomon accordingly did
execute, returning all the wickedness of Shimei against David upon his own
head.

Joab was a man of blood, a man deserving death; yet (...) was forced to
indulge him so far in his sin, as to continue him in his honor, until the
Lord tendered an opportunity, and gave him power to be avenged on him to the
^^most.

Such Oaths, Covenants, Protestations, and Declarations ^^deliberately and
rashly made, such honor and indulgence (...) i^ conferred, or continued to
Delinquent persons deserving death, condemned by the decree of God; such oaths
are (...) justly broken, then with justice and honor to God, or (...) Numb*
35. 31, 33.
and respect to a Republic they can be kept. If a man should swear to save the
life of a murderer, such an oath not only may, but must be broken, because
the Lord has positively determined, that no satisfaction shall be taken for
the life of a murderer, neither can the land be cleansed from blood, but by
the blood of him who shed it. The inconsiderate (...) of making and taking what
cannot possibly and without sin be performed, must solemnly and seriously be
repented of before the God of Heaven, by States and by private persons. Such
circumstances may intervene, which may render that oath unlawful, which at
first was lawful, impossible to be kept, which before was possible, and in
such cases the Lord does disingage us, and the binding power thereof does
cease. Oaths Genesis ^4 8. Josh. 2. 20. 1 King^ 1. 51, 5^.
are conditional, as was Abraham's servants; the oath of the Spies to Rahab; of
Solomon, to Ad^n^jah, and bind not unless that condition be performed.

If a State do bind themselves, or others by an oath to defend the Person, and
power of a Prince, maintaining Religion, and Justice, preserving their Laws,
and Liberties, this oath must be kept the Prince performing those conditions,
but in case he be a professed enemy to Religion, an Adversary to Justice, and by
no ways of love or favor can be gained to Patronage the Laws and Liberties
of his People, but still he plots and conspires against the lives of those that
are most loyal, most faithful, such oaths are no longer binding.

It is absurd, against all reason, the light of nature, the laws of Nations, to
imagine that any oath should bind a People to deliver their Sword into a
Tyrants or Murderers hands, when they know it is desired only to murder them,
or to be avenged upon them.

Such oaths as cannot be kept with the Peace and stability of Nations (all
Casuists acknowledge) leave no obligation upon the conscience, because Reason
and Rule is the bond of Justice.

The Covenant was only a civil bond wherein we engaged out of respect to the
public peace and safety of the Nation? Is the Nation by any one act in hazard?
Nay* ^s not this peace rather secured? have not the Parliament wisely laid the
Axe to the root of our distempers? Plutarch reports of Lys^nder that he cared
neither for promise, or oath, longer then they would serve the accomplishment
of his own ends. Did not Cbarles the ninth of France, the same? and what
History can Parallel the Acts of the late KING herein? better one should perish
then a Nation. Ma^asses bloud-guiltinesse 2 Kings 24. 4. 2 Samuel: 15.
reflected upon all Israel; indulgence to any deserving death, lays a
foundation of future misery, and emboldens that delinquent in his impiety.

No politic law in a Kingdom must dispense with the Positive Law of God, that
Law enacted by himself for the preservation Gen* 6. 11. Deuteronomy: ^1.
of humane societies from violence. He that sheddeth blood, by man shall his
blood be shed: by man, not by a private person, but a public Magistrate; and
a King (if guilty) by the Supreme power. The Lacedemonian Magistrates were
called Ephori, ab (...), because for the safety of the Commonwealth, their
eyes and minds, were intent, (...) people from Kings appealed to these for
judgment, who^^ ^^thority they reputed great. In France the Patricii Regni
(...) chosen out of singular Provinces, to whom the Kings at their Coronation
were sworn as to the whole Kingdom* (...) these were sworn to defend the
Kingdom, to oppose the (...) proceedings of Kings, and to depose them in case
of Tyranny. It Is vain to instance, the law of Nature, of (...) presents us
with a cloud of witnesses.

KINGS are indeed Supreme in point of Honor, but not ^.
in point of Power, because the whole power of Governing i^ not restrained to
one person, but diffused into singular par^^, in the hands of diverse Officers,
because their power i^ not ^ natural power; no man is borne a King; and yet
(...) the relation is natural, (and in that respect stronger (...) if it were
civil) the Magistrate is to afford relief in case of oppression, justice to
the child against the parent. It Is not an absolute power, then, as Aristotle
tells us, their lusts, fr^ntick and brutish humors should rule us: then as
(...) said, having got a taste of our goods, they will being in our he^d^ as a
second course: then at (...) said, they shall neither be tied to their own nor
yet to the Laws of their Kingdom^. It Is a power conferred: Kings have no more
then what is given them, they cannot dispose of their Crowns, Jewels, and
Crown Lands; King John forfeited his Dignity thereby.

Those that reign by conquest, if conquered again, their Honor determins
therewith.

Those that are elected; whether Kings, as in Pol^^l^, or Dukes, as in Ven^tia;
the Supreme and General Counsel of the State electing, retain the Authority
to depose or (...) in case of Tyranny.

Those who are Kings by succession, they (...) received that succession as a
Royal grant of favor from their Subjects, which grant in case of (...) by
Treason, or disability to govern is forfeited, as our Laws know this gran^
was not absolute; ^s a fool, a mad man, a (...) a (...) capable of rule?

Succession gives a Title to Dignity, but does not (...) (...) Authority: a
Major of a City is not in power till sworn; those who gave Princes the Title,
give them the State thereto appertaining, Prerogative, Crown Lands, royal
Manors, and Mansion Houses, Jewels, Imposts, Subsidies, etc. these they cannot
dispose of to any other ends or uses, but those for which they are given. Yea
they give them the power and authority thereto belonging; the laws the people
give them. In Germany the Emperor cannot enact a new Law without a Diet, and
what the Representative body of the Empire present as necessary to be
established, he is bound by oath to ratify: and so was it in England.
Parliaments are to Kings and kingdoms eyes, a^ Moses said to Hobab. Numb: 1. 31.


And is not that a Parliament which stands in the nearest relation to the
people, which is the liveliest representation of them? Kings and Nobles are but
accidental parts, found prejudicial to the public, by sinful confederations
with the enemies thereof: therefore abolished; yet the power remains the same
it was, though not in the same hands, improved to those ends only for which
ordained, (i. e. public safety,) and by those persons entrusted with the
affairs of the Public, a perfect and full number, and freely acting, (without
satisfying the Armies paticular interests further then the general good is
concerned therein, which they serve out of love, of conscience, duty binding
them thereto, not out of fear, not from the violence of a discontented
Soldiery, (as malice does suggest.)

I shall desire every one that has an English heart, that is a sincere lover of
God, and of his Country, to honor the persons, the posterities of this happy
Parliament, Sanctorum Oraculum, and Mundi miraculum; should you forget them,
God will remember your ingratitude: The Children of Israel remembered not the
Lord their God, who had delivered them out of the hands Judge: 8. 15: Judge: 9.
16, 10 25, and 57.
of all their enemies on every side, neither showed they kindness to the house
of Jerubbaal, according to all the goodness which he had showed to Israel. And
therefore what followed? the Lord sent an evil spirit between Abimelech and
the men of Shechem, who deals treacherously with Abimelech, whose wickedness
God rendered upon his own head, and the evil which the men of Shechem had
done, did the Lord (...) on their heads, upon whom (...) the curse of Jotham
the ^o^ of Jerubbaal: What was that curse? says he to the (...) if ye have
done truly and sincerely with my fathers house in making Abimelech King, if you
have done according to the deserving of his hands (for my father fought for
you, and adventured his life far, and delivered you out of the hand of Midi^^)
if ye have then dealt sincerely, rejoice in Abimelech, and let him also
re^oice in you; but if not, let fire come out from Abimelech and devour the men
of Shechem; and let fire come from the men of Shechem and devour Abimelech.

This was his curse, which accordingly came upon them, so heinous a sin is
ingratitude, in persons, or States, i^ shall never go unpunished. Rest
satisfied with those acts of theirs wherein the public welfare is concerned,
which tends to certain, and to constant establishment.

Kings many times have been so great* that they have been feared, and for their
Tyranny as much as hated by their Subjects: thus the Senate it self of Rome,
feared Domitian^^, Maxi^^inus, and others: Tiberius, Claudius, Dionysius,
Sergius Galbs, Valerianus, and diverse more, how were they hated by their
People? hence the Germane proverb arose, Hell is paved with Kings Crowns and I
relates skuls: we know no prince so wicked but has his parasites: What said
the Courtier to Cambyses, who would have married his own sister, Persarum Regi
^^et facere quod velit: the like said Julia to Antonius Cara^alla, who Hos* 7.
5, 6, 7.
would have marryied his mother in law, si libet, li^et, etc. Nobles too ignobly
and customarily conform their practices to their Princes principles, to humor
them and to flatter them in their sinful lusts: These occasions of sin will
be now taken away whereby glory may dwell in our Land.

And as I would persuade people to unity of Affection, so would I humbly
beseech the Parliament to s^eke by all means of favor and love in the first
place, to gain the hearts of dissenting brethren, pious and well affected to
the Republicke. There were Leges Amphyctionice, laws tending to unity, this will
be a work of the greatest praise and blessing that ever was undertaken, you
shall be an eternal excellency, a joy of many generations; This learned
College of Physicians, (who have the Lord Jeb^vah, Lord President in your
Assembly, who is wonderful Psalm. 8^. 1.
in counsel, excellent in working) we hope will advise, will prescribe a powerful
and effectual remedy, to their everlasting honor: How have Heathens honored
th^se who were Reipul li^^ M^di^i, vel Patroni, as Scip^o among the Romans,
Aristides among the Athenians? What glory did the Senate of Rome confer upon
Arcadius, of whom they said it had been good that he had never been borne, or
that he might not dye.

Yet these affections fall infinitely short of the blessing and prayers of the
Saints: and of the reward and privilege of the blessed in heaven, conserd by
the Lord upon those faithful to himself, to the Public for his sake.

In civil Acts remember that decree of Honorius, who enacted that that only
should be done by every man unto another, which he would should be done by that
other to himself, were he in his relation, station, or condition: a Christian
rule, yea Christ's own rule. Mat. 7. 12.


In Religious Acts remember the Counsel of Nazian^^n, (...), The Lord the
beginning, the end, the ^^dium of all; those who honor the Lord, even those
will the Lord honor, and you so doing to be the very glory of Christ in his
Churches, the only excellent upon the earth, in whom the delights of God,
Angels, and Saints are fixed as glorious and renowned Instruments, as the
worlds worthies, and of whom indeed it is unworthy.

Thus much concerning JUSTICE.

But now to manage both Religion and Justice well, two Cardinal virtues are
especially required.
1 Prudence. 2 Fortitude.
Esaias 33. 6.
1. PRudence, wisdom and knowledge is the stability of our aims; a change of
Government, whether religious or civil, without prudence is perilous, Omnis
sub^^a ^^^tatio est peri^ules^; for it is in a body politic at in a body
natural: by a man of understanding and knowledge the state Prove* ^8. 2.
of a Land is prolonged, says Solomon* as Justice will (...) a change
Injurious, nor Religion a change corrupt* (...) ^^sdome will never resent it,
unless it appear to be a change for the best, to the security of both*
conducible to public good and safety, to peace, to ease and liberty, or
common sense and reason will dictate what calamities must follow. A general
dissatisfaction, and popular discontent was ever by the wisest States*men
apprehended ominous: but a disunion and division amongst the godly, and those
best affected to the ways of Religion, and Justice in the fundamentalls of
each, is by the wisest God concluded fatal, and above all things amongst wise
men to Zech. 11. 14, 15, 16.
be feared, and to be remedied.

To every purpose there is both time and judgment, (says Eccles 8* 56.
the wise man) and a wise man's heart discerns it, but he that is imprudent
considers it not: wherefore the misery of man is great upon him, wickedness
and sin (says Solomon) does confound the wisdom of the wise, whereby they
lose their judgments, slip their seasons, and procure sudden, certain,
inevitable and irrecoverable miseries to themselves and others. Every State
has its Crists, and time subjects it to motion and mutation, the reason is
given in Politiques, quie p^^est^^ humana in hominum voluntatibus radic^tur.
Judgment the result of all purposes, of all actions and attempts, is wrapped up
within time: hence is that rule in Politics, Consiliarius ^em^ melior est quam
tempur. The Acts of States must be correspondent to the necessity of the times,
and the greatest persons must vail, must subject to the time, to the authority
that is. We find in Histories, the judgment and resolutions of the greatest
Princes and Counselors have been necessitated to subject to the will, and
unjust demands of Rebels, the sad effects of imprudence.

We may read that the Acts of State do alter according to the urgencies of the
people, or present exigencies of time, wherein it is more honorable toyeeld to
the just demands of friends, as the means, the only means to prevent the
imperious commands of Rebels. An equal satisfaction of every interest without
wrong to Christ and his truth, is the best policy under heaven, the only means
to prevent civil broils, all Histories, sacred and moral, declare the
calamitous events occasioned by such breaches.

2. Whereby the highest and most honorable undertakings of the wisest and most
prudent Statesmen, have frequently been subjected to the worst successes^ to
that end, it is the best reason of State, for persons public to remove every
ground of private jealousy in what concerns their own particular interest or
benefit; and to give a real demonstration, by some selfe-denying act, that it
is the Public they serve* although to their private damage. It is said of
Israel that he was an empty vine, Hosea 11. 1.
bringing forth fruit to himself.

1. Israel though a vine, a choice and a precious plant, excelling al plants.
2. Though a vine supported with the wall of strength, promising security to
himself. 3. Though a vine spreading with greatness, and flourishing with
honor, having leaves and promising fruits unto others: yet Israel is, 4. A
vine that is empty of fruit. There is a worm at the root of this vine* which
draws this strength, consumes this honor, frustrates th^se hopes,
self-interest, which undermines personal, national, felicity, prosperity,
which renders Israel em^ty and unfruitful to God, to the Public, to himself,
Self Ends perverts the wisest men in their best actions, and renders them the
worst in the eye of God and good men* of God who judgath of the action by the
end, to whom our dispositions are manifest.

Prudence is necessary to advise, to consult with in all actions, but
especially to bet our companion in grand designs and undertakings. No wiseman
will ever attempt any action without good advice, much less will he undertake
important affairs upon sleighty debates, Jest by overmuch have and violence
such enterprises prove unsuccessefull: Quintus Fabius esteemed it more honor to
be reputed slow, then to hazard his affairs by precipitance.

1. Prudence to improve those opportunities within time, lest if they ^ee once
lost, ^he best advice meet with the worst event, and the misery of a State
thereupon be great, for sudden and lasting miseries, due ever follow the loss
of opportunities; Therefore (says the Politician) opportunities must be
closely pursued, that no advantage of time ^e lost, ^ro^^^ ^apill^ta (...) est
oc^asi^ (...) le^^ (says he) whilst like fool^^ we (...) ou^ selves to win
the game, we depart the greatest los^^^* Upon wh^^ advantage Mag^a Ch^r^^, and
Ch^rta de Forresta, and other Gra^^^ and Acts were obtained, and how
maintained, our own Chronicles record. And it is not only wisdom to get, but
o^ the two pieces, it is the greatest policy to preserve what is so obtained*
Would it not to that end, be great prudence to settle the land Forces, 1. in
the several Counties in confiding hands? The officers commanding, the members
commanded to be truly religious, and of approved integrity and fidelities? has
not time, and experience discovered in every County, City, Town and Village,
who are faithful, w^^ disaffected, and who by such influences are able and
willing to do do public service or prejudice, having estate or esteem, parts
or authority for any such employment, martial or civil? This consideration is
none of the least, nor of the least advantage to promote an establishment, to
preserve a safe, a sure peace, not only with respect to the Militia of the
State but to all Civil offices in every Corporation, City, Town, Village, or
in any Court whatsoever in the Commonwealth.

2. Prudence not only to furnish a formidable Navy in trusty hands at present,
but for future encouragement unto Seamen, to do a^ the State of Spair, to gain
^en for all services by Sea or land, with money and good pay. Our ships are the
walls and bulwarks of these Islands, and thereby not only the State is secured,
but the Trade preserved, and the necessities of the poor supplied, to the great
advantage of the Nation. Wherefore Queen Elizabeth of famous memory, afforded
Seamen and Soldiers the best encouragement beyond all others, because they
served for the good of the whole; poor Seamen she freed from all taxes, for
goods imported and exported, whereby she gained their hearts, was enabled
hereby for any service, became terrible to the whole world, rendered this
Commonwealth secure, prosperous and peaceable, beyond all others: Merchants
being thereby ^ncouraged.

3 Prudence to secure and strengthen all the Ports, Forts, Havens, and Harbors
with the Inland Garrisons of the Commonwealth, to examine the strength
thereof, and how each is furnished with all manner of provision, powder,
bullet, match, cordage, arms and Ordinance, that upon any invasion or occasion
there may be no want in our Magazines, and that a true Bill of Account be
rendered to the Council of State, and those stores maintained, and constantly
preserved without imbe^lement.

4. Prudence to supply the treasure of the Kingdom so much exhausted, of so
great concernment, of so necessary use, (money being the sinews of War) that
there may be a sufficient stock at all times for all public services* should
Seamen, Soldiers, and other servants to the State, want their due pay,
discontented at home, and corrupted abroad, would not this hazard our Public
affairs? States must consider the necessities of poor men, who cannot forbear
their wages, nor allow of time, and days for receipt, nor pay fees to procure
their dear earned wages: a great grievance to the subject crying in the ears
of God, creating Jam. 5. 4.
a general murmur in the hearts of all men, whereby such States discourage the
hearts, weaken the hands of those, without whose service they cannot subsist in
the time of need.

5. Prudence to prevent the combinations and underminings of fained and
male-contented friends. The old Serpent still retains his principles, Divide
and Impera, he works upon such persons by such instruments, fit to effect and
perfect this design by men of parts, of reputation with the people* by them
staining the honor of the persons, of the actions of our worthies, by malicious
calumniations, by vile aspersions, only to prejudice their upright intentions,
in the affections of the vulgar, and to obstruct their faithful endeavors,
whatsoever is contradictory to the corrupt and ambitious end^ of such, (though
most suitable to the present exigence^ of State, conducible to the good of the
republic,) these persons vigorously oppose, therein accomplishing the designs
of open adversaries, beyond the greatest confederation with them, pleading for,
but by their acts and violence wholly undermining the Public, like the sons of
Kora^ who did not pretend the absolute eradication of government, nor the
deposition of Moses and Aaron ab offi^i^, but intended a more equal
distribution of power, (Moses and Aaron invading the rig^^^ and liberties of
that people as (...) themselves) yet this act tended to sedition, to (...) that
(...) of government (...) to violate the (...) fear, on the peoples part, and
therefore is punished from heaven with the saddest, sorest judgments; but the
worst design i^* that if the people cannot be divided from you, such will s^^k
to ^.
divide you from them, or if that prevail not, to divide your among your selves*
the first is dangerous, but this last is deadly.

6 Prudence to regulate future elections, that the persons elected for plety
toward God, for justice toward men, for prudence in public affairs, for
resolution, courage and faithfulness be such, as that no respect unto
themselves, nor the fear, nor yet the favor of others may poyse them from the
zealous and conscionable pursuit of any cause of public advantage, although
attended with personal prejudices, accompanied with the greatest difficulties;
He is a public person who has a public spirit; who is more divine then
popular, more popular then personal, who seeks his particular interest least;
the honor of God, the affairs of the Lord Christ and of his Kingdom and Gospel
most earnestly. The Electors to be persons wise, judicious, and well affected.
Power distributed into safer hands is not lost either to the benefit of the
whole, or to the good of every part, it concerns every part that the whole be
safe, it concerns the whole body to preserve every member from peril, no
society can be safe without preserving its due parts whereof it is compounded
from being hurt. It is a martial rule, that every Soldier carries his
neighbors life in his hands, in breaking his ranks he loses his own, for
betraying his fellow Soldiers. Those who betray the public justice, deprive
them of a private liberty, Esa^ by his profaneness lost* both Heb. 12. 16, 17.
blessing and birthright which Jacob inherited.

7. Prudence to look up all public counsels, so securely, so secretly, that
such matters as are to be debated Communi concilio, none be present at, who lie
under any cloud of suspicion, none who hold any correspondency with public
enemies, who will impart the debates and resolutions of State, to such who
prejudice the enterprises, and frustrate the designs thereof.

8. Prudence to endeavor the friendship of forain States and Kingdoms (if with
honor) though with the expense of some treasure, the same might be purchased)
this conduces much to the good success, and happy events of all affairs,
domestic or forain, both in respect of Council and strength, on all necessary
and urgent occasions. I shall also add the privilege it would be to this State,
to have such a golden key by the side thereof, as would open the closest
cabbinet counsels of all forain States, especially of such who may design to
prejudice the peace and prosperity of this. It is unknown how much this State
had been damnified, if some (whom I could name) had not been faithful and
wise, in the due observance of these last rules, (persons worthy all honor)
pity but some character of special honor should be set upon them and theirs,
by whom Parliament, City, and Country have been preserved and delivered, ere
they knew their danger, then imminent, when the whole dreamt of security by
Treaties. I cannot remember the mischief^ then intended without horror, nor the
care of those Worthies (without the privity of the House) to prevent them
without honor, they being acquainted by certain intelligence, with the
endeavors of forain Princes, the highest resolutions, deepest designs, secret
motions, subtle intentions, military provisions, and martial preparations of
domestic and forain enemies, the cabinet-counsell of the enemy being opened to
Sir Hen. Mild^^^, when to no other beside him, who made as wise, as faithful
improvement of his intelgence to the good of the whole in apparent peril, as
any one man in this Republic.

2. Concerning Fortitude, Resolution and Courage, without which the honor of
the day, and the goodness or beauty of the way is lost, I shall add a word or
two. Statesmen under the Gospel have higher precepts, better presidents,
stronger reasons to stand up and engage for the defense of their liberties,
then C^riu^, S^ipio, Cato among the Romans, then Themistocles, (...)
Aristi^^es, among the Athenians: a Roman, Lace^em^^ian or Ath^ni^^, may be very
zealous for civil liberties, as we read in (...) in Cicero and other authors,
what Livius, what (...) and many others acted and suffered, for the obtaining
of their civil (...) with what resolution and courage Ier. 9* ^.
they resisted those who opposed* yea but proposed such rules, or counseled to
such (...) as ^ended to the infringement thereof, deposing some, banishing
others, putting others to death and confiscating the goods of all such as they
reputed enemies, Christians under the Gospel have as much reason, having power
and opportunity to preserve what God and Nature has invested them with, and
being lost, to restore those rights a^ their native birth right.

Let profane Esau's under-value their freedoms; Paul a Roman will defend his
privileges, and valiant Shammah his field of of ^^ntils (who stands his ground
when deserted by the people) against an Army of the Philistims, whom he
conquers. Joabs argument may put us upon higher Acts, our liberties being
superlative. Be valiant, says he, for our people, and for the Cities of our
God, and let the Lord do what i^ ^.
good in his own sight. Be valiant for the Lord and for his truth, says
Jeremy. When men have more valor for their civil, then they have for divine
liberties, more resolution and courage in those causes, which concern
themselves and the outward man, then those which concern the Lords honor,
their souls eternal welfare; they act but at Heathens, who did many heroic
Acts, but what singular thing do ye? the Acts of Christians should be
performed with the greatest respect to God. We will not lose civil immunities,
because the price of the blood of our ancestors, the inheritance of our
forefathers. Naboth would not therefore part with his vineyard, no not to the
King, although he would have purchased it, and given him to the full value
thereof. But Gospel liberties are transcendent, to take from our children and
posterities their glory, y^a Gods glory; to deprive them of that legacy, and
deed of gift bequeathed them by Christ in his last testament, the price of his
precious blood, is such sacrilege as there is no robbery like unto it under
heaven; and desperate is that State where all men are willing to captivate
their souls for the freedom of their bodies, to press their consciences to
death, to save their goods.

The Apostle who persuades us to seek freedom^ a^ the hands of the Supreme
Power, does also advise us so to use (...) 15, 16.
that liberty that it be not a cloak of malitiousness, of pride, of presumption,
of selfe-willednesse; so to use it as not to abuse authority, as not to
pervert, or enforce the supreme power of a State, to patronage our private and
sinful interests, to own our violent attempts, or unwarrantable engagements;
but to be as the servants of Christ, for humility, honor and affection toward
all who have the Image of God upon them, and in the fear of God to give the
greatest civil respect to those in authority, be they good, be they bad.
Therefore the act of such who would diminish the divine authority of the
Magistrate, who endeavor to take that from him which God has Psalm: 8 2. 5. 2
Pet: ^. 10. Jude 9. 10:
given him, or would enforce him to, give what is not his to give, is so full of
sinful presumption, and detestable usurpation, that such cannot but fear to
perish in the gaine-saying of Corah. Also such who would persuade the
Magistrate to part with his restrictive power in matters of religion, invite
him to give that sword given him by God, into the hands of furious men, who
would destroy all government, violate all bands* both sacred and civil, and
with as much right, (and some will plead reason too, who are against
magistratical authority, and would level all into an equality,) these may
desire his restrictive power in natural and in civil acts, yea with as much
reason, and right also, they may abridge parents and masters of their
restrictive authority over children and servants (H^^^esco referens) as they
may deprive the Magistrate of his.

To gain our own liberty with the loss of Christ's, argues want of
resolution, for were such willing to subject their wills and consciences to
Gods word, to obedience to his divine Will, a^ well by suffering, as by acting
when called thereunto, they would not transgress the bounds to adventure upon
such preposterous courses. Because former Representatives presumed too much,
shall future assume nothing, no not a power of restraint? v^ ^orum stupori qui
non exhorrescunt. True Resolution must be fetched from heaven, through God
Psalm. 6 12. Ier: 10. 23. Ier: 31. 1, 2* Esaias ^8. 15.
we shall do valiantly; that resolution which is accompanied with a dependence
on our own wisdom, ^or strength, is to rest upon an Arm of flesh, is to make
a lie our refuge.

To maintain the strength of your resolution, two considerations are worthy
your observance.

1 The consideration of the goodness of your ^^use* every Psalm. 74 2^
cause is good so far forth as God is engaged therein; Arise O Lord, says the
Prophet, plead thine own cause. The more you engage for God, the more you
engage God unto you. You know that text, and how it is applied by Rehobeam 1
^hr. 13 9, 10.
against Jeroboam, we keep the charge of the Lord our God, but ye have forsaken
him. God himself is with us, ^ight ye not against him, for ye shall not
prosper. Ye know how H^z^kiah 2 ^h^ 14 9, 1^, 11, 1^, 13. 2 ^h^. 16. 9* 2
(...) 19 2. 2 ^h^o. 35. 21, 22, 23, 24.
encouraged his Soldiers, when they went forth against the Army of Senacherib;
be not afraid for all the multitude that is with him, for there be more with us,
with him is an arm of flesh, but with us; is the Lord our God, to fight our
battell^. If the Lord be engaged in a cause, who dare appear against him* to
engage therein without God, procures but war and blood in Kingdom^, lasting
troubles, and continual miseries, as we see in the cases of Asa, Jehosap^at,
and Josia^, good Kings, yet for some small miscarriages (for comparatively they
were not great) they procured unto themselves and to their Kingdoms wrath. The
particular acts of public persons, are prejudicial to the public State, to
the whole Nation, and when the Lord has any special controversy with a
Nation, and some great judgment to in flict, he leaves such persons, to the
power of such corruptions, 2 Samuel 24. 1.
against the strength of all humble advice and counsel to the contrary, that
thereby he may make a way to his wrath. But now if the Lord engage with us, let
enemies consederate, let Nations associate, their power shall be broken, their
counsel Esaias 8, 9, 10
shall not stand (says the Prophet.) For the Lord is with us, all such as are
incensed against us shall be as nothing, all that war against us (says the
same Prophet) shall perish, for God Esaias 41. 10, 11* 12.
is with us. The Lord when he gave the charge of Israel to Joshua, tells him,
that he would be with him, and would not ^ail him nor forsake him; only he
charge him to be strong and very courageous, that he might observe to do all
that is written in the Law, for then should he make his way prosperous, then
^os. 1. 7, 8.
should ^e have good success, Gods presence and blessing whithersoever he went,
in all his actions and undertakings* Now,

2* That cause is good which is begun by rule, (...) carried on by the same
measure, with an uniforme and constant motion to holy and honorable ends, if
any Act be done to please man, out of fear or favor unto any, or if it be
done out of private self, or sinister respect to personal ends and interest,
Mat* 16. 22.
honor, or estate, those acts are odious in the sight of God, and will be
dreadful against the souls of such men, when God awakens conscience. The
sinners in Zion are afraid, fearfulness Esaias 33. 14* 15. Hosea 11. 1.
has surprised the hypocrites: who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire,
who among us shall dwell with the everlasting burnings? If done with respect to
the honor of God only, such acts are acceptable.

Secondly, Good, if uniforme, if our motions he straight, without
deflectibility, constant and permanent without instability. The Apostle tells
us that such as are like waves James 1. 7. Gen: 49 4.
rouling and swelling by the motion of the wind, such shall never excel, never
receive wisdom, whereby to excel, (...) the hands of God. Such whose minds
are fixed upon several objects, interests, and ends* whereby their will are
possessed with an habitual and native flectibility, to one object at one time,
with some deflectibility in respect unto some other at another time, diverse
from what before they intended; these are double minded, and therefore unstable
in all their ways; as we see in Bala^^, ^e durst not but obey the command of
God, and yet inclined to gratify the humors of B^la^k, to Numb: 23. ^1^. 2
Pet: 2 15, 16. Hosea 7. 11, 12, 13.
obtain his own covetous ends, and to attain the same by his sinful wits, ^e
undermines the divine will of God. It is a fatal simplicity, preceding
destruction, for our own ends to gratify, to comply with enemies to God: such
persons must needs be man of uncertain minds, and various resolutions.

Thirdly, I^ our eye be upon the Rule, upon that w^y wherein the Lord would
have us walk, to begin, to continue therein in a counter motion to the
sins of the (...) with the remotion of such corruptions, discovered by the
word, by the holiness, and righteousness of divine (...) D^^. (...) 10* Hosea
1^. 9.
crossing our corrupt ends, (...) and interests, (to which (...) our hearts
(...) ^lu^d) such a^^^ are good. But (...) of ou^ hearts be so strong and (...)
stumble, and fall, that we take offense and displeasure at the truths of God
discovered, or the works and providence of God administered, because unsuitable
to our wills, to our interests; this case is very dangerous, God will never own
it nor us therein.

Secondly, the strength of your authority, that would be considered in the
next place. Potestat juxta necessitatem habitat, is a Pythagorian Maxim,
violent necessities have enforced private Hest: 4. 16.
persons to public actions, when against all law, as w^^ see in the cases of
Hester and of Jehojadah* It is an everlasting Rule in politics, that no State
can admit any law or privilege whatsoever, but the same at some times, and in
cases of necessity and urgency, must be violated. Wise men in the
consideration of the Acts of Statesmen should respect the reasons, and the
ends of their acts, more then the acts themselves; the reason of State lies in
the public safety, the J^^ Reipubl cae is the bond of Parliament, and viv^
Ratio and manifesta equi^as, is the very anima legis and the fundamental of
all imperial laws in all Kingdom^ and Commonwealths. This is a maxim in
Theology, as well as in morality, that the law is good because it is just. The
affairs of State should not be managed by custom, by the opinions or
affections of men, by the private ends, or interests of any, but by Religion,
by Reason, by Conscience, the rules of all acts being divine, and all humane
motions must be suitable to the decrees of God, of natures law, to the rules of
equity, and for the welfare of the Republicke: and the necessity of law, is to
be weighed in the scale of preservation of public peace, of liberty, of
profit, and of the safety of the whole, before respect unto any private person,
honor, or advantage. The strict and grammatical construction of Law binds not
a private person in a public case: If my neighbors house be on a fire, I may
pull down the house next it, rather then endanger a City, or street: a servant
may by violence pluck his Master out of doors, in case his person be in peril
by fire. What Jury will condemn a man that steals a loa^e of bread to save his
own and his childrens life, if he could not obtain it by begging?

If a Patient be sick, and his Physician forbids him wine, or strong water,
this patient and his friends will be very respective and strict in the due
observance of that rule. But now in case of a swoone (though the Patient desire
it not, yea, deny it, refuse it, being insensible of his state, and of that
necessity) his friends force him to take quantum sufficit, notwithstanding the
order to the contrary. This Physician (being rational) neither can nor will be
offended therewith, the necessity of his patient being of more force in this
present case, then his former prescription was in the other, which although it
did not expressly except any, yet necessarily did imply an exception in this
case; that inhibition only respecting this end, the life and health of the
patient, which by no other means at this time could be provided for, but by
such a violation: the like may be said in such cases, wherein the safety of a
State consists.

Never State had more pressing necessities then you now, in respect of your own
security: your persons, posterities, honors, and estates, yet more in respect
of your friends who have been firm to you hitherto, and most of all in respect
to the people (in general much dissatisfied) to the soldier who is
discontented, and should thereupon forsake you, what dangers must necessarily
invade you, your wisdoms understand; you had need be active to afford general
content to all men if possible, at least to encourage friends to act freely
under you. You were first sent by the people, who elected you to this end, who
entrusted you with power to act what in your reason conduced most powerfully,
and effectually to their good, liberty, and safety.

Secondly, you are continued in the same place and power, and left to act in
the Commonwealth, for such a time as this, to save your selves and all that
first adhered to you: for all shall suffer, shall fare alike. It Is folly to
dispute your authority, for there is no visible authority left in the State for
any to act by, but yours as most Supreme; and again, That power must be
obeyed actively, in case of scandal, and to avoid offense, which in other
cases may lawfully be d^^^ed. Suppose your commands unjust, illegal, and
injuriou^ (...) against Law, against Privilege, yet due obedience (...)
thereto is more warrantable from our Lord Christ^ example in paying tribute
unto Caesar, then disobedience to the scandal of the Gospel in private
persons can be justifiable; yea admit the power it self usurped (as in
Athalia) yet obedience under it in those persons, who want both Call and
Authority to reform, or remedy what is irregular, is by the Lord commanded and
commended. And what opposition is against that power, is by the Lord himself
condemned, as we see in the case between Rehoboam and Jeroboam.

But lastly all power is primarily, and essentially, and originally in, and
from the people, as the first subject, they being the creator of all that
authority, which is derivative. It is theirs absolutely and totally by right of
possession. But because common people have but common capacities, and are not
competent judges in affairs of most material importance, tending to public
peace and safety, therefore reason and justice has distributed and committed
this power into several hands, that communi concilio, such members elected by
themselves, be they more, be they fewer, may act and execute those matters for
them, which they cannot commodiously, and immediately act for themselves, the
people still retaining to themselves that exercise of power which belongs to
their peculiar and personal liberties, dignities and proprieties, in lives and
estates, in persons and goods, as due to themselves or theirs, dispersing the
former to that end only to strengthen and not to straighten themselves, in
their proper and native rights. The power of Derivatives or Relatives is most
eminent in that subject which stands in the nearest relation: power is more in
the wife then any under the husband in the family, heat is more in fire, then
it is in water made hot by fire. Quicquid efficit tale magis est tale, those
that stand in the nearest relation unto, are the liveliest Representation of
the People, in those is power most transcendent. When Pope Julius Secundus had
offended the College of Cardinals, (the representative of the Catholic Church
of Rome) they sent a citation to summon him, (who challenges Supremacy over
Kings and kingdoms, Church and States, notwithstanding all his pre-eminence,
his power,) to answer to certain depositions, they then and there censured,
and deposed him as insufficient to govern, and decreed that that power formerly
in him, was now lawfully devolved into the hands of the general Council, and
was by them to be disposed of according to order, for the rule and government
of the universal Church, to which order every person was commanded to submit.
So the Romans when Tarquinius Superbus had rendered regal government odious to
the Commons of Rome by his Tyranny, and exorbitancy, the Senate deposed him,
censured him to banishment, and altered the frame of the Government from Kings
to Consuls; it is hence a known maxim in civil law, and owned by most
Nations, that he who changes Government, (from a Monarchy to a Tyranny) loses
the right of the former. In France the Patricii Regni, in Spain the person
representing that power Justitiae Arregonicae; in Hungaria, Bohemia, Polonia,
Germania; some who have been Patroni Reipublicae, the Conservators of their
liberties, against the invasion of oppressing Tyrants, the Protectors of their
Laws, these have brought the greatest Princes to the deepest censures,
Histories are full of instances.

These States stating this for a fundamental, that treason against a State is
more criminal then against a King, the whole being greater then a part; Those
hold every State or Kingdom to be an Independent body, no one having
denomination over the other, neither owing an account of their actions each
unto other, but only to those by whom they are entrusted. One State may as well
take liberty to prejudge another in matter of vote, with as much reason as they
may in matter of fact; and what State would tolerate such usurpation? neither
are consociated kingdoms further concerned in the affairs each of other, but
for mutual helpefulnesse to the remotion of common dangers, by the conjunction
of Councels, and powers, still preferring their Liberties, privileges, and
interests, distinct, peculiar, and entire. The end of consociation being to
strengthen, not to straighten each other in their proper due and native rights;
to equals appertain only a power of equality, not of subjection.

What Trajanus the Emperor desired of the Senate of Rome that that sword
received from them, might by them be drawn against himself, should he rule
amongst them contrary unto law, is not unknown. I will not mention the law of
Conradus the Emperor, known to every Historian, it is a fundamental Rule in
all Politics, Instituere and destituere est ejusdem potestatis, and in
Divinity it holds as firm, shall he that hates Job 34 1^.
right, govern? (says Job) that the Hypocrite reign not lest the people be
ensnared. Solomon tells us that a poor and wise (...) 4 1^.
child is better then an old and foolish King, who will not be admonished, for
out of Prison he comes to reign, whereas he that is borne to a Kingdom
becomes poor. The power of a King is potestas juris non injuriae, subjects
will not, cannot always bear. In all States it was ever held pernicious to
permit any man to grow so great, so mighty, that no man might or durst control
him.

In Scotland at a general Assembly convened 1553. this conclusion was
determined by universal consent, Principes omnes t^m suprem^ quam inferiores,
etc. All Rulers, supreme or inferior, may, and ought to be reformed, or
deposed by those by whom they are confirmed or admitted unto office, as often as
they break their promise by oath to their subjects, because the Prince is no
less bound unto his Subjects, then the Subject is unto him, and therefore that
oath which ought to be kept by both, the breach thereof is to be reformed
equally in both, according to the laws of the kingdom, and the conditions made
by either party.

They tell us in their Histories, that such acts as be intolerable in private
persons, are much less to be favored in Princes, because Regis ad exemplum,
that it is a corruption in those kingdoms, which favor the vices of any person,
noble o^ ignoble, that it is a servill State, wherein the nobility is either so
timorous, or so besotted with affection, or favor to a bad King, that they
will rather indulge him in vice, or tyranny, then be persuaded to discharge
their duty and conscience to God or good men; that Princes themselves are very
unhappy beyondall men, might they be permitted to do what they list, and none
be admitted to censure them.

To conclude this Argument, where there is a good cause* where there is
sufficient authority, what difficulties should discourage that heart, weaken
that hand, faithfully set, skilfully exercised in the Lords service? what said
Nehemiah, when his enemies plotted, and his friends feared? shall such a man as
I flee (says he?) Who is there that being as I am, (a public person called
to so public a work, wherein the Lords honor is so much concerned,) would go
into the Temple to save his life? I will not go in.

The Lord to encourage Zorobabel in his service against all opposition, tells
him, that he would be a wall of fire round about Jerusalem unwalled, and the
glory in the midst of her; a wall round about for security, for protection, of
fire to the destruction of all her enemies that should rise up against her, and
in the midst should not only be his glory, presence, and power, to strengthen,
to encourage their spirits, but to present and render their persons and actions
amiable and honorable to the world, to Angels, and to good men.

Oh that the spirit of life from God may enter into the body of this State,
that this Parliament once so interested in the affections of the people
generally, whose hearts were pinned upon their lips, whose purses, and lives
freely were engaged for them, may by their last actions recover their lost
honors. It was said of Br^tus, Nemo primum contemptior Romae suit, Nemo minus
postea. It was a precious speech of his, who being demanded by a Prince, the
years of his age, he answered but forty five, when he was indeed seventy five,
from the time of his natural birth, because says he, Annos m^^tis nunquam
vit^ nominabo, those years spent in the service of the world, the flesh, and
the lusts of his own heart; wherein he was a slave to sin, to self, and lived
without Christ, he esteemed not in the number of the years of his life, he
called them the years of death: we should not account our selves really alive,
until we live to the honor and for the service of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Oh that every member of this House did act his part faithfully, sincerely, as
member of a new elected Parliament, as a member of the body of Christ, as a new
man, Non sumus noti, nisi ^enati, such as act conscionably for God, shall be
had by him and his Saints in everlasting Jer. ^. 2. Jud. 5. 18*
honor, h^^ will not forget their labors, not their Esaias 60. 15.
hazards, nor their love; yea, the posterities and families Esaias 58. 12.
of such as stand in the breach, who repair the wastes of former ages, who
restore the foundations of future generations, Esaias 61. 34.
shall be had in precious esteem; as a blot of eternal infamy will remain upon
those, noble or ignoble, Nehem* ^. 5.
who disowne the Lords service, and pluck their shoulders from his yoke.

To encourage you therefore in this honorable service for God, and the Cities
of our God, let the eye of your faith be intent upon these four considerations
as grounds of present and future confidence.

1. Those State-miracles, and great wonders which the Lord (...) 6^. ^. ^, 5.
Psalm 4^. 8.
of Hoasts has done in and for this Nation, and by this Parliament, the mercies
we have received (although the fruits of faith and prayer) yet have exceeded
infinitely our thoughts, imaginations, but the greatest mercies are yet to
receive, precious was the faith, and strong was the argument of that woman:
Judge. 1^. 2^.
If the Lord would have destroyed us, would he at this time (note that) have
showed us all these things? It Is my argument, I think it is invincible, one
mercy is an engagement unto another, Host. 6. 13.
in falling thou shall surely fall, it was a Divine prediction.

2. Though the sins of the Land be many, yet the Lords controversy is not at
this time with his Saints, but with the Jer. 51. 5, 6.
inhabitants of Babylon, whatever the sins of the Saints be he will pardon, will
save his servants, but ruin his enemies. Israel has not been forsaken, nor
Judah of his God, of the Lord of Hoasts, though the Land was filled with sin
against the holy one of Israel, this is the time of the Lords vengeance, but he
will render unto Babylon her recompense.

We live in that period of time, wherein time shall have end Rev. 10. 6. Rev.
16. 14.
or be no more, (in that sense that John meant it,) the time of the rage of the
enemies, the reign of Antichrist.

The Kingdoms of this world shall be the Lords, and his Esaias (...) 9. Hagg 2.
21, 22.
Christ's, his enemies shall be his footstool, and the pride of all opposite
glory shall be stained, the heavens and the earth shaken, that the Lord may
overthrow the thrones of Kingdoms, and destroy the strength thereof; The most
high God rules (...) the Kingdoms of men, and times, thrones and Dominions, are
Dan. 4. 17. Dan: 7. 6, 27.
his prerogative, they have their periods unto a time or times, and the dividing
of time, and then the judgment sits: this time is at hand.

3. Should the Lord prosper his enemies, himself should be the greatest loser,
and suffer most in his own honor. For,

1. These enemies would blaspheme his name, and tyrannize the more over his
Saints, who should be as sheep appointed for the slaughter, they would reproach
the footsteps of the Lords anointed, and in derision say, Where is now their
God? Deuteronomy: 32* 2^.
they would with despightfull heart confederate to their ruin, and conspire to
cut them off from being a Nation, that the name of Israel may be no more in
remembrance; their sword will make no distinction between a Presbyterian and an
Independent, if the image of God be in either, it is his grace which they
despise, but the Lord who has reproved Kings, will also Psalm: 106.
Princes, for the sakes of his servants.

Psalm: 30. 9. Psalm. 137. 4. Exo6. 8. 26.
2. The Lord should lose the honor of the high praise of the Saints, how can
they sing the Lords song under captive enemies? The Lords sac ifice is an
abomination to an Egyptian, for a time he may suffer Egyptians to oppress,
and Assyrians to rule with rigor, but when the Lord by these afflictions Esaias
52* 5.
has humbled their hearts, refined them, and fitted them for deliverance,
engaged their spirits in his service, what men or powers now stand in
opposition to interrupt the motion of his grace, even the greatest mountains
shall melt before him, his Ps: 102. 13, 14. ^eph* 3. 8, etc.
name shall be then known unto his adversaries, and the Nations tremble at his
presence.

4. And lastly, The Lord has prepared a remedy to administer proportionable
and suitable to our disease; he has not left us without balm in this our
Gi^^ad. When the Lord sent Heb* 10. 5. Jer. 14. ^, 9.
his Son out of his bosom to undertake the work of salvation, he fitted him a
body for that work: he is not as a stranger in our land, as a way faring man
that turns aside, to tarry for a night as one astonished, as a mighty man that
cannot saves (that is) he is not as a man that has no calling, no opportunity,
no will to meddle, he is not a^ one deprived of power and strength by
astonishment, but the Lord our God in the midst of us has been Zeph. 3. 17.
mighty for to save us, he has not broken the staff and stay of this Nation,
the mighty man, the man of war, the Judge, the Esaias 3. 1, 2, 3.
Prophet, the prudent and the ancient, but has given us as wise and honorable a
Parliament, as ever any age since the creation enjoyed, and therewith such an
Army (our adversaries being Judges) for piety and justice, for prudence and
courage, as no story since the days of Joshua can parallel their noble and
heroic acts: this Army under God the arm of our Salvation, the dread of Rome,
the crown of this Nation; that had not the Lord delighted in us, he would not
have raised us up such Saviors, nor have performed these mighty works for us,
by such honored instruments; he does not extraordinary things for ordinary
ends, upon these grounds, who after all these considerations professing
godliness will dare to be so unnatural, as to lay violent hands upon their
best friends, to violate the bonds of nature, of grace: to conspire against the
lives of such who have fought for their liberties, thereby betraying their owns
persons, with their posterities, to certain ruin, to subject both to the
servitude of any Imperious Lords, or Lawgivers, rather then to their own who
intend them the greatest felicity? Oh my soul enter not into their secret, mine
honor be not thou united Genesis 4. ^.
into their Assembly, said that good Father, cursed be their anger, for it is
fierce, and their wrath, for it is cruel. It is more honorable in any who
apprehend themselves injured, to bear with patience, rather then to remedy or
reform what they conceive irregular, by any one act of hostility, such may
learn of Heathens, rather to suffer many then to offer any injuries. So says
Socrates, upon private discontent, upon particular revenge to contrive the
ruin of a Nation, (though themselves perish therewith) is prodigious and
stupendous wickedness; the event of war is uncertain, but this is certain, if
that work which these would overturne be of men, it will of it self come to
naught, but if it be of God it cannot be overthrown, and they shall be Acts
3. 38.
found fighters against God. Besides more is lost by spoil in one years war,
then would be in many years due observance of the just commands of State,
although to some personal prejudice* It is reported that when Aristides
perceived the ill effects of some differences, which arose between Th^misteel^s
and himself, to compose them, he (...) by this argument, we are not mean in
this Common (...) will prove no small offense to others, disparagement to our
selves, and prejudice to ^he public: I^ we must need^ ^^rive (...) contend,
who shall ex^ell (...) It were a (...) to (...) Christians if the Gospel should
not teach us better. O^ thee we did convert our reasonings into re^^dies* our
(...) into ^^ty. The envy of Ephraim ^^all depart, and Judah (...) no Esaias 11.
13.
more ve^ Ephraim, the adversaries to both shall be (...) and the stick of
Ephraim, and of Judah, shall be one (...) in the Ezekiel. 37. 19. Iam: 4. 17, 1^.
hand of the Lord. In these divided and distracte^ (...) grace of the heart, the
holiness of the life, appears in the (...) studious desire, and diligent
endeavor to make peace ^o maintain the unity of the spirit in the bond of
peace; there is but one God, one Faith, Oh that there were in us one heart; it
is a sad Zech: 1^. 1^.
token that the Lord will see an idol shepherd over the land, or leave such to
that tyranny and bondage, which shall be worse to them then Prelacy; and if the
staff of bonds continue broken by as, if we still divide in our opinions, in
our affections, and wound each other with the tongue, and with the pen, which
wounds are sharper then swords, we may justly fear, and must expect a more
smarting scourge then ever we ye felt; a Kingdom divided against it self, a
Parliament, an Army, a People divided how can they stand? Remember the miseries
of the Pal^tinate, of Germany, how civil discords and disagreements in matters
of Religion* exposed them to thirty years wars and miseries thereby. Oh that we
were wise to know in this our day the things of our peace! Why did the Lord
Christ die to reconcile us, who are but a remnant preserved from death,
reserved to life, to eternity, and shall we bite and devour, and destroy each
other? the Lord give us humble and self-de^ying hearts, that we may not seek
our own, but the things of Jesus Christ.

Hag* 2. (...) Rev: 6. 12. Rev: 16. 18.
The Lord is now shaking heaven and earth, and what befell the civil Some of
Rome Pagan, shall befall the State of Rome Papal^* All Magistratical, all
Ecclesiastical, all authority opposite to Christ's Ministerial S^ep^er, must
and shall be thrown downs. All Kings, Princes, and States in this last age
shall be subjected to the Government of our Lord Christ, or perish. Therefore
Zeph: 1. 7. (...). 9. 1.
be silent all flesh at the presence of the Lord, because the day of the Lord
is at hand; a day of darkness and darkness, because the way of the Lord is
in the whirlwind, his footsteps in the mighty waters* out of a Chaos the Lord
framed heaven and earth, out of confusion and irregularities he can extract
peace and order.

The greatest mercies arise from the most hopeless beginnings, a dead people
shall be a glorious Nation.

Faith subdueth Kingdoms, conquereth the hearts of mutinous men. Therefore
pray for the good, and for the peace of England, O let them prosper who love
it. For our Brethren, for our Companions sake, Pray that peace may be within
the walls, and prosperity within the palaces of the Nation; Because of the
House of the Lord our God, let us seek the good of England, in the peace
whereof is our peace, the peace of our precious wives, and of our dear children.

Oh that fatal simplicity which is in our hearts, whereby we wrangle our
selves into blood, whereby we countenance and by our divisions confederate with
apparent enemies, against real friends, against those who are Hujus Reipublica
Restitutores, (as was said of Vale^tinianus,) and sanctorum refugium. Oh the
senseless stupidity of this Malignant generation, who are like those Pears that
Solinus speaks of; which although they be wounded, yet cannot be awakened!

Oh the horrible ingratitude of this Nation to the Lord, about to deliver it
from bondage, to conduct us into Canaan, and because of some disappointments,
some difficulties we murmur and rebel against those raised up by God for our
deliverance. Populi ad servitudinem pr^parati. It is a Germane Proverb, That
we must bow our knees to that tree which gives us shadow; there is more
prudence in due obedience to the Authority of this Parliament, then there is
piety in any compliance with the ends of such as are professed enemies to the
peace of this State, then there is policy upon the best pretense, to divide
amongst our selves. Apud Christians (...) qui pa^i^^r, sed qui (...) (...)
miser est, (says Jerome) and not only true Christianity, but the best
magnanimity consists in the conquest of our ownwills.

Fortior est qui se, quam qui fortissima vincit M^nia, nec virtus altius ire
potest. FINIS.
ERRATA.
IN the (...) to the Parliament. p. 3. li^. penalt. r. necessities of the
times. p. ^. l. ^lt. r. expend their time. l. 9. r. people for period. In the ^
p. to the Read. p. 2. l. 15. r. to religion for in Religion. p. 3. l. 14. r.
there being for the being. p. 3. l. ^4. dele. of near to declared. In the book.
p. 1. l. ^lt. r. that for the. p. 4. l. 14. for these r. th^se. l. 34. ^. ^^der
the cognizance. p. 6. l. 10 for require r. enquire. p. 8. l. 3. for
persecutions r. persecution. l. 27. r. Marian. p. 9. l. 4. r. yet they. l. 6.
r. d^e rather. l. ^. 1. Secondly, l. 27. r. (...) for (...) p. 11. l. 8. for
faithful r fruitful. l. 24. r. sin beingeth. p. 12. l. 30. for power r.
power^. p. 13. l. 7. for has r. have. l. ^4. r. who not only have been, etc.
p. 14. l. 2. r. their light. l. 6. r. above sixteen hundred. l. 30. r. of
shares, of fears, of griefs. p 18. l 15. for Rights. Rights. p. 1^. l. ^4. r.
Open thy mouth for the (...) plead the cause of the needy, says the Lord, that
h^ (...) forges (...) (...) and remember (...) misery no more, lest the dumb
signs, that (...) the patient expectance of the poor, does cry al^nd, etc. l.
29. r. such. p. 20. l. 1^. for circumstance r. expectan^e. p. 23. l. 8. for
eminent r. imminent. p. 24. l. 9. r. and to hold. l. 19. r. (...) thereby
conferred. p. 26. l. 3. for great r. greatest. p. 27. l. 17. r. are therefore
abolished. p. 28. l. 18. dele as before hated. p. 29. l. 22. for so be r. shall
be. p. 33. l. 4. for King^. 1. Commonwealth. l. 34. r. Moses and Aa^^^ (as
they pretended) in^ading. p. ^4. (...) 26. dele the comm^^ after justice, and
put it after Public. p. 35. l. 10. r. and pity. p. 40. l. 36. for life ^.
lives. p. 42. l. put in before any in the family. r. of the family. p. 43. l.
21. for denomination r. denomination. p. 48. l. 27. for injuries r. injury.


