A BAKERS-DOZEN Of Plain Downright QUERIES, Harmless and Honest: PROPOUNDED
To all that expect benefit from this present POWER. Wherein is discovered, The
Bawling, Mercinary, accustomed Tricks, Querks, and Quillets of the Learned
Lying, Daggle-tayl'd Lawyers, Crafty Atturneys, and subtle Solicitors, etc..
With a Description of the Dutch Water-Rats: And the difference between Spanish
Pieces of Eight, and the Babies, Pupets and Quelchoses of FRANCE.

By George Gregory, Gent.

LONDON, Printed in the year MDCLIX.

A Bakers Douzen Of Downright QVERIES Propounded to all that expect benefit
from this Present POWER.
I.
Whether the Officers of the Army were in earnest or in jest, when they
re-invested this present Parliament in their pristine Power; And will they now
own and defend it, having put it upon them; and may all well-minded People
believe for a Truth, and not be deceived, but that it may appear the Mace is
above the Sword?

II.
If agreed upon upon all hands, the People of the Land have not Reason to be
satisfied therein by Public Declaration, that doubts may be taken away, and
all may follow their several employments without any distraction?

III.
Whether a Power thus made, finding the Law now in force destructive and not
for the weal of the People, may not make null the old, and enforce a new Law,
suitable to the safety and welfare of the Nation, that oppression may not be
upheld because it is ancient?

IIII.
Whether can Justice truly be said to be had in England at all by the
proceedings of our Law; For Justice done for any other end than for Justice
sake (though many fools are content to buy it) does it not plainly prove the
seller a Knave?

V.
Whether a Multitude of Laws are not the greatest badge of an enslaving
People, having always been fomented a numerous sort of Governors, either for
their own profit or for preferment of their favorites, or satisfying their own
boundless Wills; whereas Right is couched in few words, which Reason the
Foundation of Law, the more clearly sees, and sooner decides?

VI.
Whether is it not most agreeable to Reason, that there should be in different
Judges in every County, which by their vicinity might by report of honest
neighbors, know the condition of the Cause, as well as from the parties
themselves; And that no daggle-rayl'd Lawyer, Attorney or other, should plead
any Cause (save their own) for that it is impossible a Judge should but loose a
great deal of evidence, which is to be perceived in the carriage, countenance,
and deportment of the parties themselves, which in a bold brasen-faced,
dawling, mercenary, accustomed lying Lawyer, shall never be discovered to the
most piercing eye upon Earrh.

VII.
Whether do not many People of this Nation for malice or revenge, make it their
common practice to oppress the poor man's cause the more violently, because
they know (though fools themselves) they can have a Learned lying Lawyer, a
crafty Attorney, a subtle Solicitor, if his Cause goes to the Divil, to follow
it for money, whereas admonition from a grave Judge seasonably given, may take
effect in the party interested in the Cause himself: which it never does in a
Common Pleader, because gift which blinded his eyes, makes his Tongue run the
perpetual motion.

VIII.
Does ir not too manifestly appear, that Law does undo more then it relieves;
for our Court of Equity as it is now handled, a Suit in Chancery, though it
wear out both the Boots, Shoes, and patience of the Clyent, yet commonly
out-lasts any four Gowns of his Council, though he wear it the longer to
demonstrate his Antiquity.

IX.
Whether does it not plain appear that changes in Government are most
chargeable to any Commonwealth. And debillitating the poorest sort for want of
Trade through the destraction of the Times; is it not therefore honest policy
to submit to the present power as most fittest to go on for the Common good,
as having most experience by their own and others government, and by
consequence abler to avoid all inconveniences, and whether is it safest to
consent on all hands from Ministers or other professing Religion, lest while
they bridle not their tongues they speak their Religion vain; That a Lawyer
plead not against it, unless for a place which he shall loose, the first Fee
he takes by all honest men's consent; And whether the Soldiery if they retard
it and be not content with their pay, do they not crack an Apostolical command?

X.
Whether though it be impossible to make all of one mind; yet may not a
Government be so settled that those that will take any osfence, may not be
suffered to give any in point of Faith: And for Manners Morallity, may not that
serve?

XI.
Whether the common adversary do not get advantage by delays or discourses,
Trades decay, and Tradesmen discouraged, whereas unity emboldeneth all,
Merchants adventure, Tradesmen give Credit, Mechannicks live by their labors,
and such as want employment find it at Sea, which if we longer neglect the
Hollander, that water-Rat will get all our fish and carry it to Spain, and
bring us no better return then a few small Reasons to fetch our ready money,
and if they prove to be our brokers for Wine another year, they will balance
the loss of their last War, with the gain of their Trade?

XII.
Whether the War with Spain, or the Peace with France agree best with the
stomach of this Commonwealth; and whether pieces of Eight be not more staple
Comodityes then the Babies, Pupies and Quelchoses of France?

XIII.
Whether as the Case now stands with England and Englishmen, may they not
having made a supreme power force a new Law, fit for our present Condition,
having the light of Reason and the Word of God, rather then to set this
Government upon the Basis of Monarchy, which with his Laws will bring in
himself.

A word by way of Address to the Right Honorable the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England, etc.

That notwithstanding the Nations several and sad Complaints; yet still the
Audacious Impudent Lying Covetous Deceitful Atturneys, and bloody murdering
Jaylors, have continued the wicked and audacious practice of injustice, Tyranny
and Oppression, and the still continued sale of Justice for the price of
Iniquity called Bribes and Fees; None has hitherto truly Considered the ruin
of Thousands of People, Robbed of their Estates, Liberties and Lives, by
Arrests, Outlawries, false Judgments, Executions, Decrees, Orders and Repors,
begotten and brought forth by corrupt Judges, covetous Lawyers, deceitful
Atturneys, Masters of the Chancery, Registers, Clerks, Sheriffs, Bailiffs,
Sergeants and Goalers, by whom the Poor, the Widow, the Fatherless, and the
Stranger is slighted, scorned, devoured, yea eaten up as they eat bread, none
hitherto in Authority have called for Justice nor for satisfaction to the
oppressed, none has hitherto regarded the lamentable Cries of the Inthralled,
none has laid to heart the miserable enslaved Condition of this Nation by
Lawyers, none hitherto has considered the asflictions of Joseph in bands, as
formerly they have Protested, declared, vowed and promised to do, but hitherto
not performed by them; Therefore in behalf of this whole Nation, thus enslaved
and groaning under this unsupportable Burden. The Appeal and Outcry is made
unto You the abovenamed Persons, praying for speedy help, remedy and redress
of these great National destructive maladies, in and by suppressing the
Lawyers speedily, advancing Justice vigorously, abolishing the Capias for
arrest of men's persons, and restoring the Just and undeniable Liberties of this
Nation, according to Magna Charta, with full reparations to all the Oppressed,
ruined and wrongfully Imprisoned in the Land. If the head of Royalty be cut off
and the Power disowned, and this Nation declared to be a Free State, why then
the members of Tyranny suffered to flourish, and still to bear the poisonous
fruits of Slavery and destruction, contrary to the freedom and deliverance,
long-since by you Promised and now again this Promise by you confirmed; and
why not then this Nation a Free people as of right they ought to be; That so
the Lawyer may no longer rob them of their Estates and Liberties, nor the
Jailer of their Lives, to the utter ruin also of Wives, Children, and Families.

FINIS.

