A GREAT FIGHT IN WALES Sixteen Colors taken, Arms and Ammunition, with the
prisoners, and men slain. The Parliaments recalling their former ^otes, for
making no further addresses to the King, and the new address to be made unto
Him. The Letters on Monday last from Scotland, and a Message from the
Parliament of England to the Parliament of Scotland, in answer to the Demands
and Proposals. Also the proceedings of Sir Marmaduke Langdale, and the raising
of Forces in the North. And Letters from the Prince, and the Duke of York.

London, Printed by B. A. 1648.

A DECLARATION Of Colonel HORTON AND The Officers and Soulders under his
Command.
THe Honorable Houses of Parliament having resolved that the forces under the
command of Maj. Genesis Laughorn should be disbanded. And for the speeding of that
work, his Excellency the Lord Genesis issued forth his positive Orders to the
Commander in chief of those Forces, for the disbanding of the forces in
South Wales. But Col. Rice Powel with his Forces (after many solemn and public
engagements of his submission to the Ordinances of Parliament, and his
Excellencies orders for disbanding) does now contrary to the said Orders and
engagements, not only refuse to disband, but earnestly endeavors to lay the
foundation of a new war, the which that he may the better accomplish, he does
entertain all such soldiers formerly disbanded, as by any fair promises he can
allure unto him, laboring to increase his number, to the great charge of the
Inhabitants, and not resting there, issues forth his warrants to summon the
Countries to several Randezvouz, attempting thereby to engage them in a
desperate design, to the manifest hazard of spilling the blood, and unavoidable
ruining the Estates of his Neighbors and Country men.

And yet would persuade the people, he only intends to oppose new Forces
drawing toward them, as he suggests, to endanger their peace, though
occasioned by his and his adherents disobedience to the Parliament and his
Excellencies orders to come to ease the Country of the burden of free quarter.

Therefore we thought fit (for a prevention of the miseries, these delusions
may lead the Country men into) to declare and publish, that the true reasons of
these forces marching into these Counties, are no other, th^^ ^s has been
already expressed, viz. to gain obedience to the Parliament and his
Excellencies Orders for disbanding, which will free the people from the
oppression which they lay under, and from all other charges whatsoever, besides
their ordinary assesments.

And then after easing the Country of these heavy burdens; they will suddenly
depart again, hoping in the mean time, to prevent the inconveniences that
formerly accompanied Armies.

Let therefore all well meaning people timely take heed of being divided by
fair tales to ruin themselves, and seriously consider the different fruits of
war and peace. It is the settlement of peace the Parliament endeavors through
the Kingdom, which is no where disturbed but in these parts, And by whom, it
is here done, and upon what grounds and pretenses, we leave to the judgment of
all ingenious men, who will impartially weigh the truth of what has been here
published.

HORTON.

Die Lunae 8. May 1648.
THere have sundry Votes past the House of Commons this day and on Satterday
last, both in relation to the King, and in answer to the Propositions lately
received from Scotland; and therein they in the first place recalled the former
Votes for making no further addresses to the King, and voted, that further
addresses should be made to him, viz. by sending the Propositions again which
were tendered to His Majesty at Hampton Court.

The House then resumed the consideration of the Letter, with the Demands
enclosed from Scotland, and ordered, that the Lords concurrence should be
desired to the Vote, for the Government of this Kingdom to be by King, Lords,
and Commons.

They further debated upon the Votes yesterday past, for preserving inviolably
the solemn League and Covenant, and the Treaties of both Kingdoms, and the Vote
for a further address to his Majesty, upon the propositions at Hampton Court,
and made some explanation or addition thereunto, That they would be ready to
join with Scotland upon those propositions, so far forth as may tend to the
union and peace of both Kingdoms.

The Copy of a Letter from Northumberland.
SIR,
THe scene is much altered in these parts, Malignants have now gotten some
head again here, and increase their numbers daily. Sir Marmaduke Langdale has
a strength of Horse in this County, wherewith he has given an alarm to some
of our quarters about Morpeth: they say, they will not join with the Scots
against England, but only act upon a Commission which they pretend from Prince
Charles; yet it is apparent, that the Scots and they hold correspondence, for
when Sir Thomas Glenham, sir Marmaduke Langdale, sir Charles Lucas, Capt.
Woogan, and Iome Forces which are now in England, were in Scotland, and
demanded to be delivered up to the Justice of the Parliament of England, by the
Parliaments Commissioners in Scotland, they were protected, and nothing would
be done therein; the Committee of danger there alleging, that it was not
within the large Articles agreed on between both Kingdoms.

Sir Arthur Haslerig is very diligent in fortifying of Newcastle. Some
Gentlemen of these parts are gone up to London, to acquaint the Parliament with
the affairs and conduction of these Northern Counties, and we hear the Parl are
about to associate these Counties again, and to put 10000. men more into a
posture of defense against the Cavaleer party, which are entered Berwicke, and
begin to overspread the Country. By the next, I pray, let us hear what news at
London, for which you shall command

Your affectionate friend, S. J.

LEtters came this day from Scotland, to this effect, that the Parl. of
Scotland have voted their Declaration to be printed; about which time the
Assembly of the Kirk will print their Declaration against raising of forces to
invade England, yet a report from the Committee of danger, for the Levies of
men and arms is approved, and Warra^ss issued forth accordingly, but a List of
the Officers is not yet past the Generalship, nor confirmed on Duke Hamilton,
nor a Randezvouze appointed.

Edinburgh 1. of May, 1648.
From Bristol was this day advertized, that since Col. Flemming wsa killed,
there was an encounter between col. Horton and Col. Powel, who had a
considerable party, some whereof were newly come to join with Poyer, the fight
is related to continue about an hour, and the success is said to be the
taking of 15 or 16. Cullers by Col. Horton's Forces from Col. Powels; in doing
whereof, it cannot be conceived, but Col. Horton took many prisoners, and that
there was a great slaughter, the particulars, if true, will shortly come, and
be communicated more fully to the public view.

Letters out of Holland say, that Prince Charles, and the Duke of York are met
together at the Hague, some solemnities have been used by way of entertainment,
which was enlarged, for that the report goes, they intend not to stay there;
but whether it be either of them have a design for the North or West of
England is not yet known.

The Parliament this day proceeded on the business of the Church, they
likewise sell into debate of other things, for giving satisfaction to our
Brethren of Scotland, they expect a good Answer from the Parliament of England,
the receipt whereof, its believed will satisfy that Kingdom, and continue a
good correspondency between us.

Imprimatur G. M.

FINIS.

