A Welsh Narrative, Corrected, And taught to speak true English, and some
Latin. OR, ANIMADVERSIONS On an Imperfect Relation in the Perfect Diurnall,
Numb. 138. Aug. 2. 1652. Containing a NARRATION Of the DISPUTATION Between Dr
Griffith and Mr Vavasor Powell, near New-Chappell in Mountgomery-shire, July
23. 1652.

Pruritus Disputandi fit Scabies Ecclesiae.

Henr. Wotton Mil.

LONDON: Printed by A.M. for John Brown at the gilded Acorn in S. Paul's
Churchyard. 1653.

Reader, be plesed before thou read to correct these faults, and other
mistakes which are through the Printers negligence.

Page 3. l. 3. read praesertim. l. 38. r. Art. 23. p. 6. 1. 14. r.
Propagation. p. 11. l. 11. r 1652. and l. 27. r. ingenuous, p. 12. l. 22. r.
assistants. p. 15. l. 16. r. Congregation p. 16. l. 8. r. Asaph. p. 16. l. 25.
for or r. of p. 18. l. 17. del. comma. l. ult r. Merioneth. p. 19. l. 2. 3. r.
Dirge's. p. 20. l. 7. r. ashamed. p. 21. l. 19. r. several p. 23. l. ult. r.
Scripture.

ANIMADVERSIONS on an Imperfect Relation IN THE Perfect Diurnal, Numb. 138.
Aug. 2. 1652.
I Presume it is the Printer that says it, [ I have given you a short and
exact Narrative of that meeting, and the Disputes then held for your
satisfaction.] But I must tell him, That it is neither exact, nor satisfactory:
As he is abused himself, so he is made an instrument to abuse others. It is
short indeed, that is, of Truth and Ingenuity, and consequently short also of
exactness.

Montgomery 27. July 1652.
Nar. The news that fills all mouths at present in these parts, is the late
Dispute between Dr Griffith, and M. Vavasor Powel at New-Chappel in Montgomery:
That day appointed was July 23. The Doctor promised a Sermon, but performed not.


Anim. It is an ill sign, a bad omen when you begin to faulter from truth, and
fail in your exactness so soon in the very beginning, specially in a
circumstance impertinent to your undertaking, only to show your rancour and
itch to cast aspersions on the Doctor. To whom was it that he promised a
Sermon, Can you tell? If you cannot tell to whom, you must be forced to
acknowledge, to no body as you know: and so you can allege no promise; and
where no promise was, no performance on that behalf was to be expected. I was
present my self when the Gentleman that built the Chapel, moved the Doctor in
it, when there was some speech of the Dispute intended, saying, I hope you will
bestow a Sermon on us: The Doctor replied, that he could not promise; for his
indisposition of health, and weakness of body was such, that if any thing else
was done, he could not hope to be able to hold out to preach, and this in the
hearing of diverse Gentlemen of note and credit.


Nar. The place appointed could not contain the people, therefore they were
fain to have the Disputation without doors: When they were settled on both
sides, the Doctor would go on with the Disputation in Latin --


Animad. In giving an exact Narrative, it was necessary you should have told,
what the Doctor said and did, and for what reasons then expressed; and not
involved all in one general phrase, The Dr. would have Latin. And therefore
seeing you have omitted so prolix a passage, the ground and foundation of all
that which you call a Dispute; give me leave truly to inform the Reader.


The Doctor first turned himself unto the company, and spoke to this effect:
This unusual concourse of people met together bodeth some extraordinary
expectation, and speaks the occasion to be unusual. A strange thing, a
wonder scarce heard of in an age, to hold a solemn Academicall Disputation in
the Country, a sphere not proper for it. He observed, that the company met
together, consisted of three sorts of men; Many professed Scholars that
expected satisfaction in the way of Learning: Diverse Gentlemen of rank and
quality, who though not professed Artists, yet no strangers to the Sciences and
ways of Disputation; and their expectation also he conceived might be the
same: The third sort unlearned women and illiterate men, that knew not how to
judge of such matters: His desire therefore was unto this meaner sort, that
they would have a little patience, while they should dispute, as was agreed,
more Academico, promising that whatsoever passed, it should faithfully be
declared unto them in the way and language they were capable of. Hereupon M.
Powel and his company began to cry out, English; but the better sort, if not
the greater number, Latin: In this time of noise, M. Powell said somewhat of
Prayer; the Doctor replied, That was not unthought of, nor should be forgotten:
Then in prosecution of his desire to give satisfaction to the principal part
of the Assembly, he went on thus; Age igitur, accingamur ad opus: Seduti solent
in Scholis disputaturi, nihil aggredi, presertim in re Theologica, insalutato
numine, brevi saltens Precatiuncula Ordiamur.

Suscipe causam mean, in quantum etiam tua est, O Domine susceptor meus,
adversus omnes eos, quicontra te tuosque, and veritatem tuam insurgunt. Tu qui
via es, and veritas and vita, deduc nos in viam tuam in qua ambulemus; ut
spiritus tuus deducat nos in omnem veritatem, and veritas tua ostendat nobis
vitam and salutare tuum. Illumina intellectus nostros, ut in lumine tue
videamus lumen, ut in lumine gratiae thae perducamur ad lumen gloria thae, and
in lumine verbi tui videamus and despiciamus lumen illud scientiaesaecularis
and naturae. Da Sedium tuarum assistricem sapientiam, ut divinam voluntatem
tuam recte intelligamus, and fideliser and studiose excquamur, per Jesum
Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

The Prayer ended, (wherein M. Powel twice endeavored to interrupt the Doctor,
in loud English,) the Doctor began to repeat and state the Questions in Latin:
but M. Powel and his company began to clamor, and others on the other side to
require the contrary to what they cried out for. The Doctor to prevent all
occasion of tumult, M. Powell withal yielding unto him in point of learning,
condescended to repeat the Questions as they were proposed to him by M. Powell
in English.

Quest. 1. Whether your Calling or Ours be most Warrantable, and nearest the
Word of God? Quest. 2. Whether your mixed Ways or our Ways of Separation, be
nearest the Word of God?
The Doctor told him, that in regard they were comparatively propounded, they
could not be clearly and well disputed of in that way; and therefore either of
them was to be reduced to distinct and positive Conclusions. In the first
Question two Propositions, the one Affirmative, the other Negative,

1. The Calling of the Ministers of the Gospel in the Church of England is
warrantable and according to the Word of God. This he said was in terminis the
Confession of our Church, Acts 23. and attested unto by all the Reformed
Churches in their Confessions.

2. Your Calling (if opposite to and distinct from this) is not warrantable nor
according to the Word of God. Then added, That he came not there to allege any
thing against their Calling, until they gave him fuller account of it, what it
was; when M. Powel declared himself, what his opinion is, whether Erastian,
Socinian, Brownist, Anabaptist or Enthusiast, he would consider what to say
unto it: In the mean time he stood only to defend the Doctrine of that Church
whereof he is a Minister and member.

In the second Question are two Conclusions also:

1. The first Affirmative. Our Parochial, which you call mixed Congregations,
are according to the Word of God. This concerns the Discipline of the Church,
settled and establised by Laws both of Church and State, avowed in the practice
of all Christian Churches. The second Negative,

2. Your ways of Separation are not according to the Word of God.

M. Powell approved well of the Doctor's cleerness in thus opening the
Questions.

When it was expected M. Powell should begin the Dispute, he desired he might
have the liberty to propose some Rules, as he called them, and they were three:

1. That nothing which should pass in that Dispute, should be made public (he
meant I believe, set out in Print,) without knowledge and consent of both
parties. The Dr. assented readily, and has exactly observed the Rule: whether
they have done so or no, this Narrative is a sufficient testimony.

2. That the Dispute might be held in the spirit of love and meekness. Which
the Dr. assented unto also, and performed accordingly. He leaves them to
answer for themselves, and all true lovers of truth and peace to judge between
them.

3. The third proved to be no Rule, but a tempting Question: In what capacity
do you stand there, as an Episcopal man or a Presbyterian?

The Dr. replied, that that was nothing to the Question, but if he had any
thing to say against either, he would answer for either. But M. Powell still
pressed, Whether are you? The Dr. answered, I am both; if you will needs know,
I am an Episcopal Presbyterian. Then M. Powell repeated his words: So there
was an end of the Rules.

Then he went on (as you might expect, being past his Rules) irregularly, using
all means and artifices he could devise to evade and desert his Question, which
in fine he did wholly; professing, that he had nothing to say against the
Church of England, or the Calling of her Ministers: but he was only against
such as abused their Calling. And thereupon he proposed another Question, Do
you undertake to defend the corrupt part of the Ministry? The Doctor answered,
No: he was accountable for no man's errors, neither would he defend his own,
when they were made to appear unto him to be errors. And to evidence that
personal miscarriages did not abate the Calling, he instanced in Judas, who
was an Apostle, though he were withal a Devil. Whereunto M. Powell very wisely
replied, Will you be Judas then? What return was given him by a stander by, you
may remember if you please: but the Doctor made no answer, demeaning himself as
became him in Christian meekness, despising such obloquies.

Narrat. But because that would give no satisfaction to the people, for whose
sake chiefly the Disputation was intended, is was concluded it should be in
English.


Animad. How it was concluded, and upon what ground, is told you before. But
you irrationally conclude, before you had delivered the premises: Such is your
exactness. By the People surely you mean here the ignorant only (for all the
knowing part of the Company were of the contrary mind) and to intend
satisfaction by way of disputation, to such as do not know what belongs to
disputation, is a senseless device. The Doctor sure had some interest in the
intention, as challenged to be a party and an actor in the Dispute, and he
should best know his own intentions in it: And I heard him say, he had no mean
regard to M. Powel's satisfaction, who expresses so much doubt in his Letter,
if the Latin of it will bear any construction. As for M. Powel's intentions,
they are also best known unto himself. But it should seem by you, that all he
aims at is, to be well thought of by the Ignorant, and applauded by the
multitude: And much good may it do him with his popularity.


Narrat. The Doctor being desired to pray, prayed in Latin: the greatest part
of the people accounted what he said little better then a latin mass.


An. It is not true that any request was made unto him; there was indeed an
intimation only of the fittingnesse of praying upon such an occasion, which the
Doctor presently apprehended and conformed unto: Your gloss and censure on his
prayer is both arrogant and uncharitable. Arrogant in assuming to your self to
know the hearts of the greater part of the company, what they privately thought
of it: then uncharitable in endeavoring to cast the aspersion of Popery upon
it. It is well known the Doctor was ever of another strain, and has withstood
Popery both by writing and preaching for above these twenty years, as much as
any Minister in Wales. Your preachers are in the consequence good agents for
the Papists: it is too evident Popery is more improved amongst us since the
indiscreet execution of the late Act of Propogation, then it was in above
twenty years before. The prayer it self, because there are copies of it given
by some that took notes there, you have here given you to prevent mistakes. It
will vindicate it self to all undepraved judgments from all kind of reference
either to Mass or Popery.


Narrat. The Doctor being asked whether be stood there in the capacity of an
Epispocall man, or a Presbyter, etc. answered. etc. --


An. Of this passage you have a fuller account then here is given before in its
proper place: wherein M. Powel's drift was easily discerned, hoping to find by
this means an occasion to discover some diversity or opinions in the Moderator
and the Doctor: but the design failed.


Narrat. The Doctor brought along with him M. Hildersham, a Presbyterian, to be
Moderator, who was altogether on the Doctors side.


An. True it is that M. Hildersham came along to the place with the Doctor, as
did many others, whom he did not bring, but they rather did bring him to the
place, as it is usual with friends. Neither did M. Hildersham come as a
Moderator, for there was another able and well known Orthodox Divine of the
neighborhood desired to do that office for the disputants, who had also in
part promised to be there upon the day, and the Doctor did rely upon it. But as
he was taking horse that morning, a gentleman delivered him a letter from his
intended Moderator, excusing himself in regard some urgent occasion had
intervened, which necessarily called him another way. Upon this occasion M.
Hildersham being their in place, and known to be fit for such an employment,
both for his integrity and learning, was desired by the Doctor to take the
place upon him; and so you have the truth, which you failed in the delivering.
What M. Hildersham is, is well known throughout the land, a grave, learned,
Orthodox Divine: what his opinion is in point of Church Government (for that is
all should rationally be understood by your style of Presbyterian, though
happily you may seem uncharitably to extend it further) he is able to give you
a full and just account when he shall be lawfully required to do it. True it
is, he esteems of the Doctor as of his brother and friend, but not so as to
side with him in any error: Amicus Plato, sed magis amica veritas: and if you
be remembered, M. Hildersham did voluntarily. when he was desired to moderate,
profess that he would do it to the best of his understanding impartially: So
that your saying the Moderator was altogether on the Doctors side, infers
that the truth also was altogether on his side, infers that the truth also
was altogether on his side, at leastwise in the Moderators judgment; for
otherwise he professed to become his adversary, if he said or maitained any
thing against the Truth.


Narrat. M. Powel would have justified the communion of Saints in gathered
Churches, which is called Separation: but the Doctor would be respondent for
his own Calling and parish.


An. Both parts here are misreported; although for substance it be not much
material, yet men should speak but truth in mean matters: I do not remember
that the Communion of Saints was so much as spoken of in this instant: Neither
did the Doctor assume any undertaking for his Parish? But when M. Powell would
have waved the first Proposition, and go to the next, or happily to that of
Separation, which it should seem he had most mind unto; the Doctor bid him keep
to the Question, and either take the Propositions in order, or let them all
alone.


Narrat. That the people might not be disappointed, Mr. Powell was content,
signifying to the Doctor that his Arguments would have reflection upon his
person, which he had endeavored to shun.


Animad. What M. Powell endeavored to shun appears plainly by the story,
that is, disputing of the Question which he himself propounded, and therein the
people were altogether disappointed of their expectation: For they expected the
Ministry of the Church of England should have been disabled by him, and then
the way had been open to the new Discipline. But M. Powel's reflecting upon the
Doctor's person was a manifest design. And the Arguments show it, that it did
not only reflect upon him by a secondary diverted motion, but directly aimed to
reproach him out of a depraved intention. That party looks on the Doctor, as
a man standing in the gap before them.


Nar. The Doctor became Respondent, and M. Powell urged a Syllogism against
his Ministry, which wast his;


They that are not qualified, elected and ordained according to the Word of
God, they have not their call from God. But you are not qualified, elected and
ordained according to the Word of God, Therefore you have not your Calling from
God.

Animad. Became! How? by some new change of the Scene? was he not Respondent
from the beginning? He undertook not at all to oppose, but only to answer, as
he was challenged. As for the Syllogism, the Conclusion is inverted, and it is
not against his Ministry, but intended only against his interest in the
Ministry. But let it pass.


Nar. The Doctor said it was a false Syllogism, because it consisted of
Negatives. The Moderator, Priests, Scholars on their side triumphed, because
the Syllogism was false respect of the form: The Hearers approved of the
matter; but the Doctor, Moderator and Scholars on that side, would by no means
allow of the Syllogism --.


Animad. The Doctor excepted against the Syllogism, as false, consisting of
all Negatives; and he still persisteth in it against all the new Artists,
affirming that no such Syllogism was ever allowed of in Disputation. As for
the triumphing as ye ignorantly call it, (it was not a triumph, but a
deservedly caused laughter) it did not follow immediately upon the Doctors
excepting against the Syllogism (for then all was hushed, and all expected that
M. Powell should either alter or (...) it:) but on another passage which
intervened, and you have very wittinglly and for shame left it out. Give me
leave for setting of things right to call it to your remembrance, if you have
forgotten it. M. Powell persisting in his error or opinion of the Syllogism,
was desired by the Doctor, to tell him in what Mood and Figure it was; and he
after some pause and consideration answered, that it was in Barbara: and
thereupon was raised that general laughter, which you are pleased to call
triumphing: an absurdity so gross, that it deserved hissing.


Narrat. So through this cavilling Ignorance M. Powell was much obstructed in
arguing.


Animad. You say very right, M. Powell was much obstructed in arguing, so that
he knew not what to say, nor which way to turn himself, being so extremely
laughed at: all he could say in this passage was cavilling, and that occasioned
by his Ignorance, Ignorance of the first Elements of Art and Logic; every
Freshman can say, Ass^rit A, Negat E, sed universaliter Ambae, and Syllogizari
non est ex particulari. Neve Negativis recte concludere si vis. And Ignorance
of the grounds of Art: Shall I give you a reason why a negative Syllogism
concludes nothing? because the inference depends wholly upon the relation
and dependence between the Terms, and that dependence cannot appear, except it
be affirmed in one of the premises. But let me say what I will, you still plead
Art, and Authority for your Ignorance. For shame! Is it not enough for you to
belly the living, and abandon reason, but ye must abuse the Arts and defame the
dead? They were not, I mean Keckerman and Burgersdicius, sush silly Artists, as
you make your selves and them too. I have neither of the Authors by me;
therefore I pray you lock on them again, and examine them. It may possibly be,
the Printer has deceived you; or it may be, you do not better (that is, not
well enough) understand theirs, then other men's Latin. I shall tell you anon
my conjecture, who in probability might be the contrivers of this doughtie
Narrative, but will first endeavor to show you the grosseness of this
Ignorance that obstructed M. Powell, by some examples. What say you to this
Syllogism,

No unreasonable Creature is to be taken to be in Capacity to Dispute:

But A M, or V.P. is not an unreasonable Creature.

Ergo, A.M. or V.P. is not to be taken to be in Capacity to dispute?

Fort the Major I refer my self to the Mr Replicants in the last Act at Oxford,
whose first Thesis in Comitiis was; Bruta non possunt ratiocinari. The Minor I
refer unto themselves. So what remains but that they either except against
the Syllogism, and so I have my desire: or deny the Conclusion; and that would
make them more ridiculous, and that I would not wish my greatest enemy.

Or what say you to another? Suppose the Dr. had urged thus against your
Separation,

That which is according to the Word of God, is not to be spoken against.

Your way of Separation is not to be spoken against. Ergo

Your way of Separation is not according to the Word of God.

I doubt not but M. Powell may as well find a Barbara for this in the second
Figure, as for the other in the first, which consisted all of Negatives; and I
will expect his answer when he has studied the Question a little better. One
more yet, because it may concern or come into the hands of some Divines,

Nulla Creatura est Deus.

Nulla, i.e. ne una quidem Personarum in Trinitate. neque Pater, neque Filius,
neque Spiritus Sanctus est Creatura. Ergo

Nulla, sive ne una Personarum in Trinitate, neque Pater, neque Filius, neque
Spiritus Sanctus est Deus. Is not this fine work for an Atheist, an Arrian, or
Macedonian heretic? And can ye be stall in love with your new Logic? If this
will not convince them of their Ignorance, I think I may well enough be excused
for saying any more. Only one humble request I have to make unto the
Parliament, that when Red Castle is made an University (as there was some talk
of it not long since) Mr. A.M. or V.P. may be the Logic Professors, upon
condition, that he teach the young Sophisters this secret not yet revealed unto
the world, of making good Negative Syllogismes in Barbara; I confess, it is a
hard task, but they may be rewarded out of my Tithes, and others ejected Dunces
and antiquated Logicians.


Narrat. Though the form of the Syllogismo be very true according to the Rules
of Art and the Authority of the best Logicians, as Keck. Burgers.


Animad. This is answered, I believe, sufficiently already, And I shall add no
more; but only acquaint you by the way, that it is on this passage I ground my
conjecture I spoke of, concerning the Author of this exact Narrative, Suo
ipsius indicio periit Sorex. Teren. For this piece agrees exactly, as face
answers face, with a Note which was showed me taken out of M. Mosiyn's
exposition at Poole, 1 Cor. 1. July 25. 1552 Some of you were at the Dispute.
To that which was informed upon, we have since consulted with the best
Logicians in these later days: They say it was true according to Logic, and
Arts in Universities, and Scholars, and form, etc. I trouble you with no more
of his silly nonsense vented the next week again at Oswestrie, Aug. 1, 1652.
The Narrative, ye see, is grounded on the same consultation with Logicians, and
so sent up, contrary to their own rule, without consulting the Doctor. The
matter is fully cleared before; I leave the Arts, Universities and Scholars to
speak for themselves, who can soon vindicate themselves from the reproach and
scandal such Ignorance can cast upon them.

In the mean time, they must take this notice from me, that the Separatists are
upon disclaiming all interests in Arts, and Universities, and Scholars: For
what said M. Mostyn in his preachment July 25. We did not stand upon Logic,
but by the Truth; what is to sway us but Scriptures? An ingenious confession,
We did not: And ye do not yet, it seems. If ye stand not upon Logic, we are to
expect but small account of any other Art or Science from you. For Logic is
Ars Artium, the Key and Gate or Entrance into all the rest; and if ye care not
for the Arts, ye are not for Universities: and take away Universities, and then
farewell Scholar. You stand not upon Logic! you Animal, you stand not upon
reasoning then, and yet you take upon you to dispute forsooth, that is, to
prate without reason. For what else is Logic, but a method, form and rule of
reasoning orderly for the perfecting of a man's natural discourse? but that you
stand not upon. What then? But by the Truth. What? do you swear? Or it may be,
you mean, you^ and by the Truth. You do indeed, as Contraries, juxt a se posta:
And your falsehood makes it to appear brighter and more glorious; your daily
prating instead of Preaching, has made God's word very precious amongst us:
And one Orthodox true Sermon is more set by now, then an hundred heretofore;
such is the famine of the Word, which you have caused by your propagating the
Gospel. What is to sway us but Scripture? My friend! Is Logic no help to the
interpreting, and applying of Scripture? Let me tell you, that what the Lawyer
faith of his profession, is very true of yours and mine, Scire Leges non hoc
est, earum verba tenere, sed vim and potestatem. It is not your potting of
text, wherein by the help of a Concordance the word Separate may be found, that
proves your Tenants; but you should demonstrate, that the scope and meaning of
the Text is pertinent to your purpose. And that you can never do without reason
and Logic. But enough of this unreasonable ^^uff and folly of yours.


Narrat. The Doctor formed the Syllogism in a way which himself liked, and so
the Disputation went on.


Animad. The Doctor formed the Syllogism, that is true indeed; but you
misreport the occasion, not his own humor or liking, but because M. Powell and
his assistance could not do it, and that the disputation might be no longer
obstructed through their ignorance. For you may remember, if you please, that
when they were at a stand, the Doctor sid, I partly know what you would have,
and if you cannot form your Argument into a good Syllogism, I will help you,
which accordingly he did, and thus he is requited for his pains. May he be so
served again for me, when he does them any such courtesy against himself.


Narrat. M. Powell took the first particular in the Syllogism and proved, That
the Doctor was not qualified, because he was not qualified with the gift of
Prayer, in regard be used the same set form of Prayer for many years together
before and after Sermon, which he always read. Forms of Prayers are to supply
the want of the Gifts, so the Doctor wanted the Gift, and was not qualified.
The Dr. denied that a form of Prayer did exclude the gift of Prayer.


Animad. Here are some things of your own putting in to shreds of the Dispute.
You put in 1. For many years together; It was not said then, and your saying it
now is an untruth. The Dr. has used many forms of Prayer, and all he uses, he
alrereth on occasions: And he does it upon a grounded persuasion, that it is
the most edifying way, and most useful and convenient for the people. 2. You
put in, which he always read: An untruth too, and intended for a calumny, the
Lord forgive you. 3. Forms of prayers are to supply the want of gifts. No such
thing then spoken of; and I need not trouble my self here impertinently to
examine it. There are more uses then one of set prayers. Neither will I trouble
the reader with all the passages in urging this Argument, which in effect do
signify as much as nothing. All was fully answered in that compendious
Position of the Doctors: The use of forms of Prayer does nor exclude the gift
of Prayer. Against which Mr. Powell offered not any proof. And for the Doctors
personal qualification in this particular, he has given sufficient testimony,
that he has one gift more then his opponents have amongst them all, to wit,
The gift of praying in True Latin.


Narrat. M. Powell desired that he would answer the force of the Argument, and
produce Scriptures for his denial, that his words might satisfy the people.


Animad. Grant this passage to be true in substance (in expression it is not)
it makes little or nothing for the Opponents credit. When the Doctor had
denied the major proposition, which was this, He that uses a Form of Prair,
has not the gift of Prayer, It was a senseless demand, or a miserable shift
in him to call for an answer to the force of his Argument; whereas the denying
of the Proposition did plainly show it to be of no force. For what force can
there be in falsse premises: And an unreasonable thing to require Scripture of
a Respondent for every thing he denies! The truth is this, When M. Powell knew
not how to prove the Proposition denied, he would have the Doctor to show a
reason why he denied it; who replied, It was reason sufficient, that it was
false; and it was the Opponent's part to prove the contrary. Then came the
Assistants in to help, Mostyn, Nevet, Edwards, confidently affirming, it was
usual in the School to require a reason for the denying of any Proposition (M.
Nevet indeed said he had heard it;) The Scholars on the Doctors part, being
many of both Universities, decried it. The Moderator also telling them, they
insisted on a thing unheard of, and in it self unreasonable. The Doctor himself
put an end to this impertinent debate, who told them he had some reason to know
the laws and use of disputation, as most there, and he never knew of any reason
required for the denying of any simple Proposition, nor of the denying of any
consequence, until the Argument be grown to too great a bulk in proving
consequence upon consequence. For when one argues Enthymematically, and his
consequence is denied, his way to prove it is per rationem Consequentiae, which
being made the Antecedent lays the ground of another Enthymeme, the whole
former Argument making the Conclusion; And so forward, Argument after Argument,
and Enthymeme by Enthymeme, until it come to eleven. By that time the
Conclusion consisting of all that went before, will be grown so great and full,
that a weak memory can scarce retain or well remember it. Therefore when it was
come to that pitch, the use was to require a reason of the denial of the last
consequence. If a reason was given, the Opponent was to endeavor to show it to
be invalid; If no reason given, it was free then for the disputant to return to
his first Antecedent, and go on to prove it. Against this the Opponents had
nothing to object, and so desisted.

But M. Powell asked the Doctor, By what Scripture he could prove a Form of
Prayer? For that is altogether M. Powell's disputing, asking Questions: The
Doctor answered, It was sufficiently authorized, Luke 1. where our Savior
taught his Disciples a Form of Prayer: M. Powell replied, Our Savior wrought
miracles, will you work miracles? It was answered, No, it did not follow; Our
Saviors precepts and other imitable actions are different from his Miracles.


Narrat. The Doctor, Moderator, and Scholars on their side, had not one word to
speak.


Animad. Sure, if they were silent, it was in expectation of some proof from M.
Powell of his Proposition, but none came; And so if you had meant to speak
truth, you should have said, that neither M. Powell nor his Assistant Mostyn,
nor M. Nevet that prompted both, had one word to say; And so it would have
followed more rationally in your Narrative


Narrat. Then M. Powell went on to the second particular of his Syllogism, and
proved that the Doctor was not rightly elected.


Animad. Went on and proved? Nay, stay there; that is not yet done, your
meaning is, He did his endeavor, as the man did that threshed in his Cloak.
But I had almost forgotten to put in mind of another passage by the by, which
you would have called triumphing, if you had conceived it fit to be mentioned.
Was there not a general laughter justly raised, when M. Powell thinking to
approve himself sententious and learned, chanted it aloud, Debet mendacem esse
memorem? Sed transeat hoc cum cateris erroribus.


Narrat. That he that is rightly elected, is elected by a Congregation of
Saints. But you are not elected by a Congregation of Saints, Ergo. The Doctor
denied the minor, saying, He was elected by Saints (when as indeed he was
placed there by the Bishop, and imposed upon them, rather then chosen by them.)


Animad. This last clause or Parenthesis was no part of the dispute. Sorry they
were sure, that it was then omitted, and therefore they have here inserted it,
after Consultation in the Narrative. Somewhat they must say to the dead Bishop,
as well as to the living Doctor. But God be thanked, the Survivor is able to
answer for both. You should have considered, that the Election here disputed
against, was his Election to the function or Ministry, and that is a different
act from his Election to a place or charge wherein to exercise his Ministry. In
regard these men are so forward to seek to deprave the Doctor on this behalf,
he is ready to give the world an account if need be of either: For present
satisfaction I have with importunity extorted from him out of public
instruments this brief account of his Elections.


His Election to his Calling or Ministry was in Oxford, by the Society whereof
he was a member, and continued so to be until he was Bachelor in Divinity.
Then for the exercise of his Calling he was elected by the University, and sent
by express license or Commission under their public Seal, Ad Praedicandum
Evangelium per universam Angliam, i. e. to preach the Gospel throughout all
England; A grace not granted unto any, but after performance of the exercises
required by Statute in that behalf, that is, Answering in the Divinity Schools,
and preaching Quatuor laudabiles Conciones infra Praecinctum Universitatis. He
was elected also by a Reverend Prelate the Late Bishop of Asap to be his
Domestic Chaplain, and by him presented, by the right invested in him by the
Law of the Land, first to the Rectory of New-Town, then of L'landrinio, and
lastly to L'lanymynech, where he has constantly resided these eighteen years,
and was received by the respective Parishes with approbation and comfort.

How and upon what grounds popular Elections of Bishops and Pastors were
devolved to some one or more, eminent in every respective Diocese or Division,
with the consent of the people, I will not trouble my self now to show you. But
granting, that a formal Election by vote were necessary in this case (and the
Doctors Academicall Elections are known to be such, all graces passing there by
suffrage) yet M. Powell has too hard a task of it to unsaint so many; and that
he must do, before he can by this medium infer any thing against the Doctors
calling. Entreat M. Powell to have a charitable opinion or his own Progenitors
among the rest. To my knowledge his grandfather and grandmother were of the
Doctors charge or flock.

Narrat. M. Powell proved the minor thus; He that is chosen by ignorant and
scandalous men is not chosen by Saints. But you are so chosen, Ergo. The Doctor
said, his Parishioners were visible Saints.


Animad. You heard before what Apology M. Powell made for himself, how sorry he
was that his arguments must have reflection upon the Doctor's person; but here
you see, that without scruple or preface, his zeal doubtless set him on
against charity at once to scandalize and defame the whole Parish. They are
beholding unto him for his unchristian opinion of them, whom he does not know
so much as by ^ace. When they are weary of the Doctor, they have small
encouragement to choose him for their Minister, or lift themselves in his
Congregation. But you say, the Doctor said, the Parishioners were visible
Saints; wherein you commit a double error, 1. In not reporting his full
answer. 2. In imposing words on him which were not his. The Doctor told you,
that the Scripture speaks of two sorts of Saints, some by special Calling
and Election of Grace, others by general vocation to, and profession of the
name of Christ. The former we are not to judge of; The Doctor thought it
sufficient to be elected by Saints of the later sort. And for the phrase,
visible Saints, it came not from the Doctor, but M. Nevet (I will not say as
Sexeca did of Claudius, Ea part, qua melius loquebatur) although his back was
to the Assembly all the while.


Narrat. M. Powell asked, Where be your Saints? A knowing Gentleman, a Lawyer,
of the Doctors Parish, stood up, and M. Powell desired leave to ask him a
Question, to know whether he were a Saint: the Question he asked, was, What was
the Image of Christ in the soul? Upon this there was much bustling, and
prompting, and doing, yet no Answer came.


Animad. The same way of captious arguing ye see still asking Questions; where
are they? As if, if they were not there to be catechized by him, they must be
no where. It Is true, the Gentleman that stood up is a knowing man, too knowing
to be of your ignorant opinions; The greater your fault, that knowing him to be
such, you should so misreport him. As if there were any knowing Gentleman, that
knew not how to answer M. Powell. When M. Powell had uncivilly, unjustly
branded all the Doctors Parishioners with scandal and ignorance, it was very
seasonable and necessary, for so knowing a man to let the company know he was
sensible of the obloquy, and to stand up in his own and his neighbors just
vindication.

M. Powell desired leave to ask him a Question. You say right; but you should
have told the Reader all in an exact Narrative: And therefore have added M.
Powell desired of the Doctor leave to ask his Parishioner a Question. It should
seem by this address, that M. Powell thought the Doctor assumed unto himself
such peremptory command and power over his charge, as M. Powell himself does
over his separated Congregation, that no man is to ask them a question, nor
they to answer without his leave: The Jesuits mode right, Nihil sine licentia
Superiorum. But the Doctor pretends to no such Privilege; He is amongst them
(as you know who) as one that serves. And therefore replied; He might do that
without his leave.

But the gentleman himself well knowing his own liberty, told M. Powell his own
leave should be granted before it could be expected he should answer his
Question; but for that time he freely gave it. M. Powell there upon asked him,
How is the Image of Christ wrought in the soul? The Gentleman answered
instantly without prompting, Inwardly by the Spirit, outwardly by the Word. M.
Powell had nothing to say against the answer: And being out without asking any
more leave, asks another Question, and that you have hit upon; What is the
Image of Christ in the soul? Whereunto the Gentleman beginning, an answer was
immediately interrupted by M. Powell, crying out scoffingly and without cause,
Look how they prompt him: The Gentleman replied, he neither had nor needed any
such help to answer M. Powell or any of his assistants: to which assertion
diverse Ministers and Scholars there present then gave their suffrage and
public testimony. And the Moderator in particular told M. Powell very truly,
that the Gentleman had bestowed more time in the University and the ways of
study, knowledge and learning, then he or any of his assistance.

The Gentleman believing M. Powell by his uncivil scoff, unwilling to receive
an answer, offered none afterward directly to that Question: But conceiving
himself to have a fair right to retaliate in the way of questioning, specially
considering his first condescension to M. Powell, he asked him (the fittest way
to answer such a Questionist) and that very pertinently to the argument in
hand, Whether there were no scandalous persons amongst them? M. Powell
answered, none. The Gentleman again asked, What, no Adulterers? M. Powell made
no answer, nor any for him; but a stander by, said, yea, adulterers and
buggerers too. The company understood his meaning without saying any more. For
all the Country ringeth of it. etc. the Goals and public Records of the
respective Counties of Denbigh, Montgomery, and Merrion are the ground and
evidences of this passage: Whereof I need say no more, I would there were not
so much of truth in thus much. But as for the Gentlemen, however these men
value his knowledge, I am sure they are indebted to his charity. For I have
heard him heartily wish, they could as easily wipe off from their Churches the
foul blot of these horrible and monstrous ways of propagation of the Gospel,
as he shall the imputation of ignorance in the particular wherewith this false
Narrative endeavous to asperse him.


Narrat. M. Powell went on to prove he was chosen by ignorant, superstitious
and scandalous men. And he did it by instance in a number of his Parishioners,
who sang Psalms before a dead corpse buried that very morning the dispute was.


Animad. It fell out, I mean, this instance, very opportunely, M. Powell had
wanted an argument else. To such as it is the Doctor answered. 1. For matter of
fact, he knew nothing of it: he was himself at the interring of the body, and
he never heard nor knew of any singing either before or after. Neither did he
ever give any countenance to such needless singing by the way. 2. For the
charge it self, Singing of Psalms is neither scandalous nor superstitious,
neither do the Papists use such singing; There is a great deal of difference
between David's Psalms and Dirgo's Trentals, and the like: And a vast difference
between the intention in Singing in the Reformed Churches, and the Popish
Funerals. It is the opinion and intention or use that formally make the
superstition, Singing of Psalms is a spiritual duty or exercise; and the mere
prefence of a dead Corpse is no Supersede as unto it.

3. For the consequence or force of the Argument, I shall desire the Reader to
observe it. A few of the Doctor's Parishioners did sing Psalms coming to bury a
dead corpse, July 23, 1652. Therefore they were superstitious and scandalous
that elected him or approved of his election, Mar. 20, 1633. Except M. Powell
prove this wild consequence, his new Argument brought him by good intelligence
that morning fresh and fasting, will stand him in no stead at all for the
invalidating of the Doctor's Election by those of whom the most or greater part
are Saints in heaven. And he conceives himself bound in charity to think so of
them. And M. Powel with all his Holiness is able to produce no color of
evidence to the contrary.


Narrat. Upon this they were ashamed: Then the Moderator stood up to help: He
propounded this Question, Whether they might not be Saints, though they sung
before a dead corpse? Unto which M. Powell answered, It was against the
Directory.


Animad. Shame in their faces that deserve it. If they were ashed I am sure it
was of you, that have hardened your foreheads that ye cannot blush for your
lying and impudence. Let the world judge by the whole story who had the cause
to be ashamed. And though M. Powel thought himself facete in popping the
Moderator in the mouth with the Directory, yet every one that has any
understanding may discern that it does not reach at all unto the demand or
question. The Parishioners were in ill case, if every thing they do against the
Directory must presently unsaint them; And the moderator, and the Doctor in as
bad condition, if every thing that is done in their Parishes unwitting to them,
must presently make null their Election and Calling, because it is against the
Directory.


Narrat. So he past to the third particular in the Syllogism, That he was not
rightly ordained. M. Powell urged a Syllogism to try how they were instructed
about Ordination, thus, They who are ordained according to the Word of God are
ordained by Apostles or Evanglists: But you are not so ordained, Ergo. The
Doctor did add, or by their successors.


Animad. If they had not been better instructed before they came there, they
might have returned as wise as they came for any thing of Divinity or other
sciences that was to be learned from the opponents; for they want a great deal
of instruction.

The Doctor did add, You are still too short of the exactness you profess.
You should have said, If you be a scholar specially: The Doctor distinguished
of the Apostles considered either in their Persons, or their Office,
Commission, and Successor. If M. Powel meant it of the Apostles in their
Persons, The Doctor denied the major Proposition, If of them in their office
and successors, he denied the minor. As for Evangelists, as such never any
writer said that they were entrusted with the Power of Ordination, And if you
be remembered, there were proofs given of the necessity of succession, and
continuance of a power to ordain. But M. Powell never offered to make any proof
of either of the Premises.


Narrat. There were many passages too and fro about the succession of the
Apostles and Evangelists.


Animad. Some there were about Succession of Apostles: But for succession of
Evangelists, the Doctor and his friends, I believe, never heard of any to
continue in the Church. What the passages were you do not tell us: Nor will I
trouble my head with recollecting them. If any of them had been such, as might
but seemingly be conserved for the advantage of your of your cause and glory of
the day on your part, all men may presume, you would not have concealed them.
And since you have passed them over in silence, let them lie dead for me. I am
confident the Doctor never conceived he could any way improve his credit by
disputing with such as you. And I know his Christian temper so well, that he
destreth no man's disgrace.


Narrat. The Moderator said, the Doctor was infirm in body, which he hinted
sevirall times before, and desired an end of the days disputation.


Animad. This is not truly said neither. For about this period he first spoke
of it, and I do not well remember that he spoke of the Doctors infirmity but
twice in all. But be it as you will. The matter is not great. It was time to
call for an end of the disputation, when after three hours wrangling it was
scarce begun. For neither of the Questions proposed were hitherto disputed of,
but wholly declined: Only the Doctor and his charge were brought upon the
stage, or to a popular bar to be arraigned before an ignorant multitude, or at
least made marks for their mighty and sharp arrows, even bitter words. But, God
be thanked, you do not find any enormous crimes laid to any of their charge:
and for any thing yet appears, they may all be as good Saints, as the best of
the New Congregations. For the worst God bless me from comparing with them.


Narrat. M. Powell said, He might choose any other in his stead. But they urged
an end,


Animad. This passage is not remembered neither by diverse who were present, and
would gladly have embraced the opportunity to take up the Cudgels against M.
Powell and his brethren: and I am told, that as soon as the Doctors back was
turned, there went a young man to one of the bench, and challenged him to try
his skill at the same weapon, but was refused.


Nar. Nay, said M. Powell we have said nothing for our Ministers, Gifted men,
Separation, we desire you to stay. As for the Ministers it was declared how
they were gifted, elected, approved.


Animad. Truly ye had said as much as comes to nothing all the while. And
nothing can be remembered, that you say was declared for the Ministers. All I
understood was what M. Powell declared for himself, viz. In the way of his
Calling. He had somewhat from the Bishop; afterward he received Imposition of
hands with fasting and prayer by a Presbytery in London (So M. Powel is an
Episcopal Presbyter as well as the Doctor, and there is some hopes they may
agree in time, when this youthful heat is a little over) By them he was sent
to the Assembly of Divines for approbation (By your favor, if it were so, the
course was a little preposterous. For examination and approbation should
regularly go before Ordination.) And lastly allowed he was by the Parliament.
The Doctor took his word for his own story. As for any other Ministers, how
they were gifted, elected, approved, there was not a word spoken, as either I
or any of my acquaintance that were present can remember. Whereby the reader
may observe how M. Powell declined wholly both parts of his first comparative
Question, alleging nothing against the Ministry he has so so long traduced,
and for amends making his own in nothing different from it: And in that case he
might well expect to meet no opposition from sober men.


Narrat. As for the gifted men, they were sent forth upon trial.


Animad. It may be so; The Doctor never troubled himself to enquire after them,
neither who they were, nor yet how gifted. It may be, you mean, The Smith,
Weaver, Capper, Soldier, etc. that are sent about, and well rewarded, to try
what they can propagate. Of them there was no more said in effect but this. M.
Powell asked, whether it might not be lawful for a man unordained to preach
for trial. It was answered that it was: And it was usual both in the
Universities, and before other governors of the Church. Ye^, I have known a
Bishop, and he is still living, that would not be induced to lay hands on any
stranger, before he had heard him preach. But then the Doctor asked Mr. Powell,
how long they were to be Probationers; how many Sermons would be sufficient for
trial, and who to judge; or to that effect. To which he received no answer.
The Tradesmen I now mentioned, have been these two or three years upon their
trial, as it seems, and are likely to be longer yet for all I know.


Narrat. Several Scriptures were urged for Separation, and how they were
necessitated to separate by reason of persecution and corruption in those times.


Anim. It is not urging Scriptures that will serve the turn (never any Heretic
so desperate, but could make a shift to do so) but proving by Scripture, that
vindicateth truths, and makes them credible. You would have the world believe
you did so. But it appears partly by your own difference, that it was
otherwise. For if it had been so, it would have bin well worth your labor, to
have acquainted the Reader with the particular Texts, how applied to the matter
in hand, and how answered; which because you have wholly omitted (such is your
exactness) give me leave briefly to supply.

The first Scripture urged was, Number 16 v. 26. or 24. It is not much material
whether. To which the Doctor answered immediately, That that Scripture was
nothing at all to the purpose which Mr. Powell alleged it for; being a
peculiar case, wherein the Lord in an extraordinary dispensation gave a
special command to the innocent part of the Congregation to separate from the
rest, to the end he might execute his Justice in an exemplary unusual way upon
the guilty, in that very instant. By opening the story, he showed the
heinousness of the sin, the greatness of Gods displeasure against it, and the
extraordinary judgment thereupon: And that extraordinary occasional commands
of God to that people are not to be drawn into example by us. And for this
particular the Jews case and Mr. Powel's were in no circumstance alike. Mr.
Powell said nothing to the contrary, but went on to another Scripture; and that
was 1 Cor. 5, 11. With such a one no not to eat. The Dr. being weary of
standing in the heat of their impertinencies, staid not to press him to apply
the Text, or form his argument out of it; but presently answered, That that
Scripture was nothing to their purpose of Separation neither; as might plainly
appear by the scope and sense of the whole Chapter; wherein the Apostle first
proposes the case of the incestuous person, then blames the Corinthians for
what they did in that behalf; directs them to proceed to Censure against him,
to excommunicate him; gives the use and reasons of his Command, and extends
the Discipline to other scandalous offenders also, Adulterers, Railers,
Covetous, Extortioners, etc. Such also are to be excommunicated according to
the express command, v. 13. Put away the wicked person from among you. This
Scripture speaks of the Censure of the Church, not of gathering
Congregations; of putting away corrupt members from the Church, not of
gathering a Church of several Congregations. This being said, Mr. Powell made
no reply; but went on to a third place of Scripture.

2. Tim. 3. 5. From such turn away. The Dr. presently told him, 1. That the
relative such was to be referred to all the sorts of sinners, whereof the
foregoing verses gave a catalogue (and the Moderator said they were nineteen in
number) and desired to know whom Mr. Powell charged to be so guilty. 2. The
charge there to Timothy, a Governor of the Church, is but turn away, which is
a sign of dislike or displeasure; a command to show no countenance to such,
but reprove them rather. Not to leave his station, and to go and gather a new
Church, but (if the force of the word must be extended further) to turn such
out of the Church, as he was invested with power, being a Bishop, so to do. Mr.
Powell replied, the Doctor said rightly, That the word, such, was to be
referred to all that went before. And then he went on to another place of
Scripture.

Acts 19. 9. The Dr. without looking on any book all the while, told him, that
Text answered it self by the circumstances. The Apostles case and theirs was
nothing alike: The Apostle had to do there with hardened, blaspheming Jews, and
idolatrous Heathen, Infidels, that set themselves against the Name of Christ,
and Profession of Christianity, to persecute it. It was time for him to
separate and be gone, when it was not safe to stay any longer. Then Mr. Powell
replied, This justifies my Separation, for I was persecuted (I do not well
remember how long since). The Doctor answered, He was able to say nothing to
things he knew nothing of heretofore. For the present, God be thanked they had
no such cause to complain. Master Powell then took occasion to acquaint the
company with an affront a gifted Brother met with lately at Dolgelly in
Merionethshire, near thirty miles off: He was violently plucked out of the
Pulpit, and his blood drawn. This was news to the most part of the company.
But since I hear, the man was an unordained Tradesman, sent forth it should
seem for trial; and this was part of it. And this is all that was alleged for
necessity of separation in case of persecution. And this is all the commotion
in Wales, as I believe, spoken of in the beginning of the Diurnall. They want
some pretense to bring the Soldiery again amongst us.


Narrat. When the Dr and Moderator perceived how all things were, they had
nothing to say against him, and were quite silent.


Anim. You should have considered, that the Doctor and Moderator came not there
to oppose, but answer; and that they had done; and expected either further
opposition, or liberty to be gone. The Dr. might well be silent, being grown so
hoarse, that his voice was hardly audible. The Dr. faith indeed, he had a
purpose to have concluded with a short speech to the company, recollecting the
passages; but wanting voice to do it, he turned away in silence; leaving the
Reader now to do it for him.


Narrat. There was nothing intended against the godly Ministers of England, nor
their People, though of differing judgments.


Animad. No, what say you to the Dr. and his people? are they not godly? or was
there nothing here intended against them? Speak the truth, or eat these words
again, or give your selves the lie. The time was, when the Commissioners for
the propagation of the Gospel gave the Doctor this testimony, tanquam a tripode
(I mean the Chair man in the name of the rest) that he was a man without
exception, and somewhat more, which is not here so pertinent to relate. And for
point of difference in judgment, Master Powell expressed himself more then
ordinarily charitable, saying he was persuaded that many that dissented from
him in opinion, of several professions, some Papists also, might be saved.
What was done by the other party after their departure, it cannot be expected
that the Doctor or any of his company should give any account. I was told
indeed, I cannot say how truly, that a young man of Master Powel's company drew
some people after him to the side of the Common; and there inveighed against
Learning and all such as profess it, Doctors and others. It may be, it was not
so: But if it were, it is no news amongst them. The Doctor was told beforehand
by a knowing friend, what would be the issue of this business; and he himself
professed he expected no other, but such endeavors to blast his credit, as are
here used in this Narrative: well knowing that what Luther applied unto
himself, is indeed every good man's case.

Hos scio pro certo, quod dum cum stercore certo,
Vinco seu vincor, semper ego maculor.
This for a truth I apprehend,
Whilst with a T -- I do contend,
Prevail I, or prevail I not,
I am sure to take a spot.
I am confident the Doctor will give me little thanks for my Poetry, who
delights not in recriminations, although interpretative. And it is too
apparently known whence all the dirt is taken up, which they have endeavored
to fling in his face, even from the sink of their own corruption. So farewell
Master Narrative: and learn to be more faithful and exact in your relation of
the next Dispute.


FINIS.

