A great OVERTHROW Given to the KINGS Forces in Wales, Under the Command of
Sir Charles Kemish, and Kerne the Sheriff: By Lieutenant General Laughorne,
Colonel Morgan, and Sir Trever Williams; Two thousand killed and taken.

The Enemy not above one hundred and forty left upon the Rally; And all their
Arms and Ammunition taken, Bag and Baggage; with the transaction of the whole
business, from the first to the last.

With a true Relation of the taking of Cardiffe, and one Morgan a Jesuit, and
all the particulars of the fight; and how Colonel Morgan has got between the
Enemy and Ragland.

With a Letter from an eminent Commander in Bristol, commanded to be printed
and published.

Published by Authority.

London, printed for Matthew Walbancke, 26 Feb. 1645.

A perfect and full Relation of the Routing of Sir Charles Kemish, Colonel
Carne the high Sheriff, and the rest of the Forces in Glamorganshire, by Major
General Langhorne, Sir Trever Williams, and Col. Morgan.
Colonel Morgan the Governor of Gloucester hearing that the enemy about
Ragland had done so many mischiefs, and increased so fast; and having
consideration of the hard service of Monmouth Garrison, so environed with the
Enemy of all sides, he ordered a Party of two hundred foot, and one hundred
Horse to set up a Garrison at Lenath, Sir Philip Jones his house, which is about
three miles from Ragland; notice whereof being brought to Ragland, Sir Charles
Kemish he sent out Captain Wastman with a party of Horse and Foot to obstruct
them from Garisoning there, and the mean while others were sent to Alarm
Monmouth; but we having notice of their design deterred the business till a
more fit opportunity. In the mean time the Enemy plundered the Country, and
the Gorernour of Monmouth having lately escaped the danger of Treachery by
discovering the design in due time, took the like care to prevent the like
now, in case any should be on foot, he caused the Purcullis to be let down,
and the Draw bridge to be pulled up; and the Country people on the borders of
Brecknockshire, many of them were forced to ship away their goods, and make
what speed they could for Bristoll, to preserve themselves and what they had;
for the enemy carried away many well-affected people Prisoner to Ragland, and
the mean while Car^^ the high Sheriff of Glamorganshire revolting was as
barbarous in those parts, plundering the Country, and forcing the inhabitants
to serve him; and having possessed himself of Cardiffe Town, which was not
strong enough to oppose an Enemy, nor prepared for a Siege, yet the Castle was
kept against them. For we had very honest, godly, and faithful Officers there
then, viz. the Governor, Colonel Prichard, Col. Leighton, sometimes of
Plymouth Rigiment, and others, who apprehending the danger in time that they
were in, they stored the Castle with what Provisions and Ammunition they had,
and many honest men had the best of their goods carried in thither; some went
in person, and thither the Governor and our Forces belonging to that Garrison
retreated, with a resolution to hold it out to the last man, rather then to
yield to that Runnagado crew, to whom many Club-men was joined, he having not
Arms enough for them at first; but they sent to England for both Arms and
Ammunition, and other Officers, from whence was speeded supply for him, and Sir
Charles Kemish with a Party from thence marched to join with them; Major
General Skippon speeded them what releife could be by Sea, both of Salt,
Coals, and other Provisions, and he and Colonel Morgan raised what Forces they
could, and sent all the Sailors they could get, the Vice Admiral, with other
Ships assisting herein; The mean while Major General Laughorne prepared all
the Forces he could about the South-west of Wales, and drew off his men from
Abarnstwitch, all being laborious to relieve those parts in time before the
Enemy had rested there, and were grown too strong for us; Sir Trever Williams
also drew up all the Forces he could make to assist in this so considerable a
design; which required the more haste, because we had certain Intelligence
that Sir Charles Kemish was joined with them, and that they were of Horse and
Foot nigh three thousand, and did daily increase, and so were still likely to
did except we did speedily dissipate them.

On Monday the 16. of Feb. 1645. the Vice Admiral approached near for giving
notice to Colonel Pitchard of Relief coming, and within sight of the Castle
hanged out their Colors, to let them know for whom they were, and for what
purpose they came, and shot of first one Piece of Ordnance, and then another,
and so six Pieces were shot off to let them know in the Castle that Releife
was then at hand; the sight of which Ship, and hearing of which Pieces our men
gave a great shout, and were very glad; Colonel Pitchard the Governor,
Colonel Leighton and the rest sat in Counsel, and ordered strict quarter,
and encouraged the Soldiers to prepare for a storm which they might fear,
upon the enemies understanding that releife was coming; and withal put them
in mind how far God had already then preserved them, encouraging them still
to trust in that God who had so kept them, till he had perfected his Work,
which they hoped would now suddenly be, being assured by those shot made to
give them notice that Releife was then at hand; and the Soldiers expressed
much resolution to the prosecution of the work, crying out, they would never
yield whilst they were able to withstand the Enemy, not doubting but to see
them dissipated. Their resolutions were the stronger against them also, because
there were many amongst the Enemies that were notorious Papists, some Jesuits,
Popish Priests, and Friars, and diverse of their Officers supposed to to be
such; one Father Morgan a Jesuit they had taken before, who was sent over to
(and is now in) Bristoll a Prisoner, a notorious Rogue, who vapoured much at
his hearing of the Enemies gathering and strengthening themselves about
Cardiffe for the King; now it so pleased God that the waters rose very high for
the transporting of our men, and they rose very much at Oast the passage, which
was as ill for the Enemy to hinder their flight from us.

But in the mean time Captain Bowen and other Officers of Major General
Skipons men, who had formerly been surprised by the Ragland men, in their
Quarters at Carlion, 200. Horse and 80. Foot falling upon them; about 100. of
his men were most of them taken, and so cruel was the Enemy at that time, that
they threw some of them into the water and drowned them. Captain Bowen had
been with Sir Charles Somerset, the Governor of Ragland, about their exchange,
which they have reason so desire as speedily as they can, by reason of the hard
usuage they find, and they procured that some should go upon their peroll viz.
Captain Bowen, and a Lieutenant; and Sir Charles Somerset signed their Passes,
Charles Somerset, Governor of Ragland who are to procure one Master Harbert,
and Captain Keitleby, two notable sticklers for the King, to be exchanged for
them, or to return back again Prisoners to him; and they are gone to Major
General Skippon to Bristoll, to procure the exchange accordingly. But all this
while the design went on for the relief of our friends in Cardiffe Castle, and
the dissipating of the Forces in those parts, which took good effect. So soon
as the Enemy had intelligence of the approaching of Major General Laughhorne,
who marched with about 250. of his own Horse and Foot, and some others of the
Country, that rose and joined with him: The Enemy drew off from before
Cardiffe Castle, first summoning it, to which they had a denial, they drew
into a great Field to fight us, we marched up to them, and fell upon them with
such gallantry, that we routed them, and made them fly several ways, Carne
himself stayed not to keep them together, but like a Vagabond ran up and
down bemoaning himself, and glad he was he had a good and a nimble Horse, not
to charge, but fly with. Major General Laughhorne has given so great a blow
to Sir Charles Kemish, that of his Ragland Forces has killed and taken so many,
that of above three thousand, there are not above sevenscore of them left upon
Rally, nor those likely to get to Ragland; for Colonel Morgan and Sir Trever
Williams came in both very seasonably, and are all pursuing. Colonel Morgan is
got between Sir Charles Kemish and Ragland, It was a very bloody Fight, two
thousand killed and taken; A great number of Arms we have taken, and rescued
many Cattle which they had plundered from the Country people, and much of their
Ammunition and Plunder; it being a very great Victory; And Major General
Laughhorne, Colonel Morgan, and Sir Trever Williams, are still in pursuit of
the Enemy; And this action it is hoped will prove the preservation of
South Wales.

The Copy of a Letter from one of the Chief Officers in Bristoll*
SIR;
I Now came from the Governor, (Major General Skippon,) whilst I was with
him, in came a poor man) with six Gentlemen of Glamorganshire that fled
hither,) with a Letter, which intimates thus much, that Cardiffe is retaken,
for it was taken by the Enemy and Clubmen (since my last,) and many strange
passages are in the Letter. The Governor, Colonel Pitchard, and Colonel
Leyton, who has been sometimes of the Plymouth Regiment, betook themselves to
the Castle with their Forces, and kept that: The Vice Admiral in Monday last
made a sight of the Castle, and shot off six Pieces, to let them know in that
time they should have relief, which was performed by Major General
Laughhorne, Sir Trever Williams, and Colonel Morgan: The Messenger says, that
they had a very bloody sight, but assures the Governor that we routed Sir
Charles Kemish of Ragland, and all his, and that there are not 140. of them
left upon Ralley, nor those likely to get to Ragland, for Colonel Morgan is
fallen between them and home. We expect the particulars every hour, but the
waters are very high here, and at Oast (the passage.) Since this Messenger,
whilst I was with the Governor, in came Captain Bowen, one of the Captains
of the Governors Regiment, belonging to the New Model, taken three weeks
since, (and a Lieutenant) by Ragland, they demand Captain Kettleby for the
one, and one Master Harbert for the other. Here is one Morgain, a Jesuit,
prisoner also, who was sent from Cardiffe before the revolt. I hope the Welsh
that have acted in it, will pay for their treachery.

Sir I am Your affectionately to serve you.
From my Quarters in Bristoll this Friday night, Febr. 19. 1645.
FINIS.

