The PROPHECY of Paulus Grebnerus Concerning these Times.
PAulus Grebnerus was here in England with Queen Elisabeth, Anno 1582. and
presented her with a fair Manuscript in Latin, describing therein the future
history of Europe, here and there limming in water-colors Some principal
passages.

Dr. Nevil, Clerk of the Closet, being in favor with the Queen obtained this
book of Her, and bestowed it on the Library of Trinitie-Colledg in CAMBRIDG,
where it has been published to the view of all persons, till about 5 or 6
years ago, by much perusing and ill handling, it was much slurred and defaced.

In his PredictionsHee describes the Troubles of Russia, and the Election of a
Swedish King, Sigismund by name, to be King of Polonia, by which he shall
irrecoverably lose his own inheritance.

That of the Swedish race there should be one GUSTAVUS ADOLPHUS by name, that
should take heart from the distractions of Germany to invade the Empire with a
small Army, fight many Battles prosperously, but should at last perish in a
pitcht-field.

That about that time should Reign Rex Septentrionalis nomine CAROLUS, qui
ducet Uxorem Mariam Papisticam, ex quo evadet Regum infelicissimus. Tunc
Populus ipsius Ditionis eliget sibi alium Imperatorem, Comitem; qui durabit in
Imperio tres annos, aut circiter. Ac postea idem Populus eliget alium
Imperatorem, Equitem, non ejusdem familiae nec Dignitatis, qui detrudet omnia
sub pedibus suis: durabit aliquanto longiore tempore: and post hunc eliget
nullum.

Post hunc apparebit quidam CAROLUS e CAROLO descendens, cum immensa Class in
litore Ditionis patris sui, and cum Auxiliariis Danicis, Suedicis, Hollandicis,
Francicis prosternet adversariros suos, and administrabit Imperium
perfelicissime, and long lateque dominabitur, and erit Carolo Magno major.

Englished Thus: -- About that time a Northern-King should Reign, CHARLES by
Name, who shall take to wife MARIE of the Popish Religion, whereupon He shall
be a most unfortunate Prince. Then the People of his Dominion shall choose to
themselves another Commander [or Governor] viz. an Earl: whose Government shall
last three years, or thereabout. And afterward the same People shall choose
another Commander [or Governor] viz. a Knight, not of the same Family, nor
Dignity, who shall trample all things under his feet: he shall endure somewhat
longer time: And after him they shall choose none at all.

After him shall appear one CHARLES descending from CHARLES, with a mighty
Navy on the Shore of His Father's Kingdom, and with Aid from Denmark,
Swedeland, Holland, France shall overthrow His Adversaries, and shall govern
His Kingdom wonderful happily, and shall bear Rule far and near: and shall be
greater then CHARLES the Great.


