AN EXPOSITION Of the five first CHAPTERS OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL, WITH USEFUL
OBSERVATIONS THEREUPON.

Delivered in several LECTURES in London, By WILLIAM GREENHILL.

Matthew. 13.11. To you it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom.

(...), Nyssen.

Ama Scripturas sanctas, and amabit te sapientia, Jerome.

LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons for Benjamin Allen, and are to be sold at
his Shop, at the sign of the Crown in Popes-head-Alley, 1645.

Errata.
PAge 3. Line 22. read Galal. 4.21. one. 9. 24. desperatest. 10. 28. Haroeh.
29. 8. was there. 31. 1. Bagdet. 36. in marg. for use, put 8. 44. in marg.
(...) 49. 17. the thing. 57. ^7. dele 1. 59. 12. dele in. 62. 32. there is. 71.
4. Lo. and 18. a cloud. 73. 13 hasty. 76. 9. Sanctius. 76. 9. remained. 77. 18.
to this day. 83. 13. creature. and 20. Cherub. and 21. dele of. 85. 25. unto
every good. 88. 25. Dunaan. 91. 13. watch. 97. 30. there. 101. 3 look. 101. 18.
Deuteronomy. 17. 103. 2. Heb. 16. 104. 31. move. 107. 17. Isa. 6.2. that is. 112. in
marg. (...). 113. 7. hand. 114. 18. your. 133. 38. the 8. 9. and 16. Chapter
of. 139. in marg. Rueus. 140. 2. deceitful. 141. 31. Bosworth field. 148. 23.
Sanchez. and 25. learned man, for. 149. in marg. Sylla tam. 150. 9. that
those. and 10. dele that. and 29. Psalm. 32.155. 2. Psalm. 10.12.164.17. the. in
marg. (...). 169. 14. exposed. 171. 7. conrent. 174. 17. awakened. 180. 18.
way, a firmament. 189. 8. dele 2. 191. in marg. Oleaster. 191. 22. judiciary.
198. in marg. Thom. 199.7. time. 202. 2. Hashshem. 10. Hammephorash. 17.
Shemhaetzem. 203. in marg. (...). 214. 11. Job 42.225. in marg. (...) 228. 16.
know things to. 229. 8. offices -- if set. 232. 26. rebellion. 234. 35, 36.
your. 238 10. woare. 240. 3. a bare. 242. 24. Joh. 35. 2 Chro. 36.243. in marg.
(...) 244 in marg. (...) 258. 34. add, they were plain. 286. 33. of my. 287.
3. henceforth. 290. 32. the. 293. 30. Obser. 5. 295. 20. revelation. 298. in
marg. pudore. 300. 35. Diotrephes. 308.22. spoil. 309. 10. M^m^k^mo. 329. 10.
God. 331. 13. Gods. 336. 37. did, hear what. 340. 12. require 342. 9. in. 343.
4. cause. 343. 38. same thing. 353. 16. 1 John 3.3. 361. 10. from. 366. 7.
visions. 393. 9. Lovain. 396. 29. is -- days. 402. 23. crection. 405. 20.
homer. in marg. Waserum. 419. 10. Hanun. 19. thing. 422. 17. stubble. 422. 26.
dele but. 445. 2. severiores. 450. 12. Priesthood. 451. in marg. Mead. 452. 7.
mentioned in.

TO THE EXCELLENT PRINCESS, And most hopeful Lady, THE PRINCESS ELIZABETH
HER HIGHNESS.
May it please your Highness;
SOLOMON, the wisest of Princes, counsels us to remember our Creator in the
days of our youth; it is a great Virtue to be mindful of God timely: Timothy
from a child knew the holy Scriptures: (...) 2 Chro. 34.3.
Josiah that good Prince, while he was yet young, or tender, (as the Hebrew
bears it) began to seek after the Lord, he did that which was right in his
sight, he walked in the ways of David, he turned not aside, ^ King. 22.2
to the right hand or left. The Lord takes special notice when young ones are
mindful of him: the childrens crying Hosanna, is recorded in the Gospel; Mat.
21.15.
children walking in the truth, is observed by John, Epist. 2.4. 1 King. 14.13.
and the Lord minded the good was found in the child of Jeroboam: doubtless
Gods eye is upon your Highness, for that good is found in you in these your
tender years, and is well pleased, that your sweetness of nature, and
choiceness of wit are joined with desire to know him, with love to his Worship,
affection to the godly, and delight in such sentences as these are, viz.

(...).
Deus meus and omnia.
La mia Grandezza dal Eccelso.
All which with these precious speeches of yours, I had rather be a beggar
here, then not go to heaven, and how shall I be sure to go to heaven? are
acceptable to the Highest, and m^ke strong impressions upon us inferiors: Your
desire to know the original tongues, that you may understand the Scripture the
better, your resolution to write them out with your own Princely hand, and to
come to the perfect knowledge of them, breed in us hopes that you will exceed
all of your Sex, and be without equal in Europe, as Drusius said of his son,
who at five years learned Hebrew, and at twelve writ it ex tempore, both in
prose and verse. Encouraging instances your own Sex will afford, Eustochium
profited so much in the Latin, Hebrew, and Greek, that in her time she was
called the wonder of the world. Istrina Queen of the Scythians so excelled in
Greek, that she taught her sons the Greek tongue. Zenobia Queen of the
Palmirenians, was skild in the Latin, Egyptian and Greek tongues, she read the
Roman Story in Greek, abridged the Alexandrian, and all the Oriental
histories. Politian has an Epistle to Cassandra, a Venetian maid, whom he
calls the glory of Italy, her delight was not in wool, but books, not in the
spindle, or needle, but in the pen, not in paint, but in ink; she writ Epistles
and Orations to admiration, she excelled in Logic and Philosophy, and had such
perfections, as caused the learned to admire, if not adore her. Queen
Elizabeth was so learned, that she read every Author in the original, and
answered Ambassadors of most Nations in their own language, she went twice to
Oxford, and once to Cambridge purposely to hear the learned Academicall
disputations, where her self made Latin Orations; she translated Salust, and
writ a Century of Sentences; she set apart some hours daily to read, or hear
others read to her; she so excelled in learning and wisdom, that her teachers
rather learned of her, then brought learning to her. Your Highness seems to aim
at all the excellencies in the prementioned: for your writing out the Lords
prayer in Greek, some texts of Scripture in Hebrew, your endeavor after the
exact knowledge of those holy tongues, with other languages and learned
accomplishments, your diligent hearing of the word, careful noting of Sermons,
understanding answers at the catechizing, and frequent questioning about holy
things, do promise great matters from you. If the harvest be answerable to the
spring, your Highness will be the wonder of the learned, and glory of the
godly. It is my unhappiness that I cannot be sufficiently adjuvant to such
Princely beginnings; yet because this following Treatise is an exposition of
Scripture, I take the boldness to present it to your Highness, and shall
continue to pray to him who is All, and able to give All, that he would
preserve your Royal person, bless your hopeful endeavors, fill you with all
divine perfections, make you a chief praise in Israel, and fit you for an
eternal weight of glory.

Your Highness most humble servant, WILLIAM GREENHILL.

To all Wel-willers of TRUTH; Especially to the Authors and Fautors of the
Expository Lectures in this City.
IN most Arts and Sciences are difficulties, in Divinity are depths; Plato,
Aristotle, Euclid, have their nodos, and the Scriptures have their (...), in
them are dark sayings, Psalm. 78.2. Riddles, Ezekiel. 17.2 Parables, Matthew. 13.35.
Wonders, Psalm. 119 18. great things, Hos. 8.12. things hard to be uttered, Heb.
5.12. hard to be understood, 2 Pet. 3.16. Mysteries, Mat. 13.11. hidden and
manifold Wisdom, 1 Cor. 2.7. Ephesians. 3.10. the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2.10.
Much is in it that God has intermixed the holy Scriptures with some
difficulties. Hereby we are led up to conceive there be infinite depths in God,
which eternity must take us up to study. They convince us of our incapacity of
high things, Joh. 16.12. They prevent our undervaluing of divine Truth: (...).
flesh and blood is very apt upon reading, and apprehension of easiness to lay
aside choice Works; God has therefore hid some truths under the rocks, laid
them deep, that so there might be digging and searching, Prove. 2.4.
as for treasures. Difficulties quicken and whet endeavors; sloth is a great
gulf which hinders men from coming at the truth, and it made the Father fear,
Ego vereor ne per nimiam negligentiam and stoliditatem cordis non solum velata
sint nobis divina volumina, sed etiam signata Origin. In Verbo Dei abundat quod
perfectus comedat, and quod parvulus sugat, Falg.
lest thereby the Lords Book should not only be shut, but also sealed up.
Ingenuous spirits, when they hear of hard things, stir livelily, and what they
get by sorest labor, is most precious. The rocky and knotty things in the
Prophets and Apostles, suffice to exercise the greatest abilities and graces
which are seated in humane nature; they keep men's thoughts from swelling into
a conceit of omnisciency; they make us long to be where we shall know as we
are known, 1 Cor. 13.12. and in the mean time, to pray with David, Open thou
our eyes, Sine Deo, impossible est discere Deum, Iren.
that we may see the wonders of thy Law; hard things drove David to the Lord,
he knew, that without God he could not understand the things of God, whose
glory it is, both to conceal and reveal a thing, Prove. 25.2. Mat. 16.17. Many
have sued to God for further discovery of his mind, and have attempted to help
us in Scripture difficulties: but all dark things are not yet cleared, nor all
depths yet sounded; To this day a veil is upon the heart of the Jews in
reading the old Testament, 2 Cor. 3.14, 15. and surely, the veil is not fully
removed from the hearts of us Christians, we have seen very dimly into sundry
things, not only of Paul, Peter and John, but of Moses and the Prophets,
especially of this Prophet Ezekiel, who has therefore been past over, both by
Writers and Readers, as dark, difficult, and less useful. Robert Stephen
mentions one, Respons. ad censu. Theol. Paris. in praef.
and that a Sorbonist, who had lived above fifty years, and knew not what the
new Testament meant; and have not sundry persons among us, lived their fifty
years, and not known what Ezekiel meant? Has he not been a Book clasped and
sealed unto them? If this Hieroglyphicall Prophet have been a wonder to all for
his Visions, yet he has been known to few, by reason of the abstrusenesse of
his Visions, which have kept off great Rabbis from employing their talents to
open them. If weakness and error be found in these poor labors of mine, J
entreat you to remember, J have been among prophetical deepes and
difficulties, which may plead for him who knowing his own insufficiencies, came
invita Minerva to this task. If any light appear for the better understanding
of these aenigmaticall things; I must say with Daniel, There is a God in Heaven
which reveals mysteries, to him be all the glory. My prayers shall be to him
inlightneth every man which comes into the world, Dan. 2.
that he would anoint your eyes with eye salve, whereby you may daily see more
into the great and glorious truths of God and those things which may strongly
make for your eternal peace and comfort. So prays

Your Friend and Servant in the Lord, W. G.

The Introduction to the Work.
ALL Scripture being the breath of Gods Spirit, 2 Pet. 1.21. 2 Timothy 3.16. none
can be Judge or Expounder of it but the same Spirit. Men are only Indices
veritatis, they cannot bring a sense, but show you what is the sense of
Scripture. Those are called to be Expositors, must not fetch senses ab extra,
but take what is in the bowels of the Text, and hold forth unto others. A work
which requires ability, wisdom, diligence, and faithfulness: Ability to
inquire into the originalls; wisdom to compare Scriptures, consider
circumstances, and to discern the verity, spirituality and propriety of Texts
and Phrases; diligence to dig and search after truth, which lies deep, and
hid; faithfulness to give out Truths being found, with their own luster, not
humane tincture. Whosoever does thus, shall purchase favor in Heaven, if not
esteem on earth. Expository work is ancient and honorable; Ancient as
Nehemiahs time, Chap. 8.8. the Levites gave the sense of the Law, they
expounded it. In those days the Jews had their Perushim, Interpreters, which
was above five hundred years before Christ: what ways they interpreted
Scripture, Helvicus.
you may read in Shindl. Pentagl. page 1491. and in Weems his Christian
Synagogue, 2 book, chap. 1. page 221. It Is also Honorable; for the Lord Christ
was an Expositor, Mark. 4.34. he expounded all things, (...).
Luke 24.27. he interpreted; and verse. 32. he opened the Scriptures. Paul
also was an Expositor, Act. 28.23. he expounded. This work being so ancient and
honorable, let it find the more acceptance with you.

Some would have Expositors only give the literal sense without observation or
application of any thing: if all people could prophecy, were skillful in
Scriptures, as Ezra, mighty, as Apollo, I could like it. But because many
truths lie so deep, and so closely couched, as all cannot easily discern or
extract them, it is necessary to give the sense, and draw forth points
observable, yet with a brievous perspicuity and perspicuous brevity. The
literal sense may be strong meat for some, when observations may be milk for
others. That course shall I take, and so I come to the Title.

The Antiquity, Scope and Occasion of Writing, Nature, Benefit and Parts of
this Prophecy handled in the Title.
The Book of the Prophet Ezekiel.
FEw of the other sacred Books have this Title in the original prefixed. The
word Sephar, (...)
a book, signifies any writing; be it great or small, short or long, it has
this name in the Hebrew language. Jer. 3.8. a Bill of divorce is mentioned; the
word in the original is Sephar, a book of Divorce. It was the use of the Jews
to call any Writing, though it had but a few lines in it, Sephar, a book. And
so a Catalogue that had not many names in it, is called a book, Mat. 1.1. The
book (or, the catalogue) of the generation of Jesus Christ.

This Book of Ezekiel is large, having eight and forty Chapters in it, and may
rather be called a Volume, then Sephar, a Book, a Bill, a Catalogue. Some Books
in the Scripture that are far less then this of Ezekiel have that title. Esther
which is not long, has this title, Megillath Esther, the Volume of Esther, or
the Book of Esther, so it is in your Bibles. The word comes from Gabal, (...)
which signifies to roll or fold up, for the use of the Jews was to fold up
their Writings, as being the best way to preserve them from dust and other
dangers. These two words are sometimes found both together, as in this Prophet,
Chap. 2. v. 9. There was sent unto the Prophet a hand, and in it there was
Megillath Sephar, a roll of a Book.

The Jews had many Megillaths, many such volumes or rolls, especially five,
which they did use at several times.

There was the Megillath of the Canticles, which they read at the Feast of the
Passover, because it contained much of the love of God to the Church, and in
the Passover they apprehended much of Gods love toward them.

2. Then they had the Megillath of Ruth, which was read a^ the Feast of
Pentecost, because it contained the Genealogy and original of David their
King, who was so beloved and dear unto them.

3. They had the Megillath of Ecclesiastes, and that they read at the Feast of
Tabernacles, in memory of Gods protection of them forty years in the
Wilderness, because that volume did contain in it many acts of Gods providence
which watches over his people continually.

The fourth was the Megillath of Esther, which was read in the Month of Adar,
because that discovered the plot of Haman, and the goodness of God that did
deliver them from that imminent danger.

The last Megillath was the Book of the Lamentations, and this contained, as
the sum, so the bewailing of the Babylonish captivity which was grievous unto
them. This Book they read in the fifth Month which was answerable to the
latter end of July.

These were all little books, little volumes, Ezekiel is rather a Megillath,
and Ezekiel must be one volume, a book written in the Babylonish captivity,
some five hundred and fourscore years before Christ; so that it is above two
thousand two hundred years since this book was written. From hence you may
observe:

First, the Wisdom of God in causing this and other books to be written. A
book is a writing, the original word signifies to write. Here is the wisdom
and goodness of God, that the Prophecies of Ezekiel and other Prophets should
be written. God will have his Church furnished with, and regulated by written
truths, not unwritten traditions: The Jews they had their Cabbala, which they
say were full of secret Mysteries. The Papists, they have their Traditions,
they call them unwritten verities, and we call them unwritten vanities We have
a sure word of Prophecy to stick unto, and they uncertain fancies, which
corrupt the worship of God, and endanger immortal souls. Bellarmine has a
whole book de Verbo Dei non scripto, of the Word of God unwritten; such words
of God we acknowledge not. It was the wisdom of God that the Prophets should
write, and that their writings should be extant. When the Lawyer asked Christ
what he should do to inherit eternal life, Christ does not send him to
unwritten Traditions, or to Jewish Cabbala's, but he sends him to a known and
written Law, What is written in the Law? how read thou? Luke 10.26.
So we must look to what is written, and how we may read, not what they tell
us was revealed to such a Saint, and has continued to so many generations, and
is the truth of God: these are delusions. The writings of the Prophets and
Apostles are sufficient for us, and we acknowledge the infinite goodness of
God, in that these should be written for us to have resort unto. If this
Prophets, others, and Apostles works had not been written, there would have
been great inconveniences; some things would have been forgotten; some
neglected; many things corrupted, and all things in time questioned, and so the
whole truth would have been without authority in the hearts of people.

Secondly, see here the providence of God likewise, in preserving this book of
Ezekiel; which was written in Babylon, for there was the Prophet, and there he
had his visions: for a book to be preserved in Babylon is a wonder. The Law was
lost in Sion, in Manasses his days, and found again in Josiah his time: If the
Law may be lost in Sion, much more may a Prophecy be lost in Babylon; and if
not lost in Babylon, yet it might have been left in Babylon; if not left there,
it might have miscarryed in their return; if not then, yet when Titus and
Vespasian took and sacked Jerusalem, it might there have perished, and been
utterly extinguished, and we never have heard of this Prophecy of Ezekiel. But
here is the hand of God manifested in it, that though this Prophecy were
revealed to Ezekiel in Babylon, and run through so many hazards, yet it should
be preserved to this very day.

Again, see where is the true antiquity: This book was written five hundred and
fourscore years before Christ, two thousand two hundred years ago, and is not
this book now very ancient? other Prophets, and the whole Scripture are the
true Antiquity. Papists, and many amongst us stand upon antiquity, and what is
their antiquity? The Fathers, or some Heathen Writers, are their antiquity. But
what is the true antiquity but the Word of God? That is Prima veritas, and pura
veritas, the first truth, and the pure truth, that is the fountain, all other
are but muddy channels. When any points are in controversy they fly to
Fathers and to Antiquity, and what is found there they take for truth: but this
is to desert God, and run to man. My people have forsaken me the fountain of
living waters, Jerem. 2.13.
and hewed them out cisrerns, broken cisterns, that can hold no water. I am the
fountain, says God, my Scriptures are the fountain of living waters, yet they
run to their own pits and cisterns that hold no water. Some moth-eaten and old
writings, some ancient copies that have lain hid some hundreds of years from
the world, are brought forth, and obtruded upon people for truths, and they
must be truths. But for your direction, know, that if they be not in the Kings
Records, what ever writings they be, never regard them: and if you will search,
never search into inferior Courts, search not books that are on this side the
Kings Court, that are made of late; but go to the King of heavens Records, have
recourse to his Court, look into the Law of God; Isa. 8.20.
To the Law and to the Testimony; if they speak not according to this word, it
is because there is no light in them; throw them by; that truth which is found
in any writings, and not to be drawn out of Gods Book, is not from antiquity,
these are the true Records, here is the true antiquity; And so much for this
word Book; The Book of the Prophet Ezekiel.

(...).
Ezekiel, that is the name of our Prophet. Among the Jews there were no
Sir-names, but every man had only one name, as Samuel, David, Isaiah, Jeremie,
Ezekiel, etc. This name Ezekiel does signify the strength of God, or, one
strengthened by God: He had a great work to do, he needed great strength for
that work. He was to deal with wicked Princes, and wretched people, such as
were exceeding opposite, desperately wicked, impudent, hard-hearted,
rebellious. Therefore Chap. 3. verse. 8, 9. Behold (says God) I have made thy
face strong against their faces, and thy forehead strong against their
foreheads, etc. The Hebrew words here for strong, are Chazakim and Chazak,
(...).
I have made thy faces Chazakim, strong, I have given thee many faces, and I
have given thee many strengths, strong both in the singular and plural number,
all the strengths that is fit for a Prophet that had such a great task to
undertake and go about. He was to reprove them for their sins, to threaten
Gods judgments, to vindicate Gods justice in bringing them into captivity,
himself was to endure much hardship, and many conflicts, for which ordinary
strength would not suffice: therefore he is fitly called Ezekiel, the strength
of God, or a man strengthened of God.

Or thus: Ezekiel does signify one girt of God: Cingere, vineire.
for Chazack is to gird or bind, and Ezekiel is one whom God has girt and
bound up for some employment: answerable to that expression of Paul, Behold
(says he) I go go bound in the Spirit to Jerusalem, so you read it; but it
may be, bound to the Spirit; Acts 20 22. (...).
the Spirit of God goes before me; and I being bound to the guidance of the
Spirit, do follow the same whithersoever it leads me. So here, our Prophet was
girt up of God from the world, bound in, or to the Spirit, and so followed
that, which way soever it led him.

Touching this name of Ezekiel, you may observe a note or two.

First, see the wisdom of God in giving names suitable to the events that do
follow and fall out afterward. Ezekiel was to deal with a stubborn people, a
rebellious house, that did oppose heaven, that did stand it out against God to
the uttermost. There was need therefore of a strong Prophet to subdue their
rebellious spirits. If an ordinary man had come, he would soon have been
discouraged, his spirit would have sunk and fallen within him; therefore here
the Lord orders it so, that a name shall be given unto him which shall be
suitable to the event, he shall be a man of God, he shall be strong,
strengthened, girt up of God, to deal with a proud, rebellious, obstinate
people.

You may find in Scripture diverse names that have been imposed through the
wisdom and guidance of God upon parties before their birth, and the event
has answered afterward very fully: as Genesis 17. Thou shall call his name Isaac.
Isaac signifies laughter, and Isaac proved matter of laughter to his father
and mother all their days, he was a dutiful son, you never read that Isaac
fell into such sins as some other of the Patriarchs and Prophets fell into.
He was a child of laughter to them. So 1 Chronicles. 22.9. His name shall be
Solomon, for I will give peace and quietness unto Israel in his days: and the
event was answerable to his name. So Josiah, 1 Kings 13.2. it signifies the
fire of the Lord, and Josiah was the fire of God indeed to make a reformation,
to pull down Jeroboams Altar, and to offer upon it the Priests of the high
places that had burnt Incense upon it, to burn men's bones thereon, to throw out
idolatry, and to destroy the high places. So the name of our blessed Savior
which was imposed before his birth, Thou shall call his name Jesus, They shall
call his name Emanuel, he shall save his people, he shall be God with us, and
it was so. Luke 1. Call his name John. John notes Gracious, and he was
gracious in the eyes of his very enemies, he had favor in the eyes of Herod,
favor in the eyes of the people. Gods wisdom is seen in ordering of names
beforehand, suitable to events that follow afterward.

2. This should direct parents to impose encouraging names upon their children.
What encouragement was it to Ezekiel to think of his name, the strength of God,
a man girt up of God for some great design and employment? Names at first were
imposed for distinctions sake, and not only so, but to show the hopes and
desires of parents touching their children for the time to come; Obvirtutis
auspicium imponunt u^ vocabula, Jeron.
Good names were prognosticall, Parents expected, and children were encouraged
much by them: Leah names her son Judah, which is praise, that she might praise
God for him, and he might do things worthy of praise all his days, and the
Tribe of Judah did worthily in Israel.

Thus much from the name of Ezekiel.

The Boook of the Prophet Ezekiel. This word Prophet, is not in the Hebrew. The
Book Ezekiel, or the book of Ezekiel: But it is in the body of the Prophecy,
Chap. 2. v. 6. They shall know that there has been a Prophet among them.
Prophet is from the Greek word, (...).
and it signifies one that foretells things to come. (...)
The Hebrew word Nabi of Naba, which signifies to foreknow, (...)
foretell, or discover things. Some derive it from a root, which signifies to
bud, to bring forth: for as a tree draws sap from the earth, sends forth that
sap into leaves and fruit, becomes profitable and serviceable unto man; so does
the Prophet, he draws sap from the root, which is God, from him he has many
hidden deep and divine truths, which he reveals and sends forth for the
delight and benefit of others.

Prophets were of two sorts, distinguished by the Temples; some were Prophetae
priores, and others Prophetae posteriores. The former Prophets were those of
the first Temple, the latter Prophets were those of the latter Temple, and they
were Haggai, Zachariah, Nehemiah, Ezra, and Malachi; these Prophets continued
but forty years after the second Temple was built, and then did Prophecy
depart from Israel, Trausiit prophetia ab Israele, Shind.
which was the saddest blow one of them, that ever Israel had. All the rest
were Prophets of the first Temple, and among them was our Prophet Ezekiel and
Daniel, though they were in the captivity; for the first Temple was not yet
destoyed, and they had lived at Jerusalem among the Prophets: and the Prophets
of the former Temple (it is observed) had the largest visions, and the fullest
discoveries of the mind of God, more was discovered in the first Temple then
in the second, till Christ his coming: for the second Temple had Prophets but
forty years after it was built, and the first Temple had Prophets for four
hundred and thirty years.

The Prophets (to speak for the honor of this our Prophet) were all honorable
men, men of great esteem and worth, they were men of God, as it is said, 1
King. 17.24. I know thou art a man of God, Ish Elohim, a man of the Gods, a man
of God the Father, a man of God the Son, a man of God the Holy Ghost, he had
to do with all, a man of Gods counsel, a man of Gods protection, a man of Gods
countenancing, a man of God that stood for God, a man of God that would plead
the cause of God in the corruptest times, against the desperate enemies. A
Prophet was a man of God.

That they were very honorable, you shall find by that passage, 1 Samuel 10.11.
Is Saul also among the Prophets? It is a Proverbiall speech, and notes a thing
that is very rare and unusual; What, is Saul that was a man of mean condition,
Saul that was erewhile seeking his fathers Asses; is Saul now come to so high
and honorable a condition, as to be a mong the Prophets? This was matter of
wonder. The Prophets they were so honorable, and in so high an esteem, that it
was counted a strange thing for any to come to that dignity and preferment,
that were not of the Prophetical race, the Tribe of Levi, or such as were in
order to those holy functions.

They were likewise men privileged, Psalm. 105.15. Touch not mine Anointed, and
do my Prophets no harm; Anointed is the same with Prophet, as Expositors
observe, though it is carried otherwise in the general apprehension of men for
Kings, but anointed here is the same with Prophet: They were anointed when the
Holy Ghost was given unto them, and they were called unto their Office; this
was their anointing of God, and they must not be touched nor harmed. Genesis 20.7.
says God to Abimelech, Give the man his wife, for he is a Prophet; he is an
honorable man, he is a man of high account in mine eyes. Princes must not
wrong a Prophet, God spoke to a Prince, Give him his wife, for he is a Prophet;
the greatest person in the world should not dare to touch a Prophet that is a
man so honorable, a man of God, and so gifted, and sent of him to such great
employments.

(...)
Further, a Prophet was called in Scripture a Seer, 1 Samuel 9.9. Let us go to the
Seer, for he is now called a Prophet that was before time called a Seer; (...)
that i, from the Hebrew word to see, and not barely to see, but to see
exactly, curiously, thoroughly into things. The Prophets saw through the clouds,
they saw into the heavens, they saw into the very counsel of God. Isa. 30.10.
Which say to the Seers, See not; you see too much, the meaning is, you see too
acurately, why do you see so, and tell us such things? So Abraham he was a
Prophet, you heard before, he was likewise a Seer, Joh. 8.56. Abraham rejoiced
to see my day; he saw it distinctly, he saw it so, as it affected him, he saw
it and was glad.

There is, besides this word, another name in the Hebrew, which the Prophets
had, (...)
and that was Chozeh. Isa. 30.10. That say to the Prophets, Prophecy not, the
Hebrew is La chozim, to those that foresee, and foretell things: you have a
conjuncture of these three in one verse, 1 Chronicles. 29.29. They are written in
the book of Samuel, Haroah, the Seer, and in the book of Nathan Hannabi the
Prophet, and in the book of Gad, Hachozeh the Seer. The word comes of Chazah
to contemplate, to see; from which root comes our English word, to gaze, and so
it is interpreted, Isa. 47.13. Star-gazers; this only by the way.

Our Prophet had the honor to be a Seer as well as a Prophet, therefore verse
1. it is said, I saw visions, I had the honor to see visions, (...)
and visions of a God.

These Titles of Seer and Prophet, as they set out the dignity, so likewise
they point out the duty of the person. As they were Seers, they were the eyes
of the Church, Oculi Ecclesiae.
to see good coming, or evil, that they might encourage them upon the one, and
draw them to repentance upon the other. As they were Prophets they were os
Domini, the mouth of the Lord, to speak to the people whatsoever the Lord
himself did make known to them.

All this then does but serve to breed in you an honorable esteem of this our
Prophet; he is a man of God; he is a man honorable among the rest of the
Prophets; he is a Seer; he is the eye of the Church; he is the mouth of God.

Having thus opened unto you the Title, I shall now show to you; 1. The scope
and occasion of this Prophet. 2. The nature and condition of it. 3. The
seasonableness of this Prophecy for this time. 4. What benefit you are like to
have by this Prophet; and then divide the Prophecy in general, and fall into
the Chapter.


1. For the scope and occasion of this Prophecy. In general, it is to show the
certainty of Jerusalems destruction, and the seventy years captivity, which
were now in question; and so to confirm the Prophecy of Jeremy, being of the
same argument.

Jeremy having prophesied of the captivity of Jerusalem for seventy years, the
utter ruin of the City and Temple; many, both in Jerusalem and Babylon (the
captivity being begun, for now Ezekiel and diverse were in Babylon) murmured and
complained of Jeremy, that he was a false Prophet; that he had not the Spirit
of God; that he had misled the people; that he had brought them into bondage
by his fair words, put them upon yielding unto the King of Babylon, and
betrayed them: You shall find false Prophets bestirred themselves, and opposed
his prophecy both in Sion and in Babylon, as Jer. 28.1, 2, 3. Hananiah being at
Jerusalem, when Jeremiah was in the house of the Lord, in the presence of the
Priests and of all the people, says he, Thus speaks the Lord of Hosts, the
God of Israel, saying, I have broken the yoke of the King of Babylon; within
two full years will I bring again into this place all the vessels of the Lords
house that Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon took away from this place, and
carried them to Babylon; And I will bring again to this place Jeconiah the
son of Jehoiakim, King of Judah, with all the captives of Judah that went
into Babylon. Here is a false Prophet contradicts all that Jeremiah had spoken,
touching the seventy years captivity.

The false Prophets likewise in Babylon, they were at work, and they strengthen
the hands of the false Prophets at Jerusalem by their doctrine, Jer. 29.8, 9.
Thus says the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel, Let not your Prophets and your
Diviners that be in the midst of you deceive you, neither hearken to your
dreams which you cause to be dreamed, for they prophecy falsely unto you in my
name, I have not sent them, says the Lord. And in the 24, 25, 26, 27, 28.
verses of the same Chapter, you shall find, that Shemaiah the Nehelamite, sent
Letters from Babylon to all the Priests, and to all the people that were at
Jerusalem, accusing Jeremiah for a mad man, for making himself a Prophet, for
sending Letters to them in Babylon, for lengthening out the captivity to
seventy years, for encouraging them to build houses, to plant gardens, to eat
the fruit of them, he would have Jeremiah imprisoned and set in the stocks.

Thus Jeremiah was accused, cried down at home and abroad, his prophecy was
slighted, scorned by many, and most were troubled at what Jeremiah had
prophesied: This made such work, both at Jerusalem and at Babylon, that the
people of God were much despondent, and their enemies mightily insultive: Now
hereupon the Lord stirs up Ezekiel, powers out his Spirit upon him calls
him forth to prophecy, sets him a work to justify Jeremiah, and to ratify
what he had foretold concerning the Babylonish captivity, threatening ruin to
the City and Temple, to Kingdom and King, to their Nobles, Priests and all the
people.

Hereupon, (says Josephus) the prophecy of Ezekiel, as soon as ever it was
written (I conceive he means not the whole Prophecy, but some part of it) was
sent to Jerusalem, but little fruit came of it; For Zedekiah being then King,
and having seen it, he would neither believe Jeremy nor Ezekiel, but presently
concludes, that both were liars and false Prophets; and that upon this ground;
Jeremiah had said, Chap. 21.7. that Zedekiah should be carried captive into
Babylon; and Ezekiel denied that he should see Babylon, Chapt. 12.13. Hereupon,
says Zedekiah, they were both false, here is a contradiction, the one says, I
shall be carried into Babylon, the other says, I shall not see Babylon. But
God quickly made this good, 2 King. 25.7.
for shortly after, Nebuchadnezzar came, besieged Jerusalem, took Zedekiah
captive, put out both his eyes, bound him with fetters of brass, carried him to
Babylon, which he never saw.

From hence by the way you may observe; first, upon what slight and weak
grounds Princes and people will cast off prophecies and truths of God, even
upon mistakes and misapprehensions. Zedekiah could not apprehend what truths
there were in these two prophecies, had he compared one thing with another, he
might easily have seen truth; but small matters will make Princes and people
turn off the truths of God, especially when they are not suitable to their own
spirits; and in these days people can without much ado turn off any truths
Ministers bring, if they be not suitable to their apprehensions and fancies.

2. That God will make good the word of his Ministers and Prophets, though they
seem contradictory to men's fancies and sense. Jeremiah says, that Zedekiah
shall go into Babylon, and Ezekiel says he shall not see Babylon: God makes it
good notwithstanding the prophecy is thrown away. The word of God shall take
hold upon Princes, Nobles, people, and slay them if they have despised and
stood out against it.

But from this general scope of Ezekiels prophecy, that he is sent to
strengthen and justify Jeremy, take this observation, That it is good for
Ministers to strengthen the doctrine, works, hands and hearts one of another. A
Prophet is questioned, trod under foot, his prophecy thrown out as false; an
Ezekiel is stirred up to justify a Jeremy: When Ministers justify one
another, the work goes on with more strength; when there is a double witness to
a truth, it will seal it more strongly to the heart. God gave four
Evangelists; one had been a great mercy; but that things might be ratified in
your hearts, sealed up in your consciences, you have four Evangelists, each
one strengthens the doctrine and things of another: So the consent of
Ministers and Prophets is a great matter to ratify truths in the hearts and
consciences of people, and to establish the Church. It is good therefore for an
Ezekiel to strengthen a Jeremy.

2. More specially the scope of the Prophet is, to comfort the captives that
were then in Babylon; for they began now to be troubled that they had hearkened
to Jeremiah, yielded to the King of Babylon, because Jeremy had prophesied that
Jerusalem should be destroyed, the Temple burnt, and that all should be laid
waste, whereas Jerusalem stood still; and now five years were gone, and nothing
done unto the City or Temple (for it was in the fifth year of Jehoiachins
captivity, that Ezekiel began his Prophecy) They now began to be discouraged
that they had left their habitations, that they had hearkened to Jeremy so far,
as to come to Babylon: they were likewise disheartened in Babylon, they met
with much hardship there, being put upon building, planting, sowing, and other
difficulties,: yea, the Babylonians themselves scoffed at them, and said, Sing
us one of your songs of Sion. This made them to droop, and to wish, O that we
were at Jerusalem again, that we had never hearkened to Jeremy. The Jews also
at Jerusalem reproched them, and they said, they were men of cowardly and base
spirits, discouraged with the words of a timorous and lying Prophet, one
Jeremy, and thereupon yielding themselves into the hands of Nebuchadnezzar,
they wretchedly betrayed the City, Religion and their Country; these things
went to the very bowels and reins of the godly, and did greatly disturb them.
Hereupon the Lord, to support, their spirits, to comfort them in these their
distresses, and to be an Ezekiel, even the strength of God unto them, stirs
up Ezekiel, sets him on work.

Lastly, the scope of the Prophet is the same with the rest of the Prophets,
viz. to lead unto Christ, as you may see by reading, Luke 24.44. Act.
3.18.21.24. They spoke of Christ, and led to him; but it is more especially
aimed at by this our Prophet, who begins with the Law executed, a Captivity,
but ends with a Temple, and restoration by Christ, thereby leading the people
that were captives in Babylon, to Christ the King of Jerusalem. In Ephesians. 1.10.
(...).
you have this expression, That he might gather together in one, all things in
Christ, the word notes, to sum up, or to make a brief collection of the heads
of all that was spoken before; implying, that much has been said of Christ by
others, and that the chief heads of all should be summed up, brought together,
and be found in Christ. Much was spoken by David of Christ, much by Isaiah,
much by Jeremy, Zachariah, Ezekiel; now the sum of all that is in them, and
in the rest, shall be gathered together as in one head, you shall meet it all
in Jesus Christ; He is the Magazine and Treasury of all their strength and
wealth, the chief things that ever have been spoke by the Prophets formerly,
they are all concentred in him. He is the Alpha and Omega; the Alpha of
Genesis, The seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head; and the Omega of
the Revelations, The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. So that
all between Genesis and the Revelation, leads either directly or collaterally
unto Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.10. The Prophets prophesied of grace that should
come unto you, searching when, or what manner of time the Spirit of Christ
which was in them did signify, when it testified beforehand the sufferings of
Christ, and the glory that should follow. See here, they showed you the grace
that should come, the Spirit testified in them of the sufferings of Christ, and
of the glory that should follow. They were Seers, and they saw Christ, and the
glory of Christ, and they lead the people up to Christ.

Thus you have the scope and occasion of our Prophets prophesying and writing;
it was to convince them of the heavy captivity of seventy years, to strengthen
Ieremyes prophecy, to encourage the Church of God in Babylon, and to lead them
unto Christ.

2. In the next place we are to show you the nature and condition of this
Prophecy, which is full of Majesty, obscurity and difficulty. Nazianzen says,
Orat. 23.
That Ezekiel is the chiefest of all the rest for matter of admiration, and
acuteness he is the greatest of all the Prophets, and the deepest; which made
Jerome say, there was in this Prophecy of Ezekiel a sea of Scripture, he is so
deep, a labyrinth of the mysteries of God, he is so dark, so difficult; if he
do but equalize other Prophets in dignity and worth, yet he exceeds them in
difficulty and darkness. It must be said of this Prophet, as of Paul's Epistles,
2 Pet. 3.
There are some things in them hard to be understood, and so there are many
things in this Prophet which are hard to be understood: There are some strange
words in him, such as are no where else in Scripture to be found: He has dark
visions in him, such as will exercise the greatest abilities in the world to
find out the aim of God, and those truths that are wrapped up in them; he has
uncertain Chronologies and Chorographies, mystical Parables, forain Histories,
and many transcendent matters, which may awaken your attention, and do call for
the uttermost of man's industry in the opening.

Hence it was counted rashness for any one to read this Prophet till he was
thirty years of age. And Jerome tells us, Maldonat.
that it was prohibited among the Jews, that any should read the beginning of
Genesis, the book of Canticles, the beginning or ending of this Prophet, till
he were thirty years of age. Ante aetatem sacerdotalem.
The Rabbis think it not lawful to interpret this Prophet, but only by
touching some general things in it; particular things might not be descended
into. One says, A Lapid.
Ezekiel is Jeremy veiled, a hand shut up, and you know not what is in it; like
a book sealed up, and none can open it, or knows what is written within. These
expressions have been used to set forth the darkness and difficulty of our
Prophet.

And I will appeal unto you all this day, that if that question were put to
you, when you shall read this Prophet, which Philip once put to the Eunuch,
Acts 8.30.31.
Understand you what you read? might you not all answer without blushing, How
shall we understand without a guide? And who is sufficient to guide your
understandings through this difficult and dark Prophecy? For mine own part I
durst not have ventured to launch into this deep, unless I had been requested
unto it: And being called unto it, I desire to go out in the strength of the
Lord, and to be as a Star in his hand, guided by his Spirit, to lead you
through the difficulties of this Hieroglyphicall Prophet.

But you will say, If this Prophet be so difficult and dark, surely he is not
seasonable, nor suitable to these times; some other Scripture might have had the
pre-eminence.

For this, take two or three answers: First, I find that many Interpreters
have fallen upon this Prophet in troublesome and tumultuous times. Gregory the
great, he writ and preached upon this Prophet, when the Barbarians were almost
at the gates of Rome, and when the sword was devouring multitudes. Jerome
likewise studied and writ upon this Prophet, what time Alaricus, King of the
Goths, took Rome and wasted all, and filled the Christian world with tears and
blood. Calvin that great Light of Europe, spent his last breath upon this
Prophet, and in times that were not very peaceable, but stirring and
troublesome. Lavaters Lectures upon this Prophet were together with the
commotions in France; Gallicis tumultibus.
and he professes, that he did the more willingly give up himself to the study
of this Prophet, that so he might free his spirit, from the sad thoughts of
the public and private mischiefs which were in his days, and acknowlegdeth
this was a remedy to him against many evils.

Secondly, I answer, that compare our times a little with the times and state
of the Jews, and we shall see some seasonableness in handling this Prophet at
this time.

1. The sins the Prophet cries out of amongst them, are rife amongst us; the
sins then were Idolatry, Superstition, oppression, corruption in the worship of
God, luxury, uncleanness, profaneness, scorning at goodness, hiding their eyes
from the Lords Sabbaths, and the like. Now I ask, are not all these sins alive,
and too lusty in our Kingdom at this time, and in this City wherein we live?

2. There was then a malignant party which was active and at work, and did
oppose and hinder the reformation (what lay in them) which was on foot by
Jeremy, by Ezekiel, by the three Children, by Bacuch, by the Rechabites; all
these and many others opposed the corruptions of the times, and labored to
have a reformation in the worship of God, to bring the people back again from
their corrupt ways to the Lord; but there was a great opposition by the
malignant party, and the chief opposers then were the Priests, and the false
Prophets, who poisoned the judgments of the people, who suggested false things
unto them, who fed them with vain hopes, with corrupt opinions and deceivable
doctrines: the chief of the Priests were chiefest in malignancy and opposition,
this you shall see, 2 Chronicles. 36.14, 15, 16. All the chief of the Priests and
the people transgressed very much, they polluted the house of the Lord, they
mocked the messengers of God, despised his words, and misused his Prophets;
this was the practice of those times; Was there ever any great disorder,
corruption in the Church, or any sedition, treason almost in the State, but
some of the chief of the Priests have had their hands in it? When the Calf was
set up in Moses his days, Aaron the Priest had his head and hand in it; when
David was a dying, Adonijah makes the sedition and stir in the Kingdom, but
Abiathar the Priest had a great hand in it? Both in the State and in the Church
you may well observe, that the chief of the Priests have had their hands in the
evil, in the trouble. And have not we now a malignant party that oppose the
reformation intended and begun? Do they not set themselves with all their might
against the Ieremies, Daniels, Ezekiels, and Rechabites of the Land that will
not defile themselves? There is such a party, you all know, that do oppose
godliness, that despise the Prophets, scorn the Saints, make sad the hearts of
the righteous, and strengthen the hands of wickedness, therefore this prophecy
may be seasonable enough in regard of that malignant party that does oppose too
openly.

3. They had lost their country, their choysest comforts, they were in
captivity and constant jeopardy of their lives, if they provoked the
Babylonians, they were ready to fall upon them, and root them out presently;
and those at Ierusalam were in danger every day to have their liberties,
estates, consciences, Religion, and lives taken from them; And are not we like
unto them? and are not we even in a Land of liberty in a state of captivity? Do
not our estates, our liberties, our consciences, our Religion, our lives, and
all lie at the stake? We are even in Babylon in the midst of Sion; we are in
a sad and heavy condition; therefore this Prophecy may be seasonable now,
considering our estate is so like to theirs.

4. The times then were such, that they loathed Manna, ordinary and plain
truths would not down, unless truths were new and transcendent, they were weary
of them, and slighted them; Jeremy was too plain a Prophet for them, too low,
and God gives them Ezekiel, a dark and hard Prophet. And is it not so in these
days? we have been fed with Manna so long, that we loath Manna, as a wormy
thing; If we have not something new, unheard of, transcendent, we are weary,
we think it not worth our going out of doors, if so, then here is a Prophet
that may be suitable to these times, and your desires; God gave them this
Prophet in a time of affliction, and there was something in it; for afflictions
open men's understandings, Vexatio dat intellectum.
and enlarge their capacities: when people are under pressures, then their
understandings are quickest, then they are most apprehensive: therefore God
gave them such a Prophet as might suit with their condition, in exercising
their parts and graces to the full, when at the best. Now is a time of
affliction, if your spirits be awakened, and the bent of them be after high and
hard things, lo, here are difficulties and transcendencies for you; here are
high things to draw up your thoughts, to exercise your spirits, be they never
so choice and apprehensive.

One thing more for the seasonablenesse of this Prophet, it is said heaven was
open, and Ezekiel saw visions of God. If ever God has opened heaven since
Christ, now he has done it in these sad times; God has now caused, and is
causing you every day to see visions out of the Prophets, and out of the
Gospel. These expository Lectures are openings of heaven, and let out clear
and choice light unto you from heaven; therefore seeing heaven is opened, let
visions of God be counted seasonable, and become acceptable unto you.

But if this Prophet be so dark and difficult, what is the benefit and fruit we
shall have by him?

This is the next head we are to come unto, and the benfits of this Prophet
are these: the darker the Prophet is, the more of God may you look for from
him. God dwells in darkness, as well as in light. Psalm. 18.11. He made
darkness his secret place. And Exodus 19.9. God came to Moses in a thick cloud,
Tenebrae sunt latibulum D^i.
and there Moses had the most of God. Here God is coming to you in a dark
Prophet, and questionless you shall find much of God in him; here you shall see
much of Gods mercy in upholding and comforting the spirits of his people, and
providing for them in a strange land; here you shall see much of Gods justice
in punishing sinners for their sins and iniquities; here you shall see much of
Gods truth in fulfilling of prophecies; here you shall find much of Gods power
in subverting of Kings and Kingdoms; here you shall find much of his manifold
Wisdom in these dark visions; here you shall find more of God then you expect.

2. This prophecy is an exact History of the time of the Jews being in
captivity; in it you have many passages, of Nebuchadnezzars reign and
government, of his acts abroad and at home, and of Gods dealing with his people
in the time of this their seventy years captivity. Were not Daniel and Ezekiel
extant, we should have such a great loss as the world could not tell how to
repair it; the acts of Gods dealing with his Church and people in that seventy
years, would be swallowed up in a Chaos of darkness.

3. You shall see for what sins God subverteth and overthrows Kingdoms and
States. In this Prophet you shall find, that the Lord does ruin glorious
Churches, great Cities, mighty Kingdoms, men of great renown, families and
posterities, and the particular sins for which he does it; Namely, for false
worship, Idolatry, injustice, uncleanness, profaning of his Sabbaths,
contempt of his Word, abuse of his Prophets, and sins of that nature. So that
as it is, Prove. 21.30. There is no wisdom, no counsel, nor understanding
against the Lord. God will overthrow even Kings and their Councels, Kingdoms
with their Nobility and Gentry, with their Magistrates and people; God will
overthrow them when he once sets upon such a work, such a design: There is no
standing out against him.

4. You shall see here also the different carriage between the godly and the
wicked, in times of Judgment. When judgments are abroad in the world, the
inhabitants of the earth should learn righteousness; but wicked men they grow
more active against God, more impudent, more desperate and hard-hearted; they
combine and plot together to root out the righteous: this you shall see in
this Prophecy. And for the godly, you shall find that when judgments are
near and upon them, they are mourning in secret, they get together, they that
fear God speak often one to another; they fast, they pray, they redeem the
time, they work out their salvation with fear and trembling, they give God no
rest, they will be at it at midnight: In a word, you shall find the carriage
of the godly to be exceeding contrary to the carriage of the wicked.

5. Here you shall find Gods new Covenant, wherein you shall see the riches of
free grace, God doing all, both making the Covenant and performing it, both
commanding and giving what he does command unto your souls.

6. You shall find that this Prophet is an Evangelicall Prophet, for he points
at Christ, he will show you where he is, he will lead you to the Temple, where
you shall see Christ with his line in his hand, and measuring out a Temple for
the times of the Gospel, measuring of his worship, his worshippers, and all
that does concern the new Jerusalem. Much of Christ will be found at least in
the conclusion of this Prophet.

7. You shall have a lively representation of the uncertainty of all things,
and of all conditions in this world. In Lament. 4.12. it is said there, that
the Kings of the earth and all the Inhabitants of the world, would not have
believed, that the adversary and the enemy should have entered into the gates of
Jerusalem. None thought, none of the Kings of the earth, none of the Kings of
Israel believed that ever Jerusalem, which was so fortified by mountains round
about, should be taken by the enemy: But you shall see in this Prophet, that
even Jerusalem, the City of God, the Temple that was the glory of the world,
and Sion the perfection of beauty, they are all laid wast: Neither Prince,
Priest, Prophet, Nobles, nor any are spared, but all are destroyed, all are
carried into captivity, all are brought under, the sons, the precious sons
of Sion are carried away into Babylon. So that there is no place, no condition,
no prerogative that can privilege any from the hand of God where once sin is
come to a perfection. Prove. 14.34.
Righteousness exalts a Nation, but sin is a reproach to any people. Let
them be Jews or Gentiles, let them be Kings, Priests, or Prophets, when sin is
grown to a height, then the wrath of God comes to a perfection, and God will
lay a Sion wast, God will raze a Temple, God will carry a Iehojakin, a
Zedekiah, Prince and Prophet, Priest and People into captivity. Is Sion gone?
is the Temple razed? is Jerusalem laid in the dust? What confidence then can
any Kingdom, can any City have? Let not England, let not London be secure.
Fear and Tremble. Repent of sin. Take heed of provoking God. Look beyond
the Kingdoms of the earth. Look up to heaven, and make sure of that Kingdom
which cannot be shaken, which cannot be taken from you. Thus you have some of
the benefits that are to come by this Prophet.

We are now to fall upon the general division of the Prophecy.

In this Prophet you have, 1. The Preface; wherein is contained Gods appearing
to Ezekiel, his calling of him and strengthening of him in his office; And these
are laid down in the three first Chapters. 2. You have the Prophecy it self;
wherein you have these four things. 1. The destruction of the Jews by the
Babylonish captivity, with the causes thereof, viz. their sins. This is laid
down in the next 21. Chapters. 2. Threatening of judgment and destruction to
several Nations that had insulted over the people of God, being carried away
captive, and the hand of God being upon them: these were the Ammonites, the
Moabites, the Edomites, the Philistines, the Assyrians, and Babylonians: And
this he does from the 25. to the 33. Chapter. 3. Sharp reproving of the Jews
for their iniquity, for their hard-heartednesse, for their not improving the
hand of God upon them; and exhorting them to repentance, he tells them of
freedom, some mercy and deliverance; and after that again of affliction and
trouble that shall befall them: And this he does from the 33. to the 39.
Chapter. 4. A typical Prophecy concerning Christ and spiritual freedom
through him; laid down in the vision of the new Temple, and of the new
Jerusalem, from the 39. Chapter to the end; wherein there will be many glorious
things made known in due time.



Thus you have the general division of the Prophecy.

To come to the Chapter. Ver. 1, 2, 3. Now it came to pass, etc.
In this Chapter you have: 1. Ezekiels first vision, from the fourth verse to
the end of the Chapter. 2. In the three first verses you have: 1. The time,
what year, what month, what day this vision was, ver. 1, 2. 2. The place; 1.
general, the land of the Chaldeans; 2. particular, by the river of Chebar;
ver. 3. 3. Together with this, you have the occasion; his being there among the
Captives.
3. The subject of this Vision, Ezekiel. Described; 1. From his office; a
Priest. 2. From his parentage; the son of Buzi.
4. The Author of this Vision; God. I saw visions of God; such visions as came
from God.


Now it came to pass, etc.
Now] The word in the Original is And; And it came to pass. It seems a
strange beginning of a book; especially when it referres to nothing said or
writ before. There are many of the books of sacred Writ begin on this manner;
as Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Iosuah, Ruth, Samuel, Kings, and diverse others.
In historical books, it may note the series, connect things antecedent with
things consequent: but in prophetical books, it cannot note or make a
connection with things foregoing. Jonas begins his Prophecy so, and what was the
antecedent to make up the connection? Here is the Quere, and difficulty, why
the Prophet should begin his book on this manner, And it came to pass.

Some satisfy the doubt thus. They make it an idiome or propriety of the
Hebrew tongue, to begin books with this particle, And, or Now; and so they make
nothing of it. But surely this is not all, there is something wrapped up in
this Now, or And, Van.
which may be of instruction and use to us.

Now, or, And it came to pass. The Prophet doubtless was meditating upon the
condition he was in; meditating of the condition that he had been in. Time was
that we were at Jerusalem, that we went with joy to the Temple, to the solemn
Assemblies, that we heard the voice of God, that we saw his glory, his beauty,
his power and his strength there: Time was that we had communion with the
Saints; that we sung songs of Sion together with chearfulnes and with joy; we
had precious Ordinances, honorable Sabbaths, Sacrifices that did cheer our
hearts, and seal up pardon of our sins to us, and intimate the good will of
God in Christ to our souls; we sat under our Vines and under our fig trees,
and were in safety. But now, now we eat the bread of mourners, we drink our
own tears; Now we are deprived of all Ordinances, stripped of all our comforts;
we are sold into the hands of enemies, we are become captives to a heathen
Prince; our bondage is grievous, and must continue seventy years. It is the
fruit of our sin. God is righteous in all his judgments, and if we willingly
accept the punishment of our iniquity, he will in wrath remember mercy, regard
us in our low estate, he will sweeten and sanctify our captivity to us.

Such thoughts as these were in the breast of the Prophet. And I incline the
rather to think so, because it was upon the Sabbath day (as I shall show you
afterward when I come to open some things that follow) when he was meditating
on this manner. Also you shall find in Scripture relatives used without
antecedents; as Psalm. 87.1. His foundation is in the holy Mountains. Here is a
relative without any antecedent, yet the antecedent is supposed, and easily
found out. His foundation, whose foundation? the foundation of the Temple, the
foundation of the City is in the holy Mountains. The Scripture does sometime
lay down things relatively and conjunctively, when the antecedent may be
supposed and found out with a little inquiry. So here, And it was thus and thus
with the Prophet, he was meditating, there was the Word in his bosom, and the
particle And connects that with this Word of God revealed to him and expressed by
him.

Hence then take this note: That the hearts of the servants of God are
exercised with thoughts of Gods dealings with the Church and themselves. Their
thoughts are better exercised then the world thinks. Ezekiel here had his
thoughts busied about his former and present condition, his heart was exercised
that way. I have other meat to eat (says Christ) then ye know of; So the
Saints, they have other meat, other thoughts to feed upon then the world takes
notice of; It is often unknown how their thoughts are exercised. Eli thought
Hanna mad when he saw her lips go; but her heart was better employed then he
fancied. Many think Gods people melancholy, and not worthy of their company,
they are but heavy pieces, when their hearts are in heaven, and they are at
solid and serious converse with God. You have an expression to this purpose in
Cant. 1.2. Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth. The Spouse had not
spoke of her Beloved before. It is a strange speech to begin thus; Let him
kiss me with, etc. Who should kiss her? here is no mention of Christ, no
mention of God, no mention of any before, but on a sudden, Let him kiss me
with, etc. Though Christ had not been mentioned by her lips, yet Christ was
deep in her thoughts, and in her desires, she had meditated on Christ before,
and so breaks out into this speech, Let him kiss me with, etc. And Ezekiel
having his heart meditating, and taken up with the thoughts of his former and
present condition, of the Church in general, of Gods wrath to them, and Gods
mercy in the midst of his wrath, breaks out, And, or now, in the thirtieth
year it was so and so.

This then instructs us what is the practice of the choice Worthies of God,
their hearts are meditating and taken up with diverse things that the world is
not aware of. It is good for us to be in meditation this way: Isaac he went out
to meditate in the evening, and while he was meditating comes Rebekah, the
desire of his soul; and the Prophet being in that posture, has visions of God
to cheer his soul, and the souls of his people. If you would be meditating,
you may see heaven opened, and God coming down into your bosoms.

In the thirtieth year.

This time does trouble Interpreters very much; It is not said in the thirtieth
year of what, or of whom, but barely in the thirtieth year. Here is an
uncertain Chronology, which makes a difficulty in the Prophet.

1. In the thirtieth year; not the thirtieth year from the Jubilee, as some do
make it, for the fifth year of Jehoiachins captivity corresponds not with the
thirtieth from the Jubilee; for as Junius, and some others (that take pains in
searching out the truth herein) do observe, that falls in but with the ninth
year from the Jubilee; therefore we let that pass.

2. In the thirtieth year. Some make this to be the thirtieth year of his age,
the Prophet was thirty years old, and then he began to prophecy. But this is
not the practice of the Penmen of Scripture, to compute the prophecies from
their own age and birth; and there is good reason for it, because prophecies
and things that do concern the good of the Church so nearly and so much, do
receive witness and strength from the time wherein they are extant, and those
times must not be particular times, times of particular men that are not known,
but the times must be such as arr known to the world, that all may be convinced
the thing was done at such a time: now the birth of one that afterward was to
be a Prophet, is not like to be a time so noted in the world, that the world
then should take notice that Ezekiel was born, and did begin the computation of
his prophecy from thence. It is not like therefore that this should be the
meaning of the thirtieth year; If so, he would have said in the thirtieth
year of my life.

3. In the thirtieth year. That is, in the thirtieth year since the Law was
found in Josiah his days, and since that great Passover which was kept by
him. In the 2 King. 22. there is mention of finding the book of the Law, and in
Chapt. 23. of the great Passover, and this was in the eighteenth year of
Josiah his reign, verse 33.

Now if we compute the time from the eighteenth year of Josiah, it does amount
even to the thirtieth year in which our Prophet had his vision, and began his
prophecy: For Josiah reigned thirteen years after this (as you may observe in
the Story) he reigned thirty and one years in all, 2 King. 22.1. and then
Iehoahaz his son reigned three months, Chapt. 23.31. then Iehoiakim reigned
eleven years, verse. 36. and Iehoiachin his son reigned three months before he
was carried captive into Babylon, 2 King. 24.
and five years of his captivity was past when Ezekiel began his prophecy. So
then take the thirteen years of Josiah, the eleven years of Iehoiakim, there
is twenty four, then add the five years of Iehoiachins captivity, that makes
twenty nine, and then tahe three months that Iehoahaz reigned, and the three
months that Iehoiachin reigned before he was carried captive, it makes up
twenty nine years and six months, therefore says he in the thirtieth year, it
was the thirtieth year current, and so I^positors do for the generality put it.

And whereas some would have it to be the thirtieth year of the ^haldean
account; it being according to them thirty years from the beginning of that
Monarchy from Nebuchadonosor, (as some call him) who was the father of this
Nebuchadnezzar the great, that carried away Iehoiachin into captivity: If it
were the thirtieth year of that Monarchy, it falls in with the thirty years
since the eighteenth of Josiah, wherein the Law was found, and the Passover
kept; so that these two may stand together, and there need be no jarring
between Interpreters for this time.

In the fourth month. It was not the Month Tebet or Thebeth (as some will
have it) which answers to that we call January; but the month Tamuz, or
Tammuz, that which answers to part of June and part of July; (about the time
we are now in) for the Jews were to reckon their months from April, as Exodus
12.2. This shall be the beginning of months, it shall be the first month of
the year to you; that month was Abib, Nisan, or Nissan, and answers to part
of March, and part of April; now from thence this is the fourth month, and
falls in with the latter end of June and beginning of July.

In the fifth day of the month. This I find some do make to be the Sabbath
day, and it is very probable that it should be so; for Chapt. 3.16. he says,
that at the end of seven days the Word of the Lord came unto him again. Hence
they collect, that it is not likely that God would step over the Sabbath day,
and give Ezekiel visions upon another day, and not upon that; for if Ezekiel
had had his visions upon another day, the people should have been destitute of
all the benefit, they were so employed in their works of building and planting,
and other accommodations for a captivity, that they had no leisure to resort
unto Ezekiel upon a week day; therefore they strongly conclude, that it was
upon a Sabbath day, in the latter end of the week.

From hence observe:

1. That that time is not considerable wherein the Law of God is out of date;
the time was reckoned here from the eighteenth year of Josiah, wherein the Law
was found. It was lost in Manassehs and Amons days, till the eighteenth year
of Josiah, when being found, it was brought forth for the comfort and
instruction of the people, for the worship and honor of God, and from that
punctum the Spirit of God reckons the time, and begins the account. When Gods
Law is out of the way, and his Worship down, that is no considerable time at
all in the eye of God. Parties that are in the dark, or dead, we do not reckon
of their time. One converted in his old age, said, I have been long in the
world, I have lived but a little time, meaning, since he was converted, the
time before was incomputable; The widow that lives in pleasure, the Apostle
says, is dead while she lives, 1 Timothy 5.6.
and the world is dead that has not the Law, the place is dead that has not
the Ordinances of God; so long they have been, but they have not lived, they
have not measured time; and therefore the Spirit of God fixes the account at
the finding of the Law.

2. The things here not being specified, but left undetermined, that God would
have us observe the remarkable passages in Church and States when they fall
out, not one or two, but many, or all the chief: as the eighteenth year of
Josiah, when the Law was found, when that great passover was kept, when he and
the people of God entered into a solemn covenant with God, when the great
reformation was made among them, such great acts were taken notice of; as also
the changes in Babylon, when the Chaldean Monarchy began, when Nebuchadnezzar
was put into the Throne, and his head lifted up above others. God would have us
take notice of the chief acts of his mercy and providence at chief times. Hosea
14.8. Ephraim shall say, What have I to do any more with Idols? There will be a
great alteration; then it will be a remarkable time, said God, I have heard
him, and observed him, and then follows, Who so is wise, and he shall
undrstand these things, prudent, and he shall know them.

Now is a time of memorable emergents, and they should be considered, the
famous things of 1640. 1641. ought to be had in everlasting remembrance: a
triennall Parliament, resurrection of Religion, Law and Gospel were found
again, Reformation begun, Protestation and Covenants taken, the Kingdoms
united here, and forain ones shaken in pieces.

3 This makes for the truth and strength of our Prophets visions and prophecy;
for when exact particular times and places are set down, that things were done
in such a year of such a King, such a month, such a day of the month, it
adds weight to an ordinary History; and when the Spirit of God shall so
punctually determine the time to a year, a month, a day, it is a strong seal
to the truth of the visions and prophecy.

4. See here (from the fifth day,) that God has a special care of his
Sabbaths, and of the spiritual good of his servants. Of his Sabbaths, that
they shall not lie in the dark, when they are in Babylon God will open heaven
and appear to a Prophet, and give him visions upon a Sabbath day. God will do
it too upon a Sabbath day, that so the people which were in a sad condition,
that labored now in Brick and Clay again, that were building, planting, taken
up with secular affairs, might have a seasonable opportunity for the good of
their souls. The Sabbath was made for man, for the good of man, and they found
it so. Though they be in Babylon, they shall have a Prophet, they shall have
visions, and visions upon a Sabbath day, when they have liberty and opportunity
to come to the Prophet to be instructed in these visions without prejudice to
their Callings.

Ezekiel 1.1, 2, etc. (As I was among the captives by the river Chebar) that
the heavens were opened, and I saw visions of God.

In the fifth day of the month (which was the fifth year of Jehoiaxhins
captivity.)

The Word of the Lord came expressly unto Ezekiel the Priest, the son of
Buzi, in the land of the Chaldeans, by the River Chebar, and the hand of the
Lord wast here upon him.


As I was among the captives by the river Chebar.
HEre is the place mentioned where the Prophet was, and the occasion of his
being in it.

Among the captives. The original s, in the midst of the captivity, the
abstract being put for the concrete, captives for captivity: and this is
ordinary in the Scripture; as circumcision for cirumcised, Phil. 3.3. Election
for Elected, Romans 11.7. the election has obtained, that is, the elected, and
here, in the midst of the captivity, is, in the midst of the captives.

In the midst, is not to be taken Geometrically and strictly, as if he were
exactly in the midst of them proportionably every way considered; but in the
midst is to be understood, among the captives, they were captives, and so was
he: As Josh. 7.13. There is an accursed thing in the midst of you, that is,
amongst you.

By the river Chebar. This is the particular place; The notes upon your quarto
Bibles, do say, that this river Chebar was part of Euphrates. Rabbis and
others say it is Euphrates it self. But if it were Euphrates, why should the
Spirit of God change that name which was known, and take a name which was
unknown? Surely the Spirit of God would have said Euphrates; and not Chebar. If
it be a part or channel of Euphrates, why kept it not one of those names that
is mentioned, Genesis 2. Gihon, Pison, Hiddekel? Gihon it cannot be, for that
river runs toward Ethiopia; Hiddekel it is most likely to be which lies in
those parts, but that river kept its name, and was not changed, as appears,
Dan. 10.4. where it is said, He was by the ^iver Hiddekel: if Pison be it, some
reason must be given of deserting that name, and imposing one new and unheard
of. Interpreters therefore conceive this Chebar to be a river of it self,
rising from the mountain Masius, (running through Mesopotamia) and emptying it
self into Euphrates, at a place where is a Town called Chebar, whence the
denomination probably may come; but rather it is called Chebar, because of the
plenty of waters that are in it, and for the plenty of grass that is upon the
banks thereof.

Near this river had the Jews their habitation, and they were placed together.
Chapt. 3.15. I came to them of the captivity, that dwelt by the river Chebar.
Here they were placed, because the Jews were odious to the Babylonians, as of
old they were to the Egyptians, and dwelt distinct from them; In Salmanassars
time, when the ten Tribes were carried into Assyria, they were put in Halah,
and Habor, by the river of Gozan, 2 King. 18. The Rabbis call this river
Sabbation, the Sabbaticall river, because it flowed not, but desisted from its
ordinary course upon the Sabbath day; and Josephus says, that it was certain
this river did constantly forsake its course upon the Sabbath day; God thereby
miraculously intimated to them, that he would have them keep a Sabbath, though
in a strange land. These captives were fixed by Gozan, or by Chebar, which is
the particular place; the next is the general place, the land of the Chaldeans.

Chaldea was the country of Abraham, he went from Vr of the Chaldeans,
Genesis, Chapt. 11. verse 31. and Stephen calls it Mesopotamia, Acts 7.2.
Abraham was in Mesopotamia before he dwelt in Charran. It lay on the north of
Chaldea, between Euphrates and Tygris; in verse 4. it is said, Abraham came out
of the land of the Chaldeans, and dwelt in Charran: these two, Chaldea and
Mesopotamia were promiscuously taken, sometimes being near together, and
sometimes distinctly. The chief city in Chaldea was Babylon now called Bagdat,
from Baga, which in Arabic signifies a garden, because it stood in a pleasant
place, and had many gardens in it; it was built by Nimrod, that mighty hunter,
the first King that ever the world had; when the tower in it was built up, nine
thousand one hundred threescore and four paces from the ground, which is above
nine of our miles, then it pleased God from heaven to confound their language,
Quia ibi (...)
and of one made threescore and twelve, hence was it called Babel, Genesis 11.9.
because God there confounded the language of all the earth, and their work
together.

This country was called the land of Nimrod, Mic. 5.6. Quae excussit.
and the land of Shinar, Genesis 10.10. which signifies shaking, because it shook
their language, and scattered the people inhabited it, out of the land: It is
branded by Zachary for the dwelling place of wickedness, Zac. 5.11. Out of
this land of Chaldea, it is conceived by some, came the three Wise men, who
offered the gifts to Christ; for the Chaldeans were the chiefest Astrologers,
and exactest Astronomers that were in the world, as you may observe, Dan. 2.

These Chaldeans were a martial people, very cruel, Jer. 6.22, 23. A people
comes from the North country, and a great nation, Jer. 50.41.42.
they shall lay hold on bow and spear, they are cruel, and have no mercy,
their voice roareth like the Sea, etc. They were polluted with abominable
Idolatries, superstitions, sorceries, enchantments, and all manner of
profaneness; into this land, and among this people, did God bring the Jews,
who had been so dear to him.

Babylon was the seat of the chiefest and greatest Monarch of the earth,
thither came a continual conflux of people from all parts of the world, to
whose scorns and wrongs the Jews were daily exposed; they said, These are the
holy people, these are they come out of the holy land, come and sing us one of
the songs of Zion; and so profane was Belshazzar, as that he took the holy
vessels to quaffe and carouse in: into this land were they brought, and the
godly were constrained to hear and see the blasphemies and abominations that
were amongst them, and to bear the scorns and frowns of all comers.

Thus have I opened to you the particular place, by the river Chebar, and the
general place, the land of Chaldea.

Let us see now what observations will arise from hence:

1. Observe, that God is not tied to places; let the place be never so holy,
let it be the holy Land, the holy City, the holy Temple, God is not tied unto
either of them, but has his liberty to work and manifest himself where he
pleases, even in Babylon. The Rabbis have a rule goes for truth amongst
them, Nunquam Spiritum sanctum extra terram sanctum prophetis loqu^.
and is firmly believed, that the Holy Ghost never spoke unto the Prophets out
of the holy Land; and therefore they say, Jonas fled to Tarshish from the face
of the Lord, to avoid the inspiration of the Almighty. But here we see in
Chaldea, by the river Chebar, is Ezekiel inspired; here heaven is opened unto
him; here he sees visions of God; here the Word of the Lord comes expressly
unto him; and here the Spirit of God does work mightily in him. One shift they
have for this, They say, Ezekiel was a Prophet before he was carried out of
the Land of Canaan, before he came into Chaldea. But we have nothing in Jeremy
nor Ezekiel, nor in any other part of Scripture, that Ezekiel was a Prophet,
and moved to prophecy before he came into Chaldea: and therefore it is said,
verse 3. That the hand of the Lord was upon me there, there first, in that
polluted land, I never had the Spirit of the Lord before I came into Chaldea.
(...)
When the Inhabitants of Jerusalem had polluted the holy City, profaned the
holy Temple, and defiled the holy Land with their Idolatries, and other
wickednesses, then God departs, pitcheth his Tabernacle elsewhere, and powers
out his Spirit in Babylon. God is not tied to places, he can in a dungeon, in a
prison, in a Babylon, let down his Spirit into the heart of any servant of his,
and raise him to a prophetical height.

2. Observe, that no place is so wicked, but God can raise up instruments to do
him and the Church service there. Babylon was a seat or land of wickedness, a
sink of all sin, the mother of Harlots, and abominations of the earth, Rev.
17.5. Yet here, even out of Hell it self, Quasi ab ipsis inferis?
does God raise up a Prophet for his people. It was said by Nathaniel, Joh.
1.46. Can any good come out of Nazareth? Much more may it be said, Can any good
come out of Babylon? Can any good come out of Rome? What was answered there?
Come and see. So here, come and see a Prophet in Babylon, come and see the
Spirit of God powered out upon Ezekiel, even there. And to this may the first
word of the prophecy have some respect, as if the Prophet had said, They have
had Prophets in Jerusalem a long time, but no Prophets elsewhere: behold, now
also is a Prophet in Babylon. God can raise up to himself Saints in Nero's
Court, he can raise up instruments ordinary and extraordinary to do him service
in Babylon, in Rome, in Egypt, in most profane and vile places that are
overspread with all Idolatries and abominations whatsoever.

3. See here a door open for the enlargement of the Church, a type of Gods
goodness toward the Gentiles. The Church had been shut up for 850. years in
Judea (for so long it was from Joshuahs entering into Canaan to the captivity)
but now he opens a door for the Gentiles, here is a Prophet, a Church in
Babylon, here is a way made for the bringing in of the Gentiles, and enlarging
the borders of Sion. God will not only have mercy upon Jews, but upon the
Babylonians.

4. That the godly are wrapped up in the same calamity with the wicked. Ezekiel
is among the captives, and many others with him; they lost their country,
friends, estates, liberties, ordinances, they were in great misery, brought
very low, under a heathen King, amongst enemies, exposed to the scorns and
wrongs of all, and Ezekiel, Daniel, the three Children, Mordecai, and many
others, were all in the same condition. The children of God are subject to the
same outward public or private calamities that the wicked are. All things come
alike unto all; if you look upon the outward face of things, there is no
exception. Good Josiah was slain in the battle as well as wicked Ahab; Naboth
was stoned as well as Achan: If David, a man after Gods own heart, prosper in
the wars, so does Nebuchadnezzar a heathen, a tyrant: sicknesses, diseases,
deaths, of what kind soever, are common to good as well as to bad: the sword,
plague, famine, has seized upon the carcasses of the godly as well as the
wicked: If wicked women die in childbirth, so does good Rachel. There is no
condition but may befall the children of God; 1 Pet. 5.10.
the same afflictions are accomplished in your brethren, that are in the world;
and no temptation has taken hold of you, but such as is common to the nature
of man. Whatsoever affliction then you have, whether public or private, this
may be some solace, it is no other then what befell Ezekiel, Daniel, and has
befallen the godly in all generations.

5. That the godly are mingled in this world with the wicked and profane; men
of great worth, great grace, rare excellencies, they are not so privileged as
to be exempted from the society of the wicked and ungodly. Here is Ezekiel
amongst the Chaldeans, Joseph was amongst the Egyptians: and Job says of
himself, Chap. 30.29. that he was a brother to Dragons, and a companion to
Owls; and David cries out, Psalm. 120.5. Woe is me that I sojourne in Mesech and
that I dwell in the tents of Kedar, that is, with a barbarous and profane
people, that were like to the posterity of Mesech, and Kedar; The Church of
Smyrna, Rev. 2.9. was pestred with the Synagogue of Satan, and Pergamus, verse.
13. had her dwelling where Satan's seat was. In that City, if you observe the
14. and 15. verses you shall find there was much Idolatry and persecution; for
there were those that held the Doctrine of Balaam, who taught Balac to cast a
stumbling block before the children of Israel, to eat things sacrificed to
Idols, and to commit fornication; and there Antipas my faithful Martyr was
slain. Where there is Idolatry will be persecution and uncleanness; and where
these be is the seat of Satan, and the Church of Pergamos was seated even where
Satan had his seat and throne; therefore it is no strange thing for the people
of God to dwell amongst the wicked. In Canticles the Church of Christ is said
to be a Lilly among thorns; a Lilly, and none growing near but thorns that
scratch, prick, and tear the Church; Micah 7.4. The best of them is as a brier,
the most upright is sharper then a thorn hedge, the best of the wicked are
Briers and Thorns one time or other. It is the lot of the godly to be among
the Chaldeans while they live here in the world.

6. See here that God has a special care of his Church and people, when they
are in the lowest and worst condition. Where now is Jerusalem become? Where is
the glory of all the world? now they are carried into captivity, now they are
in a strange land under a strange King and government, now they are deprived of
all their sacrifices and services of that nature; now they are imprisoned, now
they are in danger of their liberties and lives every day; yet as the Psalmist
says, Thou remembrest us in our low estate, in this low estate, when they are
at the river Chebar, in the land of the Chaldeans, does God remember them, and
sends an Ezekiel to them, and unto him even in Chaldea, in Babylon, were the
heavens opened, and he saw visions of God. Where there are the greatest
enemies, God will show himself a friend; where the Church is exceedingly
straightened, God will give enlargement; Now his people are in Babylon in
captivity, he sends a Prophet to them, Ezekiel, the strength of God, such a
Prophet as shall be strong to keep them off from Idolatry, though they were
amongst Idolaters, strong to comfort their hearts against all the strong
discouragements they had, strong to lead them toward God and heaven, though
they had false Prophets to lead them down to hell; strong to oppose the false
Prophets, to reprove them stoutly, to encourage the people faithfully, and to
make known the mind of God unto them without flattery. They shall have a
Prophet, though they be in Babylon; this should stay up the spirits of the
godly, if they should be driven into Wildernesses, God will provide Ezekiels
for them.

7. Observe from the place; that we are to take heed of judgeing the condition
of men by their outward afflictions. When great calamities come, people
ordinarily grow great censurers, and condemn those parties that are under them,
to be the greatest sinners of all others. Take heed of this; If you will draw
such conclusions as these, the hand of God is upon such; in such a place there
is the plague, there is the sword cutting them off, they are carried out of
their country into captivity, there they are imprisoned, there they are held
in great bondage; surely these are none of Gods people, these are naught, vile
persons, reprobates; If you will judge thus, you will condemn the generation of
the righteous: For Ezekiel, Daniel, Mordecai, the three Children, and many
others very godly, were in the captivity, as well as those that were very
wicked; such conclusions must not be drawn from the sufferings of the Saints;
you know the Prophets and Apostles met with very hard measure, while they were
in the world, they were whipped, stocked, imprisoned, stoned, sawn asunder,
tempted, tormented, slain with the sword, and evil entreated every where; and
if you should measure their condition by their afflictions, condemnation must
be their portion, and they must be in the catalogue of delinquents. Have not
some in our days, been slayed, roasted alive, cut in pieces, thrown into the
river? have not their houses, and many in them been burnt together in Ireland?
Have there not been cruel and desperate things done? Ireland now is full of
blood, sculs and graves; shall we say they are the greatest sinners that have
suffered such great things? When Pilate had mingled the blood of some of the
Galileans with their sacrifices, there were those that presently thought them
greater sinners then the rest: but Christ has taught them and us, Luke 13.
what use to make of judgments upon others, not to censure them, but to repent
our selves; Except you repent, you shall all likewise perish; think not that
they are greater sinners then others, think not now that the Jews in Babylon
are greater sinners then all others, think not those in Ireland are greater
sinners then your selves. If he be a wicked man that meets with great
afflictions, then Christ must be the wickedest man that ever was; for he was
vir doloris, a man of sorrows, and had the greatest affliction that ever befell
any. As it was no argument of Zedekiah his goodness, who at this time was in
Jerusalem, drank wine in bowls, and had a great deal of felicity; so it was no
argument of Ezekiels guiltiness and sinfulness that he was in a strange land,
in Chaldea, among the captives, by the river Chebar. Paul, when he was at the
bar, with Iron fetters about his heels, was a better man then Agrippa with
his Crown on his head, and his Scepter in his hand, and sitting in judgment to
condemn him. Dan. 9.
Daniel in his captivity is said to be a man of desires, a man that God took
great delight in; when Jeconiah a King, and dwelling at Jerusalem, is a
despised broken Idol, a vessel in which there is no pleasure, Jer. 22.28.
Those that are in great affliction, may be greatly beloved, when those who are
in great prosperity may be greatly hated.

Use.
That the wicked fare the better for the godly. There were many godly now in
captivity, as well as there were many wicked ones, and because of the godly
that were there, God powers out the Spirit of prophecy upon Ezekiel, and by
that means the very wicked come to have the benefit of his prophecy, and
partake of his visions. Many wicked ones have a share in the public duties of
Gods worship, when the godly meet together in those Exercises. Ezekiel in Chap.
33.32. is said to be unto them as a sweet song of one that has a pleasant
voice, and can play well on an instrument; he was a sweet song to sweeten their
bitter captivity. Joseph being in Potiphars house brings a blessing; and
Jacob in Labans family increases the stock of his Master, and Joseph in Egypt
saves the Egyptians, and almost the whole world. Godly men and women are great
advantages to the wicked, how ever they hunch and punch at them. Were the godly
once out of the world, God would soon put fire to the four quarters thereof,
and the wicked should presently feel it.

Which was the fifth year of King Jehojachins captivity.
Touching Jehojachin, there are many things remarkable.

As,

1. In 2 Chronicles. 36.9. it is said, that he was eight years old when he began to
reign; and in 2 King. 24.8. it is said, he was eighteen years old when he
began to reign. Here seems to be a great difference in the Scripture, hardly
to be reconciled, and it has puzzled many.

This difference is thus reconciled: The Kings of Judah when they were in
imminent danger, did use to declare their sons to be their successors, and so
Iehojakim the father of this Iehojachin being beset by Nebuchadnezzar about the
second or third year of his reign, did declare his son Iehojachin to be his
successor; Now in the book of Chronicles he speaks of the time from the first
declaration which was about the eight year of Iehojachins age, and the book
of the Kings mentions the time when he came to reign alone, and reckons from
thence: For Iehojakim reigned diverse years after his son was declared to be
King, and reigned with his Father. So that the one book speaks of the time he
reigned with his Father, the other of the time that he reigned alone in the
Throne.

2. It is remarkable touching Iehojachin that he had other names; As 1 Chronicles.
3.16. he is called Ieconiah, and Ier. 22.24. in disgrace Coniah. He was a
wicked King, and God cut off the first part of his name, a sad presage that ere
long he would cut him off. Evil Kings who have had Gods name joined with
theirs, when they have rent themselves from Gods commands and worship, he has
cut off his name from theirs, and taken mercy and peace from them. This you
shall see in Eliakim, he was a wicked King; and in 1 Chronicles. 3.15. he is called
Ioakim; El, that signifies God, and was joined to his name, is taken away. God
would not suffer his name to be joined with the name of so wicked a King any
longer. So here in Ieconiah, Iah, which is one of the names of God, is taken
away, and in hatred and contempt he is called Coniah: God was taken from his
name, and departed from him too. When God will honor a man, he adds letters
of his own name to theirs; As Abram afterward was called Abraham,
a letter out of Gods name was put into his; Genesis 32.28.
and so Jacob, his name was changed to Israel, a Prince of God, or one that
prevails like a Prince with God.

When God changes names in mercy, and makes an addition of letters of his own
name unto men's, Magnae benevolentiae pondus.
it is an argument of Gods great love, of great esteem and great honor to the
party; but it is an argument of disgrace, when God either brands them, or
detracts from their names. Thus God branded Jeroboam, Jeroboam the son of
Nebat that made Israel to sin, and Judas the Traitor. And sometime he
detracts from their names, as here Ieconiah is called Coniah; the beginning and
glory of his name is taken away; and he was (as Coniah signifies) prepared of
God, prepared of God for vengeance, prepared of God for a captivity, for base
services, prepared of God to be a broken Idol, to be cast out and despised, as
it is in that 22. of Jeremy.

3. This Iehojachin was written childlesse, Ier. 22.30. Write this man
childlesse. A heavy doom to write a man childlesse, especially, a noble, a
royal family, when children are much desired by all, most by Princes, that so
the Crown may not be alienated. Ieconiah is not written childlesse in regard he
had not any child; for ver. 28. it is said, Wherefore have they cast out him
and his seed? He had seed, and yet was written childlesse. How is that? He was
as one that had no seed, he was deprived of the benefit and comfort of his
seed; in effect he was a childlesse man, because his children were carried into
captivity, and none of them did inherit the Kingdom and succeed him in the
Throne; for it is said, ver. 30. No man of his seed shall prosper, sitting upon
the throne of David, and ruling any more in Judah; they dyed in captivity, and
none of them did sway the Scepter of that Kingdom.

But there is some objection lying against this; For in 1 Chronicles. 3.17.
Salathiel is said to be his son, and his son begotten in captivity, Mat.
1.12. If Salathiel be his son, and his son begotten in captivity, how then
is this true that he was written childlesse?

You must know (for answer) that this in the 1 Chronicles. and Mat. 1. is spoken
after the legal account; for Jeconiah, or Jehojachin, having been 37. years
in captivity (as you shall read afterward) he had seen the death of his
sons and daughters, his unckles and kindred, so that he had none left of his
own loins, or any that were very near unto him, to declare to be his
successor and to inherit the Crown, therefore having neither son, brother,
uncle, nor kindred that were near unto him, he was as a man childlesse every
way. Now Salathiel being his nearest kinsman alive, he declares him to be
heir to the Crown, and to succeed him in the royal dignity, according to
the order set down by God in case of the want of issue, Numb. 27.8, 9. etc.
And now this kinsman in the legal sense is said to be the son of Jehojachin,
that is, the successor of Jehojachin; not that he was his natural son come
out of his loins, for Luke 3.27. Salathiel was the son of Neri, according to
the natural line. Be it then according to the legal account, that Jehojachin
was his father, yet still it holds good, Iehojachin was a man childlesse.

4. In this King was ended the glory and royal dignity of the house of David.
It is true that Zedekiah reigned some years after him, but Zedekiah dyed
before Iehojachin: and in the genealogy of Christ, Iehojachin is mentioned,
not Zedekiah, neither is there mention of any more Kings of Judah after him; he
was the period of the book of the Kings, and he finished the line of the house
of David. None out of his loins, nor out of any other loins did sit upon the
Throne till Christ came. As for Zerubbabel, who was thought to be King, and to
sit upon the Throne after the captivity, it will appear he was no King; for
the learned observe that he was rather a Captain, Duke, or Leader of the
people, and was stirred up of God to further and finish the work of the
Temple, after which (the Rabbis say) Zerubbabel returned into Babylon and
there dyed.

But if that be not sufficient to clear it that he was no King, you may
observe in Zach. 6.11. that when two Crowns were made, neither of them was set
upon the head of Zerubbabel, but both were set upon the head of Joshua, the
son of Iosedech the high Priest; showing that all the power was invested in
the high Priest, and translated from Regal to Pontifical. So that Iehojachin
was an unprosperous man, to lay the glory of the house of David and of his own
in the dust: And hence that name is conceived likewise to be given him, (...)
Ier. 22.11. The name of Shallum, which comes of a word, signifies to
perfect, finish, or put an end to a thing, because he finished the Kingly
government of the h^use of David. And although some put this name upon Ieho^haz
the son of Josiah, making him that Shallum, yet others understand it of
Iehoja^hin, and it is most probable to be him, because (says the Text) he went
forth out of his place and was not to return thither any more; 2 King. 24.12.
and so did none but Jehojachin, who voluntarily yielded himself to
Nebuchadnezzar; he was that Shallum that put an end to all the Kings of Judah,
and laid the royal glory in the dust, and turned the government to the
Priesthood, where it continued till Christ came and sat upon the Throne
himself.

5. His captivity was long and sore, 37. years was he a prisoner in Babylon,
as appears 2 King. 25.27. Others had there more liberty, they were not
imprisoned, they had the benefit of the Prophets, advantage of all the
Ordinances which were amongst them, those they had to sweeten their captivity,
with many outward comforts, whereas Jehojachin lay in prison, and was deprived
of them; his Crown, Throne, Scepter, Kingdom, Country, all were gone, and he
is a captive imprisoned. A King, and a King of Judah, one that had lived so
high, and been in such glory and great pomp, for him to lie in a prison, and
in a prison in Babylon, not a few but twenty, almost forty years; this is a
thing observable in this King, and sets forth the constancy of his misery: He
was one of Josi^hs posterity, and it is observed that the posterity of
Josiah, who were Kings of Judah, in 23. years were carried four times into
captivity, whereas Josiah himself enjoyed 31. 2 King. 23 34.
years in peace. And it appears thus; Iehoahaz his son reigned three
months, and then was carried away by Pharaoh Nechoh King of Egypt: after him
Eliakim or Iehojakim, another son of I^siah being made King, 2 King. 24.1.
was taken by Nebuchadnezzar twice (as some observe) and carried to Babylon;
and then if it were so, they were five times in captivity; but howsoever sure
we are that in the 11th year of his reign, 2 Chronicles. 36.5, 6.
Nebuchadnezzar came up against Jerusalem, and took Iehojakim and bound him in
fetters to carry him to Babylon. After him Iehojachin whom we are speaking of,
is set up and reigns three months and ten days, who being young and
fearful, yields himself to Nebuchadnezzar that besieged Jerusalem, and was
carried away together with many thousand others into Babylon: After him
Zedekiah his uncle who reigned 11. years, 2 King. 24.10, 11, 12.
and having broken his promise, violated his oath, and denying tribute to
Nebuchadnezzar, is taken, his sons slain before his eyes, 2 King. 25.7. etc.
himself carried away to Babylon, and there he dies; and all this was within
23. years; for this Zedekiah reigned 11. years, and Eliakim or Iehojakim 11.
more, and the other two, three months a piece.

From all this observe:

1. The different proceeding of God with Kings that are good, and Kings that
are evil. Good Kings, as David, Hezekiah, Iehosaphat, Josiah, how precious are
their names! how sweet are they! like an ointment powered out: how do they
keep up the glory of their houses! they are not written childlesse, they are
not written men that shall not prosper; God does not brand them with any note
of infamy, nor detract from their names, they are not carried into captivity.
But for Kings that are wicked, how does the Lord proceed in his anger against
them, and make their names to rot! See it in Ahaz, 2 Chronicles. 28.22. God sets an
Emphasis, a star upon him, brands him with a note of disgrace for all men to
observe that read his Story, This is that King Ahaz; What King was he? Even
that King that in the time of his distress did trespass yet more against the
Lord; that King that ruined himself and all Israel with him, that King that
shook the foundation of Church and State; This is that King Ahaz. So Jeroboam
is branded, he is seldom or never mentioned but this is added to his name, he
made Israel to sin. So Eliakim a wicked King had part of his name taken away;
and here this Jehojachin is called Ieconiah and Coniah, a broken Idol, a
vessel in which there is no pleasure, a man that must be written childlesse, a
man that must be carried into captivity, and be imprisoned 37. years. Good
Kings are the glory of the world, the glory of that State where they live: but
these evil Kings in Judah and Israel, their memory stinkes, their names rot,
their posterity is cut off, their houses fall to the dust, and they have a
foundation of wrath for their issue, if they have any; four times within the
compass of 23. years, were they carried into captivity. God proceeds
against wicked Kings to the third and fourth generation, for their Idolatry and
oppression, for the evils they countenance and maintain in their Kingdoms,
and in his worship.

2. That afflictions are invalid to subdue corruptions. Five years they had
been now in captivity, and yet their corruptions were not mortified, all the
hard things they had met withal, had not made them yield and stoop to God.
Jeremiah had been Gods Hammer to batter them in Jerusalem, in Sion, and God had
exercised them five years with his wrath in Babylon, and yet their iron
adamantine hearts were not broken, but Ezekiel must be stirred up now in the
fifth year of Jehojachins captivity, a Prophet that must be the strength of
God to break them, that must lay on load and not spare. You see then that
afflictions of themselves do not kill corruptions, they do not break the
principle of stubbornness, and strength of rebellion that is in the hearts of
men and women. Nay, 2 Chronicles. 28.22.
sometimes it proves so, that afflictions make us the worse, like waters being
restrained they swell higher and threaten heaven it self, so corruptions being
restrained, they swell and threaten the ruin of States, Families, of souls
and bodies to all eternity: Isa. 1.5. Why should ye be stricken any more? ye
will revolt more and more. Let God come with a plague to a City, with a sword
to a sinful Nation, let God come with any judgment, the judgments themselves
will never do us good, unless there be something added to the judgments,
unless they be sanctified to us; our proud stubborn hearts, our vile natures
will stand it out against God, even when the sword is in his hand.

Ezekiel the Priest, the Son of Buzi, etc.
We are now to come to the subject of the vision, set down in the first verse
indefinitely I, in the third specially, Ezekiel; described from his office, a
Priest, and from his parentage, the son of Buzi. Josephus, and some others,
conceive the time of Ezekiels transmigration to be in Jehojakims days, but
others make it to be in the days of Jehojachin the son of Jehojakim, when he
and so many thousands were carried away by Nebuchadnezzar into Babylon, 2 King.
24.10, 11, 12. Then was Daniel, Mordecai, the three Children likewise, and
Ezekiel carried into captivity, as sundry affirm. And that he was then
carried into captivity, is evident from the Text it self, for in the 40.
Chapter of this prophecy, ver. 1. it is said, In the 25. year of our
captivity; he joyneth himself, and does not say their, but our captivity;
and therefore was then brought into Babylon when Ieconiah was, and from that
time began the captivity, and the reckoning of the 70. years. Now he began to
prophecy in the fifth year of the captivity, thirty-foure years after
Jeremy, Jere. 1.2.
who began in the 13th year of Josiah, and had prophesied long, but done
little good amongst them, they were so obstinate in his days; God stirs up
Ezekiel, and sets him aworke, and he prophecieth 22. years, as we may gather
out of his own prophecy, Chap. 29.17. In the 27th year the Word of the Lord
came unto me: It was five years before he began to prophecy, and 22. years
after we hear of his prophesying. He might prophecy longer, but we find it
not recorded in holy Writ.

If it be demanded, What became of this Prophet Ezekiel? Antiquity tells us
that his end was very lamentable, and yet like a Prophets; for usually the
Prophets came to untimely deaths. Adrichomius says, he was torn in pieces
with horses. Lib. de incarn. Verbi.
Athanasius tells us, he was killed for the peoples sake. Epiphanius relates
that he was slain by the Ruler of the people for reproving his Idolatry.
Chrysostom in his 46. Homily upon Matthew 23. and those words, O Jerusalem,
thou that slayest the Prophets, etc. says thus; O Jerusalem, I have sent to
thee Isaiah the Prophet, and thou have sawen him asunder; I have sent thee
Jeremiah, and thou have stoned him to death; I have sent to thee Ezekiel, and
by dragging him amongst the stones, thou have dashed out his brains. All agree
in this, that Ezekiel came to an untimely and bloody end; and so did most of
the Prophets and Apostles. What ever men's ends were in killing the Prophets,
God had other ends; That by their blood and death, the doctrine they delivered,
being sealed, might pass the better; That none should look for great matters
here in this world, when such great Worthies were so ill entreated; That men
might be stirred up by their example, to stand for the truth unto the death;
That it might be a demonstration of the judgment to come; seeing they were
used so hardly here, surely it follows then that there is a time wherein God
will call over things again, and recompense the sufferings of his Prophets,
and be avenged on those that had done them such wrong. God had such ends as
these.

Hence note;

1. The wisdom of God, that touching the lives and deaths of the Prophets and
Apostles speaks little. There is not much said in the Scripture touching them;
and why? Lest we should attribute too much to them, and too little to God. We
are apt to look at the pen rather then at him that made the pen, put in the
ink, and writes with it. We look at the instrument, and neglect the
principal agent. Since the lives and deaths of Martyrs and holy men came into
request, God has lost too much of that honor has been due unto him;
creatures have had it.

2. See here the ingratitude of the people, that do not only kick, but kill
their Prophets, not only mock, but murder their Prophets. Isaiah is sawen
asunder, Jeremy stoned, Ezekiel his brains are dashed out; Oh the ingratitude
of the sons of men, that do thus requite God for the Prophets he sends to
them, that break the earthen vessels for bringing them heavenly treasures in
them!

Ezekiel the Priest.
He was both of the Prophetical and priestly dignity, which was not common,
very few of the Prophets had this honor. (...).
The Hebrew word, is a Sacrificer; the Greek signifies as much: one that
medleth with holy things, that offers sacrifice for sin. Priests were of high
account, both among the Jews and Gentiles: Among the Jews, great was the
honor the high Priest had; and the inferior Priests had their honor
likewise; None might take this honor to himself, but he that was called of
God, as was Aaron. Heb. 5.4. They had the charge and command of the Sanctuary,
and of all things that did appertain to the House of God. The Jews and their
Rabbis do tell us, that there were twenty four several sorts of gifts
appointed of God for the Priests, all which are set down in their law expressly,
and are mentioned by Mr. Ainsworth, upon Numb. 18.19. Among the Heathens also
they were very honorable; Potipherah was a Priest of On; the Chaldee says,
Prince of On, because, thoug a Priest, yet he had Princely dignity.

The Priesthood, you know, was intailed upon the Tribe of Levi, and it is very
observable what was the occasion of it, Exodus 32. When the people had sinned in
Idolatry, and grew seditious and tumultuous, Moses stood in the gate of the
Camp, and said, Who is on the Lords side? Let him come unto me. Whereupon all
the sons of Levi gathered themselves together unto him, with their swords by
their sides, and presently executed the commands and counsel of Moses, and
slew every man his brother, companion, neighbor, v. 27. They were one of the
least, if not the very least Tribe of all the twelve, yet were they not
fearful, or backward unto this work, but ventured themselves among the people,
showing great faith and zeal to vindicate Religion, and the glory of God. This
fact and forwardness of theirs was so well taken of God, that it brought a
choice blessing upon them and theirs, God fully rewarded them for it: for
whereas a curse was threatened against Levi, Genesis 49.7. I will divide them in
Jacob, and scatter them in Israel, yet this curse was turned into a blessing,
and they are exalted to be near the Lord in the holy things of the Temple that
did appertain to his worship and service; for after they had finished that
execution upon the people, the Text says, verse 29. That Moses said to them,
Consecrate your selves to day to the Lord, because every man has been against
his son, and against his brother, that the Lord may bestow upon you a blessing
this day; and thereupon they were taken into the place of the firstborn (that
did all before) and had the Priesthood settled upon their Tribe, together with a
choice blessing, which is recorded, Deuteronomy. 33.8. 9, 10. And of Levi he said, Let
thy Thummim and thy Vrim be with thy holy one; Bless Lord, his substance, and
accept the work of his hands, smite through the loins of them that rise
against him, and of them that hate him, that they rise not again. Here was the
occasion of Levies being taken into the Priesthood, and to serve with God, and
to serve for ever.

From hence take this note which is very considerable: That it is good to
appear in the cause of God, and to be forward to vindicate his honor and
glory, to stand for him and his people: It is good to vindicate God when he
suffers in his worship, in his servants, in his cause any way. The Tribe of
Levi was forward to vindicate God, and God rewarded them, they had a blessing
that day: So Phinehas he was zealous for God, Numb. 25.10, 11. Phinehas (says
God) has turned away my wrath from the children of Israel while he was zealous
for my sake among them, wherefore say, Behold, I give unto him my Covenant of
peace, and he shall have it, and his seed after him, even the Covenant of an
everlasting Priesthood, because he was zealous for his God. If we shall appear
in Gods cause, and venture our selves in his quarrel, we shall never lose by
it. Peter was a man forward, he put forth himself for Christ, he would be
first speaking; when Christ had said, Whom do you say that I am? says he,
Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God; and presently Christ fastened a
blessing upon him, Blessed art thou Simon Bar-Jonas, flesh and blood has not
revealed this unto thee, thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my
Church. Men that go upon good grounds, and will lift up Gods Sabbaths, Worship,
Honor out of the dust, though they do hazard lives, estates, or limbs, God
will remember it, and they shall be recompensed. You shall find in Judges
5.18. That Zebulun and Naphtali were a people that jeoparded their lives unto
the death in the high places of the field; They went forth, and stood for God
and his people against Iabin and Sisera, that came against Israel, and
threatened ruin: And in Matthew. 4.13.14, 15. when Christ comes, he preaches
the Gospel first to them; God remembers their kindness, and rewards it,
though it were long before: So you may lay the foundation of a mercy for your
posterities a hundred years hence. This should put us on to appear in the
cause of God, whenever we see Idolaters, and the enemies of God lift up their
heads, and strike at truths, and God in his Ordinances and servants; put forth
your selves, God will remember you, though you jeopard your very lives.

The son of Buzi.
Ezekiel was neither the servant nor the son of Jeremy, as some have fancied,
but the son of Buzi. This Buzi was a Prophet, if the rule of Jerome and the
Rabbis be true. Filium Prophetae se assere re.
Jerome says, when a Prophet names his Parentage in the beginning of his
Prophecy, it is to affirm that he was the son of a Prophet; and so say the
Rabbis likewise, That man was a Prophet, whom the Scriptures set down to be
the father of a Prophet. Then Buzi here who was the father of Ezekiel a
Prophet, by these rules was a Prophet himself. But this is the voice of men,
not of heaven.

His name signifies contempt, disgrace, a man contemned, scorned, despised in
the times and places where he lives. You may hence note:

1. That the Prophets and Ministers of God have always been subject to
derision and scorn. Isay 8.18. I and my children are for signs and wonders in
Israel. If the Vine do bear such ill fruit, what then does the Thorn bear? If
there be mocking and scorning of the Prophets in Israel, what reproaches, what
taunts and bitter sarcasmes will there be then in Babylon? 2 Chro. 36.16. They
mocked the Messengers of God, and despised his words, and misused his Prophets;
They counted them teachers of lies, false Prophets, seditious, factious, such
as delivered strange doctrines, plotted treasons, etc. nothing was too vile,
too bad to lay upon the Prophets and the sons of the Prophets. Zedekiah smit
good Micaiah on the cheek, 1 King. 22.24.
and says he, Which way went the Spirit of the Lord from me to speak unto
thee? Thou fool, thou silly man, thou mad man, thou false fellow, thou deceiver
of the King and people, which way went the Spirit of God from me to thee? and
so smites him on the cheek; Signum maximae ignominae.
Now to smite on the cheek was a proverbiall speech among the Hebrews, and it
was a sign of the greatest disgrace that could be done to any. This was the
condition of the Prophets, while they were here in the world: And also of the
Apostles, We are made as the filth of the world, and offscouring of all things
to this day. 1 Cor. 4.13.
Paul a great scholar, full of the Holy Ghost, called by an extraordinary way,
yet he says of himself, and the rest of the Apostles, that they were counted
as the offscouring of all things; men get up all every where, on every side,
so the word carries it: the men of the world were like unto a man that raked
every where to get a basket of filth, dirt and dung to throw in some ones face;
(...).
so they scrape in the doctrines, lives and passages of the servants of God, do
catch at all advantages, do seek every where to pick up something, that they
may have wherewithal to upbraid, reproach and revile them; and we are made as
the very filth and dung upon the face of the earth. Was not Hus, that Worthy of
God so counted? when the Prelate (who had the power of ordering things) had put
a paper crown on his head with three ugly shaped devils upon it, and this Title
over their heads, Haeresiarcha, Here is the Diabolical Heretic, that great
Heretic that has three devils in him; and when they sent him away to the
stake with this farewell, Go thy ways, we commit thy soul to the Devil; Was
not here a man made the filth of the world? Even such mockings, such dealings,
such doings must the servants of God look for while they are here. They are the
sons of Buzi, they are Buzies indeed, men of contempt and scorn among wicked
and vile men.

2. That whom the world contemns, God will honor. Here is a Buzi, a man of
contempt in the world, but God gives him a son, and a son who is a Prophet,
and a son whose name is recorded in Scripture, together with his own, all
honorable things. Hannah was scorned, reproached by Peninnah, but God gives
her a Samuel, and honors her with the motherhood of such a son: Joseph was
thrown out by his brethren, cast into the pit, sold to Potiphar, put into
prison, but God did lift him up in Egypt, and set him almost in the Throne,
made him the next man to the King himself: Christ was the stone disallowed and
rejected by the builders, even the Master Builders, the great ones, the
Rabbis, the Pharisees, but God makes him the chief corner stone, God sets him
up on high. This is for the comfort of those that are godly and thrown out by
the world, God will take them up and put honor upon them in a way they know
not of.

From the Subject we come to the things fell out with the author of them, and
they are these: 1. Heaven is opened. 2. Visions are presented. 3. They are seen
of Ezekiel. 4. The author of them is specified, Visions of God.


The heavens were opened, and I saw visions of God.
The word opening, among the Jews, notes sometime, not the reality, but the
effect of a thing. Genesis 3.7. Their eyes were opened; they were not shut before,
but now they saw that which they saw not before, and so their eyes are said to
be opened. In the Gospel Christ is said to open the eyes of the blind, the ears
and mouth of the deaf and dumb, not that their mouths were absolutely shut, or
their ears absolutely stopped, or their eyes so closed that they could not stir
their eyelids, but Christ opened them so, as he made them to see, hear and
speak, to do that which they could not do before; so that in regard of the
effect they are said to be opened. Sometimes again it notes the truth of a
thing; and so Stephen saw heaven opened, and Christ standing at the right hand
of God; and Peter saw heaven opened, and a sheet coming down to him.

The question is, whether of these ways it is to be taken here? Origin says,
That the heavens were open to the eyes of his body, there was a division of the
heavens, and so in a literal sense he saw the visions, and the things
presented to him; But Jerome says, Non divisione firmamenti, sed fide
credentis.
The heavens were opened, not by the rending of the firmament, but by the faith
of the believer. You may take it in the literal sense, and according to the
truth of a thing. The inconvenience objected against it is not considerable:
for, it is said, If the heavens were literally opened, how could Ezekiel see so
far, as to see things in heaven? the strength of his eyes could not reach it;
for if the Sun and fixed Stars which are far above the Sun, are greater bodies
then the earth, and seem so little unto us, how little would any thing in
heaven seem to the eye, when it is exceedingly beyond both these?

Answ. The heavens being opened, it does not follow that Ezekiel must see the
visions in heaven, the things he saw might be nearer then the Stars or Sun. The
Dove came down and lighted upon Christ, and the sheet was let down from heaven
unto Peter, and so the visions might be nearer unto Ezekiel then the highest
heavens; The heavens were opened, and he saw visions of God. it is not said
that he saw visions in heaven; and grant it to be in heaven, Stephen saw Christ
there, and so might Ezekiel see the object of his vision there: yet neither did
Stephen by his natural strength see Christ, nor Ezekiel these visions, but he
that opened heaven did open their eyes, strengthened them to see at such a
distance: Or, Secondly, you may take it effectively, that was done to the eye
of faith, as if heaven had been opened. A thing is said to be opened when that
is removed which hinders coming at the thing shut up, the seven seals were
loosed, Rev. 5. then was the book opened, when the shuts of the window are
turned aside, that the eye can come at the light, then the window is open, the
impediments are taken away: Vbi discussis omnibus obstaculis Deus facit ut
fidelium oculi usque ad gloriam ipsius coelestem penetrent.
and heaven is open, when all lets being set aside, God causes the eyes of his
to see divine visions, or reveals divine mysteries unto them, as if heaven were
open; and this is the way most peculiar to the servants of God. Hereafter
(says Christ) You shall see Heaven opened, and the Angels ascending and
descending upon the Son of man. The Angels are not corporeal, they cleave not
the heavens asunder in their descent, or ascent, that is not the meaning, but
the spirit of the Text is this; the impediments should be taken away from their
minds, they should be so enlightened with the glory of the Gospel, they should
see, as it were, even Angels come down and minister unto Christ; they should,
as the expression is, Nova acie, apertis oculis.
2 Cor. 3.18. with open face behold as in a glass the glory of God, see heaven
opened in Christ, and the Angels descending upon the Son of man; And so did
Ezekiel see heaven opened.

Observe. The Key of Heaven is in the hand of God, he opens heaven at his
pleasure, and lets out and in what parties and things he pleases; Angels,
visions, and other things he lets out; he opens heaven, and lets in your
prayers, your tears, your souls at his seasons; the key of the grave, the key
of the womb, the key of the clouds, the key of hell is in the hand of God, and
he turns them at his pleasure; but above all, the key of heaven is in the hand
of God, he is Lord Chamberlain, there is none goes out, nor comes in, till God
himself turn the key. If you would have mercies, you must look up to God for
them, and desire him to turn the key. Rev. 3.7. he is said to have the key of
David, he opens and none can shut, he shuts and none can open; a key notes
power, and the key of David chief power in the house, in the Kingdom; where
that key is, there is the greatest power; God has that key in his hand, the
key of David, all power to open and shut heaven when he will, he can open your
hearts at his pleasure, he can open Texts at his pleasure, he can open dark
things unto you; therefore seeing all power is in the hand of God; look up to
him for mercies, and desire him to turn the key for your good and his glory.

2. That God does great things for those that are truly godly, that are true
believers. Heaven is opened for them, and only for them.

We do not read in the book of God, that heaven was ever opened for any
wicked man, wickedness shuts up heaven, godliness has the privilege, to
the godly heaven is opened. To Christ it was opened, Mat. 3.16. To Steven, Act.
7.56. To Peter it was opened, Act. 10.11. To John it was opened, Rev.
4.1.19.11. And it is opened to Ezekiel here in the Text, I saw heaven opened.
It is shut against others, wicked men shall never see it open in mercy; the
Judgment at last shall not be in heaven, but in the air, or on the earth. It
is the privilege of believers to have choice mercies.

Great things God will do for them that the world shall have no share in. It
was the godly that saw Christ after the resurrection, and not any wicked man.
It was for believers that Christ prayed, and not for the world, Joh. 17. It is
for the heirs of salvation that the Angels are sent forth to be ministering
Spirits unto, Heb. 1. And it is for the faithful the heavens are opened, that
they may see what the glory of their Fathers house is, into what a family they
shall ere long be received. This sets out the excellency of faith unto us; for
as it is a hand to receive Christ and his benefits, a mouth to eat his flesh,
and drink his blood; so it is an eye to see into heaven, and the eye for which
heaven is opened.

EZEKIEL. 1. The heavens were opened, and I saw visions of God, etc.

The Word of the Lord came expressly to Ezekiel the Priest, etc. And the hand of
the Lord was there upon him.

And I looked, and behold a whirlwinde came out of the North, a great Cloud,
and a fire enfolding it self, etc.


I saw visions of God.
GOD has manifested himself unto his Prophets several ways.

1. By speaking immediately unto them without interposition of any medium, even
mouth to mouth and face to face. So he spoke to Adam in Paradise; to Moses,
Exodus 33.11. The Lord spoke to Moses face to face, as a man speaks to his
friend. This manner of Gods manifesting himself was peculiar to Moses above
any, or all the Prophets besides, as you may read Deuteronomy. 34.10.

2. God manifested himself to his people by Dreams, which was in the night
season: there was some representation of something unto them when they were
asleep. Thus God manifested himself to Jacob, Genesis 28.12. And Jacob says,
Genesis 31.11. that the Angel of God spoke unto him in a dream.

3. God has manifested himself to his people, by Visions, Psalm. 89.19. Thou
spakest in visions to thy holy One. And Genesis 15.1. The Word of the Lord came
unto Abraham in a vision. These three you have together in two verses, Numb. 6.
and part of the 8th. If there be a Prophet among you, I the Lord will make my
self known to him in a vision, and speak to him in a dream; and to Moses
will I speak mouth to mouth. Here in the Text it is by way of vision that God
speaks or appears unto Ezekiel; I saw visions of God.

In a Vision there are these things:

1. There is some species or similitude represented to the sight, whether it be
to the eye of the body externally, or to the eye of the mind internally,
always something is represented to the eye.

2. A Vision is of something that is future, whether at some little distance,
or very remote. Hence it is that Vision is put for prophecy, Isa. 1.1.

3. In a Vision there is always such an irradiation of the mind, such divine,
satisfying, over-powering, strong light, that the party who has the Vision is
put out of all doubt and dispute concerning the truth of the thing he has
seen, or is represented.

Moller. Ps. 89.20.
4. There is in a vision a strong impulse upon the spirit of the party to do
that which is the mind of God concerning that vision.

5. It is when they are awake. God speaks to men by dreams in the dark when
they are asleep, but usually visions are when men are awake.

All these are found here in the Prophet Ezekiels vision:

1. There are representations of diverse things to him, he was an
Hieroglyphicall Prophet, he had more things presented unto him of that nature
then any Prophet besides; All that follows here in this Chapter, are
representations of things to Ezekiel in this vision.

2. It is of things to come; for this Prophecy being either of the ruin of
Jerusalem, or of the state of the Church, still it was of that which was not
present but future.

3. The Prophet he had strong inlightnings, he had such irradiations of his
mind that he was satisfied touching the thing, therefore he says, The word of
the Lord came expressly unto him, the hand of the Lord came upon him in a great
deal of strength.

4. He had a mighty impulse, though he was backward, unwilling to go on in
the work of God, yet the Spirit came upon him with power, and put him on.

And lastly, it was when he was awake, walking up and down by the river Chebar,
there he had these visions.

Thus much for the nature of a vision; now these visions were visions of God. I
saw visions of God. Not that he saw God often, and so every sight of God made a
new vision, (for no man can see God and live) but visions revealed to him by
God, which did in some measure set out the glory and majesty of God; and so
they are called visions of God.

Or visions of God by way of opposition and exclusion, thus; I saw visions of
God, I had divine visions, not Satanicall delusions; (for Satan has his
Prophets, and they have their visions whereby they delude the world) not
dreams and conceits of mine own, no Angel, no Devil, no dream, no fancy of
mine presented them unto me, but they were prophetical visions, such as God
himself has presented.

Or visions of God lastly, in regard of the eminency of them. I saw visions of
God, that is, choice, rare, difficult, transcendent visions. Things that
excel, in Scripture Phrase usually are said to be things of God; As the
Mountains of God, the Cedars of God, the City of God; as you may read Psalm.
36.6. Psalm. 80.10. Jonah 3.3.

1. Observe here the certainty of the things contained in this Prophet. He
does not say, I heard, but I saw visions of God. The sense of sight is the most
certain, most active, most discerning, most evidentiall of all the senses.
Therefore 1 John 1.1.3. That which we have seen with our eyes, which we have
looked upon, we declare unto you. There was certainty in that which they saw.
One eyewitness is more then ten heare-says, then ten eare-witnesses. Thales
being asked the Question, Quantum ocul^ ab auribus.
How much truth should differ from a lie; his answer was, As much as the eyes
differ from the ears: intimating, that what you hear may be false, but what
you see that is certain. The Prophet here saw visions of God, to show the
certainty of these visions, and so of the whole Scriptures, which are visions
of God.

2. See here the dignity of these Visions, they are visions of God, such as
are great, glorious, transcendent things. Men's words, works, things are mean,
poor, and worthless, but the things, the visions of God, they are so high, so
excellent, that few can reach them, they are beyond the apprehensions of
ordinary men: yea the Prophets themselves did not see all that was in those
visions, God did vouchsafe unto them. This shows the things of God have
transcendency in them, are of great authority, and challenge answerable
esteem. These are visions of God, and must with all Scripture be valued
accordingly. Hence the Ancients have called the Scriptures, An Epistle of God
sent from Heaven to the sons of men. Therefore in them is nothing
impertinent, empty, but all in them is glorious, full of sense, mysteries, and
Spirit; this strengthens the authority of Scripture, Ne titubet fides.
that our faith may not stagger at all, but be confident, and build upon them,
as visions and truths of God.

3. See here, that when God begins once to let out mercy to his servants, he
stints not presently, but proceeds, I saw not one vision, but, I saw visions of
God, he had many choice ones. It was kindness that Ezekiel had such a name,
The strength of God; it was kindness that the Lord would open heaven to him;
it had been great kindness if he had seen but one vision; but for Ezekiel to
have heaven opened, and to see visions of God, many visions, one after another,
this shows the great kindness of God. When Rachel had her first son, she
called his name Joseph, which signifies adding, or increase; for she said, The
Lord shall add to me another son, Genesis 30.24. Now God has begun to show
kindness, he shall not only give me this, but he shall give me another son
also. When the Lord has bestowed one mercy on you, you may name it Joseph,
increase, addition, for God will bestow another upon you. Abraham had many
mercies from God, one after another; and Moses a multitude of mercies, he
converseth with God face to face, he hears God speak, he has Gods presence
to go along with him; yea, he sees all Gods goodness and glory to pass
before him. When mercies come forth, God will not presently shut the door of
mercy again: Heaven is opened, visions are presented one after another. Psalm.
36.10. Continue thy loving kindness, the Hebrew is, draw forth, or, draw out
thy loving kindness: A metaphor either taken from vessels of Wine, which being
set abroach once, yield not only one cup, but many cups: so when God sets
abroach the Wine of his mercy, he will not fill your cup once, but twice and
seven times: or, taken from a Mother, who has her breasts full of milk, draws
them out for her child, not once, but often; the child shall have the breast
many times in the day, and many times in the night: so when God begins to
show mercy to you, he will draw out his breasts of consolation, and will bestow
mercy after mercy upon you: or from a line which is extended; for so God being
in a way of mercy, will extend the line of mercy, and measure out mercy after
mercy for you. Is not heaven now opened? Do you not see visions of God this
day? How often is heaven opened in this City in a week? How many visions have
you from the Prophets? What manifestations of truths are there? What
discoveries of the mind and will of God to your souls are there in these
days? I saw visions of God, says Ezekiel, and so may you.

The Word of the Lord came expressly.] The Hebrew is emphaticall, (...) ^ssendo
fuit, om i^o fuit, fiendo factu^ est.
the Word of the Lord by being, has been, or, has altogether been, had much
being in me. Besides the visions I saw, there was a real communication of
truths to my understanding; evident and express commanands from God came unto
me, and it came so, as it had entrance and abiding in me: Accurate factum est,
there was an accurate and real work of it upon me, and in me. Prove. 3.24. (...)
Keep sound wisdom; the word for sound wisdom in the original is, that which
is essence or being; intimating, that all other things are nothing; and the
Word of God that has only substance and being in it, making substantial where
it comes, and so here it gave being, and was an ingraffed word in the soul and
heart of the Prophet; so that the meaning is, the Word came with that evidence
and clearness unto me, that I could not withstand it, it had such entity and
substance in it, that it made me of a common man a Prophet.

And the hand of the Lord was there upon me.] The hand of the Lord is taken in
two senses, especially in Scripture:

1. For judgment, or punishment, so you have it, Acts 13.11. speaking of
Elymas the Sorcerer, says Paul, The hand of the Lord shall be upon thee, and
thou shall be blind; Gods hand was upon Elymas, and he was stricken blind for
perverting the Deputy. In this sense it is not taken here.

2. The hand of the Lord is taken for prophecy: When the Lord does come upon
the sons of men, and stirs up their spirits to prophecy, that is the hand of
the Lord.

But yet this is not all: It notes the virtue and power of the Spirit of God
which came upon the Prophet; not shaking, disturbing, and throwing of him down,
as some Rabbis conceive, but changing, comforting, elevating and exciting the
spirit of the Prophet to see divine mysteries; and notes also, that efficacy
and power which did set on the Word upon the heart and conscience of the
Prophet; that power which did subdue all opposition, carnal reasonings, and
remove all impediments whatsoever stuck upon the heart of the Prophet, and
hindered him in that work which God would have him to undertake; It is this hand
of the Lord that makes the Word mighty, spiritual, lively, according to that
in Hebr. 4.12. the Prophet felt the intrinsecall virtue of this hand, the
Spirit of God in his own heart; it was a quick and lively word unto him. This
intrinsecall virtue of the Spirit, if it reached not the Prophets hearers, yet
it abode in the prophecy, and it remains an efficacious prophecy to this day.
It Is worth inquisition, what the virtue of the Spirit is, expressed here by the
hand of God.

There are three things in it: The hand is 1. Symbolum roboris. 2. Index
veritatis. 3. Instrumentum operationis.


1. The hand is Symbolum roboris, the Type or Emblem of strength; therefore of
a strong man, we say he is a man of his hands, that is the symbol of his
strength: So the Spirit of God is a Spirit of strength, the hand of God notes
the strength of God, and the Holy Ghost is the power and strength of God. Luke
1.35. The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall
over-shadow thee: And greater is he that is in you then he that is in the
world. The Spirit of God that is in the hearts of his children, he is of more
strength then Beelzebub, the prince of Devils, and god of this world.

2. The hand is Index veritatis, the hand or finger does show a thing; If you
would have a man go this way or that way, you show him or point him with the
finger, you direct him with your hand: Solomon, Prove. 6.13. speaking of the
wicked man, says, He teaches with his fingers, that is, he shows others by
his hand to do wickedly; the Spirit of God is Index veritatis, this hand of God
does show you the truth, 1 John 16.13, 14. He shall show you, says Christ,
things to come, He shall take of mine and show it unto you; It is the Spirit of
Christ, this hand of God that shows you all things; you will never know
truths till this hand point to them, and teach you: you may have notions in
your head, and guessings in your spirits and bosoms, but the reality and
certainty of things will never be attained to, till the spirit of God acquaint
you with them.

3. The hand is Instrumentum operationis, the instrument of action; men do all
by the hand, therefore it is called the Organ of organs by the Philosopher. So
the Spirit of God that does all, Zach. 4.6. Not by might, nor by power, but by
my Spirit: I will do all by that, says God: It is the Spirit of God that does
convince; it is the Spirit that does convert; it is the Spirit that does dictate
and inspire godly men; it is the Spirit that sanctifies; it is the Spirit that
leads into truth, that comforts; the Spirit is the great agent, the hand of God
by which God does all his works. It was the Spirit that moved upon the face of
the waters at first; the Spirit of God was the agent in the work of creation,
and the great agent in the work of redemption and salvation.

These phrases being thus opened, observe hence:

1. That the Prophet received what he delivered to them from God; The hand of
the Lord was there upon me, and the Word of the Lord came expressly. The
Prophets must deliver to the people what they receive from God, and not what
they bring of themselves: They must not bring their own visions, their own
conceits, what seems good in their own eyes; but they must bring the Word of
the Lord to the people; They must not speak according to the humors of the
people, as they move them, as they would have them, but they must speak as the
Spirit of God moves them, as God will have them: 2 Pet. 1.21. The holy men
spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost: 1 Cor. 11.23.
and Paul says, What I have received of the Lord, that I deliver unto you; he
would not deliver any thing he had from the world, or from himself, but, what I
received from the Lord that I deliver unto you. Ministers they are Gods
Seeds-men, and they must have their seed from God, else they will sow tares.

2. It is of much concernment for Ministers, to see they have a good and clear
Call to their Ministry. Ezekiel here stands much upon it; I saw heaven opened,
I saw visions of God, and the Word of the Lord came expressly to me, and the
hand of the Lord was there upon me. Here were strong evidences of his Call to
the work he was to go about. Ministers are to be the mouth of God to the
people, and the mouth of the people to God, both are weighty businesses; they
deal about the eternal truths of the eternal God, your immortal souls, and
the everlasting condition of them. The glory of God is concredited in a great
measure unto them; the great things of the Kingdom of Christ are put into
their hands, to dispense as God shall move, and give them opportunity. Had they
not need therefore to see to it, that their Call be right, and to make it out
strongly and clearly, that God has sent them? If they can clear it up that God
has sent them, they may expect his assistance, his blessing, his protection
and success in their labors. How ever things prove, this will be their
comfort in the midst of opposition, reproach, persecution, hazard of liberty
and lives, I was called of God, I am in his work, in his way, he brought me
into his Vineyard, he will stand by me, I will go on, let him do with me what
he pleases. The clearness of a man's Call will add much comfort to a man's
spirit in a black day; it makes conscientious, pitiful and painful; a
Ministers call being evident, the peoples consciences will be satisfied, will
receive his doctrine; then will they look upon him as their Pastor and Teacher,
reverence him for his works sake, and are likely to receive much good by him:
Whereas otherwise, if the Calling of Ministers reach no higher then a Patron or
Prelate, there is seldom any good comes either to Ministers or people;
therefore it concerns them to look narrowly to it, that their Calling be of
God, clear and strong to themselves, else they cannot make it out to others;
neither shall find that comfort, nor do that good which otherwise they might.

3. That in corrupt times, when Religion, the Church, and Gods glory are
greatly endangered, God then takes care to raise up some extraordinary servants
to vindicate his truth, in his people, his glory; all was brought now to a
desolate condition, false Prophets prevailed, Religion suffered, Gods honor
was low, and now God takes Ezekiel that was one of the ordinary Priests before,
and bestows a larger measure of his Spirit upon him, and raises him up to be
a Prophet, and sets him awork, to do great things in Babylon. Though now men be
not called immediately by the voice of God and Christ, as of old, yet by
extraordinary instincts and motions of Gods Spirit, they were heretofore, and
are still put upon great services: Philip was a Deacon by his ordinay Calling,
but by extraordinary instinct and hints of Gods Spirit, he was raised up to be
an Evangelist, and to do greater service unto the Church of God. So Luther,
that was a Friar at first, by extraordinary instinct of Gods Spirit, was raised
up to purge errors out of the Church, and to glorify God, especially in
clearing the doctrine of Justification by Free grace: So Zwinglius, Wickliffe,
and others in our days; God has not left himself without witness at this
day, he has stirred up the spirits of some to do him great and extraordinary
services.

4. That those Ministers are fittest to speak to the people, that find the
Word of God to have being in them. The Word of the Lord came expressly to me;
the Word of the Lord had being in him, was ingraffed in him. When the Word is a
word of being in our hearts, then it will be a word of power in your
consciences. That which comes from our hearts, will reach to yours, and will be
effectual in you; otherwise the Word is but an empty sound, it comes from the
teeth outward, and reaches but to your ears, and seldom goes down into your
souls.

5. Take this note, that there are principles of opposition in the dearest
servants of God to the work of his Spirit. It is said, the hand of the Lord
came upon me; invaded me, so some render it. I stood out against God, I had
my carnal reasonings, I had stubbornness and opposition in my will; I said
there was a Lion in the way, and I pleaded hard against this work and service.
But the Spirit of God came upon me, came mightily upon me, came with a strong
hand upon me, as he says, came so upon me, that it subdued all my carnal
reasonings, subdued the stubbornness of my will, it removed all my shifts and
pretenses, and brought me off to go about the Work of God; Is it not thus with
most Christians? When you would pray, when you would do good, is not evil
present with you? But when the Spirit of God comes upon you, it will overcome
that indisposition, that sluggishness, that opposition, it will work down
distempers, and frame you sweetly to go about the work of a God as it did
Ezekiel.

6. That the Word and Ordinances of it, that visions and revelations do the
heart of man real good, when divine virtue goes along with them, otherwise
not. What if Ezekiel had seen never so many visions; what if God had spoken
never so expressly unto him? unless the hand of God had been upon him too;
unless the Spirit of God had improved those visions, and ingraffed those words
in him, all had been as an empty sound, all had been as mere shadows and
sights to him. But when the Spirit of God goes along, then there is efficacy
and benefit in any Ordinance; take away the Spirit from the Word and Ordinances
of God, and they will be but dry bones without meat or marrow: take the Gospel
which is called the ministration of the Spirit, if the Spirit be not in it, the
choicest promises, the sweetest truths there, what are they? they are Literae
damnatoriae, and Leges mortis, they are letters and laws of death to the soul.
When the hand of the Lord is upon an Ordinance, and upon a man in that
Ordinance, then is there good gotten, and then does the soul gain. 2 Cor. 10.4.
Our weapons are mighty through God.

7. That all spiritual good received and done by the Saints, is from the
operation of Gods Spirit, which therefore is called Gods hand. Luke 11.20. If I
by the finger or hand of God cast out devils; this finger, Mat. 12.28. is
called the Spirit of God; If I by the Spirit of God cast out Devils. That
which is called finger in one, is called the Spirit in the other. Now do men
receive any good? have you faith? have you love, patience, meekness,
understanding, zeal, godliness, any, all graces? It is this hand of God that
has wrought them. Do you do any divine good unto others? It is this Spirit
of God that works by you, and inableth you to do that good. Act. 6.10. They
were not able to resist the wisdom and Spirit by which he spoke. Stephen
spoke by the Spirit of God. If you hear, if any good be done, or received, it
is from the Spirit, which is the hand of God. Therefore you should know, to
whom to give the glory and honor of all your receipts, and of all your actions.

8. Note here; That the Messengers of God should come not only with the Word
of God, but also with the hand of God; they should ^^ing his truths and his
Spirit. Ezekiel, the Word of the Lord came expressly to him, and the hand of the
Lord was upon him. It is needful that Ministers come not only with Law and
Gospel, with the Word of God, but that they come with the very hand, even the
Spirit and power of God; for all the efficacy and good done, is by the Spirit.
If a Minister come and bring the letter only without the Spirit, what evidence
will there be to his own soul, of the certainty of those things whereof he
speaks? How will he be able to see into the spiritualnesse of them, to know
that they are of God, and that they are to be commended to the people in the
name of God, when he wants the Spirit of God to discern them himself? What
prevalency can there be in the hearts of hearers, when the Minister comes not
with demonstration of the Spirit? What bottom is there for the faith of men,
where there is the wisdom of words, without the power of the Spirit? The
hearers get most good when Gods letters come to them not without his seal,
evidencing they are his letters. Hence says Paul, 1 Cor. 2.4, 5. My preaching
was not with enticing words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the
Spirit and of power, that your faith should not stand in the wisdom of men,
but in the power of God. Then does the faith of hearers stand in the power of
God, when the Ministers come with evidence and demonstration of the Spirit of
God.

Last of all, From these three verses generally considered, observe; That when
Gods servants are in deep afflictions, then are usually brought in the
sweetest consolations. Here is Ezekiel taken out of his own Country, deprived
of his estate and friends, of the Temple, of Gods Ordinances and solemn
Assemblies, and of all the sweet and good that Jerusalem afforded: He is
brought into Babylon, he is a captive there, he is solitary now by the River
side, he was in a distressed and forlorn condition. What man here would be in
Babylon now, and not think himself very miserable? When Ezekiel was in this
condition, heaven is opened, visions are seen, God speaks expressly unto him,
the hand of the Lord is there upon him. So that you may see, when we are in
deep aff^ictions, many times God comes in with his sweetest consolations.
Genesis 15.1. Abraham in the Chapter before had gotten a victory, and rescued Let
his brothers son, out of the hands of sundry Kings, and being come home, he
falls into a shaking fit, and is filled with fear lest those Kings should
reinforce their strength, come upon him and his, and destroy all. While he is
in this agony, God comes to him; Fear not Abraham, I am thy shield and
exceeding great reward. God came in his deep distress, and brought in a sweet
refreshing to his soul. Elijah that great Prophet and worthy servant of God,
after he had made a sacrifice of Baals Priests, and Jezabel sought after him to
slay him, and had vowed that he should die the death, 1 King. 19.
if there were no more men in the world, he was forced to fly for his life,
and he flies into the Wilderness, and there was a great famine, neither bed
nor bread he had there, and whither to go he knew not, he had many enemies, he
hardly knew a godly man left, he was even weary of his life, now he sits
down under a Juniper tree, and desires that God would take away his life; It
is enough now, O Lord, (says he) take away my life, for I am not better then
my fathers; I am even willing to die, the world is so wretched, and there so
much hatred of thee and thine; Ahab and Jezabel are against me, all the
Country and Land cry out of me as the troubler of Israel, and to what purpose
should I live any longer? While he is in this condition, God sends an Angel
unto him, and an Angel with bread to feed him, and with glad tidings to comfort
him. John when he was in Patmos, banished by Domitian, in a place where were
the condemned parties belonging to the State of Rome; those that were the most
desperate and vile wretches, that they would feign be rid of, they sent them to
Patmos: John was there, and while he was there, he had those revelations that
were full of glory and excellency. The three Children, when they were in the
fiery furnace, the fire did them no hurt, but loose their bands and set them at
liberty, and then one like the Son of God comes and walks amongst them,
and comfort them in those fiery flames. In deep distresses then God does
often let out himself: he dwells in the darkness, and lets out himself,
and becomes light to those that are in darkness. You know that passage in
the book of Martyrs, of Glover and Austen, Mr. Glover was sad and full of
fears some days before he was to suffer, his spirit was down, he quaked and
trembled to think of the stake, and of that bitter cup he was to drink, he
was afraid that he should deny his Savior, and undo his soul. But the night
before he was to suffer, he cried out unto Austen, Ob Austen, he is come, he is
come. I knew a woman in travel, Mrs. A. G.
and in that travel whereof she dyed, who had been sometime in darkness, and
having much sought God and waited for the revelation of his countenance, when
she was almost spent in her travel and come near her end, upon a sudden
she sprang up and fixing her eyes toward heaven, said, He is come, he is
come, he has kissed me with the kisses of his mouth; his love is better then
wine; I will not ex^hange my condition with the greatest Prince in the world;
the Lord is infinitely good, he has not deceived me; neither will he ever
deceive any. She had these impressions upon her spirit, till the breath went
out of her body. Thus God in great distresses, in deep afflictions, brings
in seasonable and sweet consolations.

And I looked, and behold, a whirlewinde came out of the North, etc.
We are now come to the Vision: some make five Visions in this Chapter.

The first is a Vision of a tempest in this fourth verse.

The second is of the four living creatures, with their description, from this
verse to the 15th.

The third is of the wheels, from the 15th verse to the 22.

The fourth is of the Firmament, from the 22. verse to the 26th.

The fifth is of a Throne with one in it, from the 26th to the end.

Some others put them all together, and make them one Vision; these being all
parts of it.

Before I come to open this Vision, or any parts thereof, it will be needful
to show you the scope of this Vision, which will help us in the understanding
of the same.

The scope of this Vision is to set forth the glory of God; and this appears
from the last verse of the Chapter, where it is said; This was the appearance
of the likeness of the glory of the Lord. The Spirit interprets all to be a
manifestation of the glory of God.

This glory of God is evidenced two ways:

1. By his powerful providence in the administration and ruling of all the
creatures in the world; For all creatures are under the command of God, and he
does dispose of them for what services he pleases, and not only in the world,
but specially in the Church is his active providence, preserving, and
destroying as seems best in his own eyes, so that nothing is done there
rashly, or without his will; nothing otherwise, sooner or later then he has
decreed; all creatures, actions, events, come under his will, rule, and power.

2. By a representation of Jesus Christ, the Judge and Governor of this world,
who is the brightness of the glory of God, and the express image of his
Person; and this from the 22. verse to the end of the Chapter; as the other is
from the 4. verse to the 22.

This glory of God is presented to Ezekiel in this Vision, for these ends:

1. To breed in him an high reverence of divine Majesty. The sight of great
and glorious things do awaken our dull, heavy, sensual spirits: naturally we
are indifferent to the things of God, and unless something transcendent and
glorious be presented to us, like Gallio we care little for other things:
therefore in Exodus 19.16. when the people saw the lightning, and heard the
thunder, when God came down upon the Mount in that glorious manner, this
awakened them, and bred an awful reverence in them of divine Majesty; All the
people that were in the Camp trembled.

2. To prepare and fit him for entertainment of what God should speak unto
him. We are not always in a frame to hear God speak, there are great
distempers in our spirits: you have all experience enough of the truth of this:
therefore it is said, Psalm. 46.10. Be still and know that I am God; Be still,
let not your spirit be in a rage, taken up with the world, the cares, fears,
pleasures, and businesses of it, be not parling with a lust, but be still and
know that I am God.

3. It is to encourage him to his work, and to frame his spirit to a ready
execution thereof. Ezekiel was to enter upon a heavy task, he was to deal
with the stubborn Jews, a rebellious people. He knew that Jeremiah had
preached 35. years, and other Prophets in times better then he was in, and
little or no good had been done upon this hard-hearted people. Therefore lest
Ezekiel should be discouraged, that his heart might not faint, but be quickened
to the work, the Lord does show him his glory in these Hieroglyphics, his
glory in these creatures, his glory in his Son, that so seeing the glory of
God, he might be warmed, oiled, and encouraged to run about this work. For the
sight of glory is potent with a gracious heart, to make it active for God. We
cannot (says Peter and John in Act. 4.20.) but speak the things which we have
seen and heard. Joh. 1.14. Mat. 17.1, 2.
Now they had seen his glory as the glory of the only begotten Son of God.
They had been in the mount, seen Christ transfigured, and his face shine as
the Sun. And having seen his glory and heard his voice, this encouraged
them, notwithstanding all difficulties, to be active for him. This was Gods way
to appear to his servants, to encourage them to the work he would set them
about. Exodus 3.
God appeared to Moses in a burning bush. To Joshua in a vision like a man with
a sword in his hand. Josh. 5.13. 2 King. 6.17. Act. 10.
To Elisha by horses and chariots of fire. Peter being confirmed by a vision of
a sheet let down from heaven, goes and preaches to the Gentiles. And Ezekiel
here has vision upon vision, that so being strongly confirmed, he might not
fear the faces of Jews or Babylonians, but proceed with life and spirit about
the work he was sent.

Note: The sight of Gods glory is very efficacious upon the spirits of men. If
God let out his glory, it will work strangely upon good and bad. When they
came to apprehend Christ, says he to them, Joh. 18.6.
I am he. It is conceived that Christ let out some glimpse of his glory, this
did so astonish them that presently they recoyled, and fell to the ground.
Isaiah when he saw the glory of the Lord, Isa. 6.5, 6.
he cries out, Woe is me, I am undone, I am a man of unclean lips, and I
dwell among a people of unclean lips. And then God manifesting his glory so
far for his good, that his lips were touched by an Angel; Now Lord (says he)
here am I, send me, I am ready to go, though it be on a message of death,
though it be to root up Nations and Kingdoms. So it was with Job, I have heard
of thee (says he) by the hearing of the ear, Job 42.5, 6.
but now mine eye sees thee, (that is, thy glory) Wherefore I abhor my self
in dust and ashes; I will speak no more against God, I will do whatsoever
thou shall command or expect at my hands. So Isa. 40.5, 6. The glory of the
Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together: And what then? All
flesh is as grass, and all the goodlinesse thereof is as the flower of the
field. There is no greater or more efficacious way, to take off your hearts
from the creature, Videnti Deum omnis creatura est angusta.
then to behold the glory of God. There was no man that ever saw the glory of
God, but he looked upon the creature as nothing afterward.

I looked, and behold, a whirlewind came out of the North, etc.
In this Verse we have the first part of the vision, and it is of a Tempest; A
whirlewind is a sudden wind, which takes up what is obvious, and carries it in
a circular motion, wheeling it about, and hurling it here and there. Theodoret
calls it the blast of a storm; the Septuagint a wind which takes away trees,
houses, lesser things, A Lapid.
and disperseth them. Some have been eyewitnesses of whirlewinds in Italy,
which have taken away stabula cum equis, stable with horses, carried them up
into the air, and dashed them against the mountains; so mighty are these
whirlewinds in some countries.

Out of the North.
The Northern winds are very piercing; and if we respect the Prophet in this
whirlewind, it was to purge the air, that the visions might be clearer and
more conspicuous to his eyes, and himself better disposed to the reception of
them; Bacons Natural History.
for Southern winds make the humors fiuide, and the body heavy, they relax the
sinews, and prejudice the motions of the man: But Northern winds shut up the
humors, consolidate the parts of the body, intend the spirits, make man more
lively, fit to receive and do.

But there is something else in this North Wind; great difference there is
among Expositors concerning this vision, and no man almost knows where to
fasten; what I conceive to be the truth you shall have.

By this whirlwind from the North, is meant Nebuchadnezzar, with his army that
should come and besiege Jerusalem. Jer. 1.13, 14. this is set out under the
representation of a seething pot; I saw (says he there) a seething pot from
the face of the North; (so the Hebrew is) and what is that? Out of the North an
evil shall break forth upon all the Inhabitants of the land; The evil is, The
Families of the Kingdoms of the North shall come against Jerusalem, verse. 15.
There is the evil; the Babylonians shall come to Jerusalem, and be a wind, a
whirlewind, a tempest to it.

Nebuchadnezzar and his Army are compared to a whirlewind, in the sudden
rising, swift going, and terrible execution.

1. In the sudden rising, winds (you know) rise suddenly. Act. 2.2. Suddenly
there came a sound from heaven, as of a rushing mighty wind, which shows that
winds do come unexpectedly. Jonah 1.4. No sooner was Jonah in the Ship, but God
sent out a great wind upon the Sea, such a wind should Nebuchadnezzar be, he
should come suddenly upon them. Jer. 6.26. The spoiler shall come suddenly upon
thee: Habak. 2.7. Shall they not rise up suddenly that shall bite thee? and
awake that shall vex thee? A metaphor taken from a Dog, Serpent, or wild Beast,
when a man passes by the way before ever he thinks of it, the Dog, Serpent, or
wild Beast starteth up, bites or stings him, so should Nebuchadnezzar be, (for
he speaks of him in that second of Habakkuk) he should come suddenly and set
upon Jerusalem, and overthrow it as a mighty storm and tempest does a tree or
house.

How could this be sudden, when the Prophets had foretold them of it long
before?

To this I answer, first; That because they did not believe what the Prophets
did foretell, touching Nebuchadnezzar and his destruction of Jerusalem,
therefore it was sudden to them, though foretold. Lam. 4.12. The Kings of the
earth, and all the Inhabitants of the world would not have believed that the
adversary and the enemy should have entered in at the gates of Jerusalem.
Neither King nor people would believe the Prophets, they would not be persuaded
that ever an enemy should enter within the gates of Jerusalem, and lay it wast.

2ly. Though they were foretold, though they did believe it, yet because they
were not prepared for it when it did come, therefore it was sudden unto them.
Luke 21.34. Take heed, lest by any means your hearts be overcome with
surfeiting and drunkenness, and that day come upon you unawares: though men
believe that evil shall come, if they be taken unawares, unprepared, it is
sudden to them. So these, either not believing, or not being prepared, though
they did believe, the coming of Nebuchadnezzar was to them as a whirlewind very
sudden.

2. In its swift going; The wind is said to have wings, 2 Samuel 22.11. because
of its swiftness and speedy motion; and Ships that are driven by it, are said
to be swift, Job 9.26. And so it is said of the Chaldean horses, that they are
swifter then Leopards. Hab. 1.8. Leopards are very swift creatures, so swift,
that Claudian fastens this Epithet upon them, Pardi fulminei, Leopards are as
swift as lightening and thunder; and therefore, Dan. 7.6. Alexander is compared
to a Leopard, because of his speedy conquering the world. Celerity in matters
of war is of great moment: And it would do well, that those that are now
interessed in it, would make more speed; for speed does great things. Alexander
being asked the question how he overcame the world in so little time, answered,
By not delaying: every opportunity was taken. These Chaldeans and their horses
were very swift, and they came with great speed upon Jerusalem, and therein
resembled the wind.

3. In its terrible execution: A whirlewind, or any wind which brings a
tempest, what dreadful work does it make? Houses, Mountains, Trees, Steeples,
are shaken and torn in pieces; what can stand before a tempestuous wind? You
may see the power thereof in 1 King. 19.11. A great strong wind rent the
mountains, and brake in pieces the rocks. The strength of rocks and mountains
was weakness to the strength of the winds; those great vessels at Sea, viz.
Ships, when a storm comes, how are they battered and shaken, sunk and split
against the rocks? There is terrible execution done by the winds at Sea and
Land, when they are in their strength. So Nebuchadnezzar and his forces were
very terrible: Habak. 1.6. and so on, we may see the terriblenesse of them; I
will raise up the Chaldeans, a bitter and hasty nation; and verse 7. They are
terrible and dreadful: and verse 9. They shall come all for violence, their
faces shall sup up as the East Wind: that wind was most vehement and scorching
in Judea, and devoured all that was green; so did the Chaldeans devour and
destroy all their pleasant things; they shall gather the captives as the sand.
The wind drives great heaps of sand together, raises a mountain presently, so
should they gather the captives as heaps of sands. Then afterward, verse 10.
They shall scoff at the Kings, and the Princes shall be a scorn unto them,
they shall deride every strong hold, for they shall heap dust and take it. No
person, no hold can stand before them. In these respects Nebuchadnezzar and his
army are compared to a whirlewind, and a whirlewind out of the North.

A great cloud.
Clouds are moist vapors, exhaled from the earth and Sea by the Sun, and
condensated by the cold in the middle region, and carried by the winds up and
down, this way and that way: they are the bottels of heaven which God does fill
with Wine or Vinegar, with Mercy or Wrath. This cloud here likewise does
represent the same thing again unto us; Nebuchadnezzar and his army, Jer. 4.13
chiefly, his army. In the Prophets Ezekiel and Jeremiah oftentimes his army
and and himself are compared to a cloud, and that in three respects.

1. Clouds cover the face of heaven; many vapors gathered together, rise up
and darken the Sun, and keep from us the comfortable aspect thereof. Ezekiel.
32.7. I will cover the Sun with a cloud. The same word that is used for a
cloud, does signify likewise a multitude, a great company. Ped^tum equ^tumque
nubes. Heb. 12.1.
Livie speaks of a cloud of horsemen and footmen; and Epiphanius speaks of a
cloud of Flies; another of a cloud of Locusts; and the Apostle speaks of a
cloud of witnesses: and here you have nub^s militum, a cloud of soldiers, and
this cloud does cover the face of the earth; this army of Nebuchadnezzar does
cover the land. 2 King. 25.1. It is said, that he and all his host came against
Jerusalem; all the Militia of 127. Provinces: and Hab. 1.8. their horsemen
shall spread themselves, they spread themselves through the country: Ezekiel.
39.9. Thou shall ascend, and come like a storm, and shall be like a cloud to
cover the land, thou and all thy bands, and many people with thee. It is
expressly meant of Nebuchadnezzars army, which should be so great, as that it
should cover the earth. The Talmud expounds those words, they shall be like a
cloud to cover the earth, of Nebuchadnezzars covering the land with his army.

2. A cloud is so swift, as that it is irresistible; it powers out the rain and
none can let; it will keep its way, go on, or break it self in pieces. Isa.
60.8. Who are these that fly as a cloud? clouds fly so swiftly, that there is
no resisting of them. So this army of Nebuchadnezzars went with that swiftness
and irresistibleness, that it was not in the power of any to withstand them,
neither Joakim, nor Jehoiachin, neither Zedekiah, nor Pharaoh, King of Egypt,
four Kings could not withstand this Nebuchad: and many other heathen Kings that
he had to deal withal, none of them could resist him and his forces; he went
on invincibly, strong holds were nothing to him, Hab. 1.10.
he made heaps of dust, and took them at his pleasure.

3. Lastly, clouds are Emblemes of misery and afflictions; and the Hebrew word
for a cloud signifies also calamity; (...)
for clouds are full of waters, hail, fire, lightening, and thunderbolts, they
send down such things upon the sons of men, as fill all with darkness, fears
and troubles; it is natural for a cloud to be an Emblem of misery, for clouds
bring storms and tempests. The day of the Lords wrath in Scripture, is set out
by clouds, frequently. Zeph. 1.15. That day is a day of trouble and distress,
a day of darkness and gloominesse, a^ day of clouds and thick darkness: So
Joel 2.1, 2. Ezekiel. 30.3. and 34.12. So this army of Nebuchadnezzar is fitly
compared to a cloud, because of the misery and calamity came along with it.
Great miseries have gone along with all armies, but specially with this. Hab.
1.6. They were a hasty and bitter nation, they rained down their wrath upon
Jerusalem, they had instruments of death, they sent out their thunder and
lightening, and burnt the House of God, the Kings house, and every great man's
house in Jerusalem, 2 King. 25.9. A terrible storm was now upon Jerusalem, when
they shot their arrows into the City, slew multitudes, burnt down all, and
carried the people into captivity; what a storm was here! So here God stormed
Jerusalem with Nebuchadnezzar his army; and what are armies but clouds of
blood and fire, the great ordnance of God, out of which he shoots thunderbolts
of death, Is. 28.2. and by which he storms the strongest towns?

1. Observe here; That winds, clouds, and all vapors are subject to the power
of God. He calls them forth at his pleasure, and caries them which way he
pleases to execute his will: he sent the whirlewind, and the great cloud;
these lawless creatures, over which no King, no Nation ever had command, (for
who can command the winds or the clouds?) yet God has absolute power over
winds: Prove. 30.4. He gathers the wind in his fist, he can open it, and let
out a wind where and when he will, to shake the foundations of the earth: He
has the waters in a garment covered up in cloud, and he only can power them
out, and make great floods; He is the father of the great rain, Amos 5.8. He
calls for the waters of the Sea, (that is, the vapors whereof the clouds and
rain are made) and powers them out upon the face of the earth. It is God that
flies upon the wings of the wind; Psalm. 18.11. It is God that rides upon the
clouds, and makes them his Chariot, and walks upon the wings of the wind;
Psalm. 104.3. It is God that rides upon the swift clouds; Isa. 19.1. God has
the use of the winds as a Foul of his wings, and can flutter and make a great
or small wind as he pleases; God has the command of the clouds as a Prince of
his chariot to drive it which way he pleases.

If you have a wind at Sea or Land to do you good, remember that it came out of
Gods hand; remember God rides upon that wind, and carried it that way you would
have it: If the clouds, the bottles of heaven, be carried over your Gardens,
Orchards, Lands, Habitations, Cities or Countries, do water them and make them
fruitful, remember that God rides in those Chariots, that he opens those
bottles of heaven, and lets down that which is sweet and comfortable to the
sons of men: If they prove terrible unto you; if there be a storm and tempest,
remember it is God that sends the storm and tempest. All is in his hand.

2. That it is Gods prerogative to impose higher significations upon things,
then they have by nature. This whirlewinde out of the North, this great cloud,
naturally had no other signification then other clouds and winds; God lifts
them up to a higher honor, and makes them to represent Nebuchadnezzar and his
Army, his own wrath and vengeance in that Nebuchadnezzar and in that Army of
his. It is Gods privilege to put things into a higher condition then they have
by nature. No man, no Prince on earth could have put this signification upon
that whirlewinde. The Rainbow was before the flood, but had not that honor to
be a witness between God and man, that God would never drown the world any
more, till God himself imposed it. The brazen Serpent was no more then other
brass, but by divine institution it was made a type of Christ. Where such
institution is not, no creature can be translated to another or higher
condition then that it was set in by the first creation, without sin. To make
garments signify purity, Crosses Christ crucified, (besides the superstition
and injury in thrusting them out of their rank) it is a presumptuous stepping
into the Throne of God, and a bold usurpation of his prerogative; It belongs
unto him to impose significations of a higher nature upon the creature then
ordinarily it has.

3. That the anger of God which way soever venting it self, makes a storm and
a terrible tempest. God was about to power out his wrath by Nebuchadnezzar and
his Army; and this proved such a tempest, as ruined Jerusalem: this verified
Psalm. 11.6. Upon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, and an
horrible tempest, the portion of their cup. When Gods wrath once breaks out, it
will be terrible to all it falls upon.

What therefore will wicked men do when God shall come out like a whirlewinde,
when God shall come out as a great cloud, thunder, lighten in the world, rain
fire and brimstone and an horrible tempest? When God shall do this, what will
become of them? Wicked men in Ezekiel. 13.10, 11. are compared to a wall that is
daubed up with untempered mortar; When God shall come with a tempest and shake
that wall, can it stand? No; it is said it shall fall, a stormy wind shall
rend it. The Jews daubed with untempered mortar, and when the storm came,
they fell; many Christians daube up themselves with the untempered mortar of
their own righteousness, of vain hopes, of doing this and that. But when this
whirlewinde blows, they will down. Mat. 7.27. They are houses built upon the
sand, and when the winds blow, the floods beat, and the rain falls, they will
fall also, and fall from the hopes of heaven to the bottom of hell. Therefore
look to your foundation, look that you be not built upon the sand, but upon a
rock, and that you daube not with untempered mortar, for there is a tempest
already begun.

4. That God can bring adverse power from any quarter, he can raise wind and
clouds from the North, from remote places, those we little think of; he can
make use of a lusty, bitter, and merciless Nation, and that suddenly, to
awaken a secure people, to correct his own servants, and to plague his
enemies. It Is likely they had such thoughts at Jerusalem as these; Surely
Babylon is a great way off, Nebuchadnezzar has his hands full, none of the
Kings of the earth will or dare come near Jerusalem: Lam. 4.12. We are in no
such danger as these timorous Prophets speak of; Why should we trouble our
selves with needless fears? we will on in our wonted ways: and are not such as
these our thoughts? do not we think that foraine enemies are so employed and
taken up at home, that they have no leisure to come and trouble us? But God can
from the North bring a tempest, God can from foraine Nations bring in those
that can power out their wrath upon us, and make as grievous a storm as ever
fell upon Jerusalem. We do not believe, and they did not believe. But what if
God do not bring it from abroad, cannot he raise up a storm from within? Is
there not already a wind out of the North, a whirlewinde and a cloud raised?
and how soon do any of us know but there may be blackness, darkness, and
the day of the Lord round about us, we may be suddenly environed with winds and
dreadful storms, such as our hearts never thought of, and our eyes never saw?
Let us not be secure, a bloody tempest is amongst us already. The drunkard
maybe secure when he is at Sea asleep upon the top of the Mast, (though it may
cost him his life for doing so) but a sober man will look about him when he
sees the Ship shaken, and hears the winds blow, and perceives the waves
rise; and if it be possible, save his own life, and the Ship too. If you be
sober men, look about you. Is not the storm begun? Do not the winds blow?
Are not the clouds dark? Is not the day of the Lord upon us? If it be possible
save your own lives, and the Ship that you are in, that now begins to shake,
to sink. The heathen Mariners had so much religion, that when there was a
storm every one cried to his God; and so much charity, as not to suffer Jonah
to lie asleep, but go to him and say, Awake thou sleeper, what meanest thou?
arise, call upon thy God, that if it may be, he may save both thee and us. Be
not you behind the heathen Mariners, show so much religion and charity in
you, as every one to go and call now upon his God. Cry to your God now, that
he would still the winds; That he would rebuke the waves; That he would still
this storm. Cry to God now with all your strength, and wrestle with him night
and day, that he may show some mercy to his Beloved, and not give her up to be
a spoil to the hands of enemies. Awaken your Jonahs that are asleep in your
houses. Call upon husband, wife, friends, Minister, all, and every one to put
to their hearts and hands, to secure this Ship that is almost now split and
falling in pieces. Now take your Censers, for wrath is gone out from the Lord,
put fire and incense in them, that if it be possible, Mat. 8.24.
you may stop the wrath. When the Disciples were at Sea, and a storm arose,
Christ being with them asleep in the Ship, they awake him, saying, Lord save
us, we perish. So do you, Christ seems to be asleep, awake him with your
prayers, and say, Lord save us, we are called by thy name, we are Christians,
save us, else we perish. Christ you see presently arose, rebuked the winds,
and the Sea, and there was a great calm. Be not secure now of all times, but
think with your selves what you would do if all the Nations of the world were
come against England, if all the Counties in England were in an uproare, if
this City were besieged and fire thrown into it to burn the houses. Think
what you would do then, do it now, fit and prepare your selves for the
stroke of God in the storm and tempest, that how ever it go with your
bodies, estates, liberties, or lives, yet it may go well with your immortal
souls.

5. That God disposes of winds and clouds for what services he pleases. A
whirlewinde is made Elijahs chariot to heaven, 2 King. 2.11. The Lord has his
way in the winds, Nah. 1.3. He answered Job out of the whirlewinde, Chap.
40.6. By a wind he conveys the holy Ghost to the Apostles, Act. 2.2. So for
the clouds, God sets his bow in them to witness the security of the world
from drowning, Genesis 9. He created a cloud upon the Assembly, Isa. 4.5. He went
before the Israelites in a pillar of a Cloud, Exodus 13. And the glory of the
Lord appeared in the Cloud, Exodus 16.10. The Temple was filled with a cloud, 2 Chronicles. 5.13. A cloud received Christ and carried him to heaven, Act. 1.9. When
we behold the clouds, and hear the winds, we should be carried higher in our
thoughts, then to look at them philosophically in a natural way, we should
mind them Theologically, as instruments of choice services of God, as
instruments of his power, wisdom, and glory.

VERSE. 4. And I looked, and behold a whirlwinde came out of the North, a great
Cloud, and a fire enfolding it self, and a brightness was about it, and out
of the midst thereof as the color of amber, out of the midst of the fire.


A fire enfolding it self, etc.
A Fire enfolding it self: or, as the Hebrew word is, (...) Ignis se involvens,
Mont.
a fire that does put forth it self, and receive it self into it self; like
unto a wave of the Sea that rises high, and falls into it self again: or as
in an House on fire, the fire breaks forth strongly, and the flame returns into
it self presently. The Septuag. render it bright shining fire, which comes out of
a cloud, viz. lightning; Ignis fulguraens.
and how ever some think it not to be meant of the lightning, because lightning
goes straight forth, and never returns, according to that, Mat. 24.27. The
lightning comes out of the E^st, and shines even unto the West, and so does
not infold it self; yet we have Scripture to confute this conceit: Exodus 9.24.
there was fire mingled with the hail, (...)
the same word in the original, fire that does infold it self: And they that
curiously observe the lightning, may find that it does oftentimes return into
it self, and pass (as it were) as a ball in the air, or as wound up into a
Globe. But this reaches not the meaning yet in the Text, A fire enfolding it
self: Zanchius thinks it rather a fiery globe which removed in the cloud, and
like Cabbage leaves grow up into themselves, and enfolding, make a Globe; so
the flames of this fire turned into themselves, and became a globe; and it is
probable to be this, because it is said, there was a brightness round about it,
the fiery globe within begat that circular brightness, which lightning being
transparent could not do; and the rather it is thought to be this then
lightning, because the color is said to be as the color of amber, whereas if
it had been lightning, that is transient, and the color hardly observable;
therefore it should seem to be some fixed thing; I conceive it to be vapors in
the clouds, kindling and burning into themselves, the flame turning inward, and
making a globe; Ignis se accendens, Shindl.
and thus I find it expounded, A fire kindling it self: and so it is most
natural to the cloud to have vapors in it, which fire and kindle themselves,
and burn into the form of a globe. Now what is meant by this fire enfolding it
self, or this fiery globe, is very doubtful; they that come nearest to the
truth, take it to be the wrath of Nebuchadnezzar, or rather the wrath of God in
using Nebuchadnezzar to burn the City and Temple; but with submission to the
judgment of the learned and godly, I take the fire to be meant of sin, the
sins of Prince and people, Priests and Prophets did kindle and involve them in
the fire their own sins took hold of and consumed them. Prove. 5.28. His own
iniquities shall take the wicked himself, and he shall be holden with the cords
of his own sin: A man's sins will turn upon him, take hold of him and bind him;
and so here Jerusalems sins kindle upon her self, take hold of her and burn
her: sin we find in Scripture comes up to the nature of fire. Prove. 16.27. In
the lips of the ungodly there is a burning fire; and it is likened to fire,
because of the destructive nature; whatsoever fire takes hold of, it consumes;
and so does sin: Job 5.2. Wrath kills the foolish man, and envy slays the
silly one: and Prove. 1.32. The turning away of the simple shall slay them. So
then Jerusalems sins, the sins of Kings and Nobles, the sins of Prophet, Priest
and people, are here to be understood by this fire enfolding it self, which
drew the wrath of God into Jerusalem, and so kindled, fired, and consumed them
all.

From hence note, that the cause of Kingdoms, Cities, Prince and peoples ruin
is in themselves, their own sins are the fire enfolding: Hos. 13.9. O
Jerusalem, thou have destroyed thy self, thou art the cause of thine own spoil
and captivity, thou have set up the Calves, worshipped them, and they bleat so
against thee, that they have undone thee. Isreal's sin was Isreal's destruction;
and so Jerusalems, it was not the whirlewind, nor the cloud; not Nebuchadnezzar
or his army, that could have made one breach upon Jerusalems, or led one soul
into captivity, if there had not been sin amongst them, it was their own sin
which kindled divine wrath, and brought in their destruction, otherwise they
had been safe enough; Jerusalem might have stood to this, been as great and
glorious as ever. The principles of our mine are in our selves: Iron breeds the
rust, garments the moths which devour them. The ill humors in a man's body, fire
and consume the house by a burning fever; children breed the worms which bring
them to their graves; and States the sins which bring them to their ends; where
sin is bred and countenanced, it proves consumptio totius, families, cities,
kingdoms go down where sin goes up. Let not kingdoms therefore blame God or
others, but let them and all say, The root of the evil is in our selves, we
should never be laid wast, if we were true to God, faithful and close to the
rule; if we did not sin, there would be no fire to consume us and ours.

A brightness was about it.
There being a Globe of fire within, it sent forth beams which produced an
answerable brightness; which brightness (the cloud being thick and dark of it
self) was a window to let in the Prophets eye to see what was in the cloud.

By this brightness is shadowed out unto us, the terrible Majesty and glory of
divine presence, putting it self forth in the punishment of sinners: As fire
begets a splendour round about where it is; so do the judgments of God set out
to the world his glory, justice, holiness. Psalm. 9.16. The glory of his
judgment in punishing ill doers, is a solid, constant, spreading glory, as
that brightness was not flashie in the cloud, occasioned by the lightning, but
fixed certain, and on every side.

The note hence is, that execution of justice upon delinquents makes God and
Magistrates glorious; there was a bright splendour in the cloud, Exodus 15.6.
upon the destruction of Pharaoh and his army in the red Sea, it is said, Thy
right hand, O God, is become glorious in power, thy right hand, O God, has
dashed in pieces the enemy, and in the greatness of thine excellency thou have
overthrown them that rose up against thee. This act of justice was a glorious
and powerful work; so when God destroyed the Bethshemites, 1 Samuel 6.20. Who is
able to stand before this holy God, say they? The holiness of Gods justice and
power shine so clearly in the world, that they dazzle men's eyes and hearts, and
makes them tremble before God: when Phinehas executed justice, how honorable
was he in the hearts of the godly? what a great and glorious reward did he get
by it? Never was Solomon more honorable then when he executed justice between
the two Harlots, and called for the sword to decide the controversy; our
Magistrates are clothed with scarlet, and they may think that makes them
honorable, but their robes never bring true honor to them if justice be not
done: one act of justice executed upon delinquents makes them more honorable
then all the scarlet robes in the world. How glorious and dreadful was the
Parliament, Strafford.
when that great man fell in Israel! And if justice were executed upon
delinquents, and they had their due, we should be glorious in power, dreadful
to nations, terrible to our enemies, they would say, Who is able to stand
before the God of this Parliament? before the God of this kingdom?

Out of the midst thereof as of the color of amber.
That is, out of the midst of the fire, not out of the midst of the wind,
(...)
or out of the midst of the cloud. The Hebrew word for Amber, is a word that
is found no where else in all the Scripture but in this Prophet, and but twice
more, viz. at the 27th. verse of this Chapter, and at the second verse of the
8th. Chapter. Rabbi Iarchi confesses he knows not what the meaning of this
word is; another Rabbi says it was the name of an Angel, who instructed
Ezekiel. The Septuagint, Jerome, and diverse others translate it Electrum,
amber; and because here is mention of the color of Amber, we must inquire what
Amber this was. There be diverse kinds of Amber; one sort of Amber is called
Succinum, Succinum quarundas arborum s^ cus.
which is the juice of certain trees, the gum of Pine trees, which being
hardened by the air, is yellow and bright; that is white and duskish is
bastard Amber.

A second sort of Amber is a liquid substance which flows from the Sea rock,
and about the Sea shoares, and being hardened by the air, winds and water
floats up and down upon the Sea, especially about Florida, and other Indian
shoars, and it is of a honyish and waxie color.

The third kind of Amber is metallicall, made of metalls, and those more
precious then gold, as Jerome, inferior to it, as Zanchius says. This Amber
is compounded of gold and shining silver, is very precious, and of great use.
But besides this, there is yet another metallicall Amber, called Aurick^lcum,
the choicest and purest Brass, and this is thought to be t^^ Chasmal or Amber
here mentioned, according to that, Rev. 1.15. His feet were like to fine
brass, as if it had burned in a fiery furnace. Brass does most needy resemble
fire. The color of Amber here is a fiery color, and surely this is near the
truth; but yet it comes not up fully to the nature of the word here: for I do
not find amongst those that search into the nature of words, that this word
Chasmal is interpreted Amber, as the learned observe, Prunam ardentissimam, or,
sum ignitam.
it signifies a coal that is fired most intensively; a coal that has the
utmost heat it is capable of, so hot, that presently it burns any thing it
touches: such coals are more red and lively then others, and it comes nearest
to the nature of the word to render it, (...) quasi (...) fest^nant^r excidens
consumens. Color insignis, Calv.
as the color of a burning coal. Hence Junius and Tremelius render the word,
Color vividissimus, the most lively color; for nothing has a more lively
color then hot coals, or fine Brass burning in the fire: either of which, you
may take, but I rather cleave to that of burning coals, which being in the
midst of the fire, might so sparkle and shine, as to dazzle the eyes: and
whether Chasmal in this place, were not more fitly rendered, as the color of
burning brass, or of a burning coal, then as the color of Amber, I leave to
consideration.

Now what is meant by this Amber or coal, there is great dispute; some
understand by it Christ, because he is more precious then Amber, more lively
then any burning coal whatsoever. But we must lay this sense aside, because
there is a Vision of Christ in the latter end of the Chapter. The soundest
Expositors by Chasmal, lead us to some inferior to Christ, viz. the Angels,
who are called Seraphims, Animalia ignea, as Kimchi has it; of Saraph, to
burn, and Seraphims are fiery burning creatures, Isa. 6.2. About it stood the
Seraphims, that is, the fiery burning Angels; answerable to the Chasmal or
burning coals here. So in Judges 13.20. an Angel went up to heaven in a flame
of fire, that element was most suitable to Seraphicall and Angelical nature. 2
King. 6.17. There were horses and chariots of fire round about Elisha, and
Angels were in those chariots. They are likened to fire, because of their
ardent and burning zeal to do the will of God, Psalm. 103.20.

For the word [Colour] the color of amber, in the Hebrew it is, the eye of
amber, the organ is put for the object: so you have it used, Numb. 11.7. The
color of it was as the color of Bdelium; the Hebrew is, the eye of it was as
the eye of Bdelium.

Now having given you the meaning of Chasmal, viz. that he saw Angels of fiery
color, like to hot burning coals, so intense and zealous that they were ready
to do and execute whatsoever God would have done;

Note hence;

1. That heavenly things are so transcendent, and we so weak, that we can
comprehend or receive very little of them. They must be presented in things
beneath their excellency, to make us capable of a little of them. Per
corporales ostensiones incorporearum percipimus notitiam. Prad.
God must manifest his mind here by winds, clouds, by brightness of a cloud,
by a fire enfolding, by burning coals, that so we may take up a little of the
mind of God. Joh. 3.12. says Christ to Nicodemus, If I have spoken to thee of
earthly things, and thou do not understand them, how will thou understand if
I speak unto thee of heavenly things? Nicodemus a Doctor in Israel, did not
apprehend the doctrine of regeneration, when expressed in his own Dialect: had
Christ spoken of the great things of the kingdom of heaven in their own
nature, how could he or any of us have understood? Here we see darkly and as
in a glass. God is pleased to go in the way of man with us, to condescend to
our capacities, and to present heavenly things in Hieroglyphics, winds,
clouds, fire and coals, that so we may have a little apprehension of the
nature of those things.

2. That heavenly Spirits are most pure and lively. So much the word Chasmal
leads us unto; it notes coals that have no darkness, no smoke in them, that
are altogether fiery, and so lively as that they cannot be more lively. Such is
God, he is light, and no darkness, he is more lively then all the world
beside. He is Actus purissimus, all his actions exceed our apprehensions. Such
are Angels, they are pure and lively creatures, Heb. 1.7. Angels are Spirits
for their purity, and flames of fire for their activitie and zeal. Rev. 15.6.
Sunt luminaria clarissima, specula pura, quantum possibile est summa luci
simillima. Dionysius.
the seven Angels are clothed in pure and white linen, and their breast girded
with golden girdles: pure linen they have and golden girdles, no spot in the
linen, no dross in the gold; to set out their purity: and girt they are, to
show their readiness and zeal to do the will of God: they are as burning
lively coals, that if God do but speak the word, they run, they fly. But of
this more hereafter.

VER. 5. Also out of the midst thereof came the likeness of four living
creatures; and this was their appearance, they had the likeness of a man.


NOw we come to that part of the Vision concerns the living creatures, from
thi^ fifth ver. to the 15. where Gods glory and government of the world are set
out from superior causes, viz. Celestial things.

These four Creatures are commended to us: 1. From their general nature, they
are living creatures. 2. From their number, they are four. 3. From their
form, they had the likeness of a man. 4. From their several parts: as 1.
Their faces, and the number of them, ver. 6.8.10. 2. Their wings, the number,
situation, and use of them, ver. 6.8.9.11. 3. Their feet set out by the figure
and color of them, ver. 7. 4. Their hands set out by the figure and situation
of them, ver. 8. 5. From their motion, which was forthright, ver. 9.12. And
this is illustrated from the quality of it; it was swift, ver. 14. They ran;
it was as speedy as lightning; and from the cause of it, which was the Spirit,
ver. 13. whither the Spirit was to go. 6. From their color, which was like
burning coals and lamps, ver. 13.



What these living creatures are, is the great dispute among Expositors: Some
make them to be the four Covenants of God; 1. That with Adam. 2. That with
Noah. 3. That with Moses. 4. That with the Apostles. Some make them to be all
the creatures. Some the four cardinal Virtues, Justice, Wisdom, Fortitude,
Temperance. Some the four faculties in the soul: The Rational, Irascible,
Concupiscible, and Conscience. Some the four chief Passions; Joy, Grief,
Hope, and Fear. Some the four Monarchies: Assyrian, Persian, Grecian, and
Roman. Some the twelve Tribes of Israel, in their Stations, East, West, North,
South, when in the Wilderness. Some the four Elements, of which man's body
does consist. Some the four Evangelists, Matthew, Mark, Luke, John: and this
being the opinion of Jerome and Gregory the Great, prevailed much, but now is
deserted. Others understand by these four creatures, those be complete and
more perfect in the Church. Others expound them to be Christ, but Christ is
brought in, in the latter end of the Chapter, sitting upon the throne: These
creatures are some distinct ones from him, and inferior to him. By them then
we are to understand the Angels, which have a great part under God in the
government of the world. The word Chaia, living creatures, does not only
signify a creature that is corporeal, living, and sensible, but it notes out
to us any living being, or substance, whether corporeal or spiritual, and so
Tully calls Intelligentias animales, living intelligences, in Quast. Acad. l. 4.

The best Interpreters go this way, and understand by the living creatures,
Exercitus invisibiles, Principalities and powers, and we need not fetch light
from men, where the Scripture gives interpretation it self. Ezekiel. 10. There
you have frequent mention of Cherubims, which were these living creatures, for
ver. 8. it is said, There appeared the form of a man's hand under their wings.
They had the same faces, one excepted, and as many, ver. 14. and Ezekiel says,
ver. 15. This is the living creature that I saw by the river of Chebar. And
more plain yet in the 20th verse, This is the living creatures that I saw
under the God of Israel by the river Chebar, and I knew that they were the
Cherubims. Although he called it before the living creature, in the singular
number, yet here he changes the number and says, they were the Cherubims. We
may trust Ezekiels judgment, he was guided by the Spirit, and his Cherubims
do hold forth the same parties to us, that Isaiahs Seraphims did to him.

The word Cherubim notes generally any figure of man or beast, say the Hebrews,
but specially of the figure of a young man or a child, with wings stretched
out: Exodus 25.
Such were the two Cherubims before the Arc. The Chaldeans call a little
child, Rabi or Rabia; Whence some derive the word Cherubim, quasi Cherabia, as
a little child; others fetch it from Caph, which notes likeness, and Rob or
Rab, which words signify, as in general quality and quantity, so multitude
and magnitude, so that Cherubims etymologiz'd are tanquam multi and magni, as
it were many and great.

The word Cherub, notes not only Angels, but Angels as they appeared and were
figured with any external form of man or beast, and such figures were
Hieroglyphicall, They are (...), incorporeall, without flesh and bones, Luke
24.39. They are pure as God is actus purissimus.
as herein this vision; The Prophet saw not these Cherubims, or Angels, or
living creatures, but the likeness of them; for the nature of Spirits is
invisible, no soul, no Angel, neither God himself can be seen; how then is
their likeness presented to the Prophet? it is no bodily likeness, but a
likeness in life, quality, and motion. But the Text says, They had the
likeness of a man, that is, not in his nature and essence, but in some
qualities, they had the face, hands, thighs and legs of a man, all which set
out some choice qualities in the Angels ^ they had also something of the beast
and bird, and if they were in nature like the living creatures, Angels were
strange Monsters, and not Spirits in compound.

By their likeness unto man is laid before us the rationalitie, knowledge, and
understanding of Angels; they are not ignorant creatures, but ipse
intelligentie, the most understanding creatures in heaven or earth. 2 Samuel
14.20. The widow of Tekoah told David, he was wise according to the wisdom of
an Angel of God, to know all things that are in the earth; that is, he was very
wise, as the Angels are, to search out, understand, and discover things; A
multitudine scientiae: Cherubim quasi Cherabbim.
Therefore Jerome thinks they are called Cherubims from their much knowledge,
Cherubims, as it were, Rabbis, Doctors, Teachers of others; and this office
some Angels have had. Dan. 8.16. Gabriel, Make this man to understand the
vision: and Chap. 10.14. I am come to make thee understand what shall befall
thy people in the latter days; They have prophetical knowledge in them, and a
treasury of things that are past and done long since. Rev. 4.6.8. There is
mention of four beasts, or living creatures, (the same with these in Ezekiel.)
full of eyes before and behind, because they see and know what is past and
what is before them; their natural knowledge is great, being such excellent
Spirits; but besides that they have much revealed to them concerning God,
Christ, the Church, and things contingent. Hence is it said, 1 Pet. 1.12. Which
things (namely of Christ and the Gospel) the Angels desire to look into.
(...). Exodus 25.
The word notes bowing down, to pry heedfully into a thing, John 20.5. The
Cherubims were made looking down toward the Mercy-Seat, and here the Angels
look into the things of Christ, in whom are hid the treasures of Wisdom; and
so they grow in this knowledge daily, as also in experimental knowledge,
arising from things done daily in the world and in the Church. Angels love to
be at the Congregation, to meet the Saints, and learn of and amongst them; they
understand partly by their essences, and partly by species communicated to
their understandings as to ours. Angels are good Philosophers, they know the
Principles, Causes, Effects, Life, Motions, Death of natural things. Rev. 7.1,
2. and 16.5. They are great Statists, and know the affairs of Kingdoms: Dan.
10.13. says Gabriel, I remained with the Kings of Persia, he became a
Courtier, and acquainted himself with the affairs of Persia.

Four living creatures.
These were four Angels in particular; some conceive Michael, Gabriel, Raphael,
and Vriel, which were chief over the rest the whole Host of Angels. But that is
not the sense, neither that God only uses four Angels in his service: for many
thousands are employed, Luke 2.13. There was a multitude of the heavenly Host,
and 2 King. 6.17. there was an army with the Prophet; but it relates to the
object, viz. The world, which is distinguished into four parts, East, West,
North and South, the work of these Angels laid in all those parts, and none of
them exempt from the presence, observation and operation of the Angels.

Obs. 1. That God imployes not ignorant silly ones in his service, but those
are intelligent, Angels that are wise and very knowing; such should the Angels
of the Churches be; (...)
The Priests lips should keep knowledge, Mal. 2.7. And as God is termed, 1 Samuel
2.3. a God of knowledges; so should he be a man of knowledges: the Pharisees
were blind guides, and what a multitude of blind Priests were there till within
these few years in the Christian world? and too many there are to this day
that have their right eye darkened, Zach. 11. last. But the man of God should
have new and old in his treasury, and be thoroughly furnished unuo every and
word and work.

2. That the Angels are in all quarters of the world, taking notice of men's
words, works and ways they go, I had almost said of their very thoughts, and
that they do, Si signo externo prodantur, Lesl.
if discovered by some sign; Angels can be present at all times, know what
devils or other men can know of us; any voice, any act they are privy to; yea,
by outward expressions they may gather what is within, they being spirits, can
insinuate far into our hearts and natures, though not immediately know our
thoughts. Therefore we should carry our selves soberly, righteously and holily
in this world in regard of them: 1 Cor. 11.10. the woman is to have power on
her head because of the Angels, she is to be covered, and to carry her self
modestly, reverendly, because of the Angels. Psalm. 138.1. Before the gods will
I sing to thee: the vulgar has, in conspectu Angelorum, before the Angels,
their presence should awe men and women, and keep them from all dishonesty,
evil words, acts, gestures, secret grudging, all discontents and distempers;
for as they are rejoiced to discern a good frame of spirit in you, Grata est
Angelis pia significatio, Aug.
to see you keep that order God has set in the Church and State, to walk as
Christians to the honor of God; so they are grieved to see the contrary, Magna
cura vigilanti studio ad^unt nobis omnibus horis and locis succurrentes and
providentes omnibus necessitat bus nostris gemitus nostros and suspiria
referentes ad Deum. Amb^lant nobiscum, in omnibus viis nostris, considerantes
quam pie quam honest in med o pravae nationis conversemur, adjuvant
laborantes, protegunt quiescentes, hortantur pugnantes, coronant vincentes;
grandi^ eis cura de nobis, August. Soliloq. c. 27.
and you must answer for your sins against these great officers in the great
family of heaven and earth: a thing that is little thought on, but if it be a
sin to despise and grieve a believer, a brother that is inferior to an angel,
is it not much more a sin to dishonor their presence, and grieve their
persons? Smoke drives away Bees, and an ill savor Doves, so do ill passages
drive away the Spirit and Angels of God, Eccl. 5.6. The Angel that is of Gods
council, a witness of our ways, will not take it well, the Angel may smite
thee for neglect of duties, ill performances of them.

3. That men should be ashamed to be ignorant, seeing angels are likened unto
them for knowledge and understanding. Many men, yea, such as are called
Christians are brutish in their knowledge, their souls serve only for salt to
keep their bodies from putrefaction, Ephesians. 2.12. without God in the world; that
is, without the fear, authority and soveraignity of God falling upon their
hearts, and without the knowledge of God in their heads; and God may say of
many Christians, My people is foolish, they have not known me, they are foolish
children, they have none understanding, they are wise to do evil, but to do
good they have no knowledge; Jer. 4.22. The Apostle bids us in understanding to
be men; shall we be babes only, let us now be Angels in understanding; David
was wise as an Angel, and the Saints shall judge the Angels, 1 Cor. 6. The
evil Angels, they are very subtle, they have their depths, methods, wiles,
and how shall we do it, if we be ignorant; they come to the Assemblies to get
advantage to accuse us, let us get knowledge to condemn them.

4. That God does interest Angels and use their service in the government of
the world; not only men, Magistrates and Ministers, but Angels also. Carcer Dei
and Angelorum.
The Jews made Jerusalem the prison of God and Angels, they thought that
neither God nor his Angels did appear, or rule any where else. To take off
this conceit, God appears to Ezekiel in Babylon after this manner, to convince
him, that he and his Angels do govern there, and in all quarters of the world,
as well as at Sion; that God rules in the world is granted, but that Angels
should help to sway the Scepter is not so credible. A little therefore to clear
it, 2 Cor. 4.4. In whom the God of this world has blinded their minds; some
understand it of the true God that created the world, but the best interpreters
give us in Satan here, and make him the god of the world, Exemplo imperio and
suggestione.
and that by example, command and suggestion, and Christ does thrice call Satan
the prince of the world, Joh. 12.31.14.30.16.11. and Ephesians. 2.2. according to the
Prince of the power of the air, the spirit that now works. Vnaquaeque res v
sibil^s habet Angelicam potestatem sibi praepositam, Aug in l. 83. qu. 79. q.
In hoc mundo visibil nih^l n si per creaturam nv^sibilem d sponi potest. Thom.
1. part qu. 110.
The devil has great power in the air to raise winds, to cause storms,
thunder, lightning, which is the power of the air, and the same power has he
in the spirits of the children of disobedience, and by that spirit whereof he
is Lord, he can move them any way, as the winds and clouds, and carry them
against Christ and his truths. Now hence I infer, that if Satan and ill Angels
be as gods, princes in this world, have power in the air and hearts of wicked
men, then must it needs follow, that good Angels are as Gods, and princes, and
have as much power in the world and hearts of good men as they, otherwise
devils should gain by their fall more then ever they had by their standing, and
it is not credible that wicked damned spirits should have more honorable titles
and larger power then the holy and glorious Angels.

What be those services the good Angels are employed in?

Answ. 1. To inform us of Gods will, and God of our ways.

They acquaint us with Gods mind, Genesis 18.19.
Angels told Abraham and Lot what God would do to Sodom: an Angel tells
Elijah, 2 King. 1.3.
what to say to the Messengers of the King of Samariu^ an Angel tells the
Apostles, Act. 1.11.
that Christ shall return in that manner they had seen him go up to heaven.
Christ tells John, Rev. 22.16. that he had sent his Angels to testify those
things in the Churches: the Angel tells Daniel that he came forth to give him
skill and understanding, Chap. 9.22. Mat. 1.20.2.13. An Angel informs Joseph of
the mind of God, touching Mary and Christ. So to inform God what is done here
among men, the Angels went up the ladder as well as came down, Zach. 1.11. The
Angel sent out by the Lord, certified the Angel Christ, that stood among the
Myrtle trees, Per M^nistros more potentisst^m regis omnia faci^, Bonav.
that they had traveled up and down the world, and behold, say they, all the
earth sits still, and is at rest; This God does for honor and not
necessity, he knows all things, but he will have them witnesses of his will.

2. In opposing the great enemies of Christ and his Church, whereupon they
intermedle with Kings and Kingdoms, and the great affairs thereof. Dan.
10.20. Know thou wherefore I come unto thee? now will I return to fight with
the King of Persia, and when I am gone forth, lo, the Prince of Grecia shall
come. This Angel Gabriel opposed the cruel Edicts of Cambyses, King of Persia,
who labored to keep the Jews in captivity longer, and to oppress them sorer
then others had done; but Gabriel kept them from execution, and brought his
kingdom to ruin by degrees; and therefore he says the Prince of Grecia shall
come, I will leave Persia, and go into Greece, and stir up Alexander to come
into Persia and spoil the King of his kingdom: when Princes are stirred up by
flatterers and profane wretches to oppress the godly, to hinder the work of
the Temple, then Angels do fight against them. Elesbaan King of the Ethiopians
being in arms against Dunaam a Tyrant, his army was much oppressed with famine
and the power of the Tyrant, whereupon he dyed to God for help, and presently
heard, Gabriel, Gabriel, Gabriel, thrice he heard that voice from heaven,
intimating, that Gabriel would help him; whereupon he joined battle with the
Tyrant, overcame, killed most, and took the Tyrant King of the Homerites,
Baron. anno. 523. Ammonius de gestis, Francorum, l. 3. c. 87.88. Vbi non est
contrarietas voluntatis, non est pugna.
and bound him in chains. At a great battle between Clotharius and
Theodoricus was seen an Angel with a drawn sword, and many were slain on both
sides. Some understand these Princes to be Spirits, if good, there is no
discord between them; good Angels are without sin, and so no opposition in
their wills to Gods, or one another; if of evil Angels, it is that we aim at,
the good Angels oppose and contend against the evil with all their strength,
Rev. 12.7. Michael and his Angels fought against the Dragon and his. There was
a great battle in heaven, the Devil and his angels were cast out, which is
for the great comfort of Sion; certainly devils and devilish men would
overrun all, if there were not Angels employed in the four quarters of the
world, to keep the Church and people of God: when Balaam and Balak would have
cursed Gods people, an Angel comes forth and fights against them, Numb. 22.22.
This is one great office of the Angels, to fight against Princes, Potentates,
and men of the earth, that seek to oppress the people of God, and labor to
hinder Temple work and the welfare of Sion.

3. To execute the judgments of God upon wicked men: the death of their
firstborn in Egypt (which was the chiefest of the plagues, and touched them
nearest) was done by a destroying Angel; who therefore is called Hammaschchit,
Exodus 12.23. the destroyer shall not come into their houses, but into the
Egyptians he did come; the singular number is put for the plural, a thing
usual in Scripture, and so the sense is, that Angels were the destroyers of
Egyptians: and the Psalmist in the 78. Psalm. 49. says, God did this work by
sending evil Angels among them; not that these Angels were wicked spirits, as
some have thought, but Angels or messengers of evil, of death unto them. The
Egyptian Sorcerers used the help of wicked Angels to oppose Moses and harden
the Egyptians, and God used the help of good Angels to punish evil doers; they
have been, and are employed in such service; the Angels that came to Lots
house, smote the Sodomites with blindness, great and small, which were at Lots
door, Genesis 19.11. They fetched fire from heaven, and destroyed the place, ver.
13. When seventy thousand died of the plague, 2 Samuel 24.17. in David's days, it
is made the work of an Angel, ver. 17. he saw the Angel that smote the people;
it was an Angel that slew 185000. Assyrians. Isa. 37.36.
Psalm. 35.5, 6. It Is their work to chase and persecute wicked men; often Angels
of God do suddenly destroy them. Act. 12.23. And immediately the Angel of the
Lord smote him; Lorinus thinks it was the Devil did it, but it was some good
Angel, that being zealous for God, did vindicate his glory, which was given to
a mortal sinful man. Angels cannot endure this dishonor; Josephus in his
19th. Book and 8. Chap. sets out this story fully, how he came in, in cloth of
silver, was saluted as a God, saw an Owl over his head, Ego ill^ v^stra
ap^llat une (...) vitam relinquere ju^eor satali necessitate coarguente vestru^
mudacum and quem ^^n^^talem salu^ast^s admo^tem (...).
felt a pain in his bowels, and said, I whom ye all call a God, am commanded
to leave my Godship, and by death to confute your lie of my immortality.
Neither belongs it to Angels only to punish the wicked, but to exercise
chastisement upon the godly; an Angel meets Moses in the Inn, and would have
slain him; Exodus 4.24. So the Greek and Chaldee read it; and that because he
neglected the circumcision of Moses; an Angel smote Zachary with dumbness,
because of his unbelief, Luke 1. So an Angel corrected David for his sin of
numbering his people.

4. To defend the godly, to save and deliver them from harms: this is a
constant office; they keep the Saints from evil men, spirits and things. Rev.
7.1, 2, 3. Four Angels stood on the four corners of the earth, and held the
four winds of the earth, that they should not blow on the Sea, or any tree: and
another Angel cries to the four, hurt not the earth, sea, trees, till we have
sealed the servants of our God in their foreheads. Psalm. 34.7. The Angel of the
Lord encampeth round about them that fear him, and delivers them; Angels are
like Armies round about the General, and keep from danger; when Jacob was to
meet with his brother Esau, (who came with a band of four hundred men against
him) the Angels of God met him, (they are forward to this service) Genesis 32.1,
2. And when he saw them, what, said he, This is Gods host, what need I fear my
brothers host? and he called the place Mahanaim, or Machanaim; It Is in the
duall number, and notes two Hosts, two Camps: if my brother have one band, I
have two, if he have men, I have Angels, if four hundred men, I have twice four
hundred Angels. When Elisha was in Dothan, the King of Syria sent a great Host
with horses and Chariots, and they came by night, compast the City about, and
now Elisha is a lost man, and Gehezi cries out, Alas Master, what shall we do?
Fear not, says he, 2 King. 6.14.15, 16, 17.
they that be with us, are more then they that be with them; and when the young
man's eyes were opened, he saw the mountains full of Horses and Chariots of
fire, and that round about Elisha; was there an army against Elisha? here is an
army for him: were they many? here are more: were there Chariots and Horses?
here be Chariots and Horses of fire. When Daniel was in the den of Lions, he
had no fire to scare them, no weapon or strength to kill them, but an Angel is
sent to shut their mouths; so that here is a wonder, a Lamb amongst Lions, and
not rent in pieces; where Angels are the Lambs keepers, there the Lions are
toothlesse and mouthlesse; the Angels have a special charge of the godly:
Psalm. 91.11. He shall give his Angels charge over thee, the Angels stand
charged with the custody of the godly, and when a guard is set about a person
of quality, who dares come near to hurt such a one? It Is said in the 7. verse,
A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand, but it
shall not come nigh thee; It Is nigh, when at a man's side, at his right hand;
but it shall not come nigh to hurt thee; and what is the reason? for, he shall
give his Angels charge, etc. They look well to their charge, they neither
slumber nor sleep, Rev. 21.12. Gods care of his Church now, is greater then it
was under the Law; for the wrath is double to what it was then, there are
twelve Angels at the gates of Jerusalem; whereas in Ezekiel 9.2. there were but
six. The Church being now enlarged, the enemies are enraged, and the guarding
Angels increased; no sooner were the Apostles imprisoned, but an Angel brings
them forth, Act. 5.8, 9. and what great things the Angel did for Peter, Act.
12. is known to all; Ver. 15.
his deliverance was so great, that they could not believe he was come forth
and knocked at the door, but that it was his Angel; whence the opinion of
Tutelar Angels has received great strength: some affirm from hence, Dan. 6.2^.
that every man has his particular Angel to keep him, which seems rather a
Platonicall conceit, then a Scripture truth, for Isidorus Clarius turns this
place, his Messenger, Nuncius ejus.
and so the word is used in Scripture. Judge. 2.1. The Angel of the Lord came
up, or Messenger, as it is in the Margent; and Mal. 3.1. I will send my
Messenger, the Hebrew is my Angel: and surely this party that knocked at the
door was Peter's Messenger, not his Angel; and if this be well rendered Angel,
why is not that so rendered, Luke 7.24. (...).
The Angels of John being departed; it is the Messenger, and so it were better
here, his Messenger, then his Angel: for shall we suppose the faithful so
ignorant, as to think an Angel could not come in without knocking, and having
doors opened? Besides, the apparition of an Angel would have affrighted them
greatly. Not to stick at this, although we find not warrant in the Word for
assignment of a particular Angel to every man, yet we acknowledge many Angels
appointed to that work. Matthew. 18.10. Their Angels (not their Angel) behold the
face of my Father.

5. To guide and lead the godly in good and safe ways. Genesis 24.7. He shall
send his angels before thee, and thou shall take a wife unto my son from
thence; So ver. 40. he will send his Angel with thee and prosper thy way: the
business of marriage is so weighty and honorable, that Angels presence and
assistance is in it; Angels are present and president over that work: Psalm.
91.11, 12. They are charged to keep thee in all thy ways, to bear thee up in
their arms, that is, their strength shall be employed to uphold and lead thee
in a good way: God begets children to himself by the Word and Spirit, and puts
them forth to Angels to nurse, to guide, and lead; it is a metaphor taken from
Nurses, that bear their children upon their arms, and lift them over
thresholds, Exodus 32.34. Behold, Angeli reges, and Domini eorum sunt quos
regunt.
says God to Moses, my Angel shall go before thee, he was to go to Canaan, and
an Angel was to lead him that way, Angels are well acquainted with the ways to
heaven, if you will go that way, you are sure to meet with Angels.

6. To comfort; next Christ and the Spirit, Angels are the best comforters,
because they stand nearest God always, before his face, and they are sent to
comfort Gods servants, when in straits, under pressures. Mary was a poor Maid,
of mean condition, and to her comes an Angel, Luke 1.30. Fear not Mary, thou
have found favor with God, So Cornelius, thy prayers and alms are come up, a
memorial before God. Acts 10.4.
Chap. 27.24. When the Ship was tossed, waves, winds and darkness conspired
their ruin, then says Paul, an Angel stood by me, and said, Fear not Paul,
God has given thee thy life and the lives of all with thee, wherefore be of
good cheer, he had drunk a cup of Angelical consolation, and knew well to
comfort them with the same consolation. When Daniel fasted and prayed, and was
much afflicted for his people, Dan. 9. Chap. 10.11.12. O Daniel, a man greatly
beloved, understand the words that I speak unto thee; for unto thee am I now
sent, fear not Daniel. Mary rises early, and meets with Angels that comforted
her, John 20. Luke 22.43. An Angel appeared to Christ and strengthened him, the
servant comforted the master.

7. To look unto the souls of men, that they fall not into the hands of Devils
at their death; for if the Devil durst contend with Michael for the body of
Moses, much more for the souls of men. Luke 16.22. Lazarus soul was carried by
the Angels into Abraham's bosom, men carry the carcass to the ground, but
Angels carry the soul to glory, they guard it through the clouds into the
presence of the blessed God: before he had none but Dogs to pity him, now he
has Angels to attend him. The Devil is mighty busy while we live, he goes
about like a roaring Lion, but at death then he is most busy, and presumes
there is a tree cut down for his fire.

8. They are Gods reapers at the end of the world. Mat. 24.31. He shall send
his Angels, and they shall gather together his elect from the four winds, from
one end of the world to another; they must blow that terrible trumpet, awaken
the dead, and cite them to judgment; they must gather the ashes, bones, limbs,
bodies of Saints together. Matthew. 13.41, 42. The Son of man shall send his
Angels, and they shall, etc. Basil in his Hom. of 40. Martyrs, tells of one that
seeing them thrust in a Winters night into a cold lake, he saw Angels descend,
and putting Crowns upon all their heads, but one.

9. To declare Kingdoms, Cities, People cursed. Judge. 5.23. Curse ye Meroz
bitterly, said the Angel of the Lord, A Lapid. in locum.
because they came not out to help, etc. Some think this Angel was Michael, who
was General in this war, but that is the opinion of men, not the warrant of
Scripture.

10. The Angels have work and power in the Church of God. Rev. 15.6. Seven
Angels came out of the Temple, and Chap. 14.15, 17. Another Angel came out of
the Temple; Angels being in the Temple is often spoken of, and notes some
power, that they have in the Assemblies under the Gospel. Zach. 3. Ribera.
The stone with seven eyes some make to be Christ with his Angels that are
employed for the government of the Church throughout the world; and surely
Michael and his Angels do contend daily in the Assemblies against the Dragon
and his; In the Assemblies, Devils are present and active, Satan stood at
Joshuahs right hand to resist him, to hinder all the Temple work; when we are
near God, devils are near us, intending mischief, but Angels are at hand, and
hinder their designs; they observe us and our carriages in the Congregation.
Eccl. 5.6. Make not vows, and then slight them, there is an Angel present; and
it will not be enough to say it was an error, God will be angry, and an Angel
may smite thee for it; this is spoken of us, when we are in the House of God,
there the Angels keep special watch.

Lib. 6. de bello Iudaico, Relinquamus has fedes. L. 7. c. 12. Migremus hinc.
And to major humana vox exced^re deos, Tacit.
Josephus says, that the voice of an Angel was heard out of the Temple,
saying; Let us leave these seats; they had a place in the Church as well as
others: and again, he says, the Angels were the keepers of the Jewish people,
and that a little before the Romans coming, was heard a voice out of the
Temple, Let us go hence: and a Heathen Writer says, that a voice greater then
man's was heard, That the gods were departing.

VERSE. 6. And every one had four faces, etc.


NOw we come to their several parts; and first of their faces, which are
mentioned here in the 8th. and 10th. verses, every one had four faces, and the
likeness of their faces were: 1. The face of a Man. 2. Of a Lion. 3. Of an
Ox. 4. Of an Eagle.


In some Pictures you may see several faces, so drawn they are, that which way
soever you look, a several face is presented: so here, before was the face of
a man, behind of an Eagle, on the right side of a Lion, and on the left side
of an Ox: here is not a face but is compared to the face of some principal
creature, man is the chief of all the rest; a Lion is the King of wild Beasts;
the Ox is the chief of tame ones, and the Eagle of Birds.

The face of a man types out unto us the understandings of Angels, and that
their administrations are with knowledge and equity; of this has already been
spoken.

This face is put, first, to show the excellency of reason, which must have the
introduction into, and managing of all actions, else they are neither humane
nor Angelical.

By this face also is noted their humanity and love to mankind; Angels are of
a loving nature, and most careful of men: therefore it is said, Heb. 1. last,
They are ministering Spirits sent out, etc.

The face of a Lion types out the strength of Angels; A Lion is a creature of
great strength, Prove. 30.30. The strongest amongst beasts, and turns not away
for any; he never flies or fears. Isa. 31.4. A^st. nunqua^ fugit aut metu^t.
If a multitude of Shepherds be called forth, he will not be afraid of them,
nor abase himself at their noise; and Judge. 14.18. What is stronger then a
Lion, said the Interpreter of Sampsons riddle? and we may say among all
creatures, what is stronger then an Angel? The Scripture calls the Devil the
strong one, Mat. 12.29. (...).
and so it calls the Angel, Rev. 10.1. I saw a mighty Angel; and they are very
mighty, an Angel can hinder the blowing of the wind, Rev. 7.1. stop the mouths
of Lions, Dan. 6.22. break iron chains, open prison doors and iron gates, Acts
12. an Angel can smite with blindness, Genesis 19.11. 2 King. 6.18. Both
Sodomites and Syrians were so smitten; Angels work upon the fancy, Matthew.
2.13.19, 20. suggest many things of great and good use to the mind; for if
Devils can take the word out of our minds, sow tares in the field, Luke 8.12.
Matthew. 13.24, 25. put devilish thoughts into the heart, Joh. 13.2. work
powerfully in the heart of the disobedient, Ephesians. 2.1. and trouble their
spirits, 1 Samuel 16.15. I see not but good Angels may do as much, being more
potent then they. Rev. 12. Michael and his Angels overcame the Dragon and his;
and Psalm. 103.20. they excel in strength, they are called exercitus coelestis;
Luke 2.13. one can do more then a great Army; one slew 185000. in a night, 2
King. 19.35. They are Bellatores fortissimi, and have appeared like Warriors;
David saw an Angel with a sword in his hand stretched over Jerusalem, 1 Chronicles.
21.16. Elisha saw them with horses and Chariots of fire, 2 King. 6.17. Angels
are Gods Militia. Psalm. 68.17. the Chariots of God are 20000. even thousands of
Angels, they stand always before God, and can do what ever God wills and
commands.

This consideration of the strength of Angels, should add to our comforts and
Gods praises; if a man be in danger, and have a strong convoy appointed by the
King, he is secure, much comforted, and thankful too, that Majesty has
appointed it: God has given us the mighty Angels that are stronger then Lions
to be our guard to convoy us through the Wilderness of this world; let it
multiply our comforts and Gods praises.

The next face is that of an Ox; and it notes out the obsequiousness,
faithfulness, patience and usefulness of angels in their ministrations; for
an Ox accustomed to the yoke is very tractable, not stubborn, kicking and
flinging, as untamed Heifers are, Hos. 10.11. Ephraim is as a Heifer that is
taught, and loves to tread out the corn: a Heifer taught, and delighting in
his work, is willing to it: such are Angels, Psalm. 103.20. They hearken to the
voice of his Word, they look upon God as the great General, and if he give out
the word, they give out their strength, and go about the work willingly, they
are very obsequious to his commands; if he says, Go smite Herod for his pride,
Balaam for his covetousness, David for his vainglory, Senacherib for his
blasphemy, and Sodom for its uncleanness, presently they go.

Praestat fidum maisterium.
2. Faithfulness; an Ox does faithful service, Horses do often deceive in their
service, but an Ox seldom in plowing or carrying of burdens: So Angels are
faithful in their ministrations, they fail not in the least particular; the
Angels would not let John worship him; the Angels would not suffer Lot to
linger in Sodom.

3. Patience; an Ox is a patient creature, what burden soever is laid upon
him, or what work soever heels employed in, the Ox is not impatient; So the
Angels they are patient in their ministration, though they meet with much
opposition. The Prince of Persia withstood Gabriel 21. days, Dan. 10.13. In
the midst of oppositions and great services, they are without all impatience,
though their work never end, Rev. 4.8. yet they never complain.

4. Usefulness; Prove. 14.4. much increase is by the strength of the Ox, no
creature more useful to the support of a family then the Ox; for of old, all
the plowing was by Oxen. Elijah finds Elisha plowing with twelve yoke of Oxen,
1 King. 19.19. And Job had five hundred yoke of Oxen, and it is said, they were
plowing, Job 1.3.14. no mention of Horses: and in some places of this Kingdom
they make greatest use of Oxen: by their strength, Kingdoms and Families are
maintained. Therefore Moses, Deuteronomy. 3.17. compares Joseph to the Bullock or Ox,
because he sustained his fathers family and Egypt with corn, Exodus 22.1. If an
Ox or Sheep were stolen, and so killed, or sold, the thief was to restore five
for the Ox, four for the Sheep; and the reason was, because of the service and
usefulness of those creatures; they served for sacrifice to God, to plow the
earth, to feed and cloth the family, in other things they were to restore only
double. David makes it one part of the happiness of a Commonwealth, that the
Oxen be strong to labor, Psalm. 144.14. Oxen are needful and useful
creatures; and Angels herein resemble Oxen, they are ministering spirits, sent
out for the service of Gods family, they live not to themselves, but to the
public: In the Revelations you may read what great services the Angels are
employed in; they sound the trumpets, and power out the vials of Gods wrath,
they preserve the Saints from the violence of Devils and devilish men.

This instructs man to be like Angels in these qualities; if God command, call
for any duty, to be obsequious, yielding, and to say with Samuel, Here I am,
Speak Lord, thy servant is willing to hear, ready to obey; and when we are in
the service, let us be faithful, do it conscionably, let us be patient,
although we meet with delays, oppositions, reproaches, and loss; let us be
serviceable and profitable to others; Angels have no benefit by their
ministrations, God has the glory, and man the good.

The last face is that of an Eagle, and in it, as in a glass, we may see the
perspicaciousnesse, swiftness, and vivacity of the Angels; for these three are
Eagles observable:

1. They are quick-sighted, Job 39.29. Her eyes behold afar off, speaking of
the Eagle, from the top of the rocks, out of the clouds, they are said to
behold fishes swimming in the Seas, so strong is their sight, that they soar
aloft, and can a long time behold the Sun with open and steadfast eyes: In
aquila Cicurata Merlin in Jobum c. 39
Scaliger has seen it in a tamed Eagle. A man of acute parts that can see
quick and far into matters, we say he is Eagle-eyed: the Angels are not wanting
in this particular; they are quick-sighted, 2 Samuel 14.20. and Rev. 4.6. The
four beasts they are mentioned, being the same here in Ezekiel are said to be
full of eyes before and behind, and in the 8th. verse full of eyes within; they
have much natural knowledge, much revealed knowledge set o^t by their ^yes
within, and much experimental knowledge coming in by their observation and
deep insight into things, noted by their eyes before and behind; they soar
aloft, stand before God, behold the face of God always, Matthew. 18.10.

2. Eagles are swift in their flight, 2 Samuel 1.23. Swifter then Eagles, and Job
9.26. The Eagle makes have to the prey. Pindar calls the the Eagle the queen
of Birds; Lam. 4.19.
for her swiftness, no Foul flies more swiftly then the Eagle: hence, when
things were to be done suddenly, the Scripture mentions the Eagle, Hos. 8.1.
He shall come as an Eagle against the House of the Lord, that is,
Nebuchadnezzar shall come suddenly. Angels are no dull creatures, in a night
the destroying Angel slew all the firstborn in Egypt; in a night 185000. in
the camp of Senacherib: and Dan. 9.21. Gabriel came flying swiftly to Daniel,
and suddenly there was with the Angel a multitude of the heavenly hosts, Luke
2.13.

3. Eagles are fresh and lively always, age and sickness works not upon them
as upon other Birds; Nec annis debilitatur, nec morbis obnoxia est.
the Eagle in her age is youthful; how then does she die? Pliny tells us, that
it is neither age or sickness that kills the Eagle, but hunger, the upper bill
grows so over her under, that she cannot open her mouth to take in
sustenance, and so dies. Psalm. 103.5. Their youth is renewed like the Eagles;
Crebra mutatione pennarum, Hieron. Imberbes ut juvenes.
the Eagle is renewed by the often change of her feathers. The Cherubims before
the Mercy-Seat (which represented the Angels) were without beards, to show
their vigor, vavacity and eternity. Angels never grow old, they are always
lusty and lively, their service does not wear them out; it is man's sin that
withers and consumes him more then his work. Adam should never have looked old,
never have decayed, but retained an immortal vivacity, if he had not sinned;
they are lively in their service, not dull.

Observe. 1. That Angels are fit for public and great service; they have four
faces, a Man's, a Lions, an Oxes, an Eagles, which tells us they have all is
requisite to great undertakings; they have wisdom to consult, to contrive and
manage the affairs of the world prudentially; they have the strength of a Lion
to execute; they have the willingness and faithfulness of the Ox to rejoice
the heart of the commander; patience to undergo the difficulties of the work,
and usefulness for the public; they are quick-sighted to discern and prevent
the designs of enemies, and speedy to dispatch much in a little time, and that
with cheerfulness; this is meant by their four faces, which notes their
perfection and fitness for service in all parts of the world; in regard of
which, and the Prophet to whom this vision was made, they are said to have one
face before, another behind, and on each side one; and that God does use their
service in all creatures rational and irrational; they have the shapes of
men, birds and beasts.

2 That suitable persons ought to be employed in public and great services;
God imployes Angels in the government of the world, who are wise, trusty,
strong, and speedy: and you know what men God calls for, in the State and
Church, Exodus 18.21. Provide thou out of all the people able men, such as fear
God, men of truth, hating covetousness, and place such over them to be Rulers
of thousands, hundreds, fifties, tens; he must search amongst all the people
for such, far and near, and if in one Tribe he cannot find them, he must in
another. The time has been, that seniority, money, favor, friendship, has
carried the great places in this City, but you have smarted for it, in stead of
good Angels you have had il spirits, now I hope you will not look who has most
money in his hutch, best friends to back him, but most wisdom in his head, and
zeal in his heart, and God on his side; now I trust you will learn of God, and
employ such as have the faces of men, Lions, Oxen and Eagles, men full of
wisdom, courage, trust, serviceablenesse to the public, and of great
dispatch, such should be in the City, in the Army. So for the Church, you know
what men God points you to, 1 Timothy 3. and 1 Pet. 5. Gods Bishops must not Lord
it over Gods heritage, and exercise dominion over it, Gods Officers must not be
Prelaticall; it is the fleece, and not the flock that such men look after,
unless it be to scatter, to wound their conscience and suck their blood; some
of that Sect, in stead of preaching to save souls, have only plotted to ruin
Kingdoms.

3. That Angels being noble and glorious creatures, disdain not to do service
to them that are far beneath themselves. Man at first, when in his glory, was
under the Angels, but now since he sinned, he is fallen lower, as low as hell;
man is now a miserable, mortal creature, he has a vile body, a defiled
conscience, and a polluted soul, yet Angels that are styled Gods, Psalm. 8.5. so
is the original, that are Cherubims of glory; Heb. 9.5. that are holy; Mat.
25.31. Elect; 1 Timothy 5.21. that are of the privy Council of Heaven, and the
lifeguard of God himself, Matthew. 18.10. even these blessed creatures are not
ashamed to serve us, though we have the sent of the earth and hell about us,
though we do often grieve and offend them with our sinful carriages, and the
great God their Lord and Master, yet they despise us not, but cheerfully
minister unto us. Would any great Prince attend a mean man full of sores and
vermin? if so, it argues wonderful humility; it is more that Angels do, in
waiting upon us: it is monstrous pride then in men that have parts, place,
honor, greatness, grace, what ever it be, not to stoop to those that are
inferior: thou have not more worth in thee any way then an Angel has: and
Angels condescend to serve us, therefore let not us mind high things, but
condescend to men of low estate, and not be wise in our own conceit, Romans 12.16.

4. That God affects speed in his service; Angels are swift as Eagles, and
dispatch great things in a little time, they know a dull lazy motion is not
the motion heaven approves, Zach. 2.4. says one Angel to another, Run, speak
to the young man; going is not sufficient, where running can be had: Festina
lent, is not a Motto for heaven gates; In the worst work that ever was in the
world, Christ calls for speed, What thou do do quickly, Joh. 13.27. when
Judas was about his treason. Speed and life in businesses is commendable,
acceptable: Matthew. 5.25. Agree with thine adversary quickly; Zach. 8.21.
Darius would have his decree done speedily, Ezra 6.12. and God would have his
Decrees and Will fulfilled, done with speed: It Is Gods will now, that you
should help him against the mighty. When the Temple was to be built, the people
came so fast, brought in so much, that they were bid to stay, and that work of
theirs was pleasing to God and man. We have a Babel to pull down as well as a
Temple to build, can you be employed better? Luke 16. you are Stewards, and may
quickly be called to account, Be speedy in what you do.

In the the 11th verse you have one thing more touching their faces, and that
is, their faces were stretched upwards, thus were their faces; it is in your
books, as if it had reference only to the former verse and not to that follows
in the eleventh; but Montanus and others that render the Hebrew exactly, read
it thus: But their faces and their wings were stretched upwards; it is true,
they have the faces of men and beasts, but they are stretched upward, they
looked up to him that sat upon the Throne, which was Christ: the Cherubims
faces, Exodus 25.20, 21. were toward the Mercy-seat, and that was above upon
the Ark; so that there and here, the Cherubims, these Angels look upward.

Obser. 1. That all creatures depend upon Christ, these Angels have the faces
of Men, Lions, Oxen, Eagles, and look up to him; if there were nothing in it
but this, that Angels in their own nature looking up, it might convince us,
that all inferior creatures do depend upon him, as well as those noble ones;
but when they come in with the faces of other creatures looking up, it is clear
evidence, that all depend upon Christ: Col. 1.16, 17. By him were all things
created that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible,
whether Thrones or Dominions, Principalities or Powers, all things were created
by him, and for him, and by him all things do consist: he holds all in his
hand, heaven and earth, men and Angels, they all consist and subsist in him.
Heb. 1.3. He upholds all things by the word of his power.

2. That in all our ministrations, we are to have our instructions and
directions from Christ: Angels look up to him, if he speak they hear, they
move and act, if not, they stir not. Moses and Aaron did nothing in the State
or Church, without direction from God: Princes must look into the Law of God
continually, Deuteronomy. 1.7. that they may do things warrantably: the Centurions
soldiers and servants did come, go, and do at his appointment, not their own;
and Angels run not of their own heads, they will hear a word of command, have
a commission from Christ, before they go. It Is not enough that we be knowing,
full of courage, quick to dispatch much, a Commission, a Warrant from God we
must have, else all our doing is nothing; nay, let us do the will of God
without knowing, we are warranted by God to do it; it is rather sin then
service, Pro. 3.5, 6. Lean not to thine own understanding, let it be never so
great, acute, clear, it is not beyond Angels, they look up to God, and so must
thou, In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths. Christ
is the great Counselor, and we must not in one or two, or some great
exigence of business consult with him, but in all our ways, what ever we
attempt for our selves, families, State, Church, we must consult with him sits
upon the Throne, and he will direct our paths; Most miscarry in their ways, or
make little progress, because they consult not at all, or very little with
Christ; whereas if men did consult with Christ, and do all upon his warrant,
upon a divine ground, they should never miscarry in their ways, but proceed
farther in the paths of godliness in a few weeks, then they did before in may
years: when David had consulted with God, he could say, God was at his right
hand, so that he should not be moved, Psa. 16.

3. That the pleasure of Christ is worthy our waiting for; Angels look up and
attend what he will say, and make known unto them; these holy, glorious and
mighty creatures think not much to wait upon Christ, and exercise their
patience till he please to reveal his mind. Christ is a great King, the only
Counselor, and his counsel of infinite worth, and it is not State, but
equity, that all creatures wait upon him, Angels do it, and shall we grudge at
it? Psalm. 123.1, 2. Unto thee lift I up mine eyes, O thou that dwell in the
heavens. Behold, as the eyes of servants look to the hand of their Master, and
as the eyes of a maiden to the hands of her Mistress, so our eyes wait upon
the Lord our God: He interprets the meaning of looking up, which is waiting
upon God, for manifestation of himself: Psalm. 5.3. David would direct his
Prayer to God, and look up, not down to the world, down to corruption, but up
to God, what he would speak: Psalm. 85.8. I will hear what God the Lord will
speak: Mic. 7.7. Let the resolution of the Prophet be thine, I will look unto
the Lord, I will wait for the God of my salvation, my God will hear me.

4. That Christ is an object of admiration and adoration: The looking upwards
is Signum admirationis and typus reverentiae; the Cherubims looked toward the
Mercy-seate, admiring and adoring him was figured by it; and we lift up our
faces toward heaven, when we admire and adore God: you have the phrase in Job
22.26. Thou shall have thy delight in the Almighty, and lift up thy face unto
God; That is, admire and adore that God thou delightest in. Where is most
delight, there is most admiration and adoration. Christ is the delight of
Angels, when he was incarnate, they bowed down to pry into that mystery; and
now he is glorified, they look up to admire him; there is matter of admiration
in Christ, all in him is not yet drawn out and discovered, 2 These. 1.10.
Christ shall come to be admired in all them that believe. As it is in a Country
when it is discovered, still new and new things are met with; so in Christ, Rev.
22.1, 2. There the vision of Christ is compared to River-water, and that is
always new, fresh, and to a tree of life with twelve manner of fruits every
month. The vision and fruition of God is new, savoury and pleasant unto them
every month, day and hour; and this is to Angels as well as to any other. 2.
To adore him, Heb. 1.2. Let all the Angels of God adore him. They do look up,
acknowledge him God, and tender to him that glory the Father has; even
adoration; Christ that was despised, rejected of men, the stone disallowed of
the Master builders, that we hid our faces from, and esteemed not, he is the
object of Angels adoration.

5. That the service of Jesus Christ is honorable service; Angels do stretch
up their faces and wait for it; and it is the glory of the Angels, that they
are ministering Spirits, sent out by Christ, Heb. 1.14. is a comparison between
the glory of Christ and Angels, and their glory is that they are his servants;
we think the service of great persons an honor to us; Who is greater then
Christ? all power in heaven and earth is given unto him, Mat. 28. And he is
more honorable then all Princes, he is King of Kings, and must be honored as
the Father, Joh. 5. Servire Deo, est regnare. Philo.
The Apostles counted it their great honor to be servants of Christ; Paul,
James, Jude, Peter, begin their Epistles with it, they set it in the front, as
the most honorable title; this service is liberty, not bondage, Servitus
Christianorum regia est l bertas, August: in Psalm. 99.
his Spirit is a Spirit of liberty, his Law is a law of liberty; and Romans
8.2. The Law of the Spirit of life in Christ, has made me free from the law of
sin and death; he is not the servant of Christ, is the slave of Satan; this
service is spiritual, profitable, honorable; David had rather be a
doore-keeper in Christ's house, then dwell in the Tents and Courts of
wickedness, Psalm. 84. Luther said, He had rather fall with Christ, then stand
with Caesar. Joh. 12.26. If any man will serve me, him will my Father honor;
if we serve Christ, Angels are our fellow servants, Rev. 22.9.

6. That holy creatures have heavenly minds: Angels look up, and that in their
employments, their eyes are fixed above upon the Lord Christ, and it is certain
where there is holiness, it carries upward; water will rise as high as the
spring; (...), from looking upwards; or (...), which is the same, Os homini
sublime dedit.
and so does the water of the Spirit; Paul's conversation was in heaven, Phil.
3.20. Rev. 10.2. An Angel has sea and earth under his feet; and Rev. 12.1. The
Church has the Moon under her feet, all ceremonial worship, all mutables in
the world; and says, Cant. 7.10. I am my beloveds, and his desire is toward
me. The Church finding Christ's affection toward her, cannot but look out, and
look up. Most men look downwards, and are neither like Angels nor men, more
like swine, worms, moules. Many are loath to come near God, lest he should
say, Put off thy shoes from thy feet, put off thy earthlinesse; if we would
have God look down from heaven, we must look up to heaven; David said, When I
awake I am still with thee, Psalm. 139.18. He was with God when he lay down,
and with him when he awaked and rose.

The next thing is their wings, mentioned in the sixth verse; every one had
four wings; and verse 8. under their wings on their four sides; and in the
8th, they four had their faces and their wings; and in the 9th, their wings
were joined one to another: 11th, their wings were stretched upward, two of
every one was joined one to another, and two covered their bodies.

Angels are set forth to us in Scripture with wings: here with four; In Isa.
6. and Rev. 4. with six wings each of them: and they are said to be winged for
the agilitie of their natures, and swift motion in executing their office.
Omnis spiritus ales est.
Tertullian says, Every Spirit is winged, they fly in a moment into any part
of the world, to execute the commands of God. Gabriel came flying to Daniel,
Chap. 9.21. and that swiftly. Astronomers observe, that from the center of the
earth (which is 3000. to the surface) up to the Sun is above four millions
of miles, to the Firmament, where the fixed stars are, Clavius in Sphaeram.
Lessius de omnipot: Dei.
above fourscore millions of miles, and from thence to the place of the
blessed, where Saints and Angels are, more millions then from the earth to the
Firmament. So that according to their account, it must be above 160. millions
from heaven to earth; and this space the Angel came flying in a little time: we
think a Bullet out of a Musket flies swiftly, and it does, for it hits the
bird or mark ere the report is heard, and will fly 180. miles in an hour,
according to its motion. The Sun moves swifter 1160000 miles in one hour;
the fixed stars about the aequinoctiall Moon 42. millions of miles each
hour; and yet the motion of an Angel is swifter, being a Spirit, and passing
through the air without opposition; no creature in heaven or earth moves
faster then an Angel.

Their wings are four; but the Seraphims in Isa. 6. and the four Beasts in
Rev. 4. are set out by six wings each of them. A question hereupon arises; Why
the Visions being correspondent, the Angels here are described only with four
wings: Ans. That pair of wings is wanting here did cover the face of Isaiah
his Seraphims, and John's four beasts; for they standing before the throne and
face of God, were not able to behold such Majesty, brightness, and glory,
with open face, although they were most pure creatures. We cannot look upon the
Sun in its strength and glory, but we cover our eyes with our hand; so they
their faces with their wings; now here was something in stead of these wings,
and did the office of those wings, and that was the Firmament: Ver. 22. The
likeness of the firmament upon the heads of the living creatures: and ver. 26.
Above the firmament was the throne. This firmament interposed between the
luster of divine glory, and their eyes, as the wings did in the Prophets and
Apostles vision, and therefore here was no need of that pair of wings; they
were not before the throne, but sub expanso, and to do works beneath in the
world.

Observe. That the glory and Majesty of God is such as no eye can fully behold;
there wings, here the firmament is interposed between God and Angels. When God
came down upon Mount Sinai, and manifested his majesty and glory, what said
the people? Speak thou to us, and not the Lord, lest we die. They could not
endure the shine of Moses face, much less the luster and majesty of the
Lords; something must interveene, else man dies for it.

Touching the wings of these our Angels, three things are laid down; 1. The
conjunction of their wings; 2. The Extention of them; 3. The use.

The Conjunction is in the 9th verse; Their wings were joined one to another;
and ver. 11. Two wings of every one were joined one to another. The extremity
of their wings when stretched out and ready to fly, did touch one another; so
as they seemed to have but one wing.

Observe. 1. That there is mutual love and much agreement between the Angels:
the Connection of their wings, notes the Connection of their hearts; and the
Hebrew is; (...)
As Sisters that love one another entirely, and work together most sweetly, so
are the Angels, they love and labor together most sweetly; Foemina ad sororem
suam.
there be no divisions or distractions among them, what business soever is
appointed, they all agree in; we men can hardly agree in any one business;
Aliud stans, aliud sed^ns de republica sentis, Declam: in Ciceron.
so many men, so many minds: Salust told Tullie, that his mind was very
changeable concerning the Commonwealth; and it is true of most of us, what we
allow now in matters of the State or Church, we condemn anon, and so are at
agreement neither with others, nor with our selves; but Angelical concord
parallels, yea exceeds our discord; Angels are all love, peace, and unity.

Alae aequaliter extentae, elevatae, conjunctae.
2. That there is a blessed harmony in the works of God done by Angels, their
wings go evenly, jointly, not one before another, above another divided any
way, but there is unity and uniformitie in all their actions and operations.
Could we behold the actions and works of Angels, we should see such glory and
beauty, as never was seen in the works of men. If we look upon a building that
is uniforme, and every part proportionable, we are much taken with it: A
garden that is drawn out exactly, and every thing in it set in order: An Army
that keeps rank and posture, and proceeds in all things according to rule,
how beautiful and comely are they? All the actions of Angels are such, one
runs not before another, one is not divided from another, one disallowes not
what another does, but their harmony and correspondency is such, that if a man
could see the same, he would be ravished with the works of Angels. Jam. 3.16.
Where envying and strife is, there is confusion; but among Angels there is no
envy, no strife, so no confusion.

Mutuas sibi invicem tradunt operas ad exequenda Dei decreta.
3. That we should join our helps for furtherance of the works of God: Angels
join their wings, and afford help to each other to do the will of God; Devils
and wicked men join together against God and his ways; Psalm. 2.2. The Kings
of the earth set themselves, and the Rulers take counsel together against the
Lord, and against his Anointed, etc. And good men should join together, their
heads, their purses and abilities whatsoever, to further Gods work. If Angels
appear and put forth their wings to do the will of their God, let us appear
and put forth our hands to do the work of our God.

The second thing about their wings is, they were stretched upwards, not let
down, drawn up, resting upon their bodies, but extended as ready for service
as might be, ver. 11.

This notes unto us the readiness of Angels to do the will of Christ; their
faces look up, attend his commands, and their wings are stretched out to fly
about them as soon as they are made known; as a Hawke that is upon the wing,
watches till the foul rise, and then falls upon her, and flies after her
immediately. Angels are upon the wing before the command goes out, and when
it is out, God shall not need to use motives or arguments to put them on. The
manifestation of his will, is the strongest motive unto them; and it should be
so with us; We pray that Gods will may be done on earth as it is done in heaven;
the mere manifestation of Gods will therefore should prevail with us as with
Angels; but let God manifest his will, bring forth his strong arguments to move
us, yet we have no wings, or if wings, not stretched forth, or if stretched
forth, we rather flag then fly with them.

The third thing is the covering of the wings, ver. 11. Femora.
two covered their bodies, their thighs, feet; that is in Isa. 6.1. their
uncomely parts: which are in Scripture Phrase called the feet. One wing did
cover the forepart of their body, another their hinder parts.

Obs. 1. In this covering of their bodies, God propounds them a pattern of
chastity and modesty unto us; Those parts are hid, which might uncovered,
argue disreverence of God, or concupiscence in them, or be offensive unto men:
God loves chaste spirits, and chaste behaviors; the Angels are very chaste,
and would not have any undecent thing objected to divine view, whose authority
and majesty they adore; Nihil impurum in conspectum Dei veniat.
No impure thing must come into the sight of God, therefore God ordered, Exodus
20.26. That there must be no steps to his Altar, lest the nakedness of the
Priests were discovered in their going up, and so offense given to God and man;
and further he appointed linen breeches to cover the Priests nakedness, Exodus
28.42.

2. It notes out to us that Angelical nature is a thing hidden, and too high
for us, while we are in our houses of clay, their natures are beyond the reach
of man's brain, and that we are so far from the knowledge of Gods face,
nature, and ability to behold them, that we cannot know and behold the lowest
parts, the very feet of Angels, they are veiled up from us: As too transcendent
for our capacities, we know not the natures of any creatures here below, not of
a flower, a fly; we describe things, but do not, cannot define them; I would
see the proudest of you all define the nature of a straw, as one preached in
Cambridge to all the Scholars: Vitreum vas lam^imus, pultem non attingimus.
if we know not the nature of these visibles, of bodies, then much less of
Angels, and if not of Angels, least of all of God.

3. That men are apt to Idolize choice Instruments employed in Gods service,
and therefore the Angels are covered with wings to prevent it. Such is the
beauty, wisdom, strength, use and celeritie of Angels in Gods service, that
man is apt to deifie them. John falls down to worship before the feet of an
Angel, Rev. 22.8. And when Paul and Barnabas had healed a creeple, the
Lycaonians said, The Gods are come down to us in the likeness of men, and
they would have sacrificed to them, Act. 14. And should the Angels appear to
us in their natures without being covered up, we should take them to be Gods;
but they will not have that honor, they will hide their beauty and excellency,
and desire the glory only be given to God.

The next thing we are to come unto, is their feet in the seventh verse.

VER. 7. And their feet were straight feet, and the sole of their feet was
like the sole of a calves foot, and they sparkled like the color of burnished
brass.


STraight feete] They were feet of men, and by a Synecdoche, feet are put for
the legs and thighs; the Septuagint read it, Their thighs were right or
straight; and therefore could not be the thighs or feet of beast, which in the
hammes are with compass and not straight; they were neither bending inward nor
outward, but straight as pillars: Columnarum instar.
This types out to us:

1. That the ways of Angels are all straight and right; feet in Scripture are
put for ways; inward of the soul, outward of the whole man. Pro. 4.26. Ponder
the path of thy feet. Psalm. 119.105. Thy word is a lamp unto my feet; that is,
all my actions; and Eccles. 5.1. Keep thy foot when thou go to the house
of God; that is, thy thoughts, affections, will, reason, and all within: Take
the feet of Angels for their thoughts, desires, wills, reason, actions; they
are all right, there is no act of theirs void of reason, as the acts of brutes
are, none done by rash motion or sudden passion, as too many of men's are, they
go not without warrant, and when they go, they go in the way appointed of
God, never turn out, but are exact, keeping to his will.

2. They are firm, constant in their resolutions, and service for God: that is
noted by feet in Scripture; for feet are the basis and foundation of things.
Exodus 30.28. The Laver and his foot; that is, his basis whereon he rested;
men's feet or legs are the foundation whereon the body rests. In Eccles. 12.13.
Firmitas homini debebatur in pede, ad quem pertinebat onus totius corporis quod
per lincam rectam incumberet, De Subtle.
they are called the strong men: and Cant. 5.15. Christ's legs are said to be as
pillars of marble: and Scaliger says, that men's firmness is in their feet,
on which the burden of the whole body directly depends. Here then we have the
firmness and constancy of Angels to go on in Gods work, no burden can make
them buckle, no act, no force can put them out of their way, no weariness can
make them sit still; Angels will meet and stop Balaam, and give him commands;
the Angel will have Lot out of Sodom.

The sole of their feet was like the sole of a Calves foot. (...)

As it were the sole of a round foot, Quasi planta pedis rotundi: pedes
rotundos, like a globe. (...). Cumt alaribus, Horat. Ad omnen occasionem and
nutum Dei.
so the Hebrew signifies both round, and a Calf that is fat, and has round
feet, smooth, round, and movable to carry any way: the Septuagint has it
winged feet. Mercury the Poets god, was painted with shoes which had wings:
This sets out unto us, both the swiftness of Angels, of which before, and also
their usefulness to move any way to do service in any part of the world, like
a Bowl or Globe is equally disposed for motion into any of the four quarters
of the world; so are the Angels ready to move any way upon every occasion and
hint from heaven: man cannot do so, one man is fit for one service, not for
all; one is fit for counsel, another for war, a third for Sea, a fourth for
Land, etc.

They sparkled like the color of burnished brass.
Steel or Brass being polished or burnished, shines very beautiful, and sends
out eye-dazling beams, such as have much glory in them: and by this color of
their feet, we are led into these observations.

Obser. 1. That the Angels are unpolluted in all their ministrations: they
contract no filth, no soil to their feet; when they are in motion they are
pure spirits, act purely, and abide most pure, their feet are like polished,
not polluted, burnished, not blemished brass, and so hold forth to us an
example of purity in our ministrations; that we should be conversant in them,
so as to be unblemished, 1 Timothy 2.8. lifting up holy hands, etc. 2 Pet. 3.11.
What manner of persons ought ye to be in all manner of holy conversation? here
it is answered, like Angels.

2. That the works of God by Angels or men done rightly with a straight foot,
that is, done according to Gods will, have much glory and efficacy in them,
they shine like the polished brass, there is their glory; and sparkle, there
is their efficacy. When the Angel destroyed Senacharibs host, what glory and
efficacy was in that work? When the Angel came to Manoah, and went up from him
in a flame of fire, how glorious was this sight, how efficacious was the work
in the heart of Manoah? John preached the truth with a right foot, and without
delay, when called to it; and he was a burning and a shining light, Joh. 5.35.
Herod found him so: Mark 6.20. He feared John, knowing he was a just and holy
man, the glory of his justice and holiness shines into his head, and the power
of them affected his heart; he knew, he feared; actions done according to
Gods will, hold forth much of God in them; 1 Cor. 14.24. If an unbeliever come
in and hear them prophecy, that is, according to the mind of God, carry the
action as becomes the Church and the presence of God, he is convinced, and
almost converted, and says, God is in you of a truth; he sees so much glory,
feels so much power, that he can contain no longer, etc. Isa. 52.7. Their feet
are beautiful to your eyes, and their actions are efficacious in your hearts;
Gods will is the Standard and measure of all actions, and when they are done
according to it, they are very glorious and beautiful.

3. That they are cheerful in the ways and works of God: they go not dully
about their service, their feet do shine, they have more delight in doing one
act of Gods will, then we have in doing all the natural acts of our lives;
you shall find them in a sweet posture and frame always: Rev. 4.9. they give
glory, honor and thanks to God, and Rev. 5. they are brought in singing, and
singing a new song, which notes their cheerfulness, and intention of it: so
in Luke 2. ver. 13, 14. Angels are the Quiristers of heaven, they make heaven
heavenly.

The last part they are described by, is their hands.

VERSE. 8. They had the hands of a man under their wings.


SOme would make sixteen hands to each living creature or face, but that is not
likely; we find no number set down, and therefore will be content to leave
that undisputed, whether two, four, eight or sixteen; Hands they had, and hands
of a man; and that under their wings on their four sides.

The hand notes action: Eccles. 9.10. Whatsoever thy hand find to do, do it
with thy might: So Prove. 3.27. (...). Arist. 3. de anima.
The Philosopher calls it the Instrument of Instruments, and says, God has
given to man two special Organs, to the body the hand, to the soul reason; and
look what use reason is of to the soul, the hand is of the like use unto the
body; yea, soul, reason, body, are all beholden to the hand for the service
that it does, the great things in families, Cities, Kingdoms are done by the
hand. Scalig. faith, Scal. exercit. 256.
Nature has armed man with three things, Reason, Speech, Hands. Reason is the
hand of the understanding; Speech the hand of Reason, and Hand the Executresse
of Speech that does the commands; all things would be as dead, if the hand did
not quicken them by the spirit and motion of art.

Obser. 1. That Angels are fit for service; they have hands, and hands are not
made in vain; they are for work: where there are no hands, no power, strength,
or way to put forth that power, there is no fitness for service; but Angels
have power and ways to execute that power; they have hands, not for ornament,
but for action.

2. That Angels do their works rationally, they have the hands of a man; look
as men do manage the works of their hands judiciously and wisely, so do Angels;
there is nothing defective, superfluous, perverse, rash, indiscreet, or
culpable in their ministrations, they know all circumstances, and miss not in
any: how wisely did the Angel manage the business with Mary? Luke 1.28. he
salutes her, she fears; In the 30. verse he comforts her, and tells her, she
should conceive, and have such a son as never woman had; and when she doubted
of it, ver. 34. How shall this be, seeing I know not man? ver. 35. the Angel
tells her, The Holy Ghost, etc. And farther, see the wisdom of the Angel, he
tells her, ver. 36. that her Cousin Elizabeth had conceived a son in her old
age, and that was the sixth month with her, and how ever thou think it
impossible for thee that art young without man to conceive, and for her is old
with man to conceive, ver. 37. yet nothing is impossible with God.

3. That knowledge must issue into actions: Angels are full of eyes, and full
of hands too, their actions are answerable to their knowledge, Rev. 4.8. They
are full of eyes within, and they rest not day and night; if they have no
service in the world beneath, they will be praising God above; they know much,
and therefore act much. Knowledge without practice is little worth; Scire tuum
nihil est n si te scire hoc sciat alter, Pers.
if hid from others, it is as nothing, as not being, says the Poet: Unless
Learning, Knowledge be improved, it is of no account: the Egyptians painted a
tongue, and a hand under it, to show that Knowledge and Speech is efficacious
and good, Quid prodest (...); Nazian.
when that which is known and said is done. What good does the unpracticall
speech of Golden-tongued men? Let men be Chrysostomes, golden-headed and
golden-mouthed, if they be not golden-handed too, it is nothing. God would not
have us all eye, and rest in knowledge, Joh. 13.17. If ye know these things,
happy are ye if ye do them; and Rev. 22.14. Blessed are they that do his
commands, that they may have right to the tree of life; happiness is intailed
to doing, not knowing: and the Angels seem to find greater happiness in doing
Gods commands abroad in the world, then standing always in his presence, Psalm.
103.20. They hearken unto the voice of his word, if he bid them go they are
gone, and account it their greatest honor to be doing; they have hands, and
would not be idle: knowledge without action, is a man without arms; it is wine
shut up in the vessel, that does good to none, and will corrupt at last, and
man the vessel, such knowledge will be like the poison that lies long in the
body, and at last kills without remedy.

4. That Angels are great agents, and do much service; they have hands on their
four sides, at least they had four hands, and they were able to do much, and
great service; some make more; and no hands of theirs is idle: one Angel can do
more then thousands of men, witness that great slaughter in a night, and other
things formerly spoken of. Briareus, a great doer is said to have an hundred
hands.

5. That God does carry on his works here in the world by invisible virtue, by
hands under wings, by ways and means not seen: There is vis plastica in the
womb, which forms and perfects the birth, yet is not seen; and in the womb of
the world God has vires plasticae, which form and perfect his works, yet not
seen; much is done by the power of Angels, yet their power not seen. Mighty
things are done by Gods Spirit in the Ordinances in the Assembly, in our
hearts, and yet Gods Spirit is an invisible agent: the Minister, the Word would
not do it, unless some invisible virtue went along therewith, Zaeh. 4.2, 3.
though none were found to power oil into the Lamps, yet God had Olive trees
were not thought of, nor seen: Zachary saw not, the Candlestick, Bowl, Lamps,
or two Olive trees, till the Angel awakened him, and made him see, that God had
ways to communicate virtue unto the Church he knew not of, and that though the
Church were poor, low, not able to make a considerable Army to carry them to
Jerusalem, and plant them there, yet he had his Spirit to work it out for them;
and therefore says, Not by might, not by power, but by my Spirit, 2 These. 2.8.
The Lord shall consume Antichrist by the Spirit of his mouth: and so the two
witnesses, Fire goes out of their mouths and devours their adversaries, Rev.
11.5. in an invisible way, by a secret work: It was a hand under the wing that
made peace betwixt Scotland and us, that gathered this Parliament, that has,
and does keep it; it is invisible virtue that has made them unanimous and
magnanimous; invisible virtue that upholds this Kingdom, that restrains the
remainder of wrath, that daunts the adversary, that has shaken the Prelacy,
and brought forth the great things in our days; it is the hand under the wing
that has opened the hearts and purses of many to further the great service in
hand.

6. That we are to do Gods works without noise or notice of our selves; Angels
that are agents for God, have their hands under their wings, their actions are
seen, but not their hands. In Jud. 13. when Manoah Catechized the Angel, and
asked him, What is thy name? v. 17. the Angel would not tell him, but said, Why
ask thou thus after my name, seeing it is secret? ver. 18. And you shall not
find the names of above two Angels in Scripture, Gabriel and Michael. Angels
are jealous of Gods glory, and had rather conceal their hands and names, then
God should lose the least degree of his glory: for Manoah would therefore have
known his name, that he might have honored the Angel afterward; and we are
very apt to look at the instrument, and neglect the principal: it is wisdom to
muffle up our selves and to hold forth God as much as may be Mat. 5.16. Let
your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, etc. he does
not say, that they may see you, but see your good works, and glorify their
father, not you: As Fishers, they would have the bait seen, not themselves;
they would catch the fish with their bait, not scare them with their sight.
Mat. 6.1. Take heed you do not your alms before men to be seen of them; alms
must be given, but we and our hands must be hid. Paul exhorts the Philippians,
to hold forth the word of life, Phil. 2.16. not themselves, but the Word of God
which is the word of life.

7. That their operations and presence are together; they are not in heaven,
and so work on earth, or in one part of the world and work in another, but
their hands are under their wings, whither their wings do carry them, there
they act, and not elsewhere. The Angel came down to stir the water in the pool,
Joh. 5.4. and cure the Party that stepped in first; they have not that power to
work at any distance.

8. That Angelical virtue and nature is hid from us, it is too high for our
capacity; their hands, their operative virtue we cannot discover, or see into:
a little of the Angels is presented to us by these faces, wings, feet, hands,
etc. but the distinct knowledge of Angels as Angels is reserved til we are
like the Angels in heaven; therefore we must not intrude into those things
which we have not seen, vainly puffed up with our fleshly minds, but be content
to be ignorant of their natures and many of their actions and excellencies,
till we come to glory.

Now from their parts we come to their motions; and it is said;

Verse. 9 They turned not when they went, they went every one straight forward.

Verse. 12. And they went every one straight forward, whither the spirit was to
go they went, and they turned not when they went.

Verse. 14. And the living creatures ran, and returned as the appearance of a
flash of lightning.


They turned not when they went. Which way soever they moved, they turned
neither face, wings nor bodies, but went straight forward, there was no
digression, regression, wandering, no circulation, but their motion was
straight, they moved in linea recta, they move, and move not impertinently, but
directly. By this motion of Angels, is set out Gods government in the world;
they are his agents, our Prophet seems to cross himself in ver. 14. it is
said, they ran and returned, and ver. 17. they returned not when they went;
here in this 9th, they turned not when they went: this knot must be loosed, or
else our Prophet will suffer.

The Solution of this doubt is, that the Angels being in their work appointed
of God, went on without turning or looking back til they came to the issue and
end of it, til they came to the place appointed, and then they returned unto
God to give account of their service, and to receive new instructions. They
went not back after the work was begun, but after it was ended; what ever
difficulties interposed in the way, none of them could drive back, or divert
the Angels, till their work was done, and then they presently returned.

Obser. 1. That the works of God in ordering the things of the world are
straight: Angels are as Gods hands, and in them is the agency of his work, and
they go straight on, and there be no windings, no turnings in their operations;
the works of God seem crooked to us, but there is nothing crooked in them. A
Carpenter that builds a house has some pieces of timber long, some short, some
bowing, some straight, of all which he builds a goodly house, but some rude
ignorant fellow understands not the reason of that diversity, and when the work
is done there is nothing seen defective, but all is straight and perfect; so in
the works of providence and divine dispensations in the world, they seem
crooked, (and therefore some have called providence crooked and winding) but no
such thing is in them: Psalm. 18.30. His ways are perfect, Deuteronomy. 32.4. His work
is perfect; take the work of creation, providence, redemption, they be without
obliquity, deformity, or defect, but men are not so, and the reason is given,
for all his ways are judgment, that is, all his administrations, all his
doings are judicious, right and equal.

2. That Angels persist in and carry on their work; they are constant and
persevere, Constantia est in proposito, perseverantia in opere.

Charles the 5th his Motto was, Plus ultra.

Faelicitatis index ultimus dies, Solon.


they turn not back, they give not over, but proceed to the end; they are not
slothful, weary, unfaithful, but active, lively, holding on to the end; This
may be useful to our thoughts: Angels go on, and lively in their work, shall
we be lazy? they persevere, shall we draw back, or turn aside? Lots wife
looked back, and she was turned into a pillar of Salt, Genesis 19.26. she looked
to the things behind, which was unwarrantable, and God did severely punish her,
she had part of Sodomes judgments, which were brimstone, salt, and burning,
Deuteronomy. 29.23. And she was made a pillar of salt to season after-ages, with the
fear not only of backsliding, but also of back-looking. Josephus says, he
saw this pillar in his days, Antiq. l. 1. c. 12
which was near two thousand years after; but Borchardus that lived some 300.
years since, says, it was in his days. Adrichomius says, it is yet extant;
and the Targum has it, that it will endure to the day of judgment. Whether
this material pillar be extant or not, is doubtful; Christ has set up a
spiritual pillar, that will endure to the end, to make us faithful to the
end: Remember Lots wife, Luke 17.32. Look back and die, go on in the ways and
commands of God and live. It was the reproach of the Israelites, that they
would have gone back to Egypt, and they died for it in the wilderness. Matthew.
10. He that endures to the end shall be saved: and Luke 9.62. No man having
put his hand to the Plough, and looking back is fit for the kingdom of heaven.
A man plowing, if he look back, endangers the Oxen which plow, and must needs
make crooked furrows, and mar all: so one that has begun to plow in Gods
field, if he look back, he is unfit for heaven. Exodus 17.12. Moses hands were
steady till the going down of the Sun, and so must ours till the Sun set, till
our lives end: Gal. 4.9. How turn ye again to weak and beggarly Elements?
Gal. 5.7. Ye did run well: It Is dangerous when either of these come in against
a people; but the godly have a promise, Jer. 32.40. I will put my fear in
their hearts, that they shall not depart from me.

3. That they keep close to the work in hand, (...) They fetched no compass.
to what is enjoined, they divert neither one way nor other, as they give not
over, so they turn not aside upon any pretense whatsoever, but hasten to the
execution of what is commanded; how un-Angelicall are we that have such roving
spirits in all our employments? though we look not back, yet we look aside. God
complains, This people draw nigh with their lips, but their heart is far from
me; they are in my house, and in my work, but their hearts are in neither,
they look toward me, as if they were my people, but their hearts look another
way, as if they were worldlings, hypocrites; like Watermen, they row one way,
and look another. Ezekiel. 33.31. With their mouth they show much love, but their
heart goes after their covetousness; we are too guilty of this evil, our
hearts are seldom at home. What Is said of the Harlots feet, Pro. 7.11. They
abide not in her house; the same may be said of our hearts, they abide not in
the house: When you walk abroad and keep the path, the Spaniel that is with
you ranges over much ground, and seldom is in the path; so is it with our
hearts, we may be in the path of duties, but our hearts ranging over the world,
heaven and hell. Jam. 5.17. Elias prayed earnestly; in the Original, it is he
prayed in prayer, intimating, a man may be at prayer, in prayer, and yet be a
prayerlesse man, not pray, and that because the heart is not in it; So in
hearing, you may hear and not hear, etc. What Is the reason Christ knocks at
the door so often, and is not let in? the heart is dead asleep, or abroad.

4. Ad transitum facici suae aut tractum faciei suae objectum. So Piscat.
That Angels have the scope and mark in their eye which they aim at: They
went every one straight forward; the Hebrew is, to the way or passage of his
face, that path was before his face; that is, they went thither where their
eyes or faces were fixed; as they look not back nor aside, so they always
look upon the mark, each goes forward to that is before him; this keeps them
on to the work, and in the work, they have the mark in their eye. Pro. 4.25.
Let thine eyes look right on, and let thine eyelids look straight before
thee; look to the charge appointed, to that is right, to that is set before
thee of God, and this will quicken thy industry. Phil. 3.13, 14. Forgetting
those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are
before, I press toward the mark. Paul had not his eye upon what was done
bygone, or on what was upon either side of him, but upon that was before him,
the mark, (...).
heaven, eternal life was the mark in his eye, and he pressed after them, he
was as intent upon them, and as pursuant of them, as he was in the work of
persecuting the Saints, he reached after them as the one thing necessary,
Assequitur nulla qui sequitur multa; Is Angelicus qui nec multus nec varius est.
we set not the mark before us, in stead of heaven, Christ, eternal life; we
have the world, our pleasures, and a multitude of things in our eyes, and so we
are divided, and do nothing.

5. That Angels mind and pursue every one his own work, not others: They went
forward to the work, object, mark set before their faces; he that had his work
designed him in the East, minded not his work lay in the West; each acted his
own part, and fell not upon any thing concerned another, although their
employments lay the same way; what was before their faces, that they did and
nothing else: Devils compass the earth, and meddle with all men, and with all
matters; it is not so with the good Angels, they kept their station, and do
keep order, they intermedle not with ought concerns them not. The Apostle would
have Christians to be Angelical, (...).
1 These. 4.11. Study to do your own business, those things concern our
general and particular calling; if men will with their wit and curiosity run
out of their bounds, they are extravagant and busi-bodies. Some think because
they are Neighbors, they may meddle in all contentions; because Subjects, they
may interpose in all State-affaires; because Christians, deal with others
sins; but this is to break the hedge, to break out of our own callings into
others, and such though they seem great doers, do nothing. 2 These. 3.11.
There are some among you that walk disorderly, (...).
working not at all, they are busybodies: What busy and do nothing? Yes
because they do things impertinent unto them, unfruitful, unprofitable, out
of place. When Peter medl'd too far in John's matters; What shall this man do?
Christ takes him up sharply; What is that to thee? Joh. 21.22. And some think
this made Peter so sharp against that sin afterward, and to look upon it
as bad as theft and murder; 1 Pet. 4.15. Let none of you suffer as a
murderer, or as a thief, or as an evil doer, or as a busie-body in other
men's matters.

They ran, and returned.
Here is the quality of their motion, it was swift, they had wings to fly, and
feet to run: much has been spoken of the Angels swiftness; I shall here
therefore touch upon their return when their work is done, they make no stay,
they linger not at all, but return with all speed; when God sends them out or
calls them in, their motion is very speedy; it is set out here by a flash of
lightning, that is the soonest into the world and out again of any sensible
creature, in a moment it is in your houses and out again, in a moment it
shines from East to West, and is gone, it is very glorious and mavelous
active. Angels are Cherubims of glory, Heb. 9.5. and the most active of all
Gods works, and when their work is finished they retire immediately; as
lightening when it is come to its period, does reciprocate and fall back into
its self without delay; so do the Angels return to him sent them out, to
know his farther pleasure and to do him more service.

Obs. 1. That Angels in their services are glorious and terrible: They are like
the lightning, which shines, dazles, and does dreadful things. Judge. 13.20.
When Manoah and his wife saw the Angel go up to heaven in a flame of fire,
they fell down on their faces to the ground, and thought they should dye, ver.
22. It was a received opinion among the Jews, that if they saw God or an Angel,
they should dye upon it. Judge 6.22, 23. Gideon a mighty man of valor, cries
out, Alas, O Lord God, because I have seen an Angel of the Lord face to face:
and the Lord said, Fear not, thou shall notidye: If they had a vision being
awake, they apprehended death, but they never had experience of any that dyed
upon any such occasion, this rose rather from the apprehension of glory and
majesty in God and Angels, and consciousness of their own weakness and guilt, as
not able to abide the presence of those glorious creatures, that came
immediately from the presence of the glorious God; and we find that some have
been much affrighted, and almost struck dead, at the presence of the holy
Angels. Mat. 28.2, 3, 4. An Angel comes from heaven, whose countenance was like
lightning, and his raiment as the Sun, and for fear of him the Keepers of
the Sepulcher did shake and became like dead men, there was no spirit left in
them, the glory of the Angel did exanimate them: they are glorious and terrible
in their ministrations; and so should the Ministers of the Gospel, (...).
the Angels of the Church be: Nazianz. says of Basil, his speech was thunder,
and his life lightning. Such were James and John, Boanerges, sons of thunder,
Mark. 3.17. They were terrible to sinners in their preaching, like thunder and
lightning.

2. That account is to be rendered to God of all our services: whom God sets
awork, he will reckon with; Angels return and become responsable to God their
Lord and Master, those mighty and glorious creatures, when their work is
finished, do willingly and cheerfully return, and give in their answer; God
looks for it, and they delight to do it; and, account we must all give of our
work in the world. Romans 14.12. Every one of us shall give account of himself
unto God; God will say to us, Come, give account of your Stewardships, Luke
16.2. Every one has a talent, is a Steward, has some trust committed to him,
and he must not think to run, and never return; let men act how they will,
return they shall, be they never so great, be they Princes, Magistrates,
Commanders, etc. Eccles. 12. God shall bring every work unto Judgment, with
every secret thing, whether it be good or evil; both the work and the workman
must be questioned. Mat. 12.36. Of every idle word that men shall speak, they
shall give an account of in the day of Judgment.

3. That Angels are lively and unweariable in their negotiations, they run and
return as a flash of lightning; when they had done great service in the world,
they were as lively at the end of it as at the beginning, they return back with
as much life and speed as they went forth, and were ready for new employments,
they returned as to give account of what was done, so to receive new commands
and work. This is a good pattern for us all, that in the works of God those
employments he calls us to, we grow not weary of; one sin fits for another,
and men are unweariable in that trade; So one duty should fit for another, and
we should never be tired in our spirits, Ad laetitiam et animi pacem magnum
pondus habent rectae actiones.
though we be in our bodies. Gal. 6.9. Let us not be weary in well-doing; the
wicked are weary of and in well-doing: What profit is it, say they, that we
keep his Commandments, and that we walk humbly before the Lord of Hosts?
Mal. 3.14. When will the new Moon be gone, that we may sell corn, and the
Sabbath, that we may set forth Wheat? Amos 8.5. Psalm. 36.3. He has left off to
be wise, and to do good. Mal. 1.13. They said, What a weariness is it! and
snuffed at it, and brought that was torn, lame, sick; but the godly are never
weary of Gods work, Desidia est mors superstes, Vacua est vita.
though sometimes they are weary in it, through the strength of the flesh,
weakness of grace, and other discouragements, but they having tasted how
gracious the Lord is, are not, will not, cannot be weary of his service; his
Commandments are not grievous to them.

4. That they seek not themselves, but the honor and glory of their Master,
they stay not when their work is done, upon pleasure, curiosity to see or know
any thing, but immediately return, and are taken up wholly with the glorifying
of God, they are attent, watching his Commands, for they look up; they are
intent upon his work, they turn not to either side, look not back, but go
straight forward; they contend for his glory, they run, return, and give
account, and would have new Commissions, be at work again, and have God to be
glorified to their utmost abilities. Isa. 6.3. Holy, holy is the Lord of Host,
the whole earth is full of his glory; they see God so glorious, excellent, and
holy in himself, so glorious in all his works, that they mind not themselves,
but God, and make it their only and great design, to glorify God, Rev. 4.8,
9. And this is our duty and comfort if done. 1 Cor. 10.31. Whether you eat or
drink, etc. The glory of the infinite, holy, wise, and great God, should be
precious to us, we should attend his commands, intend his work, contend
against all lets, within or without, and promote his work and glory to our
utmost. That work is not referred to Gods glory, but our gain, credit or
profit, is a dead work. Omnibus operibus nostris coelestis intentio adjungi
debet. Aquinas.
The Schoolmen call for a right intention in every work, as that which
animates and inlivens the same: and though we cannot actually intend Gods glory
always in every thing, yet there should be a vertuall intention of it. A bowl
runs, an arrow flies by virtue of that arm first sent them forth, and all our
actions should proceed in the strength of a morning or primary intention of
Gods glory.

One thing yet remains touching the motion of Angels, namely, the efficient
cause of their motion, and it is the Spirit, set down in these words:

VER. 12. Whither the Spirit was to go they went.
SOme doubt there is what is meant by the Spirit here, not the counsel or will
of the Angels; and so the sense to be, that they went which way they had a
mind, whither their own wills and spirit carried them; and my reason is,
because they are brought in here as servants and officers; and therefore not to
be left to their own wills, but to be under command, and at the will of
another; Soldiers go not where they please, but where their General
pleases. By Spirit, we are to understand, neither the will of Angels, nor
winds, nor the soul of man, (for Spirit in Scripture does signify all these)
but the essential and eternal Spirit of God; and this is evident by the 20th
verse, Whithersoever the Spirit was to go they went; it is not said,
whithersoever their Spirit was to go they went, but whithersoever the Spirit;
that is, the Holy Ghost, coessentiall and coequall with the Father and the
Son, whither that Spirit of wisdom and power led them, thither they went;
when that Spirit bad them return they returned, as that Spirit moved them, so
they moved.

Object. The Spirit of God neither goes nor moves from place to place, being
infinite; how then can this be meant of the Spirit?

Ans. This is spoken humanitus, after the manner of men, in regard of the
vision Ezekiel had, Non mutatione loci, aut essentiae, sed declaratione
potentiae and gratiae.
it seemed so to him, but the Spirit being infinite, neither goes nor moves by
real change of place or essence, but by declaration of its power and grace.
When the Spirit or God does that is unusual, then they are said to come and be
present. Again, the Spirit went in the Angels, not simply in it self; there
was in the Angels imperium and impetus Spiritus, the imposition and impression
of the Spirit, which carried them on.

Observe. That Angels, although exceeding wise, full of knowledge, active, and
able to do great service, yet are not at their own dispose, they move not at
their own pleasure, they went not where they listed; Let the abilities of the
creature be never so rare, excellent, they must be under the power of a
Superior, they must be ordered and directed by a higher cause. Angels
themselves are not Lords of themselves, they are not sui juris; much less men
that are lower then Angels, 1 Cor. 6.19. Men are bought, and they must be his
servants at his dispose that has bought them, and that is God: And therefore
they must not abuse their bodies and souls to fornication, any sin, but
glorify God with both.

2. That it is the Spirit of God is the great Agent that sets Angels aworke,
they perform nothing by their own virtue and strength, but at the command and
impulse of the Spirit they act, they set out, proceed, finish, return; As it is
in a Ship at Sea, there are the winds without to drive it, and the Pilot within
to guide it to what place he pleases; so here is the command of the Spirit ab
extra, and the impetus intra, to carry out and order these; the great things
Angels have done, have been done by the Spirit of God; if they suggest good
thoughts; if an Angel strengthen Christ in his agony; if they reveal mysteries
and things to come to Daniel and others; if contend against Princes, and
agitate the great affairs of the kingdom, it is by virtue of the Spirit of
God, that works efficaciously in them, and in good men that are employed for
the glory of God, the public good of Church or State. When choice garments
were to be made for Aaron, Exodus 28.3. the 31. and v. 3. Cunning and carved
work in gold, silver and brass was to be made for the Tabernacle, it was the
Spirit of God that enabled and acted men for that service: When great things
were to be done by the Judges in Israel, it is said, The Spirit came upon them,
and the Spirit moved them, Judge. 3.10. The Spirit of the Lord came upon
Othniel, and he judged Israel, and went out to war, and the Lord delivered the
enemies into his hand, and his hand prevailed. So Jephtah, Judge. 11.29. and
Sampson, Chapter 13.25. The Spirit came upon them, and moved them, and they did
great things; And this is set down to let us see, that it is the Spirit does all
in the Magistracy, and in Martial affairs, in City and Camp; yea, and Church
too, Zach. 4.6. Not by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit, says the Lord of
Hosts: often mention is made of the Lord of Hosts, and truths that concern the
Temple, are sealed up with it in this Prophet more then others; because there
needed to such a work as building the temple, the power of a mighty God; so
many, so mighty were the enemies; yet God would not do it by the might and
power Zorubbabel had, but by His Spirit.

3. That Angels are led, and easily led by the Spirit, they went; it notes
their duciblenesse or tractablenesse; they went without dispute, without delay,
immediately, cheerfully, and they went whither the Spirit was to go, that is,
whither the Spirit would have them go; the Spirit is so infinitely wise, holy
and good, that even Angels do freely and fully submit to the conduct of it; and
therefore it is, that they go straight forward, that there is no crookedness
in their works; that they do such speedy and honorable service; and if such
glorious, able, and perfect creatures be willingly led by the Spirit, shall we
that are base and beggarly refuse the manuduction of the Spirit? if so, we
forsake the choicest mercy: for Romans 8.14. As many as are led by the Spirit of
God, are the sons of God, be they Angels or men. It seems there are but few
that are led by the Spirit of God, because he says, As many as are led,
intimating, all are not, few are: there be other spirits that lead men; there
is a spirit of envy, Jam. 4.5. of the world, 1 Cor. 2.12. of whoredoms, Hos.
4.12. of security, Isa. 29.10. a spirit of error, 1 Jo. 4.6. of Antichrist,
ver. 3. and by these most men are not only led, but driven, quenching,
grieving, vexing and resisting the good Spirit of God, more like devils then
Angels: but let us when we have imperium, or impetum, monitum, or motum
Spiritus, let us say, whither the Spirit will have us go we will go, what that
will have us do, we will do; offer up our selves, freely and fully to the
conduct of the Spirit, and that will lead you into all truth, and into the
land of uprightness. It Is an argument you are of the world, if you receive not
the Spirit of truth, and submit not to the guidance thereof, John 14.17.

VER. 13. As for the likeness of the living creatures, their appearance was
like burning coals of fire, and like the appearance of lamps: it went up and
down among the living creatures, and the fire was bright, and out of the fire
went out lightning.


(...)
THe Hebrew word notes a Torch or burning wood, where the fire and flame are
more tenacious and strong, titiones, firebrands, that are lively, and flaming,
heating and lightning.

In this verse is set out, not the figure and shape of the living creatures,
that was done in the 10th verse; but the color of their faces: which is
described,

First, by similitudes.

1. They are liken'd to burning coals of fire. 2. To lamps.
Secondly, by the motion of it, It went up and down among the living creatures.

Thirdly, by the operation and efficacy of it, lightning went forth of it.

For the better understanding of this dark verse; we must consider, that the
Lord Jesus Christ, being exceedingly offended with the wickedness of the
Jews, is presented in the vision to the Prophet, sitting as an angry Judge
upon the throne, ready to take vengeance on them for their sins; they were
Idolatrous, oppressive, profane, ungrateful, slighting, and persecuting the
prophets; therefore Christ comes armed against them with zeal and fury, and
suffer they must: hereupon the Angels being inflamed with the zeal and
indignation of their Lord and Master, are said to be like burning coals and
lamps. When men have a holy anger against sin and sinners, and are zealous for
God, how do their faces burn and glow, and their eyes sparkle? so was it here,
the Angels were affected much to see the Lord Christ so wronged by a company of
sinful wretched men; whereupon their color became fiery, their faces burned
with zeal, and their eyes sparkled, and they were ready to execute the sentence
of the Judge upon this delinquent people.

It went up and down among the living creatures.
The fire and flame that stood not still, (...)
but was in perpetual motion, Mithhallecheth, it made it self to walk of it
own accord and pleasure; it went up and down; it, that was fire went up and
down among those four formed creatures: some make it the likeness and
appearance it self that went up and down, but it is better to understand it of
the fire which is distinct from the likeness of the creatures, and it is the
vigor of Christ's Spirit. Virtue came out from Christ, the King and Judge upon
the Throne, which was like fire and flame, to prepare, quicken, and actuate
these spirits to a fuller execution of divine pleasure.

It was light, and out of the fire went forth lightening.
Here you have the operation of this fire: it was light, that is, it did
inlighten the Angels; they saw by this light what was to be done in this great
design of Christ in saving the innocent, and punishing the guilty. Out of it
went forth lightning; that is, the effect of it was dreadful unto men, as
lightning is; the judgments of Christ executed by Angels in the world, work
effectually for the benefit of the godly, and for the undoing of the wicked.

Observe. 1. That the Lord Christ does use Angels in the execution of his
judgments upon sinners; an Angel smote Herod, Senacheribs host, Pharaohs
firstborn, the Sodomites. Psalm. 35.5, 6. it is the Angel of the Lord that
chaseth and persecutes the wicked.

2. That Angels are zealous, forward and effectual in executing judgments
upon delinquents; they are burning Coals, Heb. 1.7. they are called a flame of
fire; fire is hot, and notes their zeal and forwardness; it is active and
consuming, which notes their effectualnesse: Angels are like the fire that fell
upon Elijah's sacrifice, which consumed the sacrifice, the wood, stones, dust,
and licked up the water, 1 King. 18.38. So effectual was that fire, that
nothing could stand before it; and when the Lord Christ sends out Angels, none
can stand before them, they are so zealous of, and effectual in the execution
of his judgments. The wicked are but as the wood, stones, dust and water,
these flames of fire will consume them. This should quicken Magistrates and
those be armed with authority, to be zealous and forward in punishing
malefactors, and executing judgment upon delinquents. Romans 13.4. The sword is
not given them in vain, they are revengers of Gods quarrel, and it is
Angelical to execute wrath upon them do evil; it was Saul's sin that he spared
Agag, but Samuels glory that he hewed him in pieces, he was zealous, forward
and effectual in it; so Asa in removing his mother Maachah from being Queen,
because she had made an Idol in a grove, which he cut down, 2 Chronicles. 15.16.
and brake her Idol in pieces, and burnt it. Those are appointed of God to see
justice done, if they do it not, become guilty themselves. Old Eli a Judge in
Israel, because he was too partial toward his sons, God was angry, and his
end was sad. Lewis the 11th, King of France, having pardoned a murderer twice,
and suing again for his life, said, What, do thou ask pardon again? Iam
tertium homicidium perpetrasti.
this is the third murder thou art guilty of: his fool standing by, said, The
other two are thine, who did pardon them, this is his first; had justice been
executed then upon him, he would never have fallen into this. So another Lewis
having pardoned a murderer, and afterward reading that in the 106. Psalm v.
3. Blessed are they that keep judgment, and he that does righteousness at all
times; presently recalled the pardon, and said, Non minus coram Deo veus est
quam si ^pse perpetrass^^.
That Prince which does not punish delinquents when he may, is no less guilty
before the Lord, then if he himself had done the fact. Let those therefore that
it concerns, be zealous of, ready to, and effectual in the execution of
justice upon delinquents.

3. That Angels have new influence from Christ suitable to the Ministration
they are to be employed in; though Angels be creatures of much knowledge,
wisdom, strength, speed, and usefulness, yet when Christ is to employ them,
they must have new virtue and influence; it went up and down among the living
creatures: Let them be as burning coals, they have need of more heat; let them
be as lamps, they have need of more light, their services are great, and Christ
contributes unto them continually: as they have new instructions, Quae
adsingulares vocationes and effectiones little sunt necessariae.
so new accessions and additions of virtue which are needful to their callings
and operations. If they have need of divine virtue to further them in their
operations, much more have we need of fresh supplies. Joh. 15.5. Without me ye
can do nothing; he says not, you may do something, or you can do little, but
plainly, without me you can do nothing; it is the virtue and influence of
Christ which inables Angels and men to do the duties of their places and
callings, Phil. 4.13. I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me;
when He sits upon the Throne, sends out fire and flame, light and heat to
strengthen us, then can we do all things, 1 Cor. 12.5. There are difference of
admininistrations, but the same Lord; it is the Lord Christ, that appoints the
administration of men and Angels, that gives direction about them with supplies
of grace and strength, to exercise them; when we go about any employments of
our general and particular callings, we should consider our own impotency,
and look up to Christ, who has all fullness, and is ready to send out virtue
to supply all our wants; therefore Paul tells the Philippians, Chap. 4. ver. 19.
My God shall supply all your need according to his riches in glory, by Christ
Jesus.

4. That the divine virtue comes from Christ, is an active thing, it went up
and down, it rested not. Men have sought after the perpetual motion, and lo,
here it is: this virtue acted continually in the Angels; it went not by a
transitive motion, from one Angel to another, but the motion was immanent,
continually acting in them, and therefore it is called fire, which is a living
active thing. The Word of God was as fire. Jer. 20.9. His Word was within mine
heart as a burning fire shut up in my bones, and I was weary with forbearing,
and I could not stay; it overcame him, and quickened him up to his work, when
he thought to preach no more; many a Christian thinks to hear, pray, read,
meditate, receive no more, but there is virtue gone out from Christ, that will
walk up and down in them, and cause them to fall to it again: that virtue comes
forth from Christ, is no dull thing. 1 Cor. 15.10. Paul had fire from Christ,
and it set him awork; I labored more abundantly then they all; see how active
he was, he exceeded all the rest of the Apostles; and how came that about?
what metal was he made of? he had fire from Christ, it was not I, but the
grace of God that was with me, that went up and down in him, and fired his
affections and spirit. David, Psalm. 39.3. thought to be silent, and not to
speak any more before the wicked, I, even from good conference he refrained;
but what was the issue? my heart was hot within me; the virtue and fire he had
from Christ began to work, while I was musing, the fire burned and flamed out,
then I spoke; He could hold no longer: So Acts 4.20. We cannot but speak the
things we have seen and heard,

5. That actions done by divine virtue, afford light and lightning: the fire
went up and down among the Angels, put them upon execution of judgment; and
from hence, (these actions being so done) prove light and lightning to the
world; they are seen, and seen far. They are light to the godly: when Angels
execute Gods judgments upon sinners, the Saints see much in it; they see
matter of fear and praise; of fear, in that Gods power, wrath, and hatred are
manifested in them against sin and sinners: of praise, in that themselves are
delivered, and justice is performed. Psalm. 58.10, 11. The righteous shall
rejoice when he sees the vengeance, he shall wash his feet in the blood of
the wicked: when the wicked are taken away by a divine stroke, by the hand of
justice, and God has the glory of his justice, the righteous rejoice at it:
but is that all? no, He washes his feet in the blood of the wicked, that is,
by this judgment he fears and reformes; it is a metaphor taken from the
practice of those parts, where they went barefoot, or with Sandalls, and so
contracted much filth, and used to wash and cleanse their feet when they came
in; so here, the godly seeing the hand of God upon the wicked, fears, and
judges himself for his sins, purges his conscience and affections, and stands
now in awe of that God who has stricken the wicked for those sins, which he
himself in part is guilty of. Waldus, a man of note in Lions, seeing one struck
dead in his presence, he washed his hands in his blood, for presently he gave
alms to the poor, instructed his family in the true knowledge of God, and
exhorted all came unto him to repentance and holiness of life.

They are lightning to the wicked, that is, dreadful and confounding. In this
work of executing judgment, as they are lamps to light the godly, so they are
burning coals, and lightning to destroy the wicked. How terrible was the
destroying Angel when the plague was in David's days? Rev. 16. when the Angels
powered out their vials of wrath, how dreadful were they? men blasphemed and
repented not, to give glory to God.

VERSE. 15. Now, as I beheld the living creatures, behold one wheel upon the
earth by the living creatures, with his four faces.


We have done through divine virtue two parts of the Vision and now are
coming to the third; That of the wheels, which has its darkness and
difficulties; and here the glory of God in his providence is considerable from
earthly things and second causes.

In the Vision of the wheels, two things I shall present unto you: First, the
signification. Secondly, the description of these wheels.


What these wheels may signify, there is great variety of opinions; with all
which I will not trouble you. Wheels by a Synecdoche, some think, is put for a
Chariot, in which God is presented to the Prophet, guarded with Angels on every
side, who stand with great reverence and readiness to do his will; and by this
Chariot they understand the Majesty, Glory, Providence and Kingdom of God, in
which he rules all things at his pleasure, as a Waggoner or Pilot; Quasi auriga.
and by the wheels the Immensity, Eternity, celerity, perspicacity, and
efficacy of God in his operations. Some think by Chariot, is meant the Church,
and by the wheels the Apostles. These are thoughts of men, we will therefore
labor to give you the thoughts and intention of Gods Spirit, so near as we
can. By the Wheels we are to understand this visible world, with all things in
it, the kingdoms of the earth, and the Church of God, and condition of all
humane things, which are all in motion and uncertain; and that this is the
sense of the Wheels may be gathered from the Prophet, in the 10th Chapter and
13th verse, where it is said, Ipsis nomen vocatum est hic orbis, or, ipsae
vocatae sunt orbis, Iun.
as for the wheels, it was cried unto them in my hearing, O wheel, O world.
Their name is the or this world: the word in the Hebrew is Haggalgal, and not
the same with the usual word for wheel, and it is both Substantively and
distinctively used, and notes out this world in which we live, in which Ezekiel
was; it is not Galgal, (...)
but haggalgal, which is demonstrative and distinguishing: Psalm. 77.18. there
is the same word, and it is not rendered in the wheel, Illuxerunt coruscationes
orbiterae, (...), that is (...); For the Greeks do absolutely take (...) for
the world, Heins. in Jacob. 3.6.
but in the heaven, or in the round; that is, the air; and the Vulgar
translates it, The lightnings have shined in the world: and so the Septuagint.
Seeing it is evident, that by the wheels is meant the world and things therein;
it is needful to examine the fitness of this comparison, and so to see the
wisdom of Gods Spirit in it.

Orb rotundato sydera quaeque micant.
1. The wheel or wheels are round, such is the form of the world, it is called
orbis globus, from the roundnesse.

2. A wheel is movable, and mutable, that part is on high is presently at the
bottom, and that which is at the bottom is quickly again at the top: and this
informs us in the mobility and mutability of all humane and mundane things, and
is principally intended by this vision of the wheels: Kingdoms, Churches,
Families, volvuntur, revolvuntur, are daily wheeled about, moved, changed, and
never long permanent in any condition. The four great Monarchies, the
Babylonian, Persian, Grecian, Roman, how were they kicked like Foot-balls, and
tossed like Tennisballs from one to another, and at last devoured by each
other? After that great rent made in the house of David by Jeroboam, what
changes, what wars and famines were in the kingdoms of Judah and Israel, you
find in the Books of the Kings and Chronicles? You may see the relation of
these wheels in one Chapter: 1 King. 16. you shall find, that in twelve or
thirteen years of Asa's reign, King of Judah, there was the death of Baasha,
Elah, Zimri, Tibni, Omri, that were wretched Kings, and made fearful stirs and
murders in Israel: and beside, wicked Ahab in that time began his reign, and
troubled all Israel. The Church, what a low ebb was it at in Elijah's days,
when he complains, Gods Covenant is forsaken, his Altars thrown down, his
Prophets slain, himself left alone, and his life also sought for? 1 King.
19.14. The Church now, when Ezekiel had this vision, was in captivity, without
a Temple, Altar, Sacrifice; and the Church is never long in any settled
condition. Rev. 8.1. There was silence in heaven about the space of half an
hour; under the ten fiery Persecutions, the Church had no rest, but in
Constantines times it had a little, but presently the Arrian heresy brake out,
and did more mischieve the Church then all the persecutions before. The Church
is wheeled about from condition to condition, sometimes it is in Egypt, sometime
in the Wilderness, sometimes in Canaan, and sometimes in Babylon; it is Noah's
Arc that rides upon rough waters, and is not like to take harbor before
Christ comes. So for families and persons, they are in a movable condition:
Aetas parentum pejor avis mox datura progeniem vitiosiorem, Horat. (...).
Eccles. 1.4. One generation passes away, and another comes; that goes, and a
third hastens after them to the grave: 1 Cor. 4.9. We are made a spectacle to
the world, a Theater, that is, we come into the world, and act here a little
while upon the Stage of it, and presently we are gone; Kings, Princes and all
conditions of men do so; Noah and his Generations are gone, David and his. If
we come nearer our selves, the Merovignian family was driven out by Pippin,
son of Martel, and that family by Hugh Capet; so that there have been three
races of the royal line in France; the Plantagenets race here is wholly gone,
or lies in obscurity; great is the incertainty, motion and mutation of the
things in this world, the wheels are up and down, and not consistent; Job is
very rich and poor in one day; Haman in great favor and under great
displeasure in a wheel of time. There is a story very suitable to this vision
of the wheels, and brought in by Expositers to give light unto it, which I may
not omit; and it is of Sesostris a King of Egypt, who had a golden Chariot,
bedecked with many precious stones, and when he rode in it, no meaner persons
must draw it then four Kings that he had conquered; one of the four cast his
eye altogether upon the wheel, and being demanded the reason of it by
Sesostris, said, I see in this wheel the mutability of all conditions, that
part of the wheel is nearest heaven, is by and by upon the earth, and contrary,
that is upon the earth is presently again nearest heaven. This wrought so upon
Sesostris, that he thought his condition might change, and therefore freed
those Kings from that servitude, and would not have his Chariot drawn any more
by them. Belisarius, General of Justinian forces, overcame the Persians in the
East, the Vandals in Africa, the Goths in Italy, and did extraordinary service,
at last had his eyes put out, his whole estate taken away, and forced to beg
of passengers without the gates of Rome, Baron.
Da obolum Belisario, quem extulit virtus, caecavit invidia, O give one
farthing to Belisarius, whom his own virtue advanced, and others envy has
blinded. Adonibezek, who sat upon the top of this wheel, was soon brought
under; he had seventy Kings with their thumbs and toes cut off, and put like
dogs under his table to eat scraps, 1 Cor. 7.31.
and himself was made acquainted with that condition. In the present affairs
of Ireland, we may see the mystery of Ezekiels wheels; all things are
running, moving, and working to a change. (...).
Jam. 3.6. he calls it the wheel of nature, or rather of this Generation,
showing, that the present Generation is hastening out of the world.

3. Wheels make in their motion a great noise and rattling, Joel 2.5. Like the
noise of Chariots on the tops of mountains; so the things in the world move not
silently, but make a great stir and mighty noise. Rev. 6.1. when the first seal
was opened, and Christ rode abroad upon his white horse of the Gospel,
conquering the Nations, there was as the noise of thunder, and stirs and
tumults were raised in Kingdoms, and mighty oppositions were made in the
world: Chap. 19. when Christ shall judge the great Whore, and avenge the blood
of the Saints, it will not be without noise: verse. 6. I heard, as it were, the
voice of a great multitude, and as the voice of many waters, and as the voice
of mighty thunderings, saying, Allelujah: for the Lord God omnipotent reigns;
there is the voice of the people like waters, a low and less noise; and there
is the voice of Parliament and Armies a greater, a thundering voice; the things
now in motion in this kingdom and others, make a great thundering in the world,
as in former days, between the Houses of York and Lancaster were fought
seventeen pitched fields, in which eight Kings and Princes perished, forty
Dukes, Marquesses and Earls, 200000. of the people, besides Barons and
Gentlemen; which things were not done without a great noise.

4. Wheels are moved by some hand, and set on running, else they stir not: so
this world is moved, acted and governed by divine virtue. Things are carried in
this world like wheels, Psalm. 113.9.
up and down, backwards and forwards, as if all were left at six and seven, and
hurried up and down by some blind chance or fortune, which we exclude, and only
acknowledge all to be moved, ordered, and effected by divine providence; it is
God that by his providence and the ministry of his Angels, that sets all the
wheels in the world in motion: a Sparrow falls not to the ground, nor a hair
off our heads without his will.

5. By the motion of the wheel many works are done; the Potters of old made
their vessels by the motion of the wheel; Ier. 18.3.
by it the corn was ground, and justice was done. Prove. 20.26. He brings the
wheel over them; that notes the punishment of evill-doers: it is a metaphor
from husbandmen, that in hot countries did by the help of a wheel break the
ears of corn, and so get it out; Isa. 28.28.
and justice is the wheel that breaks men, and gets out the truth, and
separates the chafe from the Wheat: in some place a wheel has been used to
break the bones of sinners. Hence Tully says, 5. Tuscul. beatam vitam iu rotam
non ascendere.
That an innocent life had nothing to do with the wheel. So that by the motion
of the wheel much has been done, and God by the rotations and strange motions
in the world, brings about great works. Dan. 9.25. the walls of Jerusalem
should be built in a troublous time. In the 9. verse and Chap. 1^. of the
Revelation, mention is made of trumpets and vials, which note great stirs and
changes in the world, and notable effects follow thereupon; We hope that the
stirs of our time are the preparation to the most glorious work of Antichrists
ruining, our reforming, Christ reigning, and the Jews raising; old things are
passing away, and all things are becoming new; old Religion, viz. Popery, old
Prelacy, old Service and Ceremonies are going downwards, and they that led into
captivity, are themselves a leading into captivity, Rev. 13.10.

Observe The world and things in it, are not fit for us to fix our hearts upon.
The world it self, and all in it, are of a wheeling nature, uncertain, movable,
and running away; and the word Galgal a wheel, and the world, signifies also a
mote, chafe, straw, any thing driven before the wind, and so it is used, Isa.
17.13. Chegalgal, as a wheeling thing, before the whirlwind; the margent
renders it as a thistle, or thorn; the one shows the vanity of the world, the
other the vexation of it. Shall we let out our hearts to that runs from us
like a rolling thing, and if we overtake it, runs into us like a thorn? they
that will be rich, catch the world, pierce themselves through with many
sorrows, 1 Timothy 6.9, 10. and break upon this wheel; Because it runs smoothly
sometimes, men are taken with the motions of the world, but at length you shall
find its motion rough, swift, ready to overthrow and break you all in pieces:
they are broken in Ireland, and we are breaking here; now let the Apostles
counsel be acceptable: 1 Cor. 7.29, 30, 31. Brethren, the time is short; let
them that have wives, be as if they had none; let them that weep, be as if they
wept not, and them that rejocye, as if they rejoiced not, and they that buy, as
if they possessed it not; and they that use this world as not abusing it; (...)
praeterit, decipit.
and why all this? for the fashion, or show, of this world passes away, it
acts otherwise then you expect, if you affect the world, wives, children, or
any part of it, it will deceive you; you think to hold it, and it is but a
shadow, no substance; and a shadow, a show, going away; let us therefore not
look at this wheel, but at him that moves the wheel; who is unchangeable,
unmovable, of infinite being, in comparison of whom the world is a drop, a
little dust; let us with David say, Whom have we in heaven but thee? and there
is none in earth we desire in comparison of thee; let us let go our hold of the
world, draw in our affections from it, hopes after it, and look only after that
City, Heb. 11.10.

Having given you the signification of the Wheels, the next thing premised, is
the description of them; and now I come to the particular handling of the
Wheels, where we shall meet with difficulties and excellencies.

VER. 15, 16. Now as I beleld the living creatures, behold one wheel upon the
earth by the living creatures, with his four faces.

The appearance of the wheels, and their work was like unto the color of a
Berill: and they four had one likeness, and their appearance, and their work
was, as it were, a wheel in the middle of of a wheel.


IN these Verses they are described: 1. From their number, employed in the 15th,
expressed in the 16th verse, four. 2. The place where they were, and that is
the earth. 3. Their color: they were like a Berill. 4. Their likeness between
themselves; they four had one likeness. 5. Their form was, as it were, a
wheel in a wheel.


Touching the first, viz. the number of the wheels, they were four: mention is
made of one in the 15th verse, but it is one with four faces; not the faces of
the four Cherubims, but of four wheels: which wheels were so like, that they
are said to be one wheel, he that saw one saw all: As in some picture of a
Prince, when we have seen the same in diverse places, or often in the same, we
say, this is one and the same picture; so here, our Prophet says he saw all
the wheels, but they were so like, that they might well be called one and the
same: for the Prophet mentions in the 16th verse, wheels, and four wheels, and
one likeness of them. Here by a figure called Hypallage, we may make the sense
more easy thus; there appeared one face in the four wheels, for, one wheel
having four faces. In the 10th. Chapt. it is out of all dispute that there were
four wheels, Verse, 9. When I looked, behold the four wheels by the Cherubims,
one wheel by one Cherub, and another wheel by another Cherub,

These wheels being four, represent to us the four parts of the world, Eastern,
Western, Northern, Southern, that in them are great stirs and changes.

The next thing in this verse, is the place; I saw one wheel upon the earth:
how could that be, when Ezekiel saw the vision in heaven?

Answ. This is a vision, and it appeared to him to be on the earth, not the
true earth, but the earth in a vision: as in pictures if a wheel, a Chariot, a
City, be drawn, and presented to the eye, they are presented as being upon the
earth.

Observe. 1. That all inferior causes, wheels, instruments, agents whatsoever,
are but as one wheel before the Lord. All things in the four quarters of the
world were presented by God to the Prophet as one wheel; to us they are many,
mighty, diverse, contrary, infinite, but unto God they are otherwise, all the
Armies, Parliaments, Kingdoms, Crowns, Agents in this world are but one cause,
one wheel before the great God, they are a small thing to him. Isa. 40.15, 16,
17. Behold, the nations are as the drop of a bucket, and are counted as the
small dust of the balance: behold, he takes up the Isles as a very little
thing; Lebanon is not sufficient to burn, nor the beast thereof sufficient for
a burnt offering: all nations before him are as nothing, and they are counted
to him less then nothing, and vanity.

2. That changes, stirs, and tumults, are here on the earth, not in heaven; the
Prophet saw the wheels on earth, not in heaven; there be no wheelings, no
turnings, no troubles, no wars, no deaths, no diseases, no sins, no fears, no
tears, no wicked men, no wicked thing, and so no changes; it is only the
prerogative of heaven, to say, I am the Lord, I change not, Mal. 3.6. the world
cannot say it. Jam. 1.17. With him is no variableness, or shadow of turning;
in God and heaven, there is nothing of the wheel, all is constant, immutable,
but on earth it is contrary, the things under the Sun are vanity, inconstancy,
and change it self.

3. That all the inferior agents and causes, are at the dispose of the
superior, of Angels; they have a great interest in the government of the
world, the wheel is by the living creatures, at their feet, to move and turn it
which way they please; if they will bespeak wars in the North, or South; if
they will have the world in an uproare, it is done; Angels are Gods hands and
deputies, in the administration of all things here below, in the world God
supports and subverts kingdoms by them. Dan. 10. Gabriel tells Daniel, that he
withstood the Prince of Persia 21. days, and his counselors that sought to
oppress the people of God, and that he would go again and fight with him;
Kingdoms, and the affairs of them, yea, the quarters of the world, under God
are ordered by Angels; and while Angelical and divine protection are over
kingdoms, they prosper, but when God is provoked by the sins of a people, he
leaves the wheels of that Kingdom to men and devils, it runs to ruin. Then
the Princes and Potentates are deluded with strong delusions, grow tyrannical,
Idolatrous, false, hostile, etc. then the kingdom grows weak, without spirit,
counsel, strength, success, and is infinitely entangled with difficulties,
internal, external; good counsels are slighted or opposed, opportunies of
doing that kingdom good not discerned, dangers not foreseen, or put off
without due consideration. Blasphemers, traitors, oppressors and enemies to
public good are set up, divisions, seditions, domestique wars (if not foreign)
are made and maintained, and all things work strongly to ruin; it is observed
by some, that there are more wars and desolations among Christians then others,
and the reason is given, their sins are greater then others, and provoke God
to take away his own, and Angelical protection, they leave the wheels of
kingdoms to men of corrupt minds, that move them wholly for private interests.
This informs us of the honor and greatness of Angels that have the wheels of
the world in their hands; we look upon them as great men, which have the
command of some Province or Country; what then are Angels, that have the rule
of the whole world under God? Know, though their place be great, yet they are
under command, and move not, but as they are moved by the Spirit of God: Let us
also take heed, how we offend persons employed in such great services as they
are.

4. That there are turnings and wheelings in all estates and parts of the
world; the four living creatures noted the four parts of the world, and their
agencies in them, and by them, now are presented the wheels; every living
creature had a wheel by it, and this strongly implies that there are wheelings,
turnings, and changes in all parts; yea, the very same that are in one part are
at one time or other in another part, the wheels are alike; Are wars, plagues,
famine in one country? they are or will be in another. Do men die here? so in
all parts: are men unfaithful now? so they were of old; in David's days he
said, Men of high degree are a lie, and men of low degree vanity, Psalm. 62.9.
Are there unseasonable times here? such are abroad: are things carried by
violence, oppression, injustice here? so they are elsewhere: are there
designs, plots upon our Kingdom and Church? so there are upon others;
whatever befalls one State, befalls another, internally, and externally; the
wheels are the same, and move alike, though sometimes backward in one part of
the world, and forward in another; there is no stability any where, but all
things are in flux: in vain then do men travel the world to find certainty
and content in it; in vain do we tumble up and down here and there, thinking to
find settlednesse, and something satisfactory: the world is like it self every
where; go East, West, and there is nothing but a wheel, and a wheel running.
Solomon had tried all conditions; he had wealth, wisdom, and opportunities
for he says, Who shall come after the King? intimating, that none can travel
farther then he did, to search and know the world and creatures, Eccles. 1.
and all conditions; and what does he conclude, but vanity of vanities? that
is, all is extreme and superlative vanity; and because men will not believe it,
he doubles and trebles it, Vanity of vanities, all is vanity; take any place,
or any thing in that place, it is vanity, empty, fruitless, inconstant; so
far from satisfying, that it vexes. Hence some have pictured Solomon upon an
high hill, and all the world coming toward it, and climbing up, thinking to
find happiness there, but he beats them down with a rod, saying, It Is not
here, it is not here. We must not look for stability, content, certainty among
the wheels, but above them; now its not time to look about and abroad, but to
look above the world, and the wheels of it. Christ has told us what is to be
had in this world; and it is certain: in the world, says he, you shall have
tribulation; and do you not find it? surely now it is eminent and pungent; and
he has told us what is to be had in himself: In me you shall have peace; if
we have tribulation in the world, we may have peace in Christ.

VER. 16. The appearance of the wheels, and their work, was like unto the
color of a Berill: they four had one likeness, and their appearance, and
their work was, as it were, the wheel in the middle of a wheel.


HEre we have the color, likeness and form of the wheels to examine; first,
their color (as for the work, that is, the matter whereof they were made, or
the artificial form of them) Their color and work was like the Berill: the
Hebrew is, as the eye, or, color of Tarshish; the word Tarshish in Scripture
sometimes notes a City, Jon. 1.3. sometimes a precious stone, Exodus 28.20. Esa.
2.16.
it is the same word; and Interpreters observe there is a Sea also called
Tharshish, and it is like to be that where the City Tarshish was; for Tarshish
that Jonah fled to, was a Sea town. When our Prophet says, the color was like
the color of Tarshish, he means not the city; the dispute is between the Sea
or a Stone: some render it, as the color or vision of the Sea; others, as the
color of a precious stone; and then the Quere grows, what stone, whether of a
Chrysoltie, a Hyacinth, a Crystal, or a Berill: that here is meant a stone, is
determined by infallible testimony, even Scripture it self: Ezekiel. 10.9. The
appearance of the wheels was as the color of a Tarshish stone; and it is well
rendered by our Interpreters a Berill stone; for neither the Chrysolite nor
Hyacinth do set out a Sea color, the one being yellow, the other sky-colour,
and the scope of the wheels and description of them, is to possess us with the
uncertainty and fluctuation of all things, which is livelily set out by the
Sea; we are therefore to hold to the Crystal or Berill; it is true, the Crystal
has a watery color, and its original from the water, yet it does not so fully
set out the Sea color as the Berill, which is a green stone, and they are
counted best that have the Sea-greens. Rurus de gemmis. Beryllus Thalassius.
The best rendering of this word Tarshish, is the Sea Berill, because it has
altogether a Sea-colour, and minds us of the Sea, by whose floating condition
the uncertainty of all things is laid before us.

Obser. 1. That the things herein this visible world, are as uncertain and
instable as the waters of the sea, they are never quiet, but always rolling up
and down from shore to shore, even in the greatest calm; these waters are in
motion, and suddenly in a rage by virtue of the winds, which lift up the waves
to heaven, and make all stormy and outrageous: there is no stability at all in
these waters, and the world is as unstable as any Sea, as Euripus it self, that
ebbes and flows seven times a day: all creatures are in motion, and tending to
corruption; all conditions are full of changes and inconstancy; who can tell
how many inhabitants have been in some one street, in some one house, what
wares have been brought in and sold out of some one shop? Men bless and curse,
love and hate in one day, in one hour: Amnon is sick for Tamar till his lust be
satisfied, and then immediately hates her: Ahashuerus turns off Vashti, and
entertains Esther: Reuben, Genesis 49.4. unstable as water; Pharaoh in the throne,
anon in the bottom of the Sea: Hezekiah sound now, and hears by and by, Set
thy house in order, for thou shall dye; Jerusalem besieged, and freed in one
night; in youth we are altogether for pleasure, in manhood for credit, in age
for riches, as if thick clay must be our Viaticum for heaven. We are fixed in
nothing, and nothing is firm to us; what certainty is there in honors, riches,
pleasures? What constancy in health, wealth, worship? Una dies interest inter
maximam civitatem and nullam.
What Seneca said of a great city burnt, there is a days difference between a
great city and none; the like may be said of most things and conditions.

2. Its deceitfulness; the Sea has a pleasant color to allure, it is
greenish, which is most suitable unto the senses; and yet it deceives many, if
not most; it fills with fears, it impoverisheth many, shipwracks them, promises
safety, and drowns thousands; often it looks calm, and invites to come on, and
being on, it becomes rough and ruinous. Hence the Poet calls it, fallax
profundum. A Merchant carrying Figs at Sea, suffered shipwreck, and sitting by
the Sea shore, beholding it pleasant and calm, said, Novi quid velis, ficus
vis; you would have me again to venture through the deeps, but I will trust you
no more; he spoke wittily, and did wisely: we should prove as wise for this
world, trust it not, it is a deceitful thing; it promises content, but that
cluster never grew on the worlds thorns; the Devil ever disquiets whom he
possesses, and so does the world, it promises pleasure, but pays with smart:
Breve est quod delectat, aeternum quod cruciat, an hours pleasure and eternal
torture: Dives dainties now bite like a Serpent, and sting like a Cockatrice,
it promises much good, even to make them, but it is otherwise; A^hans wedge of
gold purchased the stones beat out his brains; Judas thirty pieces bought the
halter strangled him; Sichem's lust brought the sword upon himself and the
city. It promises help in time of trouble; it rather sinks then helps, like a
man in the Sea with his pockets full of gold; it hastens his drowning, it helps
him not to the shore, Prove. 11.4. Riches profit not: it tells us of continuance
and abode with us, but here it guls us greatly; the best thing the world has,
deals with us like false friends, they leave us in the lurch, and say as the
ten Tribes to Rehoboam, Look to thine house David, 1 King. 12.16. Health says,
I must leave you, now look to your selves; Prove. 23.
Riches take wings and fly away, Eagles wings and fly with strength: Are not
men's estates, liberties, honors, privileges now upon the wing? If
Nebuchadnezzar be in the palace among his Nobles, anon he is in the Park among
the Beasts all night: as Jacob said of Laban, Genesis 31.7. Your father has
deceived me, and changed my wages ten times; so may we say of the world, it
has, it will deceive us, we look for honor, it will change our wages, and
give us disgrace; we look for riches, and it gives us poverty. Adonijah you may
find in one day upon the Throne, and at the horns of the Altar, he will be
King, and have the lives of all in his hand, 1 King. 1.5, 50.
and before night he runs to secure his own life: it tells us of happiness,
success, victory, life; but Zedektab sees Jerusalem taken, his sons slain
before his own face, then his eyes being put out, he is bound in fetters, and
carried to Babylon: Good Josiah goes forth to battle, and he is slain; Ahab
goes forth against the Assyrians, victory is promised him, but he is wounded
and dies of his wounds: Richard the third, after his cruelties, is slain in
Bosworths fields; and at the battle of Edgehill, were not some taken, many
wounded, and more slain? Joab pretended kindness to Amasa, but it proved
cruelty, he kissed him, and killed him, 2 Samuel 20. Agag is hewn in pieces like
an Ox; Jezabel eaten by Dogs, like a piece of carrion; Bajazet carried in an
Iron cage up and down the world by great Tamberlane. Trust it not, it is like
Jael, she began with Milk and Butter, but ended with a Nail and Hammer. An
Emperor of Turkey married his daughter to a Basha, and after one nights
pleasure, sent for his head the next morning.

They four had one likeness.
All the wheels were equal, none higher then other, greater, lesser, but an
even and suitable proportion between them all, no difference was to be espied
at all.

1. This informs us that there is no stability in any part of the world, but
changes every where, and such in other parts as they find with us. But of this
before.

2. That Gods administration of the World, and all the wheels of it, is equal
and harmonious; this is set out to us by the likeness of the wheels, although
in the world and things of it there be disparities, inconstancies, strange
motions and mutations; yet the wisdom and providence of God moves and turns
the wheels, so that there is an admirable equability and harmony in all things;
and if our eyes were opened, we should see and say, that no wheel could be
moved better, to us the wheels seem all out of course, and to run with crooked
motions, and to be hurried contrary ways by men and devils; but all things
are in their right course, Nulla l^nea possit melius dirigi; Rectissime omnia
inter se consentiunt.
and move that way God would have them; and what ever the appearance be, all
things agree well among themselves. We often condemn the sentence the Judge has
given, and blame a man for going about when he may go a nearer way; but when
the reasons are made known, then we are satisfied.

Their appearance and their work was as it were a wheel in the midst of a
wheel.
Here you have the form of the wheels: a wheel in a wheel. This is hard to
explain unto you. The words may be taken either transverse, Vt duo circu li ad
rectos angulos se intersecantes.
or comprehensive.

1. Transverse; the wheels were crosse-wise entangled in one another; as the
lines or circles in a globe cut and cross one another; they were so entangled,
Vt transversa esset complexio, they were in one another crosse-wise; and hereby
is laid before us the several cross, entangled, and difficult motions of
things in the world; all things do not go one way, nor evenly in our fight
and apprehension, but there are cross motions, great intricatenesse, and
knottinesse in the affairs of the world.

2. Comprehensive; a wheel in a wheel, not the gnave stock in the midst of
the wheel, to which the spokes are fastened; for that has not the form of a
wheel: but there was one wheel in another; as the orbs of the heavens
comprehend one another; as in some Waterworks, and Watches, there be wheels
one in another: and then the meaning is, that there is a secret hidden motion
or wheel, that moves the wheels which way soever they run.

Observe first, that the motions of the world, and kingdoms are perplexed and
cross motions; like a wheel in a wheel; Saul moved with all his strength to
settle the kingdom upon his own Son; but he met with a contrary motion; David
is anointed to be King, and the men of war came to David to Hebron, to turn
the kingdom of Saul to him, 1 Chronicles. 12.23. And so Adonijah said to
Bathshebah, the kingdom that was mine is turned about and become my brothers;
he met with a cross wheel that carried the kingdom from him, 1 King. 2.15.
How perplexed, entangled, were the motions of the Jewish affairs, both in
Babylon and at Jerusalem, when the Prophet saw this vision? The Papists do
erect regnum in regno, an ecclesiastical monarchy in the temporal, exempt
from temporal jurisdiction, only subject ob pacem, or bonum commune, if
subject at all; and so they give Monarchs a broken right in some things but
defeasible in other things by their spiritual Monarchy.
Nebuchadnezzars wheel was in theirs, and entangled them much in both places.
What cross motions were in France, when the King of Navarre, Prince of Condee,
the Admiral, and all that were of the Religion, looked for peace, and met with
a massacre? Are not there Romish, Spanish, French, and Popish wheels moving in
our Kingdom, Armies, and Councels? Look at this instant upon the motions of
this Kingdom, in Parliament, or out of it, and they are exceeding intricate;
Never was skaine of silk or thread so knotty, or involved, as the affairs of
the kingdom and world are; never bird so entangled in the Limetwigs or Net, as
things are at this time.

2. The motions to mutations and ruins are very swift; things move faster then
we conceive to their ends; The Jews hasted out of Egypt, and destruction
hasted on the Egyptians. A wheel in a wheel, notes intension of motion; as
Elias prayed in prayer, Jam. 5.17. That is, he was intense; so a wheel in a
wheel, intimates intensenesse of the motion. All things make speed to their
own ruin.

3. There is a secret motion which carries on the wheels, and moves them that
way they go, there is a wheel in a wheel, and that sets the other a moving;
as a spring in a Watch sets all the wheels agoing; some latent engine stirs
the wheels of the world: in some places you shall see the waters suddenly fly
all about you; the cause of that motion is hidden; so in all the motions,
turns, and stirs of the world, there is a secret wheel, divine providence,
that sets on work and carries on. That was a great wheel and turn, when ten
tribes at once fell from Rehoboam, and ran to Jeroboam; Politicians and
Statesmen could see sedition, rebellion, and treason in that motion, the
outward wheel was obvious, but the wheel in the wheel was not seen by every
eye: Behold, I will rend the Kingdom out of Solomon's hands, and give ten
Tribes to thee, 1 King. 11.31. If there be divisions, ruins, plunderings in a
Kingdom, there is a wheel in those wheels, a providence that acts and
orders. Job 6.5. Afflictions come not forth of the dust, nor trouble out of the
ground, they come out of the wheel, God turns that upon Kingdoms, and
families; as Micah 1.12. Evil came down from the Lord to the gates of
Jerusalem; God has a wheel in all the wheeling businesses of the world.
Anastasius the Emperor being informed of a conspiracy against him and the
State, Zonar.
commanded Justinian and Justinus, with many others, to be executed, by a voice
in the night he was bid to spare Justinian and Justinus, for they were to do
good service, and they both afterward were Emperors: the motion of the wheel
in the wheel saved their lives, and advanced them to honor. At the Battle of
Keinton was a wheel in a wheel, the wheel at first ran for the adverse
party, but the wheel in the wheel turned it on our side: At Brainford, there
was a wheel in a wheel. When the enemies plots have been their plagues, and
their doings their undoings, the wheel in the wheel both moved and turned
their own works upon them, Psalm. 9.16.

4. The motions of divine providence in the things of the world, are beyond the
reach of the ablest brains. Providence walks, works so darkly, deeply,
changeably, wheels about, so that mortals cannot tell what conclusions to
make: when the issues of things are extant, we can see what the antecedent
motions carried in their womb, otherwise not, unless we have it by vision;
as here Ezekiel had; or some extraordinary way. Providence has such bouts and
fetches, as puzzle the thoughts and hearts of the ablest and best: when the
Children of Israel were at the borders of Canaan, they were carried back
again to Ezion-gabor. Numb. 33. Exodus 13.18. it is said, God led them about
through the way of the Wilderness, by the red Sea: and so providence leads
businesses about, they go backwards and forwards, so that we cannot make sense
of Gods motions in the world; As in Characters, till a man learn, be
instructed in them, he can make no sense of them; and men now of rare
abilities, cannot tell what sense to make of the motions of the wheels.
Mounsieur Chastileon, Admiral of France, at the match of Charles the 9th his
Sister with the King of Navarre, was invited with the chief of the Protestants
by the King to celebrate the marriage at Paris, and to confirm Peace; the
Protestants at Rochel advised him not to go, but importunity of others
prevailed with him, he went and was massacred for it. Although he was of great
wisdom, he could not discern what way the wheels would move; the wisest man
is too weak to spell out the meaning of the wheels, and mysteries of
providence; once before he had refused to come to Court at the Kings sending,
who sent Mounsieur Du Tore his cosen to advertise him of important affairs he
had to communicate; he suspecting, answered, the King means me no good, and
tell him, there be no Count Egmonds in France; I will not suffer my head so
easily to be cut off, as he did in Flanders. Roderick King of Spain to assure
himself against the children and friends of King Vitiza, whom he had deposed,
dismounted all the strong holds, and disarmed the people; this strengthened him
against domestic enemies, not foreign attempts; For the Moors invading him,
shortly after overthrew him, and finding little resistance, in seven or eight
months conquered almost all Spain. The Britains molested by the Picts and
Scots, called in the Saxons, who for some time served them to purpose, but in the
end conquered them and their Country. These could not foresee what would be
the issue of things; the motions of providence are so secret and various, that
it lies not within the compass of man's power to make certain conclusions
therefrom.

5. There is a connection of causes and things together in the world. Hosea
2.21, 22. I will hear the heavens, and they shall hear the earth; that shall
hear the corn, wine, and oil, and they shall hear Jezreel; as in
Architecture, there is a dependence and connection.

VER. 17. When they went, they went upon their four sides, and they returned
not when they went; and so on to the end of the 21.


IN these Verses we have two things:

1. We have the effect of the wheels, which is motion laid down in the 17,
19, 20, and 21. Verses.

And 2. The adjuncts of them, which are two, 1. Height. 2. Eyes.
in the 18th verse.

The commodiousness of their motion for all parts, and the form of it, are
both in this 17th verse. The Hebrew is, In going, they went to their four
four sides, to the four parts which were next to their sides, or through the
four parts; and so the sense is; they went to, into, or through the four
parts of the world: if you read it according to our translation, upon them; the
sense is, when the four living creatures moved, the wheels moved upon their
sides; It Is our phrase, when we ask one, which side went he of such a man? we
answer, upon, or on his right or left side: but the better sense to me is, they
went according to their four sides. Look what side, what part of the world
was appointed them, that the wheels went to, and moved in.

And returned not] They came not back, but went forward: There might be
variety of motions, but no back motions, no retrogradations, being once gone
forth, they returned not.

The observation first is this: That in all parts, humane things move to their
appointed period, and there is no return of them being once there. Pharaoh and
his Host came to their period in the bottom of the Sea, and never saw Egypt
more. The Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, have taken up their lodgings
in the dust, and return no more: What David said of the child, I shall go to
it, it shall not return to me; is a fit motto to all creatures, they must go
to those are gone before, not they return to these: Cities, people, families,
silver, gold, fine linen, they must see that corruption those saw in former
days.

2. That inferior causes move constantly in their motions, to do the will of
God: The wheels turned not when they went, nothing could turn them back; nor
the Angels in their administrations, but they go on: We think it is the
creature makes stops, lets, in the affairs of the world; but it is Gods hand,
his providence does it, the wheels, all inferior causes proceed in their
motions, till God check them, and cause a stand; Esa. 43.13. I will work, and
who shall let it?

VER. 18. As for their Rings they were so high, that they were dreadful, and
their Rings were full of eyes, round about them four.

19. And when the living creatures went, the wheels went by them; And when the
living creatures were lift up from the earth, the wheels were lift up.

20. Whither soever the Spirit was to go they went, thither was their Spirit
to go, and the wheels were lifted up over against them: for the Spirit of the
living creatures was in the wheels.

21. When those went, these went, and when those stood, these stood: and when
those were lifted up from the earth, the wheels were lifted up over against
them; for the Spirit of the living creatures was in the wheels.


IN the 18th verse, we have the rings of the wheels described, from their
highness, and eyenesse. They were so high, they caused terror, so full of
eyes, they caused wonder: The Hebrew reading is somewhat different, it runs
thus; And the rings of them, both height to them, and fear to them, or by
reason of them; that is, Propter cas.
the wheels were so high, that they bred terror, struck fear into the Prophet.
The word Rings in the Hebrew is Backs, their backs were high, dreadful, that
is, their Circumferences or Rings were so, of such breadth and altitude, (for
there is no difference between those in rings and circles) that they caused
fear to those looked upon them.

Now what is meant by this height and greatness of the wheels, must be opened
unto you; and it is this: the motions of second causes and changes of things
here in this world, are so great, so incomprehensible by man, that they produce
fears and terrors to the sons of men; Men are troubled, that they cannot
fathom the deeps, and measure the height and breadth of the wheels: when men
see times and seasons changed, kingdoms dashed in pieces, the godly brought
into bondage, the wicked advanced, truth persecuted, errors in credit, justice
trodden down, and all things moving by contrary motions; they stand amazed, and
not able to reach the causes of things, to measure the wheels, and see into the
exact motions of them, they become sensible of their own weakness, and say, O
the height of the wheels! O the shallowness of our spirits!

Observe. 1. That the causes and motions, and changes in the world, are unknown
to the sons of men; the wheels are too high for them to measure; man is so
beetlelish and purblind, that the dim sight of his soul pierces not into the
secrets and knowledge of causes, Eccles. 3.11.
it only comes at the outside and extremities of things, the superficies of
the wheel, but not the height and depth of it, not the true nature and causes
of things; so that admiration, opinion, not science is begotten in man; this
Agrippa knew, that writ a Book of the vanity of Sciences: and Zanche, that writ
a Tractat, Quod nihil scitur; and Socrates was judged the learned man, so that
he said, This I know, that I know nothing; ^ Cor. 13.12.
and above all these, the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 8.2. If any man think he
knows any thing, he knows nothing yet as he ought to know; and elsewhere,
We see through a glass darkely, things are a riddle to us, we know not what
to make of them. Look into the world, and what can we make of it? the wheels in
every quarter have such a height as none can reach; second causes move so
suddenly, as none can spy them out: Cast your eye upon Physical wheels, and
they are too high for Physicians to measure: what reason can they give of
Antipathies; or that some trees should have a venomous root on the one side,
and a remedy on the other? they meet with diseases and difficulties that are
Ludibria medicorum, and must refer you to occult qualities: Cast your eye
upon Political wheels, and there you will find such heighths and depths, as
neither Ahitophel can measure, nor Machiavil can sound: Look at Theological
wheels and motions, Deorum crimen syllatum faelix, Sen.
and there be such heighths that none of the Prophets nor Apostles have been
able to measure; I will give you an instance in two or three: Jer. 12.1, 2.
Righteous art thou, O Lord, yet let me talk with thee of thy judgments:
wherefore does the way of the wicked prosper? wherefore are all they happy that
deal very trecherously? Jeremiah a great Prophet is puzzled at this height of
the wheel; Thou have planted them, yea, they have taken root: they grow, yea,
they bring forth fruit, thou art near in their mouth, and far from their
reins: Job is at a stand in this case, Chapt. 12.7. Wherefore do the wicked
live, become old; yea, and are mighty in power? God puts Job to it in the 38,
39, 40, 41. Chap. So Asaph, Psalm. 73. and Hab. 1.3. were troubled at the
prosperity of the wicked, and could not take the altitude of the wheels in
their days; Nature nor Grace could do it. If Solomon knew not the way of an
Eagle in the air, of a Serpent upon the rock, of a ship in the midst of the
Sea, of a man with a maid, Prove. 30.19. how shall we know the motions of the
wheels in the world?

2. That the consideration of the unsearchablenesse of Gods ways, should beget
fear and trembling in us; the wheels had a height and dreadfulnesse upon that
height: When a man comes to the sea shore, beholds the vastness and strange
motion of it, and finds he is puzzled, fear creeps upon him from the
apprehension of the greatness and Majesty of God, who sits upon the floods,
and commands the deeps: so here, when we think of the wheels, how high they
are, that we cannot search out the cause of their motions, this way or that
way, our souls should tremble at the Majesty of that God which sets such mighty
wheels awork: Psalm. 36.6. Thy judgments are a great deep; men's sins are a
great deep, and Satan's ways are called a depth; but Gods judgments, his ways
in the wheels are the greatest deep of all, they are unsearchable.

That Christian kingdoms are shaken in pieces with wars, when Heathen
kingdoms are spared; that there is such unequal dispensation of the means of
grace in the world; that the greatest part are without the knowledge of God and
Christ to this day; that many able men are laid by, or cast into corners, where
are but handfuls of people, and great towns where are multitudes, have no
Ministers, or such as preach holiness, and the power of godliness out of
their parishes; that people are most hardened under the most powerful means of
grace; that there be such unequal distributions of riches, talents, of nature
and grace; that precious young Ministers and others are taken away in a time of
great need, when others that are vile and base are spared; that wicked Pirates
prosper at Sea, when honest men are shipwrackt; that those have little or no
means thrive, and those have the best who are barren: Gods working in sinful
actions, his fitting vessels for destruction, his leaving his ancient people
the Jews sixteen hundred years under a curse; Romans 11.23.
O the depth! how unsearchable are his ways?

The next thing in the Verse to be touched, is the eyes in these rings.

And the rings were full of eyes round about them four, or, on every side to
them four.
Every wheel had eyes: they were stellatae oculis, bedeckt with eyes, as the
heaven with stars; there were eyes within, and eyes without, and not a few, but
many; every ring, every wheel was full of eyes.

By eyes, we are to understand the active and infinite providence of God, which
runs through all things, 2 Chronicles. 16.9. The eyes of the Lord run to and fro
throughout the whole earth; that is, divine providence is active every where.

The Scripture by eyes, referring to God, intends: first, his knowledge and
notice of things, Prove. 15.3. The eyes of the Lord are in every place,
beholding the evil and the good: secondly, his care, Psalm. 34.15. The eyes of
the Lord are upon the righteous; that is, he cares for them: thirdly, his
direction, Psalm. 42.8. I will guide thee with mine eye; and these eyes note out
Gods inspection, care and ordering the wheels in all their motions, and that in
all quarters. The rings were full of eyes, and whatever the thoughts of men
were, they moved according to direction of divine providence.

Observe. 1. That how ever the wheels and motions of them be too high for men,
and dreadful unto them, yet they are not so to God; he sees into all the
wheels, they have eyes on every side, God knows them thoroughly, their
essences, qualities, operations; we cannot pry into the state of Kingdoms,
Councels, Armies, Cities; there be as secrets of States, Arcana imperis, and
arcana rotarum.
so secrets of wheels in those States, which none know but God, and God knows
them perfectly: let wheels be never so great, terrible, move never such strange
and cross ways; as Kings, Armies, Parliaments are great wheels, and have
unknown motions; yet they are subject to the Lords eyes, he sees into all their
secrets, and sees more in their motions then they themselves.

2. The motions of the wheels are considerable and judicious, they are not
carried on blindly; how ever they seem to be carried, Non caeco impetu
volvuntur rotae.
yet they are carried by reason and counsel; there be eyes in the wheels; when
men do things rashly, injudiciously, we say; Have you no eyes in your head?
here be eyes in the rings, and they move not casually. Those motions in the
world, that seem most confused, are composed and ordered motions: Are rich men
made poor; honorable men base? are conquerers made captives? do servants ride,
and Princes go on foot? are the wicked oppressors in the seats of justice? are
the godly beneath, and the vile above? are the counsels of Jesuits, forainers,
and desperate malignants entertained, and others rejected? are there civil wars
in a Land, great plundering, spoiling of Ministers, Christians, Parliament men
themselves? these things are not done without considerate and judicious motions
of the wheels: Acts 4.27, 28. When Herod, Pilate, Gentiles, Jews, were
gathered together against Christ, were not the motions then, (though inhumane,
bloody, and murtherous) considerate, and providentiall motions? The Text says,
They did whatsoever the hand and counsel of the Lord determined before to be
done; it was no blind business, the wheels of it were full of eyes, and moved
by the motions of heaven. Gods own eye, heart, and head were in it. And now,
when the Herod's, Pilates, and Malignants of the world do stir against Christ
and his members, the wheels move considerately.

3. The motions of the rings, wheels, and all second causes, are certain,
arriving at the end appointed. They are full of eyes, which direct them to
their journeyes end, so that they miss not the mark they aim at. What if
many second causes be ignorant, blind, know not their own motions; yet if they
have guides infallible to lead them, it is sufficient to conduct them to the
intended end. If a seeing dog can lead a blind beggar from place to place,
direct his motion to the desired end; shall not the eye of providence lead any,
all second causes to their end? Providence is an unerring thing, and
disappoints not God of his expectation. The Pilot carries a great ship from
harbor to harbor, over the Seas, through the storms, and fulfils the mind of
the Master; and so Providence carries the great wheels up and down, to the very
place appointed.

4. The least motions of the wheels are not without providence; some think that
the great things in kingdoms and the world, are transacted by providence, but
for they lesser they pass in a casual manner, providence reaches them not;
but the eyes were every where, the wheels were full of eyes; not a few eyes,
here and there one, but in every part, that so man's mind might be freed from
such sinister thoughts, as that there should be any motion of any wheel without
the direction and influence of providence. God has made the least and greatest
creatures, and he causes the least and greatest motions. Providentia ita
cura^ omnia, ut unum aliquid, ita singula, ut si illud curaret unicum, August
in Confess: And the Schoolmen say, that providence is infinita in omnibus,
infinita in singulis.
Let us pitch our thoughts upon some lesser motion, the dispensation of a lot,
the fall of a hair from the head, the preparations of the heart, the answer of
the tongue, these are all of the Lord, and directed by providence; the earth
loses not a pile of grass; the trees not a leaf; the water not a fish; the
air not a bird, without an ordinance of providence.

5. Providence orders the motion of the rings and wheels in all parts, all the
world over; not one, two, or three wheels had eyes, but all four had eyes
round about them: God by his divine providence ordered things as well in
Babylon as in Sion; Providence wrought in Egypt, and in the red Sea. As there
are wheels in all parts of the world, in all Kingdoms of the earth; so there
are eyes in all those wheels.

6. The works of God in disposing and governing second causes, are admirable,
glorious, and beautiful works: The wheels were full of eyes, fitly disposed,
wisely carried on, certainly attaining their ends. Could we see the eyes in the
wheels, we should never fault the works of God in the world, but stand and
admire their glory and beauty; when the heavens are veiled with clouds, we have
sour and discontented thoughts of the heavens themselves, but when the clouds
are gone, that we can see the Stars, those eyes of heaven, then we admire
their beauty and glory; and certainly, it is a most glorious sight to see the
heavens full of stars in a clear night; and it is no less glorious to see
the eyes in the wheels, and the choice acts of providence in all their turnings
and windings: Caussin says, the world in all its parts is ruled like a paper
with music lines, and if we could see those lines, they would be as glorious
as lines of gold.

7. The motions of the wheels are such as that they hold out a providence to
all; there is something in the wheels that none can reach, and something that
any may see, they are full of eyes, and the weakest may see one providence or
other; if not all the eyes, yet some of them; there be mysteries in the wheels
to exercise the greatest, and eyes to satisfy the weakest: As no man but sees
the stars in the heaven at one time or other; so no man but may see the eyes in
the wheels. That evil does not overrun all, and the wicked devour the good,
argues a providence. In one of the Conanie Islands, Johannes Metellus says,
there is a tree which drops water at every leaf, and suffices the Inhabitants
and their flocks, being a dry Island without water. Mithridates, when in his
cradle, had his clothes consumed with lightning, and his body not touched: A
father and a son shipwrackt at sea, the son sailed to shore upon the back of
his dead father. In these particulars and such like providence does eminently
appear.

VERSE. 19. And when the living creatures went, the wheels went by them: and
when the living creatures were lift up from the earth, the wheels were lift up.

21. When those went these went, when those stood these stood; and when those
were lifted up from the earth, the wheels were lifted up over against them.


Here we have: 1. The motion of the wheels farther commended unto us. 2. Their
station. 3. The time of both.


THe motion was forwards, upwards and downwards: and for the time of their
motion and station, it was when the creatures moved or stood: as the Cherubims
moved, so moved the wheels, forward, upward, downward; and when they stood
still, the wheels stood. The kind and manner of their motions, with their rest,
depended on the living creatures; they moved equally at their motion. What Is
meant by the lifting up of the wheels must be inquired; for Angels to be lifted
up is not strange, they are heavenly creatures, and heaven is their habitation.
But for the wheels to be lifted up, that is very strange, we must search out
the sense; for into heaven they were not lifted. Expositers leave us in the
dark, all except one that I have met with pass over this difficulty; and what
I find in that one is this: the lifting up of the Angels and the wheels,
refer to the supreme cause, and seems to tell us, that inferior and
superior causes, wheels and Angels are under the regiment of the first cause;
and if we take the words actively, as Montanus does render them, viz. the
living creatures in lifting up themselves from the earth, the wheels lift up
themselves also; and that is, they looked up to heaven for direction and
assistance, which may well be called a lifting up themselves, Psalm. 25.1. Unto
the Lord do I lift up my soul; that is, to thee do I look for counsel, comfort,
strength.

If we take the words passively, when the living creatures are lift up from
the earth, the wheels were lift up, then I will give you my thoughts what the
sense may be, and it is this: the lifting up is not meant of lifting up to
heaven, but to service: when God should more then in an ordinary way let out
himself to the Angels, give them new light, new strength, and so lift them up
to great service, then the wheels also were lifted up proportionably to do
their parts; and the words in the Text invite me to conceive it to be the
sense; because it is said, The spirit of the living creatures was in the wheels;
when God by his Spirit lifted up the Angels to great imploiments, then that
Spirit lifted up the wheels, the second causes to more then ordinary service:
and the word lifting up, notes service, a higher degree of it then before: 2
King. 19.4. Lift up thy prayer for the remnant that are left. Hezekiah sends to
Isaiah when Rabshakeh blasphemed, and Jerusalem was besieged, and says,
Isaiah! thou art a Prophet, and have more then an ordinary measure of the
Spirit, lift up thy prayer, let it be extraordinary, such as may lift up the
spirits of all to join with thee, higher then ever, such as may lift up
Jerusalem out of misery. So Jehoiaehin, when he was set up upon the throne to
govern and to do great service, it is said, his head was lifted up, Jer. 52.
and so in Psalm. 12.10. the lifting up of Gods hand notes doing of some great
matter.

The next thing inquirable into, is the standing of the living creatures and
the wheels, when the one stood, the other stood; do the Angels stand still at
any time? they are active spirits, and always in motion. Two things this
standing implies:

1. A cessation from any service in hand, at the will and pleasure of God, if
he would call off the Angels from their employments before they were finished.
In this sense the Angels are said to stand, and so the second causes they used,
although they were both employed in some other service: or,

2. When they had perfected any work in hand, then they were said to stand, not
idle, but in expectation of a new Commission; like faithful servants, when
their work is done, present themselves before their Master, and demand their
pleasure; so the Angels, and second causes, hearken what God will say more, and
what is the next word and work to be done, they wait upon God for new
instructions.

Observe. 1. The motions of this inferior world, and the second causes in it,
do depend upon higher causes, even heavenly motions, the ministry of Angels:
The observation is plain from the words, When the living creatures went, the
wheels went by them. If the Angels move, the wheels move also: they are great
things the Angels have in their hands; the wheels of Nature, of States and
Kingdoms, yea, of the Church it self.

2. Nothing in the world is casual; many things seem so to us, but in veritate
rei are not so; all things here below move at the motions of others; and that
which is ordered by the motion of Angels or God himself, cannot be casual. The
wheels are moved by Angels, Angels by God himself. God directs all; nothing
happens, falls out amongst us, wherein the hand of God or Angels is not; things
are not accidental: if a thing could drop from the heavens, or be done on
earth without God and his Angels, that were casual and accidental indeed. And
because men see not the immediate or remote causes of things, who they be move
the wheels on earth, therefore they attribute effects, events and accidental
things to fortune, chance, luck, to good, to bad days and hours, which
proclaims men's ignorance and forgetfulness of God, Qui paratis mensam
fortunae, Hier. Qui ponitis mensam fortunae, Vulg.
Isai. 65.11. Those that forget God, prepared a table for that troop; for
Fortune, some read it; but those who know God, acknowledge his eye and hand,
seeing and ordering all.

Austin misses his way, and so escapes the danger of death was intended:
another being in a despairing humor, seeks a knife, a halter to undo himself,
and finds a great treasure: a third has his ring drops off his finger into
the Sea, and after finds it in the bowels of a fish. God so directs all these
accidental things, that there is nothing done but by a secret instinct and
hint from himself, Absconditum quid?
and in all such passages we should mind something of God.

3. That nothing can let the motion of the wheels when Angels and Providence
would have them stir. When the living creatures moved, the wheels went
presently; it is not in the power of second causes, of men or devils, to hinder
the work of God in the hand of Angels. The King of Persia may withstand Gabriel
21. days together, Dan. 10.13. but the wheels moved all the time, Gabriel
prevailed, and Gods work prospered in his hand: wicked men make head against
God, Providence, Angels, and think to stop the wheels when they move not on
their side, but all is in vain; if a man should catch hold of a Chariot,
running to stop or turn the course of it, were it not folly or madness in him?
and because he would be the Chariots remora, that may prove his ruin: so here,
men and devils do ruin themselves in opposing the wheels, which
notwithstanding all oppositions, proceed and keep their course. And let me tell
you a riddle, Gods works go on through the hearts, heads and hands of his
greatest enemies, Providence fetches them in, and makes them subservient to the
work; they oil the wheels, although they know it not, and forward the work,
though against their wills. God in this kind makes use of kine and cart, men and
devils, yea, any creature to carry his Ark to its place.

4. That God does sometimes raise the spirit of the creature to more then an
ordinary height, and inables it to unwonted service, The living creatures and
wheels were lifted up. So Moses, when called up to the mount, his spirit was
raised much, else the service had been too hot and hard for him. Joshuah was
advanced when it was told him, that there should not any man stand before him
all the days of his life, Josh. 1.5. Jeremy tells the Jews, that the Chaldeans
whom they thought would depart, and not meddle with their City, he tells them,
that though they had smitten the whole army of the Chaldeans, and that there
remained but wounded men, yet they should rise up every man in his Tent, and
burn the City with fire, Jer. 37.10. When men are wounded, thrust through, as
the Hebrew is, they can have but little strength; (...)
how should they be able to do it? God would lift them up to that service, as
David when he grappled with the Bear and Lion, incountred with Goliath, had his
spirit lifted up to a great height. Hence that in Zachary 12.8. H^ that is
feeble among you at that day, shall be as David, that is, such a warrier as
David, who, though a young stripling, slew a Bear, a Lion, and Goliath; and the
house of David shall be as God, and as the Angel of the Lord. The godly, though
weak, yet shall be lifted up to divine and Angelical strength; this was made
good in the time of the Maccabees, when the people of God were weak, Antiochus
fierce and vile, then God raised up the spirit of Judas, Jonathan, and Simeon,
to do extraordinary things; this was also made good in the time of the
Apostles: what great things did they do; and Paul says, I can do all things
through Christ that strengthens me; what bitter things did they and others
suffer? and it was not common strength, but special influence, Phil. 1. To you
it is given, not only to believe, but also to suffer: Blandina's spirit was
heighthned above the malice and torments of men, for having animated her
children to suffer, and sent them as conquerors to Christ their King, she
comes forth to suffer before the tormentors cheerfully, (...) Eusebius. lib. 5.
as called to supper with Christ her husband, as one comes to a marriage
supper, and after stripes, tearing with wild beasts, burnings, putting into a
net, and tossings by a Bull, being without sense of torment by reason of her
faith and conference she had with Christ, at last they killed her with the
sword; and the enemies confessed, they never saw such a woman, suffering such
things so courageously and constantly. As sometimes God suspends the ordinary
operation of the creature, the Lions mouths are shut, they touch not Daniel;
the fire burns not the three children: so, sometimes he lifts up and extends
the operation and strength of the creature to an extraordinary height; the
winds, what virtue does God put into them? how does he raise them? what
terrible work do they make at Sea and Land, tear Navies in pieces, sink them in
the deeps, and toss Ships out of the water upon the dry land? Ravens fed
Elijah morning and evening, he goes in the strength of a cake and a cruze of
water forty days, 1 King. 19. God has lifted up many in these days to do
more then ordinary service. Ezra. 1.5. God had raised their spirits to go up to
build the house of the Lord, so Hag. 1.14.

5. That God at his pleasure puts stands to the motions of the second causes;
the Angels stood, and the wheels stood, and this was by the overruling hand of
God, that can stop the course of nature, any wheels or agents whatsoever. Josh.
1^.12, 13. God staid the course of the Sun and Moon, and made them stand
still the space of a whole day; and hereupon some gather, that the ebbings and
flowings of all Seas ceased. In Hezekiahs days the Sun went backward ten
degrees; God stopped the course of the waters, and made them as steady as walls
and mountains when the Israelites were to go through the red Sea; Does not he
shut up the wombs of those are likely enough to be pregnant, and prevent
generation? did not he take off the wheels of Pharaohs Chariot? God can put a
stand to the greatest wheels, 1 King. 12.21. when an army of 180000. chosen men
was brought into the field, to fight and fetch back the kingdom that was
wheeled over to Jeroboam; see what a stand God put to that army, Verse. 24. Ye
shall not fight against your brethren, return every man to his habitation; they
did so, and presently that mighty army was disarmed. The buying in of
Impropriations, a work of great and good concernment, God put a stand to it.
The undertaking for Ireland has the wheel stopped, if not taken off; The motion
of the wheels to the Isle of Providence are stayed by the eye of providence;
Are there not stands in our consultations, and does not God often take wisdom
from the wise; and understanding from the prudent? are there not stands in our
Millitary affairs? the mighty men do not always find their arms. Has not
God often put a stand to the enterprise of our adversaries? It Is the Lord that
has hedged up their way with thorns, and walled a wall that they have not
found their paths; and God has hedged up our ways, that we have not found our
paths to a full and thorough reformation. This great wheel has great stops;
the children are come to the birth, but there is no strength to bring forth:
neither does Gods work cease, when he makes stops: A man who is printing a
Book, defers the Edition, because he will make an Addition; if it be delayed
it is enlarged, and that is no loss; stops of providence in the wheels of the
world are Gods Parentheses, and while they are writing, the work goes on.

VER. 20. Whithersoever the Spirit was to go, they went, thither was their
spirit to go, and the wheels were lifted up over against them: for the spirit
of the living creatures was in the wheels.


IN this Verse is laid before us the procreant cause of the wheels motion; and
that is the spirit, which is the first and highest agent, and moves both
superior and inferior causes. This spirit is set out emphatically; the
spirit, or, that spirit; (...)
not the spirit of the Angels, but the eternal Spirit of God which was in the
Angels, or the living creatures, that Spirit was in the wheels; and with what
motion it moved the living creatures, with the same it moved the wheels: this
is the scope to show that the four living creatures and four wheels were moved
by the same Spirit of God.

Touching this Spirit, I spoke in the 12th Verse, where I also showed you how
the Spirit is said to go, and move from place to place.

This answers a secret objection; How could the wheels move at the motion of
the living creatures? they are dead and senseless things, without any motive
virtue in them. And this objection is fully answered in these words: the Spirit
of life was in the wheels.

That is rendered, the spirit of the living creatures, (...) Spiritus vitalis,
or, spiritus animalis.
is in the Hebrew, Spiritus vitae, the Spirit of life, the inliv'ning,
quickening spirit, the lively active spirit; or the spirit of the living
creatures, and per enallagen numeri, by a change of the singular number into
the plural, the spirit of the living creatures, and so the sense runs, that
Spirit was in them, the same was in the wheels.

Object. If the same Spirit be in the wheels, are not they also living
creatures, having the same spirit and motion?

Answ. If I should say they were moved, as if they had the Spirit in them, this
might help the difficulty, but does not satisfy the Text; which says the
Spirit, was in the wheels: therefore know, that as the living God is in every
thing, moving and acting them according to their several natures, and yet does
not make all to be living creatures; so the Spirit of God was in these wheels,
not animating, inliv'ning, but moving them to those services were commanded and
appointed.

Observe. 1. That second causes move not of themselves, neither superior, nor
inferior; not the wheels which are weaker here beneath, nor the Angels which
are stronger and above, they move not, but at the motion of the Spirit; whither
that was to go they went: Earth, Water, Winds, Beasts, Fowls, Men, their
Councels, Wars, Peace, Trades, they all move ad motum Spiritus, it is the
Spirit of God that moves all the wheels. All motions, all wheels are subject to
the Spirit, and regulated by it. When the Devil accused, tempted, smote Job,
he and all his motions were ordered by a higher power; So when the Devils
entered into the swine, they did what, and moved whither the Spirit would have
them to do, to go.

2. No creatures, wheels, nor Angels, no causes inferior or superior, can go
otherwhere, or act otherwise, then the Spirit would have them. Whither the
Spirit went, thither they went, they moved not before the Spirit moved them;
and when they moved, they moved that way the Spirit moved: Devils and wicked
men cannot be any where but where the Spirit would have them to be, nor do any
thing but what the Spirit would have don. Pilate with the Gentiles and people of
Israel, were gathered together to do whatsoever the hand and counsel of God
had determined before to be done, Act. 4.27, 28. For the Spirit is the
supreme, most potent, and efficacious agent, overruling all motions, so that
no creature can move any other way then it does. Prove. 21.1. The heart of the
King is in the hand of the Lord, he turns it whithersoever he will. Kings
cannot turn them whithersoever they will; ill Counselors cannot draw them
which way they will, but they move which way the Spirit and providence of God
will have them move. Est actuosissima illa operatio Dei quam vitare and mutare
non possit. Sive sinat, sive incl net Deus, ipsu^ sinere vel inclinare, non sit
nisi volente and operante Deo: quia voluntas regis non potest effugere action
Dei omnipotentis, quia rapitur omnium voluntas, ut velit and faciat, sive sit
bona, sive sit mala.
This turning or inclination, says Luther, is that strong operation of God
which the King cannot shun or change. If Kings hearts go after outlandish
women, as Solomon's; if carried to ill Counselors, as Rehoboams; if to
Idolatry, as Jeroboams; if to root out the godly and godliness it self, as
Ahabs; if to ruin their Kingdom, as Ahaz's did; if to shed innocent blood, as
Manasses did; the hearts of Kings are in the hands of the Lord, he turns them
whithersoever he will, in all those motions he acts in just judgment, not
changing their wills, but making use of them to bring about his own designs.

3. The motions of the wheels are not unseasonable; when the living creatures
went, then the wheels went, and what is the cause of their motion; the Spirit
was in the wheels, and the Spirit was in the living creatures: if we condemn
their motions and changes as untimely, we shall question and condemn the work
and wisdom of the Spirit, which is infinitely wise and incontrollable in all
its operations: men, even the best of them, are apt to fault the motions of the
wheels, and to censure the acts of Providence as unseasonable; the counsel is
not good at this time that Achitophel has given, 2 Samuel 17.7. Did the Spirit
then move that wheel seasonably? yes, because the counsel, though not good for
David, whose destruction it tended unto, yet it was good for the ruin of
Achitophel and Absalom, and that was the intent of the Spirit in moving that
wheel, Verse. 14. The Lord had appointed to defeat the good counsel of
Achitophel, to the intent to bring evil upon Absalom, and Achitophel too.
What? civil wars in England, when Ireland lies a bleeding to death; when such
a time to vindicate the Palatinate, and wrongs sustained at the hands of the
Emperor; when such a time to help the Protestants in France; what, now to have
King and Parliament divided? now to be imbroyled in a bloody, civil war, is
not this most unseasonable? Stay thy thoughts and censures, O vain man; The
Spirit of God is a Spirit of wisdom, and knows when it is best to move the
wheels. No Musician tunes it better then the Spirit of God, had these changes
and motions been, and our enemies abroad at peace, they would have taken the
advantage of our divisions and wars, and made a prey of us; seeing therefore we
must be let blood, or die, this great and wise Physician, the Spirit in the
wheels has done it seasonably: Are great towns plundered? Counties disturbed?
Families impoverished? or, Churches dissolved? the righteous smitten; the
wicked spared? and kingdoms shaken into pieces? these motions, changes, are
not unseasonable; they are all in their appointed time: this war is in it is
appointed time, Ezra 4.17. There is mention of peace, and at such time, the
time is observed; so now, the war, and at such a time, such a time as is
appointed, as the Spirit of God judges fittest. Eccl. 3.8. There is a time of
war and a time of peace, verse. 3. a time to kill, and a time to heal, a time to
break down, and a time to build up; the Spirit knows and observes those times
punctually, and moves not a wheel but in its due time, and so the motions of
all are beautiful in Gods eye, and should be free from man's blame; man knows
not his time, Eccles. 9.12. But it is not so with the Spirit, it knows times and
seasons, and never misses to move the wheels in their due season. The travel
of a woman at nine months is not more seasonable then the turning of the
wheels at what time the Spirit pleases: If the tree, Psalm. 1. bring forth her
fruit in due season, and the Spirit moves the wheels in due season, none are
too early, none too late.

4. The consent which is between heaven and earth; the Angels and wheels is from
the Spirit of God which moves in them. When the living creatures went the
wheels went, when they stood, these stood, when they were lifted up, these were
lifted up; and what is the ground of this harmony? the Spirit was in them, that
acted them, and ordered their motions; having the same Spirit, they went the
same way, and did the same work without difference, without contentions; The
Spirit of God is a Spirit of union, where that moves it moves not to discord,
but to mind the same things, and to move the same ways: Numb. 11.16, 17. When
the same Spirit which was upon Moses was put upon the seventy Elders, then they
judged as he judged, then they moved the same way, and did bear the burden of
the people together with Moses: and v. 25. then they prophesied, and it being
told Moses, that Eldad and Medad prophesied, he will make no breach upon it,
but finding the same Spirit in them that was in himself, said, Would God all
the people were Prophets, and that the Lord would put his Spirit upon them, v.
29 he knew the same Spirit would move them the same way that he went: So
Elisha, when he had received the Spirit of God which Elijah had, he moved his
way, carried on that work he did: 2 King. 2. Wicked Balaam, when acted by Gods
Spirit, consents with the true Prophets, and prophesies the happiness of
Israel, and cannot curse the people of God, though tempted and hired to it,
Numb. 24.

5. That the wheels readily do the will of God, and follow the Spirit, where
ever it goes, thither their spirit was to go, the Spirit was in the motion; and
therefore they are said to have eyes, and the Spirit in them, and to move at
the motion of the Spirit; wheels have roundnesse, and so readiness to move,
but not Gods way, full of eyes they are, and look at Gods ends; but if they
had not the Spirit in them, they would not move that way, or if they did, it
would not be without dispute, sloth, murmuring; it is the Spirit makes them move
the right way, and readily in that way; where the Spirit is in any, there the
motion is right and ready; Air, Sea, Land, have no vigor in them, but what
the Spirit puts in, and they move as the Spirit will have them: Psalm. 148.8.
Fire and hail, snow and vapor, stormy wind, fulfilling his word, they all do
the will of God, fulfill his word readily; they have the vigor of Gods Spirit
in them: Genesis 1.2. The Spirit moved upon the face of the waters, not an Angel,
not the wind, but the eternal Spirit of God, and so they move by virtue of the
Spirit into their place, the Spirit creates, cherishes and sustains all
things; and they are all obedient to the call of the Spirit, and tread in the
paths of it, all creatures move after the Spirit: Psalm. 104.30. Thou sendest
forth thy Spirit; they are created, and thou renewest the face of the earth;
Herbs, Plants, Trees, Beasts, Fowls, all living creatures are created and
formed by the Spirit, and move according to those principles, and instincts the
Spirit puts into them, their motions and services are no other then what the
Spirit leads them unto, and those motions they readily perform.

6. The wheels and second causes do go on and move incessantly, unweariably, in
the way the Spirit puts them, they went whither the Spirit went; neither the
Spirit nor the wheels do faint or fail in their motions.

7. The Spirit of God is a living and lively Spirit, a Spirit of liveliness,
it is the Spirit of the living God. 2 Cor. 3.5. And the living God cannot have a
dead and livelesse spirit; it is a Spirit of life: Romans 8.2. The law of the
Spirit of life in Christ Jesus. The Spirit has life in it self, it gives life
to all: Job 33.4. The Spirit of God has made me, and the breath of the
Almighty has given me life, all life comes from this Fountain and Author of
life; Eve was called the mother of all living, that is, of all men and women;
but the Spirit is the father of all living, men, women, and other creatures.
It Is the Spirit that maintains life, Act. 17.28. Job 27.3. All the while my
breath is in me, the Spirit is in my nostrils, the Spirit of God is in that
breath, and maintains life by it. The Spirit quickens and improves life, 2 Cor.
3.6. The Spirit quickens; not only makes life, (...).
but makes lively; it is the Spirit that quickneth, not only from death, but
from deadness and dullness: Cant. 4.16. Awake, O North Wind, and come thou
South, blow upon my garden, that the spices thereof may flow out: the meaning
is; Let the Spirit breath in the Ordinances, and quicken up the Saints, and
then they will be lively, active and fragrant as spicerie. The Spirit rested
upon Christ, Isa. 11. and he was quick in understanding, and quick in
operation: Act. 10.38. he was anointed with the Holy Ghost, and with power,
and went about doing good; the Spirit made them lively; and so it is the work of
the Spirit that makes the Saints lively and active; it is the Spirit that leads
unto life.

8. It Is that Spirit of God which works all in all things; the Spirit is in
the wheels, and works in them and by them; we speak not now of the choice
operations of the Spirit in the Elect, but the common operations of the Spirit
in all creatures. There be admirable qualities, instincts and excellent
operations in Plants, Birds, Beasts, what ever they be, it is the Spirit that
wrought them there; the Spirit is in the wheels, the instincts in the Bees and
Birds to build so curiously; in the Locusts, to go out by bands; in the Ants,
to gather their meat in Summer; in the Conneys, to make their houses in the
rocks; in the Spider, to weave so fine a web, is put in by the Spirit of God. 1 Samuel 10.6. The Spirit of the Lord will come upon thee, and thou shall
prophecy, and be turned into another man; that is, thou shall have gifts fit
for government; the Spirit will instruct and enable thee to rule this people.

The consideration of this point should be a stay to our spirits, which way
soever the wheels move, the Spirit of God is in them; When we look abroad,
behold the cross and confused motions of the world, our hearts repine,
murmr, sink in us, shift, and we are ready to start aside out of our places
to unwarrantable practices; but let us remember the Spirit of God is in the
wheels, and stirs them at its own pleasure; If Shimei curse, David sees, God
in that motion, and says, Let him alone, God has bid him: so Job, when all
was taken away by the Chaldeans, Sabeans, he was so far from impatience, that
he falls a praising and blessing God: there is no just ground of impatience in
the world; it is the Spirit in the wheels, which moves them.

It should also help our faith, because in all designs of men, motions of the
wheels, God has his design going on; the Spirit is in the wheels, which is an
invisible, but a strong agent, and does invisible work, carry on the Lords
design, how ever the motions of the wheels seem to us; let the wheel be
entangled, run, stand still, or move contrary ways, yet Gods work goes on, and
our faith should get up.

VER. 22, etc. And the likeness of the firmament upon the heads of the living
creature, was as the color of terrible Crystal stretched forth over their
heads above.

23. And under the firmament were their wings, straight the one toward the
other: every one had two, which covered on this side, and every one had two,
which covered on that side their bodies.

24. And when they went, I heard the noise of their wings, like the noise of
great waters; as the voice of the Almighty, the voice of speech, as the noise
of an host: when they stood, they let down their wings.

25. And there was a voice from the firmament, that was over their heads when
they stood, and had let down their wings.


IN these Verses we have the fourth Vision, or fourth part of the general
Vision, which is concerning the firmament. This Vision, as formerly has been
shown, holds forth unto us the glory of God: and of that glory which lies in
his providence and government of the world, we have spoken in the precedent
parts of this Vision; there is yet more, and higher glory to be spoken of, and
that is the glory of God, in the person of Christ. This Vision of the firmamen,
is preparatory to the Vision of Christ upon the Throne; it is described,

1. From the place of it; it was upon the heads of the living creatures.

2. From the color: it was like Crystal, and terrible Crystal.

3. From the n^yse came thence; verse. 25.

In the 23. and 24. Verses, we have a renewed and intermixed description of the
living creatures from their wings, the situation, the number, the office, and
noise of them.

(...) d stendere, expandere.
To begin with the Firmament; the Hebrew word is Rachiah from a word signifies
to draw out and make thin, as metals are, and wool, to stretch out, as
Curtains and Tents are, Isa. 40.22. whence heaven is called expansum, because
it is stretched out over the whole earth; the Greeks call it (...), because of
the firmness and permanency; hereupon we call it the firmament, not from the
hardness or solidity, as if it were like Iron, or Stone, but from the
firmness of it, that it has endured many thousand years, and is not melted by
its motion, nor at all changed; it is taken sometimes for the air, sometimes
for the clouds, and sometimes for heaven it self, and so we may take it here;
even the starry firmament.

This firmament was over the heads of the living creatures, the wheels and
Angels were under it, and it was between the Lord Christ and these creatures,
and did the office of that pair of wings which did cover the faces of the
Seraphims in Isa. 6.2. great was the glory of Christ, and through this vail of
the firmament presented to them.

The color and likeness of it was as the terrible crystal.
We must a little explain these words, it was the likeness of the firmament,
not the firmament it self. The Hebr. words run thus, the ice, (...)
the terrible, or the terrible ice, (...) is ice, water hardened by cold,
whence Crystal has its birth; for, though ice be not Crystal, yet Crystal is
from ice; when ice is hardened into the nature of a stone, it becomes Crystal;
(...) quasi (...). Not. hist. l. 37. c. 2.
more degrees of coldness, hardness, and cleernesse, give ice the
denomination of Crystal, and the name Crystal imports so much, that is, water
by cold contracted into ice, and Pliny says, the birth of it is from ice,
vehemently frozen; and so you see the original of Crystal.

The Epithet here added, terrible, has some difficulty in it, that heaven, a
visionall firmament, should be terrible, seems strange: terriblenesse arises
from newness, greatness, or the glory of a thing: Things new and strange, do
cause fear: as when the earth opened, and swallowed up Corah, Dathan and
Abiram, there was great fear, it was a terrible thing; and this is called a
new thing, Numb. 16.30. If the Lord make a new thing: so when new sights are
seen in the heavens, they cause astonishment to the beholders: as comets, the
standing of the Sun, and the like.

2. Things great are dreadful; great waters, great mountains, great armies,
Deuteronomy. 1.19. he calls the Wilderness a great and terrible wilderness: Joel
2.11. the day of the Lord is great and terrible: and so, the Lord great and
terrible, Nehem. 4.14. from the greatness of it therefore might this Crystal
be terrible.

3. The glory of it, that might make it terrible; for glorious things are so,
lightning is glorious and dreadful: when Gods glory appeared in the mount, it
was terrible unto Moses, and made him to quake, Heb. 12.21. At Paul's conversion
there was a glorious light, which stroke fear into all were with him, Act. 9.
And this Crystalline firmament was full of glory: Crystal is a clear thing,
receives the light, so as to affect the eyes much, in like manner this
firmament had a great cleernesse, and transparency, being the footstool of
Christ sitting upon the Throne. Suppedaneum Christi sedentis in throno. (...).
The Septuag. sometimes translate the Hebrew word for terrible, glorious, Deuteronomy.
10.21. Who has done for thee these great and terrible things? great and
glorious things, say they; so Isa. 64. ver. 3. Thou did terrible things;
they render it glorious things; Tam vehementer nitebat ut form dinem aspicienti
afferret, Pol. Divinitatem quandam praese fer^bat, Mald.
for they are terrible: and here from the gloriousness of this Crystal or
Crystalline visionall firmament, it may be called terrible; and this I conceive
to be the true cause of its terriblenesse, it was so glorious, that none could
behold it without being dazzled, astonished and put into a trembling.

Observe. 1. That all creatures are under Christ, even Angels themselves, they
and the wheels are under the firmament where Christ is, he walks above; his
feet are where creatures heads are, all are subject to the power of Christ, and
he sits above, and he rules them, and overrules their actions. Angels and
all wheels stoop to him; the Prophet saw the wheel on the earth, the Angels
under the firmament, but Christ was above, 1 Cor. 15.27. All things are put
under him, all Angels, all men, all devils; God has highly exalted him, and
given him a name which is above every name, Phil. 2.9.

2. That heavenly things are pure and glorious, and hold forth the glory of
God, Rev. 22.1.
they have the cleernesse, splendour, and lively color of the Crystal. The
higher we ascend, the more purity, beauty and glory; there is more in the air
then in the earth and waters; more in the Sun, more in the stars and firmament,
then in the inferior things: Gods glory is every where, the earth is full of
it; If we look downwards, we may see it, but if we look upwards, we shall see
more excellency and glory. How much glory is in the Sun? who can tell how many
wonderful things it has in it? and so the firmament, Psalm. 19.1. The heavens
declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his handy work. The
out-spread firmament, that is so vast, so transparent, so beset with stars,
that darts down such sweet influences, it holds forth Gods glory exceedingly;
the glory of his wisdom, power, goodness; There is much of Gods glory seen in
it: Job 37.18. The sky or firmament is compared to a looking-glass; not
because you may see several species of things, as we see several faces in the
water, and birds in the air, but chiefly, because in it we see so much of the
glory of God, even most of his attributes, we should be often looking in this
glass, and observe the glory of God.

3. That the things above are dreadfully glorious, so glorious, that our weak
eyes cannot behold; Incu^iunt sacrum quendam honorem.
the glory of the firmament was as the terrible Crystal, such as caused dread
in a Prophet; what eye can look upon the Sun in its glory and strength? could
we see an Angel in his glory, Jud. 6. Jud. 13. Sensibile excellens destruit
sensorium.
it would terribly affright us; when Angels vayl'd up their glory in humane
shapes, it made great Worthies of God to quake; as Gideon, Manoah, and others:
glorious objects work strongly upon our spirits, and quickly scatter them. And
if the glory of creatures be such, what is the glory of God himself? 1 Timothy
6.16. God dwells in the light, which no man can approach unto: it is such
exceeding glorious light, that no created eye can endure; that light or glory
is Gods habitation, and so glorious a one it is, that we cannot look upon it.
Act. 22.11. Paul could not behold that glorious light shined about him. The
earth, heavens and world, which are Gods out-house, we may behold, but his
glory, which is himself, his inmost room, we may not, we cannot eye; this
light is darkness unto us, there is so much brightness in it, that it will
put out our eyes; and whether this glory be accessible by the Saints or Angels,
may (...) disputable; because God is invisible, and his glory inaccessible, and
besides, the Angels, they had wings to cover their faces, Isa. 6. And here they
are presented to Ezekiel under the firmament, with that upon their heads, which
shows, that they, and all creatures are distanced from God, and capable of
seeing his glory only in that way, he thinks good to propound it. That in Mat.
18.10. seems to speak the contrary, where it is frid, that in heaven, their
Angels do always behold the face of my father; it is true, they are in the
special presence of God, have sweet and satisfactory communion with God, stand
ready to do his will; but God has no face in heaven, and whether they see his
essential glory, I leave to farther inquiry.

4. That all things here below are expressed to the eye and view of Christ, the
firmament is so clear that Christ sees through it. It Is the window of heaven,
and through it he looks into the world; it is a molten looking-glass; Job
37.18.
and as we may see Gods attributes and glory in it, so Christ sees our shapes,
thoughts, distempers and motions: he saw Saul when he got the Letters to
Damascus, to persecute the Saints; the Lord Christ saw him, and knew the
bloodinesse of his mind, and said unto him, Saul, Saul, Acts 9. many are
Atheistical, and say in their hearts, as he in Job 22.13. How does God know?
can he judge through the dark clouds? Esa. 29.15.
they do evil in the dark, and say, who sees us? and who knows us? there is
one in the heavens that sees through the clouds, and darkness it self, they
are as the Sun and Firmament to him; darkness is no darkness, the firmament
is as light it self; all things done in Armies, Councels, Markets, Shops,
Families, Closets, Beds, Hearts, are naked and open to the eyes of him, with
whom we have to do, Heb. 4.13.

I come now to the 23. Verse, where the glory of Christ is set out from his
Ministers, or Officers; and they are the living creatures.

VER. 23. And under the firmament were their wings, straight the one toward the
other: every one had two, which covered on this side, and every one had two,
which covered on that side their bodies.


I Have spoken before of the wings; yet somewhat I shall add; four wings they
had, and more we may not give them, though it may seem in this Verse they had
more: for it is said, their wings were straight, that is, stretched out, and
then, that they had two on this side, and two on that side; but the meaning is,
when they did fly, those wings that did cover upward, were stretched out, and
the other did still cover their bodies or feet.

The scope of the verse is, to show that the Ministry of the Angels does refer
to, and set out the glory of Christ, and that may be seen in the observations
to be given.

Obser. 1. That where Christ is, there the Angels are near unto him, he was
above the firmament, and they just under it; the firmament was upon their
heads, there was only a glorious transparent firmament between Christ and
them, distanced from Christ they are, but not far.

2. The Angels, wise, strong, serviceable, swift and glorious creatures, attend
Christ's Throne, and are subject unto him, they were under the firmament about
his Throne. Is it not for the honor and great glory of a King, to have Nobles,
Potentates and Princes under him, attending in his Court? It was much for
Ahashuerus his glory and honor, when he had the Nobles and Princes of the
Provinces before him, and under him, Est. 1.3. And so it is much for the honor
of Christ, that he has Angels, which are greater then the Kings of the earth,
attending him.

3. They are ready to exercise the will and pleasure of Christ, this farther
advances the honor of Christ; their wings were stretched out, and they willing
to move in any service, if their Lord gave out the word: when the Centurions
servants were so willing to go and come at his bidding, it made much for his
honor, Matthew. 8.9. ready, cheerly, active servants are an ease and honor to
their Masters: unreadinesse and unwillingnesse in inferiors, do disparage
authority, and stain the glory of it; Angels that serve at Christ's Throne are
never unready or unwilling for any service.

4. They are unanimous in their Ministrations, they fall not out by the way,
their wings are straight the one toward the other, they carry on the work put
into their hands with love, sweet agreement, peace and constant. At the birth
of Christ they sung all one song, and sung without division, Glory to God on
high, on earth peace, good will toward men; as they sung, so they act, there
is no disagreement amongst them: Can two walk together, except they be agreed?
Angels do fly together, and act together; they are so agreed, that no devil,
no creature can divide them, they have all but one mind, and serve the Lord
Christ with one consent; and what honor is this to Christ, that has so great,
so many servants, and all minding the same thing?

5. They reverence the greatness and Majesty of Christ; though they be high
and glorious, yet they see so vast a distance between Christ and themselves,
that they cover their faces, Isa. 6. and their bodies here, they come not into
his presence rudely, but with great respect and reverence. As God is to be had
in reverence of all that are about him, Psalm. 89.7. so Christ is reverenced by
all the Angels that are about him. Women are to be veiled in the assemblies,
because of the Angels, 1 Cor. 11.10. to show their reverence and subjection to
them being present; and Angels are covered, to show their reverence and
subjection unto Christ; it is an honor to the Angels, that in reverence to them
the women are to be veiled; and it is a great honor to Christ, that Angels
reverence and adore him.

6. They are careful to prevent all offense in their ministrations, either of
God or man, of Christ or any creature; they cover up their bodies, their feet,
that nothing obscene may be seen and give distaste, nothing excellent be seen,
and draw to an over-valuing and Idolizing of them; so wise and cautious they
are; and this adds much to the glory of Christ, that his servants the Angels,
never give advantage to men or devils, to reproach their Lord and Master. Alas,
how much does Christ suffer by us, even by Ministers, and others in their
ministrations? Men see our weakness, our pride, our vainglory, miscarriages
many ways, and rejoice in our flesh, even when Christ is reproached. But
Angels pass through all their employments, so that they are blameless, and
Christ made beautiful, whom they serve.

7. That Angels are furnished for their ministrations; they have wings to fly,
and wings to cover their bodies, what ever may make them and their services
acceptable, speedy, successful, they have it; and this is for the honor of
Christ, those he imployes in his work he inables and accommodates, they go not
forth empty, unqualified; he sent Apostles, and filled them with his Spirit,
he gives gifts to men, and wings to Angels.

VER. 24. And when they went, I heard a noise of their wings, like the noise of
great waters, as the noise of the Almighty, the voice of speech; as the noise
of an host; when they stood, they let down their wings.


HEre is a farther description of the Angels, by their going, their noise,
their standing, and letting down their wings. The principal is the noise of
their wings; and that I shall make most inquiry into. A difficulty incounters
us in the beginning of the Verse, when they went, I heard the noise of their
wings; rather when they did fly was the noise of their wings, then when they
went. The original will help us something in this strait; it is otherwise
there: thus the words are read, And I heard the noise of their wings, like the
noise of great waters; as the voice of the Almighty when they went; so that
there the original brings it in, and so we may take it thus; the noise of
their flying was as the noise of great waters, and the noise of their going, as
the voice of the Almighty; or, rather thus: by going we may understand their
motion, the execution of their office, and that made a great noise, which is
amplified and set out by diverse similitudes.

The first similitude is of great waters: waters that run among the stony and
rocky mountains, make a terrible noise, gulling into the earth, and threatening
the foundations of the mountains; hence Job 14.19. the waters are said to wear
the stones, they eat into them, making concaves and chambers therein; and for
their noise in the 46. Psalm. v. 3. there it is no gentle murmuring, but a
roaring; the Sea roares, so that it is heard in some places many miles.

The second similtude is, as the voice of the Almighty, or, the voice of God:
some understand hereby, a great voice, because it is the usual dialect of the
Hebrew tongue, to express great things, by saying, they are things of God; as
Cedars of God, for tall and great ones, Psalm. 80.10, 11. Rivers of God, for
great rivers, and full of waters, Psalm. 65.10. Mountains of God, for high ones,
Psalm. 36.6. so a trembling of God, 1 Samuel 14.15. for a very great trembling:
and in like propriety of speech, the voice of the Almighty, for a great voice;
some truth in this may be granted, but somewhat more then a great voice in
general is to be looked at, Psalm. 18.13.
it being a Vision, and Hieroglyphicall things presented to the Prophet
therein, we must therefore refer it to that in Psalm. 29. even the thunder,
which is called the voice of the Lord, verse. 4. The voice of the Lord is
powerful, the voice of the Lord is full of Majesty; it breaks the Cedars, yea,
the Cedars of Lebanon; and so to that Ps. 18.13.

The third Similitude, is the voice of speech: some mystery lies in this, that
their noise should be like an articulate voice, the speech of man. And two
things may be intended in it; either the speech of man that is upon some
terrible design, and so speaks grievous words, even words of death, and so it
holds analogy with the other similitude of Waters, and of Thunder; or else by
voice of speech, the noise of their wings, the judgments they executed did
speak and proclaim Gods commands, his wrath, and the peoples sins; if the
judgments seemed terrible, as they were indeed; the cutting down of a
kingdom, the ruin of the chiefest City and people in world; the voice of
speech was, God commands, God is angry; you are guilty, and we must proceed.

The 4th and last similitude, is, as the noise of an host, this is a dreadful
noise; there is beating of Drums, sound of Trumpets, clattering of Armor,
jumping of Chariots, rattling of wheels, neighing, stamping, prauncing and
rushing of Horses, the roaring of Cannons, the clamors of men wounded, groans
of men dying: Carry me out of the Host, for I am wounded, says Ahab: O the
doleful complaints that are there, such as would astonish a man of spirit to
hear; the noise of the Angels was such a noise.

Observe. 1. That the judgments of God executed upon kingdoms, cities,
persons, are very dreadful: they are like roarings of the Sea, when great
storms be, and mighty Navies are dashed in pieces, and sunk into the deeps;
they are formidable as the noise of an Army, marching or fighting. How
dreadful were the plagues of Egypt? that in Exodus 9.23, 24. when hail,
thunder, and fire were mingled together, was very grievous, such as never was;
the burning of Sodom was dreadful, yet Jerusalems judgment was sorer, Lam.
4.6. all their pleasant things were spoiled, women and maids ravished in the
streets; their mighty men trodden under feet; young men and virgins crushed,
trodden down as grapes in the Wine Press; Priests and Elders dyed for famine,
children swooned in the streets, powered out their souls in their mothers
bosoms for want of bread and water, pitiful women sod their children of a
span long, and made meals of them; they were slain in the Sanctuary, terrors
were round about, and no way to escape left; if they looked for comfort, there
was none to give it; Princes were hanged up by the hands, those did wear
scarlet, embraced dung-hils, Sabbaths; Sanctuary, Law, Vision, all failed,
prevailing fire was in their bones, death they longed for, and found it not,
God was against them, their enemies prospered, and mocked at them and their
Sabbaths: Where Is your God? what is become of all your worship, sacrifice,
prayers, fastings? they clapped their hands, hissed, wagged their heads, and said
of Jerusalem, Is this the perfection of beauty, the joy of the whole earth?
this is the day that we looked for; These expressions you have in the Book of
Lamentations. David, a King, a Prophet, a man of a warlike spirit, that feared
not the Bear, the Lion, Goliath, says, my flesh trembles for fear of thee, I
am afraid of thy judgments, Psalm. 119.120. When other things did not daunt him
at all, Gods judgments did; there was daunting terror in them and no marvel,
there is wrath in them, such rage, wrath, fury, as is in wild beasts: Hos.
5.14. I will be unto Ephraim as a Lion, and as a young Lion to the House of
Judah: I, even I will tear and go away, I will take away, and none shall
rescue; such terror as is in an earthquake, that shakes the foundations of all:
Isa. 29.6. such as in a strong wind, and an overflowing shower: Ezekiel. 13.13.
such as in a flail that beats out the corn, and breaks the straw in pices: Hab.
3.12. such as in the Sea or Earth swallowing up; Psalm. 21.9. What a dreadful
cry, when Corah and his company sunk alive into the earth, when Pharaoh and his
host were overwhelmed in the Sea! such terror is in Gods judgments; yea, more
dreadful yet, such as in thunder, lightning and devouring fire, Isa. 29.6.
yea, such as is in fire and brimstone, Psalm. 11.6. God is Baal-chemah, (...)
Nahum 1.2. A Lord of wrath, so the original is, a Possessour of wrath, and in
his judgments does distribute terrors and sorrows; him therefore should the
sons of men reverence.

2. Gods Judgments have the voice of speech in them, they speak unto sinners,
Mic. 6.9. The Lords voice cries unto the City, and the man of wisdom shall
see thy Name: hear ye the rod, and who has appointed it; If the first voice
be the cry of the Prophets and Ministers, the second is the cry of the
Judgments of God the rod speaks aloud, it proclaims Gods anger, wrath, fury,
jealousy, revenge, his Omniscience, holiness, justice; the terror of the
Almighty, it proclaims our folly, shame and ingratitude, treachery and great
guiltiness before God; it cries to us for repentance: when destruction lay at
the gates of Ninivie, they understood the language thereof, and repented in
dust and ashes, Jon. 3. It cries to us for righteousness, when Gods judgments
are in the earth, the Inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness, Isa.
26.9. They cannot learn unless they be taught; and do they not teach, and
teach many lessons to fear God, whom men have forgotten in their prosperity,
to make restitution to men whom they have wronged in the day of their wills; to
be charitable in censuring others, and rigide in censuring themselves?

3. Angels are not only swift, but efficacious in their motions, and
administrations: The great waters, mighty thunders and numerous armies make way
before them, and nothing can withstand their force; and so it is with Angels
when they are upon service, none can stand before them; they destroy armies,
shake kingdoms, move all the wheels in the quarters of the world, and their
motions are not faint, but forcible.

4. It Is not every ear that hears the noise of Angels wings, though their
noise be great, efficacious, like waters, thunder, the voice of speech, as an
host, yet all hear them not; it is the Prophet hears them, and such as have
divine spirits: the operations of Angels are unperceiveable to most of the
world; all eyes see not visions, neither do all ears hear the things that
visions do speak; few are capable of divine mysteries; To you it is given to
know the mysteries of the Kingdom, Mat. 13.11. There be mysteries in the
government of the world, as well as in the Kingdom of heaven, and it is a
special gift to be acquainted with them; Gods secrets are made known to them
that fear him, Psalm. 25.14. some choice, precious, excellent spirits, they
hear, they see what others do not; such as turn from iniquity, Dan. 9.13. such
as are wise, Hos. 14.9. they understand, such as are deeply interested in the
truth and Churches cause, as have suffered much, and have their dross purged
out by the fire of afflictions; they hear, they see more, and greater things
then the men of the world; Nehemiah, Isaiah, Daniel, Ezekiel, John, that were
men of great sufferings, they heard voices others heard not: In the Revelation
it is said often, He that has an ear to hear, let him hear, every man has an
outward ear, but not the inward, the ear of the heart, whereby to perceive
the meaning of the Spirit; men hear not the voice of the Spirit in the
Churches, they hear men, but not the Spirit, what that speaks in the
Ordinances, and as they hear it not in them, so they hear not the Spirit in
the wheels, nor the voice of it in the great judgments of God.

VERSE. 25. And there was a voice from the firmament, that was over their heads
when they stood, and had let down their wings.


HEre we have a description of the firmament, from the noise that came from it,
and that is the cause of the Angels making their appearance before the Lord,
and the manner of their appearance is; they stood with their wings let down.

Whose voice this was, comes now into question; it was not a voice of the
firmament, (...) De super firmenta.
but from above, which is in the original, besides from the firmament; so that
it was not the noise or voice of the firmament, neither of any Angel; for they
are here present under the firmament, but it was the voice of Christ, of him
that was above upon the throne, and it has much in it.

1. It sets out the Majesty and State of Christ, who like a mighty Emperor,
sits upon his Throne, and speaks unto his Nobles and people at distance.

2. His authority, calling in the Angels, his great agents in the world, from
their services to appear before him, they upon this voice come from the
quarters of the world, and stand about his Throne, to give account of their
administrations, to receive new instructions, and are sent out by him to great
services.

3. To awaken, quicken and prepare the Prophet, who had hard things to meet
with, harsh people to deal withal; but when he saw Angels come and go at the
voice of Christ, it hushed all objections, and set his spirit to attend to the
voice of Christ, to receive instructions from him, and to do his will; thought
he, Shall those glorious Angels, those great Agents in the world, hearken to
Christ, be informed by him, execute his Will, and shall I a poor captive stick
at it, dispute the case with him? no, no, I will be like to these Angels,
hear, receive, and obey.

Of the standing of the Angels, formerly has been spoken in the 21th Verse, to
which I refer you.

The letting down their wings, notes their cessation from employment, as Birds
or Fowls when they fall upon their feet on trees or ground, let down their
wings, and rest from flying.

Obser. 1. The voice of Christ is mighty and efficacious, a voice that shook
the firmament, that commanded the Angels: there is Majesty, Authority, efficacy
in it; Rev. 1.15. it is said to be as the sound of many waters, which notes the
terriblenesse and efficaciousnesse of it, being strong, piercing, powerful as
water, that breaks into the great ships, and eats into the hard rocks, and
makes a dreadful noise. What an efficacy and Majesty was in that voice of
Christ, Act. 9.4. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? it struck Saul, (who was
a stout and stiff Pharisee) to the ground: so that in Mat. 22.12. Friend, how
came thou in hither, not having a wedding garment? and he was speechless.
When Christ spoke these few words, I am he, they went backward, and fell to the
ground, Joh. 18.6. three words overthrew a great multitude, and it is observable
they went backward and fell. The Majesty and Power of Christ's speech was such,
as if stricken with thunder and lightning in their faces, they fell backward;
when he rebuked the winds and Seas, those fierce and senseless creatures heard
his voice and obeyed it: when he preached, his hearers said, he spoke with
authority, and not as Scribes and Pharisees; there is a mighty operation in the
voice of Christ, it enters into the hearts of the wicked, into the graves, and
makes the dead to hear. Now is the hour, says Christ, that the dead shall
hear the voice of the Son of God, Joh. 5.25. he means the dead in sins: verse
28. The hour is coming, in which all that are in their graves shall hear his
voice: his voice was so powerful, it fetched Lazarus out of the earth, Joh.
11. There is power in the word of a King, Eccles. 8.4. Christ is the greatest
King, and in his Word is the greatest power: Power over the living and dead:
hence the Word of Christ is compared to piercing and efficacious things, to
goods and nails fastened, Eccles. 12.11. to a hammer and fire, Jerem. 23.29. to
a burning fire, Jer. 20.9. to mighty weapons, 2 Cor. 10.4. to arrows in the
heart of Kings, Psalm. 45.5. to a sword, Ephesians. 6.17. a two-edged sword, Rev.
1.16. sharper then a two-edged sword, Hebr. 4.12. it is also likened to the
voice of a trumpet, Rev. 1.10. that awakened men at midnight, and summoned them
to the battle.

2. When we are out of business in a quiet posture, then are we fittest to
hear the voice of Christ; when they stood and had let down their wings, then
was the voice from the firmament, then were they fit to hear, magnalia
Christi, the Oracles and Commands of Christ; when our hands and hearts are
filled, entangled with earthly employments, how unapt are we to spiritual
things? and if our hearts be turbulent, stirred in passion, they are fitter to
hear Satan's voice then Christ's. A sedate quiet mind out of passion, out of
all intanglements, is most capable of divine things, Eccles. 9.7. The words of
wise men are heart in quiet spirits, well composed minds: when there are great
winds and tempests, we hear not others speaking; when the wind blows in the
soul, and there is a tempest, we cannot hear God speaking; Job 4.16. There
was silence, and I heard a voice, then God spoke when the silence was; he
delights in a calm and meek spirit, that is of great price with him, 1 Pet.
3.4. when spirits are in such a frame, sequestered from the world, free from
distempers, God loves to communicate hmself to them: in the night often God
appeared unto our forefathers, because then they were in a manner out of the
world, and had tranquillity in their bosoms. When John was in Patmos, he heard
Christ's voice; when Ezekiel was by the river side, he saw heaven opened, and
heard a voice from above; that in Cant. 2.12. The voice of the Turtle is heard
in our Land, it is observable, the Turtle sings not in Winter, when the winds
and storms are, but when it is Spring and Summer, all quiet and serene, then
her voice is heard: So Christ's voice is heard when Winter is over, when the
tumults and stirs are laid.

3. As this voice referres to Ezekiel, it affords this instruction: That there
must be a voice from above, before we are fit to hear or do any service for
God; There be no preparations, qualifications in men by virtue of man, Ezekiel
himself is not fitted for to preach the Word unto this captive people, till
he hear Christ's voice. Christ does not only give the Word to be preached, but
prepares the Organ to receive, and communicate it: preparatory works in man, by
man are Popish conceits; the Chemists by all their art and labor, cannot bring
any material nearer Gold then at the first, it differs specifically from Gold,
and so it does when they leave it. Counterfeit Gold is no Gold; it is not man
can prepare himself for God and his Service: The preparations of the heart and
answer of the tongue are of the Lord, Prove. 16.1. And Paul says, We are not
sufficient of our selves to think a good thought, 2 Cor. 3.5. you may hear
Paul telling of his preparatory works, 1 Timothy 1.13. I was a Blasphemer, a
Persecuter, and injurious, what preparations were these to Grace and
Apostleship? Dead men have no preparation to life, or motion; and living men
ofttimes are livelesse, unfit for divine mysteries and employments, till a
voice from above prepare, quicken, and encourage them.

VER. 26. And above the firmament that was over their heads, was the likeness
of a Throne, as the appearance of a Sapphire stone; and upon the likeness of
the Throne, was the likeness as the appearance of a man above upon it.

27. And I saw as the color of Amber as the appearance of fire round about
within it: from the appearance of his loins, even upward; and from the
appearance of his loins even downward: I saw, as it were, the appearance of
fire, and it had brightness round about.

28. As the appearance of the bow that is in the cloud in the day of rain; so
was the appearance of the brightness round about: this was the appearance of
the likeness of the glory of the Lord; and when I saw it, I fell upon my face,
and I heard a voice of one that spoke.


IN these words we have the last and best part of the Vision, being of Christ
in his Throne; in the 26th Verse we have the Throne discribed:

1. From the situation of it; it was above the firmament.

2. From the color or likeness of it; it was as a Sapphire stone.

3. From the party in it; and that was one had the appearance of a man.

The word Throne sometimes signifies Kingdoms, and Dominions, Dan. 9.7. I
beheld, till the Thrones were cast down; that is, the kingdoms of the earth
were ruined: sometimes it notes a choice seat, fit for Kings and Judges to sit
in, 1 King. 10.18, 19. The King made a great Throne of Ivory, and overlaid it
with the best Gold, there were six steps, and twelve Lions; and there was not
the like in any Kingdom; In this last sense we are here to take it, a seat
for Christ to sit in, and so the Temple or Sanctuary is called the Throne of
God, Jer. 17.12. a glorious high Throne from the beginning, is the place of our
Sanctuary. A Throne here holds out unto us sundry things: 1. Divine Majesty and
highness of Christ. 2. Kingly Dignity. 3. Triumphant Glory. 4 Judiciary Power,
Psalm. 9.4 Thou satest in the Throne judging right. Kingly and judiciary power
are chiefly meant, 2 Cor. 18.18. I saw the Lord sitting upon his Throne, and
all Host of heaven standing on his right hand and on his left: and Rev. 20.11,
12. I saw a great white Throne, and him that sat on it, and the dead, small,
and great, stood before God, and the Books were opened; here Christ sat in
judgment over the Jews, and exercised his power, pronouncing sentence against
them.


The next thing is the likeness; as the appearance of a Sapphire stone. The
glory of this Throne was great, Solomon's was of Ivory and Gold, but Christ's is
of Sapphire, The Scripture mentions Palaces, Psalm. 45.8. Towers, Cant. 7.4.
Beds, Amos 6.4. Houses, Amos 3.5. Vessels, Rev. 18.12. And Thrones of Ivorie, 2
Cron. 9.17. but none of Saphires; Gemma gemarum, Abulens. Hieroglyph. 41.
the Sapphire is a stone of admirable worth and splendour, the chiefest of
Pearls; and Pererius says, it was among the Ancient always of great esteem:
The Empire and high Priesthood were signified by it. Among the Egyptians,
Aelianus.
the chief Priest being Judges, also wore a Sapphire about their necks; and at
this time, when Cardinals are newly created, Deorum munera and opima beneficia
invitare conciliareque fertur, ut vel hinc Ecclesiasticis praesulibus omniu^
maxim digna^ rude vulgus profiteatur, Ruen. de gemmis. Coelesti color
conspicui sunt Ruen. ibid. (...) Aureis punctis lucere.
the Pope sends to each of them a Sapphire, which sets out dignity and
greatness.

For the color of the stone; Pliny says, in his lib. 37. c. 9. that it is of
an ayrie color, he should have said of a sky or blew color; for when the
heavens are most clear, and have a transparent pleasant blew, then the Sapphire
does most resemble them; very fair and beautiful: Jerome will have Sapphire to
be from Saphar, Pulcher, because these stones are very fair and delightful.
Pliny in the place before cited, says, they do flame and sparkle with purple
veins, much like the color of Brimstone when it is first fired, there is a
pleasant blew, with a little purple in it; and so often it is in the heavens when
they are clear. The Sapphire and heavens cleernesse, are brought in together by
Moses, Exodus 24.10. they saw the God of Israel, and there was under his feet,
as it were, a paved work of a Sapphire stone, and, as it were, the body of
heaven in its cleernesse; the pavement was Sapphire, and the color of it, as
the cleernesse of heaven. We must inquire what the Sapphire represents unto us;
for surely there is something, yea, much in it. Should we tell you what virtue
is given to this stone by men of great note, it would take up much time.
Avicen, Albertus, and Mathiolus, affirm this stone to be good against
Melancholy, and the quarterne ague: Galen and Dioscorides, that it helps
against poisoning, ruptures and exulcerations; but I will pass by such things,
and come to that is nearer our purpose. The Sapphire is an Emblem:

Symbolum libertatis.
1. Of liberty, so you shall find it to speak in that Exodus 24.10. the
Israelites were come from their pavement of bricks to one of Sapphire; now the
God of Israel was exalting them to precious liberty from their vile bondage.

Puritatis and soliditatis.
2. Of purity and solidity; it has the color and cleernesse of heaven, it has
no impunity in it; things impure are the ruin of themselves, and so are
unsolid, but that is pure is firm, as the firmament, Sublimitatis coelestium
mysteriorum. Sapphirum coelestiali quid portendere significat ipsius color
Sanct.
it is pure and solid: Hence the Sapphire is a foundation stone of the new and
heavenly Jerusalem, Rev. 21.19.

3. Of the incomprehensiblenesse of divine mysteries; it has a sky color,
the color of the firmament it self, and that blewnesse we see in the heavens
is intense light, and sets out the incomprehensibility of Gods ways.

4. Caestitatis venereos compescit affectus. Rivet.
Of chastity; it is an enemy to wanton lusts: hence Cant. 5.14. Christ's belly is
said to be overlaid with Saphires, and his Throne being saphirine, it tells us,
that Christ expects chastity in the spiritual marriage, between him and his
Church.

5. Of vigor and cheerfulness, Lam. 4.7. Their polishing was of Sapphire,
Vigoris and letitiae vultus eorum Sapphirus.
their faces were saphirine; so the Chaldee reads it, their countenance before
were full of vigor, cheerful, like those are well polished; but now through
famine, black they were, withered, and like a stick without all cheerfulness.

Gloriae.
6. Of glory; and here in this Vision, Christ's glory is likened to Sapphire, the
glory of his Throne was saphirine. From the likeness of the Throne, we come
to the party, whose the Throne is, and that is, one had the appearance of a
man: who this is must be cleared; it was not God the Father, or God the Holy
Ghost, for the learned observe, that neither Father nor the Holy Ghost have
ever appeared in man's shape, but that will not hold, for the Ancient of days
God the Father appeared to Daniel, Chap. 7. Verse. 9. in the form of a man.
Expositers do most agree it was the Lord Christ, and of that judgment shall
we be, not because they say so, this were a blind ground for a rational man
to be led by, but because we find in Scripture, that Christ has often appeared
in Vision like unto man, Dan. 9.13. I saw in the night Visions, and behold one
like the Son of man; the Jews acknowledging this to be meant of Messiah: so
in Rev. 1.13. one like the Son of man appeared in the midst of the seven
Candlesticks, and Rev. 14.14. I looked, had behold a white cloud, and upon the
cloud one sat like unto the Son of man. By these places we have good warrant
to conceive, that it was Christ that did appear unto Ezekiel in this Vision.

Quest. But seeing Christ was not yet incarnate; why is he here presented in
the likeness of man?

Answ. 1. Because in his divine nature he is invisible, and being to manifest
himself, he appeared in the form of man, as being most suitable to the nature
of man.

2. It was a prefiguration of his incarnation, that in the fulnasse of time his
Divine nature should assume our flesh into the unity of his person.

3. That according to his humane nature, he should sit upon the Throne of God,
and judge the sons of men: he was administrator Patris, the great Agent of
his Father.

Whether Christ in this Vision sat or stood, is doubted, because it is said,
above upon it; neither standing nor sitting being expressed: but my
inclinations are to conceive, that the Lord Christ sat, and stood not.

1. Because Thrones are not for standing, but sitting; and we never find in
Scripture, that any stood in Thrones, but sat they have; sitting in Thrones,
is the usual phrase of Scripture, 1 King. 2.12. Solomon sat upon the Throne
of David his father, and in the 22th Chap. 10. The King of Israel, and the King
of Judah, as they sat each upon his Throne; and Isa. 6.1. Isaiah s^^ the Lord
sitting upon a Throne, Rev. 4.10. The twenty four Elders fell down before him
that sat on the Throne.

2. Kings and Judges here on earth do not use to stand, but sit, which does
more fully set out their State and Majesty, and if Kings on earth do so, how
much more this King in heaven? Besides, standing is a servants posture, Deuteronomy.
17.12. and Chapter 10. v. 8. but sitting is not, Luke 17.7, 8. that is the Masters,
the Lords posture.

Obser. 1. The wisdom of Gods Spirit in laying down things to prevent the
corruptions and mistakes of man; we are apt to think grossly of the divine
nature, that God is visible, corporeal, contained in place, sitting as man;
but see how the Spirit of God carries it here, and takes off from all such
conceits; here is mention of likeness, appearance of things, not that they
were materially so; it is the likeness of a Throne, the appearance of a
Sapphire, and upon the likeness of the Throne, was the appearance of a man; no
true body: The Anthropomorphites thought God to be like unto us, to have his
Throne in heaven, and sit in it; and so far did these men proceed in this
opinion, of Gods corporeity, and circumscription, that they assembled into
troops, and threatened to stone all opposed it: So tenacious of, and violent for
errors are men, even the deluded sons of men.

2. That man is not capable of immediate access to, and converse with God:
Here be many steps and degrees before the Prophet comes to see Christ, and then
it is not in his Divine nature, but in the appearance of a man. Here be the
living creatures in the way by the firmament over their heads, and then a
Throne, and that of Saphirine color, and afterward a sight of Christ in the
form of a man, and then converse. If the Lord should not condescend to our
weakness, and mantle up his Majesty, there could be no communion between him
and us.

3. That the Lord Christ, who appeared like man, has Kingly Majesty: Here is a
Throne, and a Throne set before him. Thrones present royal Majesty unto us,
and this Throne presents Christ's when on earth he was in the form of a
servant, but in heaven he appeared to the Prophet in the form of a King.
Neither has he a Throne only, but what ever appertains to Kings: Unction he
had, and such as other Kings had not, he was anointed with the Holy Ghost, and
with power, Act. 10.38. Promulgation, Zach. 9.9. O daughter of Jerusalem,
behold thy King comes unto thee. A Crown, Hebr. 2.9. We see Jesus crowned
with glory and honor; the Jews crowned him with thorns, the Lord with glory;
A Scepter he has also, and better then of Gold, Hebr. 1.8. A Scepter of
righteousness is the Scepter of thy Kingdom; A royal guard of Angels, they
are under the firmament, stand ready at his footstool; he has his Agents and
Ambassadors in the kingdom of the world, to declare his pleasure, to transact
his appointments; Ephesians. 4.11. Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors,
Teachers; these negotiate the great affairs of this King, they dispense the
mysteries of his Kingdom, he is not a titular King, but has large Dominions,
Dan. 7.14. There was given him dominion and glory, and a Kingdom, that all
people, nations, languages should serve him; and Psalm. 2.8. The heathens are
his inheritance, and the ends of the earth his possession. He has a
Legislative power, he makes and abrogates Laws at his pleasure. Genesis 49.10.
He came of the Princely Tribe that made the Laws; Judah bare the Scepter, and
gave the Laws, and therefore by David is called, The Lawgiver, Psalm. 60.7.
and Christ descending thence, and being typified by the King of Judah; he is
the true Lawgiver, Jam. 4.12. there is one Lawgiver, and therefore, Matthew. 28.
last, Teach them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you; he
has a pardoning and punishing power, he pardoned Mary Magdalene, and punished
him had not on his wedding garment.

4. That Christ is not only King, but the chiefest of Kings, his Throne is not
on earth, but in heaven, it is above the firmament that was over Angels heads,
and Christ's Throne is above them both; so that all power in heaven and earth
are under Christ; his Throne is exalted above them all, Heb. 1.6. Let all the
Angels of God worship him; the greatest Archangel must do it; those Thrones,
for so they are termed, Col. 1.16. must stoop to this Throne, Ephesians. 1.20.21.
God has set Christ in heavenly places, (...).
among the heavenly thrones, yea, in supercelestiall places; for it follows,
he has set him far above all Principality and Power, and Might and Dominion,
and every name that is named not only in this world, but also in that which is
to come, and has put all things under his feet, even Angels are under the
firmament where his feet stand, and all the Princes of the earth are under him.
Rev. 1.5. He is the Prince of the Kings of the earth; The inscription of his
vesture and thigh, is King of Kings and Lord of Lords; this title is not
Xerxes, Nebuchadnezzars, nor Alexanders, but Christ's alone: the kings of the
world, when they sit upon their thrones, they have their expansum over their
heads, some cloth of state made of the richest stuff that the brains of men
can reach unto, bedeckt with Diamonds and Pearls that are most costly; but
this over their throne intimates their subjection to some higher power, but
it is not so with Christ, he is above the Expansum, nothing is over his head,
Angels, Kings, Devils, are under his feet, and unto him must every knee bow.

5. That the Lord Christ, who has such a glorious Throne, is exceeding
glorious himself; his Throne is like Saphires, of a Saphirine color, which is
very beautiful; it is like the glory of the heavens: if an earthly throne be a
Throne of glory, as Hanna styles it, 1 Samuel 2.8. what is this throne? a
resemblance of the Throne of his glory, which he speaks of in Matthew. 19.28.
and Chap. 25. verse. 31. The clothing of the Kings daughter, Psalm. 45.13. was
wrought Gold, a glorious outside, but there was more glory within, she was all
glorious within; so if Christ's Throne, the outside of it be so glorious, what
is he in the Throne? all glorious, all glory, Joh. 1.14. We beheld his glory,
the glory as of the only begotten. If Apostles saw glory in him, being on
earth, in his low condition, what did our Prophet see in him, being above the
firmament, in his Throne and glorious condition? The Scriptures set him out,
not only to be glorious, but glory: Psalm. 24.8. King of glory, Jam. 2.1. Have
not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ the Lord of glory, in respect of
persons. The word Lord in the second place is not in the original, (...).
but thus it stands there: have not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
glory; so that Christ is glory and the glory, the glory of heaven, the glory of
the world, the glory of Sion, the glory of the soul: and not only is Christ
glorious and glory, (...).
but he is, Heb. 1.3. the brightness of glory; that is, spotless, perfect,
intense, exceeding glory, he is the brightness of the glory of the Father, or
the Fathers glory shines out most brightly and intensly in the Son; the Fathers
glory in the whole creation, is but darkness to his glory in Christ, and
therefore he is brightness of glory, and every thing that comes from Christ
has some beams of glory in it; his works are called glorious, Luke 13.17.
they rejoiced for all the glorious things done by him, the liberty he purchased
is glorious liberty, Romans 8.21. his Church is glorious, Ephesians. 5.27. his Gospel
is glorious, 1 Timothy 1.11.

6. That Christ's Throne must not be of common stone, but precious ones, of
Saphires; the pavement of God was of stones or bricks of Sapphire, Exodus 24.10.
and Christ's throne must be of Saphires; the Church is Christ's Throne, visible
and conspicuous as the heavens, Jerem. 3.17. Jerusalem is called the throne of
the Lord, and the Churches under the Gospel are the throne of Christ, he sits
in the Congregations, and bears rule in them, Rev. 2.13. I know where thou
dwell, where Satan's seat or throne is, there was a congregation of
persecutors, Idolaters, and unclean parties; for such sinners are mentioned in
the 13. and 14. verses; and this company was the seat and throne of Satan: many
congregations are thrones of iniquity, and shall the throne of iniquity have
fellowship with thee? Psalm. 94.20. But godly congregations are the Seat and
Throne of Christ. Now as the conscience, which is the invisible seat of Christ,
must be pure, 1 Timothy 3.9. holding the mystery of faith in a pure conscience; so
must the visible Seat of Christ be pure, the congregation where he will sit
and reign; therefore the promise is, Isa. 54.11, 12. that the state of the
Church under the Gospel, shall be better then it was under the Law; there all
stones were laid in the building, but here should be a difference made; God wll
lay stones with fair colors, Saphires, Agats, Carbuncles, and pleasant
stones; and that it is meant of Gospel Times and Churches, the words following
in the 13. verse show. All thy children shall be taught of the Lord, which
Christ applies to these times, Joh. 6.45. So then the Churches now are to be of
Saphires, such as have a heavenly virtue and purity in them, not of
Sand-stones, Tode-stones, or any High-way-stones, they are fitter to make Satan
a seat then Christ a Throne, 1 Pet. 2.5. they are called lively stones, not
dead stones, that have no true grace in them, but lively ones they must be,
that make a house, a throne for Christ: Stones, that it may be a solid
building, lively, that it may be a useful profitable building, and Sapphire,
that it may be a pure and glorious building.

7. Judiciary power is put into the hand of Christ, not only as God, but as
man; there was the appearance of a man, above upon the Throne, there sat the
Son of man, Acts 23.3.
and sitting upon the Throne, imports power, and power judicial, therefore
when Christ tells his Disciples of sitting upon the twelve thrones, he tells
them also of judging the twelve tribes of Israel, Mat. 19.28. and that Christ
had such power, and that as Son of man, appears, Joh. 5.27. The father has
given the Son authority to execute judgment, because he is the Son of man,
verse 22. he has committed all judgment to the Son, both judgment of
actions, things, and persons, Acts 17.31. God will judge the world in
righteousness by that man he has ordained, the last judgment shall be by
Christ, even that great judgment: So particular judgments here, as now Christ
sat in judgment upon Jerusalem, and sentenced them to death and captivity.
And because judgment is opus potestatis, an act of power, therefore Christ
himself tells us, that all power in heaven and earth is given unto him, Mat.
28.18.

8. The Lord Christ actually rules the world, and all things in it; he sits
upon the Throne, and exercises his power and authority, 1 King. 2.12. There
sat Solomon upon the throne of David his Father, that is, he ruled the
kingdom, and all the affairs of it: so Christ sitting upon the Throne,
presents to us his active ruling; the Prophet might see he held the globe of
the world in his hand; that he raised tempests out of the North, sent abroad
the four living creatures in the several parts of the world; that he orders
the wheels, and causes them to stand or go at his pleasure; the Lord Christ is
not out of office, or idle now in heaven, though he sits upon a Throne of
glory at his Fathers right hand; he is not neglective of the world, he upholds
it by his power, Heb. 1.3. he sends out his Angels to minister unto his, verse
the last; he still gives gifts to men, and provides for his Church, Ephesians. 4.
and makes the Word the favor of life or death to men; he restraines the wrath
of enemies, and hedges up their ways, he makes use of them as rods to drive
his straggling sheep into the fold; he subdues hearts and spirits to himself,
and protects them being subdued; he discovers, confounds the enemies plots and
persons.

9. The Lord Christ does govern all with great tranquillity, and with great
facility; he sits upon the Throne, and does all that imployes quietness of
mind. A sedate temper, there is no passion or perturbation in him, he is a
Lion for his power, a Lamb for his meekness; he rules by counsel and wisdom
in much quietness, Act. 17.31. he judges in righteousness, and what he does
is done without difficulty; let him speak the word, and presently it is done; if
he bid Nebuchadnezzar go and sack Jerusalem, carry them away to Babylon, he
goes, he accomplisheth his will fully.

10. That Christ is ready ever to hear the causes and complaints of his
Church, he sits upon the Throne, other Judges are of the Bench and Throne, and
parties agrieved may come unseasonably to them, but it is not so here, Christ
sits upon the Throne, and that constantly, to assure us, that he is always
willing and ready to hear the motions his shall make, and to execute
judgments upon their enemies: which is matter of great comfort to poor
afflicted souls, that they may at any time find this Judge sitting, and open
their grievances unto him, and have audience; other Judges are absent from
their seats, or not at leisure, or stately, and will not give way to poor
oppressed ones to ease themselves, and acquaint them with their suits, none of
these are to be feared here.

11. Christ sitting on the Throne, prompts unto us, that Christ should
accomplish the whole work of man's redemption, which the Father had appointed
him, and so sit down in glory upon the Throne. He appeared as man in that
nature, he did and suffered the will of God on earth, and in that nature he
sat down at the right hand of God; had not Christ been to fulfill all
righteousness, he had not appeared as man sitting on the throne, and had he
not done it, he should never have returned to heaven and sat down in glory;
he has satisfied the Law, is freed from the guilt of our sins, and has
presently finished the work undertaken, and therefore told his Father he had
glorified him on earth, he had finished the work he had given him to do; and
thereupon desired him to glorify him, and set him upon the Throne, Joh. 17.4,
5. which is done: and this may be of singular comfort against all our
imperfections, corruptions, temptations, and death it self.

VERSE. 27. I saw, as the color of Amber, as the appearance of fire round about
within it, etc.


HEre the man that sat upon the Throne is described unto us: 1. In general.
2. More particularly.


1. In general; I saw as the color of Amber.

2. Particularly, upwards and downwards; upwards, as the appearance of fire
round about within it: from the appearance of his loins upward; so that this
fire was more latent, and then downwards the fire was more visible, and had
brightness about it. Touching the word Hashmal, or Chasmal, I have spoken
largely in the 4th verse, Quasi (...) festinanter consumens.
and it signifies a coal intensly hot, and, as it were, presently consuming
what ever it touches; such coals are most fiery and lively: and they that
render the word color vividissimus, a most lively color, or as the color of a
burning coal, give the truest sense of the word. Before it referred to the
Angels, here to Christ: the word Chasmal read backward, is Lammashach, or
Lammashiach, which is interpreted, the Messiah; it is the Cabalists observation,
and the sum in general is this: I saw as the color of Amber; I saw Christ
that sat upon the Throne, all of an intense fiery color, like the most hot
burning coals: and so the Lord Christ is set forth, Rev. 1.14, 15. His eyes
were as a flame of fire, his feet like unto fine brass, as if they burned in a
furnace; so here, from head to feet, Christ is presented in a fiery color: and
it is frequent in Scripture, when acts of power and judgment are to be executed
against kingdoms or churches, to have Christ presented in a fiery way: so
Rev. 10.1. the mighty Angel Christ, is brought in there with his face shining
as the Sun, and his feet at pillars of fire; and presently there were great
thunders, and dreadful things: so Rev. 2.18. he is brought in with eyes like
fire, and feet like brass, and then tells Thyatira he has a few things
against her: so Rev. 19.11, 12, 13. In righteousness he does judge and make
war, and then his eyes were as a flame of fire, and his vesture dipped in blood:
thus is he described, when some great designs are afoot, as sentencing a
church, warring against his enemies, etc.

The particular description is next, which falls into farther inquiry: from his
loins upward, was as the appearance of fire within it; there is a difference
between the fire in the upward parts of Christ, and that in his lower, the one
is external, the other internal Within it, within what? within the color of
the Amber; or according to the word, as we have interpreted it, within that
fire of burning hot coals, there was as the appearance of fire in the concave
of it round about; Ignis latens, and igniens intrinsecus, Sanct.
so that there was a fire in a fire, a secret hidden fire burning inwardly;
this fire did not put forth its virtue so apparently as the other did, but
burnt inwardly, and reflected upon it self. What this fire was, is our work to
open unto you; By fire within, Gregory in his seventh Homily, understands
Christ before his incarnation, he was ignis in Judaea tantum, there only he
shined, the Gentiles knew him not; but after his incarnation he shined from
his loins downward, and was made known unto all; but by it we understand the
divine nature of Christ, which being full of perfection, too bright for humane
eyes, was more inward and remote from sense; and it is likened unto fire in
regard of the luster and efficacy of it, which none can indurc. By the burning
hot coals, we may understand the burning zeal of Christ to the glory of God
in executing judgment upon the wicked, and at this time he sat in judgment
upon Jerusalem.

From his loins downward, there was as the appearance of fire, and it had
brightness round about it: this fire and brightness was more apparent,
visible and enlightening then the other, and it represents to us the great glory
and Majesty of the Lord Christ, as it is exhibitive to, and comprehensive by
creatures; it is the glory of humane nature, which was the lower part of Christ,
less glorious; the strength of the divine natures glory shining through it,
and giving out it self in that way and degree, as man is capable of: the Sun in
a cloud may be beheld by the weakest eye, in it self not by the strongest, the
glory of both Christ's natures are shadowed out unto us in this verse.

And it had brightness round about; Splendour ei circum: that fire produced a
brightness, and a brightness on every side; it sets out the glory of Christ
in execution of justice upon those are delinquents: or, the glory of his
presence and actions, he dwells in light, and all his actions are lightsome.

Observe. 1. That the Lord Christ, as man, is very glorious; he was here in the
appearance of man, and the Prophet saw him, having the color of Chasmal, that
is, like unto the most burning and hottest coal or coals; not those in common
fires, but those that are in a furnace, which glow and shine most; Dan. 10.6.
Rev. 1.16.
in his transfiguration, which was a Praeludium to his glorious condition in
heaven, Christ's face shined as the Sun, Mat. 17.2. What a glorious creature is
the Sun! and Christ's face as glorious as that is: in Dan. 12.3. it is said, The
wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and they that turn many
to righteousness, as the stars for ever; but Christ, as the Sun, which is the
great glory of the heavens; the godly may have firmament, and star brightness,
but Christ Sun brightness. Neither does that reach the glory of Christ's humane
nature; it goes beyond it, Acts 26.13. when Christ appeared to Paul at his
conversion, what says he? I saw a light from heaven above the brightness of
the Sun, shining round about me; this was the light of the glory of Christ
glorified, and it was beyond the brightness of the Sun: The Star that led the
Wise men to Christ, Epist ad Ephesians.
Ignatius thinks did exceed all the rest in light and brightness, that none
ever was like it; be it so, yet the glory of Christ's humane nature is far above
it; no creature is so glorious, as fully to represent the glory of it:
therefore, says the Apostle, Phil. 3. last, He shall change our vile bodies,
and make them like, not the Stars or Sun, that were too low, but like his
glorious body, the original is, his body of glory: that is, his body which is
exceeding glorious, above the glory of all creatures.

2. That the Lord Christ sitting upon the Throne in judgment, is very
dreadful: he is, ignis vividissimus, as hot burning coals: the Propht Malachi
tells you of his coming, and when he comes, who may abide the day of his
coming; and who shall stand when he appears? for he is like refiners fire;
and he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver, Chap. 3.2, 3. A refiners
fire is the hottest, it melts, purges, consumes, and is terrible; such a fire
is Christ in his judgments, Jerusalem could not stand before him, but he
destroys them by the strength of Babylon, and afterward is terrible to Babylon
it self, Jerem. 51.25. I am against thee, O destroying mountain, speaking of
Babylon, which destroyest all the earth, I will stretch out my hand upon thee,
and roll thee down from the rocks, and will make thee a burnt mountain; this
burning coal, Christ, will fire and burn down that great mountain; and what
then? they shall not take of thee a stone for a corner, nor a stone for
foundations, but thou shall be desolate for ever; severe was the Spirit of
Christ against Babylon in the letter, and as severe is he now against Babylon
in the mystery: he shall destroy them that destroy the earth, Rev. 11.18. He
makes Jerusalem a burdensome stone to all that meddle with it, Zach. 12.3.
There is mention made in the 28. of our Prophet, 14. of stones of fire; Christ
is the stone of fire that breaks and burns the kingdoms of the earth; many
kingdoms in Europe are on fire at this day, and almost broken in pieces, and
burnt to ashes: we may see that Christ is terrible in his judgments, he is
riding now upon his red horse, taking peace from the earth; dipping his
garments in blood, and causing his great sword to eat flesh and drink blood; he
is upon his black horse, bringing in famine and pestilence; the pale horse is
sadled, and death is on the back of him, and intends to ride through our
Cities, Countries, Towns, Families, and make a great slaughter, Rev. 2.6. and
will yet be more terrible, verse. 17. the great day of his wrath is at hand, and
who shall be able to stand? neither Kings, great men, Captains, mighty ones,
nor any other sort can do it; they will call on rocks and mountains to fall
upon them, and hide them from the face of him that sits on the Throne, and from
the wrath of the Lamb; his eyes sparkled with fire, his feet are like burning
brass, and out of his mouth issue flames of fire; and to set out the
dreadfulnesse of this Judge, Paul tells us, he shall come in flames of fire, 2
These. 1.8. And as his appearance, so his name will be dreadful, for he has an
unknown name belongs to him in his way of ruling and judgment, Rev. 19.12. and
this will be known when he sets up his Kingdom among the Jews, says
Brightman.

3. That he is zealous in sentencing and punishing Malefactors, he is pruna
sum ignita, and not only so, but here is a fire within, zeal in his breast, a
spirit of burning within; you may see the zeal of Christ in Joh. 2.14, 15, 16,
17. The Temple being a type of Christ, and by divine appointment set apart for
worship, should not have been made a place of merchandise, but Christ coming
and finding in the Temple those that sold Oxen, Sheep, Doves, and changers of
money sitting, made a scourge of small cords, and whipped them out of the Temple
like a company of Rogues, drove out the Sheep and Oxen, powered out the changers
money, overthrew the tables, bid them take away their Doves, and not make his
Fathers House an house of merchandise; they might have said, All these are
brought for sacrificing, for public service and the worship of God; and what
do thou pretend Gods glory, and take away his sacrifice? we will whip thee
out of the Temple, and use thee as an enemy to God and his worship: and it was
a wonder they did not, Christ being a poor man, having no countenance from the
Rulers, and meddling with rude fellows, and dealing with them so sharply and
shamefully, as to whip them out: it was wonder they tore him not in pieces, or
stoned him to death for it; Christ's zeal was hot, and carried him on to punish
and disgrace those delinquents, not fearing their rage or malice, so Gods glory
might be repaired. This zeal in Christ was so intense, that it warmed the
hearts of his Disciples, who upon it, remembered what was writ of him; The zeal
of thine house has eaten me up. How zealous was Christ in his carriage
toward the Asian churches? he tells Ephesus, that except she repent, recover
her first love, and do her fitst works, he will come quickly, remove her
Candlestick out of its place, and unchurch her, Rev. 2.5. To Pergamus also he
says, Repent, for I come quickly, and will fight against thee with the sword
of my mouth, verse 16. So for Thyatira, wherein Jesabel lived, and did much
hurt. Behold, says Christ, I will cast her into a bed, and them that commit
adultery with her, into great tribulation, except they repent of their deeds;
and I will kill her children with death, etc. verse. 22.23. So for Laodicea, how
zealous is Christ against that zeallesse church; I know thou art neither hot
nor cold, I would thou were cold or hot, so then, because thou art lukewarm, I
will spew thee out of my mouth, Chap. 3.15, 16. His proceeding with the
churches, answers his apparition to John, in the vision which was with eyes as
a flame of fire, and feet like burning brass. Chap. 1.14, 15.

4. That the divine nature of Christ is too glorious for man's eyes to behold;
and therefore is presented here more remote and hidden from the Prophets sight:
There was the appearance of fire in the color of Amber, or, within the outward
fire; this was glorious, that exceeding glorious, the fire in the fire; here is
infinite glory shut up, obscured by that is less glorious. You heard before of
Christ's humane nature, that it is very glorious; much more the Divine that
communicates the luster and glory to the humane, 2 Pet. 1.17. a voice came from
the excellent glory, glory that excelled all the glory of the creature, that
excelled all the apprehensions of creatures, (...).
from the glory greatly becoming, or great becoming glory; it is glory that
greatly becomes the great God; and such is the glory of the Divine nature of
Christ, it is excellent glory; and if it were let out a little, in the strength
and fullness of it, we should be sunk by it; (...)
for Glory is a weighty thing, the Hebrew word for glory, signifies gravitas,
pondus, onus, intimating, that glory, as it is a bright, so a heavy thing;
brightness and weightinesse are in it, 2 Cor. 4.17. it is called a weight of
glory, (...).
and the glory of Christ's divine nature would oppress us, if fully opened to
our view: Moses made a request to God, which if he had granted, would have been
his death, Exodus 33.18. I beseech thee (says he) show me thy glory, God tells
him in the 20th verse, no man can see me and live, my glory will be a consuming
fire unto thee; yet God is pleased to communicate the glory of his divine
nature here to Moses in that way might do him good, and not destroy him: he
puts him into the cleft of a rock, and shows him his back parts, verse. 23.
which was some glorious body, as Testatus thinks; some humane shape, as others
conceive, and not unlikely to be Christ, Oluaster Osiander.
as he appeared in his transfiguration, full of glory and Majesty; thus God
condescended to Moses, and so here to the Prophet, Non cadit sub sensum
corporis. Juxta possibilitatem humanam. Fulgor ille tantae majestatis nos in
nihilum redigeret.
he sees the glory of the divine nature in the humane, which in it self is not
subject to man's sense, but through divine dispensation is made visible
according to man's capacity. If we cannot behold the Sun for its brightness,
nor one creature behold another, without prejudice to it self; how can we
behold the exceeding glory of the Creator, of the divine nature, without great
danger, without death? the glory of such Majesty would turn us into nothing.

5. That Christ's actions, even judicary ones, are glorious; there was
brightness round about his presence, sitting in judgment, and his actual
punishing of the Jews with war, famine, captivity, are all full of glory. This
supreme Majesty executing judgment, fills all with brightness and glory; when
the Angels came with power to judge Babylon, Rev. 18.1, 2. it is said, the earth
was lightened with his glory; Acts of judgment and justice are glorious and
shining: Ribera says, this is meant of judgment upon Rome, which shall be
evident to all, and fill the world with the glory of it, when it shall be
fulfilled; God was glorious, as well in destroying the Egyptians as delivering
the Israelites; there is so much beauty and brightness in works of justice and
judgment, that they are called the glory of the Lord, Numb. 14.21. The people
upon the ill report brought upon the Land of Canaan murmured, thought to make a
captain, and go back to Egypt; whereupon God threatened to smite them with the
pestilence, and to disinherit them, Moses interposes, intercedes for them, God
answers him, and says, Rev. 14.11. The fire and brimstone they are tormented
with, is, vindicta Dei ex qua quasi sumus produt Dei laus and gloria, Alcazar.
At thy request I have pardoned them; but as truly as I live, all the earth
shall be filled with the glory of the Lord; what is that? the glory of his just
judgments upon them in the Wilderness: and shortly after, Corah and his
confederates were swallowed alive by the earth; Zimri and Cosbi were run through
for their wickedness, and in these and other particulars, was the glory of the
Lord seen evidently: Would Magistrates and those have power in their hands,
shine and be glorious? let them execute judgment, and see justice done.
Solomon by that act of judgment between the two Harlots, touching the dead and
the living child, became renowned. What a glorious act was in it, when Darius
set Daniel at liberty, and caused his accusers to be cast into the den of
Lions? If men in place would punish delinquents, executing justice in the fear
of God without respect of persons, distemper of affections, or any sinister
respects, they would be like Angels, and enlighten the City and Kingdom with
glory; such a one is Sol justitiae, and fills the world with the beams of
righteousness; he is dextra Dei, and relieves Kingdoms, Cities, Families
with equity.

VER. 28. As the appearance of the bow that is in the cloud in the day of
rain: so was the appearance of the brightness round about.


HEre is a description of that brightness or glory which compassed him that
sat upon the Throne; himself was glorious, the brightness of glory, and he
had circumferentiall brightness, and this is resembled unto the Bow in the
cloud, that which we call the Rainbowe; first mention of it is in the 9th of
Genesis, verse 13. where God puts double honor upon it.

1. He ownes it for his; I do set my Bow in the cloud: and,

2. Makes it foederall, a token of the Covenant between him and the earth; and
so by divine institution is exalted to a supernatural work, a sacramental
sign.

I shall speak something of this Bow Philosophically, and something
Theologically.

1. Philosophically, the generation of it is in the womb of a cloud, and the
cause natural, viz. the reverberation of the Sunbeams in a moist cloud; for
when there is a moist cloud opposite to the Sun, fitly disposed to receive the
Sunbeams, and to reflect them, then is the Rain-bowes birth and appearance;
the figure of it a semicircle, sometimes less, but never greater; sometimes
there has been a Rain-bowe in the night from the beams of the Moon, which is
weak, and like a white cloud.

Mylichius observes, In lib. 2. Plin.
that from the Sun has sometimes been a white Rainbow, but constantly the
Rain-bowe is of diverse colors, specially blew, green, and red, all very
glorious, Thaumantis filiam propter admirationem. In Theaeteto.
and wonderful, drawing the eyes of the world to behold it; whereupon Plato
thinks it is called the daughter of Wonder, it is so admired.

The natural signification of it is rain, and moist weather; Scaliger says,
if it be in the morning, it betokens rain, Exercitat. 80.
if in the evening, fair weather; but we may find by observation, that evening
Rain-bows in our Horizons have been messengers of rain, as often as morning ones;
the Grecians call it Iris, which Eustathius says, is from (...), nuntio,
because it does foretell rain; some derive it from (...), contention; because
it presageth stormy and wet weathee; Homer constantly calls it (...), a
divine messenger, to tell the world there should be rain and storm. This is the
observation of some learned; that if the colors of the Bow appear thick, and
end in blackness of a cloud, rain follows certainly, but if they grow
cleerer, and so vanish, a serene follows.

Besides this signification, Lib. 12. c. 22.
Pliny attributes a special operation to it; where the horns of the Bow do
light, Plants and Herbs are made more fragrant and pleasant; Iridis incubatu
Plantae fiunt odoratiores, Exercit. 80. Ad generationem mannae and mellis ^eri^.
and Scal. is of the same opinion, who says, the incubation of the Rainbowe
upon Plants, makes them more odoriferous? and Aristotle tells us, lib. 5. Hist.
Animal. cap. 22. that it does much conduce to the generation of hony-deaw.

2. For the Theolocall consideration of this Bow; it is to put us in mind of
the great flood that drowned the world, and to assure us, that God will never
more do so; Genesis 9.14, 15. When I bring a cloud over the earth, and the Bow
shall be seen in the cloud, I will remember my Covenant between me, you, and
every living creature, and the water shall no more become a flood to destroy
all flesh. When we see the Bow therefore in the heavens, we should,

1. Be led to consideration of divine Justice against the iniquities of the
world, which he punished most severely, as to destroy all flesh: And

2. To mind the rich mercy of God to our forefathers and our selves, to whom
he has bound himself by covenant, and the Bow being the sign of it, that he
will never destroy the world again in that kind; and whereas some make the red
color in the Bow a sign of the worlds destruction by fire at last, it has
foundation in man's brain, not in any institution of God.

But I come to the words of our Prophet; here is a Bow in a cloud in the day of
rain, Qui infra lumbos imaginis apparebat Maldon. A lapid.
etc. some make the brightness here to be that which is downwards from his
loins, and to be like unto the Bow in the cloud, and so they exclude all the
parts from his loins upward, from having reference to this Bow, understanding
by his upper parts, the divine nature, by his lower the humane; and something
there is in it, because the Text says, in 27th verse: I saw from the
appearance of his loins downwards, as the appearance of fire, and it had
brightness round about it. That fire had not the other: but it seems to me
more suitable to the Text and truth, that this brightness being in circuit
round about it, did compass, not the lower parts only, but the whole Throne
and Person of Christ; and so we find in Rev. 4.3. where Christ is upon the
Throne, that there is a Rainbow round about it, and therefore conceive that
here also the Rainbow was round about the Throne.

We will not stand upon that longer, but come to see what the Bow points at:
And,

1. It is an Emblem of glory, Gods glory is much seen in the heavens always;
but when the Bow is set in the cloud, Habet accessionem aliquam non spernendam,
ac si Deus adderet aliquid ad nudum Coeli aspectum, Call. It Is a glorious
creature, and has glorious colors in it, various, and yet beautiful,
affecting the eye for the present, more then all the glory of the heavens
besides; and I find among Interpreters, that it signifies,

First, the glory and beauty of divine Providence in its various proceedings
with the wicked and the godly, it punishes the one, it rewards the other; and
when these are done, there is so much glory in it, that Angels and men are
affected with it.

Secondly, the glory which is conveyed and communicated to the creatures; for
in the heavens the glory of God does shine. You know the Rain-bowes original
and being is from the beams of the Sun, communicated, received, and reflected,
and though it be glorious, yet it is a borrowed glory, and so informs us, that
the glory in all creatures is from another, from Christ, By him Kings reign,
He gives gifts to the sons of men, He enlightens every man that comes into
the world.

2. It is a token of mercy and favor; Symbolum clementiae, gratiae and
misericordiae.
it is a Bow without arrows, the back (says Ramban) of it being toward the
heavens, and ends downward, it is a sign of mercy; for when one shoots
arrows, he holds the back from him. And that it is a sign of grace and
mercy, we will make out by Scripture unto you: that covenant made by Noah about
the waters in Isa. 54.8, 9, 10. is applied to the Covenant of Grace, stricken
with man in Christ; In a little wrath, says God, I hid my face from thee for a
moment, but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee; for this is
^s the waters of Noah unto me: for as I have sworn that the waters of Noah
should no more go over the earth, so have I sworn I would not be wroth with
thee: for the mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed, but my kindness
shall not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my peace be removed,
says the Lord, that has mercy on thee. Here you see the Covenant of waters
applied to the Covenant of grace; and in the Revelation you shall see the same
sign, even the Rainbow applied for a sign of grace, Rev. 4.3. There is
Christ sitting upon the Throne, and a Rainbow round about it, which shows,
that the Throne of Christ is compassed about with mercy: and Rev. 10.1. A
Rainbow was upon his head; Christ is presented in Visions, crowned with the
Rainbow, as a messenger of grace and peace; Isa. 9.6.
for he is the Prince of peace, and his Crown is the Rainbow, a certain
Emblem of peace, Genesis 9.13, 14. The Rainbow has variety of colors, and all
glorious, and so does the more fitly resemble the mercies of Christ, which are
various and glorious.

This brightness then in the figure of a Rainbow, signifies grace and mercy,
held out to those that were godly, or should repent of their wickedness; the
brightness before noted the glory of his judicary proceeding, and here being
formed into a Bow, it betokens mercy.

Observe. 1. That mercy and grace come to us through the humane nature of
Christ, from thence goes out the brightness and the beams that make the Bow;
when the Word was made flesh, then went out glory, John 1.14. and grace, Verse.
16. Then was Sol in nube, the most glorious Rainbow that ever was or shall be
in the world; he was not a sign of peace, but our Peace, Ephesians. 2.14. By his
blood we are brought nigh, for he is our peace.

2. God has his days of Rain: When the flood was, then there was rain to
purpose forty days together; If God has rained bread, Exodus 16. he has
rained wrath, Job 20.23. snares, storms, fire, brimstone, Psalm. 11. God rains
blood upon kingdoms, Ezekiel. 38.22. I will plead against him with pestilence,
and with blood, and I will rain upon him, and his bands, and the many people
with him, overflowing rain, great hailstones, fire and brimstone.

3. That the Lord Christ in wrath remembers mercy, he mingles mercy with
judgment; he sits as Judge upon the Throne; he pronounces s^^tence against a
sinful kingdom, executing the vengeance written against sinners; and yet here
he is compassed with the Rainbow; showing, that he will not utterly destroy
the Jews, a remnant should be spared. When the great deluge of water was
drowning the world; yet Noah and his were saved, there was mercy in the midst
of judgment: and here is a Judge with a Rainbow over his head, to assure the
godly, they should not perish in this flood of wrath, now pouring out upon the
Jews. Jerome says of the Bow, it is a sign of mercy, and the covenant which
God made with man, that when it appeared in the cloud, we might know we should
not perish by a flood; and much more when Christ sits in judgment with the
Rainbow about him, may the godly know, that they shall not perish by the wrath
of God; if the glory of his Majesty, stateliness of his Throne, terror of his
Justice, and the greatness of his Power do at any time discourage us, we must
look at the Rainbow round about him, and remember his Throne is compassed
with mercy. It Is said of the Jews, when they see the Rainbow, they go forth,
confess their sins, but will not look upon it. Confession of sins, or any duty
whatsoever, will do us no good, unless we look upon the Bow; the mercy of
Christ, now was a storm, and in it a Rain-bowe, for the Prophet, and godly to
look at, it is said in the Text the Bow in the cloud in the day of rain, then
it is a rainy day when God rains snares, fire and brimstone, and horrible
tempest upon the wicked, even then the bow is in the cloud, and the righteous
should look for it, and look to it; they should remember the covenant and mercy
of it: Is it not a rainy and stormy time now? is not this great Prince angry
with the kings and kingdoms of the earth? does he not frown, chide, and smite,
and that with deadly strokes in many places? Let us look at the Rainbow now,
and know, if there should come an overflowing scourge, a deluge of wrath upon
the world, yet the Noah's shall be arked and safe, the righteous shall be hid,
Christ will manifest mercy to them. Says John, Rev. 4.2. I was in the Spirit,
and behold, a Throne was set in heaven, and there was a Rainbow round about
the Throne; no sooner was John in the Spirit, but he saw the Throne and the
Rainbow; let us now be in the Spirit, look with eyes of faith, and we shall
see the Throne, him sits on it, and the bow round about him; and then, though
kingdoms lie under the floods of errors, superstition and ungodliness, though
drowned in troubles and blood, yet we shall see God and Christ in a way of
love and mercy toward us.

4. That Justice and Mercy do compass the Throne of Christ; there was
brightness round about, and the bow was round about; go to Christ's Throne any
way, there is nothing but justice for the sinner, unless penitent and
believing, and if such, nothing but mercy.

This was the appearance of the likeness of the Glory of the Lord; and when I
saw it, I fell upon my face, and I heard a voice of one that spoke.
Here is the conclusion of the Vision, and in it we have the scope of all was
presented to the Prophets view, and it is to manifest the infinite glory of
God; and then follows a double effect:

First, upon sight of it, he fell upon his face; And

Secondly, He hears a voice; and so a fit pass^ is made to that which follows.

The first thing is the manifestation of Gods glory: a^^ (...) glory of God is
considerable,

1. In God himself, in the Divine (...), and there it is infinite glorious,
exceeding glory.

2. In the creation, as it is expressed and opened in the volume of the
creatures, there Gods glory is greatly seen, Isa. 6.3. The earth is full of his
glory; the Hebrew is, the fullness of the earth is his glory; the world is
glorious, and filled with Gods glory, it is nothing else but Gods glory
interpreted and opened unto us in the creatures, Quid est mundus nisi Deus
explicatus?
and divine providence about them.

3. In divine dispensations toward his Church and people; Gods glory is in the
firmament, in all the creatures, but more specially and fully in the Church,
Psalm. 29.9. In his Temple does every one speak of his glory, there it is most
visible, affecting and provoking of every one to speak. In the world few take
notice of it, but in the Temple every one sees it, and speaks of it; the world
is God opened, and so glorious; the Church is Christ opened, and so very
glorious: this made David long to be in the Sanctuary, when he was in the
Wilderness; and why so? to see thy power and thy glory, Psalm. 63.2. Could not
David see them in the heavens, in the mountains, in the goodly Cedars, and
other works of God? Yes, but not as in the Sanctuary; and therefore he says,
to see thy power and glory; so as I have seen thee in thy Sanctuary; there I
have seen thee otherwise then ever elsewhere; there he saw the King upon his
Throne and in his glory.

The glory of God in each of these, is held forth in this Vision, in some
measure: there was the Spirit in the wheels, a fire within, by which the glory
of the divine nature appeared: there was a whirlewind, a cloud, fire,
brightness, living creatures, wheels moving several ways, which represent the
glory of God in the world, and government of it: there was a firmament and a
throne, one sitting upon it, surrounded with a Rainbow, which sets out the
glory of God in his several dispensations toward his Church, both in his
judgments, mercies, and government thereof.

A Question is moved; Whether our Prophet saw the glory of God?

The Answer is; It was the appearance of the likeness of the glory of the
Lord; he does not say, he saw God in his essence; it is acknowledged by most,
that we cannot see Gods essence while we are Pilgrims on earth, In vid. ^^b.
de viden. Deum, Hom. 2. 2. q. 174. 175.
and absent in the flesh: Augustine and Aquinas are of opinion, that Moses and
Paul saw God in his essence; but they were men, and not without their errors:
for had they seen Gods essence, their faith had ceased, being swallowed up in
vision.

The School-man would help it thus: the light of glory in them had not a
permanent being, but was given them transitively. Esse perman^ns per modum
transeuntis.
But this answer will not bear up the opinion: for faith and vision of glory
cannot consist in a larger tract, or in the least instant of times; as in one
man there cannot be a perfect and obscure light together, the full light of the
Sun, and least degree of darkness cannot at once be in the eye. And farther,
if they saw the essence of God, they had not the act of faith, but evidence;
for if a man had seen Rome, and after remembers it, Non habet fidem, sed
evidentiam de eo quod vidit.
he says not he believes there is such a City, but he has seen it; and so of
Gods essence: It must not be granted that ever any saw Gods essence, you have
incontrollable authority for it, Joh. 1.18. No man has seen God at any time.
Durand. says, these words are to be understood exclusively,

1. Of corporeal vision; for with a bodily eye, none ever did, or shall see
God.

2. Of intellectual natural Vision; because a natural understanding cannot
attain unto the clear vision of God.

3. Of the vision of comprehension; from all created understandings; though
Angels and Saints in heaven see God, yet not comprehensively: and 1 Timothy 6.16.
whom no man has seen, nor can see; there is a denial both of the fact and the
possibility; Aust. himself confesses in l. 2. de Trin. C. 16, 17, 18.
That the substance of God is not ullo modo corporaliter visibilem, not to be
seen at all with the eyes of flesh; and the rule of Schoolmen touching visions
and apparitions, is infallible, that the nature of God is not seen with the
eyes of the body, but only some corporeal thing is exhibited, which being
visibly seen, or sensibly perceived, God is invisibly represented to the
understanding. Al. Halcus.


But Moses saw God face to face, Exodus 33.11. So Jacob saw God face to face,
Genesis 32.

Answ. Those Patriarchs and Prophets that are said to see God, saw him in
diverse resemblances, and this is an unanswerable argument, that they never saw
Gods essence, for that is pure, immixt, always alike, neither standing nor
sitting, having no parts, no shape or likeness to any thing; therefore says
Athenasius, those Fathers saw God in some creature, Deum non fuiss ab antiquis
p^r^bus v^sum nost: (...) assumptio^e creatu ae, secundum Deitatem vero esse
(...) v sio^^em.
not in his own nature, for it is invisible.

Again, this phrase of seeing God face to face, in the Hebrew dialect imports
two things: First, Familiarity. Secondly, Perspicuity.


1. Familiarity, they had familiar converse with God, Deuteronomy. 5.4. the Lord
talks with you face to face; you asked him questions, and he gave you
answers; and it is evident that this is intended in the phrase, Exo. 33.11. The
Lord spoke to Moses face to face, as a man speaks with his friend, Moses
questioned it with God, and God most friendly answered him: So in Numb. 12.8.
Mouth to mouth will I speak with him, it notes the presentiality and
familiarity of God with Moses.

2. Perspicuity, cleernesse; they saw God face to face; that is, comparatively;
others saw God in dreams and visions, which were more obscure, but these saw
God more clearly, had more illustrious visions of God; they saw Gods
back-parts, these saw Gods face; and the phrase is used in the New Testament, 1
Cor. 13.12. Then shall we see face to face; that is, more fully and perfectly
then here; but whether we shall see the divine essence in patria, in heaven,
is questionable. Chrysostom. Hom. 14. on John, says, That before the incarnation
the Son of God was Angelis invisibilis; and if they in their glory saw not the
divine nature of Christ, it is like we shall not. Whether Christ saw the Father
or Holy Ghost with the eyes of his body, is questionable, if some doubt it,
others deny it: Halens. grants, that the soul of Christ saw God perfectly from
his conception; but he says not, the eye of his body saw him: Aquinas says,
that glorified eyes shall see God in that manner, as now our eyes do see the
life of man; life not seen with a bodily eye, as a thing visible by it self,
but by the intervention of something else, and so accidentally becomes
sensible; it is our understanding, not the eye, reaches life, and so in God.

But in 1 John 3. we shall see him as he is.

Answ. He speaks of a new and unutterable way of seeing God. We shall see him
as he is to be seen, mediante lumine gloriae; the beams of the Sun so fill the
eye, that we cannot behold the nature of it; and whether it be so in heaven,
we shall not know, till we come there; let us get holiness, and then we
shall see him will resolve this doubt.

Observe. 1. That all the glory is seen of God in this life any ways, is but
the appearance and likeness of the glory of God. There was much and great
glory in this vision, there is more in the world in the creatures, more in the
Church, and yet all this is only a shadow, and a small appearance of the glory
of God. If we should see ten thousand Torches lighted up in a dark night, they
make a glorious light; yet are they nothing to the light of the Sun, when that
comes, torch-light, starlight, seem appearances of light, rather then light it
self: So when the glory of God shall be revealed, it will darken all other
glory; and there was not so great a difference between the light in Goshen, and
darkness in Egypt, as there will be between the glory of God and that glory
now appears in the world. The glory of God is neither expressible or
comprehensible by any or all the creatures. The glory that Isaiah saw on the
earth, and that Ezekiel saw in the heavens, did not express the thousand part
of this glory; and neither heaven not earth are able to comprehend the same.

2. See the infinite goodness of the Lord, that will expose that to the eyes
of his servants, which is so dear unto him; his own glory. Precious things of
Princes and great ones, are not common for the view of all, but choice friends,
favorites shall see them. God has nothing more precious then his glory; yet
this shall his choice friends and favorites see; and because they cannot see
it in the perfection of it, God will draw a picture of it with his own hand,
and hold forth to the eyes of his here: Ezekiel had an appearance of the glory
of the Lord, but it is the greater mercy, that God will put forth creating power
in a vision, and present the likeness of his glory in variety of things,
according to the capacity, and for the advantage of his servants: so Moses saw
the glory of the Lord in the Mount; so Christ showed unto Peter, James, and
John, his glory in his transfiguration, Matthew. 17. Isaiah, he had a glorious
vision, Chap. 6. and so glorious it was, that it is called the glory of the
Lord; and this did the Prophet Isaiah see in the likeness and appearance of
it, not in its own nature, for no man you ever could so see the glory of God
and live.

Jehovah: this name by the learned Jews, is called,

1. Hashsham, that name emphatically, as the chiefest of all the rest.

(...).
2. The name of four letters.

3. The great Name.

4. The blessed Name; for the high Priest did pronounce it only once a year,
and that in the Temple, at the feast of Propitiation, at the solemn blessing,
Numb. 6.24, 25.

5. The glorious Name,

6. The name Separate, shem Hammephoraash, because separate from ambiguity,
says Maimon, from our knowledge says the son of Maimon.

7. The name appropriated to God, because it is most proper to him.

8. The name of remembering, because it brings to mind the being of God.

9. The name of essence or being, Shemhaguetzem, a name of substance.

Plebi sub poena mortis ejus pronuntiatio vitita fuit, Buxtorf. Qui pronuntiat
nomen Tetragrammatum, non habet partem in suturo seculo.
The Jews are exceeding superstitious about this name, and say it must not be
pronounced; they term it The unexpressible Name; themselves never utter it, but
Adonai, or Elohim in stead of it: they tell us, that the woman's son in the 24.
of Levit. was accused of blasphemy, and stoned to death, because he pronounced
this name Jehovah. And there is a relation of the Priests of the Sanctuary,
that not knowing how to read this name, being written by Moses, Spasmo correpti
interiorint. Gerard. in loc. Shindl.
they laughed, and were smitten to death of God for it. It Is strange to think
what miracles the Jews attribute to this name; Moses had it writ in a Rod or
Staff, Christ got it, and put in his thigh, and so by virtue of it, they both
did all their miracles: they tell of one David a Magician, that by virtue of
this name went in one day a journey of ten days. But to leave Rabbinicall
conceits; This name Jehovah imports essence, Ab (...) fuit, est.
being, existence; and by it, the eternity, independency, efficacity and truth
of God are laid before us, together with his being; (...).
and here it is attributed to Christ, and tells us, that he has his being of
himself; he is complete in himself, and an infinite sea of being; Eternal,
Rev. 1.8. Independent, Rev. 1.5. Efficacious, giving being, life and perfection
to all creatures, Hebr. 1.2, 3. Col. 1.16, 17. he is true, yea, truth;
fulfilling the promises, 2 Cor. 1.20.

Observe. 1. Jesus Christ, who sat upon the Throne here, is JEHOAVH, of the
same essence with the Father and the Holy Ghost; he is not consimilar, but
consubstantiall with them, (...). Alius pater, alius filius, alius spiritus,
but not aliud pater, aliud filius, aliud spiritus.
not like the Father, or like the Spirit, but the same; the one differs from
the other personally, but not essentially, 1 John 5.7. There be three that
bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these
three are one; one in essence, one in propriety, one JEHOVAH, Jer. 23.6. the
Prophet speaking of Christ, tells us what his name shall be called, Jehovah
Zidkenus, The Lord our righteousness, and in Mal. 3.1. Jehovah whom you seek
shall suddenly come to his Temple: by the name JEHOVAH, is meant Christ, who is
God: and this is of great concernment; it is the foundation of our faith in
Christ, of our worshipping of Christ, of our salvation by Christ, and of all
good from Christ; if he were not Jehovab, the Gospel should be a lie, our faith
a fancy, our worship false, the Church a fable, all men lost, and that for
ever.

2 Again, that the glory here represented in this Vision, was not the glory of
a creature, but of Jehovah, there was a man presented to his eye, but Jehovah
to his faith: it was the appearance of the glory of the Lord; not only of
Christ as man, but as God-man, and so the glory was glorious glory.

And when I saw it, I fell upon my face.
Here is the first effect of it, when he had this vision, beheld this glory,
he was amazed, so smitten with the luster of it, that he could stand no
longer, but down he falls, and that upon his face. There is frequent mention
in Scripture, that upon visions, and appearances of Divine Majesty the servants
of God have fallen down, Dan. 8.17. He fell upon his face, and Saul, Acts 9.4.
he fell to the earth, Abraham he fell on his face when God appeared to him,
Genesis 17.3. The three Disciples Christ took up into the mount, when they saw the
glory, and heard the voice, they fell on their faces. There is a great
difference between falling on the face, and falling on the back. To fall
forward, notes respect and humility, but to fall backward is a note of sin and
guilt: Abraham fell twice upon his face; the Prophets often; the godly, when they
are to deal with God, fall forwards, the wicked backward, Cadere in faciem,
observantiae est, and humilitatem semper olet; sed retro cadere peccatum
supponit, aut indicat, Jer.
except old Eli. We read not of any good man that fell backward: but all those
came to take Christ, Joh. 18.6. went backwards, and fell to the ground: So Isa.
28.13. Precept upon precept, that they might go and fall backwards.

There be diverse reasons or grounds of men's falling upon their faces, in
visions and apparitions of God.

1. The Majesty of God that is present in these visions, and some way or other
represented to those that have the Visions: so Dan. 10.9.

2. The luster of Divine glory that accompanies the same; this made Paul and
his company fall to the ground, Act. 26.13, 14.

3. Some new and dreadful thing that appears in the Vision as here; creatures
with four faces, and four wings, wheels, rings, full of eyes, and so high, that
they are dreadful.

4. Sense of their own frailty and weakness; Visions having divine Majesty,
Glory, and some terriblenesse in them, have wrought strange effects upon
infirm men; they have locked up their senses, and put them in a deep sleep,
Dan. 8.18.10. Chap. 9. made them sick and faint many days, Dan. 8.27. much
grieved and troubled their spirits, Dan. 7.15. taken away their strength and
comeliness, Dan. 10.8. smitten dumb, Dan. 10.15. breathless, verse 17.

5. To testify two things: first, thankfulness for some mercy received or
promised; upon this ground Abraham fell on his face, Genesis 17.23. when God
appeared to him, and told him, that he would make a covenant with him, and
multiply him exceedingly, he fell on his face, to manifest, as his humility,
so especially the grateful frame of his spirit toward God for such a mercy.

2. Reverence, worship and respect unto divine Majesty; falling upon the face
notes so much in the language of Canaan, 2 Chro. 20.18. Jehosaphat bowed his
head with his face to the ground, and all Judah and the inhabitants of
Jerusalem fell before the Lord and worshipped him: so bowing in Psalm. 72.9. is
to note reverence and worship, They that dwell in the wilderness shall bow
before him, and his enemies shall lick the dust; they shall come in to Christ,
and by bowing their faces to the ground, and licking the dust of his feet,
shall testify their reverence and subjection unto him, so Isa. 49.23.

That which made our Prophet fall down on his face here, was fear and
amazement at the apprehension of the Majesty of Christ, the great glory that
appeared, newness and dreadfulnesse of things in the Vision.

Observe. 1. See what mischief sin has done unto us; it has disabled us from
partaking of our greatest good, the sight of glory is the happiness of the
creature: when Peter saw Christ's transfiguration but dimly, he said; O Master,
it is good being here! but sin has made us incapable of the sight of glory;
Peter and the rest fell upon their faces, and could not behold it as otherwise
they might. Cum magno moerore pensare and considerare cum lachrymis debemus in
quantam miscriam and infirmitatem cecidimus, qui and ipsum bonum far non
possumus ad quod videndum creati sumus.


Gregory in his 8th Hom.. says, it is matter of great mourning, to consider we
are fallen into such an estate, as that we cannot behold what would make us
happy; we cannot endure that good, that glory, which God created us to behold;
yea, such weakness has sin brought us to, that we cannot bear the sight of
the appearance of the likeness of glory. They are weak eyes that cannot
endure the Sunbeams; they more weak that cannot endure the light which is
more remote from the brightness and glory of the Sun; and so here, man cannot
endure the glory of the Lord, nor the likeness of it, nor the appearance of
the likeness.

2. That the sight of glory is an humbling thing; when the Prophet saw the
appearance of the glory of the Lord, he falls upon his face, then he is
conscious of his own weakness and worthlesnesse, then he trembles, and sees
the great disproportion between Majesty and nothingnesse, Isa. 40.5. The glory
of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it; and then follows,
all flesh is grass; glory will convince us that we are but grass; it is not
hearing will do it, at least, not so effectually: seeing, and seeing of glory
does humble mightily, seeing of misery causes grief, mine eye affects mine
heart; but seeing of glory causes godly sorrow, Job 42.5, 6. Now mine eyes
sees thee, Nisi aliquid de aeternitate in mente videremus, nunquam in facie
nostra poenitendo caderemus, Gre.
I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes; when he saw the Lord and his
glory, then he abhorred himself, his own righteousness, all his confidences,
duties, and what ever the heart and wit of man catches hold of, and repented,
and said, What am I unto God, the great, the glorious God? he is so infinitely
glorious and distanced from me, that I am no better then dust and ashes,
Isaiah and worthy to be buried under them out of his sight; and so Isaiah, when
he saw the glory of the Lord, then was he sensible of his own vileness, and
cries out, Woe is me, I am undone, because I am a man of unclean lips, though a
Prophet, yet a man of unclean lips, for mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord
of Hosts; he had heard the Seraphims cry, Holy, holy, holy, the Lord of Hosts,
the whole earth is full of his glory; but this wrought not so powerfully as the
sight of his glory; now he saw his sin, what a great and soul sinner he was,
and therefore says he, Woe is me, etc.

3. That those be thoroughly humbled with the sense of their own vileness, and
weakness, are fittest to hear divine truths, and to receive divine mysteries.
Ezekiel falls on his face, and then hears a voice; so was it with Daniel,
flesh and blood is apt to be lifted up, to trust in something of its own; men
look at, and like their own parts, their graces, some confidence or other we
are apt to catch hold of, but we must let all go, below in our own eyes, if we
will be fit auditors of Christ, we must fall down at the feet of his Throne, if
we will hear him speak from his Throne: Jam. 4.6. he gives grace to the
humble; they find the choycest favors at his hands; Moses, a meek man, yea,
the meekest of all living, and God showed himself the most to him, and so to
him as not to others, Numb. 12.8. He spoke to him mouth to mouth, Deuteronomy. 34.10.
There arose not a Prophet in Israel like to Moses, whom the Lord knew face to
face. Isa. 66.2.

And I heard a voice of one that spoke.
This is the second effect following his sight of the glory of God; he first
falls upon his face, and then hears a voice, this was the voice of him that
sat upon the Throne, and was so glorious, that the Prophet could not behold
him; it was not the voice of the heavens, Psalm. 19.3. nor of the thunder, Psalm.
29.3. but of Christ, and the voice of Christ is taken in the Scripture:

First, for an extraordinary voice, having extraordinary power with it, Joh.
5.28. those that are in the grave shall hear his voice, that is, the power of
his voice shall fetch them out of their graves.

Secondly, for the doctrine of Christ, Joh. 10.27. My sheep hear my voice,
that is, my Doctrine; they do not hear Christ immediately speaking, but they
hear his Gospel, his Ministers opening it unto them.

Thirdly, for the speech of Christ, speaking unto others, Act. 9.4. I heard a
voice, saying, Saul, Saul, etc. such is the voice here, Christ speaking himself
unto Ezekiel.

This Vision and Voice was;

First, to affect the Prophet, that he might be humbled, awakened, quickened
up, and prepared to the work the Lord Christ intended him.

Secondly, to confirm him,

1. In his call to his Ministry; he was to be a Prophet to this people in a
strange Land, and therefore has an extraordinary call to it, Christ from
heaven appears.

2. In the truth of his Prophecy; he should utter nothing but what he had
from Christ, the author of all truth, he would put words into his mouth.

3. In the whole race and work of his Ministry, that he might not be
discouraged; seeing that he had seen such a vision, heard such a voice.

Thirdly, to confirm the Jews, Gentiles, all to whom this Prophecy should
come, of the Majesty, reality, and truth of it.





Ezekiel, Chap. 2. verse. 1. And he said unto me, Son of man, stand upon thy
feet, and I will speak unto thee.


IN the former Chapter, we met with great deeps and difficulties, mysteries of
a high nature; and if any light have appeared in the opening of them, let him
that sits upon the Throne have the glory of it; by his assistance we have gone
over sundry rocks, and through some deeps; In quibus liberis gressibus locut
onis nostrae in^repidum pedem ponamus, Greg. Hom 9. in Ezekiel.
and we desire by the same assistance to proceed, and now we are come from the
Mountains to the Plains, where we may walk with more safety.

The glory of the Lord being set out in this government of the world, in his
dispensations toward his Church in the antecedent Chapter: The scope of this
Chapter is, to corroborate Ezekiel smitten down with the sight of glory, and to
show his Call unto his Prophetical Office; the parts are the confirming,
sending and instructing of the Prophet.

1. His confirmation and comforting is laid down in the two first verses.

2. His sending in the three next to the sixth verse.

3. His instructing from the sixth to the ninth; after that, mention is made of
a roll in the two last verses, and in the beginning of the next Chapter, which
is of much concernment, as in its place may appear.

The confirming of the Prophet is: 1. By the Word of God in the first verse. 2.
By his Spirit in the second verse.


In the first verse are two things considerable: 1. The party speaking. 2. The
matter spoken; where you have,


1. The Appellation; Son of man.

2. The Command; Stand upon thy feet.

3. The ground of it, which is a gracious promise; And I will speak unto thee.

It Is Christ who speaks, and unto Ezekiel, whom he calls the Son of man; the
original is, the son of Adam, that is; of earthly man: for, as the Apostle
says, 1 Cor. 15.47. The first Adam was of the earth earthly, and Adam
signifies earth, or red earth, whereof his body was made; and when we read in
Scripture this phrase, it notes out to us,

1. Our base beginning, that we are of the earth; there is no man, be he never
so excellent, high, wise, honorable, but he is the son of Adam, terrae
filius, a brat of the earth, Psalm. 49.2. Both low and high, Adam and Ish: the
base man and the noble man, as the Chaldee renders it; both the sons of Adam,
and the sons of Jacob are so, they have all one father, and all one mother, and
that is the earth.

2. Our frailty, that we are earthen vessels and soon broken in pieces; Psalm.
9.20. Put them in fear, O Lord, that the nations may know themselves to be but
men, they think themselves gods, but show them thy power, thine iron Rod and
Scepter, bring a War, a plague, a Famine amongst them, and then they will know
that they are frail weak men.

3. Our worthlesnesse and fitness to be rejected, who amongst us regards a
clod of the earth, an earthen vessel, silver or golden ones, some prize, and
prize too much, but earthly ones are contemptible; Nations are as the drops of
the bucket, and small dust of the balance, Isa. 40. and are not they
contemptible things? this made David to wonder, and say, Psalm. 144.3. Lord,
what is man, that thou take knowledge of him? or the son of man, the son of
earth, that thou make account of him, that thou visitest him? Psalm. 8.4. and
Job 7.17. What is man, that thou should magnify him; and that thou
should set thine heart upon him? these be high and great expressions to be
bestowed upon so poor a thing as man is, to take knowledge of him; and such
knowledge, as to make account of him, as to mind him, visit him, magnify him,
to set the heart upon him, this is exceeding much from an infinite, great and
glorious God toward worthless men, and not credible, if the Spirit of God had
not revealed it.

4. Our end, that we are earth, thence we came, and thither we must, Genesis
3.19. Dust thou art, and unto dust thou must return.

This title of Son of man; I do not find given to any but three, in the Book of
God; once to Daniel, Chap. 8. 17. Understand, O son of man, forty times and
upwards to Christ, and above eighty times to this our Prophet, but with this
difference: Ezekiel is called the Son of man by another, Christ always calls
himself so. Ezekiel is four times in this Chapter so called, and it is given him,

1. To prevent pride, say some Expositers: he had a glorious Vision, was among
Angels, saw the Lord Christ, and was to enter upon the Prophetical Function,
the least of which might stir corruption, and make pride blossom; when Paul
had his rapture into the third heavens, and heard things unutterable, what
says he, 2 Cor. 12.7. Lest I should be exalted above measure, through the
abunance of revelation; there was given to me a thorn in the flesh, the
messenger of Satan to buffet me, etc. Paul was in danger of being lifted up,
but God prevented it; and so here, Ezekiel is minded of his mean original, his
frailty, worthlesnesse and end, that he might not be exalted with his Vision or
Office; we are exceeding apt upon the receipt of great mercies, to grow proud
and confident, which are evil in any, but worst in a Prophet; and therefore, to
prevent these, he calls him Son of man.

2. To frame his spirit to a right estimate of himself, through out the whole
course of his Office, that what ever good was done, Nihil supra naturae humanae
vires sibi assumeret.
he should still remember he was the Son of man, and it was God, not he that
did it. It Is a hard thing to keep the heart in an humble frame and fitness, to
give unto God the glory of what he does by us; God helps our Prophet by this
title, which runs through the whole Prophecy, and took such interest in his
heart, that whatsoever was seen, heard, said, or done by him, the Son of man,
the glory of all was given to Christ, the Son of God, he could say, I am an
earthen vessel, if there be heavenly treasure in it, he that sat upon the
Throne put it in, for mine own part, I am the Son of man, like all the children
of Adam; and if there be any difference, he made it, and if there be any
glory, he shall have it; so Paul, 1 Cor. 15.10. I labored more abundantly
then they all; that seems a derogating speech, but he corrects himself for it;
yet not I, but the grace of God that was with me.

3. To let Ezekiel and others see the rich bounty and goodness of God, in that
he would take a Son of man, who is earth, frail, and worthless, and exalt him
to so high and honorable a condition, and specially at such a time as this
was, when God was wroth with his inheritance, laid them waste, had brought them
into Babylon, and was stripping them naked of all comforts, yet now to give
them a Prophet, to call out Ezekiel, this could not but put his spirit, and all
their spirits into admiration of Gods goodness.

Stand upon thy feet.
Here is the Command of Christ, Ezekiel, I see thou art a frail man, stricken
with great fear, and can not endure my glory and presence, stand up; this is
not for thy hurt, but good, I appear not to confound thee, but to comfort
thee, not to cast thee down, but to exalt thee.

Stantis est div norum auditio, non resu pini, Apollin.
Why does the Lord command standing?

1. It Is a fitter posture for hearing then lying on the ground was, Stand, that
thou may recover thy spirits, and hear the better what I shall say unto
thee: so the Angel bid Daniel stand upright, Dan. 10.11. Oracles are for
standers, not prostrate ones, therefore, when Balaam came with the Oracles of
God to Balak, he said, Rise up Balak, and hear; Numb. 23.18. show thou
reverence and respect to the Word of God; for Kings were wont to stand when
messengers from God were brought unto them: so Eglon rose out of his seat when
Ehud told him he had a message from God unto him, Jud. 3.20. Eusebius tells us
of Constantine the great, Nefas esse institutis de Deo disputationibus
negligentes aures praebere, Eusebius. de vita Constant.
that he did hear the Word standing, and being requested to rest himself in
his royal throne, which was set there for that purpose, he refused, and being
pressed, after long time of hearing, to sit down, with a stern countenance he
answered: It were a great sin in me, not to hear attentively when God is
spoken of.

2. To show, that all mundane things should be beneath us, when we deal with
God, we must not lie down and embrace them, but stand up, and have them under
our feet: Jerome says, the Saints stand and tread all down, Sanctorum est
stare.
but sinners they fall and embrace the earth and furniture of it: Rev. 12.1.
the Church has the Moon under her feet: all sublunary things are under the
Saints feet, not in their hearts, or over their heads.

3. That he might be in a posture for service, Ephesians. 6.14. Stand, having your
loins girt; prostration on the earth is no posture for employment, but
standing is; and the Lord Christ would not have his, so affected with his
greatness and glory, so reverentiall, as to be hindered, or disabled from his
service; holy reverence does not make idle or inept to service, Stand on thy
feet therefore, says Christ, and be in a readiness, to execute what I command.

The words being opened, now take the Observations.

Observe. 1. That the Lord Christ is full of bowels and comspassions, Ezekiel
was fallen down upon his face, the glory of the Vision, and greatness of him
that sat upon the Throne had conquered and felled this our Prophet to the
earth, and there he lay as a man wounded, and without strength, but Christ
leaves him not in this condition, but speaks, and that kindly to him: Son of
man, stand upon thy feet; he is affected with his infirmity, sensible of his
fears and troubles: the man that fell among thieves, going from Jerusalem to
Jericho, being plundered and wounded, found no pity from the Priest and Levite,
but much from the good Samaritane, when he saw him, he had compassion on him,
he went to him, bound up his wounds, put in oil and wine, set him upon his own
beast, was content to go on foot by him, brought him to an Inn, and took care
of him, and paid for his cure, Luke 10.33, 34, 35. This Samaritane was Christ,
who pitied Adam, and in him mankind, that went from Jerusalem, the state of
perfection, to Jericho, a state of change; for, as Chemnit. observes, Jericho
signifies the Moon, and so a changeable condition; the Priest and Levite notes
the Law, with all its additaments, they passed by, and never reached or healed
the wounded soul of man, but Christ the Samatitane, with the grace of the
Gospel, and blood of the Covenant, with that oil and wine, cured man, brought
him upon his own shoulders to the Church, to Jerusalem again, and there took
care for him; we have not a legal high Priest which is without bowels, and can
do little for us, but we have an Evangelical high Priest, full of bowels and
mercy, such an one as is touched with our infirmities, Heb. 4.15. which should
encourage us with boldness to come unto his Throne, which is a Throne of Grace
and compassion.

2. That those are humble and smitten down with sense of their own vileness,
weakness or worthlesnesse, through the sight of glory, and greatness, Christ
quickly raises to comfort again: our Prophet was down in the end of the former
Chapter, and in the beginning of this he is up again. The humbling from the
sight of God, his glory, and greatness, is the most effectual humbling, and
the most speedy, effectual and sweetest comfort does follow it. Job, after he
had seen God, and humbled himself; thereupon his captivity is turned, his
comforts multiplied, Job 24.5, 6.10.12. So Isaiah, being humbled upon the sight
of glory, presently a Seraphim comforts him, touches his lips with a coal from
the Altar, and says, Thine iniquity is taken away, and thy sin is purged:
Daniel was humbled for his own sins, the sins of his forefathers, and the
afflictions of the Church, Dan. 9. and the Lord sent Gabriel to comfort him,
who told him, he was a man greatly beloved, and that he came to give him skill
and understanding, verse 22.23. God does not humble and throw down his to leave
them, but reaches out a hand to raise them.

3. That man carries about him principles of humiliation; he is the Son of man,
the son of the earth. Isa. 31.3. The Egyptians are men, and not God, Adam velo
el, they are weak and worthless things, and so are not only Egyptians, but
Israelites, all men, and so have no cause to be puffed up at all, but great
cause to be humbled: Job called corruption his father, and the worm his mother,
Job 17.14. you see what stock and kindred Job came of, and we are all of the
same house, therefore afterward in the 25. Chap. v. 6. It Is said, man, and the
Son of man, is a worm, and so David, I am a worm, and no man, Psalm. 22.6. velo
Ish, he was enosh, sorry, sinful, miserable man: he was Adam, an earthly man,
but not Ish, a man of worth, strength, a worm, son of the earth, weak,
contemptible. Coniah, Jer. 22.28. in the vulgar is called vas fictile, an
earthen vessel, a broken Idol, or a vessel in which is no pleasure, and then
follows: O earth, earth, earth, hear the word of the Lord, Princes, Priests
and People, he calls them all earth, to mind them of their mean original, to
bring down their spirits, to make them sensible of their weakness and condition
they were hastening unto, Isai. 40.6. All flesh is grass, and all the
goodlinesse thereof is as the flower of the field, grass withers, the flower
fades, because the Spirit of the Lord blows upon it; surely the people is
grass.

4. That the command of Christ is powerful; Stand upon thy feet, says he,
and it proved efficacious; let Christ speak, and the thing is done, By him were
all things made, Joh. 1.3. he said, Let there be light, and there was light,
he said, Let there be an earth, and let it bring forth, an it was so; he
called forth things that were not, and gave them a being; under the Gospel, how
powerful were his commands: he bade devils depart the possessed, and they did
so; he bade the winds and waves be still, and they were so; he called Lazarus
out of the grave, and he came forth presently: there is infinite power in
Christ, and great, yea, often exceeding great virtue goes forth with his
commands: he said to the Fishermen that were strangers to him, Follow me, and
they left all, and followed him.

5. That the Lord loves to encourage man to his duty; he says not here, stand
upon thy feet only, which might have sufficed, but he makes him a promise; and
I will speak with thee, I that am upon the Throne, compassed with glory, that
have the rule of all the world in my hand, I will speak with thee; here was
singular encouragement to this duty, and so to other duties; it is man's duty to
walk uprighty, and to encourage unto it; the Word says, No good thing will be
withold from them that walk uprightly, Psa. 84.11. It Is our duty to believe,
and did not Christ tell Martha in a particular case, that if she would believe,
she should see the glory of God, Ioh. 11.40. And told he not another, that all
things are possible to him that believes? Mar. 9.23. So Christ is lifted up,
that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life,
Joh. 3.14, 15. So for prayer; it is our duty; but see what encouragement, Open
thy mouth wide, and I will fill it, Psalm. 81.10. and, Whatsoever you shall ask
the Father in my name, he will give it you, John 16.23. To persevere and
overcome is our duty, and see Rev. 21.7. He that overcomes shall inherit all
things, and I will be his God, and he shall be my Son; to give alms is man's
duty, as Luke 6.38. Give, and it shall be given unto you, good measure, pressed
down, and shaken together, and running over, shall men give into your bosom.

6. That the word of Christ is a sweet comfort to a soul troubled; Stand upon
thy feet, and I will speak to thee, thou art amazed, cast down, but my word
will revive thee, put life and spirits into thee: What a comforting word is
that of Christ's, Matthew. 11. Come unto me, ye that are weary and heavy laden,
and I will refresh you: and Ioh. 6.37. Him that comes unto me, I cast out in
no wise? Christ had the words of eternal life, verse 68. and those must needs
be sweet and acceptable to afflicted spirits, and these words he has given us
in the Gospel, which is glad tidings, the savor of life, the power of God to
salvation.

VER. 2. And the Spirit entered into me when he spoke unto me, and set me
upon my feet, that I heard him that spoke unto me.


THe Prophet being confirmed by the word of Christ in the foregoing verse, here
he is comforted and confirmed by the Spirit also. What is meant by the Spirit,
must be opened; some have conceived, that when our Prophet fell upon his face
at the sight of him and his glory that sat upon the Throne, his spirit left
him, and he lay for dead, and so here by Spirit, to be understood his soul, or
spirit, returned, entered, revived him, and set him upon his feet; but this
interpretation we cannot admit for three Reasons.

1. We never read that ever any were stricken dead when God appeared unto them
in Visions; the utmost we find is that of Daniel, Chap. 10. v. 17. Neither
was there breath left in me, through fear, he was as a man out of breath, but
not without a soul, he had a deadly fear, but was not dead.

2. The Text it self confutes that opinion; for, in the last words of the
former Chapter it is said, I heard a voice of one that spoke; if Ezekiel had
been spiritlesse, soulelesse, when he fell upon his face, it had been
impossible for him to have heard a voice.

3. Had it been the return of his own spirit, the words would not have been, he
set me upon my feet, but I arose; we must therefore leave that interpretation.

2. By Spirit, some understand an Angel, and their reason for it, is because
it is said, He set me upon my feet; the Prophet being among Angels, and they
seeing him down, one lifted him up, and set him upon his feet; but this
interpretation, although it be Piscators, I cannot commend unto you: for,

First, how could any of these Angels that had faces, bodies, wings and feet,
enter into the Prophet? for here it is said, The Spirit entered into me.

Secondly, if it had been an Angel, the words must have run thus, rather then
as they do; one of the Spirits, one of the Angels entered into me, and not the
Spirit.

By Spirit then understand, that Spirit which was in the living creatures, and
in the wheels, Chap. 1.20. Even the eternal Spirit of God; and of this
judgment is Jerome, Gregory, Calvin, Junius, Maldonate, etc. If their
testimonies suffice not, take the testimony of Scripture, Chap. 3.24. Then the
Spirit entered into me, and set me upon my feet, and spoke with me, and said,
Go, shut thy self within thy house, etc. Here the Prophet repeating the same
words, shows, that it was the Spirit of God he spoke of, and neither Angel,
nor his own spirit. The meaning is this; when Christ spoke unto me, and I heard
his voice, presently I felt divine virtue, the Spirit seized upon, entered into
me, comforted and confirmed me, set me upon my feet, and fitted me to hear
the voice of that glorious Person sat upon the Throne.

Two things fall into consideration here, touching the Spirit: The first is,
the Spirits entrance into him. The second, the Spirits setting him upon his
feet.


1. It entered into him; there be phrases in Scripture concerning the Spirit,
which import motion of it from place to place, but must not be so understood.

1. The sending of the Spirit, Gal. 4.6. 2. The coming of the Spirit, Joh.
15.26. 3. The descending of the Spirit, Joh. 1.32. 4. Receiving of it, Joh.
20.22. 5. The entering of the Spirit.
These all seem to imply the moving of the Spirit from one place to another;
but the Spirit of God is infinite in essence, filling heaven and earth, and
changes not place; the thing aimed at in them, is:

1. Operation.

2. Manifestation.

3. Impletion. When the Spirit works effectually in any, manifests it self by
any, fills the heart of any with divine graces and influences; when it does
either of these, or all these, then it is sent, descended, come, received,
entered. But for the phrase here, The Spirit entered into me, a like one is in
Hab. 3.16. Rottenness entered into my bones, that is, it came not ab extra, but
there was a disposition and principle in him before to rottenness; but now it
wrought, it manifested it self, and filled him with it: so here, the Spirit was
in the Prophet before, but now there was a more lively operation and
manifestation of it: yea, farther, this entrance of Spirit, notes out his
filling with the Spirit, it possessed him fully, there was abundance of the
Spirit in him, to fit him for, and confirm him in his Prophetical Function.
The Spirit entered into him, took him up, and singled him out for divine service.

2. It set him upon his feet; here the efficacious operation of the Spirit
appears; that which nature could not do, the Spirit did, it chased away all
distempering fears, enabled him to stand up, to behold glory, to hear the King
speak from his Throne of glory, and to be ready to do his will, what ever he
should say; this was a great work of the Spirit in our Prophet.

Observe. 1. From the Prophets being down, and set up by the Spirit, that the
Spirit is the chief comforter; the words of Christ, Stand up, and I will speak
unto thee, were good and comfortable words, but the Spirit wrought the solid
and lively comfort, which scattered the clouds of fear, confirmed him, and set
him up: To speak good words to one sick in prison, is a comfortable thing; but
to heal the sick party, to bring out the prisoner is real comfort; thus did
the Spirit, it healed the sick heart of the Prophet, and freed him, being
imprisoned with fears; the real and choice comfort is from the Spirit: hence
the Spirit is called the Comforter in John four times, Joh. 14.16, 26. Chap.
15.26. and Chap. 16.7. and not only the Comforter, but the Comforter that
testifies of Christ, that teaches all things, that abides with you for ever,
as appears in the places before mentioned. Men comfort, the Word comforts,
Angels comfort; it was an Angel comforted Christ in his Agony, Luke 22.43. but
none comfort like the Spirit: Ezekiel had the Spirit of God, the great and
solid Comforter, to raise, confirm and comfort him.

2. That those the Lord Christ intends to set up for Officers in his Church, he
gives his Spirit unto, the Spirit enters into Ezekiel, before he is called, he
is filled with the Spirit, the gifts and graces of it. When Officers of an
inferior nature were to be made in the Apostles days, even officers to serve
tables, what men must be looked out? men of honest report, full of the Holy
Ghost and Wisdom, they must be such as the Holy Ghost has entered into and
filled, else they were unfit for that service, Act. 6.3. much more then should
they be filled with the Spirit, that are for the highest place in the Church of
God, Act. 9.17. Saul was filled with the Holy Ghost, Acts 11.24. it is said of
Barnabas, he was full of the Holy Ghost, the Spirit entered into them and they
preached, Acts 13.2. They must be separated for the work whereunto the Lord had
called them, even for the chief places in the Church of God; the Offices in the
Church, are for men that have the Spirit of Christ in them, in some fullness of
it; those places are not for others, such as are filled with wine, with the
world, with a spirit of envy, error, contention, and Antichristianisme, but
have not the Spirit of Christ in them: the false and lying Prophets had no
entrance of the Spirit into them, and therefore the Lord says, he sent them
not, Jer. 14.14. They flattered themselves they were called and sent of God,
and had the Spirit, as Zedekiah said to Micaiah, Which way went the Spirit from
me to thee? 1 King. 22.24. but they neither had it, nor were sent of God, but
ran, and were not sent, Ier. 23.21. And unless men have the Spirit enter into
them, they are neither fit for that Function, nor satisfyingly know they are
called to it; many among us are called of men, that were never called of God.

3. That man by his natural abilities cannot reach or receive the things of
God: Ezekiel must have the Spirit enter into him, before he can hear or
understand any thing to purpose: reason and discourse is not more above the
capacity of a Beast, then the things of Christ and his Spirit are above the
capacity of man, 1 Cor. 2.14. The natural man receives not the things of the
Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him; the preaching of the Gospel
and Christ crucified, was a stumbling block to the Jews, and foolishness to
the Greeks; the Jews were skilled in the Law, and the Greeks in Philosophy;
and neither of them entertain Christ or his Gospel, their knowledge and
abilities served them to take offense at Christ, and to condemn the Gospel for
foolishness; and it is not all that natural abilities do, not only not reach
the things of the Spirit, but they cannot do it, neither can he know them,
says the Text; for they are spiritually discerned. Tell a natural man, that
God has begotten a Son, that God is man, that a Virgin has brought forth,
that God has purchased a Church by his blood, that men are reconciled unto
God, and justified by the death of Christ, Verba audit, spiritualem sensum non
assequitur.
they are riddles unto him; such truths are like a sealed book, the spirit and
life of them he is incapable of; tell him that a man must deny himself, mourn
for his sins, walk in the Spirit, believe in another for salvation, and these
things are foolishness unto him.

4. That the Word without the Spirit is inefficacious, when he pake, the
Spirit entered, had not there been entrance of the Spirit, the Word had not
prevailed, the Prophet had not been raised; the Word is of little moment and
power, unless the efficacy of the Spirit be in it, if it be not quickened by
the Spirit, it is a dead letter. Many thousands hear the Word, who are fallen
by Adams and their own sin, but they are not set upon their feet, as our
Prophet was, and the principal reason is, the Spirit enters not into them, it
may stand and knock at the door, but has not entrance, and therefore they are
not lifted up out of their unbelief, and other corruptions; they are not
removed from the Wilderness to Canaan, from the state of nature, to the state
of grace: when therefore you find such expressions in Scripture, as that the
Word is, incoruptible seed, 1 Pet, 1.23. a burning fire, Jer. 20.9. the power
of God to salvation, Romans 1.16. the Word of life, Phil. 2.16. that it is quick,
powerful, sharper then any two edged sword, piercing, to the dividing asunder
of the soul and spirit, etc. Hebr. 4. that it is converting the soul, Psalm.
19.7. the grace of God that brings salvation, Tit. 2.11. These, and such like
phrases, you must understand, not exclusively, as if the word were, and did so
without the Spirit, but conjunctively, when the Spirit enters together with the
Word, then it is so; the efficacy is not in sonitu ipso, but proceeds ab arcano
Spiritus instinctu, all the virtue and operation is in the power of the Spirit,
neither is the Word useless, it is the Medium by which the Spirit works. God is
the Father of Lights, yet is not the Son useless, by it he enlightens us.

5. That the Word is the Chariot of the Spirit: when he spoke, Joh. 7.37, 38,
39. Acts 10.44, 45, 46,
the Spirit entered into me, together with the Word of Christ went the Spirit;
that is vehiculum spiritus, Joh. 20.22. Christ breathed upon them, and that
breath conveyed the Holy Ghost unto the Disciples; so it is the Word that
carries the Spirit to men: by the dispensation of the Word, the Spirit is
conveyed to our souls; hence the Gospel is called the ministration of the
Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.8. and the Ministers of the Gospel, the Ministers of the
Spirit, verse. 6. The Law which was from Mount Sinai, the Apostle calls a dead,
a killing letter; but the Gospel which came out of Mount Sion, he calls the
Spirit, or ministration of it; and therefore more fully in Gal. 3.2. he says,
Received ye the Spirit by the works of the Law, or by hearing of faith? not by
the works of the Law, that was the ministration of death, but by the Gospel,
that was the ministration of the Spirit: so that the word of Christ transports
the Spirit over to the hearts of those that believe; and if search should be
made, whether the Spirit do always accompany the Word of Christ, preached unto
the sons of men, some inferior degrees and works of it may be allowed to go
along with the Word: Act. 7.51. Ye stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart and
ears, ye do always resist the Holy Ghost, and Heb. 6.4. They were made
partakers of the Holy Ghost; there was something of the Spirit in the Word,
when it was preached unto these two sorts of Hearers, the one resisted the
Spirit, in the Ordinance, the other received the common gifts of it; some weak
operations of the Spirit may be yielded always, to attend the Word, but
effectual and powerful do not; the beams of the Sun are oblique and direct;
where oblique, they produce weak effects, where direct, strong ones, and so the
operations of the Spirit are oblique toward all reprobates, and the work is
ineffectuall on them, but direct upon the Elect, and so strong, efficacious, 1
These. 1.5. Our Word came not to you in word only, but also in power, and in the
Holy Ghost, Chap. 2. v. 13. it wrought effectually in them.

6. What God commands his, he gives them strength to do it; Stand upon thy
feet, says Christ, verse 1. there is the command, and the Spirit entered, and
set him upon his feet, there is the strength given, to fulfill the command.
Commands import power and free will in us, say the adversaries of free grace;
we say no, let them stand upon free will and their own strength, we will
stand to free Grace; Ezekiel cannot stand upon his feet till the Spirit set him
up, much less can he tread in the ways of holiness, and walk in them, being
commanded, the word of Christ did it not, his own will did it not, natural
reason and strength did it not, Divina vox jacenti Prophetae jussit, ut
resurgeret, sed surgere omnino non possit, nisi in hunc omnipotentis Dei
spiritus intrasset, quia ex omnipotentis Dei gratia ad bona opera conari quidem
possumus, sed haec implere non possumus, si ipse non adjuvet, qui jubet, Greg.
Hom. 9. in Ezekiel.
but the Spirit given did it: Without me you can do nothing, Joh. 15. not
much, not something, not a little, does he say, but nothing: when Christ
commands therefore, he gives power to do; he bids Lazarus come forth of the
grave, he had neither will nor power to do it, but Christ he gave spirit and
power to do it. When he bid Sinners believe, repent, walk in the Spirit, etc.
he gives the power to do so; he does it for them: Deuteronomy. 10.16. they are
commanded to circumcise the foreskin of their hearts, and Deuteronomy. 6.5. to love
the Lord with all their hearts; these they could not do, but God promises to do
them for them, Deuteronomy. 30.6. The Lord thy God will circumcise thy heart, and the
heart of thy seed, to love him with all thine heart, and all thy soul; we are
commanded to fear the Lord, Psalm. 22.23. Fear him, all the seed of Israel;
and Jer. 32.40. I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart
from me: We are bid to make us new hearts, and new spirits, Ezekiel. 18.31. and
Isa. 1.16. to wash us, and make us clean; and see what sweet promises are made,
Ezekiel. 36.25, 26. I will sprinkle clean water upon you, and you shall be clean
from all your filthiness, and from all your Idols will I cleanse you; a new
heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you; yea, I will
put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes, and ye shall
keep my Statutes and do them: Verse. 27. We are bid believe and trust in God,
often in Scripture: and Ephesians. 2.8. we find Faith is the gift God; and Mat.
12.21. In his Name shall the Gentiles trust; and Phil. 1.29. To you it is given
to believe; Christ bid the Apostles to go and preach the Gospel to all Nations,
Mat. 28.19. how could they, being not languaged, do it? they might have said,
it is an impossible thing; but Acts 2.4. They were filled with the Spirit, and
every man heard them speak in his own language: when God commands therefore,
we must not look at abilities, as Arminians and Papists do, nor disabilities,
as sundry Christians do, but look out some promises made of such things as are
commanded: see free Grace, and draw strength from thence, through the promise,
to enable us to stand upon our feet being down, to walk being up, and to
persevere in the walking.

7. It is the Spirit of God that inables to discern the things of God, and
assures our spirits of the truth and reality of them; the Spirit entered into
the Prophet, set him upon his feet, that he heard him that spoke unto him; now
having the Spirit, he was fitted to hear Christ, enabled to judge of what he
spoke, to satisfy his soul concerning the truth, reality and excellency of his
Doctrine, Job. 10.27. My sheep hear my voice, and a stranger will they not
follow; Verse 5. they can distinguish between the voice of Christ, and all
others; and how come they to do it? they are Sheep, not Goats, not Wolves, not
Foxes; and how come they to be Sheep? Christ powers out his Spirit upon them,
that enters into them, and brings them into the fold, and inables them to hear
and know the Shepherds voice, and the Shepherd himself, 1 Cor. 2.12. We have
received, not the spirit of the world, but the Spirit which is of God, that we
might know the things that are freely given to us of God. If the Apostle had
not had the Spirit, and the Spirit of God, he could not have apprehended the
things of Christ and the Gospel; they are such deep and spiritual things, that
none but the Spirit of God can search out or discover, being searched out, into
whom the Spirit enters spiritualizing his heart and head, he is a man fit to
trade with Christ, and to hear him speak: for, Verse. 15. the spiritual man
judges all things, he has a principle within, to taste and discern the
nature of them, he only has a fitness, though not a fullness to judge; (...).
he has a discerning faculty, and according to the measure of that he
judges.

VER. 3, 4, 5. 3. And he said unto me; Son of man, I send thee to the children
of Israel, to a rebellious nation, that has rebelled against me; they and
their fathers have transgressed against me, even unto this very day.

4. For they are impudent children, and stiff-necked; I do send thee unto them,
and thou shall say unto them: Thus says the Lord God.

5. And they, whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear (for they
are a rebellious house) yet shall know, that there has been a Prophet among
them.


EZekiel being raised, comforted, and filled with the Spirit, fitted to hear
the Lord Christ, and to do him service.

In these verses we have his Call to his Office, and the parties specified he
is sent unto, and the reason of his sending to them.

His Call, in these words; I send thee.

The parties he is sent unto, are the children of Israel; who are described to
be:

First, a rebellious nation; and this their sin is amplified three ways: 1.
It Is against me. 2. It Is the same evil their fathers have done; they
transgressed against me, and so have their children. 3. It Is continued; to this
day.


Secondly, impudent children.

Thirdly, stiff-necked.

Fourthly, a rebellious house.

The reason of his sending is; that they might know there has been a Prophet
among them.

I shall first open the words of this third verse; and after give you the
Observations.

I send thee.
(...) mittens.
In the Hebrew it is, I am sending thee, or, about to send thee; the present
tence in the Scripture, notes the purpose and firm resolution of the mind,
Luke 19.8. says Zach^us, the half of my goods I give to the poor, that is, I
purpose and decree to give them; it is the firm resolution of my mind: but it
notes more here, I send thee, I intend and am resolved to make thee a Prophet;
that is not all; I ordain, constitute thee to be a Prophet; for mitto here, non
propositum mittentis, nec motum missi, sed auctoritatem significat; and that
will appear from Jer. 14.14. The Prophets prophecy lies in my Name, they
pretend, says God, that they have commission and countenance from me, but I
sent them not, I never intended or constituted them to be Prophets, they never
had authority from me, I commanded them not, neither spoke unto them, they
went of their own heads, for their own ends; and if they be Prophets, they are
lying ones, my authority did never establish them, but it shall punish them.

Children of Israel.
That is, the Jews, that were brought into Babylon, who were called the
children of Israel, from Jacob, who wrestling with God and prevailing, had his
name changed from Jacob to Israel, Genesis 32.28. Thy name shall be no more Jacob
but Israel, (...)
for as a Prince have thou power with God, and with men, and have prevailed.
Not Israel, because he had seen God, as some interpret it, nor Israel because
he was a man right with God, but Israel is of a word signifies to rule, (...)
dominari, instar principis se gerere, and (...) Deus. (...)
with the addition of el to it, and so it follows in the verse, because thou
have prevailed with God; here was a good root, but the branches were
degenerate, the sons of Israel were not like their father Israel, a praying and
prevailing people; sons of Israel, according to the flesh, external shows, and
in opinion; so the most of them were, but they did not follow the faith and
purity of their father Israel: Romans 9.6. They are not all Israel that are of
Israel.

A rebellious Nation.
The word for Nation is in the plural number, Goiim, which word is mostly in
Scripture applied to the unbelieving Gentiles, those that were without God, and
strangers to the commonwealth of Israel, as Hab. 1.5. The Heathens; and Psalm.
106.42. He gave them into the hand of the Heathens; it is Goiim; the Septuagint
renders it, Into the hands of their enemies; (...).
so the Jews accounted the Gentiles, and in disgrace called them Goiim, an
abominable Nation; and at this day they call the Christians so, and make that
name, which was common before to all Gentiles, now since Christ, to be special
to Christians. The Turks, they call Ishmaelites and Aethiopians Cushites, but
the Christians Goiim, an abominable Nation; and here the Spirit of God calls
them Goiim, a rebellious Nation, by way of contempt: The Prophet prophesied
against the Syrians, Egyptians, Babylonians, and others, which in common sense
of the word, were the Nations; but here it is put upon the Jews, who were as
vile in the eyes of God as the Gentiles were in theirs; for they had forsaken
the truth, entertained their Idolatries and corruptions, and turned aside, Ad
nesaria scelera
to notorious wickednesses, something of most Nations about them, they had
taken in, and so are called Goiim, Nations, as if they had had the wickedness
of all the nations, or because they were divided in their false and Idolatrous
worship, some were for the Ammonitish way, some the Moabitish, some for other
ways, most for wrong ways, and this made them like the Nations, who had their
several ways, and to deserve the brand of Goiim.

Rebellious, Hammordim, the rebellious ones of Marad, which signifies to fall
off, to apostatize, to rebel and resist; it is like the practice of men,
against States and Princes, when they have made Laws for their Subjects to
live by, and they have accepted of those Laws, and then fall off, withdraw
from their subjection, obedience, and shake off their yoke; it is called
rebellion, Genesis 14.4. the King served Kedorlaomer twelve years, and in the
thirteenth rebelled, that is, shook off those Laws and yokes they were under.

In the Law sense rebellion is a traitorous taking up arms against the State,
be it by the natural Subjects, or by others formerly subdued, or by
whomsoever, when arms are taken up to overthrow the settled Laws of a Kingdom
and Religion settled by those Laws, this is rebellion against that State, and
that State may preserve it self, the Law of Nature, Reason, and Religion
warranting the same. I am not to speak of rebellion in this sense, but
Theologically, when men will not be under the Laws and Government of Christ,
but go a whoring after their own lusts and inventions, or others, then they
rebel; so the other Tribes told Reuben, Gad and Manasseh: Josh. 22.16. What
trespass is this you have committed against the God of Israel, to turn away
this day from following the Lord, in that you have builded you an Altar, that
ye might rebel this day against the Lord? Turning from God, and taking up our
own or others inventions, is rebelling against God.

The Vulgar has it, to the apostatizing Nations, Ad Gentes apostatrices.
and the Septuagint renders the word Rebel in Nehem. 6.6. to apostatize, thou
and the Jews think to apostatize; (...).
and apostasy is a wicked departing from God and his truth, acknowledged and
confessed, to false ways of worship: and such were the Israelites at this
time, they had left the God of Israel, and chosen other gods, and served Idols,
which made the Lord to say, Jer. 2.11. Has a nation changed their gods, which
yet are no gods? but my people have changed their glory; such is the apostasy
of Antichrist and his followers, they have departed from the true God and his
worship, and set up false gods, and false worship; so that he and all his
children are Goiim Hammordim, a rebellious, an apostatizing nation.

Against me.
It Is not against their King, their high Priest, but against me, In pactum
meum, Jerome.
against my Covenant, says Jerome, God had made a Covenant with them, not only
a spousall covenant, I will betroth thee to me for ever, Hos. 2.19. But a
matrimonial covenant, I am the Lord thy God, thou shall have no other gods
before me, Exodus 20.2, 3. God said, he would have them, and no other people to
be his; God kept the Covenant on his part, and was no Polygamist to that day,
he took not in any other nation, but they brake with him, and took in other
gods, and brought them not into the City only, but into the Temple, and
provoked their God to jealousy.

Even to this day.
The Hebrew is, to the body, strength, essence of this day, (...)
even this self-same day: these very words you have in Lev. 23.14. until the
self-same day, had not this people been brutish, they might have seen what an
unprofitable thing it was to bestow honor upon Altars, Idols, to set up
corrupt, invented worship, they might have seen what truth and force was in
Prophetical threats, how powerful God was to save and to destroy; for now
they were carried out of their own Country, they were in Babylon, a most
Idolatrous place, subject to the nations they so disdained, and had been some
years in bondage; yet even here, to that present time, they were addicted to
their old ways, and served false gods, night and day, Jer. 16.13.

Transgress.
(...)
The Hebrew word signifies, to sin, not ignorantly, or of infirmity, but
wilfully, ex superbia: Isai. 1.2. I have brought up children, and they have
rebelled; it is the same word is in the Text, they have proudly, voluntarily
sinned against me; the Septuagint therefore render it, (...)
They have prevaricated with me, rejected me, they have taken me out of the
way, who was established to be their God, and have willingly brought in other
gods; and this word pashagn, is of larger extent then marad, say Rabbis, but
in Scripture they are promiscuously used: Hos. 14.9. the transgressors shall
fall therein; those go from under the command of God, (...)
and oppose him.

Obser. 1. That it is Christ's prerogative to set up and send officers unto the
Church; I send thee, I that fit upon the Throne, that am Jehovah, that is to
come, that have all power in mine hand, that can save and destroy, that am the
great Prophet of my people, I send thee: So Mat. 28.18, 19. Christ is invested
with all power, and therefore sends Officers to all nations; Ephesians. 4.11. He gave
some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and
Teachers: it was Christ gave them, and set them up in the Church. Hence says
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4.1. Let a man so account of us as the Ministers of Christ,
we are set up and sent by him, who is the Head of the Church, the Author of
all Offices, and Lord of all Offficers. Hence follows:

1. That those Offices and Officers, are holy and warrantable, which depend
upon the will and authority of Christ, Jer. 1.5.
not those are of the wills and authority of men, as all are in the Romish
Synagogue, and too many are amongst us, Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, they
were of Christ, but being extraordinary, are ceased; Pastors, Teachers, Elders,
Deacons, Christ has given to be standing Officers in the Church, and their
callings we acknowledge holy and lawful, but all others of humane
institution, and so unholy and unwholesome for the Church. The Papists deny the
calling of Pastors and Teachers in the reformed Churches to be lawful, because
they are not sent by the Pope, and ordained by his Bishops, and so in
succession from Christ; but it is clear, that Pastors and Teachers were given of
Christ, before ever Popes or Prelates were thought on, Ephesians. 4.11. And as for
them, the Pope and his Clergy, we may safely say, that neither himself, nor
any of his Hierarchy, ever had any lawful calling, because none of them are
sent of Christ, he will never own it, that he sent any of them, neither were
they ordained according to the will of Christ and his Apostles.

2. That men unable and unhonest in the Office of the Church, set up by him,
were never sent by him; he gives gifts and graces to men, and then sends them;
the Spirit entered into Ezekiel, and then, I send thee. He has the power of
sending, it depends on his will, and that is sacred, he would not put in an
insufficient or corrupt man upon any terms, and therefore he has set rules and
laws to show what men he would have in those holy Functions, he has given
precedents of his own choosing: Romans 1.5. By whom we received Grace and
Apostleship, first Grace, and then Apostleship, 2 Cor. 3.6. Who has made us
able Ministers of the new Testament. The Lord Christ's Ministers are able, not
only in parts, but chiefly in the Spirit, that is light and life in them, such
he sends, such he approves; and as for ignorant and evil ones, see what the
Lord says, Hos. 4.6. Because thou have rejected knowledge, I will also reject
thee, that thou shall be no Priest to me; Christ would not have a profane
ignorant man to be in that Calling.

3. That those are sent of Christ may not delegate their power, and execute the
office by others, but must do it themselves; the Prophet might not appoint
another, being sent of Christ to the children of Israel; I send thee, and thou
shall say unto them, thus says the Lord; Ambassadors are themselves to
deliver their messages, and not others for them, or in their stead; Ministers
are Ambassadors, and 2 Cor. 5.20. for Christ, and do preach and pray in Christ's
stead, who is their Head and Lord, whereupon, says Paul, Woe unto me, if I
preach not the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.16. And what is the ground of it? Verse. 17. The
dispensation of the Gospel is committed unto me; I am commanded to do it, I may
not, I dare not commit or delegate this trust, this power to others. Delegation
is actus imperii, an act of power, and all the Officers of the Church must be
obsequious, not imperious, therefore Hierarchists and those that substitute
others to preach in their stead, usurp the power of Christ, to whom it belongs
to delegate men to preach in his stead, and over thousands of Churches, if he
please.

4. That those Christ sends and sets over people, are by divine institution, I
send thee to the children of Israel, he was not a Prophet to others, but unto
them, and that by divine authority, Act. 20.28. Take heed unto all the flock,
over which the Holy Ghost has made you overseers; this was the Church of
Ephesus, and the Elders of it were set there by no less authority then that of
the Holy Ghost, the Office, Power, Jurisdiction over such a people is not
humane, arbitrary, ad placitum, but of divine institution.

2. That many are called, and seem to be Israelites, which in truth are not:
the Jews were called the children of Israel here, and were so, according to
the flesh, but they were not so in the Spirit; they had not the principles of
Jacob in them; they walked not in his steps; they had his name, but not his
faith, they were called Israelites, but were not true Israelites, Romans 9.6.
they are not all Israel that are of Israel, in the true sense of the Scripture,
they are not all Israel; that is spiritual, such as Jacob was, men of Prayer,
wrestling with God, prevailing like Princes, but they are of Israel according
to the flesh; and fleshly Israelites, to whom the promises pertained not: in
Matthew. 8.12. they are called children of the kingdom, but yet such as should
be cast out into utter darkness; they thought themselves safe in being called
so, and conceiting themselves such, but they were deluded: and so now many
thousands think themselves Christians, Saints, when in truth they are nothing
less, the very contrary, enemies to true Christians and Saints. The Papists
boast that they are Catholics, Christians, the Church of God; but it is in no
better sense then these rebellious Jews are termed the children of Israel.
What are titles, when truth is wanting? no other then a kind of blaspheming,
Rev. 2.9. I know the blasphemy of them, that say they are Jews and are not;
they were Jews by name, and did reproach the Christians, and the Lord Christ,
but were not Jews in truth; Romans 2.28, 29. He is not a Jew which is one
outwardly in circumcision of the flesh; but he is a Jew which is one inwardly,
whose heart is circumcised, and is one in the Spirit. Now these men saying they
are Jews, and were not, did blaspheme, much prejudice and wound the honorable
name of being a Jew, and what were they? a Synogogue of Satan; and now those
think, call themselves Christians and are not; they blaspheme and wound that
honorable name of Christians; and so they that call themselves churches, and
are not, they blaspheme, and wrong that honorable name of Church. Papists say
they are the Church, be it so; it is the church of Satan, not of Christ, they
worship Idols, not Christ, they are Babel, not Bethel, they have the title, not
the substance.

3. That when Gods people degenerate, and fall to sinful practices, then they
lose their glory, and contract reproach; before the Israelites fell to
Idolatrous courses, and violation of divine Law, they were Gods Inheritance,
Deuteronomy. 4.20. his Portion, Deuteronomy. 32.9. his peculiar Treasure, Exodus 19.5. his
Strength and his Glory, Psalm. 78.61. his anointed Ones, Psalm. 105.15. they were
so honorable in his account, and precious in his eye, that he suffered none
to do them harm; he rebuked Kings for their sakes, and he gave Egypt a ransom
for them, men and people for their life, Isa. 43.3, 4, God thought nothing too
dear for them, no titles too good, a kingdom of Priests, a holy Nation, Exodus
19.6. but when they fell from him, to sinful and base courses, then their
honorable titles are turned into reproachful and bitter ones; they are called
here Goiim, profane, rejected, pollution, sterquilinium, excrementa mundi; so
the Jews accounted of the Gentiles, and so God accounts of them here; they
judged so of the Babylonians, and God metes out the same measure unto them; in
Prove. 14.34. it is said, Righteousness exalts a Nation, but sin is a reproach
to any people, even to Gods own people; it makes them vile, hateful, Viles
facit, Sir.
abominable to God and man, and brings such terms, as proclaims their shame,
Isa. 1.10. God calls them Rulers of Sodom, and people of Gomorrah, Isa. 57.3.
sons of the Sorceresse, the seed of the Adulterer and Whore, an hypocritical
Nation, Isa. 6.10. a nation not desired, Zeph. 2.1. a thievish Nation, Mal.
3.9. the generation of his wrath, Jer. 7.27. Loammi, none of my people, Hos. 1.

4. See here the great evil is in Sin, it is Rebellion against God, 1 Samuel
12.15. not only great Sins, Idolatry, Murder, etc. but even all sin; it is a
casting off God, a withdrawing from his Laws, Commands, Authority: as Hos.
4.12. They have gone a whoring from under their God; as a wife that is false to
her husband will not be kept in, be under the guidance, counsel and power of
her husband, but will out, follow her Lovers, satisfy her lusts: and so is it
with the souls sinning with God, it will out from under the guidance, counsel,
command and authority of God; it says of God in effect, as they in the Gospel
said of Christ, We will not have this man to reign over us, we will not be
under him; and Sinners will not be under God: God commanded Saul to smite
Amalek, to destroy all, and neither spare man nor beast; but Saul spared Agag,
the goodly things, and fat of the beast, and this by entreaty of the people;
this might seem no great matter, especially the cattle being spared to
sacrifice to the Lord, as they pretended; but see what God says of it, 1 Samuel
15.11. It repents me that I have set up Saul to be King, for he is turned
back from following me; he is apostatized from me: God calls this sin
apostasy, and Sam. v. 23. calls it Rebellion; Saul, thou have rebelled against
God; and will you know what a sin Rebellion is? it is as the sin of Witchcraft,
and you all know it is abominable, and worthy of death, thy sin is of that
malignity, as that by it thou have rejected God, and for it God has rejected
thee, and thou art a man of death for it: Rebel is an ill name, and here is a
King a Rebel against God, and so is every Sinner; for he not only withdrawes
from under God, but takes up arms against God; bitter, lying, swearing,
reproaching words, are called arrows and swords, in the 57th Psalm. v. 4. and
73. Psalm. v. 9. it is said of wicked men; they set their mouths against the
heavens, that is, against God in the heavens: (...).
and of a proud man it is said, Jam. 4.6. God resists him; he is in bellion
against God, has taken up arms against him, and God takes up arms to meet him;
it is a military word, God sets himself in a military posture against him, (...).
Acts 5.39. those opposed the Apostle, were fighters against God: but there is
no hope for Sinners to do good this way, God will prevail, and wound the hairy
scalps of his enemies, what ever they be, that go on still in their
wickedness. Let us therefore cast down our weapons, and submit to God;
rebellion is an odious thing against a State, much more against God: Let us all
say, we will not be Rebels but Subjects of the most High; we will be governed
by his Laws, we will be under his Authority, and as they said to Joshua 1.18.
let us say to God, Whosoever he be that does rebel against thy Commandments,
and will not hearken to thy words, in all that thou command him, he shall
be put to death.

5. That sins about worship are rebellions against Christ, and he takes it
hainously; they have rebelled against me; it was Christ who sat upon the
Sapphirine throne, that spoke to the Prophet, that said, they rebel against
me; and wherein was the rebellion? in casting off his worship, and in
corrupting it, when people fall to Idolatrous and false worship, or corrupt the
true and pure worship of Christ, by detraction of any part of it, or by
additionals and mixtures of their own, then they sin: so about worship, as it is
rebellion against Christ; sometimes they fell to flat Idolatry, forsaking the
true worship of God, and join to Baal-Peor, Psalm. 106.28. sometimes they set up
their posts with Gods posts, and brought in their own inventions, and mingled
their water with Gods Wine, and the wisdom of their flesh, with the wisdom of
Christ; and this he complains of as rebellion against him, and the ground of
it is, because Christ was the Head of the Church then, as well as now, and the
Lawgiver unto them as well as unto us, there was never but one Head and one
Lawgiver to the Church, and when he out of his infinite wisdom has set a
way of worship that will delight the Father himself and his Spirit, for mortal
worms of the earth to leave it, to pervert it, to mix their own devices with
it; provokes bitterly, and mounts up to the nature of rebellion, and that
against Christ; Psalm. 119.1. Indebitum cultum, indebito modo.
Blessed are the undefiled in the way; what way? in the way of worship
especially; that admit not unwarranted worship, nor worship in a wrong manner,
but walk in the Law of the Lord.

6. That children usually tread in the paths of their fathers, they and their
fathers have transgressed against me; does the father sin knowingly, wilfully?
the children will do so; do they fall off from the true worship of God, embrace
lies, superstition, oppression, whoredom? it is a miracle if their children do
not. Adam eat the forbiden fruit, and all mankind have followed his steps to
that tree; the name of a father and his example, are strong traces, to draw the
children into their way. We read of some Kings in Judah, that left the way of
their fathers, but not one of Israel, they all followed the steps of Jeroboam,
the son of Nebat, that made Israel to sin; let the parents be never so vile, if
grace prevent not, the children will walk in their ways: Ahah was bad enough,
that sold himself to commit wickenesse, and yet Ahaziah his son is said to walk
in his way, in his mothers way, who was Jezabel, and in Jeroboams, 1 King.
22.52. and if it be possible, they will go beyond their fathers in wickedness,
Judge. 2.19. They corrupted themselves more then their fathers, Jer. 7.26. They
did worse then their fathers. Iniquity improves in the going, like a river, the
farther it runs, the broader and deeper it grows: in Joh. 8.44. Christ tells
the Jews, they were of their father the Devil, and his lusts they will do;
they were such wilful sinners, sinning against such clear and strong light,
that their sin was devilish. Let parents take heed what they do, how they sin
before their children; when they do so, they pave a way to hell for them, and
dig the pit for their destruction. Raboldus, a Duke of Freesland, about the
900. year of Christ, being persuaded to turn Christian, and going to be
baptized, asked of the Bishop if all his forefathers were damned, who
indiscreetly affirming it, says the Duke, then will I be damned with them,
rather then be baptized by thee.

7. Antiquity is not the rule for worship; you and your fathers have
transgressed against me; the traditions and examples of forefathers will not
warrant the children in point of worship; here they could plead, We did what
our forefathers did many hundred years together, and have faithfully walked in
their steps, and hope we are unblameable; no, says Christ, You and your
fathers have transgressed, you should not have made their examples, but my Word
the rule of worship. The Samaritanes could plead antiquity for their worship in
Mount Gerizim, above 200. years, where they had a Temple, and many things
according to Moses. And hence was it, that the woman of Samaria said to Christ,
Our fathers worshipped in this mountain, Joh. 4.20. but Christ told her, v. 22.
You worship you know not what; you have the wills, inventions, and examples of
men, for the warrant of your worship and good intentions, in the execution of
your worship, but because you have not my Word; that is, not a Light, a Law and
Rule unto you in point of your worship; you worship you know not what; and your
good intentions neither make it acceptable unto God, nor profitable to you: In
Hos. 11.12. it is said, Ephraim compasses me about with lies, and the house of
Israel with deceit, they had their fathers, and antiquity to plead, even from
Jeroboams days; but because they had corrupted the worship of God with their
own inventions, the Lord calls all lies and deceit. In point of worship, you
must look at divine Laws, not humane examples; Leg bus, non exemplis
judicandum, vivendum est.
the rust of antiquity will not go for pay with God; men's traditions make
ineffectuall his commands: Matthew. 15.6. And can they be effectual Ordinances
unto us? if so, we had not been redeemed from them by the blood of Christ: 1
Pet. 1.18. he tells them they were redeemed from their vain conversation by
tradition from their fathers, by the precious blood of Christ, and what was
that vain conversation? A Jesuit tells us, A. Ladid. in locum.
it was in Lege Mosis, and Gentilismo; and are they freed from Moses Law given
by God, and Gentilisme, the traditions of men? are not we freed from that vain
conversation is in the laws of Popery and Prelates and traditions of Fathers?
yea, we are freed, and that by the blood of Christ, he must be our Antiquity,
our Rule, our Law; and what is not after Christ, but after the traditions of
men, must be thrown out and trodden down as beggarly elements and worldly
rudiments; therefore hear Christ (who speaks in this Prophecy) in the 20.
Ezekiel. 18.19. saying, Walk ye not in the Statutes of your fathers, neither
observe their judgments, nor defile your selves with them, I am the Lord your
God, walk in my Statutes, and keep my judgments, and do them.

8. A sinful nation is not changed by afflictions; they were now in captivity
amongst Babylonians that were bitter scoffing enemies, that said, Sing us one
of the songs of Sum; they were under the wrath of God, put hard to it, for all
their necessaries, and yet they ceased not their rebellious transgressions
against God, even to this very day: they had been five years also in this hard
condition, and yet continued. Afflictions are invalid to subdue corruptions, or
change dispositions: put a stone into the fire, it neither softens it, nor
changes it; neither cold nor hot water will make a Blackmore white; empty
Vinegar from vessel to vessel, it will never become Wine; and empty a wicked
heart from condition to condition, it will never become gracio^^; afflictions
may cause restraint of corruption hinder execution of it, stir up natural
principles, and common gifts to act, but never alter a man. But usually wicked
men are worse for afflictions; here they sinned against God rebelliously in the
land of their captivity. Wicked men grow worse and worse every day: Isa. 1.5.
Why should you be smitten any more? you will revolt more and more; the whole
head is sick, and the heart is faint, etc. When sinners are in an ill way
through their own corrupt natures, strengthened in it by example of their
fathers and their own practice, the more blows they have, the harder they
grow, and sin more desperately.

VER. 4. For ye are impudent children, and stiff-hearted.


THe words, impudent children, are in the Hebrew, duri faciebus, hard of face,
their faces were so hard, that reproof and reproach would not make them blush;
and therefore it is rendered impudent; without shame, without blushing: the face
is the seat of shame; and when men sin, and are told of it, or conceive others
know it, their faces are often filled with shame; and it is hard for one guilty
to keep shame out of his face; it is hard not to be a traitor to himself; but
these were past shame, they had the forehead of an Harlot; they sinned, and
were not ashamed. Jer. 6.15. Were they ashamed when they had committed
abomination? Nay, they were not at all ashamed, neither could they blush.

Stiff-hearted.
Robusti cord, strong in heart, or of heart; strong with a sinful strength,
with stubbornness against God: there is a natural stiffnesse in men, which
they inherit from their forefathers, and bring into the world; and there is a
contracted stiffnesse, gotten by continuance in sin; both these were in this
people, and the principle of stubbornness was not broken, but strengthened; so
that no threatenings did make them fear, no blows did make them yield; but
being stubborn they rebelled all; no promises, kindnesses did melt them; this
sin had been in them even from Moses time, Mat. 19.8. Moses, because of the
hardness of your hearts, suffered you to put away your wives: The tender love
of a wife could not prevail with them.

Observe. 1. That progress in sin makes impudent; the original is, and are
impudent; they sin to this day, and are impudent, or hard of face: the
beginnings of sin are modest, but progress in sin is shameless; in a Harlot
is first wanton thoughts, then wanton looks, after waiting for opportunities,
and here yet may be blushing; but when it comes to that in Prove. 7.13. she
caught him, she kissed him, then it is come to shamelessness, Erubescentia est
fuga rei indecentis. Impudence is the contrary: sin is the most indecent thing,
and maxim crubescibile; we blush at the nakedness of our bodies, not at
sin, which made the nakedness of the body shameful. Quantum displicet Deo
immunditia peccati, in tantum placet Deo crubescentia poeniten^is, Bernard.
and therefore it follows, with an impudent face she said, I have
peace offerings, I have paid my vows, God has had his due, and now my flesh
must have its due, I have decked my bed, come, let us take our fill of love: The
Hebrew for impudent is, she strengthened her face; it was strengthened against
modesty and shame; for progress in sin had made her shameless of sin: and so
the Prophet speaks of the Jews, Jer. 3.3. Thou have a whores forehead, thou
refusest to be ashamed, Judah was so impudent, that she scorned to blush, Jer.
8.12. Were they ashamed when they committed abomination? I looked for it, but
they were not ashamed at all, neither could they blush; O what a condition does
sin bring to! Monica the mother of Austin, at first sipped a little wine, after
drank off a little more, in time whole cups, and at last it came to
drunkenness, and so to impudency: when the Calves were first mentioned in
Israel, the people trembled at it, but afterward they could kiss Calves, and
sacrifice to Baal, Hos. 13.1. and out-stand the threats of the Prophet. Sin
banisheth shame from its habitation; so that the sinner and shame are
disacquainted: Psalm. 52.1. Why boastest thou thy self in mischief, O mighty
man? Doeg boasts of his bloodinesse, that he had killed the Priests at the
command of Saul; Zeph. 3.5. The unjust knows no shame. Though men foam out
their shame, Jude 13. and glory in their shame, Phil. 3.19. yet they will know
no shame: It Is an exceeding evil to be past shame, to be impudent in sinning;
if ever God show mercy to such sinners, they must be ashamed; What fruit had
you in those things, whereof now ye are ashamed? Romans 6.21. ye were impudent
in committing, but now ye are ashamed in confessing and remembering of them.

2. That where there is an impudent face, there is a hard stiff heart; if the
heart were not stony before God, the face would not be impudent before man;
Act. 7.51. Ye stiff-necked, and uncircumcised in heart, there was
brawnishnesse within, and impudency without; and a hard heart is one of the
greatest evils; Mercies prevail not, what mercies had they in the Wilderness,
in Canaan; and yet they did not move them? Miracles will not do it; when they
took Christ, he said, I am he, and they all fell backward to the ground,
after this, Peter cuts off Malchus his ear; Christ heals it: here were two
miracles, yet they did no good upon their hard hearts; they went on, laid hands
on Christ, who wrought the miracles, bound him as a malefactor, and thought to
make him sure for doing any more miracles. Pharaoh saw ten miracles; the
Israelites woar a miracle about them; forty years their clothes, and shoes
ware not out, they were new at forty years end, yet these wrought not upon
their hard hearts. Pliny tells of a river in Lucania, that turns leaves and
sticks into stones.
It is not fasting and prayer will do it, many are hardened in them; There be
waters, that what ever is cast in, they turn into stone; and some men's hearts
grow stony in what ever Ordinances they are. A hard heart is a grievous
disease, worse then the stone in the reins or bladder: It was Nabals disease
and death, and most men are sick and die of that disease.

3. That God sends his Prophets and Ministers about hard services, such as are
full of discouragements; when they are looked upon with a carnal eye: Ezekiel
had presently to object, Lord, will thou send me to a people that is impudent?
I shall never make them blush; to a people hard-hearted? I shall never make
impression on their spirits, by any truths I shall preach unto them, my labor
will be in vain; are they a rebellious nation? do they rebel against thee? and
will they not much more rebel against me? this is a hard task; if thou
regard'st not me, yet regard thy truths, What, shall they be cast away about
such a people as this? O spare me, and spare thy truths: No, says God, I send
thee unto them, and thou shall speak unto them; they are hard tasks that God
puts his servants upon; Isaiah was called to a hard service Chap. 6.9, 10. to
preach ruin and destruction to a people, and so unwelcome he was, that he
says, Chap. 8.18. I am for a sign and wonder in Israel: Jeremiah is set over
nations and kingdoms to root out, Quid est praed care, nisi furorem populi in
se derivare? Luth.
to pull down and to destroy, Chap. 1.10. the Kings of Judah, the Princes,
Priests, and People he was to deal withal; and Verse. 19. it is said, They shall
fight against thee. Preaching provokes all sorts of men; and so hard did
Jeremiah find his work, although God promised to be with him, he was so
derided, saw so little good come of his labors, that he resolved to lay down
his Calling, and to speak no more in the name of the Lord, Jer. 20.9. Knox,
when called to preach, he burst forth into an abundance of tears, and so
withdrew himself to his chamber, and was full of grief, and troubled, till he
was compelled to preach. Preaching is a warring, 2 Timothy 2.4. and Preachers are
soldiers; hence Paul calls Timothy, a good soldier of Christ; and when we
come to spoil and plunder people of their goods, their lusts, wills, humors,
opinions, and to take away their strong holds, their carnal reasoning against
Christ in the Gospel, and ways of God; they are in a rage, take up arms
against us. Paul fought with Beasts at Ephesus, 1 Cor. 15.32. and they gored
him, and sought his death: The Galatians that would have at first pulled out
their eyes for Paul, thrust out their tongues against Paul; he was their
enemy, because he told them the truth; those cried Hosannah a little before,
were ready to cry Crucify, crucify; hardly a Prophet or an Apostle, but
suffered by the hands of their hearers.

4. Ministers should not so much look at the persons they are sent to, or the
event of their ministry, as at their Call: I send thee, says God, look thou
to that, trouble not thy self at the persons that are so wicked, nor at the
success of thy ministry, but consider I have called and sent thee; Gods will
and command must content us, support us: what if we be scoffed at, reviled,
made the offscouring and filth of the world, yet here is the comfort of a true
Prophet, of a true Minister, Christ sent him, and he that set him awork will
pay him his wages, whether they hear or hear not to whom he is sent; the
Nurse has her wages, whether the child live or die; and we are a sweet
savor of Christ unto God in them that are saved, and in them that perish: 2
Cor. 2.15. The soldier has his respect and reward, whether he kill men or
take them alive; and we are acceptable unto God as well in the deaths as the
lives of men. This consideration comforted Isaiah, Chap. 49.4, 5. I have
labored in vain, I have spent my strength for naught; yet surely my judgment
is with the Lord, and my work with my God; and though Israel be not gathered,
yet shall I be glorious in the eyes of the Lord, and my God shall be my
strength: He would look at God, and not at the difficulty of the work, or
discouragements from men, and want of success; sometimes God gives large
encouragement, promises hope, success, providing for our infirmities, at other
times bare a commission and command must suffice, to do that would make ones
heart ache; it is his prerogative to send whom he will, and upon what service he
will. Let us lay aside all discouraging thoughts, look to our Call, rest in
Gods will, and know it is honor to be in his service, though nothing come of
it, we are acceptable to him, if not to men, and shall find a reward in
heaven, if none on earth.

5. That those are sent of God must deliver, not their own, but Gods message;
and thou shall say unto them, Thus says the Lord God: a Prophet is os Dei; and
it is great honor to him, that the great God will speak by his tongue; Thou
shall be as my mouth, Jer. 15.19. So Jeremy had Gods words put in his mouth,
Chap. 1.9. and those he must speak, not his own words, what God commanded that
he must speak, and not what himself fancied. When a man comes furnished with
the word of God, then he comes as a man of God, with authority and power; this
made the Apostle say, our weapons are not carnal, not the words of man's
wisdom, but the Oracles of God, which are mighty through God, Acts 20. he
delivered the whole counsel of God, and not his own.

VER. 5. And they, whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear, (for
they are a rebellious house) yet shall know, there has been a Prophet amongst
them.


HEre the end or reason of the Prophets sending is given, I send thee to this
people: to take away all pleas and pretenses of theirs, thou shall prophecy
unto them, and tell them of their sins, what I require at thy hands, and if
they will not hear, I have not left my self without witnesses; they shall
know, etc. they would otherwise have had to object against thee, and said, If
we had had a Prophet in our captivity to have reproved us for our sins, to have
showed us Gods displeasure, our danger, and the way to escape, we would have
ceased from our evil ways, have learned righteousness, and laid hold of
offers of mercy and grace, but we had not to reprove or instruct us, we
perished for want of visions. It Is true, we had Prophets in our country, but
there they were common, and we did not much regard them, but had one been given
us, now in this desolate, afflicted condition, we would have hearkened, obeyed,
etc. This objection God takes away, and tells them, whether they will hear or
no, a Prophet they shall have, he will not be wanting to them, they shall have
no cause to object against, or complain of him.

A rebellious house.
The original is, a house of rebellion, it is in the abstract, (...)
and notes the strength and provocation of their sin: the Vulgar has it, the
exasperating house, the house that provokes and vexes the Lord, Domus
exasperans. Irritans Sept. Domus amaricans. In amaritudinemme convertunt.
or the imbittering house, that imbitters God, and so the Septuagint renders
that in the third verse, which have rebelled against me, which have turned me
into bitterness, and made me deal bitterly with them; A house, not because God
dwelt amongst them, and was now driven out by their rebellions; but a house,
because they were the family, and seed of Israel; and this parenthesis is
inserted to arm the Prophet against their obstinacy, that he understanding
before hand, what they were, might not be despondent, but proceed cheerfully in
his work, what ever he met withal.

Observe. 1. That there be few that hear and receive the Word savingly: I send
thee to this people, and there be not many among them that will entertain thy
message, or believe the word that I put into thy mouth; Whether they will
hear, or forbear, for they are a rebellious house: this strongly imports they
would not hear, not savingly, but rather oppose the truth; there was a great
number of them in Babylon, yet very few hearkened to the Prophet, and so was it
before they went into Babylon, Isa. 53. Who has believed our report? we have
preached, and made report of God and Christ, in the Temple, in the Synagogues,
in the gates and streets; but, Who has believed us? Isaiah was a Princely
Prophet, had a Princely language, and yet neither among the great ones at
Court, nor inferior sort, was there any considerable number; for Isa. 8.18. He
says, I and the children the Lord has given me, are for signs and wonders in
Israel; if they had been many, they would not have been for wonders, that is a
wonder which is rare, unusual; and it is a rare unusual thing for men and
women to believe the Word of God, multitudes flock to the gates and posts of
Wisdom, but few lay up sound wisdom in their hearts, ^^x cent ^simum quimque
sore fiddem. Calv. ^t Es. 51 Quot esse putatis qui in e^vitate nostra
salventur? infestum quidem est quod d cturus sum, d came tamen, non possunt in
tot millibus centum inveniri qui salventur, quin and de his dubito. Quanta en^m
est, in juvenibus malitia? quantus in senibus torpor? nemo zelum habet,
multitudo sumus saeni, inordinatum mare, Chrysostom. Ad fidem plures veniunt, sed ad
coelestia regna pauci perducuntur, Greg. Hom. 19. in Euang.
many hearers, few believers: 1 Cor. 1.22. We preach Christ crucified unto the
Jews a stumbling block, and unto the Greeks foolishness; the generality of
both reject Christ and his Doctrine, of those that hear the Gospel, scarce the
hundredth man is a believing man, says Calvin, and Chrysostom exceeds him in
his 40. Hom. Ad pop. Antioch. he thinks that scarce the thousand man that
hears the Word will be saved. It Is conceived by some Expositers, that in
Antioch were above an hundred thousand people, and yet this Father feared that
hardly an hundred of them were right: Noah preached unto the old world, and few
or none hearkened. When the Jews were in the Wilderness, how few hearkened
unto the voice of the Lord of 600000, only Caleb and Joshua hearkened, obeyed
and entered into Canaan, set aside all profane hearers, all negligent ones, all
forgetful, all unbelieving and unpracticall hearers, and you shall find the
number very few of saving hearers; many come to hear, but few get into heaven.
And you know what Christ has said, That narrow is the way to life, and few
there be that find it, but broad is the way to destruction, and many there be
that go in thereat. Let Christ speak, he is not heard, not received, let Satan
or Antichrist do it, they are heard and followed. Josh. 5.43. I come in my
Fathers Name, and ye receive me not; if another shall come in his own name,
him ye will receive. When Antichrist came he was received, Rev. 13.3. And all
the world wondered after the Beast and worshipped the Beast, saying; Who is like
unto the Beast? The Doctrine and worship of the Beast was easy, suitable to
carnal spirits; but the Doctrine of Christ is spiritual, deep, contrary to
our fleshly and sinful principles; and herein the greatness of the mystery
of the Gospel is set out, that few do hear and believe.

2. See the infinite goodness of God, that will give a Prophet to such a
people as this; they were rebellious, had slighted, rejected, abused all the
Prophets in Canaan, 2 Chro. 36.15, 16. The Lord God sent to them by his
Messengers, because he had compassion on them, but they mocked the Messengers
of GOD, despised his Word, and misused his Prophets, until the wrath of the
Lord arose, and there was no remedy or healing; God saw nothing would do them
good, but that they must be ruined by warer, be thrown into captivity, and
buiried in Babylon; yet such was the compassion and goodness of God, that he
gives them a Prophet here to try them what they would do, whether they would
hear and learn righteousness, God will not be overcome with man's evil, but
will overcome evil with good: when the Jews had taken Christ the heir, and
put him to death, yet he being risen, powers out his Spirit upon the Apostles,
and gives them both to Jews and Gentiles; and Peter at a Sermon, converted
some of those that had washed their hands in his blood; when God will, nothing
shall hinder his mercy and kindness, he will give the choysest Ministers to
the corruptest people.

3. That sinners in time come to a height and perfection of sinning; they were
not only a rebellious house, but a house of rebellion; when it comes to the
abstract once, it is at the height: as there is a going on in Gods ways to
perfection, Heb. 6.1. (...).
so there is in sins ways: James tells us of, sin finished, perfected. Chap.
1.15. Hence Eccles. 8.11. mention is made of hearts fully set to do evil; and
Jerem. 3.5. Judah is said to speak and do evil, as she could; and Israel sins
are called mighty sins, Amos 5.12. Fortia peccata. (...)
the original is, bony sins, as men when their bones are come to their full
growth, are strong, and men of might; so is it in sinning, when sins are come
to their full growth, then are they mighty sins; the like is that in Jer.
44.16, 17. As for the word thou have spoken unto us in the name of the Lord, we
will not hearken unto thee, but we will certainly do whatsoever thing goes
out of our own mouth: to burn incense to the Queen of Heaven, and to power out
drink offerings unto her, as we have done, we and our fathers, our Kings and
our Princes, etc. this was the sin of Judah, her whole heart and will was in
it, and Israel was not behind: Hos. 2.5. I will go after my lovers that gave me
my bread and my water, my wool and my flax, mine oil and my drink, they
sinned with greediness, as they in Ephesians. 4.19. which sets out the greatness
of their sin. The Scripture calls such sinners, sons of Belial, Judge. 19.22.
Sons of Belial beset the house round about where the Levite and his Concubine
were, in the old man's house at Gibeah, they got her, and forced her to death;
these were sons of Belial indeed, without profit; as some interpret the word,
without yoke, as others, that is, lawless, rebellious men, men of wickedness,
given to wickedness; as Hophni and Phineas, 1 Samuel 2.12. such as Christ will
have nothing to do with, 2 Cor. 6.15. unless it be to destroy them.

4. That sin is an imbittering thing; the house of rebellion may be turned the
house of bitterness, that deals bitterly with me, and imbitters my Spirit
against them, Hos. 12.14. Ephraim provoked him to anger most bitterly, (...)
Peccata sunt amaritudines Dei. O iniquitas Peccati quae suavitatem Dei in
amaritudinem convertit.
with bitternesses, Ephraim sins were sins full of bitterness; they turn Gods
sweetness into bitterness, his patience into wrath, his bowels into wormwood;
if any thing can sadden divine nature, and imbitter the same, it is sin; What a
bitter thing is it, that God should be thrust out of his Throne and Temple, and
an Idol set up? What a bitter thing, that the heart and conscience, which is
the seat of God, should be the habitation of lusts and Devils? when God sees
this, it does much imbitter his Spirit. When Christ hung upon the Cross, they
gave him gall and vinegar to drink; which was a bitter provocation, and when
we sin, we give God and Christ pure gall to drink, Lam. 1.18. (...)
the words there are, The Lord is righteous, for I have rebelled against his
Commandment; the Hebrew is otherwise, because I have made bitter his mouth, I
have given him gall and wormwood to drink, a cup of rebellion and disobedience,
he is righteous in these bitter afflictions, because I have imbittered his
mouth and Spirit with my bitter sins. Fell and amaritudine propinare Deo.
God is all love, sweetness, mercy, and would not afflict and deal bitterly
with us, if we did not drink to him in gall, provoke him by our sins to it.
Hos. 13.16. Samaria shall become desolate, for she has rebelled against God,
the Vulgar is, Quoniam ad amaritudinem concitavit Deum suum.
because she has stirred up God to bitterness; and he will deal as bitterly
by her, they shall fall by the sword, says God, their Infants shall be dashed
in pieces, and their women with child shall be ripped up. Here was great
bitterness we think, but it is nothing to the bitterness of our sins, our
sins cross Gods will, darken his glory, murdered his Son, grieve, vex his
Spirit, deface his work, and burden him daily. There is a double bitterness
considerable about sin, the bitterness in sin, and that for sin; this last God
never tastes, but all mankind has, and shall taste; fears, sorrows,
troubles, sickness, death, etc. but the other bitterness in sin, God always
tastes it. Deuteronomy. 32.32. their grapes are grapes of gall, their clusters are
bitter, both their works and worship are bitter; there is hypocrisy and
superstition in them, there cannot be the least dram of Gall in any thing his
people do, especially in worship, but the Lord tastes it, and distastes it; our
mouths are so out of relish, that we find sweet in sin, which is gall,
wormwood, yea, bitterness it self, Job 20.12, 13, 14. Though wickedness be
sweet in his mouth, he hides it under his tongue, keeps it, and will not
forsake it; yet his meat in his bowels is turned, it is the gall of Asp^
within him: It Is a metaphor from a man given to his appetite, who meeting with
some sweet pleasing morsel, keeps it long in his mouth, sucks out the sweet,
delights his sense with it, Quod palatum oblectavit viscera d srumpit.
and lets it not go down too quickly; but when it is down, it proves a poisoned
bit; and though it pleased his palate, yet it torments his bowels: so sin in
most men's mouths, in their fancies and to their senses is sweet, and they roll
it up and down in their thoughts, and delight themselves in a conceited
pleasure of it, but there is the gall of Asps in it, the bitterness of death:
and Solomon, who had found sweetness in the ways of the flesh, at last felt
and acknowledged the bitterness in sin, and in that sin, Eccles. 7.26. I find
more bitter then death, the woman whose heart is snares and nets: Prove. 5.4.
her end is bitter as wormwood. The bitterness in sin will be tasted at one
time or other: Jer. 2.19. It is an evil thing and bitter, that thou have
forsaken the Lord thy God.

5. A rebellious people grow worse by the means of grace; let them hear the
Word, or have it tendered to them, they are more obstinate, opposite then
before; the point rises thus: Whether they will hear or no; for they are a
rebellious house; they will not hear, they will not receive thee, nor thy
message, but out of their old malice and rebellious dispositions, they will be
the worse for a Prophet sent unto them, more hardened they will be against thee,
thy person, thy Doctrine, thy conversation, thy calling, they will quarrel and
question all. Jer. 44.16, 17. As for the word that thou have spoken unto us in
the name of the Lord, we will not hearken unto thee, but we will certainly do
what ever thing goes out of our own mouth; they were the worse for the
Prophet, Facier do sac^emus. is the Hebrew.
more obstinate and set against him, and the truths he delivered, in doing we
will do, since thou have spoken to the contrary, we are more resolved and set
upon it. When Christ the great Prophet was sent unto the Jews, did they not
grow more hard, vile, and opposite to him and his Doctrine? did they not
question his calling, and quarrel at his conversation? Luke 4.18. when Christ
had told them that the Spirit was upon him, and that he was sent to preach the
Gospel, Deliverance, Liberty, the acceptable year, and spoke so, as that they
wondered at the gracious words proceeded out of his mouth; yet in the 28th verse
it is said, All they that were in the Synagogue, when they heard these things,
were filled with wrath, and rose up, and thrust him out of the city, and led
him unto the brow of the hill, that they might cast him down headlong. Christ
was a Nazaren, and yet thus would the Nazarenites have served their Prophet,
their Messiah, their own Citizen; they would have thrown him down and broke his
neck and bones together, which made Ambrose say, Est pejor magistro
Discipulorum haered^tas, Ambr.
That these men were worse then the devil, because when he had Christ upon
the top of the pinnacle, he offered not to throw him down, but said, Throw thy
self down; but these would have thrown him down with their own hands: wicked
men storm and rage against Christ, his Doctrine and doings, Luke 6.11. when he
had confuted their corrupt opinions about the Sabbath, and healed the man with
the withered hand, it is said, They were filled with madness, and communed one
with another, what they might do to Jesus; you may see how the words of Christ
ripened their corruptions; the Gospel is like the Sun which ripens weeds as
well as corn, crabs as well as good fruit; the vine of Sodom as well as the
vine of Sibnah, Deuteronomy. 32.32. Isa. 16.8.
and the Vineyards of Timnah amongst the Philistines, Judge. 14.5. as the
Vineyards of Engedi among the Israelites, Can. 1.14. And so the Word of God and
Gospel of Christ, ripens the corruptions of the rebellious as well as the
graces of the regenerate; Judas treason, the Pharisees hypocrisy, are ripened
by the Word, as well John's love and Nathaniels sincerity: in the hottest
countries are the rankest poison, the most venomous Serpents; and in England,
which is zona torrida for the means of Grace, is the bitterest enmity to
godliness, here are the rankest Serpents that ever lived.

6. That God will leave wicked men without excuse; it is Gods intention, they
shall never be able to challenge me, nor to justify themselves; Gods primary
intentions where he sends Prophets and means of grace, are the good of his
elect, their comfort, sanctification and salvation; but his secondary
intentions, are the inexcusablenesse of the wicked and their just damnation.
Hence is it, that the Apostle says, we are the savor of life unto life, and
the savor of death unto death, 2 Cor. 2.16. There is a sort of men that the
Gospel is a sweet savor unto, they smell life in it, and it revives them, it
works unto life, and these are the elect ones; but there is another sort, that
the Gospel is a favor of death unto, they smell death in it, and find deadly
effects from it, they are hardened, worsned, imbittered, and so it works unto
death: it is like a strong Sent, that kills immediately: and those it proves so
unto are the reprobate, the lost, whose minds the God of this world has
blinded, 2 Cor. 4.4. Christ also tells us, Joh. 9.39. For judgment I am come
into this world, that they which see not might see, and that they which see
might bt made blind; his first aim was at those under election, to do them
good, to make them see; the secondary end and aim was, to make others blind;
that is, such as were in a reprobate condition, when God sends his Word to any
place, it shall, and must prosper in the thing whereunto he sends it, Isa.
55.11. be it to win and draw, or to harden and make inexcusable, see Isa. 6.9,
10. Go and tell this people; Hear ye indeed, but understand not; see ye, but
perceive not: make the heart of this people fat, make their ears heavy, and
shut their eyes, etc. And this Scripture is six times in the new Testament
repeated; intimating, that as people are hardened under the means, so they are
inexcusable, having had the means; and it is a dreadful condition, to have Law
or Gospel, Prophets or Apostles, and not to thrive by them; Christ pronounces a
woe to the Cities, Matthew. 11. that had the means of Grace, and mighty works
done in them, and repented not; he tells them, it shall be more tolerable for
Sodom then for them, at the day of judgment; cursed Sodomites that were
destroyed with so dreadful a judgment from heaven shall find more favor at
the day of judgment, and more ease in hell after that day, then any that have
had the Gospel and means of grace, and not profited by them; let us learn to
tremble at the Word of God, hear it as the Word of God, as that Word shall
judge us and receive the truths of God with love, lest otherwise God sends us
strong delusions, and we be damned for not being the truth.

7. Wicked men shall one day be awakened, and see what mercy, what means,
offers of grace, they have refused and slighted; they shall know that there
has been a Prophet amongst them, the time shall come, that they shall see and
feel, that I was near, that my Word was among them, that salvation was at their
doors; they shall find me a severe Judge, that would not accept of me a
tender father; men go on a long time in a careless, sleepie or scorning way,
but when sickness comes, death is before them, and they ready to take
possession of an eternal condition, then their conscience stings them, and
they feel what an evil it is, that they have opposed, neglected, undervalued
the Prophets and Sons of the Prophets. The Adulterer will be roused out of his
pleasing dream and soft bed at last, Prove. 5.12, 13
and say, How have I hated instruction, and my heart despised reproof, and have
not obeyed the voice of my teachers, nor inclined mine ear to them that
instructed me? there will be strong convictions in the bosom of such a finner,
and conscience will sound in his ears, and set upon his spirit those truths of
his teachers that formerly have been despised. When Pharaoh and the Egyptians
were in the red sea, and the old world had the flood about its ears, what
languages did their consciences speak? did they not tell them, they had had
Moses and Noah, Prophets and Preachers of righteousness, and gave no ear to
them? did they not sting them to death, and make them cry out, and say, O that
we had hearkened to those servants of the living God? whilst wicked men are
hearing, sometimes their consciences are netled and galled: Act. 5.17. The high
Priest, and all with him, when they heard and saw what was done by the
Apostles, they were filled with indignation; and John 8.59. the Jews were so
vexed at Christ, that they took up stones to cast at him: (...) disserrabatur.
Super Martyrem, Stephanum, dentibus colubrinis stridebant quem quasi serpentem
in cord habebant, Aug. Sermon. 6. de sanct.
and those that heard Stephen, Act. 7.54. they were cut to the heart, and
gnashed on him with their teeth; with the Saw of anger, malice and envy, they
were even sawn in sunder, and gnashed on him with their teeth; and if the Word
were so terrible while they had shifts to evade the stroke of it, and comforts
to allay the power of it, what would it be to them at last, when all shifts and
comforts should fail them? Some have confessed their consciences have been so
cudgelled at the hearing of some men, as they never were in all their days
before; others, that truths have been so darted into them, they could not get
them out in a week, or month after; they have stuck like arrows in their
livers, and have been half-deaths unto them, Mortes dimidiatae.
what will the Word be at last unto rebellious sinners? it will arrest them,
and be most terrible unto them, Zach. 1.6. Did not not my words take hold of
their fathers? it did, and will do in these days; John 12.48. the Word of
Christ will judge and condemn sinners, be an Anathema Maranatha unto them, and
they shall know it.

8. That the Prophets shall be witnesses at last, for or against their hearers:
they shall know there has been a Prophet amongst them, his person, his pains,
his truths, his life, his sufferings, his death, will all come in for witnesses
one day; every Prophet, every Preacher that Christ sends, is a witness as well
as an Officer or a Minister; Acts 26.16. I have made thee a Minister and a
witness; all faithful Ministers are Christ's witnesses, Act. 1.8. They bear
witness of Christ and his Doctrine, and if we receive not him and his
doctrine, they will be Christ's witnesses against us; when the Lord Christ shall
say to a people, I have knocked at your doors many years together, but ye would
not open unto me, I tendered life and salvation, grace and glory in my Gospel
and Ordinances, but you would none of them; you had your Farms, Oxen, Wives to
take up your thoughts, Mammon to serve, honor and praise to seek of one
another, examples of men to follow, etc. as for me and my Prophets, my
Ministers, you despised, or only gave the hearing, and that was all, and my
charge is not false, here are my witnesses; What say you to it? Speak, you
Ministers of such a City, and such a place; What, did you not preach many a
Sermon, shed many a tear, swet many a drop, make many a prayer for them? did
ye not early and late watch for the good of their souls, etc? Yea, Lord, but
they would not receive us, they would not believe our report we made of thee,
they would not take thy yoke upon them, etc. we shook off the dust of our feet
against them. This will be dreadful, when such witness of the Prophets comes
in against hearers.

VER. 6. And thou Son of man, be not afraid of them, be not afraid of their
words, though briars and thorns be with thee, and thou do dwell among
Scorpions, be not afraid of their words, nor be dismayed at their looks, though
they be a rebellious house.


THe Prophet being struck down with the sight of his glory which sat upon the
Throne in the former Chapter, is lifted up and comforted by the Spirit in the
two first verses, and called to public service in the three next, and that
among a wreched rebellious people. In this and the two next Verses, the Lord
Christ gives him instruction concerning his Office.

First, negatively, in the 6th verse, Be not afraid of them; I have made thee a
Prophet, and it is not for a Prophet to fear the face of man.

Secondly, positively, in the 7th verse, where he informs him, whose words he
must speak unto them; Thou shall speak my words unto them; it is not for a
Prophet to speak his own words, but the words of him that sends him.

Thirdly, both negatively and positively in the 8th verse; Be not thou
rebellious, like the rebellious house; they will not hear me, submit to my
Laws, walk in my ways, they go after their own counsels, wills, lusts, but be
not thou like them; and then positively, open thy mouth and eat that I give
thee.

In the 6th verse you have: 1. The Appellation, Son of man. 2. The Instruction,
Prohibition or Duty, Be not afraid, which is often repeated in the Verse. 3.
The causes and grounds of fear are specified, which are diverse:


First, the quality of their persons; thou may pretend they are great, (...)
Princes and Nobles, but be not afraid, Mehem, from them.

The second cause is their words: they will reproach thee, and seek by evil
speeches to discourage thee, but, Be not thou afraid of their words.

The third is their looks; they will look strangely, frown bitterly, swell
against thee, and brow-beat thee; Be not dismayed at their looks.

The fourth is their disposition: 1. Metaphorically by Briers, Thorns and
Scorpions, they will scratch and tear, sting and kill. 2. Literally, They are
a rebellious house.


Fear not, be not afraid, be not dismayed, etc.
These words are four times mentioned in the verse, to show our aptness unto
fear, and to show the forwardness of the Lord Christ to cure our fear. The
word dismayed (there is no difficulty in the other) it comes from a word that
signifies to bruise or beat in pieces; be not thou so affected with fear, as
to have thy spirit faint, broken, sink, and discouraged within thee; be not
dismayed, let not thy spirit yield at all, stand it out; show thy self a man of
courage, a man of God, carrying thy self in thy place, befitting the Son of God
that put thee in that place.

The greater difficulty lies in the other words; Briers, Thorns, and Scorpions.

Briers.
Sarabim, this Hebrew word is no where found in holy Writ, (...).
except in this place. The Rabbis speak of twenty kinds of thorns in
Scripture, whereof this is one, and notes Briers with sharp pricks, which do
fret and burn in the pricking, much like unto a Nettle; and therefore Kircker
thinks the word here to signify Nettles: the Jews would be as Nettles unto
the Prophet; Vrtica, ab urendo. (...), insanientes quasi boves aestro agitati.
Pertinaciter resistentes, Buxt. Retractantes, Mont. (...).
and Nettles are stinging burning things. The Septuagint expresses it by a word
which notes a kind of madness, as cattle that are bit with Flies which suck
blood, and make them run as if they were mad; so they should like wild beasts,
grow cruel and outrageous against the Prophet. Shindler interprets it,
rebellious, contumacious; others, refractory, drawing back, and stubbornly
resisting.

Thorns.
Sallonim, Spina atuleatae; sharp pointed thorns, Ezekiel. 28.24. Spina
dolorifica, a pricking Brier, a grieving thorn. The Septuag. an offense of
bitterness, or, a bitter offense; the word here in our Text is in the Vulgar,
Subversores.
subverters, because thorns in a man's way do hinder and subvert him; therefore
Kircker thinks sillon is aculeus qui sternitur, from Salal, which is properly
viam aggesta terra sternere, to lay heaps of earth and stones in the way; and
so here heaps of thorns which may prick and offend passengers.

There is one word more to open, and that is Scorpion.

Scorpion.
Ackrabbim, it signifies sometimes spinosam herbam, a plant that grows in the
form of a Scorpion, whereof Instruments were made to scourge malefactors, 1
King. 12.14. Rehoboam would chastise them with Scorpions, that is, with whips
that had hooks in them, resembling the claws and stings of Scorpions; it is
also a living creature, venomous, hurtful and stinging with its tail, Deuteronomy.
8.15. God led them through the great and terrible wilderness, where were fiery
Serpents and Scorpions. Mercer thinks the word to be from Guakeb, Scorpion a
(...).
the heel or hoof, because this Serpent does bite those parts, and the name
Scorpion is from its scattering and throwing its poison up and down.

Now the great business we have to do, is to open unto you who are meant by
these Thorns, Briers and Scorpions; and by these are meant wicked and ungodly
men. I shall make that out unto you from two places of Scripture: Josh. 23.13.
They shall be scourges in your sides, and thorns in your eyes; he speaks of
the nations that were wicked and among them; and Luke 10.19. Christ tells the
seventy, they should tread upon Serpents and Scorpions, that is, wicked men,
which are like unto those venomous creatures; and thrice in Matthew, are wicked
men called a generation of Vipers, Matthew. 3.7.12.34.23.33.

I will show you, 1. Wherein they resemble Thorns. 2. Scorpions: and then draw
some conclusions.


1. Ungodly men are like unto Thorns in these respects:

First, they are worthless things, of little use, they serve to make a hedge,
to stop a gap, and that is all, they are not for great use and service; and
wicked men are worthless things, Prove. 10.20. The heart of the wicked is
little worth, the best part of a wicked man his heart is of little or no value,
his lands may be worth somewhat, his shop, his clothes, his jewels may be of
great value, but himself is a worthless thing, Jer. 22.28. Coniah, King of
Judah, because wicked, is called a despised broken Idol, a vessel wherein is
no pleasure: an Idol, says the Apostle, is nothing, 1 Cor. 8.4. in the world,
that is, a thing of no moment, of no use; what then is a broken Idol? that is
altogether inconsiderable: but may there not be some beauty, some ingraving,
some guilding upon it that may delight? No, he is a vessel wherein is no
pleasure; he is so far from delighting at all, that he is a vessel loathsome,
to be cast on the dunghill, and trod under foot: hence in Dan. Antiochus
Epiphanes is called a vile person, Dan. 11.21. one so little worth, as to be
scorned and rejected as a vile thing; and Job speaking of such men, tells us,
they are viler then the earth, men to be trod and spit upon as the vilest
earth, Job 30.8.

Secondly, they are vexing and grieving things; Ezekiel. 28.24. there is mention
made of the pricking brier, and grieving thorn, and wicked men are full of
prickles and grievances, Numb. 33.55. If you will not drive out the Inhabitants
of the land from before you, then those you let remain of them shall be pricks
in your eyes, and thorns in your sides, and shall vex you in the land wherein
you dwell.

Wherein lies this grieving and thorny disposition of the wicked?

1. In their words; and that appears:

First, in their misconstruing the words and ways of the godly, Matthew. 26.61.
said the witnesses against Christ, this fellow said, I am able to destroy the
Temple of God, and build it in three days; they mistook Christ, who spoke of
the temple of his body, Joh. 2.21. Jer. 26.4.6. Thou shall say unto them, thus
says the Lord, If you will not hearken to me, to walk in my law, then will I
make this house like Shiloh, and this City a curse. Now in the 9th Verse see
how they mistook his words, and perverted his meaning, Why have thou prophesied
in the name of the Lord, saying. This house shall be like Shiloh, and this City
desolate? he had told them it should be so, if they did not hearken, repent
and amend; but they left out that, and pretend he had absolutely said, this
house shall be like Shiloh: so many people mistake the Ministers, and say they
preach damnation, when it is conditionally, if they repent not and believe, they
must then certainly look for damnation.

2. In their calumniations: they forge lies and falsehoods, Job 13.4. Job's
friends charged him with lies, hypocrisy, pride, etc. but he tells them, they
are forgers of lies, you come to comfort me, but you wound me with your lies
and slanders; Concinnarunt mendacia. Vatablus.
and David found this, Psalm. 119.69. The proud have forged a lie, they trim up
lies with shadows of truth, and neat language; they have mints to frame their
lies curiously in, and presses to print their lies withal, Neh^m. 6.6.
Sanballat calumniates Nehemiah, that zealous and faithful servant of God, and
tells him, it is reported among the Heathen, and Gashmu says it, That thou and
the Jews think to rebel; that thou will be King, and have appointed Preachers
at Jerusalem to say there is a King in Judah; here was a malicious forgery, a
trim lie, and no less reproach then Rebel, Traitor, must be laid upon this
great Worthy and Reformer in Israel. Nehemiah returns an answer, verse 8. There
are no such things done as thou say, but thou fainest them out of thine own
heart; the Devil is the father of lies, Joh. 8.44. and all his children are
like him, forgers of lies, Jer. 20.10. Report, said Jeremiah's back friends,
and we will report it; invent some slanders, some lie against the Prophet, and
we will report it, spread it, carry it to the Kings Court and ear, and cause
him to smart for his boldness; Jeremiah heard the defaming of many; it was
their daily work; they said, Let us smite him with the tongue, Jer. 18.18. no
man can have a beautiful and well favored name for these briers, they will
scratch it, and make it very bloody; it was their daily work: the Christians in
the Primitive time, were accused of all the evils fell out; if there were great
floods, Christiani ad Leones. Pluvia defecit Christiani nominis gratia.
famines, wars, earthquakes, plagues in the Roman Commonwealth, they cried,
Away with the Christians to the Lions; and Austin observes, that they made it
a Proverb, The rain failed, because the Christian name was suffered.

3. Daring, provoking words; Nehem. 6.2. Sanballat and Geshem dared Nehemiah to
meet them, Come, let us meet together in one of the villages: four times they
sent unto him in that manner, thinking by this way to have drawn out Nehemiah,
and done him mischief; daring, provocation comes from the wicked, and herein
they are thorns and briers.

4. Scorning, scoffing speeches; Nehem. 4.2. when the walls of Jerusalem were
building, Sanballat scoffs, and says, What do these feeble Jews? will they
fortify themselves? will they sacrifice? will they make an end in a day? will
they revive the stones out of the heaps of the rubbish which are burnt: and so
Tobiah, If a Fox go up, he shall even break down their stone wall; these
scoffs and jeers went to the heart of Nehemiah, and made him pierce the heavens
for help: Hear O our God, for we are despised; the Hebrew is despite, we are
not only despised, Luther was called Germana illa bestia.
but we and our work are despite in the abstract, mockings are biting things,
therefore they are called cruel mockings, Heb. 11.36. Ishmaels mocking of
Isaac, Genesis 21.9, it is called a Persecution, Gal. 4.29. The servants of God
have been mocked and reproached in all ages.

5. Threatenings; Acts 4.17. Let us straightly threaten them, to speak no more in
Christ's Name; and verse 21. When he had farther threatened them; their tongues
were tipped with threats, they were thorny tongues, minae sunt spinae, threats
are thorns, and pricked them on to the throne of grace, and made them pray as
men pierced to the quick; for verse. 29. Now Lord, behold their threatening, let
not them wound and weaken us, but grant unto thy servants, that with all
boldness they may speak thy Word; Saul, Acts 9.1. he breathed out threatenings
against the Saints, he was Benoni, a Son of affliction to the Church: so are
all wicked men, and their tongues are thorns. Hence they are said in Scripture,
to be whet, Psalm. 64.3. to be a sharp sword, Psalm. 57.4. a sharp razor, Psalm.
52.2. and the words of it are called arrows, bitter words, devouring words,
Ps. 52.4. deadly words, Prove. 18.21. Death and life are in the power of the
tongue, it comforts, it destroys; Lingua ejus est gladius triceps Bernard.
Felo de se: Mortis fere unicum ostium lingua est, Chrysostom.
take the tongue of an evil man that slanders and back-bites, it is a great
murderer. We read of some double-tongued, 1 Timothy 3.8. but such a one is
treble-tongued, and kills, as Bernard says, three at once; himself that speak,
the person he speaks to, and him he speaks of; and the worst is, he murders
his own soul; therefore Chrysostom observes well, and says, The tongue is
almost the very gate of death, it is the death and ruin of most men in the
world.

6. Their tongues are briers and thorns, in regard of their sleighting and
undervaluing of Gods servants: as Paul is called a babbler, Christ a fellow, the
Carpenters Son; and many of Gods servants are slighted in these days; such
words they meet with as are thorns and pricks in their sides and eyes. Because
I will not multiply, take their blasphemies, O what thorns are those! thorns to
God, and thorns to man. When the French had got some victory in Scotland
against the reforming part there, the Queen regent brake out into these
speeches, Where is now Knox his God? now my God is better then Knox his God;
here was a blasphemous passage; and have we not such blasphemies in our days:
Where is now your God of Prayer and Fasting? What Is become of all your hearing,
preaching, and seeking of yo^^ God? I might add another particular, which is
the thorn^ counsels that wicked men do give, 1 King. 21.9. what counsel
^ezebel gave against Naboth, Proclaim a fast, set him up on high among the
people, and set two sons of Belial before him, to bear witness against him,
that he blasphemed God and the King; here were words of death, here was
counsel from hell. It Is not unknown what ill counsel has been given his
Majesty of late, and likewise to many others.

Secondly, In their looks; that is in the Text also, there is much in the faces
of men to daunt and trouble, men's spirits are much discerned by their faces:
Genesis 31.5. I see your fathers countenance is not toward me as before, by his
face I find a difference in his spirit, says Jacob to his wives, he found no
favor in it; the face is the seat of favor or frowns, there is some Majesty
in the face and looks of man; and when he is angry, frowns, there is
majesticall terror in it: Prove. 25.23. there is mention of an angry
countenance, and it is likened to a North Wind, which is cold and scattering; it
drives away the clouds that have the rain in them: and often times wicked men
have such Northern countenances, that they discourage, if not drive away, the
Prophets, who come with the dewes of heaven. When men frown, knit their brows,
look angerly, they have put on vizards, and they be scaring things: Job. 24.15.
He disguiseth his face, he is like a man that has on some terrible vizard,
which affrights those behold it. One of the Nevils, Earl of Warwick, had so
terrible a look when moved a little, that it was said of him, every wrinkle in
his forehead was a Sepulcher to bury a Prince in: he was of kin to that nation,
Deuteronomy. 28.50. that had fierce countenances; and Antiochus a wicked King, is
described in Dan. 8.23. to be of a fierce countenance, his very aspect was
terrible; and some have been blasted by the frowns of mortals. When some men
frown, look sour, and sparkle with their eyes, they prove Basilisks, and kill
those they look upon.

Thirdly, Like thorns in their catching nature; they catch hold of a man when
he thinks he is rid of them, and entangle him more: so wicked men, when you
think you have satisfied them, and done with them, they catch hold again, they
seek new advantages, Jer. 20.10. All my familiars watched for my halting,
saying, Peradventure he will be enticed, and we shall prevail against him,
and we shall take our revenge on him.

The words, all my familiars, in the Hebrew are, every man of my peace, I
thought I had satisfied all their cavils, slanders, objections, and that they
had aimed at my peace and good, but they watched for my halting, they sought to
entice me, and get advantage; this is the nature of wicked men. Christ, when
he had to do with any sort of them, he convinced them, stopped their mouths, they
went their way and left him, and yet they were not satisfied, but sent, and set
men to catch him in his words, Mar. 12.13. When the godly fall into the Courts
and Prisons where wicked men have some power, what advantages do they seek
against them? and when nothing can be proved, no reason but they should be
dismissed, fees are multiplied, oaths and protestations tendered, and unless
these thorns may scratch them and draw blood from their purses and consciences,
they will hold them fast, and liberty must not be had.

Fourthly, A Thorn will never alter its nature; set it in the Garden or
Orchard, water it with milk or wine, do what you will to the thorn, when you
have done all, a thorn is a thorn: so is the nature of wicked and ungodly men,
transplant them whither you will, bring them from the country to the city,
from the city to the court, put them in high or low places, bring them to the
waters side, to the rivers of God, plant them in the Orchards of God, in
Paradise it self, under the means of grace; let them have the deaw of heaven,
the shine of the Sun; a wicked man, he abides wicked still, he will not alter
his nature, he will be no more changeling, he is a Blackmore, and he will be a
Blackmore, he will live and die in his way, though he perish in that way.

Fifthly, Thorns are for the fire; Psalm. 58.9. Before your pots can feel the
thorns; the heat of the fire made with thorns, they are for burning, and that is
the end of wicked ones. Isa. 10.17. The light of Israel shall be for a fire,
and it shall burn and devour his thorns, and his briers in one day. In fire is
light and heat, God would be light to Israel, comfort and joy, but heat and
burning to the Assyrian; he sent down fire to burn the sacrifice, and he would
send a fire to burn the Assyrians which were briers and thorns to the Jews,
and that in one day; and when was this? when he sent an Angel, and slew
185000. here was fire from heaven, a Seraphim, a coal of Juniper, that burnt up
such a thicket of briers and thorns, and after this fire they fell into a
worse, even the fire of hell, which is the place prepared for all the wicked;
Psalm. 9.17. The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the nations that
forget God, there is their end, and hell is large enough to hold all, Isa.
30.33. It Is deep and large, the pile thereof is fire and much wood; it is silva
execrabilis, such wood the earth brought forth upon the curse, briers and
thorns, Genesis 3.18. and the wicked are the fruit of the curse. This phrase much
wood, some Expositers think has reference to the fact of the Jews, Musc.
when the 185000. Assyrians were slain in the valley of Tophet, they made great
piles of wood, and burnt those bodies. So God has piles of wood, thausands and
millions of wicked ones, briers and brambles heaped together, and his breath
like a stream of brimstone kindles those heaps.

In what has been said you see wherein wicked men are thorns and briers; now I
must present to you wherein they are Scorpions. You may by briers and thorns,
understand wicked men of a lower condition; and by Scorpions those of a higher,
that have more power, means and opportunity to do mischief: and the Analogy
between the Scorpion and them, lies in these particulars.

1. The Scorpion is animal insidiosum, it lies lurking under the thorns and
briers, hides it self in holes, and occultis machinationibus ferit. Serpents
are subtle creatures; Genesis 3.1. The Serpent was more subtle then any beast in
the field, When they will sting, tergavertunt, ut a nobis declinare videntur,
Conrad. in Apocal.
and stops his ear against the voice of the charmer, Psalm. 58. and bites the
horse by the heel, so that the rider may fall, Genesis 49.17. And there is one
word that signifies simplicity and subtilty that signifies plainness and
double dealing, when Adam and Eve were both naked, plain and simple, but the
Serpent was gnarummim in a contrary sense, crafty, full of folds and windings;
and wicked men are subtle, Come, let us deal wisely with them, (...).
Exodus 1.10. The Sepiuagint is, Let us deal cunningly against them: and in
Psalm. 105.25. it is said, they dealt subtly with his servants. How cunningly
did the adversaries carry their plot in the days of Nehemiah? Chap. 4.11. They
shall not know nor see till we come in the midst of them and slay them. The
Gunpowder-treason was, and some since have been, carried on with dark
Lanthornes, with secrecy and craft. Had not the enemies a close and crafty
design to make a conjunction between Papists and Protestants in Doctrine,
Discipline, and Ceremony? And had not the only wise God interposed, turned
wise men backward, and made their knowledge foolish, England and Rome had met,
and we had been in conjunction with Antichristian Planets: and we may fear
conjunction still more then open violence. Are not things carried with that
subtilty at this present, as makes the world to wonder? Men against us pretend
Religion, King, Parliament, the liberty of the Subject, to be their quarrel:
here is much of the Serpent, and little of the Dove.

The Scorpion is vigilant, watching opportuntty of mischief. Tota aestate
insomnes sunt quamdiu venenum viget. Plin. l. 8. c. 29. Semper in ictu est,
nulloque momento meditari cessat, ne quando desit occasioni Idem.
Pliny says, some Serpents sleep not all the Summer, but are always thrusting
out their stings, and waking lest they should miss their opportunity: And
wicked men are very wakeful, and watching their opportunity to do mischief,
Prove. 4.16. they sleep not unless they have done mischief, or caused some to
fall. Ahab is sick and cannot sleep, unless he have Naboths vineyard. Amnon
must have Tamar to satisfy his lust, else he must lie awake all night. Wicked
men cannot be in quiet unless they sleep in wickedness. When Christ came to
his Disciples, they were asleep; but the wicked rout were awake, and coming to
take him; they are restless like the Sea, Isai. 57.20. The wicked are like the
troubled Sea when it cannot rest, not when it is calm, but in its working,
boiling, restless condition, when it threatens storms, to swallow up ships,
to break over the banks, etc. Such are wicked ones, they storm, they swell, and
watch where to break out to empty themselves of their estates to drown a
country in the blood of a civil war: Mich. 7.2.3. they all lie in wait for
blood, they hunt every man his brother with a net, that they may do evil with
both hands earnestly, etc. They have their net set, they hunt, they watch, and
will not lose an opportunity, if one hand will not serve, both shall, and the
intention of their spirits also they are earnest in the work. And as they are
wife to watch their season, so their feet are swift in running to the
accomplishment of them, Prove. 6.18. Were not our enemies watchful and active
to break Parliaments, to make Canons, to search pockets, to fetch men into
their Courts?

3. They are exceeding troublesome to the countries where they are, they will
get up their walls into their chambers and beds, as some Expositers observe;
Eglinus in Apocal.
and therefore to prevent such evils, they set their beds remote from the
wall, and the feet of their beds in pots full of water, and for fear of them,
they lie in the highest rooms; they molest them much, and multiply their
fears: in this they are not unlike them: Ahab was a troubler of Israel, wicked
men are the incendiaries in Church and State; I must not name any, you know
more then enough, that are not nick-nam'd when they are so termed, they have
troubled this State, this City.

4. They confederate and join together to do mischief; one will stick fast to
the roof or wall, a second unto him, a third unto the second, and so make a
chain, till they reach to the party asleep, and the last stings him, and
returns, and so every one back in order; this I find of the Scorpion in Eglinus
upon the Revelation; here is both their craft and malice unto man, that they
are subservient one to another, and so linked together for such a purpose;
herein are wicked men truly Scorpions: Prove. 1.14. Come, let us all have one
purse: Nahum 1.10. the wicked are as thorns folden together, stick together as
the scale of Leviathan: Acts 4.5, 6. Rulers, Elders, Scribes, High Priest,
Caiphas, John, Alexander, and as many as were of the kindred of the
High Priest, were gathered together against Christ and his Apostles.

5. The Scorpion, feeds upon the dust of the earth; it feeds upon base and low
things, upon vile and venomous things; so do wicked and ungodly men: as the
Serpent licks the dust of the earth, so do they lick the dust of the earth,
they feed upon malice, they feed upon blood, they feed upon that which is not
their own, Amos 2.7. They pant after the very dust of the earth, they pant
after the estates and means that poor men have, in any place where they come,
and they feed upon it, and satisfy their malice and revenge to the full, in
sucking the estates, and crushing the bones of the Saints of God.

Lambunt, pungunt, venenum infundunt.
6. They kill, lenta morte, but gravi supplicio; when they set upon a man, they
lick him, they prick him, they poison him, which quickly torments, and within a
few days kills, Rev. 9.5. their terment was as the torment of a Scorpion when
he strikes a man; some Scorpions have double stings, and that they may be sure
to kill, they strike with both; wicked men lick us with their treaties, and
kill us with their treacheries: Psalm. 55.21. Their words are fofter then oil,
but they are drawn swords: in the treaties and flatteries of wicked men: if we
were not blind, we might see drawn swords, death at the throat of our estate,
of our Religion, laws and liberties. Haman flattered with Esther, that sought
the destruction of the Jews, the decree is sealed for the death of young and
old, Est. 3. here was a Scorpion; and Jer. 38.4. the Princes beseech the King
to put Jeremiah to death; such a Scorpion was Jezabel and Ahab, which stung
Naboth to death, and got his Vineyard. Hence that law in Ezekiel. 46.18. The
Prince shall not take of the peoples inheritance by oppression, to thrust them
out of their possessions.

7. Scorpions are driven away, if any of them be burnt in the house where they
haunt: Si aliqui eorum in med^o domus exurantur, say Palladius and Virga.
when Joab and Shimei were put to death by the sword of Solomon, then the other
Scorpions in Israel were afraid, and hid themselves; and the Kingdom was
established in the hand of Solomon, 1 King. 2.46. If we shake not our Vipers
into the fire, they will do us harm. Thus you see wherein the resemblance lies
between the wicked, in regard that they are called Briers, Thorns and Scorpions
in the Text.

The Observations that do arise from the Text are:

1. That he is the fittest man for public employment, is sensible of his own
naturalnesse, weakness and insufficiency for place or service: Son of man, be
not afraid; I see Ezekiel, that thou art sensible of thy own naturalnesse,
earthlinesse and insufficiency, be not thou afraid, thou art the fitter man
for my service: Moses pretended that he was a man slow of speech, and unfit
for the great work of delivering Gods people, and leading them out of Egypt
into Canaan, but he was the fitter man for God: So those Ministers or
Magistrates that are sensible of their own weaknesses, they are fittest for
Christ and Church service, and the Lord Christ will show his power most in
their weakness.

2. Those that are in Gods work, and do intend heaven, they must look for
afflictions, they must look for trouble: Ezekiel, says Christ, I Will put thee
into my service, but know, thou must not go a smooth way, thou must meet with
thorns and briers, thou shall meet with Scorpions and Serpents; there is a
Scorpion in heaven, and Scorpions on earth too; let a man be in a heavenly
calling, a Prophet; let a man be in a worldly calling, a Magistrate; he shall
meet with Scorpions and Serpents, through many afflictions we must enter into
heaven, and it is well we enter through many afflictions.

3. The way and method of the Lord Christ is to propound unto us the hardest
things at first; he deals so with Ezekiel here, he hears of Thorns, Scorpions,
a rebellious House, and hears of that which might have discouraged him; but
Christ's way is to let you know what you must look for, Matthew. 10. You shall be
hated of all men for my names sake; you shall be carried to the Court, you
shall be scourged and whipped like rogues; you shall be brought before
Governors; you shall be put to death; he tells them all of these things:

First, because it was the way to arm them against those evils: we say,
praemoniti, praemuniti, men forewarned are forearm'd.

Secondly, that they may have no cause to complain they met with worse matters
then ever they heard of.

Thirdly, to strengthen their faith when they should see such things fall out,
they might say, these be the things which were foretold, and are tokens that we
are in Christ's way. God began the world with this method; Genesis 1. The evening
and the morning was the first day, it is not the morning and the evening, but
you must have night before day, a winter before a Spring, and thunder and
lightning before a calm; and this is Christ's way, therefore, if you intend
heaven, think not to meet only with ease.

These things are all general; we come now to more particular Observations.

1. Then we must walk warily; though wicked men be not to be feared, yet they
are to be heeded; non timendi, sed cavendi sunt impii. When Christ sent out his
Apostles, he tells them what Thorns and Scorpions they must be amongst; men as
cruel as Wolves, that would persecute unto death, and what says he, Be wise
as Serpents, Matthew. 10.
innocent as Doves; keep your selves from their scratching, their stinging,
their teeth, do not you inconsiderately run into their harms, give them no just
cause or occasion of mischieving you, Be innocent as Doves, without horns,
without pushing, (...).
going, wronging any, only be wary, and defend your selves, as the next Verse
is: Beware of men, look to them, they are dangerous creatures, Wolves, Thorns,
Serpents are not so dangerous as they, be exact therefore, circumspect, yet not
so cautelous as to prejudice duty, or multiply fears: for Ver. 26. it is said,
Fear them not; he had told them they should be hated, Verse. 22. courted,
scourged, Verse. 17. persecuted from place to place, Verse. 23. put to death,
Verse. 21. yet they must not fear, but they must beware of men; he says not,
beware of devils, they were subject unto the Disciples through Christ's name,
but men would not be subject, therefore beware of them. Aelian tells us, O
creatos dormi^e solerc.
in Lybia men slept with their boots on, because of the Scorpions, that they
might not sting them; let us not sleep, but walk booted, I mean, let us be shod
with the preparation of the Gospel of peace, Ephesians. 6.15. be shod with a
disposition unto peace; let us be peaceable, harmless, innocent and heedy of
our conversation, that they do neither scratch nor sting us.

2. Public and great designs cannot be carried on with ease and speed; there
be Thorns and Briers in the way, yea, Scorpions, some difficulty or other;
Sluggards pretend Lions in the way, but public, active spirits, when they are
upon weighty affairs, find Lions in the way: Joshua, when about a great work,
to take Ai, there was an Achan in the way to make a great demur, and had almost
overthrown the design, Josh. 7. Nehemiah had a great work in hand, and were
there no obstacles to let? Tobiah and Sanballat were in the way, they scoffed,
they complied, they armed, threatened, yea, the Nobles of Judah give
intelligence to Tobiah, Neh. 6.17. The work of reformation now is a great and
good work, and are there no obstacles in the way? yea, there be thorns, and
heaps of them, which have pricked and lamed some; Scorpions which have bit and
stung others, that they move not, or very slowly in this great work; some are
unwilling, some unfaithful, some insufficient, some deeply guilty of foul
fins, which puts the work more back in one day, then they can forward with
their hearts, heads, hands, purses, and lives in many days; there are men
employed that are Achans, Sanballat's, Judases; we have much policy and carnal
wisdom, and think by that to speed great works to their period; but this is, I
will not say, the only, but a principal Remora, while we will cart the Ark,
and carry on things upon the shoulders of policy, we are in danger to lose the
Ark; yea, in danger to lose all, we will not yet see, lay the finger upon the
right sore, and go to the root of evils; things of weight in State or Church,
have their lets, rubs, mountains, and come not to birth in the day of
expectation; this should keep our hearts from sinking, and our tongues from
censuring, when great designs stick, and come not to perfection: Molestum and
impeditum cursum.
Let us remember there be Thorns, Scorpions in the way; Pity and pray for
the Parliament, Armies, Magistrates, and Ministers, who have difficult and
dangerous work.

3. Wonder not that men in place are scratched in their credits, and wounded in
their estates, they dwell among Thorns and Scorpions, the fleece and flesh
suffer by them many times, Nehemiah is a rebel, Elijah a troubler of Israel,
Christ an enemy to Caesar, and Paul a seditious and pestilent fellow; the
Israelites could not go through the wilderness, without being stung with the
fiery Serpents, Daniel escaped the teeth of the Lions in the Den, but not the
sting of the Scorpions in the Court. Men that go into the war, must not think
to escape all bullets and blows; Magistrates and Ministers are Gods Soldiers,
they both bear the sword, Jer. 1.19. they shall fight against thee, and it
must not seem strange if they get wounds. When Adam and Manasses are among the
bushes, can less be expected then scratches? it is the nature of wicked men to
blast and bespot the name of others, they have learned and do practice the
Devils, or the Jesuits doctrine, Reproach to purpose, Calumniare fortiter, and
aliquid haereb t.
and something will fasten. But let the wicked black, God will white, wash the
names of his; Daniels innocence was cleared up to the King himself, Dan.
6.22. Christ says, Woe to you when all speak well of you, Luke 6. He never
says, Woe to you when men speak ill of you, he is so far from that, as he
fastens a blessing upon it, Matthew. 5.11. Blessed are you when men speak all
manner of evil of you falsely for my sake. Basil says, when men defame us, we
are sorry for them, else I should almost have said, we acknowledge thanks to
them for their blasphemies, as procurers of our bliss. Eorum detractatio est
vitae tuae approbatio.
It Is honor to be reviled of the wicked, their calumniation is our
commendation: then a man shows himself a man of God, and for God, when he
displeases those please not God. Seneca could see on which side Right was, when
he said, Argumentu^ est recti malis displicere.

4. Seek not the acquaintance of wicked men, the Prophet Micah will give you
reason for it, Chap. 7.4. The best of them is a brier, the most upright is
sharper then a thorn hedge. You think some of them are fair men, have good
natures, good parts, great places, and you may be intimate with them, lean
upon them, and get good by them, if not do good to them: but you are deceived,
says he, the best of them, for wit, parts, birth, breeding, place, is a brier,
yea, the most upright, those that are civil, What shall you, what can you have
from a Scorpion, but aculeum, vulnus, venenum clam and palam insidiabuntur.
Somper lanam, saepe vitam perdunt. When one commended Julian the Cardinal, to
Sigismund the Emperor, he answered, Tamen Romanus est: And so when any wicked
man is commended to you, answer, Tamen sentis est.
that have a form of godliness, and walk according to their light, even they
are sharper then a thorn hedge. And because it is incident to the nature of man
to mind great ones, and seek their acquaintance, he speaks in the verse
before, of Princes, Judges, and great men, and beats men off from looking after
and leaning upon them; the sheep run to the hedge for shade in the heat, and
shelter in the storm; but what is the issue? If they eseape with their lives,
yet they go off with rent garments: and if the best of them be briers, what
are the worst of them? When David was become a Courtier, he met with a spear,
and found Saul sharper then a thorn hedge, his spirit was vexed with him, and no
marvel, wicked men vex the spirit of God, who has more patience and wisdom
then man, who is without all corruption, and altogether holy, yet his spirit is
vexed with them, Isa. 63.10. Therefore the Spirit of God counsels us what
acquaintance to seek, Job. 22.21. Acquaint thy self with God, and be at peace,
and thereby good shall come unto thee: he will not be a brier or thorn to run
into thy hand, he will not vex thy spirit, trust him, he will not deceive or
disappoint thee.

5. See what fruit to look for from them, fruits suitable to their nature, 1 Samuel 24.13. Wickedness proceeds from the wicked; it is a proverb, and they
have much truth and strength in them, and it was ancient then, and in all ages
has been made good, observed that wickedness comes from the wicked; by it
David cleares himself, taxes his malicious enemies, and confutes Saul
himself. As for me, I am accused to be a seditious and traitorous fellow, a
man that seeks thy life, O Saul, thou have followers and flatterers about thee
to exasperate thee against me, that put thee on to hunt me, as a Partridge on
the mountain, and to spill my blood; but I am no such man as they pretend, and
thou conceivest: I had thee at advantage, was counseled to take away thy life,
and could have done it; but wickedness was not in me, I cut off the lap of thy
Coat when I could have cut off thy Head. I will make thee judge who is the
wicked man, those that accuse me, thou that pursutest the soul of an innocent
man, or my self that have spared thee, having such advantage. Wickedness
proceeds from the wicked; if I had been a wicked subject, as thou and others
thought, thy life had gone: but thy Courtiers, thy Counselors are wicked; yea,
and thou art wicked, and nothing but wickedness comes from you, and that
proceeds as light from the Sun, water from the fountain, breath from the
nostrils. Christ tells us, we must not look for good from them, Matthew. 7.16.
Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? If you look for such
fruit, you will be deceived; they may grow green as the vine and fig tree,
but their fruit is different: what fruit have Papists and Prelaticall ones
brought forth in Church or State these many years? corrupt trees cannot bear
good fruit, briers, thorns, brambles, may bring fruit for Gadarens and swine,
not for Christ and his Disciples, Judge. 9. The Olive tree had its fatness, the
Fig tree its sweetness and good fruit, the Vine its pleasant wine, (they
would not leave their places for promotion: For usually when men are promoted,
they lose of their excellency, the Olive trees, Fig trees, Vines, they lose
of their fatness, if not all their fatness; of their sweetness, if not all
their sweetness) but what had the bramble? fire, and fire to consume the
Cedars of Lebanon: brambles are of aspiring nature, and when they are got up,
they fire States and Kingdoms.

6. Then it is no great loss when wicked men are taken away, when briers and
thorns are cut down, and Scorpions killed, who is damnified by it? Spina sunt
pestes terrae and frugum morbi, Plin.
wicked men are the very plagues of the earth, they suck away the sweet from
the Vine, the fat from the Olive: It was said of Nero, that he was venenum
terrae, and when that pitcher was broken, it was gain, not loss, matter for
praise, not mourning; the Husbandman is not grieved when the grieving thorn
and pricking thistle are cut out of his corn: Prove. 11.10. When the wicked
perish, there is shouting; shouting on earth, that justice is done, his
wickedness at an end, the Church and State eased of such a burden, rid of
such a thorn; and shouting in hell, Isa. 14.9. When Jehoiakim died, there was
no lamentation made for him, he was a wicked and worthless King, his carcass
was no better then the body of an Ass, and he had the burial of an Ass,
drawn and cast out in the highway or ditches, Jer. 22.18, 19. he had an
infamous burial; and such, says Olimpiodorus, is the end of every Magistrate
or Minister that teaches and governs well, but lives ill, his end is infamous,
he is buried in infamy; but godly men are of great worth: Heb. 11.38. the
world was not worthy of them, those precious ones mentioned there, and those
are living now, God valued, and values above the world; godly men are the
Pillars of the earth, they are the marrow, blood and soul of the world; the
world languishes and lies adying when they are pulled away: Moses, Exodus 32.10.
held Gods hands, Moses is a man that has power in earth and in heaven; he is
a man, that when there is a danger, can go up to the heavens, and so put the
Lord to it, that he says, Let me alone, that I may destroy this wicked
people, and I will make thee a great nation; he would have hired him to have
come to an accommodation; men are now upon accommodating, but a Moses will not
accommodate; no, not with God himself, when his people are in danger, but he
will have a blessing upon good terms, he will have Gods wrath removed, and a
reconciliation between heaven and earth, or else Moses will never be quiet with
God; what a loss is such a man? after his death, if God had not raised up a
Joshua, what had become of Israel? When Elijah was taken away, the horsemen and
Chariots of Israel went.

7. See here a ground, why we are so wary in having peace with our
adversaries; there is much ado about peace; we all say peace, but give us leave
to be wary when we make a peace, when we dwell among Thorns and Scorpions;
Thorns have their prickles and grievances, Scorpions have their stings, and we
are unwilling to be stung; we would not have our consciences, our liberties
stung; we would not have our privileges plucked from us, and all be in
danger; we are unwilling to come to this. When Scotland had made peace with
England, Flanders and the Easterlings, it was said, they had peace with the
world, but their Prelates made war with God; so we may have peace with men,
but there are those amongst us, who, if we look not to it, will make war with
God, with the Lamb, and those that follow him. It Is reported of the Spaniards,
that they had peace with all the world, but were out with God: if we make such
a peace, as to have peace with men, and to be out with God, this would be a
cursed peace; if wicked men will lay aside their thorninesse, their stings and
subtilties, be Nathaniels, and not Achitephels, Doves, and not Serpents, we
would willingly embrace a peace; we have on the shoes of the Gospel of the
preparation of peace.

8. Seeing wicked men are Thorns and Scorpions, let those in Authority look to
it, and do their duty, that the Briers and Thorns grow not too high, too great;
that Scorpions do not abound. It Is said, there were nine kinds of Scorpions
about Jerusalem and Syria, and very great ones, and twenty kinds of Thorns
also; I fear we have all those kinds of Thorns and Scorpions amongst us; (...).
the Greeks have a Proverb, There is a Scorpion under every stone, and where
almost can a man go among us, but there are Scorpions, Thorns and Briers,
scratching, catching, and doing a mischief? Let Magistrates tread upon those
Scorpions, and Ministers hew those Thorns, Psalm. 91.13. Hos. 6.5. Let Ministers
do as Chrysostom did, who would have his hand cut off, before he would suffer
Scorpions and Thorns to come to the Table of the Lord, to poison that Wine and
Bread, and to prick the sheep that came to feed there: Magistrates likewise
should do what lies in them, that neither the Scorpions nor Briers do mischieve
the sheep; you may find Scorpions in more places then one, in your Courts,
Markets, Shops, Fields, Alehouses, if you drive them not out of their holes,
Numb. 33.55.
they will be pricks in your eyes, and thorns in your sides, and vex you in the
land wherein you dwell; you may make oil of these Scorpions, and meat of these
Leviathans. Pliny and others observe, that if you burn one Scorpion in the
midst of the house, all the rest will fly away: if Authority would execute
Justice upon some of our Scorpions, cut down some of our Thorns, the rest would
fly away; we are so fearful and backward herein, that we let Scorpions
multiply, thorns and brambles increase, not only til our fleeces be scratched
from us, but our flesh stung about us, our liberties and lives endangered; we
will not see where our sore is, nor search to the bottom of it; and because
we will not do it, God may justly send fiery Serpents to sting us, and afford
no brazen Serpent to cure us. For your encouragement to deal with these,
consider, Psalm. 118.12. 2 Samuel 23.6. Ezekiel. 28.24. where it is said, There shall
be no more a pricking brier, or grieving thorn unto the house of Israel: for
they shall know that I am the Lord God.

Another principal observation is, That we must not be afraid of men what
ever they be, especially those are called to public place, as Ministers, and
Magistrates: Christ calls Ezekiel to public service, and four times he is
forbidden to fear in this verse: Be not afraid of them, that is, their
frowns, be they great ones, Kings, Princes, Nobles, or whomsoever; be not
afraid of their words, though stormy, grievous, stout, contradictory, etc.
because words do stick and strike deep oft-times, it is repeated again, Be
not afraid of their words, let them not affect thee, nor be dismayed at their
looks. The Hebrew word Techoth, signifies to be amazed, dejected, discouraged,
and let in ones way; but the Prophet must not be amazed, dejected, or
discouraged with what ever he hears, sees, or meets withal.

To give some few Reasons concerning this, and some helps whereby to fortify
our spirits, that we may not be fearful, having to do with Scorpions and
Thorns.

1. Fears are prejudicial; they take away our liberty; Tuus timor tibi est
Nero, tua tentatio tibi est Iulianus.
they put halters about our necks, and strangle our comforts; they multiply and
prolong our miseries; they wound and disable us; the work is to be done, been,
libere, intrepide; if we fear, that will fetter, infeeble and make us bungle.
Isa. 22.2. They were slain, not with the sword, but with fears: Fear slayes a
man while he is alive; fear buries a man before he is dead; fears are
prejudicial to those that are in public place.

2. They are to be men of courage who are in public place, Exodus 18.21. Moses
was to provide able men to be Magistrates and Rulers; the original is, men of
strength and courage: the word signifies virtue, strength, a bulwark, riches,
an army, all which do increase courage; so that a Magistrate should have the
courage of all these: of the virtuous, of the strong, of one in a bulwark, of
the rich, of an army; he is to be a man of might, Dan. 3.20. He commanded the
most mighty men; it is the same word, the men of most courage, that were of
mighty courage to bind Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego; those God puts into
public places are to be such: Josh. 1.9. Be strong, and of a good courage; be
not afraid, neither be thou dismayed; where courage is required, fear is
prohibited; and where fear is prohibited, as in our Text, there courage is
employed, Should such a man as I fly? fear? said Nehem. 6.11. no, I will not
fear nor fly, but be courageous and stand it out against Sanballat and the
rest, their power, their scoffs, their threats, their plots: Magistrates,
Ministers, and all Gods people should be men of courage, when Reformation and
Temple-work are in hand, Hag. 2.4. Be strong, O Zerubbabel, and be strong, O
Joshua, and be strong, O all ye people of the land, says the Lord, and work.
The work of Reformation and of the Temple will not go on, if you faint and
flag. Samuel was a man of courage, when he told Saul entreating him to return
with him, that he might worship, but he would not return with him; for, thou
have rejected God, and God has rejected thee from being King; and think
thou that I will countenance thee? 1 Samuel 15.25, 26. so Elijah was no
white-livered Prophet, but a man of metal, 1 King. 18.15, 17, 18, 19. As the
Lord of hosts lives before whom I stand (speaking to Obadiah) I will surely
show my self to Ahab this day: I, but Jezabel has vowed thy death, and Ahab
makes search for thee all the land over, and if thou be found, thou art a dead
man; Well, says Elijah, I will show my self: and when he came into his
presence, what a salute had he? Art thou he that troubles Israel? I Will have
thee dispatched one way or other; is the Prophet daunted now? no, but replies,
I am not he, but it is thou and thy fathers house: send and gather to me all
Israel, (what a commanding, what a suspicious word was this? he might have
thought that this man would get power about him, and offer violence to him and
his house) thou think to have my blood, but I will have the blood of all the
false Prophets, etc. Who might not think that Elijah rather was King then Ahab?
2 Chronicles. 26.17, 18. When King Vzziah would have burnt incense to the Lord, the
Priest resisted Vzziah, and thrust him out of the Temple; they that are in
public place, are to be men of courage, and therefore they must not fear.

3. God is with his; those he calls and imployes in public service. Josh.
1.9. Why should he be strong, and of good courage? for the Lord thy God is
with thee. Jer. 1.8. Jer. 1.19.
Be not afraid of their faces, for I am with thee to deliver thee. Gods
presence should put life into us: when inferior natures are backed with a
superior, they are full of courage: when the Master is by, the Dog will
venture upon creatures greater then himself, and fears not, at another time
he will not do it, when his Master is absent. When God is with us, who is the
supreme, it should make us fearlesse, it did David, Psalm. 118.6. The Lord is on
my side, my help, I will not fear what man can do unto me, let him do his
worst, frown, threat, plot, arm, strike, the Lord is on my side, he has a
special care of me, he is a shield unto me, I will not fear, but hope; as
it is in the next verse; I shall see my desire on them that hate me, I shall
see them changed or ruined; our help is in the name of the Lord, but our fears
are in the name of man. God takes special care of men in public place; the
Angels of the Church are as the stars in his right hand, Rev. 1.16. he holds
them fast, and it is said of Christ, Isa. 49.2. That he was hid in the shadow of
his hand, in the protection of his hand is the Septuagint: Vmbra est symbolum
protectionis, it defends from the heat of the Sun, that was in Judea exceeding
hot; God hides Christ, yea, all are eminent, and under, who belong to him, in a
special manner, and delivers them from danger, Zach. 2.5. I will be unto
Jerusalem a wall of fire round about; who shall dare to come near it then, to
hurt the Magistrates, Ministers or people there? Some think it alludes to the
Cherubim, that with a fiery flaming sword kept Paradise; others to the fiery
Chariots round about Dothan, 2 Kin. 6.17. where Elisha was: either of these is
good, and notes protection, but there is another, and it may be more suitable
interpretation; and it is this: When they traveled in the wilderness, often
wild beasts would be assaulting them, specially in the night, when they laid
down to rest, then they made a circular fire about them, and so no beast, Lion,
Wolf or Leopard dare middle with them, the fire was a wall to them; and hence
the expression seems to be taken, that God, when wild beasts, wicked men
should offer violence to Jerusalem, he would be a wall of fire round about it.

4. Those are in public place, are in Gods place; I have said ye are Gods,
Psalm. 82.6. Moses was to Aaron in stead of God, Exodus 4.16. And so Ministers,
they are in Christ's stead, 2 Cor. 5.20. and they must be like unto God,
fearlesse of men, but dreadful unto men. It Is an ill thing to see a drunken
god, to hear a swearing god; and it is as ill to see a trembling, fearful god,
a Magistrate, a Minister afraid of man, when as they having the Image and
authority of God stamped upon them, are to make others, especially sinners, to
quake, Romans 13.4. The Apostle bids evil doers, not the powers, be afraid; why,
they are the Ministers of God, and bear not the sword in vain, they must not
fear, but make others do it; so did the Apostles and Prophets, John made Herod
quake, and Paul mad Felix tremble, here were Lambs scaring Lions.

5. They that are godly, true Christians, their godliness, their cause suffers
by their fearfulness; they have received another spirit then that of the
world, 1 Cor. 2.12. even the Spirit of God, which is no timorous, cowardly
Spirit; the Apostle denies that, 2 Timothy 1.7. God has not given us the Spirit
of fear, but of power, of love and a sound mind: where there is a base fear,
there is sickness of mind, no soundness; and there is little love, and less
power: those that have the Spirit of Christ, and the Spirit of God, it is not
for them to fear; have you the Spirit of the Lord of Hosts in you? have you
the Spirit of Jesus Christ in you, and will you fear and tremble before men,
that have the spirit of devils in them? the Spirit of the Lord of Hosts is like
himself, and the Spirit of Jesus Christ is like Christ himself, he was not
afraid of any; if therefore men in place have this Spirit, they must not fear,
for they do dishonor Christianity, and the Spirit they have received from
their Lord and Master Jesus Christ.

6. There is not that in wicked men, as should make us to fear them, if we
consider they are Briers, Thorns, Scorpions, contemptible things, rather to be
despised then feared; if they had truth, grace and God with them, then they
might be feared; they have not God with them, they are a rebellious house, and
he is against them, they cannot pray to fetch in might to make them dreadful;
if they say a prayer, the prayer of the wicked is abomination to the Lord: they
are full of fears themselves, and have no true valor in them, that arises
from other and better principles then they have, if they had truth of grace,
God with them, then we might fear them, but their guilt, their wickedness
does weak^ them, and multiply their fears; can wicked men be without fears?
Isa. 8.12. fear ye not their fear, they have a slavish, distracting,
heart-smiting, tormenting hellish fear: Saul feared the people, 1 Samuel 15.24.
Is there not a spirit of fear upon many in Ireland and England too? have not
Judges feared the Courts they have sat in?

6. God will dismay, confound us, if we fear men, Jer. 1.17. Be not dismayed
at their faces, lest I confound thee before them, or break thee in pieces.
Jeremiah, says God, If thou do fear them, and betray the truth I have
committed to thee, I will forsake thee, leave thee to the hands, malice,
cruelty, and break thee to pieces before their faces: fearfulness does much
provoke God; he that sees not sufficiency in God to support him, shall find
enough to daunt and crnfound him; but if we go on with courage, discharge the
place and trust committed to us; Stellae in nocte lucent, in die latent, Bern.
in Cant. Videbis me plus posse dum torqueor quam ipse dum torques.
if we should fall into the hands of wicked men, and suffer, God will own us,
let out himself unto us, support us, sympathize with us, deliver us, or make us
and our sufferings glorious: Stars shine in the night, they are obscured in the
day; when Vincentius was tormented by the Tyrant, he said, Thou shall see me
more courageous in suffering, then thy self in tormenting.

Some helps against fear.

1. Let your fear be exercised about God, he is an object fit to be feared;
all flesh is grass, all nations are a drop of the bucket, and the small dust
of the balance; Inhabitants of the earth are as a swarm of Flies, a troop of
Grass-hoppers, and shall we fear these little things? the world is nothing
unto God; there is no greatness beside God himself, he has made the world,
Nihil magnum, nisi magnus Deus. Psalm. 119.120.
he has dried up the Seas, he sends out the mighty winds, he changes times
and seasons, he brings Princes to nothing, makes Judges vanity, he tumbles
nations into hell, and can destroy the soul and body eternally, him fear,
says Christ, Luke 12.4, 5. not men, that can but kill the body, but fear him,
who after the body is dead, can kill the soul, and cast into hell; I say unto
you, fear him: and Isa. 8.13. Sanctify the Lord of Hosts himself, and let him
be your fear, let him be your dread; let there be such a frame of spirit in
you as becomes the Lord of Hosts, suitable to his greatness, his sovereignty
and authority over you and all creatures, then you will not fear; when the
fear of God is strong in your heart, then the fear of man cease: when the
Dictator ruled at Rome, then all other Officers ceased; and when this fear of
God rules, all other fears will be hushed; and that is not all, if God be
sanctified by us, he will be a Sanctuary unto us.

2. Set faith a work; men in public place should have their hands at work on
earth, and their faith in heaven; the just live by faith, and will not die by
fear. Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 32.7, 8. when Senacherib was coming against
Jerusalem, and troubled the whole land, he set his hands awork to fortify the
City, and his faith to fortify himself: Be strong and courageous, be not
afraid, nor dismayed, for the King of Assyria and his multitude, for there be
more with us then be with him; with him is an arm of flesh, but with us is the
Lord our God to help us, and to fight our battle; here was an army of 185000.
to affright him, but here was faith in the Lord of Hosts to establish him; Heb.
11.27. Moses feared not the wrath of the King, for he endured, as seeing him
who is invisible: by faith he saw the invisible God, and that made him hold
out against the King, though his wrath was hot, his looks fierce, his words
terrible, his face cruel; Moses knew, that what ever he lost for God, he
should find in God, Prove. 29.25. The fear of man brings a snare, but who so
puts his trust in the Lord shall be safe; man's fear brings a snare, and so
death; had Moses feared Pharaoh, he had compounded with him, and so ruined
himself and others, but he that puts his trust in the Lord shall be safe, The
Hebrew is, set on high, like a bird upon the wing, that is, out of the reach of
every snare and fowler, though never so cunning. Cardinal Borromaeus being
told of great danger from some who lay in wait for him, Si Deus mei curam non
habet, quid vivo?
said, An Deus est in mundo pro nihilo? Is God idle in the world? and Jahannes
Silentiarius, being in the like case, said, If God take not care of me, why do
I live?

3. Labor for purity and holiness; the most holy men are the least fearing
men: Paul was of great courage, he had much holiness, 1 These. 2.10. and when
the Viper leapt upon his hand, he feared not, it could not kill him, but he
could kill it; he shook it into the fire: Adam at first no creature could harm
him, because holy; in the lives of the Fathers, mention is made of one Abbas
Paulus, who handled Serpents and Scorpions, and cut them in pieces without any
hurt; and being asked how he came to this condition, said, If a man be holy,
all things are subject to him, as to Adam before his sin in Paradise; if our
hearts and consciences be polluted, we shall fear, if not fly, 1 Samuel 18.12.
Saul was afraid of David, he had great riches, many forces, yet fears David a
poor man, a banished, reproach't man; and Herod feared John, he was a holy man;
Magnas vires habet pietas, Job 17.9. The righous shall hold on his way, and he
that has clean hands, shall be stronger and stronger, Prove. 28.1. The
righteous is bold as a Lion; a man that is truly and thoroughly godly, that
knows nothing by himself, that has purged out every spot, and gotten off all
guilt, and needs not blush at any thing, past or present, he is a Lion, he is
a brass wall, nothing shall daunt him, but the wicked fly when none pursue.
Nehemiah was a holy man, and he would not fly, but Manasseh a wicked King,
hides himself among the thorns, and Adam runs to the thickets, they had
prickings without, and worse prickles within.

4. Value not life too much, let us be willing to lay out our lives in Gods
service, to spend and be spent for God: Acts 21.13. Paul said, I am ready, not
to be bound only, but to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus, he
prized the name of Christ above his life; and if we would prize something
above our lives, we should not so over-rate them, as through fear of man, to
lose better things to keep them; the Devil tells us, skin for skin, Job 2.4.
and all that a man has will he give for his life; true, all to save life, but
there are some things of more worth than man's life, as the glory of God, the
favor of God, the peace of God, truth of God, the name of Christ, etc. and we
should so account of them, and be ready to sacrifice our lives for them, Nehem.
6.11. he would not go into the Temple to save his life, he knew the glory of
God, the cause, work and people of God should suffer by it, and therefore he
would venture his life: So Basil, when threatened with cruel usuage and death,
said to him had the power in his hand, This body thou art Lord of only, not of
our faith, or the cause we stand for; and whereas swords, wild beasts, cutting
of our flesh, Potius nobis deliciae quam tormenta sunt.
etc. are threatened, these things are rather pleasures then terrors to us; we
look at better things then the world has, for which we are not unwilling to
lay out our lives: Rev. 12.11. the Worthies of those times loved not their
lives unto the death, they stood, bled, dyed for Christ and his Cause, who had
stood, bled, dyed for them. Another observation is; That it is the lot of the
righteous to dwell amongst the wicked; the Prophet here dwelt amongst
Scorpions, and was amidst Briers and Thorns, a sad habitation, yet such as is
common to the Saints: Lot dwelt in Sodom, and his righteous soul was vexed, 2
Pet. 2.8. it was pained, tormented, as a man upon the rack; and David dwelt
among those were enemies to peace, and it made him cry out, Woe is me, that I
so journ in Mesech: and dwell in the Tents of Kedar, Psalm. 120.5, 6. that is,
with ungodly and barbarous people: and it is not the condition of some few, but
the Church it self, Cant. 2.2. which is as a Lilly among Thorns; so was the
Church in Egypt, in Babylon, in the Primitive times amongst the persecuting
Emperors, and their officers; so in the time of Antichrist, and at this day,
it is among Thorns and Scorpions; but here is the comfort of it, God takes
notice thereof; Rev. 2.13. The Church of Pergamus dwelt where Satan's throne
was, where he bare most sway, had most honor, a multitude of servants, where
was great uncleanness, hot persecution; there did the Church of Pergamus
dwell, and what says the Text? I know thy works, and where thou dwell; I
know, that is, I take special notice of all thy works, wrongs, how the Thorns
do scratch, the Scorpions sting thee, and I will reward thee for all. 2 Pet.
2.9. After mention being made of Lots being vexed with the Sodomites, it is
said, The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temptation; he observes
who they are among, how they are tempted, and knows ways of deliverance for
them, and appears amongst them.

VER. 7. And thou shall speak my words unto them, whether they will bear, or
whether they will forbear, for they are most rebellious.


THere is nothing difficult in this Verse; the words, they are most rebellious,
in the original are, they are rebellion, in the abstract; noting the strength
and growth of their sin, of which has been spoken in the 5th Verse; only
observe from hence:

1. That the Messengers of God must speak the word of God; Thou shall speak my
words unto them, not thine own, not other men's, but my words; Gods words are
divine, verba vitae and mortis, and they must be spoken unto the people, not
our chaffy, powerless words; Matthew. 28.20. Teach them to observe what ever I
have commanded you; they must speak only that, and all that, nothing must they
dissemble or hide away.

2. That God cares not whether wicked, vile sinners hear or no, it is sufficient
to him that they refuse offers of grace, that is enough to justify him, and
condemn them, whether they will hear or forbear, it matters not, I shall
have my glory, and thou thy reward, what ever becomes of them. And God deals
roundly with them; so Christ in Mark 16.16. He that believes shall be saved,
and he that believes not shall be damned: yea, Joh. 3.18. He that believes
not, is condemned already; and when Christ sent out his Disciples, see how
quick and round he is with those should not receive them, and their word;
Matthew. 10.14. Whosoever shall not receive you and your words, when ye depart
out of that house or city, shake off the dust of your feet, as a testimony
against them: Mark 6.11. It shall be more easy for Sodom or Gomorrah then for
that house or city.

VER. 8, 9, 10. But thou Son of man, hear what I say unto thee; be not thou
rebellious, like that rebellious house, open thy mouth, and eat that I give
thee.

9 And when I looked, behold, a hand was sent unto me, and lo, a roll of a
book was therein.

10 And he spread it before me, and it was written within and without, and
there was written therein, lamentations, and mourning, and woe.


IN these Verses, besides Christ instructing of the Prophet, you have his
farther confirmation in his prophetical Office, and that by a visible sign, by
which he conveys the gift of prophesying unto Ezekiel; and it is by a roll of a
book, concerning which we have these things considerable: 1. The efficient
cause, or whence it came, a hand was sent unto me. 2. The material cause, a
roll of a book. 3. The opening of it, it was spread before me. 4. The contents
of it, lamentations, mourning and woe.


But before we come to this roll, and the particulars of it, we must speak of
Christ's instructions to the Prophet.

In the 8th Verse, where we have,

First, an exhortation, Son of man, hear what I say unto thee.

Secondy, a prohibition, be not thou rebellious, like that rebellious house.

Thirdly, a command, open thy mouth, and eat that I give thee.

The sum of the Verse is this; Ezekiel, says Christ, see thou hearken unto
my voice, whatsoever I say to thee, let that be acceptable; regard not what
men, what thine heart and carnal reason say to thee; but remember I am God and
King, I sit upon the Throne, my counsels and words must stand, be not thou
rebellious as the Jews are, let not their example, power, relation to thee,
make thee refuse to hear what I say, or to eat this visible and sacramental
sign which I give thee.

There is nothing difficult in the Verse to clear up unto you, only these
words, Open thy mouth, you may think superfluous, and that the word Eat had
been enough; but there is nothing idle in the Scripture, all is of weight, and
such weight, that heaven and earth shall pass away before one iota of Gods
Word: it is a rule among the learned, Vox qua videtur otiosa plurimum facit ad
effectum, it notes the ardent desire of Christ, that the Prophet should have
the benefit of this sacramental sign, and that he should be forward and ready
unto it, do any thing conduced that way.

Obser. 1. That those are to teach others, must first hear and be taught
themselves, they must hear Christ, and learn of him; Ezekiel must hear what
Christ says unto him, and then he would be fit to speak unto others: when the
Lord Christ sent out his Disciples he instructed them first, Matthew. 10. So the
Apostles were in doctrinated forty days together in the things pertaining to
the Kingdom of God, Acts 1.3. The institution of Churches, the Laws,
Government, Ordinances, Offices and Officers of them, they were instructed in;
and John in his first Epistle, Chap. 1. v. 3. says, That which we have seen
and heard declare we unto you; and so it was of the Prophets, what they heard,
that they spoke, Heb. 1.1. God spoke unto the fathers by the Prophets, he first
spoke to the Prophets, and in them to the Fathers; the Ministers and Messengers
of God must hear Christ first, and then declare his mind; be obedient unto
his commands, and then mention and publish his Will.

2. God looks for more from them he calls to any service then from others; and
thou Son of man, be not thou rebellious, I expect other things at thy hand, I
look thou should be as tractable as they have been untractable, as dutiful
as they have bin rebellious, you see who have been most active among them
against me, I look thou should be as active in thy place for me; those God
does put honor upon, and set in public places, it is equal he should have
much from, yea, more then from others: says Paul, The Lord Christ enabled me,
counted me faithful, put me into the Ministry, 1 Timothy 1.12. and 1 Cor 15.10.
His grace which was bestowed upon me was not in vain, but I labored more
abundantly then they all. God had done much for him, expected it as his hands;
and he deceived not expectation.

3. See here, what God accounts rebellion, we think it must be some great
notorious thing that makes a Rebel or rebellious; but there is great
difference between the judgment of men, and judgment of God. If Ezekiel
should be difficult and backward to his work he called him unto, he would
count it rebellion, if he would not hear and do what God bid him, he should
be numbered among the rebellious; if he did not hear every thing that Christ
spoke, quecunque ad te loquar audi, so the words are read by Calvin, and the
original bears it; if there should be a crossing of Gods will in any thing,
in the least thing, in refusing to hear or do, it should be before him
rebellion; Isa. 1.20. If ye refuse and rebel, refusing to hear Gods Will and
to do it, being heard, is rebellion against God: so in 1. Sam. 12.15. If ye
will not obey the voice of the Lord, but rebel against the Commandment; not
obeying God, what ever precence we have, is rebellion.

4. That we must nor follow the examples and ways of sinful men, be not thou
rebellious like that rebellious house; they have set an ill example before
thee, do not thou imitate them, they have writ a foul copy, write not after
them, they have walked in wrong paths, do not trace their steps; such men
usually are, as those they live with; it is easy to grow naught, if we live
among those are naught: Joseph learned to swear in Pharaohs Court, and Peter
to Judaise among the Jews; Praecepta ducunt, exempla trahunt.
Consent and example of others, is like a mighty torrent that carries down all
before it; Example is a potent thing: Gal. 2.14. Why compellest thou the
Gentiles to Judaize? Paul tells Peter, that there was a compulsory virtue and
force in his example, to draw the Gentiles into evil; and it is certain, the
customs, traditions, persuasions and examples of friends, are of much
prevalency; that Christ foresaw, and arms the Prophet against them, hear what
I say, not what they say, let them say what they will, regard it not, only let
my words have place in thee, and power with thee. But thou will object and say,
They are my friends that persuade me, my kindred, mine own flesh and blood
that counsel me, they are great ones, yea, all, Prince and People, that go
that way, they are my parents that command me to do so, and I may sin in
refusing to hearken unto them, the Lord Christ takes off all these and other
objections, be not rebellious as they have been, and are, but consider; are
they friends, kindred, great, Parents? and have they and theirs long been in
that way? know, that I that speak to thee, am thy friend, and best friend thou
have; I am thy kinsman, I am here in the form of the Son of man, and to suffer
in thy nature hereafter, that thou may be the Son of God, I am thy brother,
who has redeemed thee from sin, death and hell; if others be great, I am
greater then they, and my Throne is above all thrones; if they be thy parents,
I am thy everlasting Father, Isa. 9.6. and as I have had everlasting care of
thee, so do give thee everlasting Laws and Rules of worship and godliness, in
comparison of whose light and wisdom all men are darkness and folly; and
what? will you prefer friends, kindred, great ones, parents, any before me? be
not rebellious like them, but hearken unto me, and let them go, make no league
with them, that are wicked and rebellious, Exodus 34.12. do not imitate their
worship, match not into their families, feast not at their tables; choose none
of their ways, Prove. 3.31. and Romans 12.2. Be not conformed to this world, but
be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind; that is, do not make the
manners of the world, the rule of your life, nor the worship of the world, the
rule of your worship, but look higher; let not your corrupt minds, that will
carry you after a corrupt world, a corrupt worship, and corrupt manners prevail
with you, but receive new light from Christ and the Gospel into your minds, and
then you will be transformed, you will reject all old ways, old traditions and
examples of men, and will be lead by Christ, and live by his Rules and Laws;
and thus we may be wiser then our forefathers and teachers: Psalm. 119.99, 100.
I have more understanding then all my teachers, says David, and I understand
more then the Ancient; Pro faecibus humanis. Non tam spectandum quid Romae
fiat, quam quid fieri debeat.
and what was the ground of it? he made Gods Law and Word his meditation, his
Rule: and those in these later days, that have done so, have got more
understanding then their teachers, and are wiser then the Ancients that are for
humane inventions, it is laws not examples we must look too: and the Lawyers
have a rule very useful, men must consider, not what is done, but what ought
to be done.

5. That it is the Lords prerogative to appoint significant typical and
sacramental signs: Eat what I give thee, that was the roll which was
sacramental, and signified the gift of prophecy; No man may lift up a creature
to a higher spiritual excellency, then what God has set it in by nature; what
mortal had power to have put upon the brazen Serpent a typicalnesse to
represent Christ? who had power to make the Rainbow a sign of the Covenant
between God and man? who could make the Temple a type of Christ, but he that
filled the Temple with glory? and who can institute Sacraments, ordinary or
extraordinary, but God and Christ? in them always is a Command and a Promise
of grace, which falls not within the compass of man's power.

6. That the Lord Christ provides meat for his servants: Eat what I give thee;
Christ had prophetical meat for him, a roll to give him. It Is from Christ,
that truths come: As a Nurse prepares meat for the child, and puts it into the
mouth of the child, so does Christ here, he ever gives seed to his sowers; he
furnishes his with abilities, if they want books he will provide them.

VER. 9. And when I looked, behold, a hand was sent unto me, and lo, a roll of
a book was therein.


HEre we have the efficient isntrumental and material cause to treat of: A
hand was sent unto me; sent from Christ; there could not be a hand without
some Author, he that sat upon the Throne, and made all, he made, he sent this
hand; no mention is made of any arm or body; a hand might write it, and reach
it forth; Dan. 5.5. there was in Belshazzars sad vision; the fingers of a hand
came forth, and wrote upon the plaster of the wall, nothing but a hand
appeared; had there been no hand, the Prophet might have doubted whence it
came, taken it for some casual thing; but being reached out by a hand, it was
evident to him, it came from heaven, even him that he saw so glorious, fell
down before, and was comforted by.

The material cause is, A roll of a book, Megillath Sepher: the Ancients at
first writ in barks of trees, afterward in skins of beasts, which they call
Pergamena, vellum, or parchment, supposing them to be invented at Pergamus, by
King Attalus, where was a famous Library of parchments and manuscripts, but
rouls of vellume or parchment were before that time. Ezekiels vision was long
before the Roman Monarchy; Attalus lived when that flourished, and having no
issue, made the Roman State heir to his crown; but rouls were in Isaiah's
days, Chapt. 8.1. Take thee a great roll; yea, in David's days, Psalm. 40.8. In
the volume of thy book, Bimgillath Sepher, in the roll of thy book. They are
very ancient, and called rouls from the rouling them up about Cedar, or some
precious wood, that they might be the better preserved. The Law and Prophets
were written in such rouls, and when they unrouled them, the Jewish Doctors
used to expound them, Nihil est vetustum in principum Archivis quod non sit
scriptum in voluminibus, Calv.
as is gathered from that place, Luke 4.17. These rouls are in practice to this
day in the Jewish Synagogue, and they have their Thorah or Law written in one
volume, and rouled up, as Paraeus observes on the 5th of the Revel. Kings have
their Courts of Rouls. And there is nothing ancient in the Courts and Libraries
of Princes, in their Treasury of Monuments, but is written in rouls or volumes.

For the signification of this Roll, some make it to signify the secret
counsels of God; it is true, they were written in it, but not signified by it.
The Roll here, is symbolum Prophetiae, a typical sign of the gift of prophecy
to be given to the Prophet, and in that sense we are to take it.

Observe. 1. That the Lord Christ does at his pleasure put forth creative and
infinite virtue to effect what he speaks: Eat what I give thee, and presently
a Hand is created, a Roll is presented unto the Prophet, which none could have
done, being destitute of divine power. Christ has a Hand in readiness always
to do what he will have done; he has sometimes a visible hand to do it, as
here; sometime an invisible, when he called Lazarus forth of the grave, he had
an hand invisible to effect it, when he bid the dead to hear, the dumb to
speak, the lame to walk, Devils to depart their habitation, he had an
invisible hand that effected those things; so in Acts 11.20, 21. when some of
the Brethren had preached the Lord Christ, and faith in him, it is said
presently the hand of the Lord was with him, and a great number believed; there
was a secret hand of divine power effecting that in their hearts, which the
Disciples preached in their ears: And Acts 4.30. Christ has a hand to stretch
forth, and to heal, to heal soul diseases, and bodily too, to heal State and
Church diseases, Mat. 8.2, 3. The Leper said to Christ, Lord, if thou will,
thou can make me clean, and Jesus put forth his hand, and touched him,
saying: I will, be thou clean; and immediately his Leprosy was cleansed; if we
would look to Christ as this Leper did, we might find and feel the hand of
Christ.

2. That the Lord does often times extraordinary things for the encouragement
and confirmation of his servants in their Function; Here is a Hand and a Roll
reached out to Ezekiel. Jeremiah is fearful and backward to the work of God,
and God to encourage and establish him, puts forth his hand, Exodus 4.
and touches his mouth, Jer. 1.9. Moses he is doubting, and pleading with God
to dismiss him, but by the miracles of the serpentined and unserpentined rod,
of the leprozed and unleprozed hand, he confirms in his call to that great and
hard service; Isaiahs lips are touched with a coal from the Altar in the hand
of a Seraphim, his iniquity is purged, and so he is heartened to his work,
Isa. 6. Christ breathed upon his Apostles, and said Receive the Holy Ghost,
Joh. 20.22. By these extraordinary things they were consecrated to, and
confirmed in their offices.

3. That there is a near conjunction, and sweet Analogy between the symbols
the Lord Christ uses, and the things intended; Christ intends here the gift of
Prophecy to confirm that upon Ezekiel; Now what is the external sign or
symbol? it is a book written full of prophetical things, and so did fitly
resemble the thing intended: in all the symbols that God had used in the old
and new Testament in a sacramental way, there have been fit Analogies between
them and the thing signified and intended by them; Circumcision, the Paschall
Lamb, water in Baptism, Bread and Wine in the Supper of the Lord, do set out
the manifold wisdom of God and Christ in accommodating symbols so near to the
truth, and holding it forth so livelily; and the wisdom of Christ appeared in
conveying the gift of prophecy by a Roll of a book. From this example of
Christ, giving a Roll to Ezekiel, some conceive, springs that custom in the
Universities, at the creation of Doctors, it is done by reaching them out a
Book, but how warrantable, I leave to judgment; they do it, may give them
volumen, but not rem voluminis; if they had given them the gift of prophecy,
we should never had so many unpreaching Doctors and Prelates.

4. That the gift of Prophecy is from Christ; he reached out a Hand, and gave
the roll of a Book; he is the great Prophet, and has all Prophecy and
prophetical power in himself, and whom he pleases, he can make a Prophet,
and inspire with prophetical virtue, and where he pleases, even in Babylon as
well as in Canaan.

VERSE. 10. And he spread it before me, and.


IN this Verse ye have the opening of the Roll, the fullness and contents of
it; He spread it before me, that is, unrouled it, and laid it open before me.
The word in the original signifies to expound and interpret, and we may
conceive that Christ did not only spread the roll before his eyes, Expanditur
quando hoc quod obscure prolatum fucrat per latitudinem intellectus aperitur,
Greg.
but caused him to understand it; by this spreading, he saw it was written
within and without, but by Christ's interpretation of it, he knew that there
were written in it, lamentations, mourning and woes.

It was written within and without.
The Hebrew is, in the face, and in the back; that is, on both sides, such
writings the Greeks call Opisthographa, that is, writings writ on the backside,
filled within and without. Lavater thinks, that on one side were writ their
sins, and on the other Gods judgments; this fullness of the Roll intimates,
either the length of the prophecy, as Vatablus conceives, or a multitude of
evils hanging over the heads of the Jews, as Maldonate thinks, or the
abundance of revelations committed to the Prophet, as Jun. not what Jerome and
Bellarmine conceit, that the writing within and without, should note the
literal and mystical sense of the Scripture.

Lamentations, mourning and woe.
Here is the contents of the Roll, bitter and sad things, Amara and moesta.
the burning of the Temple, the overthrow of Jerusalem, the captivity of the
Jewish nation, and all the evil should befall them; the word Kinim,
Lamentation, notes a plain complaint, a sad speech, testifying the sorrows of
mind; as David in the case of Absalom, O Absalom, Absalom, etc. this was a
natural complaint, and simple lamentation, suddenly breaking forth, without
all premeditation.

Mourning is more, it is deeper, and upon consideration; the word in the
Hebrewis from Hagah, to meditate, and notes, suspirium ab imo pectore tractum;
when one has mused much, and seriously upon the cause and matter of grief, and
then fetches deep sighs, such as are inditiall of intense and bitter sorrows,
that is the mourning here; Isa. 38.14. I did mourn like a Dove, the Hebrew is,
I will meditate, noting mourning that comes from meditation; the Doves mourning
is inward. Cranes chatter and lament, Doves mourn.

Woe.
This word vehi, notes not only the voice in lamentations and groans in
mourning, but knocking of the breast, and clapping of the hands together, as is
used in greater afflictions; thus some Interpreters understand it; but I
conceive by Woe here, is meant the threatenings of Judgment, or Judgments
threatened, according to those woes in Matthew. 23. and the fruit of them, as
it is, Lam. 5.16.

Observe. 1. That divine mysteries are unknown to men, though very easy and
familiar, till they be unfolded; this Roll could the Prophet never have
comprehended the meaning of, if Christ had not opened it; take all the types
and ceremonies of the Law, there were mysteries wrapped up in them, which
neither Aaron nor Moses had known, if they had been left to their own
abilities; those elements used in Baptism and the Supper of the Lord, we
should never have known the mysteries of them, if heaven had not helped us:
would we think the Rainbow an Emblem of mercy, if Scripture had not held it
out to us? Indians, Heathens, do not, cannot so apprehend it; take any divine
mysteries, they are too transcendent for our capacities; there be depths in
them that we cannot fathom, 2 Cor. 2.14. the natural man cannot know the
things of God, they are spiritually discerned, there must be a great mystery
wrought in him before he can discern mysteries.

2. It Is the Lord Christ that opens and interprets mystical things,
efficaciously unto the faithful, he spread the Roll before Ezekiel, and made
him to understand the mysteries of it; what is the Scriptures but a roll folded
up? a book sealed till Christ open it; we may all say as the Eunuch, being
demanded if he understood what he read; said, How can I, except some man guide
me? Act. 8.30, 31. so unless Christ guide us, and lead us into the mysteries
of the Word, we cannot understand, Rev. 5.5. When none could open the book
sealed up, the Lion of the tribe of Judah could do it. He has strength to
untie all knots, and a spirit to search all deeps; Christ himself is the
greatest mystery, and he is the great opener of mysteries, Matthew. 11.27. All
things are delivered to me and my Father, and no man knows the Father, save
the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him; if ever God be made known
savingly to the soul, it must be by the Lord Christ; and he does not reveal
unto all, but to whomsoever he will, to his Elect ones, from others he
conceals him, they have the Letter, the Roll, but not the mystery thereof,
their light is darkness. But there be some in the world, that Christ does
interpret the riddles and dark things of the Scripture unto; see that place in
Joh. 15.15. Hence, first says Christ, I call ye not servants, for the servant
knows not what his Lord does, but I have called you friends, for all things
that I have heard of my father, I make known unto you; these were Christ's
friends, Christ revealed all to them, but from other all was kept; it was
Christ revealed unto the Prophets, what they had, and to the Apostles what they
had; the Scripture may well be called the Revelation of Christ: you have one
Book called so, Rev. 1.1. The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto
him, to show unto his servants, that is, his faithful ones: if we would
therefore understand the Roll of the Book, the mysteries in the Scripture, we
must look up to Christ, and entreat him to spread them before our eyes, and to
interpret them to our hearts.

3. That the servants of God must not refuse to receive and propound large and
sad messages to the people: Here is a Roll, writ within and without, and filled
with lamentations, mourning and woe. Here was liber mortis, a book of death,
and deadly things; this the Prophet must receive, and declare to the people,
how ever they take it; people would gladly hear from the men of God good
tidings, they would have a law of kindness in our lips, our mouths to drop
honey; they would have us sons of consolation, but we must speak what our
great Lord and Master puts into the ^oul, if he bid us preach lamentations,
mournings and woes, we must do it.

4 That the Lord gives to his Prophets, truh's suitable to his Providence:
Here Is a Roll, full of lamentations, mournings and woes; sad things, and such
things the Lord was bringing upon them; there is a sweet Analogy between Gods
Word and Works. His works are his Word fulfilled, Psalm. 148.8. Fire and hail,
snow and vapor, storm wind, fulfilling his Word, when there is thunder and
lightning, snowes, rains and winds, these are fulfillings of Gods Word, no
providence do cross his Word, but all perform it. Gods works are the best
Commentaries upon his Word; and had we the wisdom to bring his Word and Works
together, we should see a sweet harmony between them. This Roll given the
Prophet, and Gods proceedings with the Jews after, were proportionable, they
felt what here was writ; all that is done in world now, is the fulfilling of
what is writ, when God gave John his Revelation, he laid in truths to suit with
his providence and works to the end of the world; it is liber providentialis,
and many things in it are acting in our days, and before our eyes, though we
discern it not; there be truths for these times, and it is their advantage that
can take them up.

5. That dreadful things hang over the head of a sinful guilty Nation.

Ezekiel, Chap. 3. Ver. 1, 2, 3. 1. Moreover, he said, Son of man, Eat that
thou find, eat this Roll, and go speak unto the House of Israel.

2. So I opened my mouth, and he caused me to eat that Roll.

3. And he said unto me, Son of man, cause thy belly to eat, and fill thy
bowels with the roll that I give thee. Then did I eat, and it was in my mouth,
as honey for sweetness.


THese words, and to the end of the 15th Verse, by some Expositers, are made
part of the second Chapter, and when the division of Chapters was made, (about
457. years since) it had been more suitable to have ended the second Chapter at
the 4th or 15th Verse of this Chapter, then where it is; but we will take it
as we find it. In the Chapter, you have,

1. A farther Narration of Ezekiels Call, to the 12th Verse.

2. A Declaration of what befell him thereupon, from the 12th to the 16th.

3. A new Revelation, with the events following it, unto the end of the Chapter.

In the first part of the Chapter you have two things:

The first is the continuance of Christ, his Speech, and the Prophets actions
about the sacramental sign, viz. the Roll.

Secondly, a renewall of his sending to prophecy, which is from the third
verse to the 12th.

In these Verses is little that needs explaining; that has most difficulty in
it, is the eating of the roll; what eating is here meant? how could the Prophet
eat a great roll (a thing not credible) without prejudice of his health, life,
or both?

Answ. He that commanded him to eat, could have prevented all danger and
prejudice, if the eating had been corporal and literal; but it is conceived
here, that the eating was not literal, but spiritual, per visionem, says one
Expositer, non re ipsa, sed spiritu, says another; and that in the 10th Verse
of the Chapter confirms us in it, where it is said, All my words that I shall
speak unto thee, receive in thine heart, and hear with thine ears, this was
the eating, to hear, meditate, and believe, his journey was spiritual, his
work was spiritual; he was to go and prophecy, and such was his meat,
spiritual meat, and spiritually eaten.

But why is he bid to eat the roll? had not seeing and reading been more
suitable? look on it, read it; why is the mouth brought in rather then the eye
or ear?

Answ. The Scripture does attribute excellency to, and place natural and
supernatural virtue, in that organ or sense by which it is exercised, Genesis 2.7.
God breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, the meaning is, he put a
soul into him; the nostrils are not the seat of the soul, but because the
breath in the nostrils does manifest the presence of the soul in man, and
discovers it, therefore it is said, he breathed into his nostrils the breath of
life: and so here, Ezekiel is said to eat the roll; not to see or hear it,
because by the mouth, the gift of prophecy which was given him by the roll,
was to be manifested and discovered to the people.

Cause thy belly to eat.
Could his, or can any man's belly eat? this seems a strange speech; but take
it thus: eating is taken in Scripture, not only for chewing, but for all the
actions belonging to meat, as concoction and consumption of it: (...)
and the Hebrew word signifies to eat, to dissolve, to consume, and so; that
sword and fire in Scripture are said to eat, that is, to dissolve, and to
destroy; the meaning then is, do thou by this roll, as the stomach and belly do
by meat, when they get good thereby, the one does not presently reject, nor the
other transmit, but they retain the meat, draw out all the virtue, concoct it,
live and work in the strength of it: so here, let thy belly eat, that is,
concoct, digest the truths thou hear, by serious meditation, and by faith;
do not like those that have weak and sickly stomachs, that quickly return what
they receive, and get no benefit thereby; but do thou take in all the arguments
and truths of this roll; do thou so concoct and consume them by the stomach and
belly of meditation and faith, that they may become thy nutriment, thou may
feel the power and efficacy of them in thine heart, and act accordingly.

And fill thy bowels.
Satisfy thy self, take enough, be not content with a little.

Observe. 1. That our obedience unto Christ must be absolute and simple; Eat
that thou find, says Christ, what ever thou find; there might something
unsavory, bitter, have been tendered to the Prophet, even that which nature
abhors; how ever he must eat it, not dispute the case, but yield obedience;
when Christ commands, blind obedience is the best, to do it upon that ground,
Authoritas pracipientis est ratio praecepti.
and no other, here the commanders will is warrant for the fact, Luke 5.5. this
prevailed with Peter, Master, we have toiled all night, and have taken
nothing, nevertheless at thy word I will let down the net. Christ's word was
all unto him, he looked not at his labor lost, at his gain to come, but at the
word of Christ, and that was warrant enough to him: so other Apostles, when
Christ called them, and bid them follow him, they left all, and straightway
followed him; they consulted not with flesh and blood, they made no objections,
chose not what they would themselves, but submitted to Christ's will: Abraham
left his country at Gods call, and knew not whither he should go, and this was
true obedience; with men we must not be so tractable, as to do things merely
upon their wills and commands, they are no gods, their wills and power are no
rules, they may sin, we must give account; and therefore may, and must examine,
prove all things, and hold fast that which is good; humane things, it is our
duty, it is wisdom and safety to question, and search into, but divine things
are without dispute and all questioning to be believed and obeyed, therefore
says Christ, Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you, Joh.
15.14. then we show the greatest love to Christ, when we give him absolute
obedience.

2. That the symbols and truths which Christ gives, are the meat that the souls
of Prophets and Ministers must feed upon; Eat what thou find; eat this roll:
it is this emphatically, other rouls and books they may look into, but this they
must eat; the Book of Christ is the book for their studies; many Scholars
study other books more then the Scriptures, then the rouls of Christ, they are
Heluones librorum, book-eaters, Fathers, Schoolmen, Historians, Poets and
Pamphlets; they devour, and are least acquainted with the Scriptures, but
Christ's command is to eat this roll, search the Scriptures, meditate in the Law
night and day, he sends us to no other. A young disciple asking an old Rabbi,
whether he might not have time to learn the Greek tongue, said; if he would do
it neither by night nor by day, he might, because by night and day he was to
study the Law; hereby he intimated, that scholars greatest study should be in
the Word of God; Paul therefore exhorts Timothy to give attendance to reading,
to exhortation, to doctrine, he bids him meditate upon these things, give
himself wholly to them; 1 Timothy 4.15. his whole strength and time should be in
them; man's life is short, and if it were never so long, it should be spent in
the knowledge of the holy Scriptures: when Paul was at the gates of death, 2 Timothy 4.6. you shall find he sends for the Books and Parchments, Paul would
study them over again; it is said of Ambrose, that to his death he ceased not to
write Commentaries, and expound Scriptures, and dyed at that in the Psalm,
Great is the Lord, Epistola Dei ad hom nes missa, Aug 2. sermon. in Ps. 90. Omnia
etiam minima plena sunt sensu, mysterio and spiritu, Bas. Hom. 6.
and greatly to be praised. This Book they must eat, read, study, with great
diligence, and make it their own: Alphonsus King of Aragon, read over the
Scriptures some twelve or fourteen times, notwithstanding his great and
public employments: and one of note read over the new Testament with Beza's
larger notes sixteen times in three years; the Scriptures are heavens Epistles
sent to men, it cannot be read too often, being full of divine mysteries.

3. That when Ministers and Messenges of God have eaten and digested the truths
of God, then they are fit to go and preach them to the people of God. Eat this
roll, and go; first eat, then go; Elijah must eat, and then take his journey;
and so Ministers must first eat themselves, then feed others; if the Nurse her
self do not eat, she will have no milk for her child, if she eat and do not
digest, turn it into blood and milk, all is in vain: so the Messengers of God
must turn what they eat, what they read, in succum and sanguinem; and then,
being their own, in their hearts and bowels, they will speak from the heart.

4. That faith is requisite to the receipt of spiritual things, he opened his
mouth, and eat the roll, he received the truths and believed; look how
necessary a mouth is to take in the meat of the body, to chew it, and send it
down to the other parts, else there is no benefit comes to a man by it; so
necessary is faith to take in the spiritual food of the soul: Faith is the
mouth and stomach of the soul, if that receive in truths, digest and send them
to the organs of actions, benefit accrues to the man, if not, prejudice. Joh.
6.35, 36. Christ tells them that he is the Bread of life, that he comes to him
shall never hunger, and that he believes on him shall never thirst, but ye
have seen me and believe not: though Christ were Bread and Water of life,
because they had no faith, no mouth to eat and drink thereof, therefore they
had no benefit, and as a man that can receive no food must die; so here, Joh.
8.24. If ye believe not that I am he, you shall die in your sins; here is
prejudice irreparable, death eternal for want of faith: our Prophet received
the fruits Christ tendered, and got by them; all Believers are or may be
gainers by the truths of Christ, 1 These. 2.13. The word wrought effectually in
them that believed: Faith makes good concoction of that meat, and answerable
operation; But Heb. 4.2. The word preached did not profit them, not being mixed
with faith in them that heard it, where is no faith to receive into the soul,
there is no profit, the ear may set it into the head, but faith must bring it
into the heart, and keep it there, till it be spirit and life to the man. The
original is, the word of hearing did not profit them, being not united by
faith to them that heard.

Observe. 1. (...) signifies sculpere as well as aperire, God opened the roll
for me to read, and I opened my heart for him to write.
The godly must act and put forth their graces toward farther reception of
spiritual things: when Christ will give Ezekiel donum Prophetiae, a Roll to
eat; he opens his mouth, he sets awork his faith to receive this gift of
Prophecy; faith in the habit is like the mouth shut up, nothing enters, but
in exercise it is like the mouth open and ready to receive; it is infinite mercy
that God at any time will offer us spiritual favors and excellencies; we
should therefore be forward, and stir up our souls and graces to the receipt of
such mercies. It Is a lazy and ill excuse for godly ones to say they can do
nothing; Grace is an active and an inabling thing, and where there is a
principle of life (as all godly men have) there is a specificall difference
between that man and another has it not; a man without it, cannot act and stir
up himself to a further reception of spiritual things, because he is dead,
but a man has it, can, and ought to quicken up his own soul to spiritual
things. The Prophet had received the Spirit that entered into him, and he
opened his mouth, exercised his faith, to take what the Lord should give: the
Apostle Paul bids Timothy stir up the gift of God that was in him, 2 Timothy 1.6.
he would have men deal with their gifts and graces, (...).
as they do with fire under the ashes, they blow them off, and blow the fire
up; and there is a flame fit for service: sloth, fear, infirmity, carnal
reason, are ashes that do often cover divine fire, that it seems dead; but we
must stir up our selves, blow off those ashes, and blow up the fire of grace,
that it may burn and shine, be useful to our selves and others. The Prophet
complains in Esa. 64.7. There is no man that stirs up himself to take hold
of me; they are like men asleep, that sit still and do nothing. The Vulgar is,
Non est quic onsurgat.

6. When man has done all he can, the efficacy and fruit is from God; Ezekiel
opened his mouth, but the Lord Christ caused him to eat the roll, he makes it
effectual; it is not our stirring up our graces, opening our hearts, putting
forth our selves to the utmost, that will make an Ordinance effectual, without
Christ; it is he must do the deed, Joh. 15. Without me ye can do nothing:
Ezekiel could not eat the roll, nor digest it, being eaten, not act, being
digested; and so the Apostles, though branches in the Vine, could draw no sap
from the root, unless that sent it up; when sent up, could not send it forth
without him; if send it forth into clusters, could not ripen it without him;
all is from him, he gives grace, exercises, strengthens and prospers grace;
Paul may plant, but there is no rooting of those plants but by Christ; Apollo
may water, but no growth, no increase, but by Christ, 1 Cor. 3.6.

7. Ministers, and all should feed liberally upon the Word; Fill thy bowels
with this roll, not taste of it a little, but feed and fill themselves; there
is great variety in the rouls of God, and we may feed upon them all, and fill
our selves with divine truth; Matthew. 13.52. Every Scribe instructed to the
Kingdom of heaven has a treasury of things new and old; as a Householder has
all meats, wines, household stuff and furniture that is needful, both old and
new; so should a servant of God have, old and new truths, those of Moses and
the Prophets, and the Mysteries of the Gospel also. Col. 3.16. Let the Word of
God dwell in you richly; he means not some part of it, but the whole Word of
God; it is not limited to any part, but spoken indefinitly, and so includes all;
and it must not be in the Assemblies, in the Houses only, but it must be in
you, and dwell in you, you must know it, and have it in readiness, as you know
those dwell in the house with you, and are ready to do any service for you. The
Corinthians were enriched in all knowledge; and we should so abound with
divine knowledge, that there should be no place for errors in us; the Word of
God should be in our hearts, in our heads, in our lips, in our lives, we all
should be like Ezekiels roll, written within and without.

8. The Word of God is sweet and delightful to the soul, it was as honey for
sweetness; there is nothing more sweet then honey; the word is, as sweet as
it: yea, Psalm. 19.10. Sweeter then the honey, or the honey comb, the greatest
sweetness is in the Word of any thing in the world. The sweetness is in the
Revelations of the Counsels and Mysteries of God and Christ, which is sweet to
know; for knowledge is pleasant, Prove. 2.10. And the more excellent the
knowledge, the more pleasant it is. It Is a word of life, Phil. 2.16. and life
is sweet, and the more spiritual the life is, the more sweet still, it
converts the soul, Psalm. 19.7. it is Pabulum animae, called by Peter, (...), 1
Pet. 2.2. sincere milk, and that is sweet, nourishing unto eternal life. It Is
the grace of God brings salvation, Tit. 2.11. and the power of God to
salvation, Romans 1.16. and herein is sweetness; it sanctifies, Joh. 17. it
comforts the soul in all straits and afflictions; Psalm. 119.29. I had perished
in mine affliction, unless thy Law had been my delight: it satisfies the
conscience, which nothing else can do. It shows the equity of Gods judgments
and dealings with wicked men; and so the sharpest threats, and most dreadful
judgments, are sweet to a gracious heart: here was a Roll full of
lamentations, mournings and woe, and yet when the Lord commends it to Ezekiel,
he finds sweetness in it; not that he was not sensible and affected with the
miseries coming upon him; for he was not withous natural affection; but seeing
the righteousness of God in his judgments toward them, he could not but be
affected with a spiritual joy, and find sweetness therein, his Will being
revealed, and that which a gracious heart rests in.

VERSE. 4, etc. 4. And he said unto me, Son of m^^ (...), get thee unto the
house of Israel, and speak with my words unto them.

5. For thou art not sent unto a people of a strange Speech, and of a hard
Language, but to the house of Israel.

6. Not to many people of a strange Speech, and of hard Language, whose words
thou can not understand; surely, had I sent thee to them, they would have
hearkened unto thee.

7. But the house of Israel will not hearken unto thee; for they will not
hearken unto me: for all the house of Israel are impudent and hard-hearted.

8. Behold, I have made thy face strong against their faces, and thy forehead
strong against their foreheads.

9. As an Adamant, harder then flint, have I made thy forehead: fear them not,
neither be dismayed at their looks, though they be a rebellious house.

10. Moreover, he said unto me, Son of man, all my words that I shall speak
unto thee, receive in thine heart, and hear with thine ears.

11. And go, get thee to them of the captivity, unto the people, and speak unto
them, and tell them, Thus says the Lord God, Whether they will hear, or
whether they will forbear.


IN these Verses is a renewall of the Prophets sending to his Prophetical
Function, and they have in them matter of encouragement, and manifestation what
he must expect:

1. Matter of encouragement; And

1. In that he was not sent to a people of a strange language that understood
him not, Verse. 5, 6. that would be discouragement, to preach to a people should
not know what a man said; this was not the Prophets case, but he was to go to
the house of Israel, whom he knew, whose language he understood, who also
understood his.

2. In that Christ had strengthened and fitted him for that service, Verse. 8.9.
and would yet do more for him, give him more truths, reveal more Prophetical
things unto him, Verse. 10.

3. That it should be all one to him, whether they heard the Prophet or not,
Verse. 11.

The other thing is, manifestation what he must expect:

1. More from Heathens then from them, Verse. 6. end: surely, had I sent thee to
them, they would have hearkened.

2. Obstinate refusal of him and his Prophecy, Verse. 7. The house of Israel
will not hearken unto thee: and it is proved by a double argument:

First, they will not hearken unto me, is an argument from the greater. If
they will not hear me their God, they will not hear thee my servant, their
Prophet.

2. Is from their disposition, and the universality of it; for all the house of
Israel are impudent and hard-hearted. And then a repetition of his mission, in
the 11th Verse.

I shall open what is difficult in the Verses, and then give you some
observations out of them.

The words in the 5th Verse; of a strange speech and hard language, and the
same in the 6th Verse are expounded in that place in Isa. 33.19. In the
original the words are deep of lip, and heavy of tongue, or rather a people
of depths of lip, and heaviness of tongue; (...)
In the word depths, there is a Metalepsis, depths are dark and difficult, hard
to be understood; it is not so here; thou art not sent to such a people, a
people of a hard and heavy language, of an unknown tongue; the Septuagint has
it thus: not to a people of a deep lip, or heavy tongue, (...), ad polum
profundilabium and gravilinguem.
thou art sent to a people that understand thee, and what thou say, and whom
thou do understand also. It Is not with thee as it was with Jonas, he was
sent to a people of a strange speech, and hard language; I send thee not to
Egyptians, to Chaldeans, but to Israelites, not Parthians, Scythians, etc. but
though thou art in Babylon, where was the confusion of tongues, yet thou art to
go to the House of Israel, and speak to them, that have heard Moses and other
Propets before, and me in them.

In the 7th Verse it is said, the house of Israel are impudent, and
hard-hearted; the Hebrew is, strong of face, and hard of heart, the same with
those words in the second Chapter, v. 4. only the difference is, that in Chapt.
2. it is d^^i faciebus, and here it is d^ri cord, there it is robusti cord, and
here it is robusti front.

(...)
In the 9th Verse it is, as an Adamant harder then a flint, have I made thy
forehead; Keshamir, the word Shamir signifies a Brier, Isa. 5.6. There shall
come up briers, Shamir, a Brier, and it is from Shamar, custodire, servare,
because a Brier by its prickles does preserve it self; it signifies also a hard
and flinty stone, Ab^ and (...).
such as an Adamant is, which is lapis servabilis, because it keeps it self by
its hardness from all injuries; no weather, no violence of hammer or fire will
conquer it; so much the name Adamant imports, being lapis indomabilis, Zach.
7.12. Plin. lib. 37.
They have made their hearts as an Adamant: there be four sorts, The Arabic,
Macedonian, Cyprian, and Indian, which is the chiefest.

(...)
Harder then a flint; it is in the Hebrew, strong above a rock. By these
expressions are set out, the invincible courage and constancy that God would
give the Prophet; Nec pudere ^^in^retur, nec m^tu taceret aut pal. ^^sce^e.
such as neither shame nor fear should prevail against.

In the 10th Verse; All my words receive into thy heart, and hear with thine
ears: it is (...), the last first, and first last, bear with thine ears, and
receive into thine heart.

Observe. 1. That those are sent of God, must speak with, or in gods words:
says Paul, What I have received of the Lord, that I deliver, not what I have
received of men, of learned Heathens and Jews; not what I had of mine own,
but, what I received of the Lord, his words, his institutions, Gods words are
weighty, and have divine authority in them, but man's are weak like himself.

2 From the 5th and 6th Verses observe:

1. That it is God determines and disposes of his Prophets and Ministers, for
their places and people; what places they shall be in, what number they shall
be over; Thou art not sent to a people of a strange language, not to many
people, but to the house of Israel. God had the power in his hand to have sent
him to other Nations, great, mighty, of an unknown language, but he set him
among Israelites, Acts 20.28. it is a divine constitution.

2. That men called of God to do him service in the Church, should not be
discouraged, what ever difficulties are before them. Thou art not sent unto a
people of a strange speech, not to many; this implies, that if he were sent to
these, he should go willingly, cheerfully; and much more, being upon easier
service, the Call of God should be encouragement enough. And if our eyes be
much upon that, it will prevent much sin, many distempers, often the servants of
God (when they come amongst their own friends, acquaintance, countrymen) are
slighted, and meet with hard measure, and course usage, but they must remember
who called, who sent them.

3. That Gods ways and judgments are unsearchable; the means of grace are
denied to those that would embrace them, and given to those that refused them;
surely, had I sent thee to them, Per interpretes, per nut^s, per gestus
commoverentur ad poenitentiam.
they would have hearkened, although thou had preached in a tongue unknown,
by one means or other they would have been brought to repentance, they would
not have been so perverse and ungrateful as the Jews were; Jonas, and Nahum
too, as Pradus conceives, preached to Ninive, and they repented; and it is
likely many nations now, if they had the Gospel preached unto them, would
embrace it, and bring forth better fruits then Christians do; Matthew. 11.21, 23.
Christ says, If the works he had done in Chorazin, Bethsaida and Capernaum,
had been done in Tire, Sidon and Sodom, they would have repented, and remained
to this day; but God in his infinite Wisdom and Justice, denied both the words
and works of Christ to those places. We cannot sound this depth, yet let us
say, God is righteous, and take heed it be not verified of us, that Turkey,
Persia and Tartoria, would have repented, if they had had the means we have.

From the 7th Verse observe:

1. Men's wills do harden them and ruin them; They will not hearken unto thee;
there is obstinacy and malice in the wills of men, that they reject the Word of
God, and what is for their good; You will not come to me, that you may have
life, says Christ, Joh. 5.40. I will give you life for fetching, and you will
none of it, and when he came to them, what said they to him? We will not have
this man to reign over us. Let Christ come, a King of righteousness, seeking
the good, the salvation of sinners, they will not submit to him, Voluntas tuae
est infernus tuus.
their own wills shall stand between them and salvation: Bernard says, A man's
will is his hell, it carries a man against heaven, and swiftly to hell.

2. There is such corruption and strength of stubbornness in men, that they
will not hear God himself; They will not hearken unto me, though there be
infinite equity in it, that they should give me their ears, hearts, all their
strength and intentions, for I have created them of nothing, redeemed them,
being worse then nothing; I have prepared eternal mansions in the heavens for
them that do hear me; I speak the words of Wisdom and Life, I aim at their
good and comfort in all that I speak; yet they will not hear me: Here is the
strength and perfection of stubbornness, a child not to hear its parents, a
people not to hear their Minister, subjects not to hear their Prince, is
thought bad enough; but children, people, subjects, not to hear their God, is
the height of iniquity. And because they will not hear Christ, therefore they
will not hear his Messengers, but despise, persecute and murder them, and
that because he sends them; Joh. 15.21. All these things will they do unto you
for my name sake.

3. Corruption lies not only hid in the heart of sinners, but breaks out in an
impudent manner, they are impudent and hard-hearted, there is stoninesse
within, and impudency without.

4. Sin is of a spreading infectious nature; the whole house of Israel are
impudent and hard-hearted, the one corrupted another, as it is in a bunch of
grapes; if one be corrupt, it will corrupt its neighbor, and that another,
till they be all alike: so was it here, one infected another, till the whole
house was so; it is like the leprosy in a garment or house, that spreads
through all. Genesis 6.12. All flesh had corrupted its way upon the earth.

From the 8th and 9th Verses: observe,

1. That the Ministers of God must look for opposition in their way; their face
and foreheads were against the Prophet, they would be like beasts, that use to
push with their horns and heads; 1 Cor. 16.4. There is an effectual door
opened unto me, and there are many adversaries, when God opens to his Ministers
a door of hope to do good, there presently appears many adversaries to shut
that door again, and so to take away the hope and opportunity of doing good; it
was at Ephesus, and there he met and fought with beasts; in the race of his
Ministry he met with Hymeneus, Alexander, and Demetrius, that opposed him:
John met with a Di^tr^phes, and we must look for many such.

2. Divine virtue and and assistance does accompany a Divine Call: I have made
thy face strong against their faces; I called thee, and strengthened thee; the
Hebrew is, I give thee a face strong; I do and will enable thee with spirit and
audacity to outface them. In Matthew. 28. ult. Go preach, and lo I am with you
to the end of the world; he sends them, and seconds them, he calls them and
incourages them: I am with you, peculiari assistentia, by my grace, strength,
comfort, direction, spirit; those that are called of Christ, and sent of him,
therefore may with comfort expect the help of Christ to go through the work he
has put them in. Paul, when sent to the Corinthians, he came in demonstration
of the Spirit and power, 1 Cor. 2.4. And in Col. 2.29. he says, The working of
grace was mighty in him, in power and efficacy: we are lost discouraged at the
greatness and difficulty of the work; Who is sufficient for these things, said
Paul? but when he looked at Christ, he said, I can do all things through Christ
that strengthens me; and if we would look more at him, and lean upon him,
we should do more, Non militat propriis viribus, sed armatur coelesti virtute.
and do better; if thoughts of our weakness, of the work, of our oppositions
and enemies sink us, Christ gives balm, spirit, and a face to outface all; a
Minister does not warfare in his own strength, but is armed from above.

3. What ever Ministers have, it is given, if they be endued with the Spirit,
wisdom, liberty of speech, courage, or any other excellency, it is that the
Lord Christ bestows upon them; I have made thee so and so. Let not us be lift
up, our Master Christ had in him all the treasures of Wisdom, the Spirit above
measure; he was full of grace and truth, did more then all, his fame was great,
and yet he was humble, and bade us learn of him; he did not slight or despise
men of mean talents, and infinitely beneath himself, but acknowledged the least
good was in any, and encouraged it; his steps should we follow, and not swell
with a conceit of worth, nor with reality of parts and excellencies; it is the
practice of too many to slight others, and build up themselves by their
ruins, but this is a worldly and wicked practice, never taught by Christ, his
Doctrine is, Let each esteem others better then themselves, Look not every man
on his own things, but on the things of others, Phil. 2.3, 4. it is injury and
indignity to Christ, not to reverence and esteem his graces and gifts in
others. Bernard tells of one, who beweiling his own condition, said, he saw
thirty virtues in another, whereof he had not one in himself, and perhaps,
says Bernard, of all his thirty, he had not one like this man's humility, this
grace is the glory of a Christian, and especially of a Minister; pride is for
Prelates, and humility for Prophets; God brooks not pride in any, least of all
in his Messengers: Christ's Disciples had a tincture of it, their thoughts were
aspiring, who should be greatest, but he sets a child before them, and tells
them, who is greatest, not he that has the strongest head, the best notions,
does the most service, but he is the most humble, he is the most high; humility
is so valued of God, that he likes it in malefactis, rather then pride in recte
factis; a man that is innocent and proud, is less in Gods eye, then he that is
guilty and humble: let us rather mind the good in others, to honor them, and
maintain love, then that is in our selves to lift us up, and make us slight
others.

4. Christ puts insuperable virtue and strength into his servants, such as the
powers of darkness and the world cannot prevail against; I have made thy face
strong against their faces, as an Adamant, as a rock, let the winds, waters,
floods, blow, wash, beat, they prevail not against the Adamant, the Rock; they
are res indomabiles: so is the power, virtue and grace of Christ in the heart
and head of a faithful Minister; reproach and derision put Jeremiah to it, had
almost silenced him: I will preach no more, Jer. 20.9. but his Word was as a
burning fire, shut up in my bones, and I was weary with forbearing, and I could
not stay; there was virtue within which would out and act; God had told them,
that they should fight against him, but not prevail; Jer. 15.20. Luke 21.15.
Christ tells his Disciples, he will give them a mouth and wisdom which all
their adversaries should not be able to resist; and could that great Council
in the 4th of the Acts prevail against Peter and John? We cannot but speak the
things that we have seen and heard, Verse. 20. So Stephen was too stout for all
his adversaries, Act. 6.10. Such virtue was put into Basil the great; you know
how he answered the Ruler, and stood impregnable against his threats, who went
and told the Emperor, saying, Victi sumus, Rex, in Ecclesiae hujus negotio vir
ille minis est superior, verbis robustior and persuasionibus fortior. You must
set upon some other man more ignoble, or force him openly, you shall never
overcome him with threats; this made Nazianzen say of him, that he was
percutientibus adamas, and dissidentibus magnes: Could all the policy of the
Conclave, and power of Antichrist conquer that divine virtue was put into
Luther? The wicked may drive the godly from their standings, not from their
steadfastness.

5. That the Messengers of God being called and strengthened by Christ, are to
go on animo intrepido; Fear them not, neither be dismayed at their looks,
though they be rebellious, etc. If they be strong, or against thee, I am
stronger that am with thee; if they frown, I smile; if they watch to do thee
hurt, I watch to do thee good; if thy Doctrine provoke them, yet it pleases me.

From the 10th Verse, observe

1. That the heart is the treasury where the truth should be laid up; Receive
my words in thine heart; he must hear with his ear, but that is not enough,
he must also admit the word into his heart, and lay it up there; what is in the
head may soon be lost, but what is in the heart abides: Books locked up in the
closet are safe, and truths laid up in the heart are secure; Jam. 1.21. Laying
aside all filthiness and superfluity of malice, or naughtiness, receive in
meekness the ingraffed word; they must first put out of their hearts
filthiness, (...).
malice, wrath, what ever had possession of the heart, and kept out the Word,
and open their hearts to entertain the Word; that as it is with a graffe put
into a stock, so it might be with the Word in their hearts, even be an
ingraffed Word, a word to root and grow there, and bear fruit in the life; Luke
8.15. The seed on the good ground, are they which in an honest and good heart,
having heard the Word, keep it, and bring forth fruit. The heart is the ground
this seed will grow in; David knew this, and therefore hid the Word of God in
his heart, Psa. 119.11. And why there? that I might not fin against thee. This
corn will not let the weeds grow, when the Word is in the heart, it keeps under
all corruption, it makes them languish and come to nothing; many do by the Word
as by their Jewels, they hang them at their ears, that is the place for them,
and so the Word is only in their ears, they hear, and that is all, it enters
not into their hearts, and therefore is subject to casualty, the Devil, world,
pleasures, one thing or other steal it away, or make it unfruitful; but the
heart is the right and best place for that treasure. A godly man's treasure is
in the heart, within, another is in the ear, and without; many hear the Word
with the ear, but receive it not into the heart, and that is a worthless
hearing; Joh. 8.47. The Jews heard Christ preach, yet he tells them their
hearing was no hearing; ye hear not Gods Word, because ye are not of God.
They heard, but not with the heart, the truth entered not, abode not with them;
let us look to our hearing, and lay up the truths of Christ in our heart, Luke
2.19. Mary kept those sayings, and pondered them in her heart.

2. All the truths of Christ must have interest in the heart; Psalm. 40.8. Thy
Law is within my heart, he does not say, a Precept or two, a part, or half the
Law is within my heart, but thy Law, the whole Law; some truth, none is so bad,
but he would give entertainment unto truths of mercy, truths of liberty,
truths of case and comfort, truths in credit; so men might pick and choose what
truths they listed, they would embrace them, but when truths are reproached,
will subject to danger, loss, difficulties, when they strike at our lusts,
call for mortification, self-denial, conformity to Christ, etc. then men will
scarcely afford truth their ears, much less their hearts; hence those
expressions in Scripture, of men's perverting the ways of God, Acts 30.10. of
being contentious against the truth, Romans 2.8. speaking evil of it, 2 Pet.
2.2. of resisting it, 2 Timothy 3.8. yea, persecuting it, Acts 22.4. There be many
truths that flesh and blood cannot endure, some have torn out parts of
Scripture, because cross to their lusts and lives; it is known what has been
done to the Word of God in Ireland, and England too of late days. Some are
enemies to the whole truth, most to some parts of it, but we must receive all
the words of Christ; if the least tittle of the Law and Gospel be more durable
and excellent then heaven and earth, Matthew. 5.18.
there is sufficient reason it should have interest in our hearts; let the
truths be what they will, so they be the words and truths of Christ, we should
receive them, and that which makes us receive one, should make us receive all;
Do I r^ceive one, because it is from Christ? then I should receive all, because
they are from Christ; if I do not receive all, I may miscarry for refusing of
one truth; Psalm. 219.6. Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect unto
all thy Commandments.

From the 11th Verse, observe;

1. That affliction, is a fit time for instruction: G^t thee to them of the
captivity; they were in Babylon, stripped of all, captives under Nebuchadnezzar,
and now the Lord judged it a fit season for a Prophet to be sent unto them;
when people are in misery, they see the uncertainty of life, the insufficiency
of all creatures, the sinfulness of sin, that the wrath of God is a dreadful
thing; thoughts of death and eternity are upon them, and now is a good season
to bring the truths of the eternal God unto them, Vexatio dat intellectum, it
makes men consider, look about, inquire how they may be delivered, where to get
safety. When a kingdom is in danger, a Parliament is seasonable; when there is
war in the gates, then counsel and instruction are welcome, and when people in
captivity, a Prophet amongst them will do well.

2. When Gods people degenerate, he owns them not for his; Get thee to the
captivity, and to thy people, God owned them not; now his care of them, and
affection toward them, is much abated: God does look upon things and persons,
that he formerly took delight in, being corrupt, as not his own: Isa. 1.14.
Your new moons and appointed feasts my soul hates; they were the Lords people,
he appointed the new moons and feasts, but because they had corrupted them,
he owns them not, but calls them theirs: so in Exodus 32.7. God bids Moses get
him down from the mount; what was the matter? Thy people thou broughtest out of
Egypt have corrupted themselves; their corrupting themselves with Idolatry,
made God disclaim them; they are thy people, go look after them, I will destroy
them else; he calls them Moses his people there, and here he calls them
Ezekiels, to let them see how his heart was estranged from them; while they
were faithful to God, he counted highly of them, they were precious in his
sight, honorable, beloved; but when they went a whoring from God, Isa. 43.4.
he accounts not of them, he calls them not his, owns them not; they had
shamefully dishonored God by their sins, and he will not honor them with the
title of his people.

3. The servants of Christ must execute their Functions without respect of
persons, or regard to success; Speak to them, what ever they be, and tell
them, Thus says the Lord, that one greater then themselves has sent thee, and
will call them to account, and whether they will hear or forbear, let not
that trouble thee, do thy duty, be not troubled at the oppositions of men, or
successesnesse of thy labors.

VER. 12. Then the Spirit took me up, and I heard behind me a voice of a great
rushing, saying, Blessed is the glory of the Lord from his place.

13. I heard also the noise of the wings of the living creatures that touched
one another, and the noise of the wheels over against them, and a noise of a
great rushing.

14. So the Spirit lifted me up, and took me away, and I went in
bitterness, in the heat of my spirit, but the hand of the Lord was strong upon
me.

15. Then I came to them of the captivity at Tel-abid, that dwelt by the river
of Chebar, and I sat where they sat, and remained there astonished seven
days.


THese words are the second part of the Chapter, and contain in them a
Declaration of what befell the Prophet, being so called, and the particulars
are these:

1. The work of the Spirit in taking and lifting him up, ver. 12th.

2. The voice he heard, verse. 12. and what it was, Blessed, etc.

3. The noise of wings and wheels, verse. 13.

4. The ablation of the Prophet, verse. 14.

In the 12th was a sublation, in this an ablation.

5. The journey he went, in the 14. and 15. verse. And

6. His condition, he was in bitterness of spirit, he sat and mourned seven
days, verse. 14, 15.

The Spirit took me up.
By Spirit here we understand, not the wind, as if some great wind should take
up the Prophet, nor an Angel, as if he had been lift up by Angelical virtue,
nor his own spirit, as Jerome would have it, but that Spirit which was in the
living creatures and wheels, Chap. 1.12, 20. and led them; that Spirit entered
into Ezekiel, and set him upon his feet, Chap. 2.2. That Spirit which led
Christ into the Wilderness, Matthew. 4.1. even the eternal Spirit of God.

This taking up of Ezekiel by the Spirit of God was:

1. To perfect and ratify his Call to the Prophetical Office; the Lord Christ
had spoken much unto him about it, and now the Spirit lifts him up, and seals
the same unto his soul, strengthening him in the full assurance thereof; when
he had heard Christ's voice, and found his Spirit working so extraordinarily,
as to lift him up; this could not but mightily prevail with, and satisfy the
soul of the Prophet.

2. That he might have a more clear and full view of the glory of him that
sat upon the Throne: when we would have one see things distinctly and fully,
we set or lift him up on high. The Devil carried Christ unto an exceeding
high mountain, and showed him the glory of the kingdoms of the world, Matthew.
4.8.

3. To put honor upon him, in letting him see, that he was to be an organ of
the Spirit for the future, he was to be employed in great service by the
Spirit, and that was a great honor. He was to be the mouth of the Spirit unto
that people; to be wholly at the dispose of the Spirit.

4. To avocate his thoughts from things below, and to settle them upon
contemplation of things divine; a Prophet is not to look downward, his heart
should be lifted up to heaven, and heavenly things.

And I heard behind me the voice of a great rushing.
It was not the voice of thunder, or of an earthquake, but of the living
creatures; and the voice some make to be the words: Blessed is the glory of the
Lord from his place; which words are in the original, the blessed glory of the
Lord from his place; that is, the glory of God is now going out of his place,
and it troubles the Angels, that they lament, and make a great noise, to behold
so dreadful a judgment to befall Jerusalem and the Jews; and so the voice to
be differing from these words. If it be granted, that these words were the
voice uttered, yet may they be taken in that sense, as is expressed, to show
their sorrow for the ruin of the Church, The blessed glory of the Lord is
departing from its place, God is leaving his habitation and people, and all is
hastening to spoil and desolation, this affected the very Angels: when some
great man, that has been a great Patron and friend to a place, is going away;
what lamentation is made? what a noise and stir is there at it? as in these
days, when some Ministers, Magistrates, and other eminent Christians, are
forced from their place by the enemies, what complaint does it cause? what a
noise does it make? and so when God leaves a people, that were beloved and
dear unto him, it fetches sighs and complaints, not only from men, but even
from angels also; the soul finds it a sad thing when God departs from it, and
often mourns bitterly. Some take the words for a Doxologie, and make the sense
this; Blessed be the glory of God, which is seen in punishing the wicked, and
delivering the Church. God shows himself just and righteous, that he will no
longer stay among a sinful people, but be gone from them, and render to them
according to their ways. The Quere will be, in what sense we may take the
words? both senses may without prejudice be admitted, while the Angels looked
upon the great loss the Jews should have by Gods departure, the great evils
would follow thereupon; they sympathized, and were so affected with it, that
they brake out into these expressions, The blessed glory of God is going out of
its place, and so it was vox lamentationis; but when they looked at Gods
Justice and holiness, they said, Blessed is, or, be the glory of the Lord.
Though men be ruined, Cities and Nations destroyed, and God driven from his
habitation, yet let his Name be glorious, and so it is vox laudis, and brought
in to answer the Objections and Cavils the people might make; they might say:
What? will God leave us? expose us to the people of forain enemies? shall we
and ours be cut off? will he thus deal with his people? is it come to this?
What equity is in it? The Angels, to prevent such murmurings, and vile speech,
said, Blessed, etc. even when he is in a way of judgment, he is to be
honored and made glorious.

Blessed is the glory of the Lord from his place.
We must make some search into these words, and inquire after the person, the
place and the glory. The person here is taken to be Christ, who appeared unto
the Prophet in the Vision. The place, the Throne where Christ sat; and the
glory, that is mentioned in the end of the first Chapter. And Christ now being
about to go off his Throne, and put an end to the Vision, the Angels cried,
Blessed be the glory of the Lord from his place. This is not all we must
expect from the words, they type out unto us, the departure of the Lord from
the Temple; that God would be gone, and take away that which was the chief
glory of it.

From his place.
God is illocall, and the Rabbis use that word, to signify Gods illocality;
which notes place; Makom is a space, or place, because all things subsist in
them; Hammakom, per Antiphrafin, is illocalis, infinitus, one that subsists, or
is comprehended in no place, and so is an attribute of God. How then is God
here said to have place Nimekomo, From his place? God properly has no place,
it is sensu metaphorico, that place is given to him; where he in any special
manner does manifest his glory, power, grace and goodness, that is said to be
his place.

And three places God is said to have in the Scripture:

1. The heavens; Isa. 66.1. Heaven is my throne, and 1 King. 8.30. hear in
heaven thy dwelling place.

2. The humble heart, Isa. 57.15. that is Gods dwelling place. And

3. The Temple in Sion, Psalm. 132.13, 14. Sion was his habitation, there was
his rest and abode, that is, in the Temple, being in Sion, in the Temple and
Sanctuary, were his voice, his Way, Psalm. 18.6. Psalm. 77.13. That was the place
where his honor dwelt, Psalm. 26.8. The habitation of his glory. The words are
in the original, the place of the habitation or Tabernacle of his glory,
alluding to that in Exodus 40.24, 25. where it is said, The glory of the Lord
filled the Tabernacle. So the glory of the Lord filled the Temple; there was
the presence of God; there was manifestations of his glory; there he heard
Prayers, and there he gave out many gracious answers; there he accepted of
their sacrifices, and communicated himself unto them; there was the Ark and
sign of Gods presence, and the Cherubims, from between which God gave out the
answers. In these things lay the glory of the Temple, but now God would be
gone, and all the glory of the Temple should depart; God moved not from place
to place, being infinite, illocall, immovable; but he is said to depart, when
he ceases to do as formerly he did, in the soul, when you find not God acting
and manifesting himself, you say he is gone. Here now God would answer them no
more, not accept their sacrifice, nor hear their prayers, etc. he would not
do as formerly he had done; he would not protect them any longer, but look upon
them as being unworthy of his presence, glory, protection and hope, and in his
wrath leave them to ruin and spoil of their adversaries, and this was Gods
departing according to that in Hos. 5.15. I will go and return to my place,
till they acknowledge their offense. That phrase, blessed glory of the Lord,
you may for the better understanding, conceive thus; Blessed be the glorious
Lord, or, the glory, the Lord; or, if you will take it as it is read, the
meaning is, that the glory of the Lord is to be celebrated.

Observe. 1. That those that are called to employment in the Church of Christ,
have need not only of Christ's word, but Christ's Spirit also; Christ had spoken
largely unto Ezekiel, and here the Spirit lifts him up, and does in especial
manner animate and arm him to the work; when the Apostles had been long with
Christ, heard his Sermons, seen his Miracles, life, joined with him in prayer,
all this would not do it, though Christ had forty days spoken to them in pa
ticular of the things of the Kingdom, Acts 1.3. till they had the Spirit, and
were filled with that; therefore Christ bid them wait for it, he knew they had
need of it ver. 4. and that it would do more in them, then all he had said unto
them, the Spirit would be Doctor intus, and acquaint them with all truth. The
Spirit would purge out their fears and distempers, it would warm, heat, seal,
ratify and make them resolute in the work.

2. That the Angels do sympathise with the Church and people of God in their
miseries. This voice was, as I showed in the opening, the voice of the living
creatures, and they made a noise, lamenting the state of Jerusalem, God being
upon the leaving of it, and exposing it to great misery; Ah, said they, the
blessed and glorious Lord is going from his place, and all miseries are now
stepping in upon his people, this affected them; we know that the Angels
rejoice at the conversion of sinners, and by the Law of contraries we infer
they are sadded at the destruction of sinners, of States and Churches; they
have been employed to comfort in trouble; and where there is no sympathy, there
is little solace. Do you not think, that the Angel seeing Christ his Lord and
Master in his agony, that he did sympathise first with him, and then
strengthen him? Angels being without sin, are as full of pity as the Devils are
of cruelty: God, Christ and the Spirit, are full of pity, and it cannot be,
that Angels which are so near them, should be void of it, no, they have a holy
sympathy with us; in Gods departure from a place is sad news, even to Angels.

3. The happiness of a people, is to have the Lord and his glory amongst them,
and their greatest misery is to have God depart from them; most think the
happiness of a people to lie in liberty, honor, plenty of all things; David
once subscribed to it, Psalm. 144.15. Happy are the people are in such a case,
but he quickly crosses out that subscription, and said, yea, happy is that
people whose God is their Lord; there is the happiness to have God amongst
them, he is the glory of a people, Zach. 2.5. he was the glory in the midst
of Jerusalem, there God dwelt, as his worship, Laws, oracles, miracles,
testified, and so he made Jerusalem glorious among all nations. Where true
Religion is, pure Worship and Ordinances, and God working for the good of a
people, defending them, that is the glory and excellency of a kingdom, 2 Chronicles. 13.25. says Abijah, God is with us for our Captain, this was more then
all the strength of Judah beside, when Jeroboam came against him with 800000
chosen men, With you are the golden calves; verse. 8. you have a great number,
but God is not with you to be your glory and defense, you have the calves,
which is your shame and nakedness, but God is with us, who is our glory and
defense. And when Jerusalem fell to Idolatry, God tells them, that they had
changed their glory for that did not profit, Jer. 2.11. they had driven away
their glory; and here was the beginning of their woe. That Is the misery of a
kingdom, to have God depart from it, then public enterprises prosper not, 2 Chronicles. 22.24. then counsel fails, 1 Samuel 28.15. protection is gone, Isa. 5.5.
then peace, loving kindness and mercies go, Jer. 16.5. This is as taking the
Sun out of the firmament, the eyes out of the head, or soul out of the body;
now a kingdom and people lie exposed to all evils and mischiefs, Hos. 9.12. Woe
to them when I depart from them, all mischiefs presently step, crowd in upon a
people left of God; famine, wars, captivity, a perverse spirit, and
treacherousnesse one to another, came upon this people, when God left his
place. And so after Christ's days, when God left them, and that voice was heard
in the Temple, Migremus hinc, Joseph. de hell. Jud. l. 7. c. 2. L^b. 11.
which Tacitus in his Annals also mentions, Audit^ major hum ma vox ex^edere
Deos, simul ingens motus excedentium, after this, dreadful misery befell them,
war, famine, dispersion was their portion, they are without God, Christ and
mercy to this day, an undone, and most unhappy people. We had almost driven
away God by our sins, specially by our Idolatry, superstitions, but God and his
glory are not quite gone, Jer. 14.9. Yet thou O Lord art in the midst of us,
and we are called by thy Name, leave us not.

4. God is glory, or glorious; there is nothing in God inglorious; as in the
Son is only light, so God is light, and in him is no darkness, he is all
light, all glory; his Attributes are glory, his Essence is glory, his Life is
glory, God is only glory; Blessed be the glory, the Lord.

5. Under the Law, God confined himself to a particular place, to the Temple;
there he dwelt, appeared, received sacrifices, gave answers, etc. So that the
Temple was not only locus, but medium divini cultus, the Jews were bound to
set their faces toward it, when they prayed, 1 King. 8.48. Dan. 6.10. it being
also a type of the body of Christ, Joh. 2.19. that sanctified their Assemblies
and sacrifices, Matthew. 23.19. But it is otherwise now under the Gospel; neither
Jerusalem nor Samaria is the place where God is fixed, Joh. 4.21. but Gods
habitation is in all places where he has Saints, Matthew. 18.20. Where two or
three are gathered together in my name, (...).
I am there in the midst of them. 2 Cor 6.16. Ye are the Temple of the living
God; and what says God? I will dwell in them, and walk about in them, that is,
in the Church of Corinth; and so in all Congregations. Now the Congregations
are Gods habitation, he walks amongst the golden Candlesticks, there is the
glorious God seen, the glorious God heard. But the place now where the meetings
are, be neither means nor parts of worship, no types of Christ, nor do they
sanctify the people or service done in them, rather do the people and
Ordinances while they are there sanctify them; and yet when the Ordinances are
ended, and people gone, no holiness abides in them, but they are as other
places.

6. The Lord is worthy of praise, when he is in a way of judgment: Blessed be
the glory of the Lord from his place; now he was departing from Jerusalem, all
woes and miseries taking hold of them, yet was he a God deserving praises; Gods
judgments are deep, we often know not the reasons of them, see not the equity of
Gods proceedings in them, yet we should be so far from murmuring, that we
should count him worthy of honor and praise, when he deserts Churches and
kingdoms, Exodus 15.11. God is fearful in praises.

7. It Is the work and office of Angels to praise God; the living creatures here
said, Blessed be the glory of the Lord from his place; and Rev. 5.10, 11. There
were many Angels about the Throne; and what did they? they sang, Worthy is the
Lamb that was slain, to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength,
and honor, and glory, and blessing; So the Seraphims in Isa. 6.3. their song
was, Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of Hosts, the whole earth is full of his
glory. Angels are musical creatures, and make the best melody; Arias thinks it
was an Angel dictated the Song of Deborah unto her; A. Lapid on Judge. 5.23.
Luke 2.13, 14. there was a heavenly Chorus, and sang a heavenly song, Glory to
God in the highest, on the earth peace, and good will toward men; this was a
short, but a sweet song; when great things have been done by God, the Angels
have been brought in praising God: as when God created the world; Job 48.4.7.
Where wast thou, says God to Job, when I laid the foundations of the earth?
When the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy?
that is, the Angels, as Interpreters observe, who at the sight of that great
and glorious work were much affected, and sang the praises of God; so at the
birth of Christ, and here at the departure of God out of the Temple, the great
God, doing great works, must have great praises, even the praises of Angels;
praise is an Angelical work, and the office of Angels, (...), Theod.
and the Spirit calls for it at their hands, Psalm. 148.2. Praise him all his
Angels, and they do it, when he is in his judgments. The Jews thought God
dealt hardly in punishing them; but Angels saw cause to praise God for his
departure from them, and vindicating his glory in the punishment of hypocrites.

8. God does his works without motion or mutation; Here it is said, from his
place; there is a show of motion and change, but no such thing befalls God, his
works make motions and changes in the creature, not in himself, he is infinite,
fills heaven and earth, and never removes from one place to another, he is
immutable and not subject to changes.

For the 13th Verse; of the wings, wheels, and noise of them I have spoken in
the first Chapter largely; yet a little I shall speak of the Verse, it is said,
that the living creatures touched one another; The Hebrew is from Nashash, to
kiss, and each other, in the Hebrew, is a woman to her sister.

Observe. 1. God makes use of Angels and second causes in the government of the
world, and execution of his judgments, all creatures have being from, and
dependence on God, and he may employ them to what service he will.

2. Gods judgments do often come suddenly and swiftly; wings make a noise, and
wheels do rattle in a moment, and judgments come in an instant, Hos. 10.13. in
a morning shall the King of Israel be cut off utterly; Belshazzar in a night,
Dan. 5.30. Nebuchadnezzar in an hour driven from his palace and pride. Dan.
4.33.

3. There is much harmony and love between the Angels; their wings touch,
kiss, they go lovingly together in the execution of their offices; they have
like affections, as a woman to her sister; they sang sweetly together at the
birth of Christ, there is no contention, envy or division among them, but much
love, they are near God, and the nearer any are to God, the more love is in
them: if we could agree better, and love more, we should be Angelical.

In the 14th Verse is laid down, what the Spirit did with the Prophet, after it
had lift him up: It took him away; after the Sublation, there was an Ablation.
The Prophet was carried by the power of the Spirit to Tel-abib; this was not a
visionall thing, but real; for being lifted up, he was taken away from the
place where he saw the Vision, he was not set down, and so left to go to
Tel-abib, but he was carried in the arms of the Spirit, as Philip was caught
up by the Spirit, and carried to Azotus, Acts 8.39, 40. The Spirit was the
fiery Chariot that carried Philip and our Prophet through the air to their
several places.

And I went in bitterness, in the heat of my spirit.
The Hebrew is, I went bitter in the hot anger of my spirit; Here the infirmity
of our Prophet appears much, in that after he had seen and heard such great
and glorious things, had found such favor in the eyes of Christ, as to have
his Spirit enter into him, comfort him, confirm him, and to bestow prophetical
gifts upon him, yet now he should be unwilling to obey Christ's call, be in
bitterness and opposition to his Will; this is grandis infirmitas, If I go and
preach of the glory departing from the Temple, I shall stir up the people
against me, they will stone me, if not, I shall offend God. The Prophet now
thought upon Gods anger against his people; his departure out of the Temple,
the ruin of the City, the stubbornness and impudency of the house of Israel;
now the weightinesse of the work enjoined him by Christ seized upon him; and
now, like Jonas, he thought to decline the service, his spirit was bitter, he
in a great heat, that he was so pressed to a work so little affected, and
over-powerd by the Spirit of God, that will he, nill he, on he must, for the
next words are:

But the hand of the Lord was strong upon me.
Which words do declare, that had not Gods hand overpowered him, he would not
have set upon that hard work of the Prophetical office; fears, difficulties,
dangers, carnal reason, unbelief, self-love; one, or all of these, would have
turned him back, if the hand of God had not strongly prevailed with him.

By hand of the Lord, some understand the Spirit of Prophecy, as if that did
mightily urge him; so the Chaldee Exposition is; others understand by it
divinum auxilium, or, virtus spiritus; which is as a hand to help; we may
safely understand the Spirit by it, which put forth its mighty power upon, and
in the Prophet. Why the Spirit is resembled to a hand, I showed in the first
Chapter, v. 3. A hand is symbolum energiae, index rei, and instrumentum
aperationis, there is strength in the hand; it shows what is to be done, and
effects it; so here, the Spirit took hold of the Prophet, which notes his
power, showed him his duty, and caused him to do it.

Was strong: The Hebrew root signifies, fortiter apprehendere, (...)
tenere, as one that holds loose joints and nerves of the body, to strengthen
and confirm them, that so the man may be more compact and able to do any thing:
it notes laying hold with strength, as men in danger of drowning; and the
Septuagint frequently renders it by a word notes so much; as Ezekiel. 7.13.22.14.
(...), and (...).
which is to hold by strength; and this sense suits with the hand of the Lord
that took hold of the Prophet, whose spirit was remiss, infirm, like a member
out of joint, and strengthened it, and enabled it to do what was intended and
appointed; the Spirit held the Prophet by its mighty power, that he could not
wrest from it by any means, but like a man conquered, must yield, and do what
was required.

Observe. 1. The Prophets were put on too, and carried on in their works of
Prophecy, and giving the Scriptures by extraordinary acts of the Spirit, that
enters into Ezekiel, takes him up, takes him away with mighty power, comes upon
him, and constrains him to prophecy; here was inspiration and impulsion of the
Spirit, 2 Pet. 1.20, (...).
21. Prophecy came not by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as they
were moved by the Holy Ghost; it was not their own spirit moved, that is,
private, but it was the Spirit of God, which is divine and public, and
carried them on with might; so that the Scriptures are not inventum humanum,
but Oracula Dei, they are not of man, but of God; therefore Philo says,
Propheta est interpres Dei dictantis Oracula, the Spirit dictates all, and man
only utters, or writes what is dictated; and as the Scriptures are not of man,
but of the Spirit; so their interpretation is not of man, but of the Spirit
likewise. Let Councels, Fathers, Churches, give their sense of Scripture, it is
private, if it be not the sense and interpretation of the Spirit: Let a private
man give the true sense of the Scripture, it is not private, because it is
divine; the sense of the Holy Ghost, and private in this place of Peter, is not
opposed to public, but to divine; and the words are to be read, no Scripture
is of a man's own interpretation; that is, private, contrary to divine.

2. The Holy Ghost is God, and a person distinct from the Son; the Spirit was
in the living creatures, in the wheels, and in Ezekiel, how could this be, if
the Spirit were not God? none but God can be at the same time in many places;
it is his peculiar prerogative and nature to be every where. The beams of the
Sun are in several places, but not the essence or body of the Sun, that is in
one place only, but the Holy Ghost was in its essence, in the Angels, in the
wheels, in Ezekiel, it was in Jeremiah, who lived then at Jerusalem; it was in
all the Saints there, in Daniel, and the rest of the Saints in Babylon; so that
the Spirit is co-essentiall with the Father and the Son, and it is a person;
otherwise how could it have taken up the Prophet, and carried him? and it is
distinct from the Son, who is described to be upon the Throne, and to give
commands unto the Prophet; and the Spirit here is brought in distinct from him,
most clear in that place in Matthew. 3.16, 17. where the Spirit is distinguished
from the Son, baptized, and from the Father, acknowledging Christ his Son, in
whom he was well pleased.

3. Great Saints have great infirmities: Ezekiel goes in bitterness, in the
heat of his spirit, he was in a froward humor, in a great distemper, the
Vulgar has it, in indignatione spiritus, there was indignation in his spirit
to the work; some have thought this affection of the Prophet, Non prorsus
vitiosum, not altogether sinful, yet some sinfulness, and vitiosity to be in
it, cannot be denied: it is granted by Calvin, that it did distare a gratia
spiritus, and for him after so clear and strong a Call, to refuse, to be in a
chafe, to withstand, was affectus penitus vitiosus, if not vilis, he had rather
have been out of service then in it, lien hid among the people, then have been
an Ambassador of Christ unto them; he had rather they should have perished
without Vision, then that himself should be a seer amongst them; here was the
weakness of this good man. I could tell you of Abraham's; Jacobs, Moses,
David's, Paul's, and John's failings: there was never since sin entered, any Saint,
sine omni macula, in many things we sin all, Jam. 3.2. And yet the Apostles
were filled with the Spirit, there was a fullness of grace in them, and in the
Prophets, yet neither the one nor the other were omni prorsus exuti carne,
notwithstanding all their graces and excellencies, they did still terrestre
aliquid spirare; and now where ever the Spirit comes, it neither extinguisheth
nature nor corruption wholly in this life; the best wine has its dregs and its
lees, and the best of Saints has his spots and weaknesses, there is no
perfection in any.

4. Holy men, set down their own infirmities, which is an argument of the truth
of the Word and the divine nature of it, men that are mere men seek their own
glory, and will not shame themselves in their Writings, but the Penmen of
Scripture having received another Spirit, are content to shame themselves, so
God may have glory, his truth credit, his people caution and comfort, all these
are in the setting down of their own sins, when holy men confess their
weaknesses, set them down, as Moses, Exodus 4. as David Psalm. 51. as Jonas,
Chap. 1.4. as Paul, 1 Timothy 1. as John, Rev. 22.8. God is glorified by their
shame; it is evidenced what God did for, and by these men, notwithstanding their
sins, men are persuaded of the truth of the Word, seeing they spared not
themselves, and would not bury their own thoughts in silence; others that see
the slips of such men of God, are admonished thereby to look to their standings
and to be watchful, and these are beaten down with the sense of their
failings, see it is the common sickness of the Saints, and not their case
alone, which is some ease unto them.

5. That some truths of God, sweet in the reception, often prove bitter in the
operation: the roll that Ezekiel did eat, ver. 3. was sweet as honey at first
unto him; but now he was to go and put it in practice, he found it bitter, and
sought to decline that service, it was like pills sugared over, sweet in the
mouth, but being dissolved in his bowels, viscera torquebat and torminibus
lacerabat praecordia. He was upon the wrack, and sick of the business, and
perplexed that he had eaten such a roll. The stony ground heard the Word with
joy, it was sweet to the taste, but after it was bitter, when persecution and
temptation came; those hearers were offended and fell away, Matthew. 13.20, 21.
the word of joy proved a word of bitterness unto them, and it is so to most men
at one time or other, they find it a sad and difficult thing to act those
truths are sweet to the understanding, Rev. 10.9, 10. John eat the little book,
it was sweet in his mouth, bitter in his belly; that is, in the operation of
it; John saw that those truths writ in it would beget hatreds, persecutions,
imprisonments, banishments, martyrdom, etc. When we come to find the
operations of truths, that they will cost us dear, dear friends, dear
liberties, dear lusts, dear lims, dear lives; we find a bitterness in
truths, though formerly they have been like Ezekiels roll, and John's little
book to our mouths.

6. Man's wisdom and spirit is opposite to the wisdom and Spirit of the Lord
Christ. Christ calls, sends Ezekiel in his infinite wisdom, he thinks it best
for him to go to these captive Jews; this rebellious house. The Spirit enters
into Ezekiel, assures him of his Call, assumes him, assists him, and yet he is
averse, in bitterness, in the heat of his spirit; he shows the antipathy
between his wisdom and Christ's, his spirit, and the Spirit of Christ they
closed not. There are principles of opposition in godly men to the ways of
Christ and his Spirit; so far as they are unregenerate, so far they are
opposite, Romans 8.7. The carnal mind is enmity against God; it is in the
original, the wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God, there is flesh in
the best men, that flesh has wisdom, it has a spirit, (the flesh is the old
man, a whole man, and must have a spirit in it to act it, such a one as it is)
and both the wisdom and spirit of the flesh are enmity to God, unsubject to
his Law and Will; and enmity to man, they work death, and end in death; Jonas
had such wisdom, and such a spirit in him, when he ran from God; but it had
cost him his life, if God had not been more gracious then he dutiful: Paul
complains, he found a law in his members, warring against the law of his mind,
Romans 7.23. Gal. 5.17. The flesh lusts against the spirit; the work of the
flesh is lusting and warring against the spirit: it is with a godly man, as it
was with Rebecca, she had great struglings in her womb, and what was the cause
of it? there were two nations in her womb, one contrary to the other; Genesis
25.22, 23.
and there is heaven and earth in a godly man's heart, which are contrary, and
make great struglings: The same soul commands obedience, opposes obedience;
the same will that delights in the Law of God, has a cross motion to the law
of sin; the heart that trusts God, doubts of his favor; while we are
believing, unbelief is opposing, Mark. 9.24. I believe, Lord help my unbelief.

7. Saints may do the Will of God unwillingly, if not against their will;
Ezekiel was in bitterness in the heat of his spirit, unwilling to be a Prophet
to this people, yet he went, I went: Jonas he goes to Ninive, but his heart is
not full on the work, there was not a throughnesse in it, he saw there was a
necessity of it, God had power to punish disobedience, and could quickly crush
him, and therefore now in a prudentiall way, he would go and prophecy to
Ninive; there was in him an unwilling willingness, his spirit was not totally
willing, as you may gather from Chapt. 4.1, 2, 3. He was against the sparing of
Ninive; it stuck upon his spirit, that he should lie under the imputation of a
false Prophet; he wishes death upon it, which shows that his spirit was not
wholly in the service; we do the work and will of God often times with great
unwillingnesse, as women part with their joyntures, or children; as Merchants
throw their goods overboard in a storm; as many now assessed part with their
goods to the public service, necessity is too strong for them, and prudence
puts them on, and there is a willing unwillingnesse; so it is with the godly,
they pray and hear unwillingly, they give unwillingly, etc. This is from the
imbecility of grace, the power of corruption, misapprehension of God and his
ways, violence of temptations, intanglements with the world, pressures of
guilt, and unsuccessefulnesse of service; let us be sensible of our
unwillingnesses in Gods ways, be humbled for them, and strive to do all animo
prompto, Deuteronomy. 28.47, 48. Because thou servest not the Lord thy God with
joyfulnesse and gladness of heart, for the abundance of all things; therefore
shall thou serve thine enemies: it is good for us to have our wills and whole
hearts in the works of God.

8. The infirmities of Gods people do not interrupt his love and grace; Ezekiel
went in bitterness, in heat of spirit, but the hand of the Lord was strong
upon me. This great distemper in the Prophet did not distemper God; it did not
cause him to retract or divert his love, but he takes hold of him by his hand,
and upholds him, as a parent would do to a child, falling, or down, the
weakness or sickness of a child does not estrange the heart of the parent,
it rather inlarges and draws out the bowels more fully; and so it is with God,
Psalm. 103.13, 14. As a father pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them
that fear him; and why so? He knows our frames, he remembers we are but
dust; the Lord knows what weak and frail things we are. The word for frame,
notes a formed vessel of earth, and the Chaldee expounds it, of our evil
concupiscence, which carries us into error; God knows that we are earthen
vessels, full of lusts and infirmities, which lead us from him, which disable
us to serve him. Now here is the love, bowels, goodness of a God, because we
are so, therefore he pitieth us: so Psalm. 78.37, 38. Their hearts were not
right nor steadfast with God, but God was right and steadfast with them, he
being full of compassion, forgave their iniquity, and destroyed them not;
Infirmities may bring crosses, but cannot cut off from mercies; this should
strengthen our faith, comfort our hearts, and encourage us with a holy
boldness to go to the Throne of Grace, Hebr. 4.15, 16. Christ, says the
Apostle, is a merciful high Priest, touched with the feelings of our
infirmities; and what infers he upon it? Let us go boldly to the Throne of
grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace in time of need.

9. The Spirit of Christ is the healer and helper of our infirmities: Ezekiel
was distempered and sick of the business, and the hand, the Spirit of the Lord
was strong upon him, that helped, that healed him: Psalm. 107.20. He sent out
his word and healed them; the Spirit in that word did the cure; and here he
sent his Spirit to seize upon Ezekiel, to work out the ill humor, to settle
his thoughts, and sweeten his spirit that was so imbittered; the Spirit is
compared to oil, Psalm. 45.7. 1 John 2.27. and that is of a mollifying,
cleansing, healing and quickening nature; when Christ was anointed, then he
healed the broken hearted, Luke 4.18. he dropped that oil into their hearts,
and that did soften, purge, heal and quicken them. Gifts of healing are
attributed to the Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.9. and helping our infirmities in prayer is
the work of it; Romans 8.26. the Spirit brings the strength, we are infirm, and
can do nothing, (...).
but the Spirit, together with us, and for us, takes up the work that we faint
not; it answers to the word here, was strong, took hold on me, bound up my
spirit together, and strengthened me, not suffering my spirit to run out.

Lastly, the Spirit works invincibly: Ezekiel may strugle, but the Spirit will
overcome, that was strong upon him; men would not come in to Christ, and do his
work, unless a Spirit mightier then their own come upon them. Gods Spirit is a
Spirit of power, Luke 1.35. The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power
of the Highest shall overshadow thee; the Holy Ghost is the power of the
Highest, and when Paul preached, it was in demonstration of Spirit and power; 1
Cor. 2.4. and his Ministry was able to beat down strong holds, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5.
to cast down all high things, and to captivate thoughts and spirits to the
obedience of Christ; the Spirit works invisibly, it is a hand under a wing, and
it works invincibly; it is a strong hand, there is none can stand before the
strength of it, Antichrist shall be consumed by the Spirit of the Lord, 2 These.
2.8. This Spirit is fire to consume enemies, it is a hand powerful to fetch in
the friends under election: the Jews are now stiff enemies of Christ, but when
the Spirit of grace is poured out upon them when this hand takes hold of them,
then they will mourn, come in, submit to Christ; no violence does the Spirit
offer to the wills of men, Oportet non tantum moveri, sed novum fieri, Prosp.
notwithstanding it works invincibly, it files off the enmity and averseness of
our wills to God, and inclines them to yield, omnipotenti suavitate, and suavi
omnipotentia.

VER. 15. Then I came to them of the captivity of Tel-abib, etc.


IN this Verse is the terminus of his journey, and his condition at the end of
it, mourning and sadness.

The word Tel-abib signifies a heap of new fruits, or green ears of corn, A
cervum novaru^ frugum. Ad opera rustcana exercenda.
of TELL acervus and ABIB spica maturescens; Jerome, and the Vulgar translate
it, a heap of new fruit or corn; and Jerome thinks the Jews were placed
there, to plough, sow, reap, thresh, and that now they were beating out the new
corn; but this opinion we cannot admit, for it was in the fourth month, Chap.
1.1. that Ezekiel had his Vision, and their harvests in those hot countries
were not in the fourth month, but rather in the first or second. The
Israelites came out of Egypt in the month Abib, Exodus 13.4. and that was their
first month, Exodus 12.2. and answered to the latter end of that month is
called January, and to the beginning of the other called February; and in Exodus
9.31. it is said, the Barley was in the ear; the word is Abib, an ear of corn,
and denominates the month, because in it the Barley eared; so then it could
not be harvest when Ezekiel came to them at Tel-abib, it was rather over: we
take the word for the name of a place, as Telmelah, Telharsa in Ezra 2.59. in
their Etymology, the one signifies a heap of wood, the other a heap of salt;
yet by Ezra they are called places: these were they went up from Telmelah,
Telharsa, etc. so Tel-abib here: And it was in the middle part of Mesopotamia,
between two rivers, Chebar and Saocorah; and here they were placed as Junius
thinks, both to secure them, that they might not think of geting away, being
shut up between two rivers, or if they did, not easily accomplish it; and
secondly, to secure the place, which was subject to inundations, and so
un-inhabited, and opened to enemies, but now by their labor, art and strength,
might be made useful and defensive.

By the river of Chebar: of that River, was spoken in Chap. 1. ver. 1.

I sat by them, that sat, and remained there astonished seven days.
Sitting notes a quiet posture of the body, abiding in a place, Exodus 16.3.
when we sat by the fleshpots, that is, abode, dwelt where we had them. Also
great grief, Lam. 2.10. The Elders of the daughter of Sion sit upon the ground
and keep silence; and so in that place in Isaiah 47.8. I shall not sit as a
widow, solitary, mourning, in deep sorrow; to which alludes that in Lam. 1.1.
How does the City sit solitary? how is she become as a widow? great grief
silenceth the whole man; the tongue speaks not, the body moves not, Job 2.13.
Jobs friends sit down with him upon the ground seven days and nights, and none
spoke a word to him, for they saw that his grief was very great; so great, it
made them all quiet and hushed, and seven days he sat in that doleful
posture, because they were used to mourn seven days in cases of great grief,
as Joseph mourned seven days for his father, Genesis 50.10. Septemdialis luctus
est quoddam acerbi doloris ^nd^cium and benevolentis animi legitimum argumentum.
and seven days mourning is an argument of great grief, and a testimony of
much love. If we refer our Prophets mourning, to the condition which the Jews
were coming to, it might be lawful, he saw their death and funeral was at
hand; and so being sensible, laid it deeply to heart, and bewailed it seven
days, testifying his good will and affection to them; but if we refer it to
his unwillingnesse to go in the service Christ called him to, it is not
excuseable, but a farther argument of his great weakness. The cause of the
Prophets sitting there seven days, might be to know the state of the people
more exactly, to whom he was to prophecy; it might be upon divine command; it
might also be for fa^ther direction from God when to begin his Prophecy; a
Prophet he was made, but had no time appointed to begin his hard work; it might
also be to prepare and awaken the people, that seeing him sit still, sad,
amazed, they might inquire what this strange sadness meant, and so his word
take the deeper impression when he should speak unto them.

Astonished.
The Hebrew word Masmim, from Shamam, (...)
notes great astonishment, even to wonder, Isa. 59.16. he wondered that there
was no intercessour; it notes also desolation, and may here be rendered, I sat
desolate seven days; the Spirit left me in that place, and men regarded me
not, being full of grief, and telling them I had sad news, so the word is
used, Lam. 5.18. The mountain of Sion is desolate; and thus we may take it: the
Vision being ended, the Prophet set down there by the Spirit, and neither
seeing, hearing, or having to do now with Christ, the living creatures, wheels,
or the Spirit, found himself desolate, and was astonished at that great change.
(...).
The Septuagint renders it conversans, intimating the Prophets meditating, and
inward discoursing of the miseries and woes were written in the roll, and
coming upon the people; the hard task he had to perform among this people.

Observe. 1. That in the place and condition God sets his, they must abide in
the same; the Spirit brings Ezekiel to Tel-abib, there he continues, abides,
till the Spirit advises his departure; let him be among captives, between
overflowing rivers, he continues and stirs not; it must not be any slight
thing that removes men from the Calling God has set them in; Ministers may not
at pleasure skip from place to place, as if there were no tie upon them,
neither captivity, incorrigiblenesse of persons, nor discommodity of place are
weighty enough to take off Ezekiel from that place and people the Spirit had
set him over; when the Holy Ghost has set men over a flock, they must take
heed to that flock, and not seek occasion to be gone upon discontents, etc. the
worst are forwardest to remove, the Bramble will leave his place to be King,
when the Olive, Fig Tree, and Vine will not stir; Christ will not be made a
King by entreaty, nor by force.

2. The men of this world are politic for their own ends; the captivity were
placed at Tel-abib, between two rivers, that they might not get away, that they
might make that part of the country strong and useful: worldly men are wiser
in their generation then the children of light; how cunningly did Pharaoh deal
with the Israelites? Exodus 1.10.
Let us work wisely with them, (says he) they multiply, and we are in danger,
left upon any occasion they take part with our enemies, or make a head of
themselves, or attempt an escape; Come, let us set taskmasters over them, wear
them out with much work, and employ them to build cities for us. Here was the
cunning to avoid the name of tyranny, he will not destroy them with sword,
fire, open violence, but work they must in brick and clay, and fall by hard
labor; so he covers up his cruelty under a fair pretense, and provides for
his own security and profit in the Israelites service. Wicked and worldly men
are all self, and all their actions draw homewards, they are their own centers;
the wisdom of the flesh, of the Serpent, of the world is theirs, and they must
needs be crafty for themselves.

3. The condition of the Saints and servants of God is very changeable here:
Ezekiel has a glorious Vision, sight of, and converse with Christ, the company
of Angels, sees the course and motion of things in the world, had the Spirit
enter into him, comforting him, assuming and assisting him; and now he is a
desolate, an astonished man, he sits as one forsaken of all; here was a great
change, and it was not Ezekiels case alone, others, even all the Worthies of
God, have found the like: David was strong through divine favor, and quickly
troubled for the want of Gods face; he had his singings and his sorrowings,
Psalm. 30. he was often in the valleys, Psalm. 25.16, 17. I am desolate and
afflicted; the troubles of my heart are enlarged; and Psalm. 143. My spirit is
overwhelmed, my heart within me is desolate. Paul is one day rapt up into the
third heavens, and another day he has a thorn in the flesh; if he have the
revelation of the Spirit to exalt him, he has the buffettings of Satan to
humble him; Paul himself knew changes.

4. Distempers of spirit fasten and continue often with the servants of God:
Ezekiel was in his distemper of bitterness and heat of spirit seven days;
it is not easy to shake off distempers when they have taken hold of us: Jonas
was in an ill humor and frame of spirit many days together; he must be
drencht, buried and boiled in the Whales belly, ere he will be pliable to the
Will of God; when Vzzah was smitten for his error, David was displeased, and in
a pet with God himself, and would not bring the Ark in three months to Sion, 2 Samuel 6.

5. Distemperednesse of spirit unfits for the service of God; Jam. 1.19, 20.
Per iram sapientia perditur ut quid qu^ve ordine agendu^ sit omnino nesc^atur,
Greg 5. Moral. c. 30.
he fits seven days, and nothing is done. The Apostle James knew this, and
therefore said, Be slow to wrath; for the wrath of man works not the
righteousness of God; wrath darkens the mind, and puts all out of frame: wise
men in their wrath see not their ways nor work, when the light of Reason,
truth, and the Spirit is gone, what can a man do befitting God? wrath makes men
bungle in their own businesses, Per iramlux veritatis amittitur, Spiritus
sanct^ splendour excluditur, ibid.
much more in the Lords, it works not the righteousness of God, but its own
righteousness, that seems right in its own eyes, that shall be done; Ezekiel
thought it right not to prophecy, not to submit to the will of Christ, and
work of the Spirit, but his passion was prejudice to him and to the work of
God; it is evil when wrath prevents reason, forces it to action, Aquin. 3. p.
q. 15. art. 9.
then what ever is done, is the work of anger, not of reason, not of
righteousness; when wrath has the kingdom, when that is in the head and
heart, there is no place for the righteousness of God: Vbi est ira, ibi non
est Dominus, sed amica Satanae, l. 2. Constable.
this made Clem. say, where wrath dwells, God dwells not. Wrath is a special
friend of Satan's, many of his counsels and designs are effected by it; the
more of this humor, the more service has hell, the less of it, the more
serviceable for heaven: Moses was the meekest man upon the earth, and he did
most work for heaven; Christ was meeker then all other, and he did work the
righteousness of God effectually, he did work for heaven and earth.

6. That the Prophets could not prophecy at their pleasure; Ezekiel sits seven
days, and there is no prophesying. Aquinas has a question, whether prophecy be
a habit; if it were so, it is in the power of man to use it any time, but so
could not the Prophet, when the Shunamites son was dead, and she came to
Elisha, what said he? Her soul is in bitterness, and the Lord has hid it
from me, 2 Kings 4.27. and has not told me: unless the Lord reveal himself
unto them, de novo, the Prophet could not tell things; the Schoolmen therefore
conclude, that prophecy is not in the Prophet per modum habitus, sed per modum
impressionis transeuntis, habites are permanent things, but prophecy is a
transient thing, as light in the air; for as the air does always need a new
illumination; so the mind of a Prophet does always need a new revelation, else
the Prophet sits in darkness, and knows not more then other men; Lam. 2.9.
Her Prophets find no vision from the Lord; and so in Psalm. 74.9. There is no
more any Prophet, neither is there among us any that knows how long. It was
night often with the Prophets: Nathan spoke not from heaven, when he bid David
go, and do all was in his heart touching the building of God an house; for it
is said, that night came the Word of the Lord unto Nathan, 2 Samuel 7.3, 4.
before he had not a word, and when it came, it was not for David, but Solomon,
to build the house; Aliquando Prophetiae spiritus deest Prophetis, nec semper
little mentibus praesto est, Hom. 1. in Ezekiel.
so that it is true which Gregory says, Sometimes the spirit of prophecy is
wanting to the Prophets, and their minds are dark; Samuel mistook, when he
said, Surely the Lords anointed is before him, 1 Samuel 16.6, 7.

VER. 16. And it came to pass at the end of seven days that the Word of the
Lord came unto me, saying;

17. Son of man, I have made thee a watchman unto the house of Israel:
therefore hear the word at my mouth, and give them warning from me.

18. When I say unto the wicked, Thou shall surely die, and thou give him not
warning, nor speak to warn the wicked, from his wicked way, to save his
life, the same wicked man shall die in his iniquity: but his blood will I
require at thy hand.

19. Yet, if thou warn the wicked, and he turn not from his wickedness, nor
from his wicked way, he shall die in his iniquity, but thou have delivered thy
soul.


IN these words, and the rest, to the end of the Chapter, is a new Revelation,
made to the Prophet, together with the events following thereupon: or thus;

1. You have the Call of the Prophet to his Office renewed, and that is in the
words read, and on to the end of the 21th Verse.

2. Special directions and events laid down from the 21th verse to the end of
the Chapter.

In the words read, you have,

First, the circumstance of time, when this repetition of his Call, or new
Revelation was made, and that was after seven days, v. 16.

Secondly, his Office specified, which is to be a watchman, v. 17.

Thi^dly, the parties he is to watch over, and admonish:

1. In general laid down, and that is, the house of Israel, ver. 17.

2. More particularly: 1. The wicked, verse. 18, 19. 2. The righteous, verse. 20,
21.


Fourthly, the reasons of it, why he must admonish both sorts:

The first is, ab incommodo, the danger and mischief of it; both they and he
shall die if it be not done.

The second, ab utili, it may be they will turn upon admonition, and so be
saved; if not, yet the Prophet delivers his own soul, and there is advantage by
it.

The words in the 16th Verse have little difficulty in them.

At the end of seven days.
It Is probable the sitting still, and silence of the Prophet, was from Sabbath
to Sabbath, on that day he had his glorious Vision, and seven days after he
had a new Revelation, Junius.
The Word of the Lord came to him; all the six days he was solitary,
mourning, meditating, and silent, but on the seventh the Lord appeared again
unto him; and so after he had upon Sabbaths revelations from God.

Observe. 1. That God bears with the weaknesses and distempers of his servants;
Ezekiel declines the Call of Christ, show us his great ingratitude, having had
such great favors from Christ, seen so much glory, and being commanded once,
twice, to go and preach to the house of Israel, yet he sits down, is silent,
and that seven days together; this might have provoked the Lord to great
wrath, to have refused him, as a stubborn self-willed man, and made him to say;
he would never admit him to be his Prophet, put such honor upon him, entrust
him with such great matters, but the Lord bears with his weakness, yea, his
continued weakness: sometimes Gods anger kindles, and breaks out quickly, and
that for little things in our eyes and opinions; as the man gathered a few
sticks on the Sabbath, he must be stoned to death; those peeped irreverently
into the Ark, the Lord smote 50000 and upward dead for it presently, 1 Samuel 6.
Ananias and Saphira, a small matter in our conceits it was to keep back a
portion of their goods, and to excuse it with a lie; for this God was wroth,
and they died, Acts 5. but the weaknesses of his children he bears with, and
those great ones.

2. Man's will and weakness cannot hinder the efficacy and execution of Gods
decree; the Prophets spirit was against this work, he refused, sat still seven
days together, and would have frustrated Gods intentions, if he could, but it
was decreed in heaven, that decree was efficacious, his will must be brought
off, and he must be the man to execute Gods pleasure in a prophetical way to
the house of Israel; Jonas departs, will prejudice Gods design concerning
Ninive, but the Lord knew how to humble him, to fetch him back, being fled, and
to make him isntrumental to his ends, notwithstanding his wilfulness and
weakness, Psalm. 33.9. He commanded, and it stood fast, and verse. 11. The
counsel of the Lord stands for ever; let there be contrary counsels, wills,
commands, they stand not, Gods brings them to naught, he makes them of none
effect; Prove. 19.21. There are many devices in a man's heart; he thinks not to
do this, and not to do that, and it shall be so and so, nevertheless the
counsel of the Lord shall stand; he will perfect the work he has begun in
men, and by men, notwihstanding their infirmities.

3. Spiritual employments must have sedate, quiet, well-composed affections
and spirits; the Spirit of Prophecy came not upon Ezekiel all the time he was
distempered and discontented, but when time had wrought off the distemper, and
the il humor was digested, then was he stirred by the Spirit of prophecy: when
the Minstrell was tuned, then the hand of the Lord came upon Elisha, 2 King.
3.15. Men's hearts and spirits are like Minstrells, out of order quickly, and
long in tuning, and right setting; but the music is sweetest when the
Instrument is best set, then God delights to communicate his Spirit to us, to
employ us. In the night often God appeared to the Patriarchs; then were they most
quiet, and fittest to receive instruction. In Augustus his days, when there
was peace throughout the world, then was Christ given, then was he born. When
there is peace throughout the little world, then are we aptest for reception
of Christ, his instructions, and readiest for his service; God will not commit
weighty and great things to men, without due fitness for them. The Prophet had
this time deeply to consider of the business, and to get himself into such a
frame, as might best sort with the Function he was to be in.

4. The Lord does not leave his long, although they be in distempers; at the
end of seven days the Word of the Lord came unto him; we may by our failings
and distempers drive away God from us, but he will visit us again; he may be
gone all the week, but come again at the end of it; Psalm. 30.5. Gods anger is
for a moment, our weeping for a night, and joy in the morning; it is not long
this good Physician will be absent from his Patient, and when he comes, he will
comfort and cure.

5. Our Prophet brought not his own, but the Word of the Lord unto the people;
it is his Word must be commended unto them; Prophets, Apostles, Ministers, are
his Ambassadors, and must speak what is given them in Commission: If they go
or speak of their own heads, they provoke God and wrong the people; Jer. 23.30.
I am against the Prophets, says the Lord, that steal my word every one from
his neighbor; the false Prophets would take some sayings of the true Prophets,
and mingle them with their own lies and errors, to get the more credit unto
them, and sometimes by false interpretations they would wrest the Word to
establish their own fantasies; they would prophecy for their own glory and
profit, and this was stealing of the Word; they did handle the Word alieno
sensu, spiritu and fine, then God or the true Prophets intended; so that their
word was not conceived to be the Word of God, but their own, and yet they would
fasten it upon God, verse. 31. I am against the Prophets that use their tongues,
and say, (...)
He says. The word is Lokekim, which signifies, lenire, mollificari,
dulcorare, they flattered and smoothed up the people, speaking things pleasing,
and said, He says; they made God the author of their dreams, which the Lord
reproves in the 32. verse, and says, Behold, I am against them that prophecy
false dreams, and do tell them, and cause my people to err by their lies, and
their lightness, yet I sent them not, nor commanded them; therefore they shall
not profit this people at all, says the Lord: people had need look to their
teachers, what they are, whether sent of God, and such as speak the truths of
God, otherwise they can look for no blessing, no profit; but when men come in
Gods name, and with Gods Word, you may look for great benefit; you must expect
reality: for here are two words, which note reality and being, debar is verbum,
and res, (...)
jehi, factum est fuit, Gods words are things of great weight and worth.

VER. 17. I have made thee a watchman.


IN this Verse is the Office of Ezekiel laid down:

First, generally, a watchman.

Secondly, more peculiarly; 1. He must learn of Christ. 2. Warn the people.


A watchman.
Tzopheh is from Tzaphah, to watch, to see from a high place, to look about on
every side, to observe accurately; as in Prove. 15.3. The eyes of the Lord are
in every place, beholding the evil and the good, The word for beholding is
Tzophoth, the same with that in the Verse, and notes God exact and accurate
eyeing of things; and it is metaphorically taken from those that are set in
watch-towers, whose office is to observe with the eye, and intention of mind,
what danger is in preparation, approach, or execution, and to inform the city,
town or army, to which he is a watchman, that all may timously look to
themselves. If any fire, robbery, treachery, invasion, or danger whatsoever
appeared, the watchmen were wont to give notice by signs or voice, both in
the night and day, and that constantly; such was the Prophet to be here unto
the house of Israel, he was to foresee and foretell the dangers were
threatened, prepared, approaching, in execution; and this he was to do
constantly, according to that in Isaiah 21.8. I stand continually upon the
watchtower in the daytime, and I am set in my ward whole nights; so Genesis
31.40.

There were two sorts of watchmen God set in his Church; extraordinary,
Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists; and ordinary, Pastors and Teachers; these
continue to this day, and these watch for the good of souls, Heb. 13.17. and
their office is as the Prophets, to learn of Christ, and to warn the people:
the other are ceased.

Observe. 1. The goodness and bounty of Christ, that converseth with, and
communicates unto the sons of men his precious truths and counsels; Son of man,
says Christ, I have made thee, etc. It had been honor to Ezekiel to have had
an Angel confer with him, and impart secrets to him; it is a great matter to
have a Prince talk kindly to his subject, tell him his counsels and purposes;
what was it then for our Prophet, to have Christ, the Lord of Angels, and King
of kings to speak lovingly to him, to tell him of heavenly mysteries? And thus
he does to us in his Word, that yet never saw his face, there he opens himself
sweetly to us, all things being written for our instruction.

2. It Is Christ's Prerogative to appoint watchmen in the Church: I have made
thee a watchman; he might not make himself one; others without Christ's
Commission and directions, might not have made him one; men should not come
into the watchtower, except called, Heb. 5.4. if he do, he will prove
neither good watchman, nor good workman. Christ himself is the great
Watchman of the Church, he is the Head, and appoints who shall be in his
stead; 2 Cor. 5.20. the Apostles were in his stead; so the Prophet here, so are
all the faithful Ministers of the Gospel, who are called mediately by the
Church according to his will.

3. The Ministers of Christ must be men of knowledge; they are watchmen, and
watchmen must have eyes in their heads, they must not be blind: in 1 Samuel 9.9.
they are called Seers, if they have no eyes, they cannot be Seers, and if not
Seers, not watchmen, and then mischief may befall the Church suddenly, and that
without remedy; if the blind lead the blind they may both fall into the ditch;
Isa. 9.16. The leaders of this people cause them to err, and they that are led
of them are destroyed. Ignorance causes error, and error destruction;
therefore said the Apostle to the Elders of Ephesus, (...), Si in laicis
videtur intolerabilis inscitia, quanto magis in his qui praesunt, nec
excusatione est digna, nec venia? Leo Ep. Constable.
Take heed to the flock over which the Holy Ghost has made you overseers,
Acts 20.28. unto which, and over which you are overseers, Inspectors, or
Watchmen; the Septuag. renders it here in our Prophet, (...), and Orig. calls
a Bishop or watchman, oculum Ecclesiae, and Psalm. 109.8. Let another take his
office, the word office is from Pakad, which is to visit; and visiting cannot
be without eyes, without knowledge; if a watchman want eyes and knowledge, how
can he discern danger, instruct the ignorant, plaster the wounded, reduce the
straying, lift up the fallen, feed the hungry, comfort the feeble, resolve
conscience, and compare things past with things present and future: a watchman,
a Minister, should be like Argus, whom the Poets say, had an hundred eyes, they
should be full of eyes; the beasts about Christ's Throne were full of eyes,
before and behind, Rev. 4.6. they saw things gone, and things to come; they
saw every way: Ignorance is blameable in any, but chiefly in a watchman;
Papists say, Ignorance is the mother of Devotion, Did. 38. c. Ign.
but the Toletan Council tells them otherwise. Ignorance is the mother of all
errors, and chiefly to be avoided in the Ministers of God, who have taken upon
them the office to instruct the people of God. The Priests lips should keep
knowledge, not ignorance, Mal. 2.7. Let Antichrist have ignorant Priests, blind
watchmen, Christ must have knowing, judicious, seeing watchmen, They are men
of God, thoroughly furnished, 2 Timothy 3.17.

4. Ministers must not be sleepy, drouzie persons; they are watchmen, and it is
not enough to have eyes in their heads, but their eyes must be open; not
sufficient to have knowledge, but that must be improved; the wakefull Geese did
better service then the sleepy watchmen: Matthew. 13.25. while men slept, the
enemy came and sowed tares. By men Jerome and Augustine understand the officers
of the Church, and by their sleeping their carelessness and negligence in their
place: wicked ones took advantage to sow tares, errors and heresy, while they
were remiss. The same word that is for a Seer, is for a Sleeper, Chofim,
because, if men see not to purpose, they are no better then sleepers, such
watchmen Isaiah speaks of, Chap. 56.10. His watchmen are blind, sleeping, lying
down, loving to slumber; when the shepherds sleep, then the Wolves watch,
Somnolent a Pastorum est gaudium Luporum, Ephrem tract. de t^more Dei.
walk and devour, Acts 20.29. I know, that after my departure shall grievous
Wolves enter, not sparing the flock; therefore watch, says he, v. 31.
intimating, that if there be not watching of the Shepherds, there will be
fearful spoiling of the sheep; the sleepiness of the Shepherds is the joy of
the Wolves; Luke 12.37. Blessed are those, etc.

5. If Watchmen, then they must endure hardships, all winds and weathers, the
cold of the night, and heat of the day; they must look for succession of good
and bad. Isa. 21.11, 12. Watchman, what of the night? The watchman said, the
morning comes, and also the night. It was now night with the watchmen, there
were troubles, afflictions, sadding things; but there was a morning of hope,
and after that an evening of sorrows; changeable conditions which the watchman
must endure; 2 Timothy 2.3. Paul counsels Timothy to endure hardness as a good
soldier of Christ. Soldiers must not only stand sentinel in the night, and
day, but go upon desperate services; such a watchman was Paul, 2 Cor. 11.23. to
the 30th. He says, In stripes he was above measure, in prisons frequent, in
deaths often, five times he had forty stripes save one, thrice was he beaten
with cords, once stoned, thrice he suffered shipwreck, a night and a day in
the deeps, in perils every where, in weariness, painfulnesse, watchings,
fastings, cold, nakenesse, etc. The scouts and sentinels are exposed to the
greatest hazards, they are taken first; you know the Ministers are the men
stricken at in these days, they are likeliest to meet with the first and
greatest dangers; Josh. 3. when the people were to go through the waters of
Jordan, the Levites and Priests were first to go in, and to stand therein till
all the people passed over; it is the watchmen are to meet with the waters of,
affliction, and to stand in them.

6. That the Church and people of God, the house of Israel are subject to
dangers, enemies, otherwise what should a watchman need? cities, armies do not
send out scouts and watchmen, if there were no enemies; where there is watching
and warding, you may be sure of it there is danger. The Church is like a ship,
tossed at sea among rocks, sands, with winds and waves, and needs the most
skillful Pilot to direct and steer it; it is like a Lamb among Lions, and needs
the most watchful Shepherd; they were in much danger in Babylon amidst
scoffing enemies, and the Church is not safe in Sion, her children are the
Wheat, and the world thresheth them; they are the Vine, the Clusters, and the
wicked rend, press, tear them; what is the color of the Church but black?
Schisms have so divided her, Errors so shaken her, Heresies so tossed her, and
Persecutions so battered her, that she is black and blew, and hardly a sound
part left in her. The Church is besieged with devils and wicked men, open
enemies, secret hypocrites, endangered daily; out of its own bosom and bowels
do those arise that threaten the ruin of it daily, Act. 20.30. the Church has
bred Eutychians, Nestorians, Pelagians, Antitrinitarians, and a generation of
Vipers in our days, that under pretense of the Church, would eat up the true
Church; and certainly it had been done, if we had not had a better watchman
then Ezekiel; Isa. 27.3. I the Lord do keep it, lest any hurt it, I will keep
it night and day.

7. The watchmen are not for themselves, but for the flock, for the whole; I
have made thee a watchman to the house of Israel, not some particular person,
not some part, not to half, but to the house of Israel; when one is become a
watchman, he has a great trust committed to him, and must look to that, the
welfare of the whole depends on him: as a man, as a Christian he may foresee
danger, and hide himself, but as a watchman he may not foresee it, run away
and leave the flock to spoil, he must discover it, discharge the trust reposed
in him, and see to the safety of the whole, with the hazard of himself; if he
do not so, he will show himself a treacherous watchman, a false, fearful,
self-seeking Prophet; the good of Sion, and not of self should be aimed at in
every Prophet, in every Minister; but we may take up the Apostles complaint in
Phil. 2.21. all seeking their own, and not the things be Jesus Christ's, not his
Gospel, his Church, his government; Paul had the care of all the Churches upon
him, 2 Cor. 11.28. And for Corinth, he sought not theirs, but them, Chap.
12.14. their safety, their peace, comfort, growth in knowledge, in faith, in
all spiritual excellencies; and why? he looked upon them as his children, his
bowels, his heirs, and therefore would communicate all he could to them, and
do what was in his power for them. Hence he says in the 15th verse, (...).
I will very gladly spend, and be spent for you; the former word (...), notes
to be at cost with them, to take some pains; he would pray for them, preach to
them, write to them, do much; but the other word notes the spending of all; so
that he would keep back nothing at all, his state, his strength should go,
Super impendar.
so that he would empty himself wholly; and when that was done, then his
spirit, his blood, his life should go; Besides that false Apostles or teachers
will do, I will do more; if they will give you of their estates, you shall have
all mine; if they will take pains, I will take more; if they will venture their
liberties to do you good, I will venture my life and all for you; let them go
far, I will go beyond them, gladly will I be spent for you; it is for your
souls, not for your estates; and though he should get nothing by it, he would
do it, though they should love him the less; here is a great Apostle, of a
greater spirit, and of the greatest charity, he was careful of all those he
was a watchman unto, faithful in seeking their good; and should be a precedent
unto us.

Now, I come to the two particular, duties of the watchman, laid down in the
Verse: Therefore hear the word at my mouth, there is the first;
And give them warning from me, there is the second.


Observe. 1. That none have such a sufficiency of light, knowledge, grace, but
they must depend upon Christ for more; Ezekiel had seen and heard much, the
Spirit entered into him, he had eaten the roll, yet he must attend upon Christ,
and hear the word at his mouth; no Prophet, no Apostle, no Minister has a
perfection of knowledge, or knows the whole mind of Christ; Paul studied to
know Christ more and more; and so did other Apostles, if they had not received
daily, they could not have given daily.

2. The Ministers must learn as well as teach, hear before they speak; and
it is Christ they must hear, of him they must learn; Thou shall hear the word
at my mouth: they must have a word, but it must be a word of Christ; he spoke
immediately to Ezekiel, he speaks in his Word to us: Matthew. 17.4. Hear him,
says the Father; and why? he is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased,
what he says is truth, he had it from my bosom, out of my counsels, and it is
pleasing unto me; therefore hear him: and Mat. 23.8. One is your Master, even
Christ; (...), Doctor, o^ (...) vic.
he is the only teacher, according to the mind of God; he is the leader in the
way, in the right and good way. Then Prophets and Ministers must learn, and be
learned, but their learning is not to be fetched from Aristotle, Justinian,
Machiavil, from Traditions, Fathers, or Councels, but from Christ. Ministers
are watchmen, and therefore they must hear the Word at Christ's mouth; they
must inform the Church and people of God in nothing he speak not, and warrants
not; you have an excellent place in Habbak. 2.1. I will stand upon my watch,
and set me upon the Tower, and will watch to see what he will say unto me. The
Prophets eye and ear were toward God, he cared not what the people and false
Prophets said, desired, determined, expected, but he only looked at God, he
would see what he did hear, what he said, which way he moved, and take all
his light from him, and then he knew he should not err, he should not wrong
any; and it follows, The Lord answered me and said, Qui patrum p^^c^^a,
c^ncil^orum decreta, and visiones hominum pro verbo Dei Ecclesiae obtrudunt.
the Prophet durst not give out any thing to the Church, til the Lord first
gave out to him; and when ought was revealed to him, he durst not keep it back.
If prophets might not bring what they had not from the mouth of God, how shall
we dare to do it? they sin greatly, who obtrude upon the Church the wills and
decrees of men, as authentical.

3. That it is the office of Prophets and Ministers to premonish their people,
to foresee danger, and foretell them. The word Zahar, (...)
properly signifies to shine, inlighten, to make clear as the Son, and
metaphorically, to admonish, because he is admonished, Qui admonetur,
illustratur and de rebus futuris edocetur.
is enlightened. Ministers must deal plainly and clearly with sinners, convince
them of their sins, and the punishments are threatened against them: Ministers
must not daub and sow pillows under men's elbows; but as it is in Isaiah 58.1.
They must cry aloud, and not spare, they must lift up their voice like
trumpets, and show the people their transgressions, and the house of Jacob
their sins. The word show them, notes a setting of them before their faces; so
that they must see, and take notice of them, and the danger they subject unto;
the Ministers must not spare any, not great ones, not the greatest, the house
of Jacob must be told of them; and Ezekiel is a watchman to the house of
Israel, to the Kings, Princes, Nobles, great, small, to all; therefore all must
be warned. Chrysostom told Eudoxia the Empress of her sins, and spared not
for her greatness; she had set up a silver Statue, about which the people
exercised vain and needless sports, which tended to the disgrace of the
Church, and for this he dealt roundly with her; it is the Prophets fault, that
Princes and great ones are so bad, they seldom hear of their own sins, or
Gods truths.

4. The Prophets and Ministers of Christ are to do their office in the name of
Christ; Thou shall give them warning from me, not from thy self, not in thine
own name. Christ, when he was upon the great work of redeeming man, and
revealing the Gospel, said, he came in his Fathers name, Joh. 5.43. And did his
work in his Fathers name, Joh. 10.25. God sent the Son, and he did all in his
name; Christ sends Prophets, Apostles, Ministers, and they must preach and work
in his name, because what they ask in his name, they receive, it is done for
them; and what they do in his name abides, is blessed, Joh. 15.16. This should
prevail with people to receive the Messengers of Christ as his Messengers, as
those come in his name, what ever their message be, conviction of sin,
denouncing of judgment; says Paul, 2 Cor. 5.20. We pray you in Christ's
stead; and here Ezekiel must warn them from Christ, be it matter of comfort, or
terror, all must be done in Christ's name and stead, and they entertained as
those that are sent of Christ, and come from him: it is good for us so to do;
for in receiving them, we receive Christ, and that is not all; we receive the
Father also that sent Christ, Matthew. 10.42. A Minister is good company when he
brings God and Christ with him, and there is nothing lost by receiving any
Messenger of Christ the right way: verse. 41. He that receives a Prophet in the
name of a Prophet, shall receive a Prophets reward; you must not receive a man
because he is learned, witty, of note, Non quia dives, potens, amicus.
akin unto you, because he is engaged to you, or you to him, because you have
some design upon him, but you must receive him in the name of a Prophet,
because he belongs to Christ, is sent out by him, and comes in his name; and
then you shall have a Prophets reward, you shall profit by his Doctrine, he
shall bless you in the name of Christ, 1 King. 17. 2 King. 4.
his prayer shall be availeable for you; the widow of Sarepta lost nothing
entertaining Elijah, nor the Shunamite by receiving Elisha; their presence and
prayers did much advantage them. But you may take the words thus: a Prophets
reward, that is, the Prophets have a great, hard and glorious work in hand; and
the shall have an eminent reward in heaven: and seeing you receive them as
Prophets in my name, notwithstanding all the reproach, discouragements they
meet with, and danger their Doctrine brings; seeing you encourage them, and
help on their work, you shall have such reward as they have, be received into
the same Mansion I receive them.

VERSE. 18, 19. When I say unto the wicked, Thou shall surely die, and thou
give him not warning, nor speak to warn the wicked from his wicked way, to
save his life, etc.


IN these Verses, is a more particular object of his Office, viz. The wicked,
whom he must tell of his sin, or die for it; here was the operation of the
Roll, sad and bitter work in the thoughts and apprehensions of the Prophet.

When I say unto the wicked.
God speaks not immediately unto the wicked, how then is it here said, When I
say, etc. God sometime speaks to them by their conscience, which tells them from
God, that they are guilty, and shall die. But this reaches not the sense of the
words; it may be thus taken; When I say to the wicked; that is, in my Word;
Gods speaks to all wicked men in his Word, and there it is evidenced what is the
portion of every sinner; but yet there is somewhat more in this phrase: When I
say to the wicked, that is, of the wicked, thou shall die, and thou give him
not warning, etc. That in Heb. 1.7. Of the Angels he says, in the original
is, to the Angels, (...).
but the sense is of the Angels he says; and so here, to the wicked, is of the
wicked; or, if this be not full enough, you may take it thus; When I suggest to
thee by my Spirit, that the wicked shall die, and thou do not give him notice
thereof, etc.

Thou shall surely die.
Moth tamuth, in dying thou shall die, that is, (...)
thou shall certainly die; amongst the Hebrews, where there is repetition of
the word by an Adverb, Gerund, Participle, or the Verb it self, it ever
increases the signification of the first word; 1 King. 8.13. I have surely
built thee an house; it is in the Hebrew, In huilding I have built thee an
house; so in 1 Samuel 26.25. Thou shall do great things, and shall also still
prevail; the Hebrew is, faciendo facies, and valendo valebis, in doing thou
shall do, in prevailing thou shall prevail: by such duplication of the words,
the signification is intended, and so in these words, thou shall surely die.

In his iniquity.
That is, for his iniquity; so the Preposition Beth, it must be understood, if
he would take notice of his sin, repent and leave it, he should not die; but
because he goes on in it, he shall die for it: Hosea 12.12. there you find
Israel served for a wife; the Hebrew is Beishshah, (...)
in a wife; but the sense inforceth it to be rendered for a wife, and so here,
for his iniquity.

His blood will I require at thy hand.
His death shall be imputed unto thee, and thou shall answer for it, I will
charge it upon thy head, and deal with thee as a murderer, thou have shed his
blood, and I will avenge it on thee; so the word inquire imports, Genesis 9.5.
Surely your blood of your lives will I require, etc. Require is thrice in that
verse; and what is meant by requiring the blood, or life of man, is fully
expressed in the next Verse, Who so sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood
be shed; so then when blood is shed, and life is lost, Gods requiring of it is
to have blood for blood, and life for life; he that sheds blood, or suffers
blood to be shed, when he may prevent it, he shall be responsible for it. God
is wronged by shedding of blood, and will have satisfaction for it; therefore
he is said to make inquisition for blood, Psalm. 9.12. Gods requiring,
mentioned, Deuteronomy. 18.19. is expounded by Peter, of destruction, Acts 3.23.

What death is meant in this Verse, is doubted among Interpreters; whether the
death of the body, or of the soul, or of both; the Ancients interpret it of the
death of the soul, the soul of the wicked going on in his sin, and of the
Prophet neglecting his duty, shall die for it: some later Expositers would have
it meant of the death of the body, some temporal judgment to cut them off by;
but we see many ill Prophets, that neglect to warn the wicked of their evil
ways, and many wicked men go on in their sinful courses, and neither are
taken away by temporal judgments: the young Prophet was slain by a Lion, 1
King. 13. because he was less faithful then he should have been; and Jonas
was cast into the deeps, buried in the belly of a Whale, because he declined
the service of the Lord; but these were extraordinary acts and chastisements,
not vindictae, true, real punishments. I conceive therefore by death is meant
all calamities leading unto death, H^c loco accipitur sanguis pro animae
damnatione, licet etiam pro corporis caede and pernicie possit intelligi. Pint.
in loc.
and the death of soul and body at last, if faith and repentance did not
intervene; if eternal death be due to the sinner, dying in his sins, it is
threatened to the Prophet for not telling him of his sin, otherwise a temporal
punishment for an immortal soul, lost eternally by the negligence of the
Prophet, should be all the recompense made, and that is not compensatio
sufficiens, nay, frequently there should not be any, for ill and idle Prophets
do live as long, as healthfully and happily as others, and die without any hand
of God observable upon them.

Observe. 1. The Lord Christ knows who are wicked and vile; we guess at men,
and presume often wrongfully they are such, but the Lord knows who are such in
truth, and is not deceived; he knows the Goats and Swine as really as the
Sheep and Lambs, he can distinguish between the vile and precious, between his
jewels and the reprobate silver, he never mis-titles or miscalls any, he knew
the Scribes and Pharisees were hypocrites, and therefore called them so; he
knew that Judas was a Traitor, Non eadem est sententia tribunalis Christi and
anguli susurronum, Jer. Ep. 39.
and therefore branded him with that name: he called Herod a Fox, Nathaniel a
true Israelite, and in neither was he mistaken; 2 Timothy 2.19. The Lord knows
them that are his, yea, and those that are not his; Christ could tell Ezekiel
what the people of Israel were better then himself that dwelt amongst them, he
told him they were Briers, Thorns, Scorpions, a rebellious House, if all the
world besides had said so, and not Christ, it had been no great matter, the
world is full of error, it mistakes; but when the Lord himself, who is
infallible, shall pronounce a man wicked, then is he wicked indeed, there is
great weight in it, let us look to it; what he says in his Word of us; if he
call us wicked, proud, froward, etc. we are so.

2. The power of life and death is in Christ's hand; when I say to the wicked,
Thou shall die, he has authority over their lives, and can at his pleasure
pronounce them dead men, Act. 3.15. he is the Prince of life; and Rev. 1.18.
he has the keys of hell and death, he can let out the soul from the body,
and let it into hell when he will. The life of man which is most dear to him
is at the will of another; He spoke with authority, when he said, Bring those
mine enemies that will not have me to rule over them, and slay them before
me, Luke 19.27. When men are armed with power over our lives, they are much
feared: Judges, when they go forth to keep Assizes, make Counties to quake; and
Princes, when they go forth to war, make Kingdoms tremble. Now Psalm. 2.10, 11.
Kings and Judges are commanded to serve him with fear, to kiss him with
subjection, lest he be angry, and command them to be slain, or tell them they
shall die. If Kings and Judges that make others fear, must fear the Lord
Christ, and submit unto him, how should all under them do it then? Christ
knows us, what we are, how we have sinned, what we deserve, and can in a
moment destroy us, or proclaim it our consciences that we shall die in our
iniquities, and eternally suffer for them; It was he awakened Judas's
conscience, and set it on fire, let out his life, and sent his soul to
perdition; Be you great or small, he is the Lord, he is ruler of the Princes of
the earth, all power is in his hand; and though he be the Lamb of God, yet he
is also the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, and can shake Kingdoms, consciences
with his voice, let us fear before him.

3. When Christ sends Prophets and Ministers, he does not denude himself of
his power, and authorize them to condemn or absolve at their pleasure, they
must depend upon Christ, hear him speak, and say of the wicked, Thou shall
surely die; before they pronounce a man a dead man, a wicked man: their power
is declaratorie, and if Christ do not declare to them, they must not declare
against others; Jam. 4.12. There is one Lawgiver, who is able to save, and to
destroy; Who art thou that judge another? none have power to make or impose
Laws upon the good or the bad, but Christ, all others must have warrant from
him, be they Princes or Prophets; and why? It Is he that has the power to save
and to destroy, not they, and therefore it follows; Who art thou that judge
another? it is arrogance and boldness in any, to step into Christ's place, and
impose any laws, decrees, or inventions of men upon the consciences of others,
or to judge the conditions of men without warrant from Christ and his Word;
Prophets may not do it, much less others. Hence, what the Prophets, and all
Ministers say, must be examined, to the Law, and to the Testimony, Isa. 8.20.
if they speak not according to this Word, it is because there is no light in
them, no mourning, (says the Hebrew) because Christ has not appeared unto
them, warranted them, and then their impositions and censures have no weight in
them, and we may prudentially refuse them.

4. The fruit of sin is death; if wickedness be found in men, death will be
threatened from God; wickedness calls for its pay, and that is death: If I say
to the wicked, Thou shall surely die; when man's wickedness clamors in heaven,
Christ will call the sound of death to be heard on earth; Romans 6.23. The wages
of sin is death; the word is (...), and properly signifies what ever is edible
with bread, and Synecdochically the wages or salarie of soldiers, and it
suites in both senses with our purpose: Ephesians. 5.11.
sin is a work, and a work of darkness, a work of the flesh, Gal. 5.19. and
they commit it are workers of iniquity, Psalm. 55. and it is equity that workmen
should have meat and wages, and here is both, death is the delicates that the
sinner has to feed upon, and death the wages that the sinner earns, such meat
and wages he is sure to have: others may miss of both, work and have no meat,
work and go without wages; but this workman, the wicked man, he shall never
miss of either of these, he shall surely die, his meat and wages shall not be
withheld; man's own sin will slay him, Prove. 5.22.

5. The Prophets and Ministers of Christ, must not only warn the people, but
warn them often, warn them themselves, and speak to warn, put on others also to
do it; they must not be flack, remiss in this business, they must do it
earnestly, constantly, use all means to regain the wicked; the repetition of
the words imports so much; if thou give him not warning, nor speaks to warn;
he must be solicitous and frequent in the work; Paul knew it, and therefore
counsels Timothy, not only to preach the Word, 2 Timothy 4.2.
but to be instant, in season and out of season; carnal reason counts
preaching unseasonable, that is, upon week days and occasional; but the
servants of God must take all opportunities to warn sinners of their evil
courses, and to win souls; Christ forbear his meat and drink, and Paul his
sleep, to preach unto the people: Acts 20.7.
flesh and blood judges night preaching unseasonable, if not unlawful, but
Paul thought it not unseasonable to preach even till midnight to do them good,
he was a night preacher and a day preacher, verse. 31. says he, by the space
of three years I ceased not to warn every one night and day, such was his
vigilance and diligence, he was exceeding careful to prevent evil, and to do
them good, Phil. 3.18. he told them often of the thing, and warned them to take
heed of the same men.

6. There is hope of wicked men, that live in dissolute ways; before, the Lord
termed them a rebellious nation, impudent children, stiffe-hearted, Briers,
Thorns, Scorpions, most rebellious, that rebellious house; and here he calls
them wicked ones; and yet they must be warned, that they may return from their
wicked ways and live; some are hopeful and curable, where wickenesse prevails
generally, and all seems desperate: Manasses was as wicked a King as lived, a
great Idolater, a great dealer with Inchaunters, Wizards and familiar Spirits,
a great seducer of the people, to make them do worse then the nations did, a
great shedder of innocent blood; so that the Text says, he did wickedly above
all that the Amorites did, 2 King. 21.11. yet this great sinner found mercy,
greater then all his sins; 2 Chronicles. 33.12, 13. he humbled himself greatly, he
prayed, and God was entreated of him; he is wicked one day, may turn another
day, he may become penitent and believing the next day, that is cursing,
blaspheming this day, as in Saul; some come in early, at the third, sixth,
ninth hour, others late, at the eleventh and twelvth; the Thief came in at the
last hour; let times be never so corrupt, persons desperately wicked, yet there
is hope, and God may have a seed amongst them, let us throw the net often, we may
catch fish in mari mortuo.

7. The end and scope of a Prophet and Ministers labors must be to save life;
he must warn the wicked, that so he may save his life, preserve his soul; Paul
tells Timothy, that by preaching and continuing in the Word, he should say
himself, and those that heard him, 1 Timothy 4.16. Men's lives and souls are in
great danger daily, Errors, Heresies, Lusts, Temptations, threaten ruin and
destruction to men continually; the work and care of the Prophets is, to secure
them from these, and to recall them from their sinful practices: Jam. 5.20. He
that converts the sinner from the error of his way, shall save a soul from
death, and hide a multitude of sins: that which Ezekiel calls the sinners
wicked way, James calls the error of his way, his sinful manners, actions,
courses, opinions, humors, affections and principles; from these must the
servant of God labor to deliver him. It Is Ministers work, and the end of the
Ministry, to save souls; therefore,

First, their scope must not be to show learning, wit, eloquence, 1 Cor. 1.17.
The Apostle preached, but not with wisdom of words; not with excellency of
speech, Chap. 2.1. not with enticing words of man's wisdom, verse. 4. and he
gives the reason of it; lest the cross of Christ should be made of none
effect, that is, lest men should think they are saved, rather by virtue of man's
wisdom then Christ's passion; or as it is more fully in Chap. 2. ver. 5. Regnum
Dei non in eloquentia, sed in fide constat.
that their faith should not stand in the wisdom of men, it will go off from
one to another, as men are more witty, and hold out the truth, in siner and
more enticing expressions, which will prove evil; therefore he declined the
wisdom of men, and preached in demonstration of the Spirit, that their faith
might stand in the power of God, in such conviction and operation of the
Spirit, as might breed invincible steadfastness in them.

Secondly, not to please men; Gal. 1.10. Do I seek to please men? if that were
my end, I should not be the servant of Christ; but he must serve Christ in
saving of souls, not in pleasing of men, when that is propounded unto men, they
will subject truth to men's humor, and become flatterers; but Ministers must not
do so, not frame their Sermons according to men's humors and minds: Jer. 15.19.
Let them return unto thee, but return not thou unto them; do not thou comply,
debase the truth to please them, but speak as the Oracles of God, and let them
please or provoke, it matters not; the provoking of them may be the nearest way
to their salvation, and that is thy end.

Thirdly, not to get a living; that is not the end of a Prophets office, it is
to make men living men, to save their lives and souls, Paul preached the Gospel
without charge to any, and told the Corinthians, he sought them, not theirs,
their souls, not their substance; yet he denies not, but that they that preach
the Gospel should live of it, 1 Cor. 9.14. It Is fit Preachers should have
maintenance, and sufficient, but the end of preaching is not a living, but
life; Cadit Asina, and est qui sublevet eam perit anima and nemo est qui
reparet, Bern.
the life of sinners, to save, to deliver them; seeing this is the end of their
calling, how should it quicken them to their work? If a Sheep were in a pit, a
child in a fire, what haste would we make to pull them forth? and shall we
see souls rushing into the eternal pit, the eternal fire, and not move our
feet, our tongues to help them?

8. The office of a Prophet and Minister is honorable; it is to save life, to
save souls, their Calling is conversant about the lives and souls of men; the
soul is the immediate work of God, the Image of God, of more worth then all the
world; it was for the souls sake, Magna res anima quae Christi sanguine
redempta est, Bern. Ep.
that Christ came down from heaven, prayed, preached, wrought Miracles,
suffered death, and gave his heart-blood; this made the Father say, Precious is
the soul, being redeemed with Christ's blood; and being a thing of such worth
and consequence, the Ministers work is to save it; that very work which is the
Lords and Christ's, therefore in 1 Cor. 3.9. the Apostle says of himself, and
all Ministers, (...).
We are laborers together with God, co-workers, concurrent with God in the
salvation of sinners; this is great honor, In Obad.
and made Jerome say, Ipse Salvator Apostolos suos mundi esse voluit
salvatores, Christ has made Apostles saviors of the world; he calls them the
light and salt of the world, they inlighten the blind, and season the unsavory
souls of men, and so save them from corruption and perdition; it is an hard, but
an honorable work, therefore says James, Let him know that has converted a
sin^^, that he has saved a soul from death, Jam. 5.20. let him know it, it is
a great and glorious work is done, that he may be encouraged, and God be
praised.

9. Ignorance will be no plea for wicked men; if they be not warned, not told
of their sins, they shall die: men are apt to excuse themselves, they are
ignorant, they knew not this or that to be sins, their Teachers were
insufficient or negligent: and this may be truth; but neither their fault, nor
thy ignorance will be a sufficient plea before God, warned or unwarn'd, the
wicked shall die: Isa. 27.11. It is a people of no understanding, therefore he
that made them will not have mercy on them, and he that formed them will show
them no favor; Nescience may excuse in part, but ignorance hardly at all; that
which men produce in favor of themselves, God produces against them; you are
an ignorant people, says God, of no understanding, you know not prima
principia, neither God nor your selves, and think because you are ignorant,
therefore to find mercy and favor at my hands, but you are deceived, your
ignorance aggravates your woe ever; therefore will I show you no mercy, no
favor; those are ignorant of God and his ways, God will be ignorant of them
in their greatest straits, Depart frm me, I never knew you, Matthew. 7.23.
Ignorance is a great evil, it makes men brutish, like Nebuchadnezzar, who had
an Oxes heart in a man's shape: ignorance is part of the Devils image, as
knowledge is of Gods; we should labor therefore to get knowledge, savory and
saving; for it is not good that the heart be without knowledge, Prove. 19.2.

10. See here who are the most cruel, bloody, and damning Ministers, even
those that are silent, that warn not the people of their sins, that preach
flattering things, or to no purpose; let men be dumb, and not speak at all, or
preach, so as not to warn them of their sins and dangers, they are, who ever
they be, whether the greater or lesser Clergy, as they use to distinguish
themselves, they are the bloody, damning, soul-murthering Ministers; you cry
out of those Ministers that tell you most of your sins, that set judgment,
hell and damnation before you, they be bitter, harsh men, cried out of on all
sides; whereas they are the faithfullest friends that sinners have; they would
fain save your souls, pull you out of the pit, keep you out of hell, and help
you into heaven, and are they censurable for this? should one see a company of
travelers going in a way they should fall into the hands of Cavaliers or
Thieves, and tell them the danger of it with great affection and compassion,
should another see them, and say nothing, or bid them go on, and they do so,
are taken, stripped, imprisoned, starved to death, you can easily tell which of
these dealt most faithfully and friendly, which treacherously and cruelly: too
many of the Ministers in England have been faulty this way, and guilty of
murdering multitudes, if not millions of souls; it is one of the crying sins of
the Land, that we have had such a dumb, insufficient, and consequently such a
bloody soul-damning Ministry: And many amongst them having slain souls, now by
putting on these wars, seek to slay bodies also.

11. There is a great necessity lies upon the Prophets and Ministers of
Christ, to preach, and to preach home to the conscience; warn them they must,
and so warn them, that they may take notice, else it is in vain, and shall be
before the Lord as no warning; this they must do, and do it often; and why? else
the blood of the wicked will be required at their hand, their blood, their
lives, lie at the stake for sinners souls, they have a hard task, a dangerous
Calling, and therefore had need preach, and tell them of their sins, that if it
be possible, they may save their souls, if not, their own; people wonder many
times at some Preachers, they are so fiery, so particular, so terrible, so
long, you may cease to wonder, their lives, their souls, go for it, if they do
it not; the hazard of souls and lives will make dumb men speak; Croesus son
being dumb, and seeing one ready to strike and endanger the life of his father,
cried out, What, will you kill my father? and if our dumb Ministers had any
faith, if they did believe that sin was slaying the souls of their people, they
would lift up their voice, they would speak; Psalm. 116.10. I believed, said
David, therefore have I spoken; and godly Ministers believe men's souls are in
danger, that their own do lie at the stake, and therefore they have spoken, do
speak, and will speak: you that have curam animarum, the charge of souls, look
about you, if you discharge not your duty, you undo them, and undo your selves;
let not fear, favor, credits, gifts, hopes, misbiass you; let not
difficulties, mistakes of people, or any other thing discourage you, but
remember your own danger, warn sinners, else their blood will be upon you, and
that is a dreadful thing; did men well consider this, they would not be so
greedy of Livings, and pawn their souls for pelf; if the death of the body were
only here meant, as it is not, we have great cause to fear silence; for if we
be liable to death for the death of that which is perishable, and must die,
what guilt then does a Prophet contract for the death of a soul which might
have lived for ever, if he had done his duty? David knew the weight of
blood-guiltinesse, Psalm. 51.14. when he cried out so, Deliver me from
blood-guiltinesse, etc. that was but the blood of the body; what then is the
blood of souls? it is a mountainous sinking thing; we have sins sufficient of
our own; we had not need to draw the guilt of others upon us; Alienas mortes
addimus, quiae tot occidimus, quot ad mortem ire quot idic tepidi and tacentes
v^demus, Greg. in loc.
so many we kill, as we see to sin, and silently suffer to go on in their sins.
Paul knew it, and therefore said, Woe is unto me, if I preach not the Gospel, 1
Cor. 9.16. And there is a woe to all that have charges, that preach not unto
them; it is The world is full of Priests, Sed tamen in mess Dei rarus valde
invenitur operator. we take upon us the office, but opus officii non implemus,
Gre. Hom. 17.
needful for us all, but especially, for Non-residents, dumb Ministers, those
are negligent in their preaching, or impertinent, to meditate often on these
words; his blood will I require at thy hands, which words are fulmina, non
verba, says Erasmus: when the Bell rings for a wicked man, fear, lest there
be blood to be required at thy hand. Herod. l. 9.
Euenius a Shepherd, that had the Sheep belonging to a city committed to him,
through his negligence, a Wolf entered, and devoured sixty of them; upon this
he was condemned and lost his eyes. Not only Ministers, but Parents and
Masters, their souls are engaged for their children and servants, and they must
be responsible for them, if they warn them not, if they perish through their
default.

12. It Is the duty of people to hear their Ministers, and willingly to receive
instructions, and take warning from them, especially people of their Ministers,
because they watch for their souls, they work for them, and they venture for
them, even their own lives and souls; it is mercy God will send any to admonish
us, if we hearken to admonitions we shall live, if we do not, we grieve the
servants of God, if they be silent, our sins are not the less.

VER. 19.
Observe. 1. THat men may be warned from their wicked ways, and yet be never
the better, they may go on still; this is too evident amongst us daily.

2. It is not fruitless, if wicked men return not from their evil ways upon
warning: The Prophet has warned the wicked, and has freed his own soul: and
this was a great comfort unto Paul, Act. 20.26. when he appeals to the people
themselves, I take you to record this day, that I am pure from the blood of all
men; and how does he prove it? thus; for I have not shunned to declare unto you
all the counsel of God. He left none unwarn'd of sin and danger, untaught their
duty toward God and man; and therefore he had this testimony, yielding sound
comfort, I am pure from the blood of all: so when he had preached Christ to
the Jews, and they opposed, blasphemed, he shook his raiment, and said, your
blood be upon your own heads, I am clean, Act. 18.5, 6. much like that of
David, 2 Samuel 3. I and my kingdom are guiltless before the Lord for ever from
the blood of Abner; Let it rest on the head of Joab. That which Paul calls
clean, David calls guiltless, when a man is guiltless he is clean, he has
solid comfort; a Minister having conscionably warned the wicked, and nothing
comes of it in regard of them, yet somewhat comes of it in regard of himself;
he is a free man, a clear man; the blood of souls shall not be charged upon
him. A Minister that is faithful, shall not need to complain of the want of
success; if he save not others he shall save himself.

VER. 20, 21. Again, when a righteous man does turn from his righteousness,
and commit iniquity, and I lay a stumbling block before him, he shall die,
because thou have not given him warning, he shall die in his sin, and his
rightousnesse that he has done, shall not be remembered, but his blood will I
require at thy hand.

21. Nevertheless, if thou warn the righteous man that the righteous sin not,
and he does not sin; he shall surely live, because he is warned: also thou have
delivered thy soul.


IN these words is laid down the other part of the Prophets Charge; it is not
only the wicked, but the righteous also fall under his care; and if he sin, and
be not warned, that effect will be dangerous and deadly to the Prophet; he is
not only to deal with the wicked, to get them into the way of God, but also
with the righteous, to see that he go not out of the way, and if he do, to
reduce him, guilt will lie upon a Prophet, if he do not call upon the wicked
for repentance: and likewise, if he keep not the righteous in the right way,
them must not he suffer to run out into errors, into loose courses, but he must
inform them of the danger, bring them to a sound mind, into the right way, and
confirm them in the truth, otherwise their blood will be required at his hand.

There is difficulty in these words, and they must be opened unto you: In Prove.
10.25. The righteous is an everlasting foundation, and Chap. 12.3. The root of
the righteous shall not be moved, Verse. 7. The house of the righteous shall
stand: Matthew. 25.46. They go into life eternal; if so, how says our Prophet
here; When a righteous man turns from his righteousness? it seems that
righteousness is not an incorruptible seed, a man may leave it, fall into sin,
and die in it. I must therefore bestow some time in opening these words:

When a righteous man does turn from his righteousness, etc.
You shall find in Scripture, a double righteousness, and so suitable
Righteous men: there is,

1. A righteousness of faith, Romans 9.30. and this is in Phil. 3.9. the
righteousness of God by faith; this is Evangelical righteousness.

2. There is the righteousness of the Law, Romans 2.26. Chap. 10.5. and this is
called a man's own righteousness, Romans 10.3. Phil. 3.9. Not having mine own
righteousness, which is of the Law. When a man's actions are suitable unto the
Law, that is legal righteousness, and so his own.

According to these two, are two sorts of Righteous men:

1. The man that is righteous by faith, who has the pardon of his sins, union
with Christ, and communion with God, such an one is he Peter speak of, 1 Pet.
4.18. If the righteous be scarcely saved; such an one John mentions, 1 Epist.
2.29. and Paul points at such, Romans 5.19. and their right^ousnesse remains
for ever, 2 Cor. 9.9. Of a man righteous in this sense, I conceive the words
are not meant; this righteousness makes a man's person righteous, and righteous
before God.

2. There is a righteous man according to the Law; Paul was such a man before
his conversion; Phil. 3.6. Touching the righteousness which is in the Law,
says he, I was blameless; and men righteous in this sense, are either s^^ning,
or real: seeming, Mat. 23.28. Ye outwardly appear righteous unto men, but
within ye are full of hypocrisy and iniquity; men thought them to be
righteous, but God knew them to be wicked and; such Legalists think themselves
righteous, Luke 18.9. they trusted in themselves that they were righteous, in
others, and their own eyes they seemed so, but in truth were not so: Zachary
and Elizabeth were righteous before God, Luke 1.6.

But there is an outside actionall righteousness before men, without reality
within, and from this it is no difficult thing to turn aside; and of such a
righteous man we may understand this place. The Chaldee expounds it so; Eos qui
justi videri volunt, permittam in publicum peccatum labi; those that seem to be
righteous, I will suffer to fall into open sins. And the Scholiast refers a
righteous man to the Priest, who has Doctorall dignity, and seems to love
virtue but does not; and the soundest Interpreters agree in it: Calvin calls it
a righteousness which has externam speciem tantum, non radicem; many have
been zealous in the service and Cause of God, and gone beyond others in
promoting his glory, but have had no true root within; such were those promoted
lately with much intention the Prelaticall ways and Innovations, but now are
turned from their righteousness, and are become Parliament converts; their
righteousness lay in opinion, not in reality, and such is this here; and the
Scripture speaks frequently, after the opinions and conceits of men; I came not
to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. The Pharisees were conceived
by this world and themselves to be righteous, when in truth they had none; and
Matthew. 8.12. The children of the kingdom shall be cast out into utter
darkness; they were not so really, but in opinion, and externally.

2. Be it here meant a real righteous man, whose inside and outside is
suitable to the Law, blameless; as Paul and Zachary; yet he that stands upon
that foundation, viz. the Law, he will slide from his righteousness: witness
Adam, who had a fuller righteousness then any of his sons since, and yet he
turned away from it. The Law required two things; to depart from evil, and to
do good; and he did the contrary, depart from good, and do evil; and in this
he has too many followers, all his children have traced those steps; and men
that not only seem, but are legally righteous, may still do it, the 18th
Chapter of this Prophecy is clear for it.

3. If it should be granted that here is meant a man justified, righteous with
the righteousness of faith, it follows not that he must necessarily turn
from his righteousness, lose his faith, and be in an unjustified condition;
Gal. 1.8. If we, or an Angel from heaven should preach any other Gospel unto
you then what we have preached, let him be accursed. It cannot be inferred
hence that an Angel will, or ever shall preach another Gospel, it is 1500. years
since this was writ, and no Angels have attempted any such thing, nor ever
will. Hypotheticall Propositions, according to Logitians, Nihil ponunt in esse,
they produce no effects, but they prove the necessity of a consequent, as thus;
1 Cor. 15.14. If Christ be not risen, then is our preaching, and your faith in
vain; the suppositian does not enforce that Christ is not risen, but it
strongly proves, that if Christ be not risen, that preaching and believing in
Christ are in vain; and so here, if a righteous man could turn from his
righteousness, he should die, but he that is once righteous with the
righteousness of faith, is ever righteous, because Gods decree is
unchangeable, 2 Timothy 2.19. his love is permanent; Joh. 13.1. his promises are
faithful, 1 Cor. 1.8. 2 Cor. 1.20. he forgets not his covenant; Psalm. 89.35.
Christ's prayers are efficacious; Quod gratia somel fecit, perpetuo manner, Thom.
3. p. q. 88.
Joh. 11.41, 42. Joh. 17.15. because he is united to Christ, and that union is
indissoluble; 1 Cor. 12.13. because the Spirit abides in them; 1 John 2.27. and
lastly, because he is kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, 1
Pet. 1.5.

Commit iniquity.
The Hebrew Asah, or Gnasah Avel, is to do evil, (...).
and answers to that phrase in the new Testament, poiein hamartian, 1 John
3.4. he that commits sin; and this phrase of committing sin, has more in it
then Hamartanein, which is to sin, to miss the mark; for, 1 John 2.1. (...),
If any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father; Christ pleads and
intercedes for such a sinner* but he that commits sin is of the Devil, 1 John
3.8. he is his son, he is of his seed, family, kingdom, acted by his counsel
and spirit; it is his trade to sin as it is the Devils, and this trade he
delights in and follows; a godly man has given it over; 1 John 3.8. He that
has this hope purifies himself: and then follows; He that commits sin; and
it is in opposition to him that purifies himself from sin, he is a man that
minds not holiness. Besides this, Joh. 8.34. He that commits sin is the
servant of sin; where sin reigns, and its counsels, laws, commands are obeyed
by men, there is the commission of sin; it is a ready, a willing obedience; to
commit sin, Romans in Joh.
is magnopere delectari peccato, to have a man's will and heart in it; when a
man's thoughts, counsels, meditations, purposes, lie that way, and he is given
to that work, (...), is a sin-maker, one that is an Artist, a workman, such
the Prophets speaks of, Jer. 4.22. They are wise to do evil; Ezekiel. 21.31.
skillful to destroy; some are bunglers in that work, others take pleasure in
it, and set it off better. That in Romans 13.14. Make no provisions for the flesh
to fulfill the lusts thereof; men love to provide for their families, their
wives and little ones, and when they do so, they make provision, and so men
love to provide for the flesh and lusts of it, and then they make sin, or
commit sin. There be three expressions in Scripture about sin, which give us
light in this point: 1. Nomos hamartias, the law of sin, Romans 7.23. 2. Hodos,
the way of sin, Matthew. 7.13. 3. Apotelesma, the perfection of sin, Jam. 1.15.


When a man subjects to the law of sin, chooses and walks in the way of sin,
and brings sin to a perfection, then does he commit sin.

And I lay a stumbling block before him.
The Hebrew is, and I give a stumbling block before his face; Mi^sol comes of
Cachal, to dash against, to offend, to fall; and a stumbling block is that a
man dasheth his foot against, is offended at, and falls by; the same with
scandalum, the bridge in a trap, which when Vermin, or wild beasts touch,
they are taken; so that to lay a stumbling block in a man's way, is to trap him,
destroy him. This phrase of Gods laying a stumbling block before him, seems
very harsh; therefore some Fathers think the word stumbling black is not here
put in an ill sense, as tending to his destruction, that turns from his
righteousness, but that it proceeds from favor, not hatred. When a just man
goes out from God, God will cross him in his sinful way, not let him thrive
in it, but cast in something contrary to his expectation and intention, whereby
he may come to see his error, and be reduced, according to that in Hos. 2.6, 7.
Theod. thinks God will set hell before him, and therefore he renders it
Barathrum, I will lay hell before him; as if God would present the terrors of
hell, and state of the damned to him, to make him consider and return to his
former righteousness. But this sense of the Fathers coheres not with what
follows, he shall die; this stumbling block is in order unto his death: it
was the watchmans part to propound heaven, hell all arguments possible to do
him good, else he should die. Some other Expositors would have it to be meant
of punishment, that God would punish such a sinner by some act of his, make him
smart, repent, and so to live; therefore the Septuag. render it Basanon
torment, (...).
God would afflict his body or conscience; and if it be taken in this sense,
then you must carry it further; God would punish him, not in a saving, but a
destroying way; and therefore this stumbling block comes not from love, but
revenging justice. I conceive Gods laying a stumbling block, is to be taken for
the punishment of sin past, and an occasion of sin future; the righteous man
having turned from his righteousness, God might lay aside that peculiar care
and providence which he exercised formerly toward that man, he may take away
those means and helps should preserve from stumbling, let him go on in just
judgment for his deserting him, and not recall him, but turn all things into
snares and stumblings unto him, whereby corruptions are ripened, and
destruction is hastened; Psalm. 69.22. Let their table become a snare before
them, and that should be for their welfare, let it become a trap; when God in
his justice once orders it so, that men's tables (that is, all their comforts)
do turn to their ruin, then he lays stumbling blocks before them. Neither is
God the author of sin, but the avenger of it, by denying assistance,
propounding objects, and exciting affections: God may be said to ^ay stumbling
blocks, but he never infuses any corruption; and so that in James, God tempts
no man, Chap. 1. 13. is to be understood: Gregory says, this laying a
stumbling block, Est nequ^quam ad pecoandum premere, sed n^lle a peccato
liberare, he is not the cause of any man's sin, the occasion he may be without
sin. A man may lay money to try his servant; God takes away estates from men,
gives peace to the wicked; true, he lays before them outward occasions, 2 Samuel 16.21, 22. he gives Satan leave to tempt and seduce them; 2 King. 22.22.
when they are out of his way, he carries them forward in their own evil way;
Psalm. 105.25. and this he does in justice, punishing one sin with the occasion
or commission of another; hence he is said to add iniquity to their iniquity,
Psalm. 69.27. to send them strong delusions, or, as the words are, the efficacy
or activity of error, 2 These. 2.11. to give up to uncleanness, to vile
affections, to a reprobate sense, Romans 1.24, 26, 28. God finds sin in man, and
may draw it out without sin: there is survitas in Rosa, foetar in cadavere, the
Sun by his beams draws forth the one and the other, and without fault.

His righteosness shall not be remembered.
Men may remember it, but God will not, he will have no regard to what is done
to reward it; his righteousness shall not be set against his iniquities to
keep off punishments; his righteousness shall be as filthy rags, Isa. 64.6. in
the eyes of God. When God pardons the sins of his people, he blots them out,
and remembers them no more, Isa. 43.25. So when God deals with a man
degenerates, he blots out his righteousness, and remembers it no more, it is
as if it had never been; it neither profits him unto life, nor frees him from
death; Ezekiel. 18.22. When a wicked man turns away from his sins, they shall not
be mentioned unto him; that is, they shall no way hurt him, he shall not hear
of them, nor see them any more; and the righteous man that leaves his
righteousness, shall neither hear nor see it any more. Aquinas has a
question, Vtrum opera virtutum in charitate facta possint mortificari: Part. 3.
q. 89.
and he affirms it from that in Ezekiel. 18.24. All his righteousness which he
has done, shall not be mentioned.

Observe 1. It concerns every man to look narrowly to his righteousness; some
righteousness or other, every man looks at, fixes his heart upon; and there be
deceivable righteousnesses: if our righteousness be legal, a duty
righteousness, and not Evangelical, a righteousness of faith, it will
deceive us; Matthew. 5.20. Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of
the Scribes and Pharisees, you shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of
heaven; let that righteousness be what it will, a man is in an ill case that
cannot enter into heaven with it; yet the Scribes and Pharisees were exact
keepers of the Law, but the righteousness of the Law and of duties will never
send or help a man into heaven; Paul labored to win Christ, to be found in
him, not having his own righteousness, but the righteousness which is of God
by faith, Phil. 3.8, 9. Paul durst not stick to a legal and duty
righteousness, he knew it was too short to satisfy divine justice, to cover
man's nakedness, or comfort his conscience; it was a higher, a better
righteousness he minded, even the righteousness of Christ, and that is the
righteousness God will accept, and he that is righteous with that
righteousness, shall not fall away, but shall enter into heaven; 2 Pet. 1.10,
11. Brethren, give diligence to make your calling and election sure; that is,
their calling to Christ, and election in him; and what follows? if ye do
these things, ye shall never fall; for so an entrance shall be administered
unto you abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom.

2. No man should boast of, or confide in his own righteousness: Luke 18.9.
there was some trusted in themselves, that they were righteous, and despised
others; but this neither pleased God, nor profited them, as the Parable ensuing
shows; If men have excellencies, they should be humble, and fearing, not
boasting and confident, escpecially when their excellencies are in the number
of movables, and changeables; 1 Cor. 1.29, 30. Christ is made unto us wisdom
and righteousness, that no flesh should glory in it self, but in the Lord; and
so, that no flesh should have confidence in it self, but in the Lord; Phil.
3.3. We rejoice in Christ, says Paul, and have no confidence in the flesh;
what ever we have or do, let us not repose upon it, we are apt to do it; but
there are Apostolical rules to help us: Gal. 6.3. If a man thinks himself any
thing, when he is nothing, he deceives himself; we are nothing, and it is
nothing we do, and shall we glory in nothing, or confide in nothing? Christ
is something, and God is something, in them we may, we must glory and confide;
the more we do it, the better, we cannot sin in going too far that way.
Another rule is, Phil. 2.3. Let each esteem others better then themselves,
their righteousness may be a lasting righteousness, when thine is a perishing
one. Another rule is, Romans 11.20. Be not high minded, but fear; Let men's
righteousness be Legal or Evangelical, they should not swell, but fear,
lest they fall; and besides, they should watch, pray, and persevere in prayer,
remembering what our blessed Savior has said, He that shall endure to the
end, the same shall be saved, Matthew. 24.13. Let none be secure, but serve the
Lord with fear, Psalm. 2.11.

3. Apostasy from God and his ways is a dreadful condition: when men fall
from their righteousness, great mischief is done, they stain the Society they
were of, they blast the Church, they make their friends mourn, and enemies
laugh; they wrong God much, yea, more then Infidels and Heretics; Plura
vincula conjunctionis violantur, and Deus ipse tacit accusatur quasi iniquus,
which causes God to complain, O my people, what have I done unto thee! wherein
have I wearied thee? testify against me; you are withdrawn, fallen to
Idolatrous passages; I brought you out of Egypt, and sent before you Moses and
Aaron, I delivered you from Balak, etc. many ties are upon you to keep close to
me, and to cause you to honor me, but you have forgotten all my kindnesses,
are gone away, and do slight me, as if Idol gods and ways were better then
Jehovah and his ways; this made God to say, Heb. 10.38. If any man draw back,
my soul shall have no pleasure in him; and what an ill condition is that man
in, in whom God has no pleasure?

There be four great evils in the words of our Prophet:

First, he will commit iniquity; when a man turns from righteousness he turns
to sin, embraces it, serves it, walks in the ways of it, and fulfils the ends
of it, and this is a sad condition; for such a man is a worker of iniquity, and
so hated of God, Psalm. 5.5. Thou hate all the workers of iniquity; it is more
then having no pleasure, and notes God is against them, and will pursue them as
enemies.

Secondly, God will lay a stumbling block before him; one thing or other, at
which he shall fall; God denies him assistance, gives Satan leave to tempt and
seduce, propounds objects to draw out his corruptions to the full; 2 Timothy 4.10.
Demas forsook Paul and the truth, and loved the present world, there was an
object sufficient to draw out his covetous disposition; sometimes the
afflictions of the godly is a stumbling block unto the wicked, sometimes the
prosperity of the wicked is a stumbling unto them, etc. It Is a dreadful thing
when God shall make any thing a stumbling unto a man, but more dreadful when
he makes every thing so.

Thirdly, He shall die in that condition; Julian apostatized, and by the
stroke of God he died in his apostasy; and what heavier judgment, then to
die in a man's sinful condition? therefore Christ told the Pharisees, they
should die in their sins, John 8.21. they would not receive him, believe in
him, therefore they should die in their unbelief, and no place is left unto
them for repentance.

Fourthly, His righteousness which he has done shall not be remembered; If a
man die, yet if his righteousness might follow him and help him, it were some
comfort; but that shall not be thought upon, he loses all he has done and
suffered: Suppose he have done much for the Church, for poor Ministers,
prisoners, and other Christians, for Truth it self, and for the glory of God,
no good shall come of it unto him now: All Adams righteousness would not
advantage him, what ever he had done before, when he comes to eat of the
forbidden fruit, he must surely die, Genesis 2.17. his former righteousness is
forgotten; Jam. 2.10. Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and offend in one
point, is guilty of all: Antecedent righteousness will not make up the present
breach, nor prevent future wrath: Gal. 3.4. When the Galatians began to fall
off, Paul intimates to them, that all their sufferings would be lost; have you
suffered so many things in vain? When men in war forsake their colors, and run
to the other side, all the good services they have done are forgotten, and they
are accounted traitors to their Country and Cause; and so it is when men run
from God and his Truth, to the worlds and Satan's service, Lumb. l. 4. d. 14.
Inanis est poenitentia quam sequens culpa coinquinat. But this is not all,
that his righteousness shall not be remembered for him, but it will be
remembered against him; 2 Pet. 2.21. It had been better for them not to have
known the way of righteousness, then after they have known it, to turn from
it; and why better? because they now sin against righteousness, and that way
they have affected and professed, and their righteousness will be a witness
against them. Let us all take heed, lest there be an evil heart in any of us,
to depart from the living God, Heb. 3.12.

4. Man's ruin is from himself; he departs from his righteousness, commits
iniquity, and God lays a stumbling block; this in justice he does, because man
has sinned; but who causes him to fall? not God, that is man's own act, he
looks not to his way, it is his own lust draws him aside, inticeth him, Jam.
1.14. the cause is from within, only the occasion is from without; riches,
honor, friends, peace, credit, parts, beauty, truths, Christ, are the good and
great blessings of God, and God in his wise disposition of things, may lay
these as occasion of stumbling before us; but if we do stumble, that is man's,
not Gods fault; Hos. 13.9. O Israel, thou have destoyed thy self, but in me is
thy help; destruction is man's, salvation is the Lords. Man fell by his own free
will, but if ever he be raised, it is by Gods free grace, and if God will not
have mercy, he will turn their iniquity upon them: Psalm. 94.23. He shall bring
upon them their own iniquity, and shall cut them off in their own wickedness;
yet Prove. 1.32. it is said, The turning away of the simple shall slay them, and
the prosperity of fools shall destroy them.

5. Gods proceedings with the wicked and godly are diverse; Here he speaks of
laying a stumbling block before the wicked man; and in Jerem. 6.21. Behold, I
will lay stumbling blocks before this people, the father and the son together
shall fall upon them: the neighbor and his friends shall perish; yea, Isa.
8.14. God himself will be a stone of stumbling, a rock of offense to both the
houses of Israel, for a gin, and for a snare to the inhabitants of Jerusalem:
and Jerem. 46.6. They shall stumble and fall; but it is otherwise with the
godly, touching them he says, Take up the stumbling block out of the way of my
people, Isa. 57.14. he will remove what offends and indangers them: and Isa.
63.13. Lest they should stumble he leads them: and Prove. 4.12. when they turn
they shall not stumble; and Psalm. 119.165. Great peace have they which love thy
Law, and nothing shall offend them. God is careful of the godly, that they be
not offended, if they should be so offended, as to stumble, and fall at any
time; Psalm. 37.24. He shall not be utterly cast down, for the Lord upholdeth
him with his hand, and keeps them, that they dash not their feet against the
stones: if God do lay stumbling blocks at any time before his, it is in the
ways of sin, as Hos. 2. I will hedge up thy way; but for the wicked, he lays
stumbling blocks in the way of mercies; they stumble at the Word, 1 Pet. 2.8.
it is the savor of death to them, 2 Cor. 2.16. they stumble at the Lords
Supper, they eat and drink damnation there, 1 Cor. 11.39. they stumble at
Christ himself, 1 Cor. 1.23.

6. An unfaithful Minister is perfidious to God and man; because thou give
him not warning he shall die in his sin, and his blood will I require at thy
hands. God has put honor upon the Minister, set him in a great place, made
him a watchman, trusted him with souls, and he now through sloth, fear,
inconsiderateness, intanglements in the world, neglects to warn the sinner;
hereby souls are lost, Satan robs God of them, is diligent to get and keep
them, this will be treachery and sacrilege too at last, and fall heavy upon
him is guilty: if a band of men be slain through the Captains fault, or taken
through falsehood, all cry out of it; and when souls perish through the fault
and falsehood of the Prophet, it is dreadful; Mont. in loc.
Zeph. 3.4. Her Prophets are light and treacherous persons; the word
treacherous in Hebrew, is viri praevaricationum, qui debitam Deo and populo
fidem pariter violaverint, such as falsify their faith to God and man; and
it is the highest treachery that can be, to be false to God, and to rob him of
the souls of men.

7. That if a Minister may perish for not warning of sinners, much more for
encouraging them, by corrupt doctrine, and by a lewd life; if death be in an
omission, much more in positive evils; corrupt doctrine, and a corrupt life,
are strong traces to draw men to perdition, 2 Pet. 2.1. he speaks of false
teachers, that bring in damnable heresies, and withal, that bring upon
themselves swift destruction, but their damnable heresies and opinions prevail
with the people, they follow their pernicious ways, and meet with their
destructive ends; Isaiah 9.16. The leaders of this people cause them to err;
and they that are led of them are destroyed.

VER. 21. Nevertheless, if thou warn the righteous man, that the righteous sin
not, etc.


THe words need little opening: He shall surely live, in living he shall live;
he shall have his life for a prey in time of danger, or he shall live
comfortably that persists in this righteousness, he shall be secure for fear
of death.

Observe. 1. A Minister or Prophets care must extend to all sorts of people;
before he had said, the wicked must be warned; here he says, the righteous
also must be warned, good and bad fall under admonition and circumspection of
the Prophets, both are committed to their charge, and they must warn them, give
account of them, and if they fail of their duty, die for it; the best and worst
they must tell of their sins.

2. The Ministry of the Word is very needful; wicked, righteous must be
warned, that they may not sin, return when they have sinned, escape death and
be saved: the warnings of the Prophets are salutarie remedia adversus mortem
animarum; not only the ministry of the Word in general, but admonitions and
reproves are means through God to prevent the death of souls; Prove. 15.31.
it is called the reproof of life; there is life in reproves, as death in sin;
increpationes sunt salutares, and vivificatrices, they teach the way to live,
and lead to eternal life; hence you have such expressions, as that he hates
reproof is brutish, Prove. 12.1. Prove. 15.10.
he is void of understanding, a sensual brutish creature; he regards it,
shall be honored, Pro. 13.18. honored with comfort, safety, life. Noah was
warned of God, and made an Ark to the salvation of himself and his house; Heb.
11.7. And when sinners take warning, it is life, salvation to them; Ezekiel. 33.5.
he takes warning, delivers his soul; how needful then is warning? how
profitable, if souls be saved by it? 2 Timothy 3.16. All Scripture is given by
inspiration, and is profitable for instruction, for reproof, etc. It is so
profitable that the salvation of souls depends upon it. When David was reproved
by Nathan of his sin, it reduced him from the error of his way, and was
salvation to him. Let us bless God for his Word, and reproves tendered to us
out of it, and subject unto them as tending to our present and eternal good.
Be not offended with the reprovers, but affected with the reproofs.

VER. 22. And the hand of the Lord was there upon me, and he said unto me,
Arise, go forth into the plain, and I will there talk with thee.

23. Then I arose, and went forth into the plain, and behold the glory of the
Lord stood there, as the glory which I saw by the river Chebar, and I fell on
my face.

24. Then the Spirit entered into me, and set me upon my feet, and spoke with
me, and said unto me, Go shut thy self within thine house.


IN these and the following verses to the end, you have directions for the
Prophet, and events that fell out.

The hand of the Lord coming upon him, he is directed to go to the plain,
where the Lord Christ promised to speak with him; and he going thither, the
first event was, he saw the glory of the Lord standing there, verse. 23.

2. He is amazed and falls down at it, which is implied in the 24. verse.

3. He has the Spirit entering into him, and is strengthened by it, set upon
his feet, which is expressed in that 24. verse.

Then here is a further direction, that he should go and shut up himself.
verse. 24. And here his silence is declared,

1. By this inclusion of himself in his house.

2. By the bands imposed upon him, verse. 25. They shall put bands upon thee.

3. By the impediments Christ himself inferres, verse 26. I will make thy
tongue to cleave to the roof of thy mouth, and thou shall be dumb.

Lastly, the time of his prophesyings mentioned, verse. 27. which is, when
Christ should speak unto him.

I come to open the words:

The hand of the Lord was there upon me.
In the 14th verse of this Chapter, and in the third verse of the first Chapter
you have had these words opened already. This hand of the Lord, was the Spirit
of the Lord, which acted the Prophet, and showed him and others, that he was
not moved in an humane way, or by inconsiderate motions, but divinely; the
power and efficacy of the Spirit.

There.
That is, at Tel-abib, in the 15th verse; he came thither, and sat down there
seven days. And being in his habitation, sad, and backward unto the work he
was called unto, the Word of the Lord came to him, verse 16. and the Hand of
the Lord was there upon him. He thought, being shut up in his house, that the
business would fall, and that he should be excused from prophetical service;
but he was mistaken, Gods Hand finds him out, and he is bidden to go forth
into the plain, not to stay any longer within his doors, but to go into the
plain, or valley; (...)
so the word in Hebrew signifies, being from a word which is to cut, divide,
break. This plain or valley, was divided from the mountains, and a solitary
place, free from company and disturbances, delightful, fit to refresh and
quiet the spirits of men.

Obs. 1. The Spirit is the great agent in divine things, it is the hand of the
Lord that does all; it beautifies with gifts and graces, calls to office,
directs whither to go, what to do; it assists and inables to all divine
operations. Christ had the chiefest work to do that concerned the Church, and
the hand of the Lord was upon him: Isa. 61.1. The Spirit of the Lord is upon
me; and Isa. 11.2. it is a Spirit of might, and enabled him to do mighty
things, Luke 24.19. And so Stephen, Acts 6.10. They were not able to resist the
Spirit by which he spoke; it is the Spirit does the great things in Religion,
sanctification and mortification are the works of this hand of the Spirit of
God, 1 Cor. 6.11. Acts 13.2. Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work
whereunto, and.

2. The servants of Christ have daily need of new influences of the Spirit to
encourage them to, and strengthen them in their work: Ezekiel was full of
fears, had many discouragements, sat in a doubtful condition what to do,
and the hand of the Lord was upon him; he had formerly felt divine virtue, seen
Christ, and heard him: yet all this does not suffice, the hand must work again
and help him, else nothing will be done. The Apostles had been much with
Christ, seen his miracles, heard his doctrine, and yet they must stay at
Jerusalem till the Spirit fall upon them, Acts 1.4. Paul says of himself and
others, We are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing of our selves,
but our sufficiency is of God, 2 Cor. 3.5. That is, all our strength and help
lies in him, we daily find a want in our selves, and God as it pleases him,
lets out from his sufficiency unto us, now a little, and then a little, and we
are ever receiving from him, and enabled by his grace and Spirit, to do what
is done; (...).
in the 1. Phil. 19. is mentioned the supply of the Spirit, it is the
administration, subministration, under-supplying, underpropping of the Spirit;
all which words note the Saints infirmities, and need of the Spirit. Those
things befell Paul, would not turn to his good, without the Philippians
prayers, and further supply of the Spirit: as a weak house must be
under-propped, a sickly man have daily help, an Army constant supply; so must
the servants of God be under-propped, helped, supplied by the Spirit: Therefore
we should daily pray, as it is in Psalm 68.28. Strengthen, O God, that which
thou have wrought for us, and that which thou have wrought in us.

3. No place can keep off the hand of God from coming upon us: There at
Telabib, shut up in his house, divine virtue seized upon him, he thought now to
hear no more of prophesying, and doing public service of that nature to the
Jews, but the Spirit of God found him out, that cannot be excluded from any
place, or limited to any time: It Is like the wind that blows where and when
it lists: When the Apostles were shut up in a room, Acts 2.2, 3. there was a
rushing mighty wind, that filled all the house, and the Spirit with it, that
filled all them. So when Cornelius and his company heard Peter preach in a
private room, the holy Ghost fell on them all, Acts 10.44. As no place can
include the Spirit of God, so can none exclude it. There were Saints in Neroes
Court, and this hand of God had been working there; it is not a dungeon, any
prison can keep out the Spirit of God from coming to, and comforting of his
servants: Glover found the truth of it when he said, O Austin, he is come!

4. The more separate from the world, the more fit for communion with God:
Ezekiel must go into the plain, and there the Lord would talk with him, he
could have conversed with him at Telabib, among the people in his own
habitation; but the Lord declines that, intimating, that while we are
conversant with worldly and wicked men, we are incapable of divine mysteries;
but when we are remote from them, solitary and sedate, we are fitter to hear
God speak: When the Church was allured into the Wilderness, Hosea 2.14. then
God would speak, and that comfortably unto her. It was by the river Cbebar he
had his former visions, when he was absent from popular noise, domestic
troubles, his mind serene and contemplative, then the Lord opened himself
unto him. Christ often left the multitude, and when he was gotten aside into the
mount, then was his transfiguration, and the voice, This is my beloved Son in
whom I am well pleased, hear him, Matthew. 17.

VERSE. 23. Then I arose, and went into the plain, etc.


IF ought have need of opening in this verse, it is the glory of the Lord, and
there is no cloud upon this. The verse expounds it self, it is the glory he
saw before by the river Chebar; that glorious vision he had there, is
represented again here unto the Prophet. The Vision was not like the Temple,
fixed to a place; but it was moveable, it was first presented to him at Chebar,
and now again in this plain.

The reasons of this second apparition of the glory of God, are:

First, to possess the heart of the Prophet with greater reverence of divine
Majesty, he was unwilling to the service called to by God, sought excuses,
thought to decline it, which argued neglect of divine Majesty to strike out
such distempers, and to strike in a deeper impression of fear and respect to
God. This glorious vision is set before his eyes, and frames him to a fitness
for that employment; he might now see Christ sitting as Judge, compassed about
with glory, having Angels ready to execute his pleasure, power in and over all
parts of the world; and if he should refuse the employment appointed, he ran
a manifest hazard of his life.

Secondly, to confirm the truth of the Prophecy, and him in it.

Thirdly, to prepare the Church in all ages to an high esteem of this
Prophecy, that was ushered into the world with such glorious vision.

Observe. 1. Divine virtue makes men obedientiall unto the command of God: The
hand of the Lord was upon him, he bids him go forth; and presently he arose
and went forth into the plain. If things enjoined suit not with our wills,
opinions and humors, we deny them, excuse and take off our selves from the
doing of them, or defer them; but let God enjoin what he will, be it harsh
to flesh and blood, contrary to our wills, carnal reason, etc. if divine
virtue once come upon us, and the Spirit move in us, we will do it; God bid
Abraham take his son, his only son Isaac whom he loved, go and sacrifice
him upon a mountain in the land of Moriah, Genesis 22. Flesh and blood had much
to object here; but because he was acted by divine virtue, therefore he
obeyed presently, he rose early, took his son, went to the place, stretched
out his hand to slay him, and to make him a Sacrifice; we stick often at small
things when nature only works, not at any thing when the Spirit of God works
in us.

2. They are obedient to God simply upon his command, meet with mercies
unexpected: Ezekiel goes forth upon command, not knowing what was to come, what
was to be done, and he meets with an extraordinary mercy, he saw the glory of
the Lord, a ravishing, a satisfying mercy. Abraham obeying the command of God,
hears the voice of an Angel twice, and meets with a multitude of blessings,
Genesis 22.17. In blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will multiply
thy seed as the stars of heaven, and as the sand of the sea shore, and thy
seed shall possess the gate of his enemies, and in thy seed shall all the
Nations of the earth be blessed, because thou have obeyed my voice. So Jacob
returned from Laban to his fathers house upon divine command, and he meets with
Angels, Genesis 32.1. he met with God, and like a Prince prevailed with him for a
blessing, verse. 28. No man ever lost by his obedience unto God; though we see
no reason for things, yet if we have the will of God that is reason enough; let
us be tractable and forward to do the will of God, and we shall not lose our
labor, we may meet with mercies unexpected, as some by coming to the
Ordinances have done.

3. See the goodness of the Lord in two things:

First, in that he will manifest his glory to the view of mortal sinful
creatures; his glory is precious, a hidden thing, and not obvious to creatures;
yet here, as before, he is pleased in a Vision to present it to the sight of
Ezekiel: it was to the Ambassador of a Prince that Hezekiah showed the house of
his precious things, Isa. 39.2. and it was a great favor to let them see such
rarities; it was a greater favor from God to let Ezekiel see this rarity of
rarities, his Glory.

Secondly, that God should act over the same thing again, present the same
Vision in living creatures, wheels, eyes, firmament, a throne, and one sitting
upon it, and give a sight of his glory the second time; this sets out Gods
goodness abundantly; men are unwilling to do the same thing twice, when as
they may do it better the second time then the first, and advantage themselves
by it, but God has no advantage, does it perfectly at first; yet simply for
man's good, he condescends to do the same thing again. So Ezekiel may be brought
to a fitness for divine dispensations, encouraged too, and in his work he
shall have a sight of glory, and a glorious Vision presented to him the second
time by Gods own hand; we think repetitions of things in vain, a Sermon twice
over is stale, unwelcome, often neither Minister nor people find any savor in
it, and so of other things; but God repeats the Vision without prejudice to
himself, or damage to the Prophet.

4. Sin makes us uncapacious of happiness; it is man's happiness to see the
glorious God, and have communion with him. While Adam stood, he could behold
God, converse with him in his glorious appearances unto him, but after his
fall, he fled from his presence, was disabled, and incapacious of the sight of
him and his glory; so here, Ezekiel cannot abide the sight of this glorious
Vision, but falls down upon his face, and hides himself from his own
happiness: till sin be purged out of us, it will be so; therefore God has
appointed purging ordinances, that we being purified, might at last see him,
and have fruition of him. Two things especially are required to the sight of
glory, Holiness and Strength, to both which sin is opposite, it defiles, it
infeebles, so that we dare not, we cannot behold glory; see what mischief sin
has done us.

5. Apprehensions and sight of glory do much humble gracious hearts: When
Ezekiel saw the glory of the Lord, he fell upon his face: the glory of a
creature raises a carnal heart, but the glory of the Creator humbles a
gracious heart. Joh. 1.14. We beheld his glory as the only begotten of the
Father; and this made John the greatest Prophet that ever was borne of a woman,
to be so low in his own eyes, that he professed himself unworthy to loose the
lachet of his shoe, ver. 27. There be some things in the sight of divine
glory, that works strongly to humble the soul.

First, It is of that luster and excellency, as that it darkens all the glory
of the world, and makes it seem no more then the luster of a Glow-worme to the
Sun.

Secondly, It sets out the shamefulnesse and blackness of sin.

Thirdly, The Insufficiency of all humane motions and duties to attain unto it.

Fourthly, Shows the infinite distance between God and the creature.

All which are humbling things, and concurring do humble more thoroughly,
Ezekiel was not only amazed, does not only fall down, but falls upon his
face, and that after a second sight of the same glory; so that it is in the
nature of glory to humble; other things may humble a little, but glory most of
all: that comes by the ear does something, but that is seen by the eye
affects most. Isaiah had heard the Seraphims crying, Holy, holy, holy, the
earth is full of his glory; but this struck not so deeply into his heart, as
the sight of glory; when he saw the King, the Lord of Hosts in his glory, then
he cried out, woe is me, I am undone; his holiness was nothing, his
prophetical office was nothing, all was nothing to him, he was an undone man,
he saw so much sin in himself; I am a man of unclean lips, etc.

VER. 24. Then the Spirit entered into me, etc.


BEing in a dejected condition the Spirit entered. It was said before, the hand
of the Lord came upon him, which was the Spirit; and here, the Spirit entered
into me. What difference is there between these two phrases? you may observe
this difference, The hand of the Lord upon the Prophet, notes the efficacy and
work of the Spirit in general, the common gifts and graces of it, which may
fit a man for public employment. The entering of the Spirit notes, not only
those, but the sanctifying of a man, so that he shall employ his gifts and
graces to the glory of God, and eternal good of his own soul. Of the Spirits
entering and setting the Prophet upon his feet I spoke in the 2. Chap. ver. 2.
It was not the air, his own spirit returning, nor an Angel, but the Holy
Spirit of God. This entrance of the Spirit notes, not motion from place to
place, for the Spirit is infinite and fills heaven and earth, but it notes
operation, manifestation, impletion; when the Spirit does work efficaciously,
manifest it self, (for there may be invisible operations) fill the heart of any
with divine virtue, when it does any one of these, or all these, it is said to
be sent, to come, to enter; it comforted the Prophet, being amazed, sunk in
apprehension of his own unworthiness, and manifested its operation by setting
him upon his feet, giving new strength to go and prophecy when time should
serve.

Go shut thy self within thy house.
These words are not ironically spoken, or by way of Sarcasme, because he had
formerly shut up himself, but they are a command from God to the Prophet; it is
true, by reason of the rebellious disposition of the people, the weightinesse
of the calling he was to be in, and the infirmity of the flesh, he had
withdrawn from his duty, and God bears with him, bids him withdraw from the
public view; Jerome thinks this shutting up was a type of the besieging of the
City, that as he should be shut up in his house, so the Jews at Jerusalem.
Others think more probably, that it was to receive instructions from God, and
to hear from him before he should speak ought to the people, therefore some
observe that our Prophet heard and saw much, and spoke not till the end of the
11th Chap. 23. verse. where he says, Then I spoke unto them of the captivity,
etc. This shutting up made way for the credit and authority of the Prophet and
his prophecy.

Observe. 1. The Spirit affects and visits an humble soul: When the Prophet was
humbled with the sense of his own unworthiness, trembled at the sight of
glory and majesty, was destitute of strength; then it pleased the Spirit of God
to enter: humiliations upon sight of glory and greatness are deepest, and the
Spirit loves to visit them speedily; God does not long leave humble souls
without operations and manifestations of his Spirit. Jam. 4.6. He resists the
proud, but gives grace to the humble, he sends the Spirit into their hearts to
comfort and strengthen them, because they are low, vile in their own eyes; but
destruction is for the proud, God is in battle array against them; the Spirit
appeared like a dove, and is a dove of the valleys, not of the mountains; while
Paul was a mountain in his own eyes, the Spirit never came near him, but
when he was humbled with the sight of glory, Act. 9. even the glory of Christ,
and became a valley, then quickly the spiritual dove took her flight to him,
for ver. 17. says Ananias, Brother Saul, the Lord has sent me that thou
might receive thy sight, and be filled with the Holy Ghost; the Lord Jesus
would not let him want his Spirit to revive him, that was so effectually
humbled at the sight of his glory.

2. The godly before Christ, had the same Spirit, grace, and comforts that we
have since Christ. Ezekiel had the Spirit enter into him; What Spirit? Even the
Spirit of God and Christ, the third Person in the sacred Trinity; neither does
that in John cross this truth, The Holy Ghost was not yet given, because that
Jesus was not yet glorified, Chap. 7.39. Not given at all is not the meaning,
but was not given so plentifully, so visibly, till Christ was glorified. You
know that Kings when they enter their Kingdoms first, or ride in triumph after
great Victories, then they scatter gold and silver plentifully, and give the
greatest honors and gifts unto men: So Christ reserved the pouring out of his
Spirit in such plenty and invisible signs, till his glorifying; therefore
Austine says, The Prophets had not another Spirit who foretold Christ to come;
but this is meant of that manner of giving which appeared not at all before.
They under the Law had not the Spirit given in that way and so largely, but
they had the same Spirit, 2 Pet. 1.21. and Luke 1.41.67.

3. The Spirit of Christ which the godly receive, is not a Spirit of bondage,
but of comfort, of grace and freedom; this Spirit did not straiten the Prophet
but enlarge him, he was imprisoned with his own fears, beat down under sense
of his own worthlesnesse; but this Spirit of Christ did set him at liberty,
and lifts him up again, and works graciously in him; this Spirit is often called
the Comforter, and that emphatically, because no man, no Angel, no Ordinance
do or can comfort like the Spirit, it helps against fears, sins, guilt,
temptations, straitness of heart; this made the Apostle say, Where the Spirit
of the Lord is, there is liberty, 2 Cor. 3.17. It knocks off bolts, locks,
shackles; it makes way for his own graces to act, and act with liveliness,
and if there be strong holds within, strong lusts that oppose, it is a Spirit of
power, and will carry all before it. 2 Timothy 1.7. God has not given us the
Spirit of fear, but of power, such power as will conquer all the rebellions of
a man's will, bring all into order, captivate every thought unto Christ, and
make a man able to do the whole will of God, an Ezekiel to prophecy to a
rebellious people, and to venture his life amongst them.

4. Those Christ sends unto the Church, he gives his Spirit unto: Ezekiel has
the Spirit enters into him before he enters upon his office: men void of the
Spirit are not meet to be Church Officers; all things in the Church come under
spiritual consideration, the people are to be professors of holiness,
ordinances are holy, and what should unholy officers do there? if they have
not the Spirit of Christ, they are none of his, and what should they do in the
Church of Christ? he will ask them one day; Friends how came you in hither? I
sent you not.

5. The Spirit performs what Christ promises: In the 22th verse, Christ bids
the Prophet go forth into the plain, and tells him he will there talk with
him, but being come thither, the Spirit entered into him, and spoke with him.
Christ and the Spirit are one in Essence, one in will, and one in operation, so
that the Prophet was not deceived, but it was the same as if Christ had spoken
to him, I will be with you to the end of the world, says Christ; his Spirit
was with them, and so in that it was made good that he was with them; the
Spirit makes good what ever the Lord Jesus has promised, when it comes, and it
cannot be otherwise; for these three, Father, Word, and Holy Ghost are one, and
agree in one, 1 John 5.7.

6. There is a language of the Spirit within a man: The Spirit entered into me,
and spoke with me; How it speaks is hard to make out unto you. We have heard
that the Devil has spoken in parties bewitched and possessed, and you have
text of Scripture for it, Act. 19.13, 14, 15. When the sons of Sceva adjured
the evil spirit in the Name of Jesus, the evil spirit answered, Jesus I know,
and Paul I know, but who are ye? Thus did the Devil express himself in the
possessed; and surely the Spirit of God can speak vocally in those where it
dwells, but that is not the ordinary language of the Spirit. A man speaks to
another, Quando conceptum mentis alteri manifestat, and as the Schools say of
Angels, Halens.
they speak manifestando suum volitum, so we may say, the Spirit speaks unto us
by manifestation of its mind unto us. Joh. 16.13. What the Spirit shall hear,
that shall be speak, and he will show you things to come: and ver. 14. he
shall receive of mine, and will show it unto you.

7. The proceedings of God with his own servants are various and darksome; the
Prophet was bid to preach often before in the 22. verse, he is called forth into
the plain, and when he is there the Lord bids him go and shut himself up in
his house, as it is in this 24. verse. Now he will have him prophecy, and
presently he suspends him from his office and liberty, neither is there any
change in God, but he by these various dispensations fulfills his eternal
counsels.

8. God considers the weaknesses of his servants, bears with, and provides
well against them: Ezekiel was timorous, the House of Israel rebellious, and
like enough to offer violence to the Prophet, if he should have presently
propounded the dreadful judgments of God that were at hand against Jerusalem,
and therefore he takes care of him, and commands him to shut up himself, that
so he might be safe, and not at first be discouraged at the wickedness of the
people, or weightinesse of his work; God is full of bowels and tenders his,
when put upon difficult employments.

VER. 25. But thou O Son of man, behold they shall put bands upon thee, and
shall bind thee with them, and thou shall not go out amongst them.


THis verse speaks of the bands imposed upon the Prophet, and what these were,
we must inquire. The word is Gnavothim, (...)
which the Syriack renders catenae, chains, the Vulgar vincula, bands,
Montanus, funes ropes, and not any ropes, but funes contorti adeoque densi,
thick twisted ropes, as the original signifies. Now these ropes or bands be
taken literally by some, and metaphorically by others.

Literally thus: They seeing the Prophet sad seven days, and now astonished at
what he had seen and heard, and observing some strange looks and carriages
from him, they thought he was or would be besides himself, and therefore they
bound him; it was a conceit among Jews and Gentiles, that Prophets were a
kind of madmen. Hos. 9.7. The spiritual man, or as the Hebrew is, the man of
the Spirit is mad; they thought him out of his wits; our Prophet had received
the Spirit of Christ, and that wrought in him, and the people might be apt
enough to judge him a mad man. 2 King. 9.11. When a Prophet came to anoint
Jehu, said his Companions, Wherefore comes this mad fellow? Prophets were
reputed mad fellows, and that not only by the Jews, but by Gentiles also.
Plato in Phaedro says, Quidam divino beneficio sunt infani, Martyr in 2 King.
9.11. K^mchi thinks that the Prophets were so called quod dum vaticinarentur
speciem praeferrent hominis alienati cum a mente, tum a sensibus.
ut Prophetae and Sibyllae, and Tullie in his 2. Book de divinationibus, Quid
habet authoritatis furor iste quem Divinum vocatis, ut quae sapiens non videt
ea videat insanus, and is qui humanos sensus amiserit, divinos assecutus sit:
and vaticinari idem sit quod insanire. This opinion was also in the Apostles
time, Act. 26.24. Festus the Governor of Syria tells Paul, that he was besides
himself, that much learning had made him mad.

In the Metaphorical sense take it thus; The Jews cannot endure thee, nor thy
prophecy, they are so bitter, so rebellious, obstinate, and set against thee,
that they will not suffer thee to look out of doors, and come among them, they
decline thee and thy prophecy, they will not endure either of them, and so thou
art as a prisoner and man in bands; not that he had any material bands upon
him, but was bound up in this sense; their sins were the Prophets bonds; and
we may take up this observation from it; That peoples sins do imprison and
imbondage the spirits of the Prophets, and so hinder the course of the word.
This Paul knew, and therefore requests the Colossians to pray, That God would
open to him and others a door of utterance, Col. 4.3. that they might not be
straightened in the work of their Ministry; Men's sins do silence the
Ministers, and send them to prisons; if you look not well to it, your sins
may quickly make this good.

I incline to the literal sense, and then it is doubtful who bound the
Prophet; They shall put bands, etc. Not the Angels; though God use them in the
Government of the world, yet we find not that God uses them to bind his
Prophets. Some conceive it to be his friends and familiar acquaintance, and
that it was done in love; if others had done it, they would have left him in
custody other where, then in his own house; but without prejudice to any I
conceive it came from the people, who either bound him, or bespake his binding.
And my ground for it is this; He is made a Watchman to the House of Israel; in
that capacity and relation the Lord speaks unto him; here is no mention of any
domestic friends, but of the people, it was they without, not they within; as
is clear from the words, They shall put bands upon thee, and thou shall not
go out among them.

Observe. 1. Christ deals fairly, not fraudulently with his, he tells them at
first what they must expect, not gold and silver, but bands and chains, They
shall bind thee. He told Jeremy, they shall fight against him, Jerem. 1.19. So
Paul no sooner is called to preaching, but he hears of suffering, Act. 9.16. I
will show him how great things he must suffer; and Mat. 24.9. Christ tells all
the Apostles, that they must be afflicted, hated, killed; and this he does in
faithfulness, love, and wisdom, that they might not be deceived in looking
for other kind of entertainment in the world; that they might not have hard
thoughts of him for hiding away such things from them, that they might be
confirmed against such evils when they fell out, and remember it was no more
then the Lord foretold them of, Job. 16.2. They shall put you out of the
Synagogues; yea, they shall kill you, and think they do God good service: and
ver. 4. These things have I told you, that you may remember I told you of them
when the time comes.

2. No excellency exempts a Prophet from the malice of men's tongues and hands;
Ezekiel is immediately called and sent by Christ, sees extraordinary Visions,
has much converse with Christ, is filled with the Spirit, yet all this keeps
him not out of bands, they spoke evil of him, and bound him. Christ himself
was all excellency beauty, goodness, yet these preserved him not out of the
hands of malice; there is nothing will satisfy it, but men's liberties and
lives, malice feeds on such dainties.

3. The generality of people are enemies to their own good, and active to their
own ruin: the house of Israel they are against the Prophet, they fetter and
chain him up, and think they have done well, to make him secure from coming
amongst them; and alas, what have they done? thrust away the physician should
cure them, shut out mercy by shutting up a Prophet, put out the light; and now
are there not droves and multitudes of people that would think it a happiness
to get all the Prophets silenced, imprisoned, banished, if not more? they would
live in darkness, and die in darkness, and so undo themselves for ever.
Christ the great Prophet, the people, after all his precious Sermons and
glorious miracles, cry, Away with this man, Crucify him, crucify him, Luke
23.18, 21. They had cried Hosanna formerly, but now the time being turned, they
turn against Christ: there be many that show some kindness outwardly to the
Prophets, but inwardly they are against them.

4. Wicked ones deal severely, cruelly with the Prophets, when they fall into
their hands; they put bands, not one or two, but many bands upon Ezekiel; and
they were wreathed, twisted, heavy, thick bands, such as might not only hold,
but hurt and pain the Prophet: when Ahab had got Micaiah into his hands, he
sends him to prison, and commands him to be fed with bread and water of
affliction, that is, with so little and so unsavory, ut longam potius mortem
trahat, quam vitam sustentet, he would kill him, non brevi morte, sed lenta
fame. Jeremiah, the Princes are wroth with him, smite him, put him in the
prison, Jer. 37.15. yea, into the dungeon where he sunk into deep mire, and had
perished, if Ebedmelech an Ethiopian, had not been more propitious to him, then
his own countrymen the Jews were, Jer. 38.6, 7. Josephus says, Antiq. 10.
they put him into a muddy pit, ut ibi praefocatus moreretur, which might
easily have been, for he was usque ad collum mersus; others think they aimed
not at his present death, but thought, paedore and fame, lingeringly to consume
him: Peter, when he fell into Herod's hands, he was bound with two chains, Acts
12.6. You may observe something in that verse; there is a prison, chains,
soldiers, keepers, all these mentioned in it; which show the severity of
Herod. A bare prison had been too much for such an Apostle, but he must be
chained, and with two chains; and for fear he should get out of his chains,
he must be between two soldiers, which probably were more afflictive to his
spirit with their oaths, etc. then the iron was to his body; and lest he
should get from these, there was also the keepers at the door, watching. Paul
tells you how he was handled by wicked men: 2 Cor. 11.23, 24. In stripes above
measure, in prisons frequent, in deaths often; of the Jews five times received I
forty stripes save one, thrice beaten with rods, once stoned, thrice shipwrackt.

5. Afflictive conditions seldom better men's spirits, they were in Babylon
under captivity, and five yeeers passed in that condition, Chapt. 1.2. and yet
their proud hearts not humbled, their old enmity to the Prophets not worn out,
2 Chronicles. 36.15, 16, 17. God sent them messengers, Prophets, and they mocked
them, misused them, till the wrath came, and there was no remedy; and therefore
he brought upon them the Chaldeans, who led them into captivity, where they
were servants and slaves; their wronging of the Prophets was the cause of their
suffering, and yet all their sufferings did not subdue their spirits, and work
them to entertain the truth, and walk peaceably toward the Prophet; they bind
him in the land of bondage: the Plough breaks the earth in many places, but
does not better it, but leaves it as it was, nothing is put in by the Plough;
if the Master dung it, and sow good seed in it, when the Plough has broken it,
then there is like to be a harvest, but if nothing be sown, weeds, nettles,
thorns will grow where the Plough has been; and so afflictions may break our
estates, our bodies, our sleep, yet if nothing be added, if God do not
sanctify them, the harvest will be tares, and not wheat.

6. It Is no new thing for Prophets and Ministers to be roughly entreated, and
laid by as useless things: Ezekiel 400. years before Christ, is shut up,
bound, kept from coming among the people, and this misery has befallen the
Prophets in several ages, 1 Kin. 18.4. Jezabel cut off the Prophets, and then
they were hid by fifties in caves; Jeremy was shut up in the prison in the
Kings Court, Jer. 32.2. most of the Prophets and Apostles were restrained from
their public employments, shut up in prisons, banished or driven into corners,
and that proves often a great sadding to ingenuous spirits, not so much in that
they suffer, but because they are out of employment, but let those are in such
conditions, or may shortly be, consider it is no strange unwonted thing, such
afflictions have been formerly, 1 Pet. 5.9. The same afflictions are
accomplished in your brethren that are in the world; besides, God has need of
no men, nor any of their parts.

VER. 26. And I will make thy tongue cleave to the roof of thy mouth, and thou
shall be dumb, and shall not be to them a reprover; for they are a rebellious
house.


HEre is a farther and full manifestation of his silence, but there is doubt
concerning the meaning of the words. The Septuagint has it, I will bind thy
tongue; and this bond, it is conceived, was a divine precept; God commanding him
to be silent, and thereupon it was, that he forbear to speak unto them. Others
take the words literally, and hold that the use of his tongue was taken away;
so that neither in public nor in private he might speak unto them, but be a
wordlesse and tonguelesse man amongst them; whereupon they being troubled, and
wondering at what had befallen Ezekiel, might search out the cause, and become
more willing to hear those sad messages he had to deliver. But salve aliorum
judicio, I conceive the words are not to be taken in their literal sense.

1. Because the Prophet is bid in the the next Chapter, verse 9. to prepare him
meat, and to eat thereof, which he could not do, if his tongue had cleaved to
the roof of his mouth; the motion of the tongue is needful to that action.

2. It Is plain from the 14th verse of that 4th Chapter, that it cannot be meant
literally; for there the Prophet speaks, Then said I, ah Lord God, behold my
soul has not been polluted, etc. We are then to take the words figuratively,
thus; Thou shall be as a man, whose tongue cleaves to his mouth, as a man that
is dumb; such a one shall thou be amongst them: and this sense the words
following infer; Thou shall not be to them a reprover; they would not have thee
to tell them of their sins, of my judgments, and the danger thereupon; and
thou shall not be a reprover unto them: and it is the Scripture language to call
them dumb that are in the place of Ministers and Prophets, and preach not, Isa.
56.10.

Observe. 1. The Lord has the power over Prophets lips, to shut and open them
at his pleasure: I will make thy tongue cleave to the roof of thy mouth, etc.
If God forbid the Prophets to speak, they must be dumb, as contrary, if he
command they cannot be silent: Amos 3.8. The Lord has spoken, who can but
prophecy? The Jews objected against the Prophets, that they prophesied no
good unto them, only sad things, and were messengers of death; the Prophet
answers, it is true, but God has commanded, he has spoken, and who can be
silent? who shall dare not to deliver and hear his message? he is a roaring
Lion, will tear in pieces disobedient Prophets and people, he was to speak, and
to be silent when God would have it so. Balaam knew this, Numb. 22.38. Lo, I am
come unto thee, O Balak; have I now any power at all to say any thing? can I
with canning do any thing? so is the Hebrew; the word that God puts in my
mouth, that shall I speak; it was in God to open or shut his mouth; he could
not with all his canning do ought: Prove. 16.1. The preparations of the heart in
man, and answer of the tongue is from the Lord; and so the silence of the
tongue, and cessation of the spirit in man, is from the Lord; Prophets are to
be silenced and suspended, not when Prelates, people will, but when the Lord
will.

2. People are impatient of reproofs; Thou shall not be a reprover unto them;
for they are rebellious, they would not endure him to deal roughly with them,
to convince them of their sins; many affect the Prophets being shining lights,
but when they are burning lights they hate them; when they scorchmen with
through reproofs and evident convictions of their guiltiness, then they hate
them, and seek to mischieve them; Isa. 29.21. He that reproved in the gate had
a snare laid for him; and Micaiah is a hateful man to Ahab, 1 King. 22.8.
because he prophesied not good to him; reproofs are veritates mordaces, they
have salt and fire in them, which few men can endure, especially being sore;
and therefore they will imprison and murder the Prophets; Put this fellow into
prison, says Ahab, verse. 27. Let John reprove Herod, and he is presently clapped
into a prison, Luke 3.19. Reproofs evidence to men, that their sins are known,
awaken guilt, and cross them in the things they love, and therefore they
cannot endure them; like Moses rod in hand, it was without hurt, but thrown
down it became a Serpent; so reproofs thrown forth prove Serpents to men, they
molest and sting them.

3. The peoples sins do cause God to cut them short of spiritual mercies; here
was a Prophet furnished with the treasure of heaven, and the Lord shuts up his
mouth, and makes him a dumb Prophet unto them; and why so? for they are a
rebellious house, they did not profit under their judgments, they still
undervalued their Prophets, they went on stubbornly in their ways against God;
and this made God deny them the benefit of the Prophets labors: unbelief,
irreformation, and ingratitude, are provoking sins, and God punishes people for
them and such like, with the removal of his word and Prophets: in Amos 8. the
Lord tells them there shall be howlings in the Temple, dead bodies in all
places, verse. 3. that their Sun should go down at noon, their feasts be turned
into mournings, and such mournings, as are for an only son, deep and lasting,
verse. 8, 9. and why so? they had sinned greatly in sleighting, and being weary
of Gods Sabbaths and Ordinances, they were covetous, they oppressed the poor,
etc. and now God would send a famine of the Word, verse. 11. and there would be
howlings, darkness and death above measure; it is a dreadful thing, when
people provoke God to take away his Prophets by death, to command them silence,
or to remove them into corners. The Prophets and Ministers are the light and
salt of the earth, if God take them away, people will be unsavory, full of
worms, noisome lusts and corruptions, they will be in darkness, and hasten to
eternal darkness; it is the Word that makes all sweet and comfortable, if that
go, Gods face is hid, his presence departed, and all lies open to ruin, it is
the sins of the people that introduce such a judgment. Idcirco tibi
praedicationis sermo tollitur, quia dum me in suis actibus plebs exasperat, non
est digna cui exhortatio veritatis fiat. Greg. Hom. 17. in Evang.
God takes away his Word, and the preachers of it, because the peoples lives
are exasperating, not conformable to what is taught; This judgment we may
fear in this Land, because the distance is exceeding great between Gods Word
and our lives; I will not prophecy, but pray; The Lord prevent and divert such
a judgment from England; if it should come, it would be the most dreadful
that befell the Land these fourscore years; afflictions you are like to meet
withal, and pressing ones; but that I may not discourage your hearts, cast
your eyes and thoughts upon that promise in Isa. 30.19, 20. He will be very
gracious unto thee at the voice of thy cry, when he shall hear it, he will
answer thee, and though the Lord give you the bread of adversity, and water of
affliction, yet shall not thy teachers be removed into a corner any more. The
word in Hebrew is, lo iicaneph, thy teachers shall not be winged, and fly from
thee when danger is, but thine eyes shall see thy teachers, and thou shall
hear a voice behind thee, etc. This is spoken of the Church under the Gospel,
as well as before; if you can therefore take hold of this promise, and cry
earnestly unto God, you shall not lose your teachers, and the truth, though you
lose your estates and outward comforts; if God should take away your teachers
from you, Lam. 3.9.
it would be an Argument of much wrath, and that this people is unworthy of
spiritual mercies.

VER. 27. But when I speak with thee, I will open thy mouth, and thou shall say
unto them; Thus says the Lord God; He that hears, let him hear; and he that
forbeareth, let him forbear; for they are a rebellious house.


THe greatest part of this verse has been spoken of in the 11th verse of this
Chapter, and fifth verse of the second Chapter; and therefore shall not need
now to be opened unto you.

Observe. 1. All times are not times for the Prophets to speak in: Thy mouth is
now shut, and it is not seasonable for thee to prophecy, but hereafter when I
shall speak with thee, I will open thy mouth. Prophets must therefore wait
upon God, as for warrant to speak, so for liberty and opportunity of
speaking. Amos 5.13. The prudent shall keep silence in that time. There be
times when God in judgment to a people, would not have them speak. Eccles.
3.7. There is a time to keep silence, and a time to speak; and both these the
Lord will show his servants.

2. Neither the Prophets infirmity, nor the peoples sins, shall always keep
the Prophets mouths shut; When I speak with thee, I will open thy mouth, and
thou shall say unto them, etc.

3. God tryes many ways with a sinful wretched people to gain them; he sends
them into Captivity, gives them a Prophet there, shuts up his mouth, opens it
again, and all to see what this people will do; I will open thy mouth, and
thou shall say, thus says the Lord; He that hears, let him hear, etc. There
are but few amongst you, who will hear, I am afraid, but if any will hear,
let him hear, etc. God will try men whether they are curable or no.

Ezekiel, Chap. 4. Ver. 1, 2, 3. 1. Thou also Son of man, take thee a tyle,
and lay it before thee, and pourtray upon it the City, even Jerusalem.

2. And lay siege against it, and build a fort against it, and cast amount
against it; set the Camp also against it, and set battering rams against it
round about.

3. Moreover, Take thou unto thee an iron pan, and set it for a wall of iron
between thee and the City, and set thy face against it, and it shall be
besieged, and thou shall lay siege against it: This shall be a sign to the
House of Israel.


IN the three former Chapters, you have had the Preface, now we are to come to
the Prophecy it self, in this Chapter and the next is a prophecy against
Jerusalem, the chief City of the Jews; the besieging of it, and miseries
attend that condition are laid down therein.

This Chapter has in it these parts:

1. A typical besieging of Jerusalem in the 8 first verses.

2. A great famine during this siege, and that is in the 9, 10, 11, 16, 17
verses; and this is aggravated from the eating of polluted bread baked in dung,
ver. 12, 13, 14, 15.

I shall begin with the typical besieging of the City; the Jews that yet
lived at Jerusalem, trusted in their strength and privileges, were secure,
fearing no dangers; they accounted them fools and weak ones, who had yielded
themselves into the hands of the Babylonians, and because Jeremiah had
counseled them to do it, and prophesied hard things against Jerusalem, they
dealt roughly with him, and got him imprisoned; Here therefore the Lord set our
Prophet a work to lay siege against Jerusalem, to batter it with warlike
instruments, that so the captives with him might not repent them of what they
had done, nor those at Jerusalem put off any longer the evil day; cry, Peace,
peace, when destruction was at hand.

In the first verse the Prophet is commanded to draw the picture of Jerusalem,
and that upon a tile; in the other two, to represent the actions of men
besieging a City.

Take thee a tile.
(...)
The Hebrew word Labenah, is a brick or a tile, it is questioned whether one
green or one dried, and if dried, whether in the Sun or fire, and whether
white or red, which I will pass over as not being of any great moment: It
signifies also any figure that is fouresquare, and so any table or thing that
may be engraven upon; and because it is from a root in Hebrew, that is to be
white, it is conceived to be a table of chalk, or some other whitish stone, in
the form of a brick or tile, whereon incision might easily be made; bricks and
tiles are neither white, nor easily admit ingravement.

Pourtray upon it the City, even Jerusalem.
That is, express the picture of it by incision and ingraving in the same;
it is more then describing with the pen or pencill.

The City being pictured upon the tile or table, he is commanded in the next
verse to lay siege to it, and so builds a fort, casts a mount, sets a Camp and
battering Rams against it; and hereby shows what the Chaldeans should
shortly do against Jerusalem.

A sort.
(...)
The Hebrew word is Daeck, and diversely expounded by the learned; Rabbi Solomon
thinks it to be an Engine to throw stones within the walls, which might annoy
them; The Chaldee renders it, Machinas, Engines; The Vulgar, Munitiones,
Defenses for the Soldiers, and such as might prevent the flight of
adversaries. Some other Rabbis think it to be a wooden Tower, Libr. 10.
out of which they threw stones and weapons to batter the walls and brain the
Citizens. Vid. Joseph. Lib. 10. Antiq. cap. 11. and 6. de bell. Jud.
Vitruvius says, that some of them were 120. cubits high, some 60. some less,
and 20 cubits broad at least. The Septuagint has it, (...) propugnacula,
Strong holds, Block-houses, Fortresses; and so it agrees with our translation,
Forts; 2 King. 25.1. when Nabuchadnezzar came against Jerusalem with his
forces, they built forts against it.

Cast a mount against it.
Solela, it is per enallagen numeri, a singular number for a plural, (...)
cast mounts against it. The word is from Salal, which is to raise up the way,
aggesta terra, when stones, turfes, and other earth are heaped up together,
that makes a mount. Job 19.12. The Troop is come together, and raise up their
way against me; it is the same word: when they besieged Towns, it was their
manner to raise mounts before them, that they might come without hurt to the
walls.

Set the Camp;
Or pitch tents against it, draw out forces, and let them sit down before the
City.

Set battering rams against it.
The word Carim, signifies rams, living creatures; (...)
and here it is put for a warlike instrument, which was made with an iron head
and horns like a ram, to batter and break down the walls of Cities; it was
drawn back by a great number of men, and then driven on with violence against
the wall, and so made breaches in them; and hence it had its name, because in
form it was like a ram, and adversa front in muros incurrebat; Some
understand here the chief Leaders in the Army, that like as Rams are the
leaders in the flocks, so Princes, Nobles, Generals, Collonells, and Captains
are leaders in Armies. 2 King. 11.4.19. The word Captain there is the same in
Hebrew with that here for Rams, and notes the chief Leaders; but in this
place we are to take it for Military instruments, which at the command of the
chief ones were employed.

Take thee an iron pan, and set it for a wall of iron between thee and the city.
The Hebrew is, a pan of iron. (...)
The Hebrew by this does note out the hard-heartednesse of the Jews; they were
as iron or brass, inflexible before God: others set out by it the great wrath
of God against Jerusalem, which now was come to that height, that no
sacrifice, no prayers or tears could divert or abate: Lam. 3.44. Thou have
covered thy self with a cloud, that our prayers should not pass through. This
pan stood as a wall between the city and the Prophet; a great impediment
between God and them; so that neither their prayers or miseries should come up
to God, nor his mercies descend upon them, according to that in Isai. 59.2.
Your iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your sins have hid
his face from you, that he will not hear; others think it notes out miseries
and tortures the Jew should suffer from the King of Babylon, when he besieged
and took Jerusalem; this pan was such an one as they used to fry things in:
and Jerem. 29.22. it is said, that Ahab and Zedekiah were roasted in the fire by
the King of Babylon, they suffered hard things, they were fried in the pan of
afflictions; and this sense agrees with that of Jeremiah Chap. 1.13. who saw a
seething pot from the North, which set out the terrible afflictions
Nebuchadnezzar should boil the Jews in. There may be some truth in these
several senses, but we may, I conceive, understand by this iron pan, set
between the Prophet and the City, the firm resolution of Nebuchadnezzar to
besiege this city, to continue it till he had obtained his design, he would
not be moved from it, but be as inflexible as iron, and as unmovable in it as a
settled wall: or to go a little higher, the resolution of God himself by
Nebuchadnezzar to besiege and destroy this city, and that without remedy; for
the Prophet besieging the city acted Gods part, and this iron pan sets out his
firm purpose to besiege them, and his implacable displeasure against them;
which is also noted in these words,

Set thy face against it;
Which, as Pradus says, is Severitatis signum gestusque Judicis constantis in
decreto, Vultus obfirmatus non annuit deprecanti.
qui nullius auctoritate, precibus, aut fletibus commoveatur ad veniam; and
this noted out Gods setting his face against them, of which he told them,
Jerem. 21.10. I have set my face against this city for evil, and not for good,
says the Lord; it shall be given into the hand of the King of Babylon, and he
shall burn it with fire.

This shall be a sign to the house of Israel.
Here was the end of all, that the Jews at Jerusalem might no longer trust in
the lying words of false Prophets, which promised safety to them and their
city, whereupon they decided those were gone into Babylon, and insulted over
them; and likewise that those in captivity with the Prophets might lay aside
all thoughts of returning again into their country, and see it mercy that they
were from Jerusalem, which was to undergo the greatest wrath of the Lord.

Obser. 1. The Lord deals with his people not only by his Word, but also by
signs and types; here is a Tile, and Jerusalem pourtraid upon it; here are
forts, mounts, tents, rams, iron-bands, all which typed out Gods dealing with
Jerusalem, and in this language God had often expressed himself: by the Rainbow
in the heavens God speaks to the world, Circumcision, the Paschall Lamb, the
High priests Garments, the stones in Aarons breast, the sprinkling things with
blood, did all signify and type out something to the people; so Jeremiahs
seething pot, Chap. 1. his linen girdle, and bottles with wine, Chap. 13. the
Potters vessel, Chap. 19. the basket of figs, Chap. 24. and yokes of iron,
Chap. 28. and so all the Parables in the old and new Testament, they utter
forth the mind of God. God has throughout his Word abundantly expressed himself
this way; and the Lord does it, because types and figures make truth more
evident and efficacious. The Word affects the ear, types and figures affect
the eye, and carry a greater efficacy with them then simple and plain speech.
The Parable of the barren fig tree, lost sheep, prodigal son, ten virgins,
etc. had much life and efficacy in them; so when Christ took a little child
and set before his Disciples, Matthew. 18. it wrought more effectual upon them
then many words, and left deeper impression in them; we may therefore see the
goodness of the Lord in it, that affords us such helps in his Word as may
affect our hearts most.

2. That the Lord knows things to come, and reveals them at his pleasure; he
knew that Jerusalem should be besieged by Nebuchadnezzar, and discovers it unto
the Prophet, and causes him to make a draught of it: which shows a difference
between the true God and all others; they cannot foresee and foretell things to
come, are not Gods, but the God of Israel can foresee things, though afar off;
Psalm. 1^9.^. Thou understandest my thoughts afar off, even from all eternity,
and he only foretells things that fall not within the reach of creat^d
abilities; he foretold the Messiah, the Egyptian and Babylonian captivity, and
times of both; there is nothing future hid from God, we know not what shall be
to morrow, Jam. 4.14. but God knows what shall be to morrow, next year, yea,
hundreds and thousands of years hence, if time be so long, and this proclaims
him to be God, even the only true God: Isa. 41.21, 22, 23. God calls there to
other gods, to bring forth their reasons, whereby to prove their divinity, let
them show what is past, and things that are to come, and then he will take them
for strong reasons, and acknowledge them gods with himself; but to tell things
past and things to come, can none but the Lord himself, and they to whom he
reveals them.

3. Gods appointment and authority makes things and actions mean and ridiculous
in the eyes of the world, to be weighty and of great use: It seems to carnal
reason a childish thing, that the Prophet should take a Tile, draw the City
upon it, make forts, mounts, warlike engines to batter it, yea, to take a pan
of iron and set between him and the city; these men of the world are apt to
look at as ridiculous, much like the practice of boys in a snow, that make
forts, mounts, etc. in sport; but be not deceived, what the infinite wise God
commands, is of great concernment, how mean so ever the things and actions
about those things appear, the legal worship if you look upon it in it self,
seems strange that they should kill so many beasts, burn them to ashes; that
the Tabernacle, and things belonging to it, should be sprinkled with blood;
that they must refrain from such meats, be unclean if they touch such things,
that they must be circumcised, eat a paschall Lamb, etc. I say, if we look at
them externally, they seem irrational things, but if we eye God commanding
them, they had an excellency, and were of great use to them, and instruments of
much good; now bread, wine, water in Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord seem
mean things, and such they are, as are common to the world, but Christ's
appointment to use these, makes the difference, that gives dignitatem and
pondus, so that they are of great virtue to them that rightly partake of them;
the Pope and his Prelates have commanded and brought much into the worship of
God, Quicquid poterat disiderari ad eximium splendorem; but it is foolish,
unsavory, unprofitable, and efficacious only to make void the Ordinances and
Commands of God; and why? because the Lord never commanded such things; that is
contemptible in the eye of man, being commanded of God is honorable and
efficacious, when that is pompous, decent, honorable in the eye of the world,
being not commanded of God, is despicable, fruitless and frivolous.

4. God is an enemy to sinful Cities; he bids the Prophet lay siege to
Jerusalem, and to batter it; he commands the ruin of a City, is an enemy to
that City; Ezekiel. 5.8 Behold, I, even I am against thee, says the Lord;
Jerusalem was once beloved, it was Gods rest and desire, Psalm. 132.13, 14. a
faithful city; Isa. 1.21. a holy ctty, Isa. 52.1. the city of the Lord; Isa.
60.14. but now it was become an harlot, full of murders, the Princes of it
were rebellious and companions of thieves, Isa. 1.21, 23. the sins of Jerusalem
were very great; you may read largely of them in the 16th of Ezekiel, where
you may find, that Jerusalems sins and provocations exceeded Sodomes and
Samaria's, she justified them in their abominations, they were little, not the
half of Jerusalems; and therefore this made the Lord to say, Jer. 32.31. This
City has been to me as a provocation of mine anger, or, for a provocation of
mine anger, and of my fury, from the day that they built it, even unto this
day, that I should remove it from before my face: there was no rank of men but
had greatly provoked him, Kings, Princes, Priests, Prophets, men of Judah, and
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, verse. 32. and therefore God was resolved to destroy
it, and to make it a curse to all nations, Jerem. 26.6. and pronounced a woe to
it in Zeph. 3.1. where ye farther see what a City Jerusalem was now become,
and what her citizens were. Woe to her that is filthy and polluted, to the
oppressing city; She obeyed not the voice, she received not correction, she
trusted not in the Lord, she drew not near to her God; Her Princes within her
like roaring Lions; her Judges are evening Wolves, they gnaw not the bones till
to morrow; Her Prophets are light and treacherous persons: her Priests have
polluted the Sanctuary, they have done violence to the Law, the just Lord is in
the midst thereof, etc. And in the 6th verse, their cities are destroyed, so
that there is no man, no Inhabitant. Sin makes God to lay wast great Cities;
Tire, Sidon, Sodom, Gomorrah, Babylon, Jerusalem, felt the stroke and strength
of Gods wrath.

5. Nothing secures a sinful city from ruin; let it be strongly built, well
fortified, abound with soldiers and munition, have great privileges, yet all
these protect it not from invasion, from destruction; Jerusalem is besieged,
ruined, burnt with fire, this Jerusalem was the City of David, 1 King. 9.24.
and God did great things for David's sake; Isa. 37.35. it was the holy City;
Neh. 11.18. a strong City; Psalm. 31.21. the joyous city; Isaiah 32.13. the
city of solemnities; Isa. 33.20. the perfection of beauty, and joy of the whole
earth; Lam. 2.15. it was the city had the Temple, the Oracles and Ordinances of
God, and greatest privileges that ever city had; therefore it is said, Kings
should bring presents thither, Psalm. 68.29. it was the city that God himself
chose above all others, to put his name there; 1 King. 14.21. and hereupon it
was called often the city of God; Psalm. 46.4. the city of the great King; Psalm.
48.2. the city of the Lord of hosts, verse. 8. and for her situation, it was
among mountains, Psalm. 125.2. had towers and bulwarks, Psalm. 48.12, 13. and was
accounted impregnable; Lam. 4.12. The kings of the earth, and all the
Inhabitants of the world would not have believed that the enemy should have
entered into the gates of Jerusalem: it was conceived to be of invincible
strength; therefore the Iebusites when David came to take it, placed the lame
and blind to defend it, thinking them sufficient to keep out David and all his
strength; 2 Samuel 5.6, 7, 8. but notwithstanding all these particulars, this was
the city to be visited; Ierem. 6.6. and why? she was wholly oppression in the
midst of her, she cast out wickedness as a fountain waters, Verse. 7. this was
the city to be besieged and made desolate; Ier. 19.8. yea a curse; Ier. 26.6.
Ninive was the great city; Ion. 1.6. but it is greatness preserved it not; Neh.
3. Babylon was the golden city, and yet it ceased; Isa. 14.4. Jerusalem
exceeded all in favors, in privileges, in promises of safety, yet this city
is invaded, taken, and laid even with the ground, let none therefore confide in
cities, in any created strength, in any arm of flesh; men are exceeding apt to
do it: some trust in Chariots, some in horses, some in cities, some in Princes
and great men, but you will find horses, and chariots, and cities vain things,
Psalm, 62.8.
and for men, that there is no trusting in them at any time, therefore says
David, Trust in the Lord at all times; ye people power out your hearts before
him, God is a refuge for us; other things are not: and because you will think
men are considerable, he adds, Surely men of low degree are vanity, and men
of high degree are a lie, they will deceive if you confide in them.

6. The sins of a people and city may be so provoking, at such a height, that
neither God nor man will show mercy to them. God bids him set an iron pan
between him and them; showing, that both himself and the army that he should
bring, would be as iron to them; they had iron hearts and necks, Isa. 48.4. and
would not yield to God, and now he would be so to them, and cause their enemies
also to be such; God would set his face against them, and the faces of their
adversaries. Great sins make God inexorable severe; Ezekiel. 14.13, 14. When the
Land sins grievously, I will stretch out my hand, and cut off man and beast;
and though Noah, Job and Daniel were in it, they should deliver but their own
souls; all their prayers, tears, righteousness, interest in God should extend
no farther then themselves. God now had shut his eyes, and would not look upon
them; he had stopped his ears, and would not hear them praying, nor others for
them, he was set against them, resolved to punish them; therefore no miseries,
no complaints, no sufferings of the living, or groans of the dying could
prevail with him; and when the army came, it used them severely enough.

7. The Lord sends out his Declarations before he causes destructions: this
shall be a sign to the house of Israel: God steals not upon men by public
judgments before they hear of them, but tells them of their coming while they
be at some distance. The Prophets hear of them, and they proclaim and discover
them some way or other; this fact of the Prophets would quickly spread and be
at Jerusalem, and so might be a warning unto them; God sends out the lightning
before he thunders, he frowns before he smites, and gives tokens of his
coming in wrath before he executes it.

VER. 4, 5, 6, etc. Lie thou also upon thy left side, and lay the iniquity of
the house of Israel upon it, according to the number of the days that thou
shall lie upon it, thou shall bear their iniquity.

5. For I have laid upon thee the years of their iniquity, according to the
number of the days three hundred and ninety days. So shall thou bear the
iniquity of the house of Israel.

6. And when thou have accomplished them, lie again on thy right side, and thou
shall bear the iniquity of the house of Judah forty days: I have appointed
thee each day for a year.

7. Therefore thou shall set thy face toward the siege at Jerusalem, and thine
arm shall be uncovered, and thou shall prophecy against it.

8. And behold, I will lay bands upon thee, and thou shall not turn thee from
one side to another, till thou have ended the days of thy siege.


IN these Verses the Prophet proceeds in the typical besieging of Jerusalem,
and the words declare to us the duration of the siege, which was to be many
days, and the cause of it, their iniquity.

The word Iniquity notes here, not sin, but the punishment of sin, and in that
sense it is often used in sacred language; Isa. 53.6. The Lord has laid on him
the iniquity of us all; that is, the punishment of our sin; and Psalm. 69.27.
add iniquity unto their iniquity; that is, punish their iniquity; punishment
is an inseparable companion of sin, and therefore it has the name of sin. And
the Prophet was to bear their iniquity; that is, the punishment of it; this he
did representatively, by this act of lying upon his side so long, setting out
the longsuffering of God, who had born with the sins of this people, and not
punished them as they deserved; our Prophet did not here represent Christ, who
bare our iniquities, but at the command of God he sustained the person of the
ten Tribes and kingdom of Judah, and therefore it is said, verse 5. I have laid
upon thee the years of their iniquity; I have appointed thee by lying on thy
side so many days, to represent the time they have offended me by their
Idolatries and sins attending the same, and so to set out my patience, and
aggravate the punishment of their sin: Christ bare the sins of men to take away
the punishment of it; the Prophet, to increase the same.

For our better understanding of these Hieroglyphicall passages in the verses
read, we shall make inquiry into sundry things:

1. Whether our Prophet did in the literal sense lie so many days upon his
side, or was it only in Vision?

Some make it real, and say Ezekiel did lie upon his side all the days are
mentioned, although he slept not all the time, yet he lay in that posture, and
that it was by special help of God, if nature could not of it self reach unto
it; yet it is related of a Noble man of Lonaim, who lay sixteen years in one
posture, viz. with his face upwards; and Pradus says, he saw a mad man which
had lien upon one side fifteen years: Theodoret thinks he lay bound all this
time, and felt most grievous pain, that so he might represent the great
miseries of Jerusalems siege, which suffered great famine.

This opinion has many and great Authors; yet I must join with those who are
for the Prophets visionall lying on his side: for besides that nature could not
bear it; how shall we clear the justice of God, that should for the Idolatries
and sins of others, which former Prophets had reproved, so greatly afflict and
punish one innocent?

Again, he was to prepare himself bread, verse 15th of this Chap. he was to set
his face against the mountains of Israel, Chap. 6. v. 2. and if he lay still
all these days on his sides, how could either of these be done? It Is also said
in the 8th Chapt. v. 1. In the sixth year, in the sixth month, in the fifth day
of the month, as I sat in my house, and the Elders of Judah before me, the
hand of the Lord God fell there upon me; if Ezekiel did in the letter lie so
many days, the time was not expired; for the Prophet had his first vision in
the fifth year of the captivity, the fourth month, and the fifth day, Chapt.
1. v. 12. and seven days after this vision he had another, Chapt. 3. v. 15.
which made it the twelfth day of that month, and on that day he was commanded
to lie on his side; and if you reckon from thence, you will find not above 413.
as Pradus reckons it, or 418. and then if you join the days the Prophet lay on
his side, they amount to 430. So it will then appear the Prophet had twelve or
seventeen days to lie on his side when the Text says, he sat before the
Elders, this lying therefore is to be taken visionally, not really.

2. What the lying on the left side points out unto us; and why the iniquity of
Israel is laid upon that side. There is some mystery in it, and the opinions
of men are different: some make the reason of it to be the situation of
Samaria, which was the head city of the ten Tribes, Isa. 7.9. and this city was
on the left hand of Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 16.46. and thereupon the Prophet lay on
his left side, to represent them and their sins, and on his right to represent
the house of Judah and their sins: but beyond this, there is something to be
taken hold of, and it is this; the left side or hand notes disrespect; the right
side or hand, dignity or favor, Mat. 25.34.41. the good were on the right
hand, the bad on the left. By this posture of the Prophet, is typed out to us
the different respect of God to the house of Israel and Judah; the ten Tribes
were less dear to God then the other; they had grievous sins, and God would
show them less mercy, deal with them as those at his left side; but for Judah,
whose sins was as great as theirs, yet God would chastise with less severity,
he would not take away his loving kindness from Judah, though he did from
Israel, Judah was at his right side, and God would in his distribution of
sorrow and wrath remember mercy.

3. Whom we are to understand here by the house of Israel: the ten tribes which
are usually so called in the Scripture, were carried into captivity 130. years
before by Shalmaneser, in the 6th year of Hezekiah, 2 King. 18.9, 10. To what
end therefore should they be brought in here, under a typical siege of
Jerusalem, when they sinned not at Jerusalem, and if they had, were now gone,
and under the severity of God?

Some take the house of Israel to be meant distinctly of the ten Tribes; and
this lying of the Prophet on his left side not to refer to Ierusalems siege,
but to the sins of the Tribes, and the patience of God toward them; others
include the house of Israel in the house of Judah, and so make not the Prophets
literal lying to look at the ten Tribes in captivity, but at those of them who
were joined to the house of Judah; for when the great rent was by Jeroboam, all
of the ten Tribes did not cleave to him; and many that at first did, afterward
seeing the evil of his Idolatrous ways, withdrew from him, and closed with
the house of Judah, 2 Chro. 11.16, 17. when they saw what Jeroboam intended,
those that set their hearts to seek God, came to Jerusalem to sacrifice, and
strengthened the kingdom of Judah; and in Asa's days, many fell to him out of
Ephraim, Manasseh, and Simeon, 2 Chronicles. 15.9. yea, in abundance; Asa being a
good King, they came flocking to him, and willingly sat down under his shade:
It Is more then probable also, that when Shalmaneser came out against Samaria,
and carried away the Tribes, that many fled to Jerusalem, and the parts
there-about; for it is said, in 2 Chronicles. 30.6. that they escaped out of the
hands of the Kings of Assyria; and in the 11th verse, that diverse of Ashur,
Manasseh, and Zebulon humbled themselves, and came to Jerusalem; this was to
receive the Passover, and then they returned to their possessions in their own
cities, Chap. 31.1. So that there were some of the other Tribes left, which did
partly mingle with them of Judah and Benjamin, and partly dwell by themselves;
these I conceive, our Prophet means by the house of Israel, and together with
these their predecessors, which were dead, and in c^ptivitie; and that because
the three hundred and ninety days, which import so many years, as it is
expressed in the 6th verse of this Chapter, must needs fetch the house of
Israel into this consideration from before the time of their captivity, and
that in the next thing we are to examine, namely, Where these three hundred
and ninety days, typing out so many years, are to begin.

Various and intricate are the thoughts of men about the beginning and ending
of these years; and it would take up much time to present them unto you, and
perplex your thoughts much.

I will give you in this point not what my self, but the soundest Interpreters
and Chronologers do judge the truth.

Funccius and Bibliander, two famous Chronologers, begin this account at the
falling off of the ten Tribes, 1 King. 12. and so do Interpreters of much worth.

Lavater, Polanus, Pradus, A Lapide, and Sanctius, begin it at the beginning of
the Jewish Monarchy, between Rehoboam and Jeroboam, then were the Calves set
up at Dan and Bethel, and the ten Tribes became Idolatrous, and not only
Jeroboam and his Subjects, but Rehoboam and his likewise, forsook the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 12.1.

From this time to the destruction of Jerusalem, were three hundred and ninety
years, which will thus appear: Rehoboam reigned well, 3 years. 2 Chronicles. 11.17.
Rehoboam reigned after his rent, 13 2 Chronicles. 12.12. Abijah, his son, 3 2 Chronicles.
13.1. Asa 41 1 King. 15.10. Jehosaphat 25 1 King. 22.42. Iehoram 8 2 Chronicles.
21.5. Ahazia 1 2 Chronicles. 22.2. Athaliah 7 2 King. 11.4. Ioash 40 2 King. 12.1.
Amaziah 29 2 King. 14.2. Azariah 52 2 King. 15.2. Iotham 16 2 King. 15.33. Ahaz
16 2 King. 16.2. Hezekiah 29 2 King. 18.2. Manasses 55 2 King. 21.1. Amon 2 2
King. 21.19. Josiah 31 2 King. 22.1. Iehoahaz 0 3 Months 2 King. 23.31.
Iehoiakim 11 2 King. 23.36. Iehoiachin 0 3 Months 2 King. 24.8. Zedekiah 11 2
King. 24.18.

These summed, being added together, make up 390. years. Iunius begins this
account at the 27th year of Solomon's reign, when he and the people fell to
Idolatry, and extends it to the 5th year after Zedekiah's captivity, but
according to the account formerly given, this amounts to a greater sum:
besides, Solomon did not by any public Edict set up Idolatry, nor abolish the
true worship of God.

The next thing to be opened, it the forty dayrs, referring to the house Judah
in the 6th verse; and here it is questioned whether these years are to be taken
inclusively in the three hundred and ninety, or exclusively and distinct from
them; some comprehend them in the three hundred and ninety days, because
otherwise they would not be finished before the Vision in the 8th Chap. 1. v.
as has formerly been showed; but the Prophets lying on his sides, being
visionall, not real, it makes not against a distinct exception of these forty
years from the three hundred and ninety, for he might in a Vision see that he
must bear the iniquity of the house of Israel three hundred and ninety days,
and the iniquity of the house of Judah forty days, and this Vision be overlong
before either number of days were accomplished. Neither is that in the 9th
verse sufficient to prove these forty years are to be taken inclusively from
the words, three hundred and ninety days shall thou eat thereof. Some collect
that the Prophet was to lie no longer on his sides then he was to eat of the
meat prepared; if it had been said in the verse, make thee bread according to
the number of the days that thou shall lie upon thy sides, this Argument had
been strong, but it is according to the number of the days thou shall lie upon
thy side, that was his left side, and so the Argument is unvalid. I conceive
the forty years to be taken distinct from the other number, because in the 5th
verse you have the three hundred and ninety laid upon the Prophet to bear for
the House of Israel; if forty be excepted out of them, then there remains
three hundred and fifty, and it could not be said, so shall thou bear the
iniquity of the House of Israel; neither could it be said, when thou have
accomplished them, lie again on thy right side, he could not reach that number
if forty years were cut off: and here is also a distinct command; Lie again on
thy right side, that is, after those three hundred and ninety be finished, then
turn thee to the other side, and lie on it forty days; these forty days for
so many years, are not additionall to the three hundred and ninety, but he is
to begin again, and that forty years within the three hundred and ninety, yet
not as part of them, or included in them, but as a new account, a day for a
year, to represent Gods patience toward the House of Judah.

These forty years, some make to be the tyrannical, 2 Chro. 33.33.
bloody and Idolatrous reign of Manasseh, who having forty years opposed
Judah, was carried into captivity, and after ten years suffering, returned,
purged out Idolatry, and for fifteen years served the Lord, Quadraginta annis
peco^vit gravissime Israel tempore Manassis, Vatablus.
qui quindecim tantum annis mansit in officio, and quadraginta peceavit. These
forty provoking years God bare with Judah. Others begin the time of these
forty years from the thirteenth of Josiah, unto the end of Zedekiah, the space
between these is forty years; God now looked for a reformation, but they
became worse and worse, as by 2 Chronicles. 36.16. does evidently appear: whether we
pitch these forty years upon Manassehs ill reign, or the time after, is not
much material; so many years did the Lord bear with Judah in a special
manner; only take notice, that some reckon these forty years not from the
thirteenth of Josiah, but from the eighteenth, wherein was the covenant renewed
between God and the people, and then they reckon five years after the
captivity of Zedekiah, to make up the forty years; for it is the opinion of
learned men, that it was five years after his carrying away, that Nebuzaradan
came and burnt both Temple and City.

Some make the three hundred and ninety days, not only to set out Gods
patience, but to demonstrate the time of Jerusalems siege, and Gods just hand
in it, which upon due observation will be found to be just so many days,
although there be a great difficulty to make it evident: for in Ierem. 52.4,
5, 6. you may read that in the ninth year of Zedekiahs reign, the tenth month,
and tenth day, Nebuchadnezzar besieged Jerusalem, and that his siege lasted to
the eleventh year of Zedekiah, the fourth month, and ninth day; now the time
between comes up toward eighteen months, and makes five hundred thirty and
nine days, Sanctius says 550.
which sum contains an hundred forty and nine days more then our Prophets
three hundred and ninety, which make but thirteen months precisely thirty
days the month; so that here are five months more in this siege, according to
Jeremiah, then we have in this type of Ezekiel. To clear this difficulty, we
must take notice that in time of this siege, Pharaoh King of Egypt came to help
Zedekiah, and raised the siege, Ierem. 37.5. Then Pharaohs army was come forth
out of Egypt, and when the Chaldeans that besieged Jerusalem, heard tidings of
them, they departed from Jerusalem; and so verse. 11. it is thought they brake up
the siege to go and meet Pharaohs army, which being discomfited, turned back to
Egypt, and the Chaldeans to Jerusalem, verse. 7, 8. Five months was spent this
way, which Jeremiah reckons in to the siege of Jerusalem. These our Prophet
leaves out, and looks precisely at the time they were about Jerusalem, which
was three hundred and ninety days, or thirteen months; and so you have this
difficulty resolved.

Verse. 7. Set thy face toward the siege at Jerusalem.
That is, strengthen, harden thy face against them, be inexorable; and this
notes out the obstinacy of the Chaldeans that should besiege them; they were a
resolute people, and would not be wearied out with difficulties, or easily
hearken to entreaties; herein the Prophet takes on him the person of the
enemy, and shows he should be stern against them.

Thine arm shall be uncovered.
Soldiers of old were wont to have their arms naked in fight; the pictures of
the ancient Warriers and Worthies are so painted, Gellius l. 7. c. 12.
and P. Africanus upbraided Sulpitius Galbus, Quod tunicis uteretur manicatis
uti foeminae; and some Interpreters say, that the Indians and Africans do it to
this day, they fight with their arms naked; here it notes out the readiness
and diligence of the Chaldeans, whom our Prophet does personate, to execute
their resolution, and shortly to fight against Jerusalem; they would not come
with faint hearts, or feeble hands, but as their faces were set against the
city, so their arms were naked and prepared against it, not in their bosoms,
in their pockets, not folded up, but naked and stretched out, ready to do
service, and so the Vulgar reads the word extentum, not uncovered, but
stretched out, which implies the uncovering, and more; a like phrase to this
you have in Isaiah 52.10. The Lord has made bare his holy arm; as servants
strip up their sleeves, make their arms bare, and ready for service, so the
Lord made bare his arm, and put forth his power to do some choice service for
his people. In this manner was the Prophet to prophecy unto the people.

Verse. 8. I will lay bands upon thee, and thou shall not turn from one side to
another, etc.
Some make the bands real, and take the words in a literal sense; but we are
to look at all herein as visionall: and here is commended the cause of the
Chaldeans obstinacy and resolutenesse in this siege and ruin of Jerusalem,
and that is the authority and command of God; he commanded the Prophet to lay
siege to Jerusalem, to lie on his side till he had ended the days of his
siege; and by the band of his power he held him so to it in the Vision, that he
could not do otherwise; and this typed our the authority and power of God in
the King of Babylon toward his soldiers, who should hold them so to the siege
of Jerusalem, that they should not depart till they had accomplished it. Their
going away to meet the Egyptian army, and drive that back was in order to the
siege of Jerusalem; and these military forces were as bands upon Jerusalem,
whose condition the Prophet here sustained, and when the Chaldeans compassed
the city about, they could not turn aside any way, till the firm decree of the
Lord was accomplished.

Observe. 1. That God bears with the sins of his people, though great, a long
time, and forbeares the punishment due to them: three hundred and ninety years
did he suffer them, which marvellously commends to us the patience of Cod; they
provoked him daily, most bitterly, and did evil as they could; Hos. 12.1.14.
and Ierem. 3.5. yet God held his peace and his hands for hundreds of years; and
therefore says in Isa. 42.14. I have a long time holden my peace, I have been
still, and refrained my self: If God had not power in him to punish, his
suffering with sinners so long were not so much; but God has power enough to
be avenged on all the sinners of the earth; he could crush them as a moth in
his hand, every moment; he hates sin with a perfect hatred, and yet he bears
with notorious sinners, with all sinners and sins, deferring the punishment of
them, sometimes a long season; so that he is not only patient, but
longsuffering; 1 Pet. 3.20. The longsuffering of God waited in the days of
Noah, while the Ark was a preparing; What did it wait for? even their
repentance: Noah preached unto them of the flood, warned them by preparing of
an Ark, and God expected they should amend and turn to him, and it was an
hundred years at least he waited upon that generation; and now, the Lord is
longsuffering, 2 Pet. 3.9. to usward, not willing that any should perish, but
that all should come to repentance; if we will not repent of our sin, God will
repent of his longsuffering, his wrath will kindle, and we shall perish, be
inexcusable, and have the deeper condemnation for abuse of his longsuffering.

2. Though the Lord bear long with sinners, yet he forgets not their sins; they
are in his book, sealed up in his bag; Job 14.17. among his treasures, Deuteronomy.
32.34. it is a speech borrowed from men that count up their Money, look over
their Writings, and put them into bags, and seal them up, that they may be
safe, and reserved for a long time; so God keeps men's sins safe by him, and
that a long season, and then at length, when they have forgot them, he unseals
the bag, and brings them forth, and shows them how their sins have abounded,
what a treasury of sin they have, and what a treasury of wrath he has; Romans
2.5. God he remembered the defection of Israel, which was almost three hundred
and ninety years before; and how ever men think of their sins past, God will
rub their memories, revive their consciences, and indict them for old sins: Job
13.26. Thou make me possess the iniquities of my youth; Job 20.11. His
bones are full of the iniquities of his youth; Psalm. 15.7. Remember not the
sins of my youth. God presented before them their youthful sins that had been
committed many years before; 2 Samuel 21.1. Saul was dead, but his sin was alive,
there was a triennall famine, and for whose sake was it? for Readiness, and his
bloody House, because he slew the Gibeonites, which was done many years before;
but here God remembers the sin, and visits it upon the heads of his sons, seven
of them suffer for that sin. Nab. 1.2. The Lord reserves wrath, he does not
presently punish sinners, but twenty, thirty, forty years after he reckons with
them, and powers out the wrath reserved; when he has had the glory of his
patience, then God visits for old sins; Isa. 42.4. God had been silent a long
time; now will I cry like a traveling woman, I will destroy and devour at
once: patience being ended, Gods wrath begins and revives the guilt and sin
that has lain asleep so long; Joseph's brethren being in affliction, their
sins came to mind, Genesis 42.21. We are verily guilty concerning our brother;
they had sold him long before, above twenty years, and thought they should
never hear of him or their sins in the sale of him, but now in a strait God
brings that sin to memory; sin is not over when it is acted, but may be heard of
many years after: it is likely now in these afflictive times, that many meet
with their old sins, and they lie hard upon them; let that be the prayer of
such, which you find, Psalm. 79.8. O remember not against us former iniquities,
Let thy tender mercies speedily prevent us, for we are brought low; and take
heed of sinning for the future against God, for be sure your sin will find you
out; Numb. 32.23. and be thorns, not in your flesh, but in your consciences;
old sins will be old Serpents, sting unto death; Isa. 10.3. What will you do in
the day of visitation? Ezekiel. 22.14. Can thine heart endure, or can thine han^s
be strong in the days that I shall deal with thee?

3. Such is the nature of States and Churches, that falling into sinful ways
they seldom return, but proceed, adding sin to sin, filling up the measure of
their iniquities; Jeroboam makes a rent, lays a foundation in Idolatrous
practices, and the House of Israel continue in that way three hundred and
ninety years, not one king of Israel right. Solomon he goes out by the
enticing of his wives, to false worship, he corrupts Judah, leavens it with
Idolatry, and not all the good Kings in Judah could get out that leaven again
perfectly; if there were a stop of Idolatrous passages made in one Kings reign,
there was liberty granted in another. Idolatry and other sins so abounded in
Ahaz, Manasses and Zedekiah's days, that the Lord was weary of them, and not
quiet till he had rejected them. And this is not only so in States and
Churches, but also in particular cases: if men fall into any way of
wickedness, so corrupt is nature, so prone unto sin, that it persists unto its
own perdition, rather then returns to its own salvation; it must be a merciful
and powerful hand of God that reduces a straying sinner, much more a straying
State.

4. That length of time is no good plea for errors; false worship, sinful
customs and practices, they could plead hundreds of years for their high
places, Calves, Samaritan Rites, Altars, Priests, etc. yet antiquity would not
exempt them from guilt and punishment; he must bear the iniquity of the House
of Israel, they had sinned in the direction, use and retention of these, and
God had visited, and would yet visit more for them: what if we have had
Prelacy and Popery, Ceremonies and Superstitious Rites among us hundreds of
years? they are plants not of Gods planting, and through age so rotten, that
they need plucking up, and it will be his honor whose shoulder and strength is
employed that way.

5. The Lord shows more favor to his, sinning great sins, then he does to
others that are not his; the House of Israel has the left side, is Loammi none
of Gods people, and therefore utterly rejected, sent into captivity, and return
not; the House of Judah has the right side, God would show them favor in
their captivity, and return them after seventy years correction in Babylon;
Gods carriage toward his, is different from that toward others: Psalm. 89.30,
31, 32, 33. If his children forsake my Law, and walk not in my judgments; if
they break my Statutes, and keep not my Commandments, then will I visit their
transgression with the rod, and their iniquity with stripes; nevertheless my
loving kindness will I not utterly take from him; here God took not away
loving kindness utterly from Judah, sending her into captivity, but it was
utterly taken from Israel; if the one be whipped with rods, the other is whipped
with scorpions. Saul he sins in offering sacrifice, 1 Samuel 13. in sparing Agag,
1 Samuel 15. David he sins in the defilement of Bathsheba, in the murdering of
Vriah, 2 Samuel 11. in numbering of the people, 2 Samuel 24. Solomon he sins in
hearkening to his wives, in falling to Idolatry, yet God dealt not with David
or Solomon, whose sins were greater then Saul's, as he did with Saul, thy
kingdom shall not continue, says Samuel, and the Lord has rejected thee from
being king, and it repented God that he had set up Saul to be King, 1 Samuel
15.11. and he dealt severely with him, he would not answer him in his straits,
but cut him off by the Philistims and his own sword; so that he and his were
broken in pieces, and rooted out by the wrath of God; but David and Solomon
were chastised with the rods of men, 2 Samuel 7.14. and see what follows in the
next verse; My mercy shall not depart from him; (meaning Solomon when he
committed iniquity) I took it from Saul, whom I put away from before me. God
proceeds otherwise with wicked men, then he does with his children, there is
much love in all their afflictions, and mere wrath in all the wickeds
sufferings. Peter's sin in denying Christ was greater then Ananias and Saphira's
in denying a portion of their goods, and almost parallel with Iudas's, yet he
has a gracious aspect from Christ, fetching penitent tears from his heart,
when the others are smitten with strokes of death.

6. The instruments God uses in the execution of his judgments shall be
resolute, ready and active; Set thy face toward the siege, and thine arm shall
be uncovered, and thou shall prophecy. The Chaldeans were resolute upon the
siege, came fitted every way to it, and were active in the work: Hab. 1.8, 9,
10. They shall flee as the Eagle hastes to eat; They shall gather the
captivity as the sand; They shall deride every strong hold, for they shall heap
up dust and take it. When God will have any notable work done, he raises up
instruments for it.

7. Gods power and providence, overrules secondary agents so, that they shall
execute his pleasure, and not disappoint it; God laid bands upon the Prophet,
and he could turn no way till he had accomplished the days of the siege, and
when the King of Babylon and his forces were come to the work, God held them to
it, and executed his judgments by them: Pilate would have quit his hands of
Christ's death, but he was to be an instrument, together with Judas, and others,
and they did what the hand and counsel of God determined to be done: Act.
4.28. Moses would have declined the work of bringing out the Israelites from
Egypt, and bringing in of judgments upon the Egyptians, but God ordered and
overruled his spirit.

VER. 9, 10, 11, etc. Take thou also unto thee the wheat and barley, and beans,
and lentiles, and millet, and fitches, and put them in one vessel, and make
thee bread thereof, according to the number of the days that thou shall lie
upon thy side, three hundred and ninety days shall thou eat thereof.

10. And thy meat which thou shall eat, shall be by weight twenty shekels a
day; from time to time shall thou eat it.

11. Thou shall also drink water by measure, the sixth part of an Hin: from time
to time shall thou drink.

12. And thou shall eat it as barley cakes, and thou shall bake it with dung
that comes out of man in their sight.

13. And the Lord said, Even thus shall the children of Israel eat their
defiled bread among the Gentiles whither I will drive them.

14. Then said I, Ah Lord God, behold, my soul has not been polluted: for from
my youth up even till now, have I not eaten of that which dies of it self, or
is torn in pieces, neither came there abominable flesh into my mouth.

15. Then he said unto me, Lo, I have given thee cowes dung for man's dung, and
thou shall prepare thy bread therewith.

16. Moreover, he said unto me, Son of man, behold, I will break the staff of
bread in Jerusalem: and they shall eat bread by weight and with care, and they
shall drink water by measure and with astonishment:

17. That they may want bread and water, and be astonished one with another,
and consume away for their iniquity.


THe time of Ierusalems siege being typed out by the Prophets side-lying, he
comes hereto type out the grievous famine should be in that siege; and this he
does,

1. From the course materials they should make their bread of, in the 9th
verse, wheat, barley, beans, lentiles, millet, and fitches.

2. From the quantity they should eat, verse. 10, 11. they must eat and drink by
measure.

3. From the quality of it; verse. 12. it should be bread baked with dung,
defiled bread; this was to type out the Israelites eating polluted bread among
the Gentiles, where they were to be captives.

4. From the Prophets deprecation against eating polluted bread, verse. 14. Ah
Lord, my soul has not been polluted, etc.

5. From Gods answer, yielding to the Prophets request, in the 15th verse,
giving him cowes dung for man's; and then declaring his intention in the 16. and
17. verse, that he would break the staff of bread, bring them to extreme want,
and cause them to pine away.

Something I must open before I come to the instructions arising out of the
words.

Verse. 10. Twenty shekels a day.
There were shekels of gold, 2 Chro. 3.9. shekels of silver, 2 King. 15.20.
shekels of brass, 1 Samuel 17.5. of iron also, verse 7. some of these shekels
are yet to be found amongst Antiquaries, on one side they have stamped the omer
of Manna, which God commanded Moses to lay up in the Sanctuary, and in
Samaritan letters writ Sekel Israel, and on the other side is stamped Aarons
rod, Vid. Noser um de Numis Hebra. Pradum in Ezekiel. Rivet. in Exodus
flourishing, with these words, Jerusalem Kedoshah. Because the Scripture
mentions the shekel of the Sanctuary, as Exodus 30.13. and Numb. 3.50. The
Rabbis, and many others make a difference between shekels, and say, that of
the Sanctuary was holy, and of twenty gerahs; others were common, and of ten
gerahs, Shekel is a weight from Shakal to weigh, from whence our word scale, or
scoal is taken.
half the weight of the other; and this opinion has prevailed much amongst
Authors: but I find it by later Writers opposed, and especially by Vilalpandus,
it is called the shekel of the Sanctuary, not because it differed from others,
but for that it was kept there to be a Standard and Measure for all the rest,
that there might not be great and small shekels at the pleasure of men, and
mischief accrue that way; they hold that the shekels were all of one weight,
though not of one substance; and that,

First, because no just reason can be given why they should differ, and so
doubts be multiplied of what shekel it was meant, when mention is made of
shekels and half shekels: as Exodus 30.13. and the third part of a shekel,
Nehem. 10.32.

Secondly, because the shekels that are now extant in the world, are of the
same weight.

Thirdly, the Scriptures make the shekels that were in common use, the same for
weight with those of the Sanctuary: observe two places and it is evident, Ezekiel.
45.9, 10, 11, 12. he blames Princes there for violence and fraud, and exhorts
them to use just weights and measures, See Lev. 27.25. Numb. 3.47.
and then mentions the shekel, which shall be twenty gerahs; this was the
shekel in common use; now see Exodus 30.13. where he speaks of the shekel in the
Sanctuary, and says, there a shekel is 20. gerahs, and so the same with that
in public use. A gerah weighed sixteen Barley corns, Vide Ainsw. upon Exodus
30.13.
and twenty gerahs came to 320. Barley corns, which made the weight of the
shekel of the Sanctuary and other: some render the word gerah by obolos, for
farthings; some by stivers, and was the value of two shillings, or two and four
pence: for the weight, which is the thing we are here chiefly to look at, a
shekel, was the same with the stater among the Grecians and Romans; Lib. 10.
(...).
and Eusebius calls shekels (...), and a stater was four drams, called (...)
which was half an ounce, and so accordingly the twenty shekels weight was ten
ounces; so that the loaf or weight of bread here allowed to the Prophet, day by
day, was of ten ounces only; others, that follow the opinion of the common
shekel, which was the fourth part of an ounce, make the weight of his meat or
bread, only five ounces, for so much do twenty shekels amount unto, and this is
so little, that hardly life can be maintained by it; I incline to the former
opinion, and leave it to your judgment.

Verse. 11. The sixth part of an Hin.
From the bread, he descends to the drink, which was no better then fair water,
and not overmuch of that, a Hin was a measure of liquid things, Maimon. in his
Tract of Sacrifice, Chapter 2. 7.
as of oil, wine and water, and it contained twelve of those measures are
called logs, of which you read in Lev. 14.10. one log of oil, which Ainsworth
says is half a pint; the Rabbis as much as six eggs, but Pradus observes that
the eggs in Palestina were greater then elsewhere, and that six of them would
fill the Romans Sextarius; and he clears a common error about those eggs, they
are not to be taken for the eggs of fowls, which are sometimes greater,
sometimes lesser, but an Egg was a certain standing measure among the Jews,
in the form of an Egg, and the least measure they had, six of these mad a Log,
and seventy two a Hin; so that the sixth part of an Hin was two Logs; that is,
so much as twelve eggs would contain, for their measure of an egg was after the
proportion of ordinary eggs, and came to no more then one pint or six ounces,
as some conceive; but a pint of water weighed, comes to sixteen ounces, which
was very little for four and tw^^ty hours; Vires non tribuit, sed mortem tantum
prohibuit, bread and water was so little, that their hunger and thirst were
rather increased then diminished thereby.

Verse. 12. Thou shall bake it with dung that comes out of man in their sight.
Poor people in many places, use mean things for firing; some burn straw, some
brakes, some turfe, some thorns, some dung, but it is the dung of beasts, which
being dried by the wind and Sun, burns well, and supplies the necessity of the
needy; but the dung of man for firing has scarce been heard of; this he should
take, and in the embers and ashes thereof bake his miscell any bread, to set
out the great scarcity of fuel, both in their fiege, and in their captivity;
this was a very irksome business for a Prophet, to gather the dung of men, to
dry it, make fires with it, and prepare his diet with such unsavory fire, and
that in their sight, not privately, this did much trouble him; but especially
to eat such bread: this sets out also the great haste and hunger they should be
in, they should not stay till the bread was baked in an Oven, but presently
hastened their dough to the fire, though never so unwholesome.

Verse. 13. Defiled bread.
Because in Lev. 19.19. they were forbid to fow their fields with mingled seed;
it has been conceived thence, that this was called defiled bread, because of
the mixture of grain; wheat, barley, beans, etc. but mingling of seeds neither
made the ground nor the bread polluted; for he is not after bid to change the
seeds, but the dung, it was that made it polluted bread, the baking of it in so
noisome a fire; and this set out the course and polluted diet they should eat,
not only when they were besieged in Jerusalem, but when they should be in
Babylon.

Verse. 14. I have not eaten of that which dies of it self, or is torn in
pieces, neither came there abominable flesh in my mouth.
Whosoever touches or eats of these was unclean, Lev. 11.39, 40.22.8. Deuteronomy.
14.21. and so for their excrements, the Lord is careful they should not be
defiled with them, Deuteronomy. 23.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Lev. 5.3.7.21. It does not
appear any where in Scripture that bread prepared thus is defiled; only here
in the former verse God calls it so, and the Jews had tender, delicate
stomachs, which did abhor all unclean things, and therefore they used much
washing, and often washed their hands before meat. The strength of the Prophets
argument lies thus: Lord, I have never eaten any abominable polluting flesh,
and how shall I now eat defiled bread? I have ever kept my self from what thy
Law has forbidden, and how shall I now defile my self with that which nature
it self abhors?

Verse. 15. Cowes dung for man's dung.
This was less terrible to nature; this relaxation was of advantage to the
Prophet, not to the people; for when the siege came, they did more horrid and
unnatural things then eat bread baked in Cowes or man's dung, as you may read,
Lam. 4.10.

Verse. 16. I will break the staff of bread.
The staff of bread is a metaphorical expression, borrowed from staves, used
by those are weak, sickly, and aged; by their staves they help and support
themselves: such a staff is bread to the frail nature of man, and man that has
it blessed unto him, finds it as a staff to stay up his fainting spirit. This
phrase imports two things:

First, the virtue and nourishment comes by bread, and hence it is said to
strengthen man's heart, Psalm. 104.15.

Secondly, the bread it self; there may be much bread, and little virtue in it,
and contrary, little bread and much virtue in it; as in the Widows meal and
oil, 1 King. 17.14. But when God will break the staff of bread, he ever takes
away the one, if not the other, the plenty of bread, if not the virtue of it:
Lev. 20.26. When I have broken the staff of the bread, ten women shall bake
their bread in one Oven, and they shall deliver you their bread again by
weight, and ye shall eat and not be satisfied. The Greek for breaking the
staff of bread, renders it afflicting with penury of bread, as breaking of
bread, Act. 2.46. notes plenty and communicating of food; so breaking the
staff of bread implies want and scarcity, Psalm. 105.16. He called for famine
upon the land, and brake the whole staff of bread, so that the land could not
sustain them, and Isa. 3.1. The Lord of Hosts does take away from Jerusalem and
from Judah, the stay and the staff, the whole stay of bread, and the whole
stay of water; God would take away the plenty and the virtue, he would not
bless either unto them: hence it is said, Hos. 4.10. They shall eat, but not
have enough, not be satisfied; Mich. 6.14. to drink and not be filled, to
cloth themselves, and not to be warm, Hag. 1.6. Some would here understand by
breaking the staff of bread, to be meant only a deficiency, not an
insufficiency; but I conceive God would take away both their bread and the
blessing of that remained, according to that in Deuteronomy. 28.17. Cursed shall be
thy basket and thy store; God would take away panem nutrientem, and panis
nutrimentum, that the blessing being removed they might be weakened, and the
bread being removed they might be consumed.

The word Makak signifies contabescere, to pine away, Verse. 17. (...)
as a man in a consumption, and not only so, but foetere, foetidum fieri, to
become noisome and loathsome; and so it is used, Psalm. 38.5. My wounds stink and
are corrupt; so they should not only consume, but grow loathsome and unsavory,
as it is usual with those are almost famished.

Observe. 1. That Gods judgments upon a sinful people are seldom single, but
one succeeds in the neck of another, before the Prophet had been put upon a
siege, and now he must express a famine, and mind them of eating polluted
bread in another land. In the 28. Deuteronomy. and 26. of Lev. God threatens judgment
after judgment, till he has consumed them; it is long before God begins to
strike, but when he once strikes, he will go on and dispatch his work, and make
an end of an impenitent people; and so recompense his slacknesse to punishment
with severity and succession of judgments, Amos 4. God had judgments, which
like fish-hooks should snatch them away, cleanness of teeth, droughts,
blastings, pestilence, etc. Ezekiel. 14. God has sword, famine, pestilence, and
noisome beasts, to send one after another, and what one leaves, the other shall
devour: God smote them with the sword in Ireland, and has not the famine
followed it? we are under the edge of the one, and shall be, I fear, under the
teeth of the other.

2. That a famine upon any is a distressing judgment; if God send it upon
Jerusalem, they shall find it very heavy: when David was put to that hard
choice, 2 Samuel 24. he would not have the sword or famine to come upon him or
his. Curtius reports of Alexander, Lib. 6.
that warring against the Bactrians, he and his were besieged with such a
famine, as they were forced to eat up their horses that carried their
necessaries: when the Carthaginians besieged Saguntus in Spain, they were
brought to such miseries with a famine, that they made a fire in the midst of
the Market place, and first burnt that they had left, and could not eat, and
then cast in themselves and children, to put an end to their miseries; whence
arose that speech, or proverb Saguntina fames, noting extreme want; It Is also
related of Cambyses, son of Cyrus, that seeking to subdue the revolted
Ethiopians, his army was in such a strait for victuals, that they were forced
to tithe out every tenth man, and to live upon them; and that this continued so
long, that Cambyses feared himself, and thereupon returned: It Is known what a
grievous famine was at Sanserre in France, when Charles the 9th besiged it in
the year 1573. and shot against it, in three days space 3500. great shot of
Ordnance, and killed not one by them, yet almost all the people were consumed
by the famine in the siege thereof, having eaten up all things living, and the
leather off of Trunks and Saddles. In Edward the second his days was such a
famine, as a Parliament was called to moderate the prices of things, Speeds
History Lib. 9. c. 11.
such was the dearth, that bread could scarce be gotten to serve the kings own
family, the famine grew so terrible, that Horse, Dogs, yea, men and children
were stolen for food, and thieves newly brought into the Gaols, were torn in
pieces, and eaten presently, half alive, by such who had been longer there. The
Scipture tells us of as great famine as we can read of; A Lapid. in loc. When
Hannib. besieged Cassilinum, a mouse was sold for 200. groats. Val. Max. l. 7.
the Samaritan famine was such, as that like Vulturs, Dogs and Swine, they fed
upon carcasses, dung it self; 2 King. 6.25. the Assyrians besieged Samaria,
until an Asses head was sold for 80. pieces of silver, that is, 80. shekels,
and that came to above 8^ of our money, and the fourth part of a Kab of Doves
dung for five pieces of silver; a Kab contained four pound and five ounces, and
the fourth part was thirteen ounces, and for this they gave ten shillings and
upward; some think is was the corn in the crop of the Dove which did fly
abroad, and came home full, but the Text is plain, it was the dung of Doves,
which whether they used for salt, having an acrimonious humor in it, or for
food, their distress was very great; but this of Jerusalem was the sorest that
ever was, they had course fare, the food of beasts, beans, lentiles, millet,
fitches, and little of this, bread and water were measured out unto them; their
bread was defiled, dressed with dung; their firing failed, having burnt up all
things combustible, Gods curse was upon what they had, he brake the staff of
bread, no strength, nourishment, came from that they had, Deuteronomy. 28.53, 55.
they went up and down distressed, and dyed for hunger; read the 4th of the
Lam. 4, 5, etc. the tongues of the s^^cking children did cleave to the roofs of
their mouth, other children asked bread, and none brake it unto them: The
scarlet men of the City embraced dunghills, the beautiful Nazarites were
blacker then coals, the slain with the sword were preferred before the slain
with famine, the pitiful women sod their children, they were their daily meat:
thus God brought down Jerusalem, and quickly can do any; let us acknowledge
Gods mercy that we are not under such a judgment; let us be humbled for abuse
of his good creatures, no more pamper the flesh with them; let us not be proud
of what we have, hoord up Gods blessings, but communicate and distribute to the
necessities of others, and use all to Gods honor.

3. That hunger makes course and loathsome things pleasant; bread polluted will
down in a famine; bread made of that which Horses and Swine eat, of beans,
lentiles fitches, etc. and be as barley-cakes; barley of it self is a sweet
grain, but being made into cakes, it was more pleasant, and such is ill diet in
time of famine, Prove. 27.7. To the hungry soul every bitter thing is sweet; the
sweetest thing is bitter to the full, the bitterest is sweet unto the empty when
Esau was faint, then red pottage was worth a birthright, Genesis 25.32.
Artaxerxes being put to flight, his Provisions taken away, and he had only a
few dry figs, and a little barley bread, said, Cujusmodi voluptatis hactenus
inexpertus fui? hunger is the best Cook, and the best sauce: when Darius drank
puddle-water, and that defiled with dead carcasses, Cicer. 5. Tusc.
he said, He never drank more pleasant drink. As it is with women in their
longings, any thing longed for is pleasant, not other things, what ever they
be; so in famine, any thing edible is longed for, and that makes it pleasant,
even an Asses head, Doves dung, polluted bread, man's flesh.

4. Note here the conformity of the punishment to their sin, they had sinned in
excess, and God would take away their plenty; Hos. 13.6. According to their
pastures so were they filled; they had full pastures, fed largely, exalted
their hearts, and thought they should never want, they forgot God in their
fullness, and he made them to remember him in a famine; fullness of bread was
the sin of Sodom, and the sin of Jerusalem also; God brake the staff of
bread; they sinned in defiling themselves with Idols, and offered meal and oil,
honey, flower for a sweet savor to their Idols; Ezekiel. 16. and now they must
eat polluted bread among the Gentiles; they had worshipped dunghill gods, and
should shortly eat dunghill bread; they had been proud of their ornaments, and
those in scarlet should embrace the dunghils; Hab. 2.8. Because thou have
spoiled many nations, all the remnant of the people shall spoil thee: it is
spoken of the Chaldeans. Pharaoh drowned the Israelites children; he and his
were drowned in the red Sea for it: Solomon to please his Idolatrous wives,
divided the worship of God between God, himself and Idols, and God divided his
kingdom between his son and his servant. Socrates tells of Severianus a Bishop,
that called Chrysostom a kneelesse fellow, because he would not bow and crouch
to good causes, one trod upon his toe, which rankled, and he was forced to cut
off that leg, and the other, and so became kneelesse himself. Comment of of
civil wars of France.
Charles the ninth, who had been bloody in his life, died of a bloody flux, and
the blood issued out of the several parts of his body, who in the bloody
massacre had caused or suffered blood to be shed in the several parts of his
kingdom; he used to blaspheme in his life, and died blasphemously at his
death. A Romish zealot repined at the fuel burnt at the Kings return from
Spain, and said, There was such waste of wood, as shortly there would not be a
faggot left to burn heretics; this party being at Blackfriars when the
downfall was, received a mark of remembrance by a piece of wood. Doctor Goad in
his Relation of that accident.

5. The afflictions and judgments befall Gods people, are not casual, but
providentiall: If the Jews be besieged, famished, taken, carried away into
other lands, and eat polluted bread there; Gods eye has directed, his hand
has acted, and therefore he says, Whither I shall drive them; what
Nebuchadnezzar and his Army did, was the work of God: so Joseph said of the
dealing of his brethren selling him into Egypt; Genesis 45.5. That it was God sent
him thither: it is the power and providence of God that acts in all troubles,
and circumstantiates them for time, place, measure.

Observe. 1. Verse. 14.
That the Saints of old were careful to walk according to the prescriptions of
the Law: The Law forbid eating of those things dyed of themselves, what ever
was torn in pieces, every abominable thing; and our Prophet was careful to
observe such and other prescriptions; it was the Saints duty to live after the
directions of the Law, what God had written to them therein, they were bound to
observe; and did exactly. David had respect unto all the commands of God, Psalm.
119. Moses was faithful in all the House of God.

2. A gracious heart will deprecate that is contrary to its sanctification, Ah
Lord, my soul has not been polluted; thou art the author of honlinesse, and I
have walked holily hitherto, and now must I defile my self? ah Lord, let it not
be. The words are very patheticall; he says not Jehovah in the original, but
Jehovi, which the servants of God have used in their most patheticall prayers
and speeches: as Abraham, Genesis 15.2, 8. Deuteronomy. 3.24.9.26. I prayed unto the
Lord, says Moses, and said, O Lord God, destroy not thy people and thine
inheritance; Moses spirit was exceedingly affected; and in such cases, he and
others called God Jehovi, and so does Ezekiel here, he was intense, in
deprecating defilements: so Peter, Acts 10. when the sheet was let down with
all beasts, fowls, and creeping things in it, and the voice said, Rise Peter,
kill and eat, his heart was stirred, What shall I eat, that is common, unclean,
and pollute my soul? not so Lord, verse. 14. (...), in no wise Lord, what ever
becomes of me, though I starve, I will not eat any thing shall defile me.

3. The godly are careful not only to abstain from great sins, but from little
ones also: it was no great matter to eat bread baked with a fire made of man's
dung, and that in a time of necessity, but even this would not Ezekiel yield
unto; there was evil in it: so Daniel would not defile himself with the
portion of the kings meat, Chapt. 1.8. Moses would not leave a hoof in Egypt;
Job made a covenant with his eyes, not to look upon a maid, and therefore ^ave
not sway to his mind to think upon one, Job 31.1. thinking is less then
looking, and this he would not allow himself. Joseph abhorred the act, and Job
the thought of uncleanness. Paul would not be subject one hour unto false
brethren, Gal. 2.5. and he bids the Thessalonians to abstain from all
appearance of evil, not only evil, but the appearances of it, Bern. de consid.
Quicquid male fuerit coloratum; this made Paul to blame Peter for yielding to
Jewish Ceremonies, when they carried a face of evil, Gal. 2.14. and to say,
rather then he would offend his weak brother by eating, he would eat no flesh
while (...) world stands, 1 Cor. 8.13. The Primitive Christans would not
throw a little Frankincense into the fire, nor bow before an Idol, though
their lives lay at stake upon the refusal.

4. That the Saints, through darkness and doubts, do stick at that which is
lawful and warrantable; God bids Ezekiel bake his bread with man's dung, and
eat it; here was warrant sufficient for him; Gods command makes a thing holy:
Act. 10.13. kill and eat, said the voice to Peter; no, says Peter, and why?
the creatures in the sheet are common and unclean; but it was replied, what God
has cleansed, that call not thou unclean or common; How came all to be clean
in the sheet, when by the judgment of the Law there were creatures unclean in
it? it was the command of God made all so, kill and eat; Peter without doubting
or questioning, might have killed and eaten any creature there, without
polluting his spirit; and so Ezekiel might have eaten such bread without
defilement, Gods command legitimates any thing: Abraham's sacrificing of his
son, Genesis 22.2. Hosea's marrying a wife of whoredom, Hos. 1.2. the brother
marrying with the brothers wife, carrying of the bed on the Sabbath day, Deuteronomy.
25.5.
Joh. 5.11. Where there is a word from heaven for any thing, we need not fear
defiling our selves: the Saints of God stuck at things when they had a word, no
marvel if Saints now stick at things when they have no word.

Verse. 15.
Note that God does condescend to the weaknesses of his servants and mitigates
what seems grievous unto them; man's dung was very irksome to the spirit of the
Prophet, the Lord dispenses with his command, and gives him cowes dung for
man's. The Saints are precious in Gods eye, and rather then grieve and displease
them, he will often upon their petitioning to him, dispense with his own will;
but take it up warily, when the dispensation is in things that are not
prejudicial to his glory, his wisdom, his truth, or his justice, and here it
was not; God suffered no way in mitigating the sentence, and giving cowes dung
for man's, it rather magnified God, that he will yield to the desires of his,
when he is in a way of judgment. Ioshuah, when Israel had sinned, and God
smote them, he falls down, he weeps and laments, beseeches God in behalf of the
people, and what says God to him? Josh. 7.10. Get thee up, wherefore lie
thou upon thy face; I will have thee mourn no longer, I will not destroy
Israel; so that in Amos 7. there is a sore judgment of Grassehoppers, that eat
up all the grass of the Land, the Prophet is grieved, and prays, Oh Lord God,
forgive I beseech thee, by whom should Jacob rise, for he is small; and ver. 3.
it is said, The Lord reported for this, and said, it shall not be; and so a
second time, after he yielded to the request of the Prophet; This should
encourage us to sue to God in these times of distress, without doubting, for a
mitigation of our miseries, if not a removal, he is a God hearing prayer, a
God that will mitigate his own judgment, rather then exasperate the spirits of
his people; Let it also lesson us to a condescension one to another; let us not
be rigid and stick to our wills, and think it disparagement to abate of our
wills and right, and yield to others, when God, who is infinitely above us, can
yield to us, and does so daily, bearing our infirmities; remember that place,
Romans 15.1, 2, 3. where the strong are bid to bear the infirmities of the weak,
and not to please themselves, but to please and edify their neighbor, and
what is the ground of it? Christ pleased not himself, but for our sakes he bare
reproach.

1. It Is in Gods power to blast the comforts of this life; behold, Verse. 16, 17.
I will break the staff of bread; God gives bread, drink, clothes, what ever
sweetens the lives of sinful sorry men here on earth; and when he pleases he
can take them or the blessing of them from us: What are clothes if they keep
not warm? What is bread if it do not nourish? it is the same as if you had n^^^.
God can break the st^ffe of bread; so that all your comforts shall be broken
comforts, and he can take away the staff of bread, so that your comforts
shall be no more. Amos 4.8. Two or three cities wandered unto one city to drink
water; but they were not satisfied: the waters quenched not their thirst, they
were broken comforts: and Hos. 4.10. They did eat, but had not enough, they
were not filled and satisfied, the staff of bread was broken, and the comfort
of it too short for them; but that is not all, sometimes there is no water, no
bread left, Lam. 1.11. Chap. 4.4, 5. Chap. 6. there was not a little, but none;
God can take away all the comforts of this life, and leave us as naked as we
came into the world; neithet is it only in his power to break the staff of
natural bread, but of the spiritual also; Behold, I will send a famine, not
of bread, and a thirst, not of water, but of hearing the Word of God, and men
shall wander, and not find it, Amos 8.11, 12. This is the sorest famine, and
such a famine is in many places. Let us take heed we provoke not God to plague
us with such a famine.

2. The end of God in his judgments, is to perplex and ruin wicked impenitent
sinners; God sends a famine, that they may eat and drink with care, with
ashonishment, and consume away in a loathsome manner. What a miserable sight is
it to see a man pined, even to death for want of bread? many in time of plenty
are filled with care and fear about their backs and bellies, what they shall
eat, and what they shall drink, and how live the next day; how much more men in
the depth of a famine? see what Isaiah says, Chap. 9.19, 20. there was a
civil war to be amongst them, famine accompanying that, and the wrath of God
to consume them, as fire does fuel, and what then? no man shall spare his
brother, and he shall snatch on the right hand and be hungry, and he shall eat
on the left hand, and not be satisfied; they shall eat every man the flesh off
his own arm: Manasseh Ephraim, and Ephraim Manasseh; when they could not
consume one another fast enough, they would consume themselves, eat their own
arms to save life, and that eating was death.

3. It is men's iniquities which bring such consumptive judgments upon them;
they shall consume away for their iniquity: sin is poison, and that makes
languishing, it eats up the strength of a man, wears out all his comforts, and
brings him to the pit: Lev. 26.31. they shall pine away in their iniquity,
their flesh, their spirits, their hopes, their lives may leave them, but their
iniquities will not.

Ezekiel, Chap. 5. Ver. 1, 2, 3, 4. And thou Son of man, take thee a sharp
knife, take thee a Barbers razor, and cause it to pass upon thy head, and upon
thy beard: then take the balances to weigh and divide the hair.

2. Thou shall burn with fire a third part in the midst of the city, when the
days of the siege are fulfilled; and thou shall take a third part, and smite
about it with a knife; and a third part thou shall scatter in the wind, and I
will draw out a sword after them.

3. Thou shall also take thereof a few in number, and bind them in thy skirts.

4. Then take of them again, and cast them into the midst of the fire, and burn
them in the fire: for thereof shall a fire come forth into all the House of
Israel.


THis Chapter carries on the Argument of the former. Jerusalem's misery in that
was presented to you under single types, a siege and famine; in this also under
a complex type is set forth the judgments of God against Jerusalem; I call it
a complex type, because it contains many judgments of God; it is generally
propounded in the first verse, particularly in the three next. The matter of
this type is here, and touching it, he is commanded, 1. To take a knife, or
razor, and to cut off the hair of his head and beard. 2. To weigh it being cut
off; and 3. To divide it.


Something I must open in the words, give you the sense of them, and then the
obs^^^^tions.

Take to thee a sharp knife.
(...)
In the Hebrew, it is a sword, Chereb, which signifies any instrument that cuts
and divides, of iron or stone: in Josh. 5.2. Make thee sharp knives; Knives of
flint is the original: what knife our Prophet meant is expressed, a Barbers
razor, Hebrew a razor of Barbers, such as they use when they trim men, and they
are very sharp, most commodious and fit for that service. This Razor here sets
out the will and judiciary power of God, in punishing the Jews by
Nebuchadnezzar, who in Isai. 7.20. is called a Razor, and that is sharp, strong
and fit for shaving.

This Razor must pass upon the Prophets head and beard, and take away the hair
of both, even close to the skin.

Head.
It types out unto us Jerusalem, which had the regions round about subject unto
it, and now the chief city of Judah, God would shave the head and beard of this
city off.

The Citizens are resembled to hair of a man's head and beard:

1. For their multitudes, they are numberless, and Jerusalem had multitudes in
it of her own, and thither was a conflux of all sorts, from most parts.

2. Hair is an ornament, 1 Pet. 3.3. not only to women, but also to men, their
hair does become them; Cant. 5.11. and people are a great ornament to a city; a
city unpeopled, is a head without hair, people are the beauty and glory of a
city: Prove. 20.29.
Solomon says, gray hairs are the beauty of old men, and gray headed
Counselors are the beauty of cities. A Lapid. Barba est symbolum virilitatis.
Some by the hair of the head, think the wise men of the City are figured out,
and by the hair of the beard, are the strong men; the beard is a token of
manhood.

3. Hair is a weak thing, blown this way and that way with every wind; and so
it is with the people, they are weak, inconstant things; Hebr. 13.9. They were
carried about with diverse and strange doctrines, 2 Pet. 2.2. Many follow their
pernicious ways; people are truly in this sense hair, they move forward and
backward, every way, there is no steadfastness in them: hence they are compared
to waters in the holy Writ, which are ever ebbing and flowing; to clouds
carried about of winds, Jud. 12.

By the hair of the beard, we may understand those in the country towns and
villages, that were near unto Jerusalem.

The shaving off this hair, points to us three things:

1. Great mourning; shaving off the hair was used in that case, Job 1.20. when
all the sad accidents were reported to Job, he rent his mantle, and shaved his
head; which was a sign of great mourning: So Ezra, the 9th, the 3d. when the
Jews had defiled themselves with strange women, he plucked off the hair of his
head and beard, and sat down astonished, see Isa. 15.2. Jer. 48.37.

2. Great disgrace; so when Hanan suspected the messengers David had sent unto
him, he shaved off half their beards, which was a great reproach, and
vindicated with the sword, 2 Samuel 10. When men are without hair on their heads
or faces, it is a reproach to them; hence the boys mocked the Prophet, and
called him bald-pate, 2 King. 2.23.

3. Destruction; when hair is cut off it falls to the earth, and perishes; and
when people are cut off from God, they perish, God would separate them from
Jerusalem, from his worship, from his presence, and so they should fall to the
earth, be as filth, and come to nothing.

The next think considerable, is the weighing of the hair.

Balances are an emblem of Justice, and sets out here the great equity of God
in dispensing of his judgments; he is exact in them, even to a hairs weight,
his judgments are not too light or too heavy, but have their just weight and
measure.

The division of the hair follows; and that notes out the diversity of their
conditions; they should not all fare alike, but the judiciary providence of God
would proceed, with some in one kind, with some in another.

A third part was to be burnt in the midst of the city. Verse. 2.
It may be questioned what city, he being now in Babylon: it was the city
purtrayed upon the Tile, Chap. 4.1. which was Jerusalem. What is meant by fire
is doubted; fire in Scripture, often notes out great calamities: as in Psalm.
66.12. We went through fire and water; 1 Pet. 4.12. Think it not strange
concerning the fiery trial; and here some understand fire in a metaphorical
sense, for famine and plague, whereby a third part of the citizens died; others
take it literally, and conceive hereby is represented the burning of Jerusalem,
of which you may read 2 King. 25.9. and in the last of Jeremiah, and this sense
Iunius favors, because it was to be done at the end of the siege, when his
visionall siege was expired, then he was to burn the hair; and when the siege
of Jerusalem was out, and it taken, then was it burnt with fire.

Another part was to be smitten with a knife, that sets out those were to be
cut off by the sword, either in the siege, or after it, as 2 King. 25.4, 5, 6,
7. and not only those in the city, but all in the regions about it.

After this, a third third part was scattered into the wind, which notes their
dispersion into several parts, as hair before the wind is carried some one
way, some another; so were these Jews scattered, some into Moab, some into
Ammon, some into Egypt; and Iohannan carried diverse thither, Ierem. 43. but God
threatened them with a sword, Ierem. 42.16. and 44.27. and made it good when
Nebuchadnezzar conquered Egypt, which is prophesied of in the 46. of Jeremiah,
God drew out a sword, and sent it after them.

Verse. 3.
The binding up a few in his skirts, typifies the exemption and preservation of
some few from the common calamities; it is a mephoricall speech, taken from
Gardiners, that pick up the good fruit in their laps and skirts, and throw
aside the other; this little number were the poor which Nebuzaradan left for
Vine-dressers, and Husbandmen, over whom Gedaliah was made Ruler, 2 King.
25.12.23. and those that escaped out of Egypt when the judgment fell there,
Ier. 44.28. it is said, a small number should escape, and return to Judah.

Verse. 4.
Take of them again, and cast into the fire; Of that remnant which was preserved
he must take a parcel and burn, this was to present to the world, the death of
Gedaliah, who was left Governor of the little number remaining in Judea; you
have the story of his death, by Ishmael, in the 41. of Jeremiah, who conspired
against him, and slew him and fourscore more. After this he took those were
left by Nebuzaradan that were under Gedaliah, and attempted to carry them
captives into the land of Ammon, but Iohannan and the Captains withstood him,
recovered the people, and after carried them into Egypt, and so from that
treachery against Gedaliah, a fire went forth into all the House of Israel.
Some refer the fire going out of this remnant preserved, to the Jews returning
turning out of Babylon, a great part of whom were slain by Antiochus Epiphane,
some put it upon their destruction by Titus. Eusebius. l. 4. hist.
Gallati^^^ extends it to Hadrians time, who slew at one time 50000, of them in
India in the city Bitter, and so ruined the whole nation. These opinions I
leave, as having less truth and suitableness to the text then that was first
mentioned.

Observe. 1. That wicked men are of little worth: take a whole city of them,
they are of no more account with God, then a little hair of the head or beard:
hair in it self is an ornament, but when it grows burdensome, off it goes,
and is rejected as a thing of naught; so inhabitants are a glory to a city, but
when they become wicked they are a burden to it, to God, he will cut them off
and value them no more then a little hair: Absalom cut off his hair when it was
heavy, but he prized it very high, at two hundred shekels, 2 Samuel 14.26. God
cut off the hair of the head of Jerusalem, it was very heavy, but he prized it
not; wicked men, multitudes, millions of them, are not worth a hair, they are
inconsiderable worthless things, all the wicked of the world are but
excrements in it, which must be cut off and thrown unto the dunghills; Psalm.
9.17. The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the nations that forget
God. Take the best thing of the wicked, it is of small price, some farthing
matter; Prove. 10.20. The heart of the wicked is of little worth; his clothes,
his ornaments and jewels, his estate, and house and land may be of great worth,
but himself, his very heart is of little worth, not accounted of in heaven. But
now take the meanest thing of a godly man, it is valued, regarded, the hairs of
his head are all numbered, Matthew. 10.30.

2. It Is the privilege of Christ to appoint whom and what instruments he
please to execute his pleasure upon sinners; Take thee a sharp knife, a razor,
and cause it pass upon thy head and beard; the Prophet might not take what
instrument he pleases, but what Christ appoints; it was he set apart
Nebuchadnezzar, Nebuzaradan, and the Chaldeans, to shave Jerusalem, and
therefore the whole work is given to God: Isa. 7.20. The Lord shall shave with
a razor that is hired by them beyond the river, by the King of Assyria, the
head and the hair of the feet, and it shall also consume the beard; this is
spoken of Senacherib, and verified also in Nebuchadnezzar, both these were
razors in the hand of God, by which he shaved the head, the Princes and Nobles;
Counselors were out off by him; The beard, the Priests and strong men; The
feet, the common people. It Is the Lord appoints and sets instruments on work to
afflict Churches and States; Amos 3.6. Shall there be evil in a city, and the
Lord has not done it? there is no razor shaving in a city, but the Lord has
set it on work there, Micah 1.^2. evil came down from the Lord to the gate of
Jerusalem; it came from above, and it came to Jerusalem; hereupon the Prophet,
in Chap. 6.9. said to them, the Lords voice cries to the city, and the men of
wisdom shall see thy Name, hear ye the rod, and who has appointed it.

3. When God has been long provoked by a people the comes with sharp and
sweeping judgments amongst them, and that is set out by the razor: he had
waited much upon them, they went on in their sins, but now God calls for a
razor, and that should go to the quick: Muscul. in Isa.
Radere non est simpliciter auferre, sed sic auferre, ut praecedentis status
vix ulla supersint vestigia, God would not reap them or lop them in those
cases; the stub and trunk are left, but he would shave them, not leave a
politic body or Church state: that place in Isa. 7.20. holds out the truth
fully, he would spare neither head, beard or feet, every condition of people,
the honorable, the mean, the lowest should be shaven; he would not only strip
them of their clothes, but shave them, and take away their native beauty; he
would fill them with mourning, make them a scorn, cut off their limbs, and
destroy their lives, there should be no city, no Temple, no King, no Priest, no
Sabbath, no God left them; but has not God shaven them in Germany, in Ireland?
and is he not shaving us now?

4. That there is no standing out against God, what ever our number or strength
is, his judgments are irresistible: men here are compared to hairs, his
judgment to a razor; can the softest or harshest hair withstand the razor? can
any one or all the hairs of the head or beard do it? no, the razor will easily
pass through all, as a fithe through grass or corn: hairs are weak things,
razors sharp and strong; Pharaoh was the strength of Egypt, but God by the red
Sea did shave him, and many thousands more from off the face of the earth; the
great men of the world are no more to God, then hairs before the razor, he cuts
off the spirit of Princes, Psalm. 76.12. he challenges the briers and thorns of
the earth, Who would set them against me in battle? I would go through them, I
would burn them together. Isa. 27.4.


5. The judgments and proceedings of God with sinners, are not rash, sine
consilio, but su^^^^ judicio, he weighs out the hair, and proportions suitable
judgments unto those that were represented by it; the infinite wise God is
exact in his proceedings: hence you have it in Scripture, that God does weigh
actions, Psalm. 1.2, 3. the paths of men, Isa. 26.7. their spirits, Prove. 16.2.
he examines how they are clogged with sin and guilt, God measured the
covetousness of Babylon, which was exceeding great, and he brought answerable
judgments upon her; Ierem. 51.13, 14. God would send Caterpillars to eat up
all her wealth. Let God deal with Babylon or Sion, he observes a proportion in
his judgments, Ier. 46.28. speaking of Jacobs seed, he tells them, he will
correct them in measure; the afflictions of the Church seem great, and often are
great, yet never are they without measure; Psalm. 80.5. Thou feedest them with
the bread of tears, and give them tears to drink in a great measure.

6. There is no escaping of Gods judgments for hard-hearted sinners; here are
diversity of judgments: fire, sword, dispersion, if one did not take, then
another would overtake them; if the fire did not scorch them, the sword should
cut them off, if not, that they should be scattered, 1 King. 19.15, 16, 17. God
bids Elijah anoint Hazael King of Syria, Iehu King of Israel, and Elisha
Prophet in his room, and tells him there should be no escaping for sinners; if
they escaped Hazaels sword, they should die by Iehu's, if not by his, they
should by Elisha's; not that he used the sword, but by his prayers, and by his
prophecies: in Ier. 1.10. he was set over kingdoms, to root out, pull down,
and to destroy; many escape the swords of Princes, and are smitten by the
swords of Prophets; Let not sinners think to delude God, he will meet with them
one way, one time or other; Amos 9.1, 2, 3. God comes there in judgment, he
stands upon the altar, and bids them smite the lintell of the door, that the
posts may shake; this was spoken of Jerusalem, not of Dan and Bethel, God would
not at all appear there; and what follows? God would destroy them, there would
be fleeing presently; and what says he? He that flees shall not flee away,
and he that escapes of them shall not be delivered, let them dig to hell,
climb up to heaven, hide themselves in Carmel, in the botome of the Sea, God
will follow them, find them out and make them smart; if enemies should carry
them away, and show favor to them, God will send a sword, and it shall slay
them, verse. 4. See Amo. 2.13, 14, 15, 16. nothing will privilege, not speed,
strength, courage, bow, horse, these are good, but in time of judgment they
will not secure; not a great house, though of stone, Amos 3.15. not gods of
gold and silver; Isai. 2.20, 21. not heaps of such treasure; Ezekiel. 7.19. They
shall cast their silver in the streets, and their gold shall be removed; their
silver and their gold shall not be able to deliver them in the day of the wrath
of the Lord: not horns of the Altar, 1 King. 2.28, 30.31. not prayer, Jer.
11.14. not fasting and sacrifice, Ier. 14.12.

7. That in great judgments and general destructions, God of his infinite
mercy spares some few: Ezekiel must take a few and bind up in his skirts, all
must not be destroyed, the fire and sword devoureth many, but the dispersion
preserved some, and some few are left in Judah; God is just, and yet when he
is in the way of his judgments, he forgets not mercy: a little of the hair
shall be preserved, when the rest goes to the fire, sword and wind; when all
flesh had corrupted their ways, a general flood was brought in; Noah and his
family were saved; when Sodom was burnt with fire and brimstone, Lot was bound
up in the skirt of God, when Athaliah slew all the seed royal, Ioash was hid,
and escaped that treachery, that butchery, 2 King. 11.1, 2. No storm sinks all
ships; no plague, famine, war, eat up all particulars, God will have a number
exempt; Isa. 1.9. God left them a small remnant, a few clusters after the
Vintage; when the cities were to be laid waste, the houses unpeopled, a great
forsaking to be in the midst of the land, Isa. 6.11, 12. in the 13th verse it is
said, but yet in it shall be a tenth, God would spare a number, though small,
he is merciful, has tender bowels, remembers his covenant, his name; and
therefore in his hottest wrath shows some mercy; this made Jeremiah say, Lam.
3.22. It is of the Lords mercies that we are not consumed, he and some few more
were hid from the common calamities, they met with mercy in the midst of fire
and sword; this made Habakkuk pray, Hab. 3.2. In wrath remember mercy.

8. That the paucity preserved in common calamities, are not all precious,
truly godly, here was hair bound up in the skirt, kept from fire, sword,
destruction, yet some of that hair of that number must be thrown into another
fire; reprobates for the present escape as well as elect vessels, some choice
ones may be cut off, and some vile ones may be kept. In the flood all were not
naught that were destroyed, nor all good that were saved; there was a wicked
Cham in the Ark, and Lots daughters that escaped the fire of Sodom were none of
the best, that fire had not purged out their lust: and those were set at
liberty from the brick and clay of Egypt, afterward were destroyed for their
unbelief, Iud. 5. they were patient in their bondage, preserved in the red Sea,
tempted God, murmured in the wilderness, and there were destroyed of Serpents,
1 Cor. 10.9. they were murmurers, fornicators, Idolaters, unbelievers, that God
delivered from the tyranny of Pharaoh, and after perished by the stroke of
God. In a storm Cedars and Oaks are smitten, when bushes and briers are spared,
and yet after they are cut up and cast into the fire. Sinners may escape
present wrath, but there is wrath to come, Luke 3.7.

9. God may take occasion from the sin of some, to bring in judgment upon all;
he must take of the remnant preserved, and throw into the fire, and out of that
fire went forth fire into all the House of Israel. Shechem ravisheth Dinah,
from thence the Lord took occasion to bring the sword by Jacobs sons, upon the
Shechemites, who slew their males, spoiled the city, and took their sons and
daughters captives, Genesis 34. David's sin in numbering the people, and God sent
in a plague amongst them for his sin, which slew 70000. of them, 2 Samuel 24. The
people were not innocent; if so, God would not have destroyed them; they were
defiled with the contagion of his sin, or under the guilt of others; God may
let in a judgment into a family, city, kingdom, upon the sin of some one or
few, and when it is in, it may extend to all or most in them: when one house is
on fire, all the rest are in danger that are near, and often times do suffer:
Hanuns discourtesie to David's messengers, his sin against the law of nations
provoked God, and cost the Ammonites and Syrians dear; for God stirred up
David's spirit, who warred upon them, and slew many thousands of them, 2 Samuel 10.

VER. 5, 6. Thus says the Lord God, This is Jerusalem; I have set it in the
midst of the nations and countries that are round about her.

6. And she has changed my judgments into wickedness more then the nations,
and my Statutes more then the countries that are round about her; for they have
refused my judgments and my Statutes, they have not walked in them, etc.


IN the ensuing part of the Chapter is the explanation of the types, and in
this explanation you have:

First, the subject, or head to be shaven, opened unto you, and that is
Jerusalem, verse. 5.

Secondly, Gods dealing with Jerusalem, in the same verse.

Thirdly, the motives that made him proceed in such a judicial way, verse 6, 7.

Fourthly, Threatening of judgments, answerable to the types, from the 8. verse
to the end.

This is Jerusalem.
It was not Jerusalem literally, but represented Jerusalem, it was a sign of
the city that was to be shaven. This head to be shaven, is here by the Lords
own mouth pronounced to be Jerusalem, which was not only the head city of
Judah, but of the whole world. Things and persons that are eminent among
others, are called the heads or chief of them, 1 Samuel 15.21. they took the
chief or head of the things should have been destroyed; and Chap. 9.22. He
made them sit in the chiefest place; and for persons, Deuteronomy. 1.15. I took the
chief of the Tribes, that is, the heads of them; Psalm. 110.6. the heads over
diverse countries; and so here Jerusalem was the head and principal of all
other cities, built upon mount Sion, and had the Temple, the Prophets, the true
worship and presence of God, so Jerusalem as the head, gave light, influence
and motion to the whole body, the Law shall go forth of Sion, and the word of
the Lord from Jerusalem, Isa. 2.3. from thence all parts of the body had
instruction and direction.

I have set thee in the midst of the nations and countries round about.
These words have occasioned some to think, that Jerusalem was the heart and
center of the earth lying in the midst of it; on the South was Africa, on the
North Scythia, Armenia and Pontus, on the East Asia, and on the West Europe,
and with these great parts of the world it was compassed about: Hence the
Spirit of God also affirms it to be in the midst of the earth, Psalm. 74.12. and
Ezekiel. 38.12. And infinite wisdom appeared in it, that so the sound of Law and
Gospel might disperse the better into all parts of the world. But this opinion
must not be taken in a Mathematical sense, as if it were so in the midst of
the earth, as that all other parts should be equidistant from it in their
extremes, as the line from the center; for so it will hardly admit of truth,
some quarters of the world being of larger extent then others; In the midst of
the nations and countries, we need not to extend to the whole world, but only
to those that were neighboring thereunto; or if we will have an eye to all
nations and countries of the earth, we must expound, in the midst, among, or
in, and the sense then is safe: I have set thee in, or among the nations as
head and chief: thus the phrase is used often in Scripture: Psalm. 101.7. He that
works deceit shall not dwell within my house; the Hebrew is in the midst of
my house: so Genesis 18.24. if there be fifty righteous in the midst of the city,
that is, in the city; and Ezekiel. 1.1. as I was among the captives, the Hebrew
word is, in the midst of them; so that it frequently signifies, in or among.
And so in this verse we may take it: or thus, thou have chief nations and
cities about thee, very rich and noble, as Asia minor, Egypt, Babylon, etc. and
I have set thee chief in the midst of these chief ones, thy prerogatives exceed
theirs, and what ever they can pretend unto, thou can pretend to more; are
they fruitful, rich, honorable, populous, strong? thou go beyond them even
in all these, I have set thee in the midst of them, that they may all behold
thy beauty and excellencies. Heathens called this city famous, and chief of the
Eastern cities, well fortified, etc. The Psalmist sets it our best, Psalm. 48.
and 87. where are many Eulogies of it, as, The city of God, The mountain of his
holiness, The joy of the whole earth, The city of the great King; that kings
saw and marvelled at; Founded in the mountains, Loved of God in a special
manner, Glorious things were spoken thereof; and that which is above the rest,
God was known in her palaces, not in the palaces of other cities, and known for
a refuge. Jerusalem was exalted and privileged above all cities and nations,
and set on an high hill, that so the truth and worship of the true God might
have been held forth to all round about her; but Jerusalem was ungrateful, she
honored not that God had so honored her; and therefore, being set in the
midst of the nations, is brought in here, not for Ierusalems praise, but for a
reproach and aggravation of her ingratitude.

This ingratitude is illustrated in the 6th verse two ways:

1. God gave them his judgments, and they changed them into wickedness.

2. They did it more then the nations and countries about them.

Changed.
(...)
The word is from Hemir, and it is feminine, noting Ierusalems act, which had
caused Gods judgments to be changed; she made a great and through change; the
word signifies commutare and permutare, to exchange one thing for another, and
to do it thoroughly; Ier. 2.11. My people have changed their glory for that
which does not profit; a great change they had made, in exchanging glory for
improfitables.

My judgments.
The word mishphat notes Commands, Precepts, Laws, Rules, Ways of God and his
worship, these had Jerusalem changed, especially the Rites and Ordinances of
his worship; so the word is taken, Psalm. 81.5. the blowing of the trumpet in
the new moon was a mishphat, a Rite, an Ordinance due to the God of Jacob.

The word Statutes is much of the same nature, noting Rules, Decrees and
Ordinances about the worship of God. See Ainsw. on Psalm. 2.7. and Leigh in his
Critica sacra of the word chock, it is mentioned in the 119. Psalm. 22 times, and
notes the constancy of divine Decrees and Laws, and therefore is applied to
the heavens and waters which keep their place and course unchangeably, Psalm.
148.6.

Into wickedness.
This is a high expression, I think not in the whole Scripture again: Ezekiel.
7.11. Violence is risen up into a rod of wickedness; it is far short of this,
you have in Romans 1.23.25. expressions suitable to this, they changed the glory
of the incorruptible God into an Image, and the truth of God into a lie: and so
in Jude, Finxerunt novos cultus suo arbitrio ac novas leges.
The graec of God into wantonness, verse. 4. And Jerusalem changed Gods
judgments which are his glory, his truth, his grace into wickedness, the
inventions, superstitions, ceremonies, laws, worship, Idols of the Gentiles
were taken in, set up, countenanced, and Gods Judgments, Statutes and worship,
thrust out, laid aside.

This they did more then the nations and countries round about them, they dealt
worse with God then Heathens; and wherein was that? in the refusal of him and
his ways: for, they have refused my Judgments and my Statutes. (...)
The Hebrew word to refuse notes not a bare refusal, but a rejecting, and that
with disdain; Hos. 4.6. they rejected knowledge, and loathed the means of
grace; they dealt with Gods Ordinances and Worship contumeliously, Prove. 3.11.
The word is expressed by despising; they made no account of Gods Statutes and
Judgments, and so despised and rejected them: they did neither for their
worship, nor their lives, regard his will. Jerusalem having Gods Statutes,
should have so prized them, stuck to and practiced them, that thereby she might
have drawn the Gentiles round about her, to knowledge and worship of the true
God, but she sinned more then the Gentiles, and justified them in their
wickedness; they sinned not out of ignorance and weakness, but wilfully,
maliciously.

Observe. 1. That the Lord gives to the sign the name of the thing signified:
this is Jerusalem, it was only a sign, and not Jerusalem it self; yet God was
pleased to call it so; and the Scripture does frequently speak in that manner,
Genesis 41.26. the seven good kine are seven years, and the seven good ears are
seven years; they were not the years though so called, but signs of years. 1
Cor. 10.4. that rock was Christ, a sign of Christ, not Christ himself; and
Chap. 11.24. This is my body, not his flesh and blood, as Papists would have
it, but a sign of it.

2. It is an honor for cities to be the head and chief of the regions where
they are, especially where the covenant, truth, and Church of God is in them;
Jerusalem was the head, and God had made good his promise in Deuteronomy. 28.13. The
Lord shall make thee the head and not the tail, thou shall be above only, and
shall not be beneath, if that thou hearken unto the commandments of the Lord
thy God; the way for cities to be honorable only above, and always above, is
to hearken unto God, to cleave close to his ways, to exalt him in his worship;
but if they will go aside from his Word and Worship, God will shave them, their
honor shall quickly be laid in the dust, they shall be made the tail in stead
of the head, ver. 43. The stranger that is within thee shall get above thee
very high, and thou shall come down very low; and verse. 44. He shall be the
head, and thou shall be the tail; and this you may see fufilled, Lam. 1.5. Her
adversaries are the chief; the Babylonians had shaved Jerusalem, and brought
her low, which made Jeremiah say, How does the city sit solitary that was full
of people? how is she become a widow, that was great among the nations, and
Princess among the Provinces; how is she become tributary? verse. 1.

3. The Lord sets his Church and people among the wicked, and that for special
ends: I have set thee in the midst of the nations, and God had peculiar ends in
it. The nations and country about was full of ignorance, Idolatry and
profaneness; God recorded his name at Jerusalem, set his worship there, and
them in the midst of the nations, that they might make known the true God, the
true Religion, the true way of Worship; that they might by their holy lives,
win those that were without, bring them in to serve the God of Israel; and had
the Jews been conscientious of their ways, faithful and spiritual in their
worship, they might have prevailed much with the nations to have turned from
their Idols, and other sins to the living God, at least have convinced them of
the evil of their own ways, and the excellency of Gods ways. Therefore
Moses used this Argument to persuade the Jews to keep Gods Statutes; Deuteronomy.
4.6. Keep and do them, says he, for this is your wisdom and understanding in
the sight of the nations which shall bear all those statutes, and say, Surely
this great nation is a wise and understanding people. Examples of ci^^es and
nations are convincing and persuasive Orators, if they be ^^lly; ^eakons on a
hill, whose light extends far: great cities have influence into all the
counties and countries round about; they came from all places to Jerusalem,
from Sheba, 1 King. 10.1. from Ethiopiae, Acts 8.27. from Parthia, Mosopotamia,
Lybia, Rome, and many other parts, Acts 2.9, 10. and what they saw and heard at
Jerusalem, that fastened upon them. What is done in great cities is much
observed, and goes forth to the ends of the earth; Rev. 17.5. Babylon the
Mother of Harlots, and abominations of the earth.

4. Ingratitude is a sin that provokes heaven it self, it caused God the giver,
to upbraid Jerusalem the receiver; I set thee in the midst of the nations, I
made thee the head, put honor upon thee, called thee my city, was thy defense,
glory, strength; I gave thee my Judgments and Statutes, and what have thou
done? corrupted thy self, corrupted the nation, changed my judgments into
wickedness, and rejected them; this troubled the Lord greatly in all ages:
Deuteronomy. 32.6. Do you thus requite the Lord, Oh foolish people and unwise? is not
he thy father that has bought thee? has he not made thee? etc. and
notwithstanding, all that God had done for them, and was to them, yet they
corrupted, bespotted themselves, dealt perversely and crookedly with God: so
Isai. 1.2. Hear, O heavens, and give ear O earth, I have brought up children,
and they have rebelled against me; Oxen and Asses were more respective of
their owners, then they were of their God, and therefore God upbraids them with
it. God had done much for that people, his Law, Prophets, Temple, Worship,
Miracles, choycest blessings of heaven and earth were for them, and yet they
were ungrateful; therefore God calls heaven and earth to witness against
them, how unreasonable they were in their carriage toward the Lord: so in Jer.
2.12. he puts it higher, Be astonished, O ye heavens, at this, be horribly
afraid, very desolate; and why should there be such a change in the heavens?
because Gods people had made a dreadful change on earth; God had been a
fountain of living waters unto them, filled them with comforts of all sorts,
made them green and flourishing, and now they had forsaken him for puddle and
broken cisterns of their own: ingratitude troubles heaven and earth; Bernard
says, man's ingratitude troubled Christ more then his cross; nails, whippings,
reproaches; yea, his death: for Christ to become man, to suffer all for man,
and he to be unthankful, this pierced him to the heart most; and when God does
much for kingdoms and cities, and they prove ungrateful, it puts God into an
upbraiding way; Isa. 5.4. I did so and so for my Vineyard, Oh, what could have
been done more? I will take away the hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up,
trod down, laid waste; it shall have briers, and no rain shall fall upon it.

5. Those have the name and face of Gods people, may become worse then
Heathens: Jerusalem changed Gods Statutes into wickedness, that was ill; but
she did it more then the nations, which was exceeding ill; hence you find Ezekiel.
16.46, 47, 48. that the sins of Jerusalem exceeded the Samaritans and
Sodomites, Thou have not walked after their ways, nor done after their
abominations: but as if that were a very little thing, thou wast corrupted more
then they in all thy ways; their sins were inconsiderable to Jerusalems, and
because Sodoms sins being so great, notorious, as that they fetched fire from
heaven, and God could forbear them no longer, it would hardly be received that
Jerusalems sins were worse then Sodoms, the Lord swears to it, As I live, says
the Lord God, Sodom and her daughters have not done as thou and thy daughters
have done, the nations and countries about never sinned so desperately against
God, as those professed his name, and went for his people; and you have the
sentence of heaven for it, Jer. 2.10.11. Pass over the Isles of Shittim, and
see, send unto Kedar, and consider diligently, and see if there be such a
thing; has a nation changed their gods which are yet no gods? but my people
has changed their Glory for that which does not profit; the turpitude of their
fact is fully set out, it was such as could not be paralleled among Heathens,
inquiry was made, the report given in, that the Gentiles changed not their
gods; they would not alter their laws and worship they had from men, but the
Jews parted with their glory when they would not part with their shame, they
let go their Religion, which was divine, Hos. 9.10.
and without any just cause, changed Gods judgments and statutes into
wickedness, into that which neither did nor could profit, they were
changelings, chopped away heaven for earth, God for Idols, and his worship for
men's inventions; this made the Lord say of them, Jer. 3.5. Behold, thou have
spoken and done evil things as thou could. What could they do worse, then
let the infinite, glorious, wise, most holy and blessed God go for Idols and
Idolatrous worship, when the heathens would not let their gods go, that were
of base and corruptible materials, made by the hands and art of men, that
could neither see, hear, or help them? What could Manasses do worse then he
did? 2 King. 21.11.

VER. 7, 8. Therefore thus says the Lord God, Because you multiplied more then
the Nations that are round about you, and have not walked in my Statutes,
neither have kept my Judgments, neither have done according to the judgments
of the Nations that are round about you;

8. Therefore thus says the Lord, Behold I, even I am against thee, and will
execute judgments in the midst of thee, in the sight of the Nations, etc.


THe 7th verse is of the nature of the sixth, and has in it motives unto God to
proceed in judgment with Jerusalem; First, They observed not the laws of God;
2. Not the laws of the Nations, but multiplied more then they; and thirdly,
before them unto whom they should have been patterns of piety.

Because thou have multiplied more then the Nations.
Some Expositors refer these words to their mercies, not their sins; and
make the sense thus; Because thou have multiplied in number, in riches, in
honor and strength, in victory, in profits, in ordinances, in all blessings,
for which ye ought to have been thankful, fruitful and obedient unto that
God who blessed you thus above the Nations; but in stead of this have
dishonored God, grown loose, Idolatrous, etc. therefore will I deal
accordingly with thee; Take it thus, and you have this note; That prosperity
rather worsens then betters a people, they had more mercies then the Nations,
and more sins then they; as they abounded in Gods blessings, so they abounded
in ingratitude. Deuteronomy. 32.15. Jesurun waxed fat, and kicked, etc. Hos. 13.6.

But others refer this multiplying to their sins; and the sense is this;
Because thou have not satisfied thy self with a little wickedness, but
multiplied sins, iniquities, transgressions, and that more then the Heathens,
that had not thy mercies, nor thy light, therefore will I judge thee; and that
they multiplied sin is evident, Ezekiel. 16.25. Thou have built thy high places
at every head of the way; thou have opened thy feet to every one that passes
by, and have multiplied thy whoredoms; she sinned with the Egyptians,
Assyrians, Chaldeans, verse. 26.28, 29.

The judgments of the Nations.
The Gentiles have their judgments, their laws, rules and ways of living and
worshipping. Some understand here the laws of nature, what men have written in
their hearts naturally, according to what you find, Romans 2.14, 15. and the
Jews that had the laws of God superadded to the law of nature, did not
abstain from those sins the Nations did; They observed the Law the Jews
brake.

Others refer it to their laws, decrees, and practice, touching their gods,
and the worship of them, they were tenacious of both, and would not alter their
worship, nor exchange their gods. It was a Maxim among heathens, Ne quid
novarent in religionis forma; and it was an Oracle of Apollo, Eos deos rite
coli qui traditi essent a majoribus; and they thought it impious to depart from
what they had received. When Paul came to Athens, they did and would worship
their unknown God; Paul could not prevail with them to exchange a lie for
truth; not all the miracles Moses did in Egypt prevailed with Pharaoh and the
Egyptians to forsake their false gods; so that these words are a reproach to
the Jews, who were not so constant as the Nations to their god.

Observe. 1. That God walks not into the way of judgments, till men do walk
out of the way of his statutes; Because ye have not walked in my statutes, nor
kept my judgments, therefore I will do so and so by you; God's delights are
in ways and works of mercy; Judgments are his strange works, and strange
acts, Isa. 28.21. he is provoked unto them as a Be unto stinging; it is the
child's wantonness causes the father to use the rod. David's sin brought the
sword to his own house, the plague to the people; when the wickedness of the
earth was great, then the windows of heaven were open, and the flood came, Genesis
6.

2. When God intends judgments, he usually convinces sinners; judgments and
convictions are not far asunder; God sets their sins before them, they walked
not in his statutes, they sinned more then the Nations, therefore he would
proceed in judgment with them; he convinces them of their sin, to make way
for a farther conviction, namely, of the equity of his judgments; when the
Lord shall convince a sinful people to be guilty, and that of great sins,
it stops their mouths, and proclaims the equity of his judgments, which are
ever short of the merit of men's iniquities. Ezr. 9.13. Our God has punished us
less then our iniquities.

3. That Heathens are often more true to their principles, then the people of
God: The Nations kept their judgments, their gods, their worship; they would
not suffer ought to be spoken against their gods. Demetrius and others were in
a rage against Paul and his companions for it, Act. 19. They were free from
many of those sins were practiced and countenanced among the Jews, who kept
neither to the true God, nor to his statutes and judgments. Ahaz is better
pleased with an Altar from Damascus, then that the Lord had appointed, 2 King.
16. Solomon that excelled in wisdom showed his folly in this, that he built
high places for Chemish and Molech: and not only a particular man, but the
body of the people, turned aside from the true God. Judge. 2.12. They forsook
God that brought them out of Egypt, and followed the gods of the people that
more round about them, they bowed to them, they served Baal and Ashtaroth: and
Chap. 10.6. it was an ordinary thing with them; The Children of Israel did
evil again in the sight of the Lord, and served Baalim, Ash^aroth, the gods
of Syria, the gods of Zidon, and the gods of Moab, and the gods of the
Philistims: They were not satisfied with one or two false gods, but fetched in
the gods of the Nations round about them. Hos. 4.12.
Hence this people are said to go a whoring from under their god, his laws,
statutes, worship, government would not suffice them, but they would out, and
have strange gods, and strange laws. 2 Chronicles. 12.1.
Rehoboam forsook the Law of the Lord and all Israel with him; Gods Law was
exchanged for the laws of men. They kept the statutes of Omri, and brake the
statutes of Jehovah, Mic. 6.16. The Jews were as unconstant to their God, and
in his worship, as any Nation under heaven; God upbraids them for it, Jer.
2.36. Why goddest thou about so much to change thy way? God had given them a
good way, a way of life, and they would not abide in it, but hasten into ways
of sin and death; they loved to wander, Jer. 14. Has not England been weary
of Gods ways, wandered to Rome, and other parts, to fetch in somewhat of
theirs? Have we not been upon conjunctures of Protestants and Papists, in
Doctrine, Discipline, and Ceremony?

Verse. 8.
In the 8. ver. is laid down a dreadful threatening; Behold, I, even I am
against thee; and the denunciation of judgment runs on to the end of the
Chapter, with many aggravations. Here the Lord is brought in a just and severe
Judge, and the chief Author of all the judgments were to come upon them; I,
even I am, etc. It Is doubled and notes;

1. Evidentiam, That so they might be persuaded of it; the Jews thought that
God would never be against Jerusalem; but to convince them, he tells them, I,
even I am against thee.

2. Certitudinem, That whether they believed it or no, they should find it so.

3. Vehementiam, To set out the intensivenesse of God in this thing, he was
serious and real, his heart was in it, he was not words, but weight; I, even
I, etc. That so they might be the more affected.

The Vulgar reads it, to thee in stead of against thee; the Hebrew bears both,
and the sense abides the same; I, even I to thee; that is, coming to thee with
my judgments; I am hastening toward thee for thy ruin and destruction; and so
coming to Jerusalem, is being against it: That phrase in Levit. 26.24. of
walking contrary to them, and punishing them, is the expository of this here;
God would come to them, come against them, and destroy them; and this should be
not in a private way, but in the sight of the Nations; it is a sad thing to have
God secretly out with one, much worse to have him an open enemy, as God
professes he would be unto them all should see his dealings with them.

Judgments.
Here it is not taken as in the 6. and 7. verse, but notes wrath, vengeance, and
punishment to be inflicted upon evil doers; it is the same word in the Hebrew
that notes laws and punishments, and both are called judgments, being from
the infinite wisdom, counsel, and judgment of God.

Observe. 1. That it is God is the great Agent in all Judgments befall Cities
and Kingdoms; Nebuchadnezzar, Nebuzaradan, and many thousand fierce bloody
Soldiers came against Jerusalem, but God was in them, acted and ordered them,
they were the rod and staff in his hand, with which he beat Jerusalem, the
Axe with which he hewed them, the razor wherewith he shaved them, and might
have said, It Is not we but your God is against you, he has commanded us to
come forth, to plunder your Country, to besiege, take and burn your City,
though you yielded not obedience to his commands to prevent the judgment, yet
we must and will to execute the judgment appointed by him; sufferers are apt
to look at the next and second causes; not at God, but Armies, plagues,
famines, what ever judgments are extant, they are in Gods hand, he is the
principal actor in them. 2 Chronicles. 12.7. God calls the wrath his wrath, and
Shishach was to power out upon Jerusalem; Shishach was the vial, God put in the
wrath, and powered it out at his pleasure. Amos 4.6.10. God tells them it was he
gave them cleanness of teeth, and sent the pestilence; and it is he breaks out
like fire in the house of Joseph, Chap. 5.6. and Isa. 63.10. he fought against
them; it was God in their enemies did it.

2. It Is a dreadful thing to have God against a City or Kingdom; Behold, I
even I am against you. I that have loved you so dearly, that have done so much
for you, that have been a friend, a father, a husband, a deliverer, a
counselor, a God of salvation, even I am against you. The word, Behold,
imports so much, where that is prefixed, usually some great, strange, and
dreadful thing follows; and so here, could a greater, stranger, or more
dreadful thing befall Gods people, then to have God against them?

1. All in God is against them; all his attributes, his wisdom, holiness,
mercy, justice, patience, power, etc. working for their ruin. Jer. 18.11.
Behold, says the Lord, I frame evil against you, and devise a device against
you: Gods head and hand, was at work against them: and so in Micah 2.3. Behold,
against this family do I devise an evil; it was ill with the family of Jacob,
when God set his thoughts a work to devise judgments for them. The infinite,
wise, and powerful God, when he is once against a people, improves his
attributes for their ruin; hence you have it in the Word, that Gods face is
against the wicked, Psalm. 34.16. and set against them, Levit. 26.17. and so his
hand is against them, Lam. 3.3.

2. All from God; as, 1. All the creatures; When the King himself is out with
any, all his officers and servants frown; also Angels are against a people,
when God is against them; When two States fall out, they call away their
Ambassadors; and God calls away his Angels, when he is wrath with a Nation,
and because their Lord and Master is wronged by that Nation they take part with
him against it, and stand ready to execute his judgments upon it; when Christ
was injuriously dealt withal, Peter drew in his Masters behalf presently;
when God was against Egypt, the destroying Angel was quickly felt there. Not
only Angels, but all inferior creatures act answerably unto their Lord, when
he moves against a people, they do it also; the stars fought against Sisera,
Judge. 5.20. the waters against Pharaoh, Exodus 14.26. the earth against Corah,
Dathan, and Abiram, Number. 16.32. fiery Serpents stung the Israelites, Numb.
21.6. see Levit. 26.22. Ezekiel. 34.28. Chap. 14.15. Wild beasts God would send
amidst them, and he did it, 2 King. 17.24, 25. there were Lions, and 2 King.
2.24. there were Bears which did devour. Herod was eaten up by worms.
Pherecydes with vermin. Pliny tells that in Spain they were constrained to
forsake their Cities, because undermined with Conies: one in Thessal: with
Moules; and in France many Towns were left, because annoyed with Frogs,
Locusts, Mice, and Waspes; God is the Lord of Hosts, and can quickly muster up
an Army of the creatures against his enemies.

2. All Ordinances; the Word is the favor of death, 2 Cor. 2.16. the Gospel is
hid to them, Chap. 4.3. Prayer and fasting witness against them, Isa. 58.5.
Zach. 7.5. Passover, Circumcision, Sacrifices, Temple, Sabbaths, New Moons,
etc. did them no good, but increased their woes, Isa. 1.11, 12, 13, 14, 15. and
Chap. 6.9, 10, 11. Hear ye indeed, but understand not; and see ye indeed,
but perceive not: Make the heart of this people fat, their ears heavy, shut
their eyes, lest they should see, hear, understand, he converted and healed;
And why thus? God was against them, he would wast their Cities, and make their
Land desolate; God was against the Jews, his purpose was to root them out; and
what did Christ his glorious Gospel and treasures of it profit them? as Ahab
said of Micaiah, 1 King. 22.8. he prophesied no good unto us; so these proved
no ways good unto them.

3. God ^ets a people he is against, against it self, he divides them; Ephraim
is against M^nasseb and Manasseh against Ephraim, and both against Judah, Isa.
9.21. When people will divide from God, God will multiply their divisions; he
can and does mingle a perverse spirit in the midst of a people he is against,
Isa. 19.14. there shall be no agreement, but in the ruin of one another. Ver.
2. I will set the Egyptians against the Egyptians, and they shall fight;
Brother, Neighbor, City, Kingdom, each against another.

4. All miseries, plagues, judgments, curses break in quickly upon that
people, Levit. 26. When God is in march against a people, he will appoint over
them, terrors, consumptions, burning agues, etc. And if these do not humble
them, he will have seven more judgments for them, ver. 18. and after them
seven more, 21. and if they prevailed not seven more, 24. and seven more after
those three sevens, v. 28. God would multiply their judgments by sevens: and
they found it truth what God said, Judge. 2.15. whithersoever they went out, the
hand of the Lord was against them for evil, as the Lord had said, and they
were greatly distressed; they met with variety of evils on every side; and
that which is worse then all these, spiritual judgments seize upon their
hearts, so that either they see not evils coming to fear and prevent them, or
profit not by them being come and felt; their great distresses and gracious
deliverances did them no good, their hearts were still Idolatrous, and they
went a whoring after other gods, ver. 17. So Hos. 7.9. Strangers devoured
Ephraims strength, and he knew it not; Gray hairs were here and there, and not
discerned.

5. No refuge left when God is against a people; riches will not profit, Prove.
11.4. Zeph. 1.18. neither silver nor gold shall be able to deliver them in the
day of the Lords wrath, but the whole land shall be devoured: then may they say
with David, Psalm. 142.4. Refuge failed me: Will ye fly to Cities, and
Sanctuaries? Levit. 26.31. I will make your Cities waste, and bring your
Sanctuaries to desolation. Will ye fly to your own hearts? Ezekiel. 22.14. Can
thine heart endure, or hands be strong in the day that I shall deal with thee?
Will ye return, weep, and pray unto God? Deuteronomy. 1.45.

The evidences or discoveries of Gods being against a people, are these:

1. When God is against a people, they are unspirited, their hearts are
despondent within them; Hos. 4.1. God had a controversy with the land, and
Chap. 7.11. Ephraim is a silly Dove, without heart; they call to Egypt, they go
to Assyria, they had no courage, but were fearful and faint-hearted like
Doves; when enemies and dangers were at hand, when Jehu's letter came to
Samaria, the men of the city were exceedingly afraid, and said, Two kings were
not able to stand before him, how then shall we stand? 2 King. 10.4. their
hearts failed them, when man was in apprehension against them; what will men's
hearts do when God is against them? his being with men, puts courage and life
into them; Josh. 1.9. Be strong, and of good courage, he not dismayed, for the
Lord thy God is with thee; and his being against them, daunts and damps all:
Isa. 19.13. when God came against Egypt, the heart of it melted, and the
spirits of it failed in the midst thereof.

2. They are not successful in their great and public undertakings, Deuteronomy.
28.29. Thou shall not prosper in thy ways; thou shall be only oppressed and
spoiled evermore; God blasts their enterprises: Jehoram comes out with a great
army against Abijah, he had 800000. chosen and mighty men of valor, Abijah
had only 400000. half so many, 2 Chro. 13.3. and what argument did he use? v.
12. Behold, God is with us for a Captain, he is not with you, and you shall not
prosper, and they did not, but fell in the battle, 500000. of them; a strange
victory, that they should slay 100000. more then themselves were in number, God
was with the one, and against the other, therefore was the success so glorious
and great to Judah, and so bloody and shameful to Israel. When God is against
a people, he works wonders to ruin them, there is a secret curse upon their
counsel, Isa. 19.3. I will destroy the counsel of Egypt, upon their goings
out, and what ever they put their hands to, Deuteronomy. 28.19, 20. Moses knew that
it is Gods presence and countenance that makes things successful; God would
send an Angel with him to drive out the Canaanites, and to plant them in
Canaan, but that sufficed not him, he must have God go with him, Exodus 33.2.15.

3. He sets over them such as proves their ruin; Lev. 26.17. I will set my
face against you, and they that hate you shall reign over you; the Greek is,
(...)
shall persecute you, intimating, that when God is against a people, he gives
them persecuting rulers; Rehoboam whipped them with Scorpions, 1 King. 12.14.
Ahaz made Judah naked and distressed the land, 2 Chronicles. 28.19.20. Manasseh
filled Jerusalem. with innocent blood, 2 King. 21.16. and made the people do
worse then Heathens, 2 Chronicles. 33.9. all the Kings of Israel were naught, and
many of them sore plagues unto the people, and especially Ahab, whom his wife
Jezabel stirred up to do wickedly, more then any before him, 1 King. 21.25.
When Gods face was hid from and against a people, he set such rulers over them,
as proved roaring Lions, and ranging Bears, Prove. 28.15. and I fear God is in
controversy with the Christian world at this time, because most Princes in it
are haters of their people, bringing them under, and tyrannizing over them. But
if God will return in mercy, he will give his people favor, and they shall
rule over their oppressors, Isai. 14.1, 2.

4. Judgments awaken not, prevail not to reform, to return to God; Isa. 26.11.
When thine hand is lift up they will not see; they saw in a general way, that
God was angry, but not so, as to humble themselves under his mighty hand; they
were rather hardened then humbled under the judgments of God: Jerem. 2.10. In
vain have I smitten your children, they receive no correction; Isa. 1.5. Why
should you be stricken any more? you will revolt more and more; God multiplied
judgments, and they multiplied revolts; God tried them with plagues, famine,
wars, bondage, and spent much birch about them, but they were stiff-necked,
hard-hearted, judgement-proof, and daily worse and worse, and walked contrary
to God, they were stubborn, and set light by his judgments; when God is
against a people, his judgments are not sanctified, they work not out the
filth and mud that is in kingdoms and cities, a wrong construction is made of
them.

5. There is a spirit of envy and bitterness against those are dear to God,
and stand most for his ways and worship; they envied Gods people, Isa. 26.11.
they mocked his Messengers, misused his Prophets, 2 Chronicles. 36.16. there was a
malignant spirit in them in times of the Gospel, when they went off from the
old way of Jewish worship, and were formed into Gospel fellowship, there was
bitterness of spirit against them, Acts 8.1. there was a great persecution of
the Church which was at Jerusalem, and they were all scattered abroad, except
the Apostles, and quickly after, Herod laid hands upon, and killed James.
Chrysostom. and Theophyl. tell you the reason, In Matthew. 17. A Lapid. in Act.
because he was a son of Thunder, opposed the Jews, the old national way of
worship, therefore he was postulatus ad nocem, the Jews petitioned Herod to do
it, and the more Christianity spread, and Churches multiplied in Judea, the
more bitter were the Jews against that way, and that was antecedent to the
destruction of Jerusalem by Titus.

6. He makes that people base and contemptible in the eyes of others; they lose
their honor and glory; they were the head whilst God was with them, but they
became the tail when he was against them.

Observe. 3. That the Lord will be known by executing of judgments, he will not
smite in secret, in a corner of the Land or City, but in the midst of them; and
so, as his judgments should come abroad, be seen and heard of the nations: the
Jews thought God like themselves, Psalm. 50.21. because he was silent, they
felt him not a revenger, and therefore would make him a partaker in their sins,
God would vindicate himself, and execute judgment in the midst of them; the
Gentiles were blind, deeming judgments to be casual; but God would so deal
with Jerusalem, inflict such punishment, as that they should see and say, they
were not accidental, but from the God of heaven; so that here the equity and
greatness of judgments are held out; they sinned, and grievously, in the
midst of the nations, and are punished accordingly in the sight of the nations;
This was an addition to the Jews misery, that their enemies should be
witnesses of what they suffered. Ad Scapul. c. 3.
Tertul. tells of Claudius Hermianus, who persecuted the Christians bitterly,
Nemo sciat ne gaudeant Christiani.
and the rather, because his wife was turned to that sect, as he called it, he
being smitten with the just hand of God, said, Keep it secret, lest the
Christians rejoice.

VER. 9, 10. And I will do in thee that which I have not done; and whereunto I
will not do any more the like, because of all thine abominations.

10. Therefore the fathers shall eat the sons in the midst of thee, and the
sons shall eat their fathers, and I will execute judgments in thee, and the
whole remnant of thee will I scatter into all the winds.


THese verses contain further aggravations of Jerusalems miseries: The 9th
verse tells you they should be such the world had not seen, nor should see; the
10th verse specifies some particulars.

The 9th verse extends to the time past, and to the time future, and falls into
examination, whether true in either part.

First, I will do in thee that which I have not done; had not God dealt
severely with the old world, with Sodom and Gomorrah, with the Egyptians, who^
(...) drowned? yes, he had; but their sins being not so grievous as the Jews,
their judgments were not so great, the sorest was that of Sodom; and Lam. 4.6.
The punishment of the iniquity of the daughter of my people is greater then the
punishment of the sin of Sodom; that was overthrown in a moment, it was a
sharp, but short punishment, Jerusalem had severity and length of time,
therefore it is added, verse 9th, That they be slain with the sword are better
then they are slain with hunger, their judgment is easy.

But was not the siege of Samaria as sad a judgment as this executed against
Jerusalem? 2 King. 6.28, 29. there the women eat their own children, and
suffered great distress through famine.

Answ. The women eat their children, but it came not to that extremity, as that
the fathers should eat their sons, and the sons the fathers, as here it was: And

Secondly, that was not taken as Jerusalem was and burnt, many put to the
sword, many carried into captivity.

This part of the verse you see cleared; that respects the time to come is more
difficult: I will not do any more the like. Did God do his utmost now? did he
not do as much, or more against Jerusalem and its inhabitants, for putting
Christ to death? When Titus besieged Jerusalem, did they not eat their
children, one another, die with famine? did not the plague and sword destroy?
ran not their blood down the streets, out at the gates, and affected their very
enemies? came not the wrath of God upon them to the utmost? 1 These. 2.16. and
said not the Lord Christ, Matthew. 24.21. that there should be at that time such
tribulation as was not from the beginning of the world, nor ever should be; how
then is it truth in our Prophet, that God says, I will not do any more the
like?

(...)
1. The Hebrew word for no more, does not always signify perpetuity, but
sometime, a long tract of time; or a considerable space, 2 King. 6.23. the
heads of Syria came no more into the land of Israel, that was, for a certain
time they did not, but yet afterward they came again, as appears in the next
verse: so Isa. 2.4. Nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither
shall they learn war any more; it is spoken of Christ's time; and for some years,
there was quietness in the world, but after the Gospel spread, wars were
learned and practiced again: one place more in Genesis 46.29. Joseph fell on his
fathers neck, and wept on it a good while, it is the same word; so then God
would not do so any more, that is, for a good while, a long season, for that
age and generation.

2. We do not find that ever there was such a hand of God upon a people, that
the fathers should eat their sons in an open visible way, and the sons the
fathers, as there it was. The Scripture mentions not the like again, scarcely
any story in the world; and in this particular it may exceed all that ever God
had done, or would do. God never would do Chemohu like that again. No such
president should be after it; and so that they should be scattered into all
parts of the world.

3. Some Interpreters conceive the words, that which I have not done, and
whereunto I will do no more the like, to be an usual phrase amongst the
Hebrews to set out the greatness of the judgment.

Because of all thine abominations.
(...)
The Hebrew word signifies a hateful thing, such as is loathsome and dangerous:
The Septuagint do frequently render it by (...), which is a thing so
detestable, as Propter foeditatem nemo non aversatur, a wickedness of which
ne-fari liceat, it is so offensive, unsavory: the word (...) abominari,
signifies such a thing as a man omibus sensibus abhors, that a man indures
not patiently, to hear, see or speak of; it points out notorious sins, of all
kinds, I shall name some unto you: the counterfeiting of the sexes, men by
wearing the women's, and women the men's apparel; this was an abomination unto
the Lord, Deuteronomy. 22.5. incestuous marriages, Adulteries, Sodomie, Buggery, Lev.
18.26, 27. he had mentioned the sins, and then calls them abominations,
falsehood in weights and measures, Deuteronomy. 25.14, 15, 16. Idolatry, as 1 Pet. 4.3.
Abominable Idolatries, and so odious are Idols, that they are called
abominations, 2 Chronicles. 15.8. Asa put away the abominable Idols; the Hebrew is,
abominations, Idols are mere abominations, Milchom was the abomination of the
Amorites, Chemosh of Moab, and Molech of Ammon, 1 King. 11.5, 7. Idols make
nations abominations to God and man, they are a shame, Hos. 9.10. an accursed
thing, Deuteronomy. 7.26. such abominations as these mentioned, and others they were
guilty of.

Verse. 10. Therefore the fathers shall eat the sons in the midst of, etc.
Here the dreadfulnesse of Gods judgments are in part expressed; fathers
should eat their sons, and sons their fathers, not as Pradus would have it,
they eat the food of one another that should have preserved life, and so became
the death of each other. It was a real eating, La^. 4.10. The pitiful women
have sodden their own children, they were their meat, and may it be thought
their hungry husbands shared not with them in those Viands? what was threatened
was made good, and certainly the fathers did eat their own children at that
time, and the children the parents. If tender mothers did this, much more
fathers, Qui solent esse seneriores in filios; so extreme was the famine, that
it made them do acts against piety, honesty, humanity, light of nature;
necessity breaks all bands; in the Samaritan famine they did eat their
children: 2 King. 6.29. you may read a lamentable discourse, of a mother
killing and eating her child for hunger, in Joseph. l. 7. bell. Judaic. c. 8.
when Titus besieged Jerusalem, it was Mary the daughter of Eleazar a noble
woman, she boiled one part, and kept the other; some smelling flesh, asked,
What was done? she tells the fact, and attoniti recesserunt, they went away
amazed. In Honorius time there was such a famine at Rome, that there was a
public cry; Pone pretium humana carnis, set the price of man's flesh.

Observe. 1. When God is become an enemy to a people, he does unheard of
things, such severity is in his judgments as is not ordinary; their
abominations had made the Lord against them; and therefore would do as he had
not done: send a sharper sword and famine then ever, Lev. 26.30, 31, 32. My
soul shall abhor you, and I will make your cities waste, bring your
Sanctuaries and land into desolation, and your enemies that dwell therein shall
be astonished at it; they shall wonder at the severity of God toward his
people, and not only inmates, but forrainers shall wonder: Jer. 19.3. Behold, I
will bring evil upon this place, the which whosoever hears, his ear shall
tingle: and Jerem. 22.8, 9. nations shall say, Wherefore has the Lord done
thus unto this great city? Then they shall answer, Because they have forsaken
the Covenant of the Lord their God, etc. Gods judgments would be so hard and
heavy, that the nations should marvel, and be unsatisfied at them, till they
should hear how they had dealt with God. Has not God of late been against
Germany, and executed extraordinary judgments there, such as cause
astonishment? have not men's eyes been twisted out with cords, their skins flead
off alive, their faces plained with chesils, their noses and ears cut off to
make hatbands, Lament. of Germany.
their mouths gagged, piss and filthy liquids powered down; Have not men been
hung up by the hands in the smoke? put into hot ovens, roasted with straw fires?
have not Divines been cut in pieces, and their limbs thrown to dogs? have not
many fed and lived upon the flesh of dead men and women, eaten their own
children, killed one another for relief against hunger; strange judgments God
brought upon Germany, and as strange upon Ireland, has it not been the land of
Gods ire, and the people the generation of his wrath; and felt more for so
short a time, then Germany or other nations? have not women with child been
ravished, then ripped open, the bed of conception viewed, the child taken out,
and thrown into the fire? have not the Protestant Ministers been stripped, bound
to trees or posts, their wives and daughters ravished before their faces, then
hanged up before them so ravished, cut down half dead, quartered and
dismembered? have not many been turned out naked, forced into waters, famished
to death under hedges; some have been mortally wounded, their bellies ripped,
bowels let out, and left upon dunghils, that they might not be soon out of
their misery.

VER. 11. Wherefore, as I live, says the Lord God, surely, because thou have
defiled my Sanctuary with all thy detestable things, and with all thine
abominations, therefore will I also diminish thee, neither shall mine eye
spare, neither will I have any pity.


IN this verse are two farther aggravations of Jerusalems judgments, and the
cause of them:

The first aggravation is the inevitableness of them; surely I will diminish
thee, and that confirmed by an oath, as I live, says the Lord, I Will do it.

The second is the disposition of God punishing them, and that is dreadful,
he will neither spare nor pity them; and then the cause is, their defilement
of his Sanctuary with their detestable things and abominations.

As I live.
It Is the form of an oath, and is much used in the old Testament, as in Zeph.
2.9. Jer. 46.18.22.24. Isai. 49.18. Deuteronomy. 32.40. Numb. 14.21.28. but it is more
in our Prophet, then in all the Scripture besides, fourteen times I find it;
men are hardly persuaded to believe God in his way of judgments, and therefore
being in that way in this Prophecy, he swears often: You have this oath, Chap.
14.16, 18.16.48.17.19.18.3.20.3.31.33.33.11.27.34.8.35.6.11. It Is a weighty
oath, and imports that which follows; it is not comminatory, but absolute,
without evasion, without revocation; as sure as I live, and am God, it shall be
done: Psalm. 110.4. The Lord has sworn, and will not repent: a thing is
ratified, and cannot be altered when it is confirmed by an oath, which is an
immutable thing; Hebr. 6. Let me not live; let me not be God, if I do not
diminish you, but be as an Idol god, without sense, understanding or life: the
sign of an oath, anciently, was the lifting up the hand to heaven; and this is
given to God when he swears: also Deuteronomy. 32.40. I lift up my hand to heaven, and
say: I live for ever. This way of swearing has lately been renewed at our
taking the Covenant, and is to be wished that it may be used when there is just
occasion of swearing, rather then laying the hand upon a book, and kissing it
afterward, such a way of taking an oath the Scripture holds not out; and the
lawfulness thereof is questioned by many.

Thou have defiled my Sanctuary.
The word Mikdash notes sometimes a holy place for refuge, and referres to God
himself; Isa. 8.14. He shall be for a Sanctuary; here it notes the Temble, the
place of Gods worship, from Kadash to separate and consecrate to divine use;
the Sanctuary or Temple was consecrate, Schindl.
ad doctrinam, ad precationem, and ad cultum divinum, it was only for holy
uses; some divide the Temple into the porch, Weems.
palace and place of the Oracle, others into the court of Israel, the court of
the Priests, and the court of God, where the Ark and Cherubims were, Jun.
Maldon.
and this they make the Sanctuary or place of holiness: for Mikdashi is my
holiness as well as my Sanctuary, there the glory of God appeared between the
Cherubims, and this place they desired.

I shall speak a little of the holiness of places, because there is an opinion
in the world, that some places are holy, and that duties done in them are
better then done elsewhere. It was the saying of a great Prelate, B. A.
that God heard prayer, Non quia precatur, sed quia ibi, because the prayers
were in such a place.

Two ways places become holy: First, by divine presence. Secondly, by divine
institution.


For the first, when God did in a visible extraordinary way manifest himself
and his glory in any place, this made it holy, as Matthew. 17. when Christ was
transfigured in the mount, and excellent glory appeared; this made the place
holy, and the Apostle called it The holy mount; 2 Pet. 1.18. So Gods appearing
to Moses in the bush, Exodus 3.5. made that place holy, such appearances of God
are not now.

The second way is by institution and appointment from God; when the Lord does
depute and consecrate places to holy uses, then are they holy, as the Temple
was, God appointed the place, the building of the Temple, the dedication and
consecration thereof; its only God can make any thing holy, none but he that
made the creature, can lift it up to a higher condition then 'twas set in at
first; no man can make persons, things, times, places, holy, besides the Lord.
Now the Temple was by the institution of God so sanctified, that it was a type
of Christ, a part of worship, a powerful means of grace, giving acceptance
to the persons, and all the duties of worship there done; so that it was a sin
for them to worship elsewhere, or to divert the Temple to any other use; We
have no extraordinary appearance of God to make places holy, nor any
consecrated by divine institution to type out Christ, or any spiritual thing
to be a part of worship, a means of grace, making the worshippers and worship
more acceptable; and therefore I conceive we have no place holy; it was not the
Temple, but the Synagogues that resembled our public places of worship, and
they were not holy; Mat. 10.17. They scourged in their Synagogues; and that was
no holy act; A Lapid. Brugens.
it is the judgment of learned ones that Paul had his five whippings, of which
he speak in the 2 Cor. 11.24. in the Synagogues; they had the Word preached in
them, Job. 18.20. Act. 15.21. as it is in these public places, yet that did
not make them holy, and privilege them from common acts of Justice; the
holiness of places under the Law was ceremonial, and Christ has put an end
to such holiness; the difference of places he has taken away, and no one is
more holy then others, Job. 4.21. The hour is coming, says Christ to the
woman, when you shall neither in this mountain, nor at Jerusalem worship the
Father; it is true, now there is holiness in these places, the men and their
services are more accepted here then any where else; but the hour is at hand,
that all such respects shall be taken away, and all places made alike, and you
and your services shall be as acceptable in every place of the world, as at
Jerusalem. Hence is it that Paul puts men upon praying every where, 1 Timothy 2.8.
Many think their prayers better in such a meeting place as this, then in their
closets, then in the fields; but they are deceived, places now add no efficacy
or acceptance to men's prayers; it is rather prayer, Ordinances, and so the
spiritual presence of God in them that makes places holy; and this is the
Argument that some stick upon; but upon examination, this will not make the
public place of meeting more holy then others; for Mat. 18.20. it is said,
Where two or three are gathered, etc. be it in a ship, a private house, a
field, if gathered together in his Name, he is in the midst of them, he is
there not for the place, but the peoples sake; yet no man judicious accounts
all places holy where spiritual duties are doing, or after they are done; and
why public places of worship should be so accounted of in time of worship or
after, is not discernable to a religious and judicious eye; of old the Altar
sanctified the gift, it is not so now.

Have defiled.
(...)
In the Vulgar it is violasti, have violated, wronged; but the Hebrew word notes
more, it is impurare, vitiare; and it is the same word with that sets out the
defilement of Dinah, (...)
Genesis 34.5. Vitiavit Dinam; a woman may be wronged, and not be defiled; the
Sanctuary was defiled, polluted, profaned. Sometimes you read of the Lands
being defiled, as Number. 35.34. Sometimes of the Priesthoods, Neh. 13.29.
Sometimes of the Lords holy Name being defiled, Ezekiel. 43.7. And here of his
Sanctuary: We must inquire what it is that defiles the same.

1. Sacrificing other where then God commanded: Levit. 17.4, 5. If an Ox,
Lamb, or Goat were killed in the Camp, or out of it, and not brought to the
door of the Tabernacle to offer, it was accounted of God bloodshed; they would
offer in the fields, and not where God appointed; and this was a defilement,
and as great as shedding of blood.

2. When they brought things or persons prohibited; as

1. Unwarrantable Sacrifices, any thing corrupt, and not according to rule,
Mal. 1.7, 8. Ye offer polluted bread upon mine Altar; it was not unleavened,
of fine flower and oil, according to prescription, Levit. 4.8. it was of Rye,
Barley, or course Wheat; and this bread, this Mincha polluted Gods Altar; and
so when they affered the blind, sick, and lame for Sacrifice, they were corrupt
things, ver. 14. and defiled the Altar and Temple of the Lord.

2. Idols; God would not have any Idol come in his house; 2 Cor. 6.16. What
agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? God and Dagon cannot dwell in one
house; this was the quarrel here, Jer. 7.30. They have set their abominations
in the house which is called by my Name, to pollute it. The same words you have
again in Jer. 32.34. and you shall find there were strange Altars set up in
Gods house; Ahaz brought in the Altar of Damascus, 2 King. 16.10. etc. And
there were the Altars of Manasseh in the Court of the Lords house, 2 King.
23.12. And the high places on the right hand of the mount of corruption, ver.
13. they did defile also, as the carcasses mentioned in Ezekiel. 43.9. which were
the carcasses of Manasseh and Amon, Mend.
buried in the Kings garden close by the wall of the Temple.

2. When persons were brought in legally unclean; Ezekiel. 44.7. Ye have brought
into my Sanctuary, strangers uncircumcised in heart and in flesh, to pollute it.

With all thy detestable things.
Shikkutzim, The word notes not offensive things simply, but so offensive as to
offend the senses and the mind, and so to offend them, as it causes an
abhorring with execration; and such things are Images and Idols; 2 King.
23.24. those had familiar spirits, the Wisards, the Images, the Idols, and all
the abominations: The word is Shikkutzim, all the detestable and execrable
things did Josiah put away; (...)
the Spirit of God speaks of them with detestation; Jer. 11.13. Ye have set up
Altars to that shameful thing, even Baal; Act. 15.20. Pollution of Idols:
dunghill or Jakesie gods, (...).
so the word Gillulim signifies: Ezekiel. 22.3. (...).
They are terror to them that worship them: 1 King. 15.13. Maachah made an
Idol; a thing to terrify the word is; and Psalm. 135.15. The Idols of the
Nations; it is the grief, torment of the Nations. These names express the
detestation of God against Idols, and should quicken us to the detestation of
them; according to that in Deuteronomy. 7.26. Thou shall utterly detest, or utterly
abhor an Idol, or any part of it: the Original is, In detesting thou shall
detest, and in abhorring thou shall abhor; noting the great detestation and
abhorrency should be in Gods people to Idolatry; for they defile men's
consciences, Gods worship and Sanctuary; therefore the Septuagint renders the
word abominations or detestations, in Jer. 22.34. (...), pollutions.

Therefore will I also diminish thee.
The Hebrew is (...) which the Vulgar renders, confringere, I will break thee;
and then the sense runs thus: My purpose was to have preserved the Temple safe
from all violation, if so be you had kept it unpolluted; but now seeing you
have defiled it with your detestable things, I must and will break it down, as
being no better then a common profane house. It signifies also to shave, as in
Jer. 48.37. Every beard shall be clipped or shaven; the Nazarites were holy to
the Lord, and if by the sudden death of any they were defiled, their cleansing
was by shaving of their heads, Number. 6.9. So also was the Leper to be cleansed
by shaving off his hair, Lev. 13 33.14.8. And so here they were defiled, and
God would cleanse them by shaving; and so it corresponds with the razor men
trimmed in the first verse, and both these senses fall in with the word
diminish, which the Hebrew word also denotes, diminuere detrahendo, and so is
contrary to Joseph which is to add to a thing; God would not add any more
mercies, but take away their mercies, and diminish them, they had diminished
his honor, he would diminish their comforts; they had stained his glory, and
he would take away their glory, the Temple and City. Some render it succidam, I
will cut down, God would deal with Jerusalem as an Husbandman does with a
barren or rotten tree.

Neither shall mine eye spare.
This kind of expression is much used in this Prophecy, more seldom in
others. The eye is the Index of the mind, the disposition whereof is seen,
discerned there as in a looking glass; anger, joy, love, grief are inmates,
yet visible in the eye, that is the casement they look out at; the hidden
things of the heart are revealed by the eye; pity, sparing, compassion are
affections of the heart and mind, and God speaking after the manner of men,
says, Mine eye shall not spare, as it is in Isa. 13.18. Their eye shall not
spare children, there should be no sign of pity or remorse in them; sparing is
given to the eye as the sign of it. From the eye is intelligence given of mercy
or severity within; you shall not have the least hint of mercy from mine eye,
but evidence of wrath only; and whereas others were wont to be affected with
the miseries they behold, their eye affects their heart; Lam. 3.51. I will not
be at all affected with their miseries, let a great army sit down before them,
let famine, plague, sword devour, let all mischief be upon them, mine eye
shall not affect mine heart, I will not repent.

I will not have any pity.
What could have been said more dreadful? the Hebrew word (...) signifies to
be of a prone, pitiful affection toward any, though they deserve ill, Joel
2.18. Gods people had sinned greatly, were under sore judgments, deserved
utter destruction; but let them fast, pray and turn, then will the Lord pity
them, though they deserve no mercy, yet he will show them mercy: so in 2 Chronicles. 36.15. they were exceeding ill, yet God had compassion on them; it is the
same word, and has a contrary signification to (...) which is to destroy
without mercy; and so the word in this place, when it has (...) joined unto
it, signifies as much as I will not have any pity, that is, I will destroy
without mercy, 1 Samuel 15.3. Smite Amalek, utterly destroy all that they have,
and spare them not, that is, have no pity on them, and when God cease to pity
a people, it is sad, then no redemption for them, Isa. 63.9. God will deliver
them into the hands of their enemies, Zach. 11.6. he will harden others
against them; when God pities not, yet if men will, it is some comfort, but men
shall not do it, Jer. 21.7. When in Nebuchadnezzars hands he shall not spare,
pity, or show mercy, when they should fall down, beg for their lives at the
hands of Babylonians, they should find no mercy, only bitter words and bloody
deeds: in Amos 1.11. it is said, Edom cast off all pity, and his anger did tear;
and so God, he cast off all pity, and destruction followed; Jer. 13.14. I will
dash them one against another, even the fathers and the sons together, I will
not pity, spare nor have mercy, but destroy them; and you may see this
fulfilled in the Lamentations, Chap. 2.2. The Lord has swallowed up all the
habitations of Jacob, and has not pitied: as a wild beast does his prey, as a
Sea does ships, God left not one, no pity at all; see verse. 17.21.

Observe. 1. That sin defiles the holy things of God; they defiled not only
themselves, but the Sanctuary, and worship of God in it, the land of Canaan was
holy, and sin defiled that, Jer. 16.38. the Temple was holy, and sin defiled
that, Ezekiel. 23.38. the Altar was holy, and sin polluted that, Mal. 1.7. the
Sabbaths were holy, and sin profaned them, Neh. 13.17. the Priesthood and
Covenant was holy, and sin defiled them, Neh. 13.29. Gods name is holy, Ezekiel.
20.39. sin pollutes that.

2. That defilement of Gods worship brings certain and severe judgments; they
had defiled his Sanctuary with Idols, superstitions, polluted bread, blind,
lame, corrupt sacrifice, by suffering unclean and uncircumcised persons to come
there, and the Prophet brings in the Lord, swearing, As I live, says the Lord,
surely, because thou have done so, I will therefore diminish thee; here is the
certainty of judgment: neither shall mine eye spare, neither will I have any
pity; here is the severity of it: Gods Worship and the Ordinances of it, are
his Name, Mal. 1.11, 12. Exodus 20.24. in all places where I record my Name,
that is, where God puts his Worship, 1 Kin. 14.21. Jerusalem is the city that
God chused out of all Tribes to put his Name in, 1 King. 8.29. My Name shall be
there; Hence says David, Psalm. 76.1. In Judah is God known; his name is great
in Israel: the Gentiles knew not God, they had not his Name amongst them,
nothing of his worship, no true prayer, and that is his Name, Genesis 4.26. not
the seals of the Covenant, Mat. 28.19. not the censures of the Church, 1 Cor.
4.5. and these are his Name. Now Gods Name is very precious, and the profaning
of it is forbidden in a special manner; Lev. 22.31, 32. Ye shall keep my
Commandments and do them, I am Jehovah; and ye shall not profane my holy
name; when they presumptuously break any command of God, say the Rabbis, then
they profane Gods Name: it is the greatest presumption and violation of Gods
commands, to corrupt his worship, to mingle our inventions with it; the spirit
and the strength of the second Command, is against all invented worship and
Idolatry, which is a hating of God, and provokes to jealousy and wrath more
then other sins, Ezekiel. 23.37, 38. they had sinned in murder and adultery,
Idolatry, but what went nearest to the heart of God, even their corrupting of
his Worship, and that is set out with a special Emphasis, This they have done
unto me, they have defiled my Sanctuary; to defile it with blood is bad, but
with false worship, with Idols, and superstitions, is abominable: what makes
God reject a people, and count them the generation of his wrath? Jer. 7.29, 30.
they set their abominations in the house called by my name, and pollute it:
read the 8th of Ezekiel, and see the conclusion, Therefore will I also deal in
fury, mine eye shall not spare, neither will I have pity: and though they cry
in my ears with a loud voice, yet will I not hear them.

VER. 12. A third part of thee shall die with the pestilence, and with famine
shall they be consumed in the midst of thee: and a third part shall fall by the
sword round about thee; and I will scatter a third part into all the winds, and
I will draw out a sword after them.


Here Is an explication of the Type in the first and second verses, with a
farther aggravation of Jerusalems misery, from the variety of punishments: 1.
Pestilence. 2. Famine. 3. Sword. 4. Dispersion: Four sore judgments.


Pestilence.
It Is from a word that signifies to speak, and speak out, (...)
the Pestilence is a speaking thing, it proclaims the wrath of God amongst a
people. Drus. fetches it from the same root, In Hab. 3.5. (...)
but in Piel, which is to decree; showing that the pestilence is a thing
decreed in heaven, not casual. Kirker thinks it is called dever, because it
keeps order, and spares neither great nor small; the Hebrew root signifies to
destroy, to cut off, and hence may the Plague or Pestilence have it is name. The
Septuagint render it (...), death, for ordinarily its death: and it is expressed
by death, Rev. 6.8. he sat on the pale horse, killed with sword, hunger,
death, and beasts of the earth; it referres to Ezekiel. 14.21. where the
Pestilence is mentioned. (...)
Pestilence may be from a word signifies, to spread, spoil, rush upon, for it
does so, 2 Samuel 24.15. 70000. slain in three days; and Plague a (...) from
(...), to smite, to wound, for it smites suddenly, and wounds mortally; hence
it is in Numb. 14.12. I will smite them with the Pestilence, this judgment is
very grievous; Psalm. 91.3. it is called the noisome pestilence, because it is
infectious, contagious; and therefore the French read it, de la peste
dangeruse, from the dangerous pestilence; it does endanger those that come near
it: and Musc. has it a peste omnium pessima, and others, the woeful
pestilence; it brings a multitude of woes with it to any place or person it
comes unto, it is a messenger of woeful fears, sorrows, distractions, terrors,
and death it self.

With famine.
Of this sore Judgment has been spoken in the 4th Chapter. (...) is exardere
fame; and the famine here is such an one as burns, withers, dries up a man;
when the calor nativus has nothing able to feed upon, it consumes the humidum
radicale, and man quickly perishes. The Scripture speaks of a three years
famine, 2 Samuel 21.1. a seven years famine, Genesis 45.6. what numbers perished
then? when famines are mighty, Luke 15.14. terrible, Lam. 5.10. prevailing, 2
King. 25.3. and destroy not only the branches, but the root, Isa. 14.13.

By the sword round about thee.
(...)
Charab signifies to dry up, to lay waste, to destroy; whence Cher^b a sword is
derived, for it draws out the blood, dries up the body, lays waste and
destroys, Deuteronomy. 32.42. It Is said to eat flesh, to drink and be filled with
blood; Isa. 34.6. Here it is put for wars, the wars of the Babylonians against
Jerusalem, which are called, The sword of the king of Babylon, Ezekiel.
21.19.32.11. What a judgment the sword of war is, we begin to know and feel,
it dries up the blood of kingdoms; it makes them wildernesses, and destroys
round about: hence the sword is said to be hurtful, Psalm. 144.10. powerful,
Job 5.20. oppressive, Jer. 46.16. bereaving, Lam. 1.20. to reach to the Soul,
Jer. 4.10. to devour from one end of the land to the other, so that no flesh
shall have peace, Jer. 12.12.

I will scatter a third part into all the winds.
It Is such a scattering as is of dust or chafe before the winds, a fanning of
them; God would bring a wind out of the North should fan them, as corn is
fanned, and scatter them abroad, Jer. 4.12, 13. I will fan them with a fan,
Jer. 15.7. It Is the same word is here, and notes a great fanning, scattering of
them; and complaint is made of such scattering, Psalm. 44.12. Thou have
scattered us among all the Heathens, that was, into the several winds and
countries round about; and Zac. 7.14. I scattered them with a whirlewind
amongst all the nations whom they knew not: this was a heavy judgment, to be
removed from their own country, friends, to be scattered several ways, to be
with them, whose language and manners they knew not, that were cruel,
barbarous, haters of God, his Worship, people, to be servants and slaves to
them, this was a judgment sorer then pestilence, famine, sword, and they had
been better have been cut off in their own land, or in their journey to those
places, neither were they in safety there, for God would draw out a sword after
them, they should be captives, undergo great hardship, and be daily in jeopardy
of their lives. The sword should pursue them, as the phrase is, Jer. 48.2.
these judgments were contrary to the blessing of plenty, safety and peace
promised in Lev. 26.4, 5, 6.

VER. 13. Thus shall mine anger be accomplished, and I will cause my fury to
rest upon them, and I will be comforted: and they shall know that I the Lord
have spoken it in my zeal, when I have accomplished my fury in them.


IN this Verse two ends of divine judgments are held forth:

1. The satisfaction of his own Justice, when judgments are fully executed, he
will be comforted.

2. The conviction of his adversaries; They shall know that I the Lord have
spoken.

Then shall mine anger be accomplished.
Here is mention of anger and fury, Deo fur^r and ira tribuitur cum ostendit
factu aliquid sibi d^splicere; max me autem irasci dicitur cum poenam infligit,
Rive^. in Exodus
which you often find given to God. But neither these nor other passions are in
God, he is not carried by affections as men are, they are neither materially
nor formally in God, whose essence is immixt and immutable; anger and fury are
given to God, when he manifests by his actions that something displeases him,
and especially when he punishes the creature, they are effects from God, not
affections in God; Isa. 27.1. fury is not in me.

Be accomplished.
The Hebrew is to finish, to perfect; as in Genesis 2.2. God ended his work, (...).
he accomplished what he was about; so here, the Septuagint has it, shall be
perfected; it notes a progress in Gods wrath, which shall not cease in the mid
way, but go on to the highest degree; as men when they are much incensed
proceed in punishment of delinquents, till they be satisfied, they let out
their wrath to the full, and so God would do. Formerly God had kept in his
wrath, not let it have the reins, nor break over the banks, and if it did get
loose at any time, and break out, he quickly called it back, and turned it
away, Psalm. 78.39. but now he would stir up all his wrath, and let it out to
the full, and accomplish it among them; now plague, famine, sword, dispersion
should have their will and power over them, God would inflict what he had
conceived and threatened against them.

I will cause my fury to rest upon them.
That is, God would terminate, fasten settle his wrath upon them, not cease it
from them, it should not fleet or move, but abide; they should be a people
under fury, a generation of his wrath, Jer. 7.29. a people of his wrath, Isa.
10.6. God would shoot his arrows into them, and they should stick in their
sides, whither ever they went Gods fury should be still upon them; it notes out
the continuation of Gods anger, which Jeremiah expresses to the full, Chap.
7.20. Behold, mine anger and my fury shall be powered out upon this place, upon
man and beasts, upon the trees of the field, upon the fruit of the ground, and
it shall burn and no^ be quenched; neither their tears nor their blood shall
put out the fire of divine wrath kindled against them, it should still burn,
notwithstanding all means used to quench the same. God would make his wrath a
biding wrath; such is that speech in Isai. 30.32. In every place where the
grounded staff shall pass, which the Lord shall lay upon him, which the Lord
shall cause to rest upon him is the Hebrew. What Is the grounded staff? the
wrath of God intended to be fixed, laid in, and laid down for a foundation of
ruin, that wrath would God cause to rest upon him, that is, the Assyrian; the
mark of the staff should be in their flesh and state for ever. I will be
comforted, God is the God of all comfort, 2 Cor. 1.3. yet he says, he will be
comforted; not that God was infeebled through discomfort, and needed addition
of comfort and strength from any creature, but it is spoken after the manner of
men, God had mourned over them a long time, expressed his grief by the
Prophets threatenings, by lesser judgments inflicted, they had done no good,
and now he would ease himself of them and be comforted. Wicked men are a
burden to God, and when a burden is taken off, it is ease, it is comfort; Isa.
1. you have God brought in much grieved, and complaining of this people, verse.
2, 3, 4, etc. and in verse. 24. he says, Ah, I will ease me of my adversaries,
and avenge me of mine enemies; ah, the time is now come, and I am glad of it,
that I shall be eased of this great burden, bearing with this rebellious
people; I will cast them off and revenge my self upon them; revenge is sweet,
Aestuantem animam vindicta levat.
it is an ease to reproached, provoked spirits; for where is anger, there is
grief and desire of revenge, which obtaining, takes away grief and anger,
whereby the mind is comforted: therefore God would ease himself by avengement
on them; so here, God would accomplish his anger, settle his fury upon them,
and be comforted in it, he would execute severe judgments, and approve, yea
applaud them being executed.

In my zeal.
These words are often in the Prophet; (...).
the Hebrew signifies sometimes zeal, sometimes jealousy; the Septuagint
renders it in my zeal, not in my jealousy. Zeal is the intention of all
affections; it notes,

1 The earnest love of God for the good of his Church and his own glory, Isa.
9.7.

2 Jealousy, which is with great indignation and grief, Numb. 25.11. such as
amounts to hatred and enmity, Isa. 59.17. God was very zealous of the good of
his people, and therefore gave them zealous Prophets, by whom his zeal was made
known; the Prophets spoke in Gods name, delivered their message with authority,
power, life; they lifted up their voices, told the people of their sins,
reproved them sharply, were very zealous in their Prophecies; hence they were
counted factious and fiery spirits, men venting their own opinions and humor:
hence their labors were slighted; they looked upon as contemptible men, not
worthy to live, they did so trouble both Church and State with the things they
delivered; but they shall know, that not men, but God spoke, that it was not
their zeal, but my zeal that they have opposed and rejected me in my Prophets.
If you refer it to jealousy, it notes out Gods taking them into covenant to
be his people; their revolt by Idolatry and other sins, and Gods jealousy upon
it, who growing hot with displeasure, spoke sharp and dreadful things against
this people, as a jealous husband would do against an adulterous wife.

Observe. 1. That God goes on by degrees in his wrath against a people, he did
not accomplish his anger and fury at first, he began with lesser judgments,
but at last came up to a perfection; before he had whipped them with scourges,
now he would do it with Scorpions; he had formerly done much, vexed them with
wars, famine, plague, but never laid waste their city, ruined their Temple,
scattered them into the four winds, as now he would do; he had in times past
corrected them like a father, he would now execute them like a Judge, the drops
of his wrath had done no good, now they should have the full vials, all the
wrath conceived against them should be inflicted, accomplished.

2. That wrath let out against a sinful people, often times lies long upon them;
I will cause my fury to rest upon them, they were 70. years under Gods
displeasure in Babylon; Gods wrath has been upon the Jews that rejected the
Gospel these 1600. years they would not be under the blessing of Christ, they
are under the curse of God, his wrath abides upon them; Gods anger and fury
has rested upon Germany above twenty years; these kingdoms of Ireland and
England are under it; fervent prayer is requisite, that God would remove his
wrath, and not let it rest upon us. It Is a dreadful thing to have settled
plague or war amongst us; The Barons wars in King John's, Henry the third's,
and Edward the second's days, made sad times, Gods wrath rested then for a
long season upon this kingdom, the choycest blood of it was let out, and it
brought a deplorable condition. Let us repent and reform, that wrath may not
rest upon the kingdom; and let us believe, that wrath may not abide upon us;
John 3.36. He that believes not, the wrath of God abides on him: man came into
the world a child of wrath, an heir of wrath, Christ is a remedy propounded
for removal of that wrath, if men believe not, the wrath of God abides still
on them, goes along with them, and will eternally sink them.

3. God takes pleasure in executing judgment, in accomplishing his wrath, and
causing his fury to rest upon impenitent and incurable sinners he will be
comforted in it: Prove. 1.26. I will laugh at your calamity; God would bring
calamities upon them, just judgments for the setting at naught his counsels,
refusing his reproofs, and rejoice in them; for as judgments are satisfaction
to divine justice, they are delightful unto God, Isa. 30.32. in every place
where the grounded staff shall pass which the Lord shall lay upon him, it
shall be with Tabrets and Harps: when God should destroy the Babylonians and
Assyrians, it should be with delight, which the Tabrets and Harps express,
which were musical Instruments, used in wars and victories, Exodus 15.20. And
when God executed judgment upon spiritual Babylon, Rev. 18.20. it was with
joy; therefore the Spirit of God calls for it, Rejoice over her, thou heaven,
and ye holy Apostles and Prophets, for God has avenged you and himself on her
also, which was a comfort and ease, a delight to God; hence judgments in
Scripture are termed his pleasure; Isa. 46.10, 11. I will do all my pleasure:
Calling a ravenous bird from the East, and Chap. 48.14. He will do his
pleasure on Babylon.

4. The Word of God may be preached among a people, and they through ignorance
and malice, not know it, nor entertain it; they shall know that I the Lord have
spoken it; they conceived not that it was the word of God which the Prophets
delivered, they thought them to be no more then other men, and their word
humane, and therefore slighted it; there was much affected ignorance in them,
Isa. 27.11. it is a people of no understanding; Jer. 4.22. My people are
foolish, they have not known me; and as many were blind, so many were malicious
against the Prophets and their messages they brought from God: Jer. 44.16. As
for the words which thou have spoken in the name of the Lord, we will not
hearken unto thee, but we will do whatsoever thing goes forth of our own
mouth; Christ came and preached to his own, and they received him not, they
neither knew him nor his doctrine, or if they did, they maliciously rejected
both.

5. That wicked men shall be convinced, and left without excuse; they shall
know that I the Lord have spoken, they eyed men and not me, they deemed it man's
voice, not heavens, but they shall find that it was the voice of God amongst
them; and what can men say, when God has spoken, and has not been hearkened
unto? every mouth will then be stopped; they would not know, but they shall know;
they would not own my truths, but they shall feel my judgments, and when they
are upon them, then will they remember the Prophets and their words, which will
be as burning coals in their bosoms; then they will see what desperate revolts
they have made from God; how they are besieged with his power, and cannot
escape the stroke thereof; when men shall see it is the infinite, great and
glorious God that they have slighted, in the Prophets, in the Ordinances, then
they will be struck dumb, and fall under the wrath of that God.

6. God will justify his servants in their zealous labors for him: They shall
know that I have spoken it in my zeal; it is God speaks in the Prophets; it is
his zeal they express; let men be zealous against sin, the iniquities of the
times, they are counted mad, fiery fellows, troublers of Israel, seditious,
factious, etc. Paul was a zealous man, and not only Festus an Heathen counted
him mad, Act. 26.24. but even the Christian Corinthians, 2 Cor. 5.13. thought
him besides himself; and such conceits had the people of Christ, who was a man
of zeal, they thought him too hot, that his zeal was beyond his judgment, Mar.
3.21. they plainly said he was besides himself; Michal scoft at David as one of
the fools for his zeal. Let the world pass what censure it will upon Gods
Ministers, God will justify those who are sincerely zealous, and count their
zeal his zeal.

7. That the Lord is intense, and will not recall his indignation, when he
deals with unfaithful, covenant breaking persons; as in Gods zeal there is
intense love toward his Church (when God promises mercy to his people, it is
sealed with this, The zeal of the Lord of Hosts shall do it, 2 King. 19.31.) so
here is intense hatred, wrath against his enemies, therefore God beats them off
from their own inventions in the second command by this consideration, that he
is a jealous God, and his jealousy extensive to the 4th generation; and Deuteronomy.
32.22. says God, A fire is kindled in mine anger, and shall burn unto the
lowest hell, and shall consume the earth with her increase, and set on fire the
foundations of the mountains; and what is the reason of this indignation? it is
given in verse. 21. they have moved me to jealousy with that which is not God;
when God is in his jealousy, he speaks dreadful things, and does answerably;
to speak in zeal, is to decree an irrevocable and bloody sentence: Hence, Josh.
24.19. he is a jealous God; and then follows, and will not forgive your
transgressions: and Deuteronomy. 29.20. The Lord will not spare, his jealousy shall
smoke against that man, and all the curses in this Book shall lie upon that
man; What man? the man that breaks covenant with God, g^ing out to false
worship, and thereby putting him into jealousy, which, as it is the rage of a
man, and makes him cruel in the day of vengeance, so it is the rage of God, and
makes him without pity, or mercy, when he executes vengeance, he will then
accomplish his wrath, and not spare, power out all his wrath and vengeance.

VER. 14, 15. Moreover, I will make thee waste, and a reproach among the
Nations that are round about thee, in the sight of all that pass by.

15. So it shall be a reproach and taunt, an instruction and an astonishment
unto the nations that are round about thee, when I shall execute judgment in
thee, in anger and fury, and furious rebukes; I the Lord have spoken it.


IN the 14th Verse are two judgments more laid down, desolation and reproach;
this last is aggravated from the extent of it, to the nations round about, and
all that passed by.

In the 15th you have the repetition of the last judgment, and the ends of
both annexed, which are: First, for information. Secondly, for astonishment.


I will make thee waste.
That is, Jerusalem, with the Villages and all the land adjacent: Judah was a
fruitful land, Isa. 5.1. the glory of all lands, flowing with milk and honey,
Ezekiel. 20.6. Moses calls it a good land, a land of brooks, waters, fountains,
deeps, that spring out of valleys and hills, a land of Wheat and Barley, Vines,
Fig Trees, Pomgranats, a land of Oil, Olives and honey; a land where nothing
was lacking, the stones of it were iron, and in the hills was brass, Deuteronomy. 8.7,
8, 9. it was the Lords land, Hos. 9.3. Imm^^uels, Isa. 8.8. a land that God
cared for, and watched over all the year long, Deuteronomy. 11.12. Egypt was an
inconsiderable land to this, verse. 10. that was profane, this was the holy
land, Zach. 2.12. the pleasant land, Zach. 2.14. it was well built, well
tilled, and greatly peopled; yet this land must be laid waste; they should be
in ariditatem, like a river dried up, that if you look for water in it, there
is none; so if look for a Temple, Worship or Ordinance, etc. in Jerusalem,
there is none; their cities and habitations are burnt, their gardens unfenced,
their trees cut down, their Vines undressed, their fields untilled, and all
made a wilderness, a land of briers and thorns, Isa. 7.24. And this was
fulfilled, as you may see in Nehem. 2.17. Lam. 1.4. The ways of Sion do mourn,
because none come to the solemn feasts: 2.2: 3.5.18. and the adversaries hand
was upon all her pleasant things; Lam. 1.10. Hence the Church complains, Isa.
64.10, 11. Thy holy Cities are a wilderness, Sion is a wilderness, Jerusalem
a desolation, our holy and beautiful house where our fathers praised thee, is
burnt up with fire, and all our pleasant things are laid waste; see here the
truth of divine threats, and the mischief of sin, it so exasperates God, that
he turns a fruitful land, even his own land, into barrenness, saltness, for
the wickedness of them that dwell therein, Psalm. 107.34.

A reproach among the nations.
(...)
God would make them not only for a waste, but also for a reproach: Charaph is
simply to reproach, to disgrace, and that is not all they should have, but they
should be for a taunt also, and that is more, Vide de Dieu. in Mat. 28.
(...) from Giddeph to blaspheme, revile, and so it is used, Mat. 27.39. for
Matthew writ his Gospel in Hebrew, where it is said, they reviled Christ, and
wagged their heads, so should this people be reproached and reviled, have
bitter taunts and sarcasms thrown at them, Jer. 24. They shall be removed to
all kingdoms of the earth for their hurt, to be a reproach, a Proverb, a taunt
and a curse; hence grew those reproaches and imprecations; Let it be with thee,
as it was with Zedekiah his family and followers: Plaga Zedekia tangat t^, fit
frater and servus Zedekia, Vatab.
and Jer. 29.22. the curse in the captivity was, The Lord make thee like
Zedekiah, and like Ahab, whom the King of Babylon roasted in the fire: this
judgment was very sore, reproaches and taunts are bitter things, piercing
deep, scarce any thing afflicts an ingenuous spirit more then they do; Zedekiah
feared nothing more then reproach and mocking, Jer. 38.19. I am afraid, lest
the Jews fall to the Chaldeans, deliver me into their hand, and they mock me;
it was a sad thing to be stripped of all their cities, the land to be laid waste,
but much more to be exposed to scorn, yea, publicly of all, and that by the
appointment of the Judge, even God, whom they took to be their friend, and that
to the nations they had hated, and held tributary many years, this was
exceeding pungent, especially they being the top and glory of all nations; it
was fulfilled, Lam. 2.15, 16. All that pass by, clap their hands at thee; they
hiss and wag their head at the daughter of Jerusalem, saying, Is this the city
that men call, The perfection of beauty, The joy of the whole earth? All thine
enemies have opened their mouth against thee; they hiss and gnash their teeth,
they say, We have swallowed her up, certainly this is the day that we looked
for: we have found, we have seen it, The Lord has done that which he had
devised, he has fulfilled his Word.

An instruction.
The Vulgar is, Exemplum, this act of God upon Jerusalem exposed so to
reproach, should be an example to the Heathen: The Hebrew is musar from jasar,
to bind, to discipline, to instruct; the judgments of God upon his people, are
vincula, bonds, to bind up Heathens from their sins; they are disciplinae,
reproofs unto them, being guilty of great sins; they are (...), instructions,
to teach them to repent of their sins; because the Jews by their holy lives
did not excite the nations to inquire after, and serve the true God, therefore
their judgments shall be their instructions, teach them to fear and forsake
their Idolatry; they could reason thus, If God spared not the holy city, the
holy people, the holy land, when they fell to Idolatry, uncleanness, and other
vile sins, how will he spare us, if we be found in the same ways? his
judgments are exceeding dreadful; we will take warning, their sufferings shall
be our safety; if judgments were to be instructions to Heathens, and wrought
upon them, shall they not much more be so to Christians? the ruins of Germany,
the blood of Ireland, the breaches of England, let them be instructions unto
us. Let us all say with Isaiah 26.8, 9. In the way of thy judgments, O Lord,
have we waited for thee, the desire of our souls is to thy name, and to the
remembrance of thee: with my soul have I desired thee in the night, yea with my
spirit within me will I seek thee early: for when thy judgments are in the
earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness. Heathen
inhabitants will do it, and shall not Christians? it is seasonable wisdom, to
learn by the blows of others.

An astonishment.
Not for stupifying and hardening, which sometimes is the end and fruit of
judgments, but for admiration; God would so deal with Jerusalem and her
inhabitants, that the nations round about should be astonished at his dealings;
God would make them an astonishment, an hissing, and a perpetual desolation,
Jer. 25.9. yea, the plagues of the city should be such, that every one that
passes by, should be astonished, and hiss, Jer. 19.9. yea many nations should
say, Wherefore has the Lord done thus to this great city? Jer. 22.8. Deuteronomy.
29.22, 23, 24. God says, The plagues of that land should be such, as that it
should be like Sodom and Gomorrah, so great, so strange, that all nations
should say, Wherefore has the Lord done thus unto this land? What means the
heat of this great anger? God might have done thus with this great city, with
this pleasant land, but he has spared us, and we have cause to be as much
astonished at his mercies, as they were at his judgments: Let us fear, reform,
lest our sweet mercies be turned into astonishing judgments.

When I shall execute judgment in thee in anger and fury, and furious rebukes.
There is mention of executing judgment in the 8th and 10th verses, and here
in this verse with addition of anger, fury, and furious rebukes; the Prophet
may seem too repetitious and verbous, but it is otherwise, repetitions of the
same thing serve to confirm the truth of the matter, to show the speed of the
event, and to excite the minds of those the things concern, all which fall in
here: the Prophet prophesying against the Jews at Jerusalem, their city, state,
and threatening destruction to all, himself keeping in Babylon, conceived that
they would not believe what he said, and fear what he threatened, neither
affected with what he delivered; to prevent these evils, he repeats the thing
often, and strengthens it with variety of words, that so his doctrine might be
the more weighty, the sooner believed, they awakened, and the judgment that
was at hand feared.

In furious rebukes.
The Hebrew is, in rebukes of heat: Pradus observes, that jacach notes rebuking
before witness, and God would do it before the nations, and these rebukes were
not to cure, but to destroy.

I the Lord have spoken.
Lest they might think the Prophet and his Prophecy might die together, and
come to nothing, the Lord tells them, it was himself spoke, and that the
Prophecy should take place, what ever became of the Prophet, because it was
from him who was the living God, and would see it fulfilled at Jerusalem,
though uttered in Babylon.

VER. 16. When I shall send upon them the evil arrow of famine, which shall be
for their destruction, and which I will send to destroy you, and I will
increase the famine upon you, and break your staff of bread.


I Have spoken of famine and breaking the staff of bread, in Chap. 4.16. Only
I shall open unto you, that expression, The arrows of famine: they are either
the arrows that bring famine, or the arrows that famine brings. The arrows that
bring famine are great droughts, Palmer-worms, Locusts, Canker-worms,
Caterpillars, thunder, lightning, winds, storms, immoderate rains, great hails,
long frosts, murrains, transportations of commodities, monopolizing, hoording
up of creatures, wars, etc. many of these are shot down from heaven by God, and
all are sent from God, and cause famine, and they are called arrows, for that
they do to the corn, cattle, fruits, and State where they are, what arrows do
to the bodies of man or beast, wound, disquiet, consume; hence, when mention
was made of a famine in Habakkuks days, Chapter 3.11. the Lord is said to march
through the land in indignation, ver. 12. and his bow to be made quite naked,
then did God shoot amongst them the arrows of famine.

The arrows famine brings, are leanness, faintness, sickness, loathsomeness,
frettings, fears of death, longings for death, gnawings of the stomach,
pinching of the wind got into the bowels, eating of their own flesh, thirsting
and burning heat, etc. these are arrows that famine brings, and kill like
arrows shot into the liver, which wounding deeply, pain greatly, and kill
quickly; and in this sense I rather take it here, because the judgment spoken
of concerning the Jews, who were to be besieged, if it be taken in the other
sense, it would have been a judgment to the besiegers, who lay in the field,
and were not so well fortified against those arrows, as they within; it is
therefore meant of the arrows famine brought upon them chiefly, not excluding
the arrows brought that famine, namely war, and these arrows were prepared in
Moses days, Deuteronomy. 32.23. I will heap mischief upon them, I will spend mine
arrows upon them; and what arrows? They shall be burnt with hunger, and
devoured with burning coals, and with bitter destruction, verse. 24. Famine is
like a multitude of hot coals in a man's bowels and bones, that cause grievous
pain, even bitter destruction; and therefore they are called here, the evil
arrows of famine, because they bring many evils, and at last a miserable death;
this Jeremiah acknowledges made good, Lam. 3.12, 13. speaking in the person of
the Church and State; He has bent his bow, and set me as a mark for the
arrow; he has caused the arrow of his quiver to enter into my reins.

VER. 17. So will I send upon you famine and evil beasts, and they shall
bereave thee, and pestilence and blood shall pass through thee, and I will
bring the sword upon thee: I the Lord have spoken it.


HEre is a repetition of the former judgment, only one is new, and that is,
evil beasts; some would have it meant of the Chaldeans, that were like evil
beasts, that with their horns, teeth, heels and hoofs, should toss, gore, rend
and devour them: others understand it literally, for evil and wild beasts,
Lions, Bears, etc. which were threatened, Deuteronomy. 32.24. I will send the teeth of
beasts upon them, with the poison of the Serpents of the dust, Lev. 26.22. I
will send wild beasts, which shall rob you of your children, destroy your
cattle, make you few in number, and your high way desolate: see the truth of
it, 2 King. 17.25. Lions were sent that slew them, they feared not God. But
this was past, and our Prophet speaks of that was to come. Know then, that as
God sent Lions to destroy them there, so he could send Lions to destroy them in
Babylon. Besides those Eastern countries were not without Lions, Daniel was put
into the Lions den; and certainly there were Lions, and other evil beasts to
make good what was threatened, whenever divine pleasure would.

I the Lord have spoken it.] They looked at Ezekiel as a mere man, and what
ever he threatened, yet it could do little, and therefore were like to regard
neither him not his prophecy. To prevent this, and to add the greater weight
to the Prophecy, the Lord takes all upon himself, and says, It is not Ezekiel,
but I that am Jehovah, who gave being to all creatures, and will give being to
my Word, It is I the Lord have spoken it. Here the Lord subscribes his own
Name, acknowledges all his, and that is enough to make all authentike. This
Lord, who is dreadful in threatenings, mighty and faithful in execution of
threats, let all the world fear and give glory unto, before he cause darkness.

FINIS.
A Table containing the principal things in the precedent Expositions.
A
ABominations, what sins are so called. 444 Account. Angels and others must
give an account. 120 Actions, done according to Gods will, have glory and
efficacy in them. 110 actions cannot be otherwise then they are. 160
Admonitions, they are useful. 361 God admonishes, before he destroys. 391
Afflictions, of themselves subdue not corruption, 42, 235, 376 in greatest
afflictions, often come in the strongest comforts, 62 God can afflict from any
quarter, 73 time of affliction is seasonable for instructions. 304 Angel.
Angels very knowing, 84 observe us and our ways, 83 used in the government of
the world, 87, 136 the services good Angels are employed in, 77, 88, etc. Why
likened to men, Lions, Oxen, Eagles, 94, 95, 96 they are fit for great
services, 98, 172 they serve their inferiors, 99 they depend upon Christ, 100,
101 of their wings, 104, 105 they are loving and harmonious in their
operations, 106, 171 314 they cover their feet, 107, 171 their ways are
straight, 108 they are constant in their resolutions, 109 of their hands, 111
they do their work rationally, wisely, ibid. Angelical virtue is hid from us,
114 they persevere in their work, 116 they mind the work in hand, 117
appprehension of death upon sight of Angel^* whence, 119 glorious, terrible in
their services, ibid. unweariable in their work 120 seek Gods glory, 121 not at
their own dispose, 122 they are ducible, 123 have new influence from Christ,
127 how said to stand, 155 they attend Christ's Throne, are willing to do his
will, 170 reverence him, 171 noise of their wings, 172 not heard by all, 175
they sympathize with us, 310 they are musical, 313 whether every one have a
tutelar Angel, 91 Anger. Wrath makes men bungle in their own and in Gods
business also, 325, 326 how in God. 457 Antiquity. The true antiquity, 5 it is
no rule for worship, 234 Christ our antiquity. 235 Apostasy. A great evil,
357 four evils of it, ibid. Appointment. Divine appointing makes things and
actions mean in themselves weighty and useful. 388 Arm. Uncovering of it. 399
B
Babylon. Now called Badget. 31 Bands. What bands they put upon Ezekiel, 373
what God put on him 399 Blandina came to suffer as to a marriage supper. 157
Blood. What requiring of blood is. 340 Business. Our own business to be done,
118 God maks stands and stops in businesses. 158 Bread. Staff of bread, what,
408 of breaking this staff. ibid. and 409
C
Calamities, common to good and bad. 330 Caldea. Of it, and the Caldeans. 30,
31 Call. A divine Call has divine assistance, 300 those are called to public
service, have need of the Spirit, 310 those Christ sends, he gives his Spirit.
371 Casual. Nothing is so. 155 Chasmal. What, 79, 186 backwards is the
Messiah. ibid. Cherub, and Cherubims, Whence, and what. 83, 84 Christ. An
object of admiration and adoration, 102 his service is honorable, 103 the
virtue from him is active, 128 all things are under Christ, 167 he sees all
things, 169 his voice is efficacious, 173, 176 he has kingly Majesty, 180 is
the chiefest of Kings, 181 he is glorious, 182, 187 has judiciary power, 183
rules the world, 184 hears the cause, complaints of his, ibid. dreadful in
judgment, 188 Christ his divine nature too glorious for our eyes, 190 his
judiciary actions are glorious, 191 he mingles mercy with wrath, 196 he is
Jehovah, 203 compassionate, 213 his command is powerful, 215 he is
encouraging to duty, ibid. his Word comfortable to the dejected, 216 what
Christ commands he gives, 221 it is Christ's privilege to set up, and send
officers, 228 he puts forth virtue to effect what he speaks, 283 he opens
mysteries, 286 he authorizes not Ministers to condemn or absolve at their
pleasure, 342 Christ tells his beforehand what they must expect. 374
Christians, called Goiim, by Jews, 226 all are not Christians seem so. 230
Children, they imitate their fathers. 233 Church, it is subject to dangers,
enemies, 334 why set among the wicked. 430 Cities. God an enemy to sinful
Cities, 379 nothing secures them from ruin, 389, 390 it is honor to be the
chiefest, and what will make them so. 429, 430 Cloud, The nature of it, 69
armies compared to a cloud in three respects, ibid. clouds, rain, wind, at Gods
dispose. 71 Coniah, What it signifies. 38 Conviction, Wicked shall know they
have had means. 461 Crystal, Whence so called 166 how terrible. 166
D
Days, The 390. days where to begin, 395, 396 of the forty days. ibid.
Decree, Men's wills and weaknesses cannot hinder Gods decree. 328 Degenerate,
Those do it, God owns not, 305 their former righteousness not remembered. 255,
358 Delegation, Of power in Church officers unlawful. 229 Desertion. God does
not leave his long. 329 Designs, Public and great ones meet with
difficulties. 263 Dispensations, God dispenses with some commands of his, and
when. 514 Distempers, They often fasten upon and abide with the servants of God,
325 unfit for service. ibid. Doubts, Through doubts we often stick at things
lawful. 414
E
Egg, A standing measure among the Jews. 406, 407 Eyes, Referring to God, 15
eye not sparing, what. 452 Example, not to be followed. 279, 280 Ezekiel,
Antiquity of his Prophecy, 4 what his name signifies, 6 nature of his prophecy,
15 seasonablenesse of it, 16 scope and occasion of it, 11 how long he
prophesied, 43 his end. ibid.
F
Faces. Why men fall upon their faces at visions, 204 what setting the face
against means. 386 Faith, The mouth and stomach of the soul. 293 Famine, It Is
a sore judgment, 445 examples of it, 410 God can send it at his pleasure, and
blast all our comforts, 415, 416 nature of it, 456 arrows of famine, what. 467
Fearfulness, Why it should not be in Magistrates or Ministers, 269, 270, etc.
helps against it. 273 Firmament, Why so called. 166
G
Gerah, How much it weighed. 406 Glory. Glorious things awaken, encourage, 64,
65 Gods glory should be much minded, 121 glorious things are dreadful, 168
Christ as man is glorious, 187 whether Gods glory be visible, 198 how
considerable, 197, 198 glory here is but appearance of glory, 201 choice ones
have a sight of the glory of God, 201 sight of glory is an humbling thing, 205,
368 manifestation of divine glory, argues divine goodness, 367 two things
required to the sight of glory. 367 Gnarum, Used in a contrary sense. 258 God,
Tied to no place, 32 is careful of his Church, when lowest, 34 he works
invisibly, 113 whether his essence may be seen 198, 199, 200 his presence and
departure the greatest happiness and misery of a people, 311 God bears with the
weaknesses of his, 328 his proceedings are different with his and others, 359,
402 knows things to come, 387 he yields to the weaknesses of his, and
mitigates what is grievous, 414, 415, Gods being against a people is dreadful,
and wherein, 437, 438, 439 how known, 440 then he does unheard of things, 445
God no polygamist. 227 Godly, Mingled with wicked, 34 they fare the better for
the godly. 36 God does great things for the godly, 50, 51 there is opposition
in the godly to the work of the Spirit, 60 they must stir up themselves to
farther reception of grace, 293 may do the will of God unwillingly, 319 whence
that is, 320 their condition is very changeable, 325 they have need of new
influence, 363 the godly before Christ had the same Spirit and comforts that we
now have, 370 they will not defile themselves with little sins. 413, 414 Goiim,
225 put upon the Jews. 226 Grace, Where it is, is ability to act, 294 means of
grace denied to those would embrace the same, 299 grace insupportable 302 a
gracious heart deprecates that is against it. 413
H
Hair, Wherein citizens are resembled to the hair of the head, 418 shaving
off the hair, what it notes. 419 Hand. Hand of the Lord, what it is, 56 it
notes action. 111 Heathens, Truer to their God and principles then the Jews,
432, 434, 435 Heart, A hard heart a great evil, 238 it is the treasury for the
Word. 303 Heaven, Opened, how to be understood, 48, 49 heavenly things too high
for us, 80 they are pure and glorious, 168 yea, dreadfully glorious. ibid. Hin,
How much it contained, 406 Humble, Fittest to hear divine things, 206 quickly
comforted, 214 man has in him principles of humiliation, 214 the humble not
long without the Spirit. 370 Hunger, Makes any thing pleasant. 411 Holy, They
be holy are heavenly, 103 holiness imboldens, 274 holy men record their own
infirmities. 317 Holy Ghost, Is God. 316
I
Jehoiachin, Observable things about him. 37 Jehovah, Of that name. 202
Jerusalem, The head City, 426. how said to be in the midst of nations, 427
Eulogies of it. ibid. Jews, Unconstant in Religion. 435 Ignorance, It will not
excuse. 346 Impudence, 236, 237 where the face is impudent, the heart is hard.
238 Infirmities, Great and best Saints have infirmities, 317 they often do Gods
will unwillingly, 319 they interrupt not Gods love, 320 who heals and helps
them. 321 Ingratitude, It provokes God much. 431 Josiah, His posterity four
times in 23. years carried captive. 40 Israel, Whence, what, 225 all not true
Israelites are called so, 230 house of Israel who meant by it. 394 Judgments
and Statutes. 428 Judgments, Of God upon Kingdoms, cities, are dreadful, 174
they speak, 175 works of judgment glorious, called glory, 191 God is
praiseworthy in them, 312 they succeed one another, 409 they are not casual,
413 end of them, 416 they are sharp, 422 irresistible, ib. judicious and in
measure, 423 no escaping of them, ibid. in great judgment some are spared, 424
not all good that are spared, 425 what makes God walk in the way of judgments,
434 God is the great actor in all judgments, 437 executes them openly, 442
severity in them, 446 they are pleasing to God, 460 judgments are
instructions. 465 Justice, Execution of it makes glorious. 78
K
Kab, How much it contained. 411 Key, Of heaven in Gods hand. 50 Kingdom,
Wherein the happiness and misery of kingdoms lies. 311 Knowledge, Should
issue out into action, 112 a tongue with a hand under it, was the Egyptian
Hieroglyphick. ibid.
L
Law, The godly under it had the same Spirit, grace and comforts we have under
Christ. 370 Living, Creatures. 82, 83 Lifting up, what it not^s. 154 Life,
Power of life and death in Christ's hand. 342 Log, How much, 406 how many made a
Hin. 407 Looks of men daunt. 256
M
Magistrates, should be forward to do justice, 126 it makes them glorious, 192
they must not be fearful, and why. 269 Malice, Nothing privileges from it,
375 entertains not the Word. 461 Megillath. 3, 242 Man, Not capable of
immediate access to God, 180 men in place meet with scratches, 264 men of the
world are politic for their own ends, 324 his ruin is from himself. 359
Mercy, God adds one to another. 54 Ministrations, Service, employment, in all
these we must have instructions from Christ, 101 God raises the spirit of the
creature sometimes to great services. 156 Ministers, Subject to reproach, 47
must deliver what they have from God, 58 must see their call be clear, ib. come
with the Spirit of God, 61 Ministers put upon hard things, 238 their preaching
provokes, it is plundring men of their lusts, will, etc. 238, 239 they must not
look at event, but their call, 239 they witness for, or against their hearers,
249 not be fearful, 269, 270 they must first digest truth, and then deliver
truth, 292 they should feed upon the Word, 294 what they have is given, 301
they may not remove at pleasure from place to place, 324 they are watchmen, and
must be men of knowledge, 332 must endure hardship, 334 they must depend upon
Christ for more light, 336 they must learn before they teach, ib. warn others,
337, 343 do their office in the name of Christ, 338 their power is declaratory,
342 they may not impose upon conscience, 342 their scope should be to save
life, 344 not to show wit, ib. not to please men, not to get a living, 345
their office is honorable, ib. what Ministers are cruel and bloody, 347 doing
their duty, shall save themselves, if not others, 349 unfaithful Ministers
perfidious to God and man, 360 they need new supply, 363 they must expect
bands and chains, 374 often are severely dealt with, 375 it is not new for them to
be roughly handled 376 More, No more opened. 444 Mourning, Why they used to
mourn seven days. 323
N
Names, Names given suitable to events, 7 alteration of names, 37 name of the
wicked odious. 41 Natural abilities reach not spiritual things. 219
O
Oath, Gods oath, 447 lifting up the hand, anciently the sign of an oath. ibid.
Obedient, Obedience unto Christ must be absolute, 291 what makes obedientiall,
336 absolute obedience meets with mercies unexpected. 366 Occasion, God takes
occasion from the sin of some to bring in judgment upon all. 425 Officers, Who
fit for public offices in State and Church, 99 Christ's officers endued with
his Spirit, 219 to set up and send officers belongs to Christ, 228 unable ones
not sent by Christ. 229 Ordinances do good, when the Spirit is on them, 60
efficacy of them is from Christ, 294 they are Gods name. 454
P
Pan, What the iron pan signifies. 385 Patience, God bears long with the sins
of his people, 400 yet forgets not their sins. ibid. People, enemies to their
own good, 375 their sins deprive them of spiritual mercies, 379 like to hair
in three respects, 418 Gods people may become worse then Heathens. 432
Perseverance, Angels go on. 116 Pestilence, The etymology and nature of it.
455 Pity, What the word notes. 453 Place, God has three places, 309 no
holiness in them now, 312, 449 no place can hinder the working of the Spirit,
364 how places become holy. 448 Pope, And his Hierarchy not of Christ. 228, 229
Principles, There are opposite principles in the best of men to the ways of
Christ. 319 Priest, Occasion of settling the Priesthood upon Levi. 45 Prophet,
Whence, 8 of the first, and second Temple, 9 a Prophet in Babylon, 23 subject
to scorn, reproach, 47 they were carried on in their prophetical work hy the
might of the Spirit, 316 they could not prophecy at their pleasure, 326 they
must speak the words of the Lord, 336 how a Prophet should be received, 338
counted mad men. 373 Providence, Acts in all motions, 144 it puzzles the
ablest, unsearchable, dreadful, 149 it is in the least motions, 152 works of it
glorious, beautiful, ibid. 287 it overrules secondary agents. 403 Punishment,
conformable to sin. 412
Q
Quiet, The quiet spirits are fittest to receive and act spiritual things. 329
R
Rainbow, The natural cause of it, 192 the natural and theological
signification of it. 193, 194 Ram, A warlike instrument, and why so called.
385 Rebellion, What, 226 what in Gods account. 279 Relatives, Used in Scripture
without Antecedents. 23, 24 Repetition, Of the same words and things, of what
use. 466 Reproached, such honored, 48 reproaches are bitter piercing things.
464 Reproof, People are impatient of them, and why. 378, 379 Righteousness, A
double righteousness, 350 two sorts of righteous men, 351 righteousness of
faith never fails, and why, 352, 353 there be deceiveable righteousnesses, 356
we must not confide in our own righteousness, ib. three rules to help against
it. 357 Roll, 282 the eating of it, what, 290 Prophets must feed upon Christ's
rouls. 292 Ruin, Kingdoms, States, the cause of their ruin is in themselves,
77 man's is in himself. 359
S
Salvation, Few saved. 241 Sapphire, What it signifies and represents. 177, 178
Seraphims, What. 80 Sephar. 3. Shekel, Of sanctuary, why so called. 405 Side,
The Prophet lying on his side, and left side. 393, 394 Sight, the certainest
sense. 53, 54 Sgnification, To impose higher significations on things then they
have by nature, belongs to God. 72, 281 Signs, God deals with his people in
signs and types, 387 why, ibid. he gives to the sign the name of the thing
signified. 429 Sin, A fire enfolding, 76 disables us from seeing glory, 205
causes Gods people to lose their glory, 231 sin is rebellion, ibid. progress
in it causes impudency, 237 sinners come to a height of sinning, 243 it is an
imbittering thing, 244 the fruit of it is death, 343 difference between
Hamartanein and Poiein hamartian, 353 sin it makes uncapacious of happiness,
367 cuts off spiritual mercy, 379 sin may so provoke, that neither God nor man
will show mercy, 391 God forgets not the sins of men, 400 seldom any return
from sinful ways, 402 it defiles. 453 Son of man, opened, and what it notes,
210 how often given to Ezekiel, and why. 211 Speed, It Is required in Gods
service. 100 Spirit, Why called the hand of the Lord, 56, 57 it is author of all
good done and received, 60 how said to move or go, 122 the Spirit is the great
agent in all, 123, 363 it works any where, and cannot be shut out of any place,
364 how the spirit of the living creature is said to be in the wheels, 160 it
moves all, ib. consent between Angels and wheels is from the Spirit, 162 the
Spirit is living and lively, 164 what is meant by Spirit, 216 entrance what,
218, 369 a chief comforter, ibid. whether it goes always with the Word, 221 it
affects and visits the humble, 370 it is a comforting and encouraging Spirit,
371 Spirit speaks in a man, 372 the Spirit enables to discern, 223 why the
Spirit took up the Prophet, 306 heals our infirmities, 321 it works invincibly.
ibid. Standing, Of that posture. 212 Stubbornnes, Men will not hear God. 299
Stumbling Block, What meant by it. 354 how God lays it, 354, 355 takes them
out of the way of his. 350 Sword, What it does. 456
T
Tel-abib, What it signifies. 322 Temple, Was a part of worship, 312
consecrate, to what end, 448, 449 what defiled it. 450 Terrible, What makes so.
166 Throne, What it signifies, 176 Christ sat, not stood in it, 179 Christ's
throne must be of Sapphire. 182 Time, No good plea for sinners. 402 Tongues,
Thorny, in what respect, 254 255 how the Prophets clave to the roof of his
mouth, 377 power of it in Gods hand. 378 Tree, Dropping water in a dry Island.
153 Truth, All truth should be received, 204 sweet to taste, bitter in
operation. 318
V
Vision, What things are in a vision, 52 visions have excellency in them, 54
effects of them, 204 why men fall upon their faces at visions, 204 why the
Prophet had a second apparition of Gods glory. 365 Voice, Of Christ, how taken.
206
W
Watchman, Christ appoints watchmen in the Church, 332 they must be knowing,
not sleepy, 333 must endure hardship, ibid. they are for the flock. 335 Weary,
Godly may be weary in, but are not weary of Gods work. 120, 121 Wheels, What
is meant by lifting up the wheels, 154 none can hinder the motion of the
wheels, 156 God puts stands to them at his pleasure, 158 they cannot move
otherwise then they do, 160 motion of the wheels never unseasonable, 161 wheels
move whither the Spirit will have them, 163 wheel, why the world likened to
it, 130 secret motion in the wheel, 140 high, dreadful, 143, 149 motions of
the wheels are judicious. 151 Whirlewind, Nebuchadnezzar compared to it in
three things. 67, 68 Wicked, The worse for the Word, 245 without excuse, having
means, 246 shall see what mercy they have refused 247, 248 they are like
thorns, and wherein, 252 like scorpions, 258, we must take heed of them, 262,
267 their acquaintance not to be sought, 265 what fruits they bring, ibid.
their loss not considerable, 266 Christ knows who are such, 241 there is hope
of those are very wicked, 344 they deal cruelly with the Prophets, 375 lesser
sins punished in the wicked more severely then greater in the godly, 402, 403
wicked men are worthless, 252, 421 Gods people more wicked then heathens. 432
Will, Man's will his ruin. 299 Wisdom, Man's cross to Christ. 318 Word, The
power of it from the Spirit, 220 it is the Chariot of the Spirit, 221 few hear
savingly, 241 it is that Prophets must feed on. 292 Work. We must do Gods work
without noise, notice of our selves, 114 enemies further Gods works, 156 Gods
works and Word suit. 287 World. There are wheelings and turnings in all parts
of the world, 137 uncertain, 139 deceitful, 140 the motions of it are cross,
143 things in it move to their appointed period, 146, 151 motion and change of
things in the world are unknown 148 the more separate from the world, the more
fit for God. 365 Worship, Sins in worship are rebellion against Christ, 233
defilement of worship brings severe and certain judgments. 453
Z
Zeal, Good to be forward for God, 46 Angels zealous in executing judgments,
126 Christ zealous in punishing, 189 zeal what, 459 what it notes in God, ibid.
God will justify his zealous servants. 462
A Table of the Scriptures opened or illustrated in the foregoing Work: The
first number directs to the Chap. the second to the Verse. the third to the Page.
Genesis. Chap. Verse. Page. Genesis 1. 2. 163. Genesis 2. 7. 290. Genesis 3. 7. 48. Genesis
10. 10. 31. Genesis 14. 4. 226. Genesis 15. 1. 62. Genesis 17. 23. 204. Genesis 19. 26.
116. Genesis 20. 7. 10. Genesis 24. 7. 92. Genesis 30. 24. 54. Genesis 31. 5. 256. Genesis 32.
12. 90. Genesis 32. 28. 225. Genesis 49. 7. 45. Exodus. Exodus 9. 31. 322. Exodus 12.
2. 26. Exodus 12. 23. 89. Exodus 13. 18. 145. Exodus 18. 21. 99. Exodus 20. 2, 3.
227. Exodus 22. 1. 96. Exodus 24. 10. 178. Exodus 30. 28. 109. Exodus 32. 10. 267.
Exodus 32. 27, 29. 45. Exodus 32. 34. 9^. Exodus 33. 11. 199, 200. Exodus 33. 18,
23. 191. Numbers. Numb. 11. 16, 17. 162. Numb. 12. 8. 200. Numb. 14. 21. 191.
Numb. 22. 22. 89. Numb. 23. 18. 212. Deuteronom. Deuteronomy. 3. 17. 96. Deuteronomy. 10. 21.
167. Deuteronomy. 32. 4. 116. Deuteronomy. 32. 32. 244. Deuteronomy. 32. 34. 400. Joshua. Josh. 10.
12, 13. 158. Judges. Judge. 6. 22, 23. 119. Judge. 3. 10. 123. Judge. 5. 18. 46.
Judge. 13. 17, 18. 114. Judge. 19. 22. 243. Samuel. 1 Samuel 6. 20. 78. 1 Samuel 9.
9. 10. 1 Samuel 10. 6. 164. 1 Samuel 10. 11. 9. 1 Samuel 15. 11, 23. 232. 1 Samuel 24.
13. 265. 2 Samuel 14. 20. 84. 2 Samuel 17. 7. 161. 2 Samuel 22. 11. 68. Kings. 1
King. 11. 31. 144. 1 King. 12. 14. 252. 1 King. 17. 24. 9. 1 King. 18. 15, 17,
18, 19. 270. 1 King. 19. 4. 62. 1 King. 19. 11. 68. 1 King. 22. 24. 47. 2 King.
6. 16, 17. 90. 2 King. 6. 23. 444. 2 King. 19. 4. 154. 2 King. 6. 25. 410. 2
King. 24. 8. 37. Chronicles. 1 Chr. 3. 15. 1 Chr. 3. 16. 37. 1 Chr. 3. 17. 38.
2 Chr. 28. 22. 41. 2 Chr. 36. 9. 37. Ezra 2. 59. 322. Nehem. 6. 6. 227. Job.
Job 17. 14. 214. Job 20. 12, 13, 14. 245. Job 22. 13. 169. Job 22. 26. 102. Job
33. 4. 163. Job 24. 14. 256. Job 37. 18. 168, 169. Job 38. 7. 313. Job 39. 29.
97. Job 42. 5, 6. 205. Job 42. 5, 6. 66. Psalms. Psalm. 5. 3. 102. Psalm. 8. 5.
99. Psalm. 9. 20. 210. Psalm. 9. 16. 78. Psalm. 10. 12. 155. Psalm. 19. 1. 168.
Psalm. 22. 6. 214. Psalm. 25. 1. 154. Psalm. 29. 9. 198. Psalm. 32. 8. 150. Psalm.
34. 7. 90. Psalm. 34. 7. 90. Psalm. 34. 15. 150. Psalm. 36. 10. 55. Psalm. 36. 6.
149. Psalm. 40. 8. 304. Psalm. 49. 2. 210. Psalm. 58. 10, 11. 128, 129. Psalm. 63.
2. 198. Psalm. 69. 22. 355. Psalm. 72. 9. 204. Psalm. 77. 18. 130. Psalm. 78. 49.
89. Psalm. 81. 1. 23. Psalm. 91. 11, 12. 92. Psalm. 103. 5. 98. Psalm. 91. 11. 91.
Psalm. 103. 14. 320. Psalm. 103. 20. 96. Psalm. 104. 3. 71. Psalm. 105. 15. 9.
Psalm. 104. 30. 163. Psalm. 106. 42. 225. Psalm. 109. 8. 332. Psalm. 118. 6. 271.
Psalm. 119. 1. 233. Psalm. 119. 11. 303. Psalm. 119. 69. 254. Psalm. 119. 120. 174.
Psalm. 120. 5. 34. Psalm. 138. 1. 86. Psalm. 148. 8. 163. Proverbs. Prove. 3. 5, 6.
101. Prove. 3. 24. 55. Prove. 4. 25. 117. Prove. 5. 28. 76. Prove. 7. 13. 237.
Prove. 10. 20. 252, 421. Prove. 11. 10. 266. Prove. 13. 18. 361. Prove. 14. 4. 96.
Prove. 14. 34. 21. Prove. 14. 34. 231. Prove. 15. 3. 331. Prove. 15. 3. 150. Prove.
16. 27. 76. Prove. 20. 26. 133. Prove. 21. 1. 160. Prove. 21. 30. 19. Prove. 29.
25. 274. Prove. 30. 4. 71. Ecclesiastes. Eccles. 5. 1. 109. Eccles. 5. 6. 86,
93. Eccles. 8. 4. 174. Canticles. Cant. 1. 2. 24. Cant. 2. 12. 175. Cant. 4.
16. 164. Cant. 7. 10. 103. Cant. 5. 14. 178. Isaiah. Isai. 1. 2. 228. Isai. 1.
5. 42. Isai. 6. 2. 80. Isai. 6. 3. 198. Isai. 6. 5, 6. 66. Isai. 6. 3. 121.
Isai. 7. 20. 421. Isai. 8. 18. 47. Isai. 8. 18. 241. Isai. 8. 12, 13. 273.
Isai. 10. 17. 257. Isai. 17. 13. 134. Isai. 19. 1. 71. Isai. 21. 11, 12. 333.
Isai. 22. 2. 269. Isai. 26. 9. 175. Isai. 27. 11. 346. Isai. 30. 10. 10. Isai.
30. 32. 458, 461. Isai. 30. 33. 258. Isai. 31. 3. 214. Isai. 40. 5. 205. Isai.
40. 5, 6. 66. Isai. 49. 2. 271. Isai. 52. 7. 110. Isai. 52. 10. 399. Isai. 54.
11, 12. 183. Isai. 60. 8. 70. Isai. 64. 3. 167. Isai. 65. 11. 156 Jeremiah.
Jer. 1. 2. 43 Jer. 1. 17. 273. Jer. 2. 10, 11. 432. Jer. 2. 13. 6. Jer. 14. 14.
225. Jer. 15. 19. 345. Jer. 20. 9. 128. Jer. 20. 10. 254. Jer. 20. 10. 254,
257. Jer. 22. 11. 40. Jer. 22. 28. 253. Jer. 22. 28. 214. Jer. 22. 24. ^7. Jer.
22. 30. 38. Jer. 23. 30, 31. 330. Jer. 37. 10. 157. Jer. 51. 25. 188.
Lamentations. Lam. 1. 18. 244. Lam. 4. 7. 178. Lam. 4. 12. 73. Ezekiel. Ezekiel.
9. 26. 91. Ezekiel. 10. 13. 130. Ezekiel. 13. 10, 11. 72. Ezekiel. 33. 31. 117. Ezekiel.
39. 9. 70. Ezekiel. 43. 9. 451. Daniel. Dan. 7. 6. 68. Dan. 10. 20. 88. Dan. 10.
11. 212. Dan. 10. 13. 85. Hosea. Hos. 4. 12. 231. Hos. 4. 12. 435. Hos. 8. 1.
98. Hos. 9. 12. 311. Hos. 10. 11. 96. Hos. 11. 12. 234. Hos. 12. 14. 244. Hos.
13. 9. 77. Hos. 13. 16. 244. Amos. Amos 2. 7. 260. Amos 3. 8. 378. Amos 5. 8.
71. Amos 5. 12. 243. Micah. Mic. 6. 9. 175. Mic. 7. 4. 265. Nah. 1. 2. 175.
Habakkuk. Hab. 1. 8. 68. Hab. 1. 9. 69. Hab. 2. 7. 67. Hab. 3. 16. 218. Zepha.
3. 4. 360. Zachary. Zach. 2. 4. 100. Zach. 2. 5. 311. Zach. 2. 5. 271. Zach. 4.
2, 3. 213. Zach. 4. 6. 57. Zach. 4. 6. 123. Zach. 6. 11. 39. Zach. 12. 8. 157.
Malachi. Mal. 1. 7. 450. Mal. 2. 7. 85. Mal. 3. 23. 188. Matthew. Matthew. 1. 12.
38. Matthew. 5. 16. 114. Matthew. 8. 9. 170. Matthew. 8. 12. 230. Matthew. 10. 41, 42.
338. Matthew. 12. 28. 61. Matthew. 13. 11. 176. Matthew. 13. 25. 333. Matthew. 18. 10.
169. Matthew. 24. 31. 93. Matthew. 28. 19. 222. Matthew. 28. 20. 301. Mark. Mark. 4.
13, 14, 15. 46. Mark. 6. 20. 110. Mark. 7. 16. 266. Mark. 7. 27. 72. Mark. 8.
24. 74. Luke. Luke 1. 36. 111. Luke 3. 27. 39. Luke 4. 28. 246. Luke 5. 5. 291.
Luke 9. 62. 116. Luke 10. 26. 5. Luke 10. 33, 34, 35. 213. Luke 11. 20. 60.
Luke 16. 22. 93. Luke 17. 32. 116. Luke 19. 8. 224. Luke 21. 34. 68. Luke 22.
43. 92. John. Joh. 1. 14. 182. Joh. 1. 18. 199. Joh. 2. 14, 15, 16, 17. 189.
Joh. 3. 12. 80. Joh. 4. 20. 234. Joh. 5. 28. 206. Joh. 8. 44. 232. Joh. 8. 34.
353. Joh. 9. 39. 247. Joh. 8. 47. 304. Joh. 10. 5, 27. 223. Joh. 10. 27. 206.
Joh. 15. 5. 227, 222. Joh. 16. 13, 14. 57. Joh. 18. 6. 66. Joh. 18. 6. 173.
Joh. 20. 5. 84. Acts. Act. 1. 3. 310. Act. 4. 20. 65. Act. 4. 27, 28. 151. Act.
7. 51. 221. Act. 7. 54. 248. Act. 12. 6. 376. Act. 12. 15. 91. Act. 12. 23. 89.
Act. 13. 11. 56. Act. 20. 22. 7. Act. 20. 28. 230. Act. 26. 13. 188. Act. 26.
16. 244. Romans. Romans 6. 23. 343. Romans 8. 7. 319. Romans 8. 14. 124. Romans 8. 26.
321. Romans 9. 6. 230. Romans 12. 2. 280. Romans 13. 3. 242. Romans 13. 4. 126. 1
Corinthians. 1 Cor. 2. 4, 5. 345. 1 Cor. 2. 12, 15. 223. 1 Cor. 2. 14. 219. 1
Cor. 4. 1. 228. 1 Cor. 4. 9. 131. 1 Cor. 4. 13. 47. 1 Cor. 6. 19. 122. 1 Cor.
7. 31. 134. 1 Cor. 11. 10. 171. 1 Cor. 11. 23. 58. 1 Cor. 12. 5. 127. 1 Cor.
13. 12. 200. 1 Cor. 14. 24. 110. 1 Cor. 15. 10. 128. 1 Cor. 15. 27. 167. 1 Cor.
16. 4. 300. 2 Corinthians. 2 Cor. 2. 16. 247. 2 Cor. 3. 5. 364. 2 Cor. 3. 6. 164. 2
Cor. 3. 17. 371. 2 Cor. 5. 4. 87. 2 Cor. 12. 14, 15. 335. Galatians. Gal. 2.
14. 280. Gal. 3. 2. 221. Gal. 6. 9. 120. Ephesians. Ephesians. 1. 10. 14. Ephesians. 2. 2.
87. Ephesians. 2. 12. 86. Ephesians. 6. 15. 263. Philippians. Phil. 1. 19. 364. Phil. 2.
16. 114. Phil. 2. 21. 335. Phil. 3. 14. 118. Phil. 4. 13. 127. Colossians. Col.
3. 16. 295. Thessalonians. 1 These. 4. 11. 118. 2 These. 1. 10. 102. 2 These. 3.
11. 118. Timothy. 1 Timothy 1. 13. 175. 1 Timothy 6. 16. 168. 2 Timothy 1. 6. 294. 2 Timothy 1. 7. 272. 2 Timothy 1. 7. 371. Hebrews. Heb. 1. 3. 182. Heb. 1. 6. 103.
181. Heb. 1. 7. 81. 126. Heb. 6. 4. 221. Heb. 11. 27. 274. Heb. 11. 38. 267.
Heb. 12. 2. 280. James. Jam. 1. 17. 136. Jam. 1. 19.20. 325. Jam. 1. 21. 303.
Jam. 2. 1. 182. Jam. 3. 6. 132. Jam. 4. 6. 233. Jam. 5. 17. 117. Peter. 1 Pet.
1. 12. 84. 1 Pet. 1. 18. 235. 1 Pet. 2. 5. 183. 1 Pet. 5. 10. 33. 2 Pet. 1. 17.
190. 2 Pet. 1. 20, 21. 316. John. 1 John 1. 3. 54. 1 John 1. 3, 8. 353. 1 John
5. 7. 203. Revelation. Rev. 1. 15. 79. Rev. 2. 9. 230. Rev. 2. 14, 15. 34. Rev.
2. 18. 186. Rev. 3. 7. 50. Rev. 4. 2. 197. Rev. 4. 3. 195. Rev. 4. 6.8. 97.
Rev. 6. 1. 132. Rev. 7. 15. 84. Rev. 8. 1. 131. Rev. 10. 1. 186. Rev. 12. 1.
213. Rev. 12. 1. 103. Rev. 13. 3. 242. Rev. 15. 6. 81. Rev. 18. 1, 2. 191. Rev.
19. 6. 133. Rev. 19. 11, 12, 13. 186. Rev. 21. 12. 91. Rev. 22. 1, 2. 102.

FINIS.

