An HISTORICAL ANATOMY Of CHRISTIAN MELANCHOLY, Sympathetically set forth, In a
threefold state of the soul. 1 Endued with Grace, 2 Ensnared in Sin, 3 Troubled
in Conscience.

With a Concluding MEDITATION On the Fourth Verse of the Ninth Chapter of Saint
JOHN.

By EDMUND GREGORY, sometimes Bachelour of Arts in Trin. Coll. Oxon.

London, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his shop, at the
sign of the Prince's Arms in Paul's Churchyard. 1646.

EDMUNDI GREGORII VERA EFFIGIES AETATIS SUAE ANo TRICESIMO PRIMO ANo 1646.
Even now I was not, and ere long I must:
From what thou see, again return to Dust.
Gaze not on this poor^ earthly shade of mine;
But read the substance which is more Divine.
W. Marshall sculpsit



The AUTHOR'^ Brief Directions To the READER.
LEt me obtain (loving Reader) this favor, that you take notice of these few
Directions in the perusal of this little Book.

First, that the main Rule of my thoughts in the compiling hereof, has been
Experience; I say, The Experience out of diverse particulars diligently
(according to my poor skill) comprised together into one. And truly if,
according to the Philosopher, Experientia est optima Magistra, Eperience be our
best Teacher, as also a chief guide in all our Divinity; doubtless it is worth
the labor seriously to mark it. Yet since that what I have written is not the
Experience of all men, but of some (for who is able to find out all the
secrecy of but one heart, much more of all hearts?) let it not, I pray, by any
means offend you, if you chance to meet with that thing which concurs not with
the Experience and Motion of your own soul; for I intend nothing herein as a
positive Doctrine or an absolute Rule: if any thing be generally true in all or
most men, be it so; if not in those things which are strange to your soul, let
your Discretion be your better Direction: for you must consider, that like an
Anatomist I have cut up as well the Breast as the Head, and as well the Belly as
the Breast: I have equally let out the foul and deformed parts that are in Man
or Mankind, as well as the fairer and better parts: Here is perchance somewhat
of all sorts of men, and again something perchance which disagrees with most
men.

Secondly, for my expressions, I have endeavored to declare every particular
herein in the fittest and most naturally-agreeing terms (as near as I could)
according to the lively sense of the Truth, conceiving a congruity of speech to
be the best eloquence; shattering in also now and then an expression in Verse,
to the end the serious intention of your mind may the more pleasantly run on
in reading: for though my poor and humble Verses add perhaps but little
ornament to the matter, yet since they do not at all interrupt the sense nor
your thoughts with any long Parenthesis, my hope is they may be delightful in
their variety, though they be not in their elegancy. And whereas again I have
cast my words into a sympathetical and fellow-feeling Mould, the cause is,
Partly for that mine own experience gives me good reason for it; and partly
again, for that I conceive, Nihil humanani a me alienum, No humane thing that
belongs to Mankind to be so strange unto me, but that I may fitly sympathize
and sensibly concur with it. Saint Paul was all things unto all men; to the
Jews, a Jew; to the Gentiles, a Gentile; to the sinners, a sinner, that he
might work the more effect and comfort in all.

Thirdly, I shall earnestly desire, if your time and ability may conveniently
serve, that you will add your own Experimental Observations hereunto, to the
increasing of this poor Book (if God shall so give his blessing) into a larger
Volume: for I could heartily wish that learned men would study Themselves as
well as their Books; would more set forward in communicating their Experience,
I say, the real Experience of their Hearts, rather then the Imaginary notions
of their Brains, to the public use, for comfort and increase of Knowledge unto
others.

Lastly, whereas I have labored very much for Brevity, knitting up all things
short and close together, to the end I might not be tedious unto you; so that
it may be dum brevis esse labor obscurus fio, whilst that I strive to be
brief, I become obscure, and the more dark to the apprehension of him that
reads: My humble Request therefore is, that you would bestow, if not a
repetition, at leastwise the more heed and deliberation in reading: and as
Elisha did in reviving the Widows Child, so let me beseech you to take this
little Book up into your Chamber or Private Room, to spread it before you, and
to stretch your self upon it, to apply the inner shape and proportion of your
hearts unto it; and so by your Prayers unto God, to desire that you may find a
soul and life in the reading of it, that it may so animate in you, that it be
not as a dead and altogether-unprofitable thing, which I also shall ever pray
for to the utmost of my power.

And thus for the present I take my leave, remaining

Yours, E. G.

The Author's POEM to Himself, on James 3. 17.
IF thou, my soul, would true Religion see,
Lo, here in brief thou may resolved be.
The Wisdom that descends from above, Emblematized thus.

Is pure, as says S. James, and full of Love;
Mercy and Peace it does extend to all,
Without deceit, and nothing partial.
The Head. If sin be Folly, Madness, want of Wit,
The Righteous then are wis^ and most discreet.

Wisdom. If Christ our Wisdom came down from on hie,
All earthly knowledge is but vanity.

The Eyes. This Wisedom's pure, and fills us with light,
To trust in him who passes humane sight.

Faith. This Wisedom's pure, and pu^ifi'th the mind
From those dark works which make the Conscience blind.

The Hands. It seek^e^ Peace, it hates to contend;
It Is gentle, mild and loving to its friend.

Charity. With it, Forgiveness easily is found;
In it, Compassion does to all abound.

The Feet. And all this Good it freely does impart,
Without a pa^tial, p^oud o^ grudging heart;

Good meaning. Nor does Hypo^^isie these Virtues kill,
With by resp^cts, or a Sinister will.

Here is Religion's Head, its Eyes, its Hands;
Here are those Feet on which it firmly stands.
(...)


E Coelo descendit

(...).

Know thy Self.

Ex tui Scientia, fit Conscientia.

JER. 17. 9. The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked:
who can know it? (...).

O thou that know the hearts of all men, Create in me a clean heart, O God,
and renew a right spirit within me.

And I saw the dead both great and small stand before God: and the Books were
opened, and another Book was opened, which is the Book of Life: and the dead
were judged of those things which were written in the Books, according to their
works: Revel. 20. 12. Of the Soul endued with Grace.
THe natural disposition and temper of man being much addicted to Melancholy,
will be apt in very childhood to make our apprehension lay cares and sadness
near our heart, to delight our selves in solitariness, and to spend the time
in Soliloquies and private Speculations: even so much may nature be inclined to
these exercises of Contemplation and such fictions of Phancie, that many an
hour shall we sacrifice to this our genius; gladly separating our selves from
Company, and picking out what time we can spare for this purpose. These
Contemplations with which our Christian thoughts will be thus aff^cted, are
chiefly grounded at first on the familiar objects of Sense, and raised to some
divine and heavenly purpose; either shall we be soaring up to the consideration
of the glorious magnificence of those more excellent Creatures, the Sun, the
Moon, the Stars; or hovering lower upon the delightful variety of Beasts, of
Fowls, of Fishes, upon the strange diversity of Nations, of Countries and
Kingdoms; again another while perchance we shall be conversing with God by
magnifying his greatness; as thus: O Lord our Governor, how excellent is thy
Name in all the world! thou that have set thy glory above the heavens: or by
admiring his mercy; as thus: Thy mercy, O Lord, reaches unto the heavens, and
thy faithfulness unto the clouds: or expostulating with him concerning
Mankind; as thus: Oh remember how short our time is: wherefore had thou made
all men for naught? Our thoughts this way will be usually very deep, very
serious and earnest; and we shall be affected with them to the life, insomuch
that they will often provoke in us the passion of grief with tears of joy, with
exceeding cheerfulness of mind, even according to that pathetical affection
of David, when he said, My lips will be feyn when I sing unto thee, and so will
my soul, etc. We shall, I say, be serious, even so serious and entirely bent to
those sweet Melancholy thoughts, and so affectionately moved with them, that we
shall scarce ever think our selves truly and really recreated, but whilst we
are thus meditating on religious matter, and exercising our thoughts in such
heavenly notions.

Here lies our Love, our Dear, and only One:
Here Is our life's Joy; here it is, and here alone.
Here, I say, lie the joy and sweetness of our life; and that, first, because
nature does dispose us to a more retired seriousness of mind; and surely no
delight can be s^ sweet as that toward which Nature sets her helping hand.
Secondly, for that use and practice in time d^ tutor up this sympathy of nature
into the grateful facility of an habit; and then if the habit of that which
agrees not with nature, be most times so lovingly married to the affections,
that it can hardly be left; how pleasing must that needs be which concur^ with
nature! Thirdly, for that this heavenly object is beyond measure unparalled
for sweetness, Sweeter, as David has it, even then the honey and the honey
comb.

The Meditations of God do many times ravish our narrow souls with unspeakable
Comfort, and drive us into a ecstasy of amazement for joy: we shall think
sometimes to our selves, What an happiness is this, that the God of heaven and
earth should so familiarly communicate himself to such vile creatures as we;
that he should grant us such illumination of mind, such joy of spirit? surely
we would not, leave it for the whole world; and it is better unto us then
thousands of gold and silver. Well, Joy and sorrow do take their turns: and
there is no perfect happiness in this life.

We that were mounted up but now,
Amongst the Stars to dwell,
Anon descend as much below,
Even to the gates of hell.
As we are raised up, I may say with Saint Paul, unto this third heaven, this
more then thrice happy Condition of Joy; so is there also given us our fatal
portion of misery, a thorn in the flesh; a thorn of sin which does as shrewdly
prick us with sorrow, as ever we were tickled with delight; the sowrnesse of
Eve's apple will not be put out of our taste: be we never so spiritual, we
cannot but be subject unto sin: I say sin, and I may say sins too; sin, as
intimating only some special ones, in particular; and sins, as denoting a
multiplicity of them in the general: for as for many of us, peradventure we are
more indifferently prone and subject unto all kinds and sorts of iniquity:
there is almost no sin, no perverseness and impiety, but that we have a strong
taste thereof in our souls: But most of us, I say most of us in particular, are
troubled with some pricking sin, some thorn or other above the rest, some
naturally-enclin'd enormity of our inner man; and these, these darling and
intimate sins of ours, whatsoever they be, do always, as we may observe, in an
eminent manner cry down the rest, do with more violence haunt us, and with more
frequency overwhelm us; so that we shall hardly long be free from them.
Ordinary and weakly disposed sins may perhaps be swallowed down with ease; but
these extraordinary and deep-rooted ones do stick close and fast in the
Conscience: our other sins for the most part we may pretty well digest in
oblivion; but this sin, this our familiar and bosom-sin, is so hearty a sin,
always with so full a desire, and therefore so palpably gross to our
apprehension, that it constantly leaves behind it a Memento of shame to our
outward man, and the sting of sadness to our inner soul. When it is past and
gone, we shall find our Consciences wounded with dismayednesse, and our hearts
drooping with grief; such sour sauce has this seeming pleasure; such a sting
in the tail has this flattering Serpent; a sting it is which, as I say,
without question we are sufficiently sensible of; we can most duly and
tenderly feel the hurt it does us; and yet for all that, when it comes too, it
does so strongly charm and bewitch our reason, that all the power that is in us
is presently dissolved, and we are no way able to withstand it: the deceitful
bait of pleasure makes us suddenly to swallow down the Bane, and then, though
like that Book in the Revelation, it be sweet in the mouth to commit it, yet is
it bitter in the belly, exceeding bitter, even as Wormwood: See Prove. 5. 4. Sin
does us no great harm whilst we look to it in time: though it bring with it a
sadness and a sting unto our Consciences; yet as long as within three or four
days, or a week, we do vent out this sadness into tears, with true
Compunction, and pull out again this sting by the hand of Repentance, we feel
no danger unto our selves. When we are in sin, our understanding is as it were
in a cloud, and our affections cold and dull; but the return of Gods favor
again, will appear unto us as the Sun dispersing with his brightness the
clouds of ignorance, and enflaming with his heat the coldness of affection: so
true find we that which our Savior speaks of himself in Saint John: I am the
light of the world: he that follows me, shall not walk in darkness, but
shall have the light of life. In darkness, that is, the darkness of sin: but
shall have the light of life, that is, that living light which quickens the
heart unto goodness, and enliveneth the affections. Enliveneth the affections

With cheerful thoughts, with nimble active love;
With flames of zeal which never cease to move:
to move upwards, and give their humble attendance upon the Almighty.

In the act of Repentance, we shall as it were throw down our selves before God
with a filial remorse and melting sorrow for our offense, sometimes casting an
eye upon the exceeding vileness of our sin, and then weeping, and grieving,
and vexing our selves, that we should be creatures so wretched as to commit
that, which, though there were no God to obey, not Law to transgress, yet a
man would be ashamed and scorn to do: sometimes casting an eye to consider, not
so much what it is in it self, as against whom; and then it is ten times grief,
to think that we should so highly offend him that has always been so good, so
loving, and, as I may say so, too much merciful unto us; that we should
displease him whose infinite goodness is more then that we are able in the
least degree to deserve, though we should with all the veins of our hearts
continually obey him; counting it a most tender thing to grieve him which has
vouchsafed us to be as dear unto himself as the very apple of his eye.

We shall, I say, weep, and grieve, and vex our selves: for it is to be noted,
that we do seldom find the true and effectual comfort of Repentance without
tears: when the eye can kindly run down with streams of water, then does our
heart begin to feel ease, then does that burden begin to be light, which before
was so heavy; and then will the light of grace begin to shine in upon our
souls, and kindle our affections with that zeal of David, Psalm. 86. 11. O knit
my soul, knit it faster unto thee, that I may fear thy Name. Many times thus in
the passion of our souls are we so overjoyed, as it were, at the return of Gods
favor, that we could even suffer our hearts to be plucked out of our breasts to
offer them up in devotion unto him: and therefore now do we lift up our souls
with such a servent desire of better obedience, that henceforth it seems not
enough for us to go or walk, but we must run the way of thy Commandments, O
Lord, since thou ^ast thus set our hearts at liberty.

To hang down the head like a bulrush, Isai. 58. 8, and to be covered with the
sackcloth of dejection for our sins, this verily is not the main; this is but
the outside and beginning of Repentance:

It only does before prepare the way,
Telling some news of the approaching day.
A lively resolution of the heart to redeem the time, this is the soul and
reality thereof. Repentance is but dead, without a lively heart: and surely it
never does us good, till it thus come unto the quick.

Well now, when the Almighty has thus breathed into our souls this breath of
life, then does our hope revive again in the confidence of pardon, and then
also shall we be so sensibly affected with Gods infinite mercies toward us,
that these his mercies, like those bands of love, Hos. 11. 4, do tie us far
more to his obedience then before; all the faculties of both body and soul do
seem too little for us to do him service with, that so in some measure we may
requite his love in forgiving, by our love in obeying; the more God forgives
us, the more we do always love him: so that we may justly witness the truth of
that which our Savior says, To whom God has forgiven much, he will love him
much. This love of God does usually raise in us a holy indignation against sin,
to hate, to abhor, and as it were trample it under our feet, making us
zealously to take part with God against our selves, who have thus took part
with sin against God; and therefore shall we be ready to enjoin a kind of
penance to our souls, and to execute in Gods behalf a revenge upon our selves,
so that if it were possible, we might give him a due recompense and
satisfaction for our offense.

The effect of Repentance is, That we shall feel our consciences satisfied, our
hearts at rest, and our selves joyfully at one with God again; and then will
our soul make her boast of the Lord, that h^ has put a new song into our
mouths, even a song of thanksgiving for this great deliverance, according to
that of David; O Lord, thou have been exceeding gracious unto us wherefore as
for our soul, it shall be talking of thy righteousness and of thy praise all
the day long. We cannot cease, I say,

We cannot cease from morn till night
thy goodness to set forth:
O Lord, it is now our whole delight
to wonder at thy worth.
Thus a while are we full of praises and thanksgiving unto God. And now then
with such a strong and powerful confidence in him, do we go on in our wonted
course of divine Meditations, that our thoughts do as it were scorn the earth,
being like Elijah in the fiery charet of zeal mounted up to dwell in heaven
only, and in heavenly things: our Phancie will be all for the high and lofty
speculations of God, of Christ, of Eternity, of the World to come, etc. The
private leisure and holy silence of the mind from outward things, gives such
advantage to the soul to flee upwards, that for the present we are even D^ified
with these glorious objects, and are become Saint-like in our thoughts: but
when it comes down again to the practick part, for the conversation of
ourlives; when these Speculations are to be actuated into a good behavior; lo,
then it proves that there is nothing at all in us of Saints, no not scarce of
men, or at leastwise, of very weak and frail men: then all that we can do, is
but to desire to keep our selves from sin, or to be unwilling to enter into
temptation; that, that for the most part, is the furthest we do proceed* but to
withstand, and vanquish, or put off sin, are we seldom able in the le^st degree
and therefore we may well a^k the question with Saint Paul, Who shall deliver
us from this body of fin? since the highest period of strength tha^ we do here
attain unto, is able to do little, even so little, that I may justly say it is
but as the shadow of something rather then anything and indeed altogether, as it
were, nothing in reality, though something in intention. Well, now being in the
state of Repentance, we can carefully take heed of the least sins, directing
our conversation in a more elevated and steady course then usual, as conceiving
our selves to lie open to the awful view of an Omnipotent and most glorious
Deity: as also, we can more duly humble our selves, and pray before him with a
fervent, with a lively earnestness and confidence of obtaining: For first, the
abundant experience of Gods great love toward us, together with that loving
affection which we feel in our hearts toward him again, breeds a kind of
union and friendship betwixt God and our souls, and this union begets a trust
and confidence in him, and then this confidence does fully persuade us that we
shall prevail with him in any thing, so that it be best for us to obtain it; I
say, Best for us, that is, for our good, though not always to our liking: our
Prayers, verily it is sit they should be confident; but they may not be
obstinate and self-willed: Nature does use to take it harsh not to have her
desire granted; but David's resolution in Psalm. 39, will at length pretty well
satisfy her: I became dumb, and opened not my mouth: for it was thy doing: For
it was thy doing, that is the reason to stop our mouths, and hold us contented:
And it is our Saviors reason and resolution in Matthew. 36. 39: Nevertheless not
as I will, but as thou will. Gods will, we are sure, is far better then ours,
and therefore good reason it is that ours should in all patience and humility
be ruled by his: better it is in his care; for he has a greater care over us
then we can have of our selves; and better in his wisdom and foreknowledge;
for he knows far better what is good for us then we know for our selves.

Our sinful wills do seldom aim aright;
Lord give us what is fitting in thy sight.
What thy good will and pleasure is, and we are contented.

Again, as we have such a submissive trust and confidence of ob^^^ning in
Prayer, so are we always more affectionately apprehensive of what we do pray,
then in the time of sin; our thoughts can go along and keep turn with the words
of our Prayers: at the confession of sins, shall we feel our selves pressed
with the burden of our wretchedness: at the Petitions of grace, our soul will
be athirst after the living God: Oh when shall we be satisfied with the
fullness of his mercies! at Thanksgiving for his Blessings, our heart does as
it were run over with the abundance of his loving-kindnesse: Even so has thy
Mercies embraced us on every side, that who can set forth thy praise, O Lord,
or declare the goodness that thou have done for our souls? Thus, I say, we can
now keep our thoughts nearer to the sense in prayer then at other times; and
yet we shall find it, at the best time of our Devotion, very difficult to keep
our intention close to it any long while, specially in Public praying: for do
what we can, ever and anon our minds will be sliding away from the matter in
hand, and dreaming upon other imaginations; at least, some other thoughts on
the sudden do come athwart us, and put us from the sense: so that seldom do we
hold our intention steady upon it thorowout a whole Prayer, unless it be very
short: For we may here pertinently take notice that sin is so naturally rooted
in us and all Mankind, that it is a very hard task (if with due inward silence
we observe it in our selves) to keep our secret thoughts within compass even
whilst the eye of Conscience is most watchful: I say,

Even whilst the Star of Jacob shines most bright
In us, to purge away the dark of night.
So that it was no marvel David said that the righteous man falls seven times
a day, whenas there is seldom an hour in the day, even in the purest condition
of our life (specially if we have any concernment to be conversant in outward
affairs) I say, scarce an hour wherein extravagant and unlawful imaginations or
desires do not most thrust themselves into the mind* which though perhaps
indeed the awaking care of Conscience, by Gods help, does quickly check out
again with shame in these or the like motions of dislike, as, Fie, it is not
right, God forbid; yet the Corruption of nature hereby shows it self to be
always active in us, though it does not now prevail as it would.

O Lord God, our best Condition in this world thou know is but as a night,
in which thougb there be some light shining within us, yet is there much more
darkness; and therefore our experience methinks does most fitly and naturally
Moralize that expression of thine concerning our Savior, Numb. 24, where thou
have called him by thy holy Spirit The Star of Jacob, even as it were the day
star of heaven arising in our hearts; a star, and that befitting the night; and
yet a star which shines to our Souls and Consciences with a blessed light of
joy and comfort; and so, as Saint John with his Baptizing tears of Repentance,
prepared the way for our Savior to be entertained in the souls of men: so, I
say, the watery clouds of sorrow for sin passing away from our re^enting souls,
do unvayl our Savior unto us, that Star and Light of divine grace, that he may
shine out again as the joyful Light of our Salvation. And O most merciful
Savior, thou that art here a Star unto us, a Day Star appearing before the
Sunrising be thou hereafter in heaven the Sun it self, the Sun of
Righteousness shining in most perfect glory unto all Eternity.

But to go on: Lo, the sweet Olive branches that this Noab's Dove, Repentant
reconciliation, brings in unto the soul. It is said, Prove. ^8. 1. That the
righteo^^ are as bold as a Lion: Lord, who is there that can say he is
righteous before thee, when as the very Angel are unclean in thy sight? much
more are we, the very best piece of whose life is as a menstruous cloth,
defiled with gross imperfections: yet see! the nearer we draw on thereunto,
the less fearful we are: the terriblenesse of thunder which according to the
Poet

Is apt with fear to shake the minds of men,
Jussit and humanas motura-tonitrua mentes,
or the hideous examples of Gods Judgments, and the ^ike; nay, even terrible
death it self, which according to the Ancients is naturally (...), the most
terrible of all terrible things; all these with which we are wont to be
affrighted, do not now strike us with so deep a passion of fear, nor go through
our loins with such a terror; and that not at all because of any deadness of
Conscience, but out of the liveliness of faith: I say, Because the Lord, as it
is in Psalm. 27, being our light and our salvation, whom then methinks should we
fear? the Lord being the strength of our life, that is, the trust and
confidence of our souls, of whom or of what should we be afraid?

Again, the Service of God leads us into that glorious liberty (which as I
conceive Saint Paul speaks of) of the sons of God. First, I mean that liberty
whereby we feel our Consciences set free from the doting scrupulosity of things
unnecessary and indifferent, the which perchance at some other times we may be
apt to stick upon with perplexity. Secondly, I mean that liberty, we may call
it The liberty of Obedience, which as it makes us willingly and freely to obey
our betters, cause it is for Gods glory, who has appointed the same, and 'cause
it is for his glory to do him service in it: so again it makes us so free in
Spirit as not to stoop to any ignoble or disgraceful servility; that is, with a
base and cowardly heart to yield our approbation in any unjust and indirect
course, because our Superiors either like or command it; to call good evil, or
evil good, for any cause whatsoever: No, we have a warrant for it methinks in
our souls, not to deny the Truth for the fear or love of the greatest or
dearest one in the world: for if we deny the Truth, we deny him that is greater
and dearer unto us then any can be besides, even God himself; for God is Truth,
says Saint John: And surely he that is in subjection to father or mother, as
our Savior says, or even unto any other Creature, more then unto God, is not
worthy of him. Many times this free spirit is apt to degenerate into a fiery
spirit; so that in stead of a moderate use of the liberty of truth toward
Superiors, shall we be ready to fall into a rash and disobedient humor
against them. Joab's dealing with King David, 1 Chronicles. 21. 3, is a singular
example to be followed in this kind; that is, to be so freely faithful unto
our Betters, as not to flatter or back them on in that which is evil; and yet
(not using our Liberty as a cloak of Maliciousness) so lovingly respectful, as
not to contradict their power with an undiscreet and churlish impatiency.
Moreover, this our foresaid unity and reconciliation with God, crowns our
souls with many happy and rare advantages; but specially in this, that it
makes our spirits cheerful, merry and full of rejoicing: a good Conscience is
as a continual feast, wherein we are satisfied with all good things, as with
marrow and fatness; and therefore most fitly has our Savior named the holy
Ghost a Comforter: And be shall give you another Comforter, Joh. 14. 16. A
Comforter, and truly so: for how can sadness take fast hold in that breast
where this heavenly joy and comfort does abide? Thus for a season do we
flourish in the state of reconciliation, flourish like an herb nourished with
the dew of heaven, or like the tree, in David's Psalms, planted by the waters
side, the flowing river of Gods mercies. And now

And now perchance that we have spent some days,
Or else some weeks in these more sacred ways,
we must begin to take an unwilling farewell of this our happiness: for by this
time, that heart and courage against sin which we have got by Repentance, does
flag, grow less and less and decay, till we are defiled therewith as before:
the drowzie eye by little and little falls asleep it knows not how; and were it
not for the awaking again, 'twould scarce perceive whether it had slept or no:
so, even so, insensibly does sin creep on, and so subtly get within us, that
we can never almost feel it, till the sting thereof has awaken our consciences
unto Repentance. And then again perceiving the wickedness of our hearts, and
the foul enormity of sin, shall we in the bitterness of our souls, and
detestation of our iniquities, humble our selves even below the dust of the
earth, accounting us not worthy to be the vilest creatures under the cope of
heaven, that have been so wickedly perfidious against our Creator; and
therefore do we consider and earnestly resolve for the present, if it will
please him once more, even this once more to forgive us this our sin; surely
methinks all the devils in hell should not prevail to overtake us so again: for
this does always touch us nearest and trouble us most, that we are so
faithless unto God, and so full of hypocrisy before him, that whereas at our
last Repentance we had so syncerely, so heartily and so seriously promised
amendment of life, and also with our whole might and main to obey God and
please him; nevertheless, though our promise does seem to be never so hearty,
and with so full a purpose, yet the end and event does show that there is
hypocrisy in it, even great hypocrisy: for when temptation comes, and sin is
at hand, then do we falsheartedly and cowardly, not only not duly strive
against and resist it, but even basely yield unto it: So infirm is our best
ability, that our Savior has wisely taught us to pray to God that he would
not try our strength with temptation; O lead us not into ^emptation. But our
weakness, or rather wickedness, is yet greater, not only in so easily
suffering temptation to prevail over us, but also in our readiness to join
with it and help it forwards, hugging the very first motions thereof in our
breasts: so that we may say of our souls as David did of the wicked man, Psalm.
50. 18, Thou no sooner saw that thief, sin, but thou consentedst with him,
and bast been partaker, etc. Nay, many times we do go one degree farther
besides this hugging and hasty embracing of the evil motions of sin proposed
unto us: I say, One degree farther, even by seeking after temptation and
inviting of outward means to beget sin within us; just as those of whom Isaiah
speaks, that draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as it were with a
cart-rope. Well, notwithstanding,

Though sin does thus even dye our souls in grain,
Thy mercies, Lord, can purge out all the stain.
Before thee we are 'sham'd to show our face;
But all our hope is in thy saving grace.
notwithstanding, I say, the unhappie discouragements of sin, we shall embolden
our selves to offer up in this manner our resolution unto the Lord. O merciful
Father, if it would please thee to pass by our iniquities, and to forgive us
this time, sure now in good earnest we will perform our words; we will
certainly keep our promise, and set our selves more syncerely to it then
before: hitherto we have promised well, but now will we do well; knowing
verily, that it is not the sudden passion of a good desire that is sufficient,
but the constant habit of better Obedience: it is not enough to have the show
of godliness in our Mouths and bare Intentions, if we deny the true power and
effect thereof in our Lives and Conversations. We will now therefore act out
our intendment in the practice of Religion: whatsoever has been past, we will
now certainly be altogether in good earnest; there shall nothing hinder us.
Thus, even thus, so eager, so intentive, and so earnest shall we be sometimes,
that we desire forgiveness from God on no other terms, but as he does find
our amendment afterward: we will even be dealt withal according to our good
behavior; and not only so, but we shall be ready to imprecate a revenge of
our breach of promise with some due punishment upon our heads, and to expect
from God no otherwise to be merciful unto us then as that we do approve our
faithfulness unto him.

And yet for all this, this utmost resolution that may be, are we at no time as
good as our word; I say, At no time can we thoroughly withstand sin; it always
overmatcheth us; it is too strong for us to deal with sin, specia^ly of all the
rest, the sin of our nature, our darling and sweet a reeing sin: this therefore
exceeding unfaithfulness of ours, in that we do so vehemently promise that
which we do never accordingly perform, does at length methinks, at every time
of our Repentance, bring us so much the further out of credit with God; so that
we can hardly see how he should believe or forgive us any more, who have thus
often dealt so falsely with him: Nevertheless sin does press us so sore, that
we may not sit still in quiet, till we get ease by Repentance.

The Conscience, like a stomach that is displeased
With meats, does vomit till she can be eased.
In this case we shall be very loath perchance, and altogether ashamed to come
again into the presence of God, as Adam was, in Genesis 3. 10; yet necessity does
prick us forward; because, O Lord, whither shall we go from thy presence to
have any comfort in this our misery? to thee therefore must we needs come, O
thou Preserver of men: Necessity I sav, sets us forward, and at length so often
experience brings us to consider with our selves, and thus to close our
judgment more near to the matter, that since there must needs be something else
in it besides the secret hypocrisy of our own hearts, why so many promises
should vanish in the air, so many promises which for the present we cannot
perceive but that they do come most heartily and syncerely from us; Sure, we
shall think to our selves, there is some other difficulty in it; sure there is
somewhat else hinders that we cannot be as good as our words: and thus
considering, after a while we begin to feel out the knot, that indeed it is no
marvel why we could not perform that which we did promise, when as we did
promise that which we could not perform, that which of our selves we are no
ways able to bring to pass. Now therefore it is easy to see the folly of our
too-violent and vehement earnestness in saying we will do this, and we will do
that, the which is not in our power to effect: and therefore more duly
weighing within our selves that it is God alone who works both the will and
the deed, as Saint Paul speaks, we learn thereby more moderately and soberly to
say, O draw us, and w^ will run after thee: Lord, we would be better, we desire
to avoid sin; but help thou our desire. We may also in Saint Paul's words truly
say that we labor, labor in our minds to be rid of sin, and to attain some
better condition of life; and yet it is not we, but the grace of God which is
with us: it is our labor, and it is not ours: something there is, no question,
in us, to set forwards in the business; and yet this something, without God,
we do sufficiently find to be even as nothing: we may (as indeed we must) be
doing, and so we our endeavors; but let us know and be assured, that there can
be no harvest except God prosper it; for it shall be like the Corn growing upon
the house top, wherewith the Mower fills not his hand, neither he that
binds up the sheaves his bosom. Many times do we observe in the passage of
our life, that when we most strive, and are most eagerly set to resist sin, we
shall usually never a jot the less, but rather the more, be foiled with sin.
First, the cause thereof (as I judge) is our impaciency; for we may feel in our
selves, if we mark it, that herein we are not so patiently contented as we
should be to tarry the Lords leisure, but would make too much haste to be
freed, before it is Gods will we should. Saint Paul himself would fain be
delivered, but it was answered him, My grace is sufficient for thee. Again,
another cause may be, for that perchance we do attribute too much to our own
strength for the deliverance; and therefore God will let us see how weak we are
of our selves to do any thing as of our selves. Behold,

Our sins take being with us in the womb, they live with us from Cradle to
the Tomb; so weak are we and frail, to encounter with sin, the common
Enemy of Mankind, specially this bosom Enemy, our natural sin and
corruption; that it is well if through continuance of many years together, we
can make these Ague fits to break their course, It is to be noted, that every
one has his double Genius, his good and evil Angel to attend upon him: the
good Angel, I mean his natural inclination to some virtue more then
ordinary; the evil Angel, his natural inclination to some vice above the
rest: if we do keep out this evil Angel, this Devil of ours, this Satan,
and Deceiver, at arms end; that is, not suffer the temptation to enter in too
nearly unto us, we may perchance now and then escape the foil: But when once
he gets within us, sure we are then to be overcome; there is no grapling with
it in our own breasts And oh how often, and often, are we thus shamefully
foiled, and overcome* sometimes do we think to our selves, Lord shall we
never be free from this pollution of sin? We do hope this shall be the last
time, now we hope we shall do so no more: but yet still there is no Last,
there is no end with it; the comfort that we have is this, that as we do
often sin, so it is no long while that we continue in it without repentance:
and so then, as David says, Though heaviness may endure for a night, the
night of sin, yet Joy comes again in the morning, the morning of
repentance: Joy, and that a double Joy; Joy, by Reconciliation with God, and
Regeneration unto Righteou^nesse; and Joy by spiritual comfort in divine
Meditations: for the pleasing exercise of these Meditations, like a sweet
Companion in our heavenly Journey, is seldom long absent from our souls,
being full of amiable delight and recreation, refreshing the heart with
pleasure, and sugaring the affections; so that many times the familiar
conversation which we have with Heaven, and that Angelical illumination of
mind which is within us, does make our ravished souls, notwithstanding all
other difficulties, say unto themselves, as Iacoh did at the news of Joseph's
life and prosperity, It is enough: we are full, and so fully satisfied with
this heavenly Manna, even this very food of Angels, that here do we sit
down, and feed our selves, perhaps some hours at a time on this Celestial
sweetness.

Our silent thoughts now take their holy scem,
To walk about the new Jerusalem:
And mark ^ow there each precious stone does vy
Which may give brightest luster to the eye.
How do we desire to rest and dwell continually in this Paradise of
contemplation; even as Saint Peter did when he saw how fine it was to be in
the Mount, and said, Lord let us make three Tabernacles, and dwell here: to
dwell here, it were good indeed, but that verily may not be, there is no
dwelling in Heaven whilst we are in the flesh, no looking for a continual
joy, sweetness and content in this vale of misery; and therefore since that
through the whole scope of this life we are ordained rather to a religious
travail and labor, then to quiet and ease; doubtless the resting our selves
so overmuch in this satiety of Joy, does us more harm then good, in that it
makes us the more to forget to take the pains to go to an other Heaven
hereafter, who are thus as it were in a present Heaven here already; the
satisfying fruition of Contemplation, does call away our thoughts from the
necessary care of Mortification, flattering many times the due sense of sin,
and giving us, as I may say, a kind of Liberty and Privilege to do amiss.
For we shall thereby thus think to our selve, when we are so often and so much
over taken with sin; there is a fatal necessity of sinning in all men; and
therefore notwithstanding that how many, and whatsoever our sins be, we make
no doubt but it is well enough with us, and that we must needs be sufficiently
in the favor of God, to whom he does afford such divine familiarity, and such
heavenly Comforts; the which persuasion of our selves, although it may be true
in some sense; true I mean, that these inward gifts of mind are generally a
token of Gods favor; yet surely thus, I say, does the sweetness and
self-conceit thereof make us often times the more slack, not so diligently to
seek to mortify our corrupt affections, not so seriously thinking how this
illumination of mind, this Tree of Knowledge may bring forth the fruit of good
works; how to become humble, to become patient, to become chaste, to become
temperate, etc.

James and John were busying their minds about who should be on the right hand,
and who on the left of Christ in his Kingdom: but our Savior calls them nearer
home to the matter in hand; to think rather on suffering with him, and that
present Condition of difficulty which they must undergo, well knowing that the
gazing too much on that easy and sweet part of religion might make them to
omit the weightier, and more material part which is to bear the Cross, and
drink of his Cup.

Well, as experience of spiritual understanding grows on, so our fancy will
be apt to abide more constant in our meditations upon anything, and be more
abundantly fruitful with variety of considerations, specially if other
affairs give us Liberty to spend our time freely upon it; our Melancholy
thoughts perhaps for some months together will be mainly employed and taken
up; sometimes with the notions of this subject, sometimes of that; fot a while
it may be, we shall be altogether to contemplate of Death and Mortality, our
fancy will hang only on Graves, on Sculs, on Passingbels, sadly weighing how
truly it is said of David, that man is a thing of naught, his time passes away
like a shadow, and that of Job in his seventh Chapter, My days are swifter
then a Weavers shuttle, and are spent without hope. O remember that my life is
wind, mine eye shall no more see good, the eye of him that has seen me shall
see me no more, etc. ringing, ringing out the Knell of death to our souls, in
this or the like manner. O thou devouted soul,

Amidst the pleasures, joys, triumphs,
And hopes now in this life begun,
Think every morning that ere night,
Thy Sun may set, thy life be done.
Amidst the cares, the doleful griefs
And fears that on this life attend;
Think every morning that ere night,
Thy Sun may set, thy li^e may end.
Another while perchance we shall take pleasure in guilding over our thoughts,
with the glorious luster of the world to come, the beatificall vision, the
beauty of the Saints; according to that of Daniel, They that be wise, shall
shine as the Firmament, and they that turn many to righteousness, as the stars
for ever and ever. Sometimes our seriousness is very much affected with Bells;
the Melancholy rising and falling of the sound does methinkes lively imprint
into our fancy the Emblem of man's inconstancy, and the fading succession of
the times, and ages of this world, she wing that which S. John speaks in the 1.
Epistle, the second Chapter, How the world passes away, and the lustt thereof;
but he that does the will of God abides for ever; the warbling out of tunes
in our mind, the hearing or modul^ting of melodious songs which have been
ancient, will revive unto our fancy the times, and things that are past,
making us exceeding sad and dumpish at the remembrance of them and ready
sometimes to let fall tears; because that golden Flower of time, that
springtide of delight is so soon past and gone; three is an end with it; and
alas woe is us; it shall never, O never return again.

Farewell, adieu ye pleasant youthful hours,
Which did our life so sweetly crown with flowers.
Many times again does the consideration of Eternity, and that endless stat^
of the soul after this life, drive these or the like Meditat^ons intentively
to our hearts; O Lord how much does it concern us with most exact care, to
take heed how we order our selves whilst we live here; when as according to
our living in this world our souls must needs enter into such an endless, and
unalterable a condition, the very beholding of which, though but a far off,
does make all our sense as it were gidy and amazed at the exceeding height,
depth, and extent thereof. The sight of a dead mau, if peradventure anatomized,
and cut up before us, or else but shrouded lying prostrate, or the like, does
usually work so real an efficacy in our thoughts, that it deeply casts us
into a loathing abasement, and vile esteem of our selves; it may be for a good
while after confidering thus, that notwithstanding Man does carry such estate
with him, is so sumptuously adorned, and so full of magnificent show in this
life, yet is he in substance but a piece of carrion, even so contemptible a
thing, that he would disdain being alive to but touch himself if he were dead.
O man, how can thou be proud, that art nothing but a bag of dung, a sink of
filth and corruption: me thinks the very meanest creatures are more happy then
we; for lo O Lord they continue perfect in that state thou have created them;
they live not in sin against their Maker, they die in innocence; but man
alas, unhappy man lives in sin, dies in trouble: O finne thou art the worst
of all evils; thou art worst then death, worse then Hell, sure better were it
to have no being at all, then that our being should be offensive to that God,
which has bestowed it on us.

In the time of plague and infectious sickness in lik^ manner do our
Meditations more consideratively enlarge themselves; how are our thoughts then
not a little swollen up with sadness and grief, at the tender apprehension of
the solitary, and forsaken estate of those poor souls, who are imprisoned,
and shut up in the infected houses; thinking thus with our selves, O Lord how
happy are we on whom the Sun shines thus merrily: the Sun of Gods favor;
we have health, we have Liberty, we have Plenty of all things at our hearts
desire: but they poor wretches are enclosed within the shadow of death; their
feet like good Iosep^s are in the stocks, and the Iron thereof enters into
their souls; the hardness of misery makes their very hearts to bleed; for
(as Job says) Tbe arrows of the Almighty are within them; and the poison
thereof drinks up their spirits: O how can we forget to have compassion on
such misery as this!

The se^ious deepnesse of our mind does also thus frequently close up in our
Meditations, the departing day: and Lord thou have added one day more unto this
our life, which thou might long ere this have shortened, and cut off; Lord
prepare us for our end; and make us willinger to die then yet we are; that
when as we shall have brought all our days to a period, as we have now this
day, we may be ready and well content, to depart out of this world to thine
eternal mercy; and that we be patiently resolved, that this face, these
hands, and this whole body of ours, after a while it may put on corruption, be
clothed with blackness and deformity: and so with the fatal necessity of all
Mankind, naturally to be composed into Mortality, and be gathered to our
Fathers to rest with them in the dust, until thine appointed time.

Until that shrill awaking Trumpet sound,
At the last day to raise us from the ground.
The Melancholy Man is a man full of thoughts, his fancy is as it were
always in a constant Motion: no sooner do we discharge our brains of these
diviner thoughts and meditations; specially our mind being at leisure from
worldly things; but forth with it is in action, either with some idle, or ill
employment; either we are building of Castles in the air, or framing of
Vtopiaes, and the Idea's of one thing, and of another, of Monarchies of
Paradises, and such like pleasing dreams of fancy; or else we are on the
otherside snarling our thoughts with the toyls of sin.

Each sense of ours to the heart,
Proves Traitor to let in,
Temptation with his fatal dart,
The Harbinger of sin.
How often thus do; the allurmeents of pleasure involve our minds in a
restless unquietness, until we give satisfaction thereunto? how often does
the provocations of lust follow our thoughts, till we commit Adultery with the
Baby of our own fancy? how often again does impatiency haunt us till we are
engaged in wrath and distemper? how often does the love of Riches torment us
into the consent of injustice?

This is the difference we may find in our souls, betwixt good and evil;
when we are affected with good things we are ready, as I say, to pour out
our brains into an abundance of Consideration thereupon: but when as we go
to make use thereof in the practice of our lives, such difficulties and
impossibilities do stand in the way, that it is even against our stomach then
to t^inke upon it: when contrariwise we are affected with evil things: it may
be we are not ready to spend so many thoughts upon them: but we may easily
observe our pronenesse to imprint them in our actions. For good; we are as the
fruitless Fig Tree, all whose sap is but enough to bear leaves, none for
fruit; so that in manner all our goodness goes out into thoughts, meditations
and desires, little or none at all into practice and performance; but for
evil, we are more fruit then leaves, the practick part of our souls does
here out-goe the speculative.

Facilis descensus av A^rni. Nature has made it easy for us to go downwards
in the paths of death and destruction; and yet notwithstanding by Gods mercy
sin does not overcome us to fulfill it in the lusts and full swing thereof; we
are not at ease and rest with it, it does discontent and trouble us; there is
no perfect quietness in our souls whilst it prevails within us; although
sometimes for want of careful diligence it takes such advantage of us, that
it is long and difficult ere we can wind our selves out of the snare thereof. I
say long and difficult ere we can thoroughly untie those knots of perverseness,
and impiety, which Satan when he gets time and liberty, does cunningly
contrive within us: Here we may note the wisely-confirm'd maturity of years and
better acquaintance wi^h the nature of things, as it does help forward our
continuance in grace, in that it becomes longer (being made clean by
repentance) ere we shall now fall back into sin. I mean into more gross
and frequent sins, so likewise it advantageth our continuance in sin, in
that it becomes the longer also (being in the state of wrath) ere we can be
duly reconciled again by true repentance; and the reason hereof without
question is chiefly to be conceived, for that ripeness of age makes nature
more solid, stiff and unmoveably set in its course, being the right subject of
constant seriousness and Melancholy; as on the other-side, youth is vainly
wavering, and according to the Poet, Cereu^ in vitium slecti, etc. Like wax
that is quickly wrought to any shape,
And pliable to any alteration.


Again touching the settlednesse of our courses in this spi^ituall condition
of the soul, it is always to be observed, that the more unhappily finne does
prevail over us, and the longer it does continue with us, the more we are
disheartened, and loath to repent; by reason that difficulty and bad success
does daunt the courage, and deter from that, which easiness and happy
proceeding do make to delight in; thus likewise in other things it is usually
seen, that he who thrives delights to be a good Husband; prosperity backs on
the endeavor, and sweetness a man's labor. In like manner also, when we have
good success in Religion, it makes us the more religious; the be ter we
thrive in it, the more we are in love with it; that which we have already
quickens the appetite, and whets on the affection with a greater longing,
having truly tasted how good it is: we can with David say, Oh how sweet are thy
words unto our taste; yea, sweeter then honey unto our mouth: our soul can
then handsomely reilish all holy duties, and religious exercises, and we do
delight in the performance thereof; as in particular, the frequenting the
Church, the hearing of Sermons; the holy Law and Testimonies of the Lord do
not now seem a burden but as a pleasure unto us.

O Lord me thinks thy words to us do shine,
A sweet direction in the paths divine.
In receiving the word, we can suck out a secret sweetness, and comfortable
benefit there from, it becomes nourishable unto us, the Rod of Gods justice,
and the staff of his mercies bound up together in his book, do pleasantly
lead forth our souls, besides the waters of Comfort; but specially is our
Melancholy soul most in imately affected with such Scripture, which presses
home the due understanding of our momentany and mortal Condition, and with
funeral exercises, which more lively set forth the same, Solomon, says, It is
better to go into the house of mourning, etc. and he gives the cause, for that
is the end of all men, and the living will lay it to his heart; we shall I say
be thus always apt on such occasions to fix the sad consideration of death
most nearly to us; and sure me thinks there can be no thoughts that do
concern us more then those of our end of our last day; neither can we bestow
any of the time of our life better, or to more purpose, then in the digging of
our Graves; I mean the providing for our end; for though perhaps we may live
a great deal longer; yet verily we are no men of this world; thy grace O Lord
has so removed our affections from these transitory things; that with Saint
Paul, We are daily dying in our thoughts, and desiring rather to be dissolved,
and to be with Christ, then to live here; not waiting, expecting, and looking
for a long continuance upon earth, but far more for a happy departure.

Life's not our joy, at death's our chiefest aim,
By life we lose, by death we hope to gain.
Also in this prosperity of Religion do we always apprehend a more gracious
satisfaction in our prayers, and supplications; the spirit of devotion so
fills and fatteth our soul with goodness, that we are wont abundantly to
rejoice therein above all other things; striving to lift up our souls often in
private devotion; in so much, that if leisure serve, we shall be ready to
offer up the incense of our zeal unto God, in admiring his mercy, setting
forth our unworthiness, desiring farther his grace and heavenly benediction,
to grow stronger and stronger in his fear and love; and the like requests and
Petitions often times, even often times peradventure in a day, not only in
short ejaculations, but even in pretty la^ge forms of expression; for no
sooner do we feel the sacred fire of Devotion flaming upwards, and aspiring
unto heaven; but presently we seriously betake our thoughts to prayer and
thanksgiving; by the way it may be here considerable, whether for our constant
devotion in private, as morning and evening, and the like; many short
ejaculations are more fit to carry up our affections unto God; or otherwise
some one long and large continued form, the former way through its often
cuttings off being in dangsr to make us degenerate into alazie and forgetful
seldomnesse of praying, the latter thorough its tedious continuance into an
unadvised dullness in praying: and therefore not much approving of either,
between both of these, two or three moderate forms, with an acute and strong
winged brevity, are me thinks more convenient to present our cause before the
Almighty in an unvariable constancy, and in a piously devout apprehension; but
to keep on our way: Now again in like manner are we most divinely studious
and diligent; to make the full benefit and advantage of that time, which is
properly set apart for Gods service, laboring to build up others, and to be
built up strong in our selves; as by hearing, exhorting, and discoursing with
truly pious and religious men, rejoicing in this comfortable Communion of
Saints; I mean the communicating acquaintance, and assisting fellowship of our
inner man, one with another; or else again perhaps more privately managing our
souls by reading; as in the Bible, Practice of Piety, Gerrards Meditations, or
the like; by Meditating Consulting, and walking with the Almighty in spiritual
thoughts* ending the Sabbath days usually in such high and serious actions;
occupying our selves in that only which may tend either to improve Knowledge,
try Faith, exercise Charity, examine Conscience, and the like, communing thus,
as David has it, secretly in our own hearts, in our Chambers, and being still
quiet from outward perturbations, thereby effectually to entertain these
heavenly Guests: And therefore duly apprehending this Celestial happiness of
the mind, shall we use to long for the Sabbath before it come, preferring it in
esteem above all the other days of the week, and calling it, as in the 58. of
Isaiah, the thirteenth verse, A delight unto us, the Holy of the Lord, etc.
accounting the holy rest of this Sabbath here to be a lively Emblem, and as it
were a taste of that glorious rest in the eternal Sabath hereafter.

The due frequenting, and solemn use of four a clock prayers on Saturdayes
afternoon, is me thinks a worthy sweet, and seasonable exercise, as being an
excellent preparation against the Sunday, to lay aside the thoughts, the cares
and business of our Calling; and truly were it generally more observed, and
taken notice of, no doubt Religion might fare far the better for it, but sure.

The Root of evil is the love of Gold,
And that is it Religion is so cold,
Because we cannot spare the time from gain,
For Heaven therefore we take but little pain.
To go on as this irradiating beam of divine grace, does cloth our minds with
a light and delight in spiritual things; whereby not only our thoughts ate set
a work on purer objects, but also our outward behavior and conversation is
ready to do its part too in Religion, our tongues not vain or offensive, but
aiming their words for the most part to pious and good discourses, aptly
applying ordinary things in our talk to some godly use, or religious
observation; our feet not swift to go after folly; nor our hand dealing with
deceit; I say as this illuminative beam of divine Grace does enlighten our
thoughts, making us full of high and heavenly wisdom in all our ways; so in
like manner it warmeth our affection toward others; melting the bowels of our
compassion into a more then superficial charitableness, and loving mindedness
unto all men, whereby with tenderness we always construe their lives and
actions in the better sense, and do sincerely wish, pray for, and desire even
the salvation of every one; but specially zealous of the good of our friends,
as of our own; and therefore are we almost ready with David, many times to cry
out, O Absalom my Son, my Son, my Father, my Child, my Wife, my Brother, my
Friend, poor soul, would to God I had dyed for thee: and as sorrowing, so
again rejoicing for no other prosperity so much as for their souls happiness;
and that too, not so much for any private relation betwixt them and us, as for
that we know it is most, ^cceptable unto God, because we do now verily make an
higher account of Gods glory, then of our own good; and therefore do we as it
were bear on our shoulders the care of Gods people, heartily praying that all
as well as our selves may thus taste and see how gracious the Lord is, how full
of mercy and compassion; so true, find we that of Saint John, in 1. Epistle,
the 4. Chapter, That he who loves God, must love his neighbor also.

This is the Touchstone to a sacred soul,
Whereby the truth of her Religion's known;
If that her neighbors grief she can condole,
With as due sense as if it were her own.
Bonum est sui diffusivum, It Is the nature of true goodness to be willing to
have others participate of it; sure then he is not really good in himself, who
is nigardly straightened in his bowels of affection toward others; but he who
has perfectly received within himself that good which comes down from the
Father, and Fountain of all Goodness, cannot but be so full in himself, in
his own heart, that he must needs run over with a liberal good will and
affection of good unto others. His Liberality of affection unto others, does
also reach ir self forth into a godly patience, in bearing the injuries and
wrongs of men, we can be reasonable well content, to put up these sufferings,
which the malice of our fellow creatures does inflict, because we know them to
be sent to us by Gods appointment, and we have so much trust and confidence in
his love toward us; that we cannot think, he will suffer any thing to light
on us for our hurt, with whom we are so dearly joined in our inner men;
believing that as he has sent affliction for our advantage, so he will not
suffer us to be tempted above what we shall thorough his mercy be able to
undergo; that he will be sure to have that care of us, as to take it away
again in due season, when it shall be most convenient for us. And here O Lord
considering thy diligent care over us, in all the dangers and chances of this
life, we cannot but truly say, O what is man, what is man that thou art thus
mindful of him, or the Son of man that thou visitest him with such abundant
of loving kindness? one would think with the Poet, that Non vacat exiguis
rebus adesse Iovi.

That then O Lord who art so far above the earth, so far surpassing, that
innumerable number of stars in the Heaven; the least of which is much bigger
then many worlds; nay, so far surpassing those Heavens of stars, and many
millions of Heavens; besides even farther then all the capacities of mankind
are able any ways to conceive or imagine; one would think I say in humane
reason, that thou that art so exceeding and infinitely great and glorious,
should not be at leisure so much as to think on such poor atoms, such
contemptible nothings as we are; much less to take notice of us with such
affection of love. O Lord the greatness of thy love is not to be imagined.

We may take notice in our souls experience, that the prosperous success of
religion, and the long uninterrupted continuance of grace within us; as it
makes us bold with God thorough his mercies; so it makes us also humble; bold
I say, not proud; although nature be very frequently apt and endeavoring in
us to take too much upon her, and to mistake Gods gifts and graces for her own
proper powers faculties and endowments; as bold, so I say again, it makes us
humble in our own selves and weakness; such is the amiable brightness of the
divine Essence, that the more we apprehend the infiniteness, and purity
thereof, the more we seem in our selves to admire, to want and to thrist after
it, and even with unsatiable love to desire perfection for this nearer
apprehension of the Almighty, who gives us light more clearly to see the
grosnesse, and obliquity of our own imperfections, whereby with humility we
loath and abhor what we are of our selves, so that our least sins in the time
of grace seem greater then our greatest in the time of sin. And therefore
do we now use at such time with a more then ordinary love and admiration, to
value Gods blessings at a higher rate, our thoughts being full of thankfulness
for that plenty of goodness, which at other times perhaps we can scarce
think on. O Lord if we consider it, thy mercies, thy sweet mercies are
renewed unto us, not only every morning, but every moment; what minute is there
that we are not greatly beholding unto thee, O Lord.

In that we live, in that we draw our hreath,
In that we are not in eternal death,
It Is all thy mercies, as liberty, and wealth.
Our food, our raiment, and our saving health.
Thus far the prosperous gale of Gods favor does carry us pleasantly on in
the course of Religion; but when the storm arises, we are presently
overwhelmed with the boisterous Waves of wrath, of lust, of distrustful fear,
of impatiency, and the like; so that we were never formerly so blessedly
refreshed with that heavenly calm, as we are now again miserably troubled,
and tossed with this unhappy tempest; there is no constancy to be looked for in
this life* but specially is our unhappy nature most unconstant to persist in
these more divine, and sin-forsaking courses; it may be we may with sufficient
deliberation vow, resolve and go on a while, to use such and such means, and
helps as perchance Fasting, Watching, or the like, for the prevention of our
frequent falls, and to keep on in a less floating, and uncertain manner in
our way to Heaven: but alas, usually either these courses are quickly left of
again, or else they be so dull and lazily performed, that the continuance of
them is to little purpose, so that three or four months at a time is a great
while for us to be free men, lively and at our own disposal ^ the service of
God; and then doubtless after our old course must we return with shame, like
fools unto the stocks; or as says the Apostle Like the dog unto hi^ vomit,
and the Sow unto her wallowing in the mire; but now the wonted use and long
acquainted experience of sinning in time does dull the sense of conscience;
making sin not to be so strange, and fearful a thing unto ^^ as in former
times in the minority of our days; O youth, thou thou I say, art the prime and
golden age for Religion, thou art that lovely one, whom the Lord delights in,
even fairer then the tents of Kedar, or the Curtains of Solomon. To go on,
heretofore the terror thereof (I mean of grosser sins) would stattle us
like a Bug bear, and make our souls quickly tender, and sore with the sense
of grief; but at lengthin continued use, what through the subtilty of Satan,
and our accustomed familiarity with sin, we are for the most part nothing at
all so deeply affected with it, we have been now so long habituated thereunto,
that we can easily sit down and sleep in it, I say sleep and perchance fall
into a dead sleep to, unless we take great heed of the danger.

Unless with good and well advised care,
In its due time we can thereof beware.
For we shall find, that unless we do forthwith in short time after the
sin, that gross and conscience-daring sin that we commit, take advantage
of the sadness which it leaves in our souls, to convert it into repentant
grief, and that it work a settled and serious dejection in us, it is seldom
that we shall so soon, or so conveniently meet again with the like helpefull
means to lift our selves out of this pit of destruction. When as the cloud of
sin settles for a while upon our souls; and that we walk as it were blind
fold in the darkness thereof; it is observeable, that yet notwithstanding we
may peradventure in that mean space now and then by the by a little drowsily
shug up our selves with a lazy kind of ill will against our sinful
wretchedness, and with a dreaming detestation, and abhorring of our
unrighteousness; but all that does us little good in the end, if our
repentance be not thoroughly and lively performed, if we do not even with
violence break off the bonds of iniquity, and cast away her cords from us, it
never does discharge our consciences, or ease us perfectly of the guilt of
sin.

The Occasional means which are wont to bring us to a truly deep and serious
repentance are diverse; many times that sense of sadness, which as I say,
sin, greater sins, leaves behind in the soul immediately after the
committing, is a special and effectual help to work our delivery from the
danger thereof. Sometimes also this thing or accident puts it in us sometimes
that, as the trerible fierceness of Thunde^, Lightning, Tempests, and the like
fearful dangers will perchance strike this serious consideration to our
hearts, Lord what a case are we in, if we should be presently snatched away with
this sudden judgment, being now in our sins? and therefore if it will please
God to spare us this time, sure we will thoroughly repent, and stand in no
such hazard hence forward. Sometimes the apprehension of Mortality, and the
shortness of our life will bring us to think with our selves that oh how
shall we put off our reconciliation with God any longer; for we see that we be
all as at the point of death, every day, one or other is departing from us to
his everlasting Mansion: we know with the Apostle, that the end of all things
is at hand, that there is no abiding for us here; and therefore what manner of
men ought we to be, how diligent and careful to make our peace with God, and
prevent the worst whilst we are sure of time? Sometimes again the afflictions
of this world, and the consideration of the vain pursuit of all earthly
things, with the which men do so generally rejoice and triumph; as when we see
the rich man swelling in his credit, the swaggering Gallant shining in his
clothes, the honorable man deifying himself in his state;

When that we see men foolishly bestow
Their whole affections on these things below.
This I say does call home our thoughts to make up our accounts, and hope for
Heaven, for that we see there is nothing but toylesome and deceitful vanity
upon earth. Sometimes also our preparation for the Lords Supper, when we
undertake the punctual and due examining of our selves for that holy duty,
does cause us so to dig out our consciences into a bleeding sorrow, that we
can rightly perform thar cheerful resolution of the mind which is requisite
to an hearty renewning repentance, and amendment of life. O Repentance,
Repentance (under Christ Jesus) thou only Savior of Mankind, who can value thy
worth? thou art to the soul of man above all the gold and precious stones in
the world; as rich as Heaven it self; how many noble and great men have
desired to see thy face, and could not see it? and yet behold thou do use to
dwell in the lowest dust, even with the humble, broken and contrite heart. And
again, thou soul that enjoyest this most rich and happy treasure: O for Gods
sake, I say for Gods sake, slight it not; but hug it, joyfully embrace it,
and keep it close unto thee, it is the richest Jewel that can com^ from
Heaven.

It is that Crown that Saints hereafter wear,
When they in perfect glory shall appear.
The opinion it is perhaps of some men, that for those sins which we have
heretofore truly repented us of, we need not at any time account our selves
guilty afterward, because the score is discharged, and as it were struck off
in the sight of God: a judgment doubtless not without its reason, and yet me
thinks not altogether consentaneous to experience; for though in repentance, it
may be we do not usually charge our thoughts with so particular and fresh a
remembrance of our ancient sins, as of these which we have committed since
our last humiliation; yet shall we ever hold our selves to stand guilty, and in
danger of all our sins, even those very sins which we had particularly
repented of before, because we do take our selves to be in such terms with
God, that though hedoth fully pardon us, yet is it always on condition that
wec should perform that Covenant which we make with him of better obedience;
and then the breach of this Coveant, upon condition of the performance whereof
(as we conceive) we are forgiven, does render us liable again to Gods justice
for all our sins; I say the Covenant which we make with him of better
obedience. For it is sure and certain, that we do never truly repent, but
that we do make or renew this Covenant with God to obey him better afterward.
Without question a Christans li^e is nothing but a continual rising and
falling, a falling by sin, a rising by repentance.

Our life's a race, wherein the surest feet
In running long with many falls do meet.
And though some men carry themselves in such a steady constant course that
they never fall much; yet many men fall more shrewdly at sometimes of their age
then at some; and most men without question at one time or other fall
dangerously, and without Gods special grace irrecoverably; As there is a time
when David rejoices, saying, surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all
the days of my life, and I will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever; So
there is also another time when he says, there is no health in my flesh,
because of thy displeasure, neither is there any rest in my bones, by reason of
my sin: my wounds stink, and are corrupt through my foolishness, etc. Sin
makes such deep wounds in the soul, that if we foolishly negl^ct to dress
them often, and tent them thoroughly, they quickly fester inwardly, and prove
dangerous; and therefore justly eonsidering this dangerousnesse in the state of
the soul to be usual amongst men, and specially in David, that holy man, that
more then ordinary man, even that man made aftet Gods own heart; as also
remembering the solicitous heed and care of that more excellent vessel of
holiness S. Paul over himself, in the words of his in the ninth to the
Corinthians, the 27. verse, Lest that by any means when I bave preached unto
others, I my self should be a Castaway; it makes us always, methinkes nor
without cause to stand in fear of our spiritual condition: not daring in our
best comforts so to set our selves at rest, as though we were wholly out of
the reach of unhappiness; the often trial of our patience, our wisely
considered experience in heavenly things, together with the comfort of the
Scripture, according to Saint Paul in his fifth and fifteenth Chapters to the
Romans, May give us a strong and confident hope, that we shall not enter into
condemnation, but thorough his mercy be saved in the day of the Lord; for we
are boldly persuaded that we are in Gods favor; and persuaded too, I say
persuaded, that neither life nor death, nor Angels, nor any other creature,
shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is in Christ our Lord;
and yet for all that, we know we are now but on the sea, not in the Haven;
the sea of danger, not the Haven of perfect safety; we cannot therefore be high
minded in our thoughts, but fear, fear and carefully take heed, lest we fall;
specially when as we are conscious to our selves of a nature which is so weak,
so apt, and ready to fall into the greatest, and most dangerous sins. O Lord
and most merciful Father, there is nothing perfect in this life: here we have
some joy, and some sorrow, some assurance, some fear, some knowledge, some
ignorance mingled together; for now we know but not in part, says the
Apostle, hereafter we shall know to the full now our soul is only persuaded
of her future state; she takes some remote glimpse as it were of her
salvation, but no full sight thereof: for we are saved by hope (says Saint
Paul) but hope that is seen is not hope; for what a man sees, why does he
yet hope for hereafter? when she has finished her course, and fulfilled her
days she shall fully know and be resolved in the matter; and as we hope to be
thoroughly satisfied with the everlasting enjoyment and therefore for the
present condition of this our life, we may take up that expression of the Poet,
Ante obitum nemo supremaque funcra faelix. None be called happy rightly may,
Before his last and dying day.


Ye pious and devout souls that are now in the state of grace, bless, O
bless the Lord your God and magnify his name with all humility; for what is
it that all of us are not damnable wretches, and most unhappy miscreants, but
only his mercy? What have we at all that we have not received? O let us then
take heed, take heed I say lest our hearts be hardened with stubbornness and
self opinion; has not the Potter power over his Clay? may not the spiritual
Husbandman break off the Olive branches, and graft them in at his pleasure? O
the depth of the riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how
unsearchable are all his judgments! and his ways past finding out, for who
has known the mind of the Lord? or who has been his Counselor? And thus
have we briefly dispatched, the first and better part of our business; I mean
this History of the soul endued with grace.

Now then our thoughts must leave their Eagle slight,
And down a while top ^ddle in the dirt,
Behold and see what policy and might,
The Devil can show forth to do us hurt.
When God lets loose this roaring Lion, O what destruction does he bring upon
us; how strongly and cunningly does he hold fast our souls in sin? how
intricately are we entangled by his snares, that we cannot get out? the heart
(says Jeremy) is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked: who can
know it? indeed it is a most hard matter to find out all the strength and
subtilty of sin in a wicked soul; for the Devil when he gets possession
specially in a more Melancholy heart; like a Wont, makes his works few above
ground; but has many secret passages and Maeanders under: the close contrived
cranies whereof, although we cannot fully search and tracke out; yet God
willing we shall the more open and principal courses, in this ensuing Part.

Of the Soul ensnared in sin.
NEmo repent fuit turpissimus; Sin creeps on by degrees; but woe is us to
what an exceeding height, and to what intolerable an increase is it able to
grow? grow I say, heavier then the sand of the Sea in weight, and more in
number; even sufficient to fill whole volumes: for who is able to find out all
his iniquities, or reckon up his sins? who knows, says David, how often he
offends? Sin in a wicked soul is so unmercifull a thing, that it has no
limits nor bounds of extent; it is that overflowing Flood in the Scriptures,
which drowned the old inhabitants of the earth; it is that raging sulphurous
fire which burnt up the Cities of the ungodly; or if you will that Phaetons
fire amongst the Poets, which enflamed the whole world; for no sooner do we
let at liberty our affections from the yoke of discipline and good order, from
that narrow path, and rule of virtue,

In cujus medio tutissimus ibis,

O man, in the midst of which thou safely might go, but presently we act out
the true Moral of Phaetons Fable. Phaeton let loose the reins to his frolic
Horses, and they carry him (as the fiction goes) to the firing of the world,
and his own destruction; we do but let go the reins to our will and
affections, and they carry us likewise headlong to our unavoidable destruction,
and to the setting on fire of this Microcosme, this little world of ours; here
we may well note, that Religio a religando vere dicta est, Religion is truly so
called from tying back the affections; and therefore now when once conscience
does thus let slip the reins of discipline, and its due care of the soul, our
little world, as I say, is all on fi^e; our thoughts, desires, and affections
being as it were without God and his fear, are altogether flaming with the
distempered heat of worldly cares, of ambitious projects, of lustful courses,
of impatio^t distractions, and the like; these things do freely range abroad
in the mind, do take their pleasure and pastime therein.

Like School boys, when their Master's gone away,
They presently are at their roguish play:
Just so, when that the Conscience leaves to rule
Our thoughts, the Devil forthwith keeps the School.
And because our inside is thus unframed with disorder, that we neglect
Religion, and leave off the necessary managing and manuring of the soul by
repentance; sin by little and little, becomes habitual unto us, an ordinary
and unregarded thing; so that in a while Melancholy making the mind more eager
and intentivel^ let in all its courses, what either by being drawn to the
impatient expectation of what we would have, by feeding our selves with the
pleasing fruition of that we do enjoy, or vexing our selves with the fear of
what may befall us, or with the grief of that which does already disaffect us,
it is so, that for the most part there is very little space wherein our phancie
is not in action with some one of these; such and such like things do so
seriously take up our time, and so earnestly employ our thoughts that our minds
can hardly get leave at any time to be at leisure for the common duties of
Christianity: for when at our necessary oppor^unities, we go about to read
the Scriptures, to meditate on good matters, or pray unto the Almighty; how
exceeding difficult is it for us to draw off our imagination from those other
things, and set it upon these? or if we do take it off, it is but as in haste
with a longing to be at them again: As also that little praying, meditating, or
reading which we do at any time now employ our selves in, does altogether
methinks pass away without any sweetness in it; it has no more relish to us
(for the most part) then even as it were a rotten stick, or a thing of naught;
so superficially does it slip away on the outside of our souls.

In every thing, it is the delightful sweet
Thereof, that does with our affection meet.
I say, It is the sweetness thereof that joins it closely to the thoughts, and
unites it to the affections; and therefore these duties and the like being so
out of relish with us, we have but little mind on them, we coldly regard them,
and in a manner wholly neglect them; or if peradventure the fashion of the
times tend thereunto, and that we can smoothly stop up the mouth of
truth-knowing Conscience with some daubing satisfaction: we may, I say, we may
some of us retain the outside, when we have lost the inside; we may seem to be
delighted with an oral formality, when as it is no whit cordial within us; like
unto shallow brooks that make a great noise with a little water; the shadow
still continuing with us, whilst the substance is stolen away. But to go on in
that way which is most usual: I say, The substantial deepnesse of true inward
pleasure and delight in divine things being rooted up, pulls away with it the
outward use of reading, meditating, and the like: so that we are seldom
conversant in these things, although the liberty of our time give us
opportunity for it never so conveniently: for it is to be noted, a truly
willing mind can find out shreds enough of time to bestow in that way, even
in the busiest and most industrious Calling. And as for that more excellent
gift of the Spirit, Prayer, that Princely Diadem amongst all heavenly graces,
from whence all other divine blessings do borrow some luster and advantage; how
far is the familiar acquaintance thereof gone from our souls? when as all our
private devotion is now posted off to the public; and that also so slenderly
and coldly performed by us, that the practice thereof is held on, it may be,
rather for fashion sake then devotion; more with the motion of our lips then
with the affection of the heart; following the public exercise rather for fear
of shame and reproach; I say, rather to keep touch and turn with the common
Custom, then out of any religious care or good will thereunto: for though the
Sabbath be but once a week, yet shall we most times be then glad, if occasion
be handsomely offered us to 'bide at home, and omit that duty.

It is too wet, or else it is too cold;
And we can pray even as well here as there:
These poor excuses, they are quickly told,
When as God knows we pray not any where.
Again, as Prayer, so the Hearing of the Word is as much neglected by us, or as
ill used, when we now sit at Sermons, it is more perchance with a censorious
ear, like Moderatours to give judgment, and pass our opinion, rather then as
diligent Auditors, with humble hearts to receive instruction. If the Preacher
does but meanly perform his exercise, we are then ready to slight it, as a
thing below us, and not worth our heeding: but if he go beyond us in his
Learning and good parts, we are on the other side peradventure disconted in our
selves, for that he exceeds the reach of our capacity and qualification: for
lo, we feel and find as in this, so in all other things (it is worth
observation) we find, I say, that Nature is always so partial unto it self,
that it is never thoroughly pleased, and fully contented, except every thing
succeed to the setting up of it self, and its own advancement; and therefore
that it has got the advantage, it takes its full selfe-contenting pleasure,
and recreation without control; diverting the whole course of our thoughts,
words, and actions to serve its turn herein: yet for although conscience has
lost its prevayling command within us, nevertheless it cease not ever and
anon to give us a call, and perhaps amidst our chiefest and securest sins,
awaken us with a deep touching item, and remembrance of our selves; but only
flashing up our eyes we fall asleep again: and thus act on the story.

Navita de ventis, de tauris narrat arator,
Enumer at miles vulnera, pastor oves.
The Plowman of his ox,
The Ship-man tells his mind,
The Shepherd keeps his sheep,
The Soldier wounds in mind.
Every one, says the Poet, thinks and talks most of that which he has most
to do with, and does most affect; and here nature principally begins to play
her part, and show her affection; our self accusing, and impatient mind cannot
abide the rehearfall of miseries; unhappiness and affliction; the hideous
news of such things is too rough for our tender thoughts to meddle with;
whatever come of it hereafter, we must by all means put off for the present,
as far as may be from us that day of the Lord, and righteous retribution of
his most just vengeance: again, also the deadness of heart makes our soul
to loath abhor and leave off to hear and speak of holy and pious subjects, as
the dispraise of vice, the commendation of virtue; the manner and means of
Mortification; of Sanctification, of our Redemption, and the like; snuffling
away all such matters if it be possible, into other discourse: because we feel
our hearts so dead and rotten inward, that these things do nothing else but
secretly speak the Condemnation and shame of our own lives: and therefore
when as out of the abundance of the heart (as says our Savior) the mouth
speaks, therefore I say on the other side, our thoughts being always. for the
most part vainly and outwardly disposed; our delight is to be talking of vanity
all the day long, to be asking after, and telling of news, whereby to claw our
idle fancy with, or it may be questioning how rich others be, what condition
they are in, how they do thrive and the like; our Melancholy thoughts mainly
laboring with emulation against others: and such verily is always the
rivality and inward striving betwixt equals, or those that be near equals in
the same kind, that sure I cannot think that it is a quality much less then
natural unto all mankind, so to contend in affectation of desire; this
emulation was there amongst the Patriarks when they sold Joseph, and amongst
the Apostles when they vie'd who should be the greatest: and thus our minds
being so wholly set on earthly things, and things of this world, it is seldom
that we can think upon those men that are in a little better prosperity then
our selves, but with the eye of envious emulation, counting it as so much the
worse for us, and an eyesore to our state and reputation that they go beyond
us; and again taking it as it were somewhat the better for us; and applauding
our selves in content therewith, if they fall out and appear to be somewhat
under the condition that we our selves are in; thus as we do enviously think
that too much which our successful neighbors have, and enjoy, and swell
after their happiness with indignation at our own; so also are we many times
unhappy in our own happiness without any comparison at all, or in respect of
others; but merely in our selves, and in regard of our own bottomless
desires, thinking all too little that we have, although we do not think of any
that have more; just as the Poet, in a similitude of covetous men,

Quo plus sunt potae plus sitiuntur aquae, The more they drink, the more they
are athirst: so may we truly say of our selves, in the words of the Prophet
Habakkuk, Chap. 3, We enlarge our desire as hell and as death, which cannot be
satisfied. What we have already, methinks, serves but as the sauce to set an
edge to the stomach to receive more, as if we had a consuming Wolf in our
breast, or those two daughters of the Horsleech which Solomon speaks of in Prove.
30, which have no other language but continual crying out, Give, give more
still, and yet more, and yet no content.

He is not rich whose mind does keep him poor;
He only has enough, that seeks no more.
Nay farther, our apprehension is apt to be so subtly deluded with this vice,
that, as if avarice were a virtue, we shall be ready to think and say, of any
one that is an hard and unreasonably-neer man in his dealings and commerce with
others, and that will stand out for the utmost farthing in every thing, though
it be never so justly due and to be yielded unto; of such a one, I say, who
has cunningly learnt to oppress the poor man by the advantage of his
necessity, we shall be ready thus to think and say, I warrant he is wise
enough, he will look to himself, he will not be fooled of his goods; taking his
example as a lawful pattern for us to imitate. But of one that is a
conscionable, honest and plain-dealing man, that will not stand so eagerly, nor
practice such policy for gain; we are likely to judge him as an easy fool,
and not wise enough to live in the world. But O alas, one day, one day
peradventure we shall see that the wisdom of this world is foolishness with
God; acknowledging our mistake herein as they did, who once said in the
sorrowful conviction of their souls: We fools counted this man's life (this
quiet honest man's life) madness, and his end to be without honor: but see!
how is he numbered amongst the children of God, and his lot is amongst the
Saints: therefore have we erred. When the soul (having forsaken God) begins to
go alone, and to trust to its own strength, so full do we presently grow with
superfluity of outward Sense and humane Wisdom, that be we never so lightly
touched with any thing which seems to waste and decay our temporal subsistence;
if once our Egyptian staff, this confidence on outward things never so little
begin to crack; how are we ready to fall in^o utter despair? Sure we cannot
continue with such a charge; we cannot hold out long in such losses or
expenses: our narrow hearts, Nabal-like, grunting and grumbling for fear that
we shall not have enough for our selves to live by. O thou unhappie soul of man
in all distresses, doubts and calamities!

What patience or comfort can thou have,
Who trustest in such things that cannot save?
Now and then, like prisoners within the Grate, we may look out into the fresh
air, and see the golden happiness of the day, though we cannot get out and
enjoy it: we shall peradventure now sometimes think upon Repentance, and gaze
afar off on the joyful condition of the soul, desiring that we could be
delivered from this bondage of sin: nay, and it may be we do also strive
somewhat, and endeavor our thoughts thereunto; but alas, it takes no firm
holdfast in our breasts, it goes not through the heart, nor seriously to the
quick as it should; but suddenly it passes away again without effect: or if it
does take any hold in us, it is very momentany and of short continuance
obscured quickly with the clouds of sin, and altogether forgotten; for let us
know that Conscience even in the freest and fullest pursuit of sin is many
times, so real and urgent with us, that it will not be slighted, but either
by excusing our selves, by mitigating the nature of sin, by a seeming
repentance, or the like, we must needs give it some content, though it be but
as a mere dulusion for the time, and to no purpose at all; but I prosecute the
pattern of our intention; in like manner as Melancholy joined with solitary
privacy is wont to make good Meditations in the time of grace take the deeper
root in nature; so likewise it being united with a retired solitariness makes
evil thoughts in the time of sin much more stubbornely to persist within us,
cleaving a great deal the faster to our apprehension, and fixing a far sore
impression in our souls.

Sad Melancholy is truly then in kind,
When silence locks the closet of the mind.
Then does mischief take greatest advantage when it gets the soul to be alone
by her self; for Homo solus aut deus aut demon, the solitary and alone man is
usually either exceeding good in his thoughts, or exceeding bad; and therefore
now we find out of due experience now I say when as grace is not able to
master our corruption, that it is much better for us to use a sociable and
jocund behavior toward others, addressing our selves in a complying Familia
ity with good honest company in civil recreation, then to be much retired
alone, though it may seem more strict, because this verily is many times a
means to put us from far worse things and greater inconveniences; natures
that are composed to Melancholy, we may fitly conceive to be much like Iron,
which receives a greater heat of fire into it, and retains it longer then those
things which are of a rare and thin substance; for we always feel these
solitary, these sad and melancholy sins of ours to be of a far deeper dye, and
to wound our Consciences more dangerously then those other lighter kind of
sins, those merry, as I may so call them, and superficial sins: these sad ones,
I say, are worse, because they are molded with deliberation in the heart, and
come from a settled good will and determinate intention; but those other, those
merry ones, are only for the most part as sudden flashes arising more
inconsiderately, and passing away as a guest of one night.

Well, to proceed in Anatomizing the particulars of this our now sin-sick soul:
The wicked, says Solomon, flees when none pursues him. An evil Conscience
having moved the foundation of our Spiritual comfort, every bush is a thief
with us, every thing becomes our enemy, though not really, yet in conceit. How
often and how apt are we now presently to terrify, disquiet and affright our
selves at nothing, perchance but at the very shadow of things? for but thus, if
we fall out with any neighbor or others into enmity and discontent; if but
once we drink into our breasts a perfect distaste, there is no digesting, no
forgetting, nothing but vexing in our souls: so many eager, fearing and fretful
thoughts do constantly boil up in our stomachs against him, that from thence
for a good while together, whole clouds of fears, of doubts and distempers do
sollicitously overwhelm and pass over our heads: so that specially if we speak
not with the party in a pretty space after, our close-kept thoughts are
peradventure full of expecting his supposed malice is ready to do us the
greatest mischief that may be, and so again are we thereupon hatching and
preparing perchance like motions of revenge against him, conceiving some cruel
tyrany wherewith to satisfy our selves upon him, little considering that all
this while for the most part we do but fight with our own fancy, fearing where
no fear is, and conceiving revenge where there is no cause of revenge: for at
length having spoken with our adversary, and unfolded our selves together, we
shall most times find that he has scarce had any the least ill imagination
against us; and so by a true hearted disclosing our mind one to the other, we
are perhaps easily undeceived, and become friends again: whereas the muing up
our selves from our enemy in a melancholy strangeness and squint-eyed retire,
might breed a continual and a deep Conscience-wounding grudge betwixt us.

The sullen man that is discontent.
bis life never wants woe:
If nothing else will him torment,
his fancy proves his fo.
Moreover, the peevishness of our Nature, in like manner, for want of the
confirming strength of Grace, is always apt to construe the words and actions
of our enemy to the worst, taking every thing to be done by him either in
despite, or malicious disgrace and contempt of us; eagerly affecting and
troubling our selves with that conceited fury of our enemy, which perchance is
not in him; or if it be, it is that thing which we ought rather to pity then
fight with; even common Christianity teaching us to have more wit and godly
advisednesse, then as Solomon says, to meddle with a fool in his folly, or
with a madman in his madness; with an unmanly weakness o^ mind childishly
in the same sense to reply again to that his madness and fury; but in stead
thereof rather mildly and charitably to entertain his foolish humor, knowing
our selves also subject unto all infirmities. But we cannot refrain; this is
our humor; we must needs deal back again the words and deeds that we do
receive. Alas, how sweet is the desire of Retaliation and Revenge to the
solitary nature, being without the directing power of Godliness? how can we
put up such and such things? how can we choose but retort again, Oh that we were
so rich, so powerful as thus and thus? what an happiness were it then for us
to be able to crush our enemies, and to cut them off as we would desire?

Invidia Siculi non invenere Tyranni
Tormentum majus -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --
Envy's a greater torture to the mind
Then the Sicilian Tyrants ere did find.
This is Envy, to our souls the very devil of all sins, that hellish tormentor
of a melancholy mind, which wearies our thoughts with continual anguish and
vexation of spirit. O Lord, when we well consider the whole scope of a sinful
man, or this man of sin which is within us, we cannot choose but think how true
it is which the Prophet Isaiah speaks by thy special command, Isai. 48. 22.
that there is no peace unto the wicked: no peace, I say, not only in regard of
the sting of conscience which follows sin, but also in regard of the ensnaring
and toilsome trouble of sin it self* Woe is us truly, no peace indeed; with one
thing or other we are still out of quiet, either sin by n^useating distempers
does disturb the health of the body, or by laborious and far engaged passions
does unsettle the rest of the mind. What peace at all is there long within us?
either immoderate fear, or care, or grief, or desire, is ever oppressing our
thoughts. And here observe it, whilst that we walk with God, we are methinks
fenced about with his favor, so that none can hurt us; for his Angels do pitch
their tents for a guard round about them that serve him. But now for want of
faith, what do we not fear? how far without reason does this passion extend in
our melancholy soul, even almost into an infinite conceit? for as a Circle made
in the water begets another Circle bigger then it self, and so that another
again bigger then it self, increasing thus I know not how far; just so the
doubts and fears of our mind, by solitary plodding upon them, will beget
bigger and bigger, and so bigger still without end: thus where there is no
faith, there is no end of fear: fear and unbelief have the like proportion in
us, and must needs go hand in hand together, as it is Revel. 21, the fearful,
and unbelieving, and abominable, etc. Again, what troubles does the mind now
many times undergo in the immoderate hoe and care for things to come, in
laboring to prevent and provide for such and such accidents, with the utmost
of our power.

And yet perchance it does no whit prevail;
A strange event makes all our labor fail.
Many, even many is the time that we are unspeakably vexed with the forethinking
and contriving of that which in the end never comes to pass; I say, vexed by
framing of hopes, of intendments, and expectations upon these and these things,
which most times one means or other, Gods providence or death does quite
disappoint and cut off, according as it is in Psalm 146. 4; for when the breath
of man goes forth, he shall return to his earth, and then all his thoughts
perish: all his thoughts, even all the former hopes, expectations and
imaginations of his heart: Blessed therefore, blessed is he, as it follows in
the next verse, that has the God of Jacob for his hope, and whose trust is in
the Lord his God. Blessed is he that herein can take the easy yoke of our
Savior upon him, by casting his care upon God; thereby saving all that
needless labor of too earnest carfulness and distrusting trouble of mind
for the morrow, because sufficient for the day is its own trouble.

But to tell on the souls unquiet state,
When sin does thus become predominate,
So uncontented and so eagerly frappish are we apt to be, through the
uneasinesse of the soul for want of true inward rest and satisfaction; I say,
so full of wrath, of passion and anger in all our thoughts, businesses and
affairs, that the least and smallest occasion, is enough to make us fret,
chafe, aed be most furiously moved with those either equals or inferiors with
whom we have to do; we cannot choose but unsheath our passionate fury and
outrageous disturbance, into cniding and unquietness; we can by no means
bridle our selves in the least degree; our humor must have its course; and
then perchance afterward, our thoughts reflecting upon themselves, do secretly
check us, and make us sorry again for this our rashness, heartily wishing that
we had not done so, and that we were at one with the party as before; only
that we be loath to confess so much, or bewray the acknowledgement of our own
error. See the disquieting unhappiness of sin! If we do not thus vent our
wrath, we can be at no rest for fretting inwardly: and if we do vent it, we are
displeased with our selves for doing it impatiently and undiscreetly: others
cannot please us, and we cannot please our selves: What peaceful harmony of
concord or content can there then be to our souls? I say, Others cannot please
us; for nature has so out of all reason bent us to our own courses, to our own
mind, to our own wills in every thing, ut fere nihil placet quod non nostrum
est; that almost nothing contents us, but that which is of our own doing and
contriving; it even cuts to the gall to be any way crossed and contradicted in
our intentions and desires: when we have once took an opinion, let it be
advised by whom it will be, stiff-neck'd nature being uncontrolled by grace, it
is so obstinate in her own sense, that it is as death for her not to have it go
and be acknowledged in her own way; and therefore let it fadge how it will, we
must, I say, we must needs prevail in contending, though it be for the worse:
and when at length we have thus peradventure through much difficulty obtained
our desire, and gotten our wills fulfilled, even then also are not our thoughts
happy therein: though for the present it might seem to delight us, yet are we
not long well pleased therewith in our selves; nay, perhaps that also in the
end gives our mind little satisfaction; it is nothing but our conceit, nothing
but that we would have it so, and then would it had not been so; this is the
course of it: so little peace of mind is there to that soul which is without
God, and left alone in the snare of sin.

Sure enough it is, O let us observe it; I say, Sure enough, that our own will
is always our worst enemy, could we but consider it: nay methinks, for all she
seems to be as our only friend, yet in truth we have no other enemy can do us
hurt, but only her: not the malice of all the creatures, men and devils in the
world, are able to bring upon us the least unhappiness without her help.

He that can then his own affections quell,
Does even as much as if he conquered hell.
It is this Own self and Will of ours that parts us from God, joins us in
society with the devil; and thus brings us at length (if not prevented by
Grace) to the certain destruction both of body and soul. It is our Saviors
counsel, that if our eye, hand, or other member offend us, we should cut it
off, and cast it from us: this doubtless is a most difficult thing, a hard
saying, for a man to cut off his own flesh, that which is so close and near
unto him, and indeed I believe that wholly to part our selves from our selves,
is to divide indivisibile, that which as long as we continue mortal men, is not
to be divided: but to cut off those rank grown extravagancies of our wills,
this proud flesh, these limbs of the devil, that must needs be done, if we mean
to follow Christ, and enter into heaven, unless together with them we will be
cast into hell fire, to follow Christ: for this is the right way to follow him,
by denying our selves; because we plainly find both by his most holy Doctrine,
Mark 8. 34, and Example, Mark 14. 36, that his business in this world was not
to do any thing of his own will, the will of man, but in all things the will of
him that sent him, even the will of God.

But further; to see what a deal of trouble and unquietness is there always
stirring in the sinful mind of man? what a restless vexation another while do
the ambitious projects and aspiring motions of our vain imagination put us
unto? even so far, that sure methinks it is an Ixion's task, or as a
Bridewell-work to undergo the toil that such encroaching and climing thoughts
many times torment us with. How does our fancy labor to be so great, so high,
so rich, that we had such an office or estate, that we were in the condition of
such a man and such a man? and thus when we have vainly supposed so far and so
far; when, like the Giants of whom the Poets do fable, we have set one mountain
of ambitious desires upon another, yet then at last are we as far from
satisfaction as they were from heaven.

Again, in the prosecution of our earthly policy, when the event of things that
do much concern us frustrates our expectation, our low creeping minds, that
sacrifice only to their own nets, to their own skill and wisdom; how do they
snarl themselves in blind conjectures? Lo, this doubtless was the cause that
our business took not effect; it should have been done by such or such a
means, it such or such a time, with these or these Circumstances; ^yring out
our selves to seek the reason thereof, like those blind men that sought Lot's
door and could not find it; never thinking all this while on the Divine
providence, which directs all things, toward which our thoughts ought to aim
their first and chief regard: and therefore it is that oftentimes we do try so
many ways, spend so much time, break so many nights sleep, to no purpose: for
sure, Except the Lord keep the City, all our labor is lost, the watchman
waketh but in vain. As Jehu answered Jehoram, 2 Kings 9, so may we answer our
thoughts, and with sufficient experience resolve our selves; What peace,
content or rest can there be, so long as this Jezebel of sin raigns and remains
within us?

No peace within, nor yet no peace without,
But full of troubles, toils, and fears, and doubt.
Our peace with all things utterly does cease,
Because with God we do not make our peace.
And thus on every side we both see and feel it, even too much, to our own
grief, That there is no peace unto the wicked. The man of Sin, is a man of
Trouble; trouble in his mind with the distractions of sin; trouble in his
conscience with fear of judgment; every way disturbed and out of rest: and yet
lo, for all this, that there is so much unquietness, and trouble, and
discontent in our sins, we are so strongly hampered and engaged therein, that
there is no power in us to break off the bands thereof, or cast away her cords
from us: through the habituated continuance therein, it is so hard and
difficult for us to repent, I mean, fully and perfectly to repent, that it goes
even against might to think of making up a reckoning and an account with God:
we are so totally as it were turned into sin it self, I mean, such an
invincible disposition of sinning in all our conversation, that O who shall
deliver us from this body of death? what course can we take to come out of this
unhappiness? It Is high time to look about us, to raise our thoughts to some
better notions: but such is the difficulty of true Repentance, that we cannot
go through stitch with it; but this and this opportunity is still put off with
excuses, with the presumptuous and flattering conceit that Gods mercy is
infinite; we have had often and often trial of it; Doubtless we shall have
some better time and more fitting season hereafter. But we who find it so hard
a matter at this time, a thousand to one but that we find it more difficult
the next: the longer we continue in sin without due Repentance, the more
methinks are we entangled with it, and daily snarl'd the faster from getting
out. O therefore let us take heed in time, and duly consider this, all we that
now forget God; Consider this, I say, whilst we have time afforded us, lest in
his wrath he suddenly pluck us away, and there be none to deliver us.

Here it is observable, according to what I have formerly intimated, that,
though not usually, yet sometimes the Conscience is so cunningly daubed up,
that it seems within us to be as well satisfied with the outward formality of
Religion, as if it were in the state of grace and true reconciliation: our
mouths and the outside of our thoughts do draw near unto God, when as our
hearts, the true depth of our heart, is far from him, even full of nothing but
dead men's bones, the rottenness and corruption of sin: we are, I say, thus so
smoothly deluded in our selves, that we can seem boldly to challenge
acquaintance with Christ, and perhaps think that we are able to boast of great
matters in his Name, and yet for all that peradventure as it was with those in
the Gospel, Mat. 7. peradventure, I say, Christ himself may never so much as
know or acknowledge one jot of Christianity within us: but this deceitfulness
of Religion, this superficial delight is easily discerned, if we mark it well,
both by our selves and others, in that it is frequently wont to vent it self
into a partial siding, contentious talking, part-taking and debating as those
of whom the Apostle speaks, that fell out about their Religion; I am of Paul, I
am of Apollo, I am of Cephas; taking the shadow for the substance, and
mistaking the truth thereof, as though it were a thing so shallowly seated in
the soul, that it consisted in wittiness of discourse, sharp understanding,
following of Opinions, and the like: no verily, the Kingdom of heaven, Religion
and godliness, is not without, as our Savior says, but within us, even in
the dressing, ordering and managing of our own souls. Indeed

Our Knowledge without Charity may swell
Into Contentious strivings full of pride:
But true Religion in that heart does dwell,
Where patience, love, and humble thoughts abide.
what ever or however the Conscience, as I say, may thus be deluded and held in
some pleasing satisfaction, finely skinned over for a while with the upper part
of Religion; yet in the truth of it, the wound that is so deep, is not so
easily cured; this sinfulness of the mind here spoken of, having gotten such
time and liberty with us, is not without great difficulty* deep sorrow, many
prayers, and much carfulness, took off again: and therefore till we can by
Gods special mercy attain unto this through piercing and happy Repentance,
there is none so sovereign and helpful a means to prevent the dangerous
increase thereof, as is the constant following of a good employment, ever to be
doing in one industrious action or another, according to the quality and manner
of our life, even in one honest action or other, though it be but to little
advantage: so that the Rule is very true, Praestat oriosum esse, quam nihil
agere; It were far better for us to be in action with that which is to no
purpose, so that we do not sin in it, then to sit still and be altogether idle:
for alas, we do by woeful experience find, that Idleness is rightly named The
devils Cushion; being seldom out of one sin or other, whilst we are out of
action in some good employment: This Cushion makes the devil so easy a seat,
that it is even an invincible work to remove him from our idle souls, or make
him sit away: this is his seat, I say, and his shop too; here he freely sits
and plyes his utmost skill, to mould our thoughts to the very wickedness of
his hearts desire; here he sits forging and fashioning all the ugliest forms of
sin, and foulest monsters of impiety that ever entered into the heart of man:
there is no sin so great, so hellish and inhumane, but Idleness has been the
means to hatch it into the world.

Quaeritur Aegistus quare sit factus adulter,
In promptu causa est, desidiosus erat.
If you demand Aegistus why
He did commit adultery;
The cause is easy to be seen,
Because he has so idle been.
And as it hatcheth all sins in the soul, so of all other is it the most kindly
Nurse of lust and fleshly desire in our melancholy nature. How does the fancy
hereby become polluted and most grossly defiled with all kind of baseness and
obscenity? what inventions does it frame for the provocation of lust? how
closely does it make us hug the amorous conceits of our enslaved fancy* nay,
how do we many times hereby so deeply infect our thoughts with this kind of
vitiousnesse, that like Lime twigs they are ready to catch hold on every
object, converting it to some libidinous and wanton motion, the which perchance
sometimes does cling so fast unto us, that we can scarcely draw off again our
imagination from it.

Again, Idleness and Luxury, the excess of eating and drinking, either in
quantity or quality; I say, fullness of bread, and abundance of Idleness, are
constant companions together: we that are idle, must needs be luxurious one way
or other. And if Saint Paul said that the idle person was not worthy to eat or
drink at all; how often and how much do we sin, when as the vanity of our idle
souls causes us to waste so much in superfluity, who are not worthy of
sufficiency? O alas, so we live many times, as if we were created for nothing
else but to eat and drink. Sure this is not the least, if not the greatest of
our sins: for if abstinence be the chiefest help to mortify the flesh,
certainly luxury is the chiefest means to quench all goodness of the Spirit:
and therefore see in the Gospel the devils desire to enter into the Swine; we
hear of no other creature that at any time they desired to enter into, but
only, I say, into the gluttonous Swine, that of all other creatures being most
uncleanly addicted to its belly; so fit an habitation is the gluttonous and
luxurious soul for nothing but devils, but sin and uncleanness.

But further with the story: our whole man is so utterly disframed and
disjoynted with sin, that there is no part but is out of order. When we
seriously reflect on our selves and our so great imperfections, we cannot but
fetch from within us many a deep sigh, to grieve at this our so great
untowardnesse, thinking thus; How much are we now behind the condition o^ the
righteous? how miserably do we mispend our time in being vassals unto Satan,
and working our own damnation, who might in this time, so ill wasted, have as
well made a good progress toward heaven, and attained unto much comfort and
proficiency in Religion? O ^ow do we want that light of understanding and
retention of Memory in good things which we ought to have? how void are we of
devotion to Godwards, that Charitablenesse of affection toward our brethren
which we observe in others, that patience and cheerfulness in troubles, that
manly constancy in ruling the motions of the soul, as grief, fear, hope, and
the like?

O we alone, we are in each degree
So frail with sin, there is none so frail as we.
For behold, we are so crazed and weakened in all the strength and constancy of
our mind through sin, that every passion is able to overturn us: either we are
too much in fear of the roaring waves of calamity in this world, or too much in
love with the pleasing vanities thereof; either we are too hot with the joy of
prosperity, or too cold with the grief of adversity; overjoyed with the
tickling exaltation of the one, or faintheartedly dejected and cast down with
the other: but of these two specially ought we to be careful and take good
heed; there is always, as we may find, a more principal danger in the joy of
prosperity; for, says Moses, Deuteronomy. 6, When thou have eaten and art full, then
beware lest thou forget the Lord, etc. Narrow vessels are quickly over-fill'd:
then, then, I say, in our prosperity do we feel our selves ready to run over
the capacity of moderation, apt to grow lawless with unlimited pride, and to
forget our reverence to that God which has created us, and always does so
great things for us: and therefore it was that David said It is good for me
that I have been in trouble. Happy is the man that is always ballasted with
such a constant steadfastness of mind, that let the wind blow which way it
will, can carry his affection with an upright, settled and indifferent
moderation; can hold him fast by God in all changes of this life, patiently
hoping in him in adversity, humbly rejoicing in him in prosperity, so to rule
himself with Saint Paul's resolvednesse of mind, Phil. 4, At all times, and in
whatsoever state he be, as therewith to be content with satiety, and yet not
drunken with excess. See the folly of a sinner, and strange besotted ignorance
of our thoughts. Behold,

We fear the face of man, poor sinful man,
When of the God of heaven we little scan.
though we have not much care of it, that our faults are all naked in the
presence of God, that the Searcher of hearts knows the depth of them, and
that they lie open plain enough before our Consciences, yet by no means we
would that men should know so much of us; no, let self-loving nature alone to
be sure to take heed of this, that no body know it but our selves: Oh, we may
in no wise bewray our infirmities in any particulars: what vain fig leaves of
poor shifts and excuses do we so we together to cover us with, rather then we
will be guilty in the sight of men: we shall choose rather, many times, to make
two sins of one, then discredit our selves by Confession; as thus: Pe^chance
when we are reproved for our untowardnesse, reprehended for our vices, or any
thing else be spoken which is harsh unto us, presently is our headstrong and
self-accusing nature all on fire with spitesul scorn and ill will against it,
either moved with so much distemper as maliciously to revile the party, or else
so deeply stung with inward unquietness, as unsoberly to depart the place, not
abiding to hear it any longer; such is our impatient desire of credit, our
self-justifying honor on our own parts: But on the other side, to hear the
dispraises and reproofs of others, to hear their credit broken by the tongue of
envy, that methinks is a contentment and recreation to us; or specially when
we meet with them who are inclined to speak against such parties that are out
of our liking, then it is meat and drink to us to say Amen, and join with them
in the like malevolent and disgraceful speeches. We are, I say, most impatient
of reproof, specially if it be laid either sharp and closely unto us, or
tedious and over urgent: and truly, though reproof ought humbly to be taken as
sent from God justly for our sins, yet many times, through the rigotous
application thereof, it proves to our evil natures not only unprofitable, but
hurtful, for we find that when a wicked passion, on whatsoever occasion, is
stirred up in the height of its fury, it is hard to be bridled, and dangerous to
be dealt withal: Cain's countenance fell with furious indignation, Genesis 4. 5,
and lo the sad effect, it is but the eighth Verse that he slew his brother
Abel. It is here worth the marking, that sometimes and in some of us the smooth
facility of mind can perhaps jest out, or pleasantly put off those self-same
sins and disgraces which the rough seriousness of others does take with a
great deal of indignation, discontent and shame: the reason thereof partly
without doubt is the different disposition of nature, and partly also the
experienced policy of sin; for sin, when it is used and practiced in the soul,
like an old Fox, grows more cunning and politic to conceal it self; it can
make its guiltiness seem to be innocence, its covetousness seem to be
liberality, its pride humility, etc. Herod-like becoming seemingly virtuous,
when it is never a whit the less, but rather the more truly vicious. But
further with the real discovery of our selves. Moreover, as the dogged morosity
of our mind is frequently apparent in our behavior toward our friends, in
our dealing with strangers, and other like instances that may be quickly
remembered, so also is our grudging unthankfulness not a little before God, and
in reference to his Majesty: So that when losses or crosses do befall us, our
words are usually these or such like: This is hard fortune, there is no body so
unhappie as we; we I warrant have the worst lot and portion of all men;
foolishly not at all heeding the frequent miseries of others daily before our
eyes, that rod of Gods correction which is imparted to our neighbors
peradventure at the same present, and does it may be in many degrees go beyond
ours; if not, at the leastwise we may remember how far the afflictions of poor
Job do outgo our greatest sufferings, and yet he sits embracing the dunghill
with these words in his mouth, The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken
away; blessed be the Name of the Lord.

Have we received all good from him so long,
And shall he think that now he does us wrong?
O the perverse impatiency of our sinful nature, when our mind at first is
newly wounded with our misfortunes, and whilst that it is in a fresh and
yet-bleeding remembrance with us, what cursed and even nothing else but madly
discontented imaginations do there rise up and occur unto our minds? how full
of raging and masterlesse thoughts are we? so that if we go about never so
little to stop the furious current of them, and to turn necessity into a
virtue, by applying the consideration of it to some contentful use or good
resolution, our wicked passion most times is so unruly with discontent, that by
no means can we over-master or bring it into the subjection of any sober
thoughts: Which being so, we must needs for the present let it slack, and
altogether as much as possible exclude it out of the mind, if that happily
afterward our passion being allayed and more reasonable, we may consider it
with some discretion; so hard a thing as I say is it to wrestle with a
disturbed passion in its excess: and truly, as sin grows on in the soul, so
the passions of our mind grow further and further into excess and immoderate
distempers.

Sin when it gets much strength within, is methinks of all things in the
world most like unto the pestilence: the Pestilence, when the height of the
disease is upon a man, makes him, even as phrenzie, distempered with the
violence thereof; so as, I say, sin does here unhinge all the affections of the
soul into a furious and madly-behaving humor, when it flies much out of reason
into an immoderate excess. The Pestilence when it works a full infection, is
a disease very mortal and deadly, so that few escape it: so sin, when a man is
much over gone therewith, brings the soul into a very sad and dangerous
condition; and it is the effect of Gods greatest mercy that we do overcome it.
Lastly, the Pestilence, that grand misery of Mankind, is usually attended upon
with many inferior mischiefs; as the Measles, Small Pox, and the like: so sin,
those great exorbitancies of the mind, which are truly the misery of all
miseries, and cause of all miseries unto us men, are ever accompanied with
smaller inconveniences and vanities of conversation: And so then, what with
greater sins, and lesser vanities, we may now well say with the Preacher,
Vanity of vanities, all is vanity.

There is no word, no deed, no, not a thought
In us, but's vain and altogether naught.
I say, What are all our thoughts, our words and deeds but vain, even of no
weight, substance and solidity? for, know thou, O my soul, that nihil est non
vanum, quod non ad aeternitatem pertinet; that all that is vain, which aims not
at eternity. Those thoughts, th^se words, those works, which perish, and do not
accompany and follow us into heaven, that we may there for ever rejoice of
them; those, all those, I say, are vain and idle, and such whereof we must be
sure, as our Savior says, to give an account: and thus through our so totally
depraved condition of sin, all that is within us is become vanity, and lighter
then vanity it self; our thoughts think vanity and nothing but vanity: we say
to our selves, What profit is there in serving the Lord? do not things fall out
and prosper as well with the wicked as the righteous? Doubtless, he that
dwells on high regards it not; and there is no difference unto us.

Again, we think foolishly, Has not God s^ chained the course of things by his
Eternal Predestination to such and such periods and events, that the fatal
bo^nds and decree thereof we can by means frustrate? Alter it we cannot; how
then is it in us to do good or to do evil? it is not our fault that we are not
saved, we could not sin, bad ^e not appointed it; and we cannot avoid it,
because he has appointed it.

Thus we many times ignorantly judge and conceive that Gods ways are as our
ways: but he shall one day convince and reprove us; he shall set our sins
before us, making our Consciences truly to confess, that Thou, O Lord, art
good, art holy, righteous and just; but it is we of our selves that have
sinned, done wickedly and stubbornly, gone astray from thy Commandments.

Our thoughts think nothing but vanity. Such is the vain singularity of our
intentions in any thing which is of moment or considerablenesse, that we
contemptuously slight and lightly regard to follow the common manner and
fashion, always aiming at some rare and unusual way, thereby to be advanced
into a more general note and eminent reckoning. Such also is the vain
disdainfulnesse and height of our mind, as to think ostentimes these and these
our inferiors not good enough to have any familiarity or boldness with us, to
be accepted or taken notice of in our company, or the like.

Such again is the vain ostentation of our personal behavior, when we are in
better company abroad in public, or amongst strangers, that we usually cast
our thoughts ambitiously behind us, with a vain care and curiosity of mind,
to observe whether our clothes, discourse and deportment are likely to leave
behind us in the opinion of men a worthy estimation; d^siring, in the stout
pride of our hearts, so to carry our selves in outward credit toward others,
as to be observed in the sight of men; and according to the Poet, Monstrari and
dicier hic est. I say, that it might be said of us, that we are such ones, of
such note, etc. And such also on the other side is our too sullen retiredness
from convenient company, when Diogenes-like we stubbornly shrink in our selves
from an ordinary conversation with men, either out of a shamefac't strangeness
and inurba^ity of behavior, or else out of a self willed roughness of mind,
that we will not communicate our selves unto others. And here

We may most times observe it by the by,
That Melancholy gives a secret touch
Of surly, close, and stern morosity,
Which speaking little, always thinks much.
Though Melancholy be full within of great thoughts, yet it seldom unmasks it
self, but upon humors; and then peradventure when we are in the vein of it, we
as vainly fall again into extremes on the other side, lavishly spending our
spirits in over much talking and eagerness of discourse, thereby wearying out
our selves many times in vain; and not only so, but perhaps working our own woe
withal: For, Locutum esse aliquand^ poe^ituit, tacuisse nunqu^: A fool, says
Solomon, Prove. 29, ^ttereth all his mind; but a wise man keep^th it in till
afterward. A fool utters all his mind; and such is our folly to run out
into vanity of words, sometimes in one fashion, sometimes in another; but
specially most of all, into vainly hyperbolical speeches, boastingly
aggravating the truth, or enviously extenuating it, according as our humor and
inclination is bent; whereby our praiso or dispraise of any thing or person is
altogether made factious after our fancy and liking, rather then any whit
according to right understanding and impartial verity: for notwithstanding we
do still pretend to speak nothing but what is just and equal, following the
only rule of discerning reason and indifferency; yet we cannot but incline our
words to the prejudicate sense of our own liking, making our arguments and
proofs servants rather to affection then reality. As for example: If we vent
our passion in ripping up of other men's faults, we plead thus for the doing it,
That we know not how to dissemble, That we must needs speak the truth, etc.
coloring that with the name of veracity, which is nothing else but the rancour
of ill will; taking our indignation and sinister desire, to be zeal, a zeal to
truth, whenas it is nothing but a breach of Charity: for though we can thus
unmercifully censure others; though other men's motes are beams unto us, and we
can fully discern their least enormities; yet we do sufficiently wink at and
flatter our selves in far worse actions; we can cut large thongs, as it is
said, of other men's Leather; enjoining great duties, expecting great matters,
and laying great burdens upon other men's shoulders, which we touch not our
selves with so much as our least finger: I say, the mean while, God he knows,
not performing the least part of our own duty: and therefore does that saying
of Saint Paul after check our Consciences; Thou that teach others, teach
thou not thy self? etc. Behold, the wrath of man, says Saint James, works
not the righteousness of God. And sure, most times, we sin more against
Charity by the wrathful censure and reproof of other men's sins, even more, I
verily believe, then they do in committing those sins which we so reprove,
because Love, says Solomon, Prove. 10. 12, covers a multitude, a multitude of
sins: surely not of our own sins, it is not so meant, but of other men's. And
Charity, says Saint Paul, suffers long, is kind, is not easily provoked,
bears all things, believes all things, etc.

If we truly consider it, when we judge this or that man's pride; what is it
else that does it, but a greater pride in our selves? when we condemn other
men's malice and envy, it is nothing else peradventure but because our own
hearts are fuller of envy themselves; nature it may be thinking thus to adorn
her self with others spoils, and to deck up her credit with the good name she
takes away from her neighbor. Better, O how much better were it for us, in
stead thereof, to turn critics to our selves and our own lives, then to be so
censoriously busy about others.

Better, I say,

To 'bide at home, and show our utmost skill
In setting right our own corrupted will.
In judging others, that is all that we can get by it, The greater judgment to
our selves: but by judging our selves, we may happily escape the judgment of
God; For, says Saint Paul, if we would judge ourselves (that is, truly
ransack our own souls for sin) we should not be judged of the Lord.

And as the ancharitable judging of other's sins does doubtless increase our
own judgment; so when we applaud, rejoice in, and are well pleased at the
falls and sins of others; what do we likewise but increase our further
condemnation? This hugging of our souls in the beholding of other men's vices,
which many times we do, proves us to have the seed of that wicked one within
us, who delights still in having more company unto damnation. Indeed to have
many fellows and companions in sinning, may perhaps rock our evil conscience
into a securer sleep for the time; but it cannot give u^ the least true rest or
satisfaction of mind. That others sin as much as we, is no privilege at all
for our sins: they shall stand upon their own bottoms, and we shall be sure our
selves to answer for our selves; one's faults cannot plead for or excuse
another: every one shall have enough to look to himself and his own ways. It
is to be marked amongst the rest, that the different temper of body and manner
of life, as to live in some places with some people, in some Callings, and the
like, is a strong means to make sin in many of us to abound into a more gross
and frequent impiety then in other-some: for although nature in all men be
corrupted with the seeds of sin, with a readiness and propension even unto the
greatest evils; yet these first beginnings are much more rankly grown from the
womb in some men then in other-some, which causes them to undergo a greater
difficulty in subduing themselves by grace, and to be more violently carried
down the stream, when once sin gets the upper hand. As also our manner of life
may add great advantage unto temptation.

In Sodom for to live a righteous Lot,
It Is like a Painter that is without a spot.
By touching Pitch, alas it is no news
To be defiled, if that we cannot choose.
He that is conversant where many occasions be offered, shall hardly put by
often inconveniences.

But we proceed with the secret sinful motions of our unhappie life. When there
is any thing of heedful concernment in our thoughts, which we do endeavor to
effect, or have resolved upon to have it done; if it chance any whit long to be
delayed, and not finished forthwith according to our hope, the greedy desire and
expectation thereof is such a torture presently to our over hasty souls, that
in a while out of distrustfulnesse we either utterly despair of it, or through
impatiency of mind, we strive (if it be possible) to bring it to pass against
might, or otherwise one way or other, are ready to procure some indirect means
whereby our eager intention may be fulfilld; headlesly running on many times
thus to multiply our sins without any reason, not considering at all, that if
we had not tormented our selves with such over eagerness of expectation, and
sinned against God with this unlawful hastiness of mind and despairing
thoughts, doubtless our business would have never the worse, but rather the
better have took its effect in due time: and this is that impatient hastiness
of mind and distrustful fear that makes many of us to curse and swear so much
in the passion of discontent; to go to Witches for recovering again the goods
that we lose; or so soon as we be sick to post to the Physician as our only
hope; and the like. It was this impatient hastiness of mind that made Saul
offend, 1 Samuel 13. 8: whenas both he, and our selves, did we but use the
counsel of David, Psalm. 27. 9, to tarry the Lords leisure, and be strong; I
say, his leisure with patience, and be strong in faith, we might verily prevent
many a sin, nay, perchance most sins; for were it not this impatient hastiness
of ours, what sin almost is there could prevail against us, had we but that
true patience and stayednesse of mind soberly to wait and weary out the
temptation, the devil might go away from us as he came.

The storm most fiercely for the time does rage:
Stay but a little, and it will assuage.
It is this too importunate hastiness that causes discontented murmur^ngs
against God, making us, when things go not to our minds, and that we prosper
not according to our account and expectation, even making us, I say, half angry
with the Almighty, as though he were a debtor to fulfill our desires. It is this
hastiness which draws us many times into the most dangerous impieties.

Sin in time brings the soul into such a senseless dullness and stupidity, that
as if we had made a Covenant with death and a League with hell, we are little
moved with any terror thereof, and we quietly yield up our selves, as if there
were an inevitable necessity for us to be thus wieked and ungodly: we know not
what to say or to do in the case; we are so much plunged in this mire and clay,
where there is no ground, no hope of coming out, that it is beyond all that we
can think and endeavor, to do our selves any good; and therefore we cannot
conceive sin and this inward corruption of nature to be any otherwise in us
then as a corruption in the body, which when once it has gotten a long
continued vent and running issue in the leg, there is no stopping thereof
without present death to the party, unless there be an issue made for it in
another place. And so we being thus filled, as Saint Paul speaks of the
Heathen, Romans 1, with nothing but spiritual corruption in the soul*
unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, covetousness, maticiousnesse, etc.
we cannot imagine how the vent thereof can be stopped, but that it must needs
have passage one way or other; and indeed so for the most part, when it is
stopped of its ordinary course, it finds out a secret vent elsewhere. And
truly after this manner sometimes we seem to be reclaimed and reformed of our
accustomed vices, whenas in very deed we do but turn out of one sin into
another: for this is the devils policy, now and then to imitate Repentance, by
altering and changing up and down our sins, to the end they might not grow
tedious unto us, to make us loath and abho^ them utterly, or perchance to give
our consciences some satisfaction with the show of Repentance, that we may the
more securely continue in sin. For the devil has many shifts to invent,
wherewith to give us content and delight. He will provide all variety and
pleasure that is possible, to indulge our appetite; as, being weary of this
sin, that we may go to another; our affections being tired with ambition, we
might recreate our selves with lust and luxurious idleness; our souls being
stopped of their course in malice and covetousness, we might take as it were a
turn another while in Epicurism and indulging vanities: sometimes perhaps a
variety in the manner of our sins for novelties sake, may give us a little
change of satisfaction; as sometimes it may be plain dealing gives the mind
best liking in our sins; sometimes equivocating and deluding excuses; sometimes
the matter is best of all to be qualified with a crafty involving of others
helping in the act: sometimes again, a sole and absolute secrecy of the whole
business, is more grateful to our conscience. Every way, and however it be
effected, we feel our selves in sin just as in the condition of sick men: he
that is much sick, is not in so much ease as to lie always on one side, though
his bed be never so soft: so sin, like the sick man's bed, has not so much
pleasure in it as to give us any long content: he turns from side to side to
find rest, and finds none so long as he is sick: so we unhappie sinners
wallow to and fro in our sins without rest: we are unstable in all our ways.

There Is no delight, no rest is to be found,
Whilst sin in us so strongly does abound.
I say, we can find no pleasure, no full, satisfactory, o^ long content in
pleasure, as long as we thus turn out of sin into sin, out of one bad course
into another, unless that we quite turn out of sin unto God. But woe is us, Hic
labor, hoc opus est, here lies all the difficulty, this is the main matter of
all; the flattering subtilty thereof has, as I said, for long ago, as Dalilah
beguiled Samson, so wholly robbed and beguiled our soul* of all their strength
and courage to true R^pentance, that we were much too weak to break off from us
those fettering bonds and manacles of unrighteousness which do so strongly tie
us unto unhappiness; a misery certainly full of all miseries, to be so far
involved therein that we can see no probability to get out: and yet lo, this is
not the utmost, it does not rest here; we must yet ^urther entertain a greater
unhappiness; for now behold a far more grievous and worse thing for the
present hereby happens unto us, Gods judgment, the usual consequence of
continuance in fin, prepares after so long forbearance to lay siege unto our
consciences; and the messenger of Satan, like a trumpe^er is sent in to summon
us beforehand: for behold, hideous and dismaying thoughts begin to slip into
our mind, exceedingly to terrify and strike through our unhappie souls, the
strangeness of which many times at the first coming of it, does so ghastly
affright and startle us, that our hearts are ready to faint and swoon with the
terror thereof: and this, this, I say, for the present out of our
unadvis^dnesse and ignorance of the right understanding hereof, commonly
becomes a greater snare to us to keep us off from Repentance, then all our
former sins, and distempers besides; for when perchance we endeavor to settle
our thoughts upon Humiliation, and are ready to take upon us the examination of
our wicked and sinful life, as lifting up our thoughts into this Meditation: Oh
how the time passes away! the daily-consuming torch of our life burns out
apace, and shall we continue still in this desolate and deplored condition
without due Repentance and reconciliation with God? how far are are we from
that glorious comfort and most happy state we use to enjoy in the time of
grace? etc. Where, I say,

When that with serious sighs we in this sort
Do our own selves into our selves retort.
preparing our selves for Repentance, and striving to humble our souls before
God, then forthwith do these hideous and dismaying thoughts, or the remembrance
of them, so utterly discourage and dishearten us, that we are fain to leave off
again so soon as we have begun: For whenas our thoughts should be filled with
humility and dejection for our sins, then are they ready to swarm with nothing
but vile and monstrous imaginations. Better therefore do we judge it, for the
most part, whilst that we are newly acquainted herewith, to let all alone, then
by that means, as we suppose, to procure Gods greater wrath and indignation
upon us. Besides, thus we are ready to conjecture with our selves; What hope or
likelihood is there for us to obtain the favor of that God, from whom we are
so dangerously separated, and whom again we are with such impiety of mind
ready to dishonor? And so are we beaten off from our poor and weak endeavors.

Not daring to approach his glorious Name
With thoughts that speak nothing but fear and shame.
Well, these hideous glances do perchance ever and anon slip into the
imagination, and are very terrible and tedious unto us. But many times it falls
out for a while, until we either better understand our selves herein, or that
God show forth his power more strongly in us: I say it falls out many times,
that the earnest employment of our mind in the fears, cares and desires of
other things, does not suffer us so seriously to tend for them, or else does
put them out of remembrance again; notwithstanding ever and anon they do come
into our heads to disturb and terrify us most wonderfully. But specially it is
to be noted, that if at any time we go about to read, or set our selves
diligently upon the work of Repentance, then sure they are abundantly present
with us: and because they are so terrible that we cannot abide them, we must
therefore needs leave off whatsoever we have took in hand; and this we may
conceive to be a special policy of the devil, to have them chiefly proposed to
our phancie at such times, to the end, if it could be so, there might be no
time for us to repent in: For now methinks at length, through a due
self-consideration, and these manifold checking troubles and inconveniences,
which so disturb us, that we cannot tell which way to turn for them;
doubtless, I say, we have great longing to be reconciled unto God, and we
would very fain repent, putting our strength really to it, did not now these
Scar crows stand in the way to affright us: and now in this (though not
otherwise) we can truly repent that we did not repent heretofore, that we had
not drawn near unto the Lord whilst he might be found, since that in those
great water-floods, this day of trouble and temptation, we cannot come nigh
unto him: for most deservedly we that have continued so long in our sins for
our own pleasure, to content our selves, must yet continue a while longer to
content Gods justice. As yet then for all this, though the Ax be as it were
laid to the root of the tree, Gods judgment and vengeance to our evil
Consciences, yet we cannot leave off the deceitfulness of our souls, our
oppressing policy, the vanity of our mind, the excusing our sins, the
swelling and self-conceited folly of our hearts, and the like.

It is to be observed, that according to the method in this Book before
premised, most of us men have some one part or space of our life (be it four or
five years, or whatsoever) wherein sin has more full power over us, and
perhaps does thus prevail in us with an high hand and settled course, and this
time above all the rest is the time of sin, as being so properly disposed for
it, that during the continuance thereof, we can never attain unto true
Repentance: for though that we may sometimes superficially fallow up our souls
with the Sollow of Humiliation, yet do we not so thoroughly plow them up as to
fit them for the due receiving of that good seed which is able to fructify
into newness of life. Sure this is not an easy thing:

A perfect sinner does not change his hue,
So quickly turning his old life to new.
Though we may peradventure many times outwardly scan over the duty of
Repentance, yet do we not during this time so perfectly repent, as thereby to
get a full Release from the* guilt of sin, or such a comfortable and a
discharging acquittance to our Consciences, as we ought to have, and which
makes us cheerful and free powerfully to resolve and set on toward amendment
of life.

Well, to the matter. I say, What by one means or other, we are yet still
scared off from the main hope and help of our souls, the comfort of
Reconciliation; so great is our sinful folly and unability unto good. But this,
all this, is but for a taste of inward trouble: See what follows: the hand of
the Almighty does not leave us so; if a man will not turn, says David, Psalm 7,
God will whet his sword: he has bent his bow, and made it ready: hitherto
there is no turning with us, nothing is able to turn us unto a due serious
repenting, or sufficiently to rouse us up out of the unhappie Lethargy of sin;
and therefore sure God is now whetting his sword and bending his bow against
us As Lazr^^ in his grave, so we have been in our trespasses and sins so long
dead, even stark dead unto all goodness, that we had need be called unto elata
voce, as it is in the Eleventh of Saint John, with a loud voice, if God mean
that we shall effectually hear him.

Dangerous diseases deserve desperate cures. If nothing else can thoroughly awake
us, the Judgment of a troubled mind and tormented Conscience must do it. But
when once it comes to pass that the Almighty shows forth his wonders in the
deep, his mighty strength after this manner in the deep thoughts of man's heart;
O what a sharp fit and tedious bout must we undergo? for, says Solomon, The
spirit of man may sustain his infirmity: but a wounded spirit who can bear?

Not Job 's afflictions, nor yet all those ten
Egyptian plagues can parallel again
The misery that that poor soul is in,
Whom heaven does strike with terror for his sin.
Any outward cross or trouble is tolerable, and may be sustained: but the
inner trouble of a distracted mind and wounded Conscience, who can bear?

You may note, that though the mind and Conscience be touched with many secret
terrors and perplexed difficulties, in the course and passage of this life,
according to that of David concerning himself, Even from my youth up, thy
terrors have I suffered with a troubled mind.

I say, There be in the soul of man many tormenting thoughts; as also sins of
ours, and sayings of Scripture often too hard for us well to digest: but this
ensuing Passage of a distracted mind and troubled Conscience is seldom
paralleled.

For lo, I shall herein show you a Mystery, even welnigh the very height and
utmost pitch of Terror and sad Distraction that the melancholy mind can
undergo without falling quite into Fury and Madness, which does fitly follow
this more then ordinary ill course of life here presupposed, and so long a
sleep in presumption.

For this is the right Method in the state of the soul: before such great
trouble of mind, there usually precedes a deep sleep in Presumption, because
the mind and Conscience can never be very much inwardly troubled, (it may
suffer some small distress) I say, never be much troubled, as long as fear,
the watchman of the soul, keeps his due centry. And therefore this is the true
wisdom of a careful Christian, diligently to keep this watch about him, lest
he be overtaken, besotted and engaged in sin, and so then the day of the Lord
come upon him like a thief in the night: I say, the day of the Lord, the day of
his Judgment, a day of gloominesse and thick darkness; a day of trouble and
distraction of mind, even such a day (as is expressed in the next Part) wherein
the Lord thundreth from heaven with his mighty power against the soul of man,

Of the Soul troubled in Conscience.
WEll, the troubles and terrors before spoken of in the precedent part, in
reference to these that follow and are now at hand are but as S. Matthew says
of those troubles that shall go before the day of Judgment, the beginning of
sorrows. I say, the beginning of sorrow, they are like the scattering drops
which fall before a shower; and O now the shower it self begins to fall apace,
a terrible shower, and most violent storm, such a one as David speaks of in
Psalm. 11. verse. 6. where he says, Upon the wicked be shall rain snares, fire
and brimstone, and an horrible tempest, this shall be their portion to drink.

For now our minds and bodies being perhaps more properly made fit for that
purpose; I say, the rather fitted thereunto; as either by occasion of the
leisure and vacancy of the mind, or also by the like concurring occasion of
strong melancholy vapors in the body, or other diseased disturbance: Though
fin only be the procuring cause, yet these or some of these are usually the
present occasions which mainly help it forward; we quickly fall into an
exceeding dumpishnesse of mind, and even in a short space our fancy is followed
with swarms of tormenting thoughts, in so extraordinary a manner, that we
cannot tell what to do; they come so thick one upon another, and are impious
in so high a degree, that the dismal and hellish terror thereof does quite
dull and take off our senses. There is, for the most part, no one hour all day
long, but that we are haunted with them, as with so many hideous ghosts,
insomuch that usually do what we can, nothing will put them from our mind, or
give us the least ease and respit from this misery.

Intentions still, our mind gets no relief
At all, from this torm^nting inward grief.
Those thoughts, they are such black thoughts, most of them so infinitely
fearful* so unspeakable heinous, that they do make us extremely to shake with
fear, and put us many times in such a trembling, that we are as it were
fainting with the deep agony and anguish thereof, they do so subtly shoot
into our imagination, that for our lives we cannot with all our strength and
endeavor shut them out, or so much as mitigate the violence of them; they are
even as the piercing lightning, which cannot be withstood. For, least your
understanding should be mistaken. it is to be noted, that those thoughts not as
yet spoken of. are more of a darting, then a reflecting nature. To go on, they
are as so many terrifying Haggards and hellish ghosts unto us, that do even
make us shrink for fear, as often as we do but think upon them, or so much as
take the least glimpse thereof into our apprehension; and then as soon as we
are thus never so little afraid, they will sure come upon us, and that the more
fiercely too, fear giving any adversary advantage, to have the greater power
over us: The manner of being affrighted herewith, many times is as when some
extraordinary thunderclap on the sudden, strikes a man with so violent a
terror, that his heart is even (as they say) out of his mouth therewith; the
passion whereof is able to be in such an excess, that it does even stun our
senses for the time, making us as quite sick with the amazement of it.

What shall I say? No mortal tongue can show
Those fearful terrors which our mind does know.
It is said indeed in the sixth Chap. of Genesis, that every imagination of the
thoughts of man's heart are only evil continually. But O these and the like
thoughts, as I may say, even sent from Hell into the soul of man, are so beyond
measure unreasonably evil, that we shall many times think to our selves, think
it, I say, to be a thing almost impossible, that man, as a mere man, and being
only in the mortal condition of humanity, should be capable of entertaining
such intolerable things within him: As also sometimes we shall think thus,
that if other men did but know what vile imaginations, what monstrous
indignities there are in our heads, they would sure be ready to kill us out of
zeal to piety, and revenge to Gods glory, as not fit to live on earth, who are
in truth full of nothing but Hell: Many times perhaps are our thoughts of such
high and immediate impiety* that we verily look for one fearful judgment or
other presently to confound us, and do even quake and crouch down, as though
some fierce thunderbolt of vengeance were already falling from Heaven upon us:
These thoughts they are not all of them evil in the same degree, some it may
be being far worse then some; as also, they are not all of the same nature, for
the diverfity of every ones constitution, and the diversity or several kinds
of sins, to which we are most addicted, do perchance much vary the nature of
them; yet most of them in the same particular party (specially at the first) do
ever point to one kind of end and effect; in a while the much prevailing
strength of these thoughts has such a terrifying power in us, that even but
one of them is sufficient to strike an heartbreaking passion of so great a
trembling and distemper into us, that we shall not be wholly out of it again
for a whole day after, being usually in the mean space revolving in our minds
the heynousnesse thereof or bu^ying our fancy with orher trifling conceits of
the like nature; so that our mind is never no never free from some one
cogitation or other, which concerns this our trouble: At our first entr^ into
this sad case, before we are fully possessed with the course and quality thereof;
we shall be apt thus to consider and revolve within our selves. O Lord, how
shall we do to recogitate and examine over again in repentance these unhappy
thoughts, when as the very remotest glimpse of them in our fancy, is so too
much terrible unto us; for we do feel our selves seldom lively and perfectly
to repent us of our sins, but that in very act of repentance, those things
which do most go against our conscience do re-appear unto us afresh, and that
we do as it were really see the enormity of them: I say we shall thus perhaps
ho and be solicitous how to repent, for though we may and do now repent, in the
habit and intention of repentance, I mean in the reality and sense of it; yet
peradventure we cannot in a right and duly performed act thereof, habitually by
turning from our evil course, but not actually, by putting in practice that
lively action of the mind, which is ordinarily requisite and belonging
thereunto. I say, for all that our hearts be as it were broken in pieces with
these heavy troubles, yet we cannot enjoy so feeling a remorse in our souls, or
so kindly dissolve our selves into a serious and right humiliation as we
desire, and as we ought to do; though as it seems to our poor unhappy souls.

The Lord has charged us with so great a Curse,
That mortal flesb cannot sustain a worse.
Though I sa^ we are so Divell-like, and hellishly untoward in our selves, and
though we truly know and do well consider this our woeful condition, yet can we
not perchance thorough this great distemper of fancy; can we not, as I say,
perform that action of mind which fitly belongs thereunto, being held in such
a strong incongruity unto the natural use of all inward duties that there yet
appears in us, me thinks, no due readiness of heart to a bleeding and truly
conscientious sorrow.

Now therefore in this most evil case, least that we should go down quick into
Hell, and be swallowed up with this sudden destruction, we do mightily labor
to set out all the power and strength that we have, in striving to deject and
bring down our outward souls to a duer and more applyable sorrow for our sins:
For you must understand that the strongnesse and violence hereof, a pretty
while, upon its first coming, does amaze and so much take up our thoughts with
disturbed terror and admiration, that we cannot presently apply our selves
with good, and exactly go over each particular of repentance to the full. Now
then, as much as it is possible, I say, to the utmost, do we set our selves
this way, to turn a new leaf, to change the whole frame and course of our
inner man: For lo* O Lord, there is no rest unto our souls, by reason of this
thy wrath, neither is there yet any ease at all to our consciences, by reason
of our sins. First then to begin, The former policy, delight and habit of our
mind, which we did heretofore seriously embrace, applaud and approve, is now
become hateful and odious unto us, we cannot abide so much as the very thought
thereof; and lo, the whole aim of our intention and purpose is only set to a
particular and punctual re-counting of all our sins past, although the
heynous^esse and multitude of them, for want of due repentance so long, is
perchance grown to that pass, that it is most irksom to us, our hearts even
faint thereat, and are very loath, even as loath to meddle thoroughly with this
scrutiny, and to search it to the purpose, as the grleved party is loath to
open the plaster from his tender soar, the clinging whereof he knows will
tear away the very skin from the flesh.

So hard a thing it is for to divorse
Sin, that is ro^ted with a constant course.
So difficult is the due ordering, purging and examining of a conscience that
is much overgrown with sin; we do now, as I say, set our selves to a particular
re-capitulation of all our sins that so we may fully try out, and remove the
cause of this our mis^ry, and therefore, as it were, stopping our ears and
apprehension, as much as possible, from the noise and disturbance of all other
things; we do altogether dive our thoughts into a most deep and distinct
consideration and remembrance of all our former iniquities, whereupon there may,
and doubtless will, at one time or other, occur unto our memory all, even
all, I say, and almost every one of the greatest sins of our whole life, with
their particular circumstances, and manner of committing. Thus here

Deep Melancholy, without noise presents
Of each our sins the sad and true contents;
And then she sits with that accusing scroll.
To pass her judgment on the guilty soul.
Judging, deeming, and concluding, sometimes one to be the greatest of the sins,
sometimes another; sometimes this to be the chiefest cause of our misery,
sometimes that; sometimes neither this nor that in particular, but in general,
the sinful courses of our whole time; but all this while, ever now and then,
shall we be thinking with our selves, sure our case is so dangerous, that never
any souls were in the like sad condition; sure our case is so incurably bad, we
cannot conceive how it is possible for us to come into Gods favor any more.

Our wound of Conscience is se deep, it is sure,
So deep, me thinks, that it is past all cure.
Thus we hang in suspense betwixt hope and fear, least that it be not possible
for us to be saved, and then snall we be very earnest and diligent to search
out after such books (if we can read) which handle matter of conscience, and to
peruse them, as perchance Master Greenbam, Master Perkins, Master Bolton, and
the like, to see whether we can find any likelihood that ever any have been in
the like wretched state before us, or affected with such trouble and
distraction in the same nature; and when perchance we do find but little or
nothing, whereby to conjecture that others formerly have been in such a case;
then verily, me thinks, there is no hopes for us, no body was ever in such a
desperate danger, and therefore we must needs be damned: But if peradventure we
read or hear of any that have been somewhat near alike affected as we are, whose
inward trouble does resemble the manner and fashion of ours, it does revive us
with a little comfort and satisfaction: That only does give us most ease of any
thing: That, and nothing but that, does afford some refreshing to our weary and
distressed souls: Well, having, as I say before, brought up our sins out of the
abisse of long oblivion; and as Enders Witch did Samuels person or personated
Ghost: So having raised up the true representation of these ugly ghosts, to our
sad remembrance, we labor by grieving and sighing; for perhaps we can hardly
weep at first, though we do much force our selves to it. I say, by sighing, by
fasting, and prayer, to bring our mis-happen and untowardly distempered souls,
to apply and conform to some lively penance and sensible remorse for our
wretchedness; we do now suffer no difficulty to withdraw us from this
necessary work of dejection, but do keep our selves at School to it by force,
for though we do grieve and sorrow not a little for our sins, yet still being
in this case as we are, it seems to us not enough, it pierces not to the
depth of our offenses, we must yet do penance in further humiliation; this then
compulsive and violent urging our selves to sorrow for sin, together with the
troubled thoughts of our mind and conscience, in a while breeds in us perchance
a constant custom and habit of sighing, so that we shall often, ever and anon,
interrupt our breath with sighs; when we are altogether so untoward and out of
all order in our minds, that we can do nothing else, nor pray, nor read, nor
consider, nor meditate as we should; then shall we force our selves to sigh;
this we can do, and this perchance is all that we can do; and this, with the
continued use thereof, does at length so spend our spirits, and dry up the
natural moisture of our bodies, that it makes our countenances, for the most
part, look with a very pale and sorrowful dejection, according to what Solomon
says, a merry heart makes a theerfull countenance, so our sorry heart makes
us a sad countenance, our beauty is quite gone, for very trouble, and worn
away because of all our iniquities; and though for all we are thus unreasonably
tortured with these close fretting troubles, and such continual anguish of
mind, yet a good while upon the first beginning of our trouble, it is the
nature of us all, to strive howsoever to keep it as much as may be, very secret
and private unto our selves, for that we are ashamed, and loath that any should
be acquainted with what an unhappy case we are in; but we shall usually with
the grief thereof, go about so solicitarily, so moopish, and look so ill, and
perchance starvingl^ too, as if we were drunken or distracted, that our friends
cannot but observe the unwonted state and behavior of us.

Each one may read the story of our case.
In the sad tokens of a silent face.
Such earnest trouble and intention of Hannab's mind, made old Ely take notice
of her, as if she had been drunken; who answers, No, my Lord, I am a woman of
a sorrowful spirit; And though perchance for a while we shall be loath to give
such an answer, and tell the truth to our friends, or others, who are ready to
demand what the matter is with us? why we look, or sigh so? what does a^le us?
and the like; yet in time this grief is so intolerable, that it must needs have
its vent, for strangulat inclusus dolor, any grief by its keeping close, does
rage the worse: Gods heavy hand is so strong upon us, there is no concealing of
it long; the weary and restless condition we are in, makes us in the end not
to care who knows it, or to whom it be told, so that we might but find any help
or ease thereof; for perhaps we are so exceedingly tired out with this trouble,
that there is not so much as the least rest or intermission at all unto our
minds, neither day nor night, whilst we awake we think out, whilst we sleep we
dream out, and we are interrupted with tumblings and tossings even all the
night long; the mind never cease from its trouble; when we are in company,
let there be what business or discourse soever in hand, we are amo^ost them,
as those that are quite stunned and amazed in our senses, no otherwise affected
then if we did neither see nor hear them, our mind being always working and
musing upon its inward grief; and when we are private by our selves, either
what through the agony of evil and tormenting thoughts. and what with plodding
on the heynousnesse of our sins and general course of our life, or by being
terrified and dismayed with certain difficult Texts and passages of Scripture,
our mind and conscience is in a constant agitation, at no rest.

Lo there is a fin, that to the heart does wound;
And here is a thought, that strikes us to the ground
With s^^ouning fear; And then a Text again
Buries that soul, which those before bad sluin.
I say, when we are in private, and so forth, for our desolate and sorsaken
soul delights, as David did in the 102. Psalm, to sit alone by her self like
an Owl that is in the desert, or like a Sparrow upon the house top; thus being
alone toyled in misery, and snarld in perplexity, that we cannot tell what to
do, we shall kneel down in our chamber, or elsewhere, and by urging our selves
to tears, in a while gush out a bundantly in our prayers, for though it be
difficult for a full grown and middle age to dissolve their grief into tears,
yet in such cases as this it is usual, and then most of us, when once we do
thus bring our selves into an use and custom of weeping, we do seldom pray at
any time without tears, desiring to weep often: and often in private, when we
cannot pray as we would, for how many and how many times is it, that we do
pray, God knows, with poor relish and devotion of mind, forcing our selves to
pray when we cannot pray, repeating the words, when we are in such a case, and
so out of order in our selves, that we have no heart or affection of Prayer? I
say, no heart for obserne hinc illae lachrimae, it is the deadness and want of
a heart, that is our greatest unhappiness in all our distresses, and therefore
good David so earnestly cries out for an heart, Create in me a clean h^a^t O
God, O turn my stony heart into an heart of flesh, etc. To go on, There is
most times suck an untowardlinesse in our hearts and affections unto prayer,
that our distempered thoughts by means thereof, are ready to turn every thing
to a quite contrary sense, to a vain, perchance, or ill conceit, so that when
we should be most reverently serious in our devotion, then do the twharting
glonces of our Fancy make as it were a foolery of it; and this will make us
exceedingly to sigh, and cry for discontent, that we should be so vain,
untoward, and out of all order; thinking, Lord, what shall we do, we cannot
help it, though we be thus never so untoward we cannot tell how to avoid it;
and these words perchance, we cannot tell what to do; Lord, we cannot tell
what to do in our greatest plunges of distress will be an usual expression
with us.

Lord, hear our groans, we wot not what to say,
We pray, and yet alas we cannot pray.
Of our selves we are not able sufficiently to think or comprehend in how bad a
condition we are, thou only that truly know our misery be merciful unto us
according to thy great mercy.

When we are solitary and melancholy, private musing upon our selves and our
miserable condition, there do often such quames of terror come over our minds
and consciences, with such fainty fits of despair, that we are even as heart
fick for the time with them; the cogitation of diverse things reflecting upon
our consciences makes our drooping spirits many a time even ready to forsake
the body, and give it its last farewell; sometimes that Text of the Hebrews,
which says, that those who after they have tasted of the heavenly gift, and
the power of the world to come, if they fall away it is impossible to renew
them to repentance. This word impossible is a hard saying, and does wonderfully
dismay us. Sometimes that unpardonable Sin against the Holy Ghost, which
shall never be forgiven, neither in this world nor in the world to come, does
strike us even as dead without hope of recovery; for let that sin be what it
will be, either this or that, as perhaps we have read and learnt out diverse
opinions of it what it is; sure we think the greathesse and heynousnesse of
our sins must needs without question comprehend it; nay, if it be a sin of
such and such a nature as some are of the opinion it is, there is not the least
doubt to be made but that we have evidently and often committed it. Sometimes
that place of doing despite to the spirit of grace does speak hard unto our
consciences, and sometimes that where it is said of Esau that he found no place
for repentance, though he sought it with tears. Sometimes the darting thoughts
which do so vehemently terrify and distemper our minds, makes us tremble to
think on that place in the Apocalypse, where the damned ou^ of their rebellious
nature are said to curse and blaspheme, etc Sometimes shall we think on Caines
sin, that it was no other then those sins were our selves have committed,
even perchance in the fame kind of malicious and murdering thoughts against our
Neighbors; besides so many and so great sins of other natures, for the which
we are more worthy to be damned then he. Sometimes the grievous punishment of
the murmuring Israelites, who were angry with God out of impatience, does pass
sentence upon us of the like Judgment and Condemnation. Sometimes again, the
application of Saul's case will disquiet us, the application of the house built
upon the sand, the application of him whose last estate was worse then the
first, who being delivered from one Devil, there entered seven worser ones
afterward into him. Sometimes we stick with great fear on Predestination,
being not a little touched with the utter improbability of our being
foreordained unto Salvation, who are altogether so wicked and untoward, that
God may as well, and with as good reason, to our judgment, save the Devil
himself as we; whatsoever we hear spoken either in Scripture: or else how to
the Condemnation of the wicked, does as justlv and fitly me thinks come to our
Consciences as if it had been framed on purpose for us: as also, whatsoever is
said to the commendation of the righteous, does sound again even as punctually
to our particular shame, and confasion of face. The saying of St. Peter to
Simon the Sorcerer, does most rightly me thinks fit us being thus truly in the
gall of bitterness, and in the bonds of iniquity; so hampered and snared in
our sins and terror of Conscience, that by no means can we get out of these
fears and distractions.

What ere we do, doubts do thereof arise,
What now we like, anon we do despise.
As for example; If we do give liberally to the poor, intending to take
Daniels counsel in his fourth Chapter, that is, To break off our iniquities
by showing mercy, and so forth; then sure it comes into our mind that our
actions are but Pharisaicall; or that we do^ it without charity, without which,
though we should give away all our goods, it will as St. Paul says, profit us
nothing; if we do not give liberally when as our ability can do it, then are
we just as churlish Naball, or as wicked Dives. Again, if we do let in the
consideration of our sins and miserable estate, so nearely and deeply into our
apprehension that we cannot endure it, then sure we are like Caine, ready to
cry out, that our raisery is greater then that we are able to bear: If on the
other side, we endeavor to forget it, and put it from our mind, then do we
seem like Saul, to drive away the evil spirit with David's Music: If we do
keep on our going to Church, and the like outward duties when as we seele no
good motions within us correspondent thereunto, but rather all untowardnesse,
then we are as Hypocrites, that make people to be mistaken in us, in accounting
and deeming us to be better the^ we be, to be something when as we are nothing:
If we do wholly omit and neglect those duties, as not to go to Church, and
the like; then are we profane Atheists, and not fit to live amongst
Christians; such is the unconstant weakness and unquietness of our souls,
that thus as Job, in the seventh Chapter, the fourth verse, When we lie down
we say, when shall we arise, and the night be gone; and we are full of tossings
to and fro until the dawning of the day; and with David, in the 38. Psalm, we
may most truly say, that there is no soundness in our flesh by reason of thy
wrath, neither is there any rest unto our bones by reason of our sin, for our
iniquities are gone over our beads, and are a sore burden, too beavy for us to
bear: a heavy burden, too heavy as well for our enfeebled bodies as
distempered souls.

The Soul and Body like two Turtle Doves
Do both in one affe^tion syrapathize,
What moves the one the other quickly moves,
Each in the others love both lives and dies.
As the Soul, so I say the body sustaineth an heavy portion of this spiritual
misery, for we do here with in time usually grow so weak, even truly, as they
say, so weak as water, being what with grief and abstinence from ordinary food
wasted and pined away to nothing but skin and bone; neither have our bones also
any rest in them, for they are ready to ache as we but lie in our Beds, and are
exceedingly dried up like a Potsheard; such is the feeble weariness and
laxation of our limbs, that kneeling any whit long at Prayer, when we rise we
shall be ready to f^ll backwards, so that as David in the 22. Psalm, just so
we are even powered out like water, and all our bones are out of join; if we
sit a while more then ordinary, such a benumbed stiffenesse and deadness does
seize upon us, that we shall hardly perhaps be able without help to stand
upright. Again, thus are we grown old. I say, old with grief, and are become
as it is said, Like a dead man that is forgotten. The continual sighing and
anguish of mind seems to press and oppress our flomackes, as if some heavy
weight did lie hard upon it; thy hand O Lord presses us so sore, that it is
uneasy for us to fetch our breath; and lo, it may be we are wholly for many
days together as in a constant feavour of distemper. I have known the water of
such a distressed soul, only through this intolerable trouble of mind and
Conscience, to look so ill that a wise and well experienced Pyhsitian has
given his opinion of it, that he never saw so bad and disturbed an estate in
all his life before. O the sad case! O the sorry and miserable condition of
man, that is thus wounded with the sting of conscience for his sin! Behold how
David complains and laments in his 39. Psalm, O take away thy plague from me,
for I am even cansumed by means of thy heavy band: When thou with rebuke do
chasten man for sin, thou make his beauty to consume away, like as it were
a moath fretting a garment, every man therefore is but vanity. O man, unhappy
man, who can sufficiently bemoane thee? What heart is there can choose but smart
to see this thy misery, and here to show the griese that I now conceive?

Ob that my tongue could speak forth tears of blood,
And eyes run down with waters like a flood.
But to go on, for we may not stay here; I say, to go on with the Story of our
darting and affrighting thoughts, when any grievous and terrour-striking flash
does dart into our minds, we are presently apt thereupon to ponder and examine
with our selves, whether it be worse and of greater impiety, then those that we
have formerly had, and for the most part, ever the last does seem to be the
worst; sometimes it may be we may thus think with our selves, why? what be they
but bare thoughts? they be not wishes, desires, or real actions of the mind;
And then perchance the next time these thoughts do come unto us in manner of
wishes, which for the present, through the sudden passion of fear, does
confound us with such an amazement, that we cannot at all tell what to think or
do, we are so quite out of heart with those and our other dismayments, for any
hope of salvation, that me thinks it is but a folly to persuade our selves of
comfort: Well, when the thoad^ of this overwhelming tempest is somewhat allayed
and past over; we shall perhaps begin to consider again (being loath to be
drowned) that grant they be wishes, or be they what they will be, never so bad,
yet we cannot help it, it is not in our power to dispose of our own thoughts
though they do come thus unhappily unto us; we desire them not, we had rather
be rid of them; and then, when we have so far pretty well resolved our
selves for the time, rather then our melancholy fancy shall be at any rest or
intermission from tormenting doubts and terrors, our half bewitched imagination;
our imagination, I may well say, as half bewitched, will also send for them,
and bring them into mind, and then there is not the least show of hope any
more to be caught hold by, then we are quite stricken down into Hell, with an
utter confusion of despair; we have hitherto strived against might, and all
in vain too but deceive our selves with hope; without question such is our
persuasion and conceit) we must needs be damned if ever any were damned; we are
now shut under Hatches, past hope of recovery utterly forsaken and cast off
from Grace; and sure we now count it an advantage, and ^he only height of our
hope, if we might but be in a lesser degree of Condemnation, we do take it as
a benefit to us, not to be placed in the extremest condition of Hell; this,
this is but a poor hope, a cold comfort God knows, and yet even this so poor
a hope can we hardly grant our selves. O now shall we think how happy is that
soul, that is but in probability of salvation; Oh, it is not preferment,
credit, rich apparel, or outward pleasures, the common joys and felicities of
this world, that stand high in our esteem, we can now value these earthly
things truly as they are, even as nothing; we envy not the happiness of those
that have them, nor are we discontent to be without them* give us, O Lord give
us this one thing, The comfort of thy grace again, The hope of salvation, and
we look for no more; hither, hither are our desires, our cares, our thoughts
only bent, here is the only treasure we aim at.

There Is no content without it to be had,
There Is nothing with it that can make us sad.
Two things are here well to be observed by the way; First, that the merely
reasoning and reflecting thoughts of Conscience do never cause such sharp fits
of despair in the soul of man, as those which are also partly darting and
affrighting: the second is, That despair in the understanding is nothing so
great an impiety against God as is despair in the Will, with an impatient
resolution, a dispairing motion or opinion, as a desperate sin.

To return again to the disconsolate amazement of our souls, laboring in
despair; this poor hope as I say of being in a lesser degree of Condemnation
we cannot grant unto our selves, for we shall reason chiefly thus; If God be
most just as he must needs be, he cannot but distribute equal right and
Justice unto all men, and so he may not spare any one person more then other,
for any favor or respect whatsoever, but only for their good behavior, and as
they have better husbanded their time and his gifts in them, for will the
righteous God of all the world judge partially? No verily, he is truth it
self, far be it from the Lord, as it is in the 34. of Job, and the 10:
verse, that he should do wickedness, and from the Almighty that he should
commit iniqutty, for the work of a man shall he render unto him, and cause
every man to find according to his ways; and though there be mercy to be
found in Christ for the greatest sinners, yet are we notwithstanding me thinks
to make account that God certainly requires our good behavior in amendment of
life, according to that of Saint Paul, in the second to the Corinthians, the 5.
Chapter, If any man be in Christ he is a new creature. As the Father is Truth,
so is the Son, and if we mean to be the better for him, and come thorough him
as the way into Heaven, we must follow him as he is the way, and the truth, in
newness of life; and therefore how can we, who be thus in the greatest state
of sin, as we conceive our selves to be both in the former passage of our
life, as also especially now for these present thoughts, and tormenting
impieties of mind, but needs expect and look for the greatest Condemnation of
all men: so true is that Heathen, but wise speech, Se judice nemo nocens
absolvitur.

There is no advocate can plead our cause,
When Conscience once does prosecute the Laws.
For nay, yet further, me thinks we do so much hate what we are, and applaud
Truth and Justice, that unless we might be free from sin, from this wretched
and hellish condition of mind, though God himself should now call us into
Heaven, we would surely stand without; we could not, nor would not come in,
unless he would show the like mercy upon all; unless all other men were
bidd^n come in too, whom we are of opinion to be far more fit for it then our
selves.

Well, this thought and conceit as it has some reason in it, in that we cannot
deject our selves as low as our sins deserve; we know so much of our selves
that we cannot but think all others better then our selves, who are so
exceedingly bad in our selves. I say again, as it has reason in it, duly
considering the unhappy state of sin; and this transcendent unhappiness of the
mind, which is now so full of the Hell of tormenting distempers and
despair, that we cannot think our selves possibly capable of that most holy
place, and glorious condition, which is only fit for the purity of Saints and
Angels: yet is there no question a kind of close stubbornness usually joined
with it, even in this our lowest dejection; thus I say, there may be though
we do not all perceive it, too much stomach in us: too much stomach; as much
as to say, Since that God has not delivered us from these sins and vvretched
untovvardnesses, we are therefore as it were careless to be delivered from
the punishment; as if a Father for some discontent should shut his Child out of
doors for an hour or two, though perchance the Father afterward would let
him come in, yet forsooth he will not, but in a mogging humor lies abroad all
night. So verily in this aforesaid passage and conclusion of mind, as I
conceive it, is not much unlike with us: as if God had fcarce dealt well
enough with us, to let us fall into these snares of sin and distraction:
therefore now peradventure in this case we do not much care for mercy; our
Melancholy forsaken soul, as David in the 77. Psalm, refuses comfort, and as
Jacob at the supposed nevves of ^osephs death, in the 37. of Genesis, would
not take comfort of his friend; so now either we cannot, or will not take
comfort from others; it is hard to tell ^ruely which is the cause for sin*

These motions have so deep a secrecy,
The truth thereof there is none can well discry.
As I say, let the cause be what it will be, either real or imaginary, or
deluding (for note this, that the excess of Melancholy in many of us is
altogether a strong distempered delusion of fancy) however, sure enough it is
to our seeming that we are not able to receive it, because whatsoever is said
to us by any of our friends or others in the way of comforting us, now in
this our extreme distress of mind: for the most part it is all in vain and to
no purpose; as touching the sins which lie upon our consciences like
mountains of Lead, too heavy for us to bear. If it be urged and applied that
St. Peter forsvvare Christ his dear Lord and Master, after that he had a long
time received so many gracious courtesies from him, after that he had been an
ancient Apostle, full of heavenly wisdoms and understanding; that David
committed both Murder and Adultery in his elder age, after he had familiarly
vvalked with God many years together, and yet both these so great offenders
were easily forgiven. Again, that our Savior Christ came into this World for
nothing else, dyed for no other purpose but only to save sinners; and that he
delighted in mercy whilst he was here amongst us, rejo^cing to do his Fathers
work, that great work of mercy; as appears by his general Proclamation,
Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, etc. and as it eminently
appears by his manner of conversation upon earth, by being usually amongst,
and familiar with Publicans and sinners, by his favorable and kind speech, and
behavior to that Woman taken in Adultery, to Mary Magdalen, and the like. Nay
^et once further, if it be urged and pressed unto our Consciences that the
mighty Jehovah, even the Lord God himself in his own words has spoken by
the Prophet Ezekiel, As I live, says the Lord God, I desire not the death of
the wicked. And again most Pathe^tcally by the Prophet Isaiah, Though your
sins were as crimson they shall be made as white as snow, though they were red
like scarle^, they shall be as wool. If you will, I say if you will at last
but endeavor to be reclaimed, if the consent, etc. as it follows in the next
verse; intimating that it is not the greatness of our sins that can separate
his mercy from us, if there be any desire or inclination to good, be it never
so little, even as nothing; for he will not quench the smoking flax, nor break
che bruised reed. Alas, it must needs be a very little fire that does but make
the flax to smoke, when as it is so combustable a thing that the least spark
is able to set it in a flame. Alas, the brickle reed being bruised and crushed
into shivers it is a very little hold-fast that it has, it is as good as quite
broken off, and yet he will not break it off, it shall grow together again,
become firm and useful* Such is the exceeding mercy of the Lord to poor
sinners, even beyond all humane likelihood and capacity.

When man does see no hope, or life at all,
Our God can then revive us with a call.
And yet lo, all these comfortable persuasions can do no good, all this is
but Surd^ cavere. to sing as it were to a dead man; this, nor nothing of this
fits our Disease, it comes not aneer me thinks unto our case, it agrees not
with our malady, though Christ came into the world to save sinners, and though
the Lord has given most large and merciful promises in the Scripture for the
comfort of sinners, yet this is nothing to us, this concerns not such sinners
as we; such grievous, such constant, such highly rebellious sinners; if others
have sinned grievously and yet are saved, certain there was a far greater
reason for it in their other towardliness to good, or the like, then that we
can find in our selves. Mark it, it is this our present untowardnesse that
always puts us into the greatest plunges of despair, and thus our thoughts
stand fully possessed with nothing else but that we are remediless wretches,
desperate miscreants, and utterly forsaken of God. And no marvel, that
thorough this sad unhappiness of mind that we, we miserable, wretched, and
sinful souls are thus forsaken, when as our blessed Savior himself in that
his great agony of trouble, and distress of mind on the Cross cried out, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? No marvel, I say, that we who are the
greatest of sinners should be forsaken, and left alone to sink into
unmercifull despair; when as he that was no sinner at all, even one with God
himself, with the imputative burden of our sins, Cried out, as if he had been
left destitute, and even ready to yield under them; My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? But to go on, O the strength of Melancholy, or rather
indeed the strength of sin, and a convicted Conscience! In Melancholy natures
there are no Arguments and Reasons of the most skillful Divines that can ease
our hearts, or refresh our souls in this extremity of trouble, perhaps
moderate Physic, convenient employment, and the constant company, direction,
and guidance of some wise understanding party may be necessary outward helps
for us; but verily the best inner comfort that at any time we do gather,
though usually it be but little, is as I have formerly said by those that are,
or have been afflicted with troubles and disturbance of mind, somewhat alike us
in the same kind, either by a full understanding of the event, passages, and
condition of their trouble, or else by conference with them if it may be, and
communicating our estates and maladies together.

Take It for a rule, that that Physician still
In all Diseases fits the Patient best,
Whose own experience does improve his skill,
And it confirms with a probatum est.
The experience, I say, of others misery is the best satisfaction we can find
in our own; and truly we do not meet with a better or more generally sovereign
salve, in the comparing of all our judgments and experiences together, then in
the midst of all our grievous tortures and distress of mind, to strive wholly
to rest our selves as quiet, as contented, and as patient as we may, and to
tarry the Lords leisure. Our souls, our bodies, and all are in thine hands, O
God, deal with us as it shall seem good in thine eyes; if thou have ordained
and prepared us for Heaven, blessed be thy Name; if thou have given us over,
and that we are like Tares bound up and fitted for Hell, blessed also be thy
Name; it is doubtless for thy glory, and it is but our just desert; come life,
come death, come Heaven, come He^l, the Will of the Lord be done; we are not
able to sustain the care of our selves, all the strength of our poor souls and
bodies is not sufficient to take a full charge, or undergo care enough to
preserve the least creature in the world, much less of so noble a creature as
is the soul of man: Since therefore we are not sufficient for these things, we
must do the best we may, and cast the rest of our care upon God; humbly
resigning over our selves unto him, that so he may bear that care for us,
which our weak and narrow ^ouls cannot bear for themselves. Sure we do not a
little offend God, I am verily of the mind, in being over much discontented,
and impatiently grieved, as many times we are in our selves; ^ot though in the
bitterness of our misery being persuaded to be content, and to be resolved
with more quietness of mind, we shall usually, not without reason, plead for
our grieving and taking on so deeply. O Lord, how can we be quiet and at rest,
to sustain such a Hell in our breasts? Can we carry fiery coals in our bosom
and not be burnt therewith? Can our soul be rackt with such tormenting anguish
of impious thoughts, and despairing terrors, and yet not weep, sigh, and
abundantly complain thereof? Does not Hezekiah in the 38. of Esaias, Chatter
like a Crow, and a Swallow, and mourn like a Dove, for the fear of cutting off
of a few momentary days, and can we be sufficiently impatient with grief, to
be cut off from the Land of the living, even all hope of Heaven for ever? Shall
Rachell mourn for the loss of her Children so that she will not be comforted,
and can we weep and cry out enough for the loss of our souls unto all
Eternity? Nay, can we endure but so much as to conceive the Devil haling,
^erking, and tormenting any of our dear friends, either living or departed
this life; I say, to see their distracted looks, to hear their lamentable and
intolerable cries, and not to have our bowels melt within us; and we can endure
to see our selves turned out from the face of God for ever, to burn and fry
most deservedly with everlasting pains in Hell fire. O let us alone at the
thoughts of these things, to pour out our selves into Oceans of tears, and to
roar, even roar aloud forth very disquietnesse of our hearts. I say,

O let us houle; cry out, and make a moan
Able to break the very hearts of stone.
So just cause have we in this case, me thinks, to forrow without measure, nay
more, if it were possible, then to the very death: Is there any cause of sorrow
like this cause? Weep not for me, that labor may be spared to weep for other
things: but weep for our selves, there is cause enough; that is truly to be
wept for, and nothing else but that for our souls unhappiness: And yet were it
nothing else but our own eternal punishment and damnation that were to be
lamented, though that were too too much, yet we could in some better sort bear
it; but this alas, who can bear this? how can we endure these impious
rebellions of mind, which are not only Gods punishments for sin, but also a
most highly sinful untowardnesse it self. Since then it is as it is, how can
we choose but vehemently take on and complain in the anguish of our spirits?
perchance it may be replied again unto us, that sure these rebellious untoward
thoughts which we so complain of, can be no sins which are thus displeasing,
thus tedious, thus full of trouble unto us. How can that act of the
understanding be accounted ours, which we do not enjoy and truly consent unto?
But grant whatsoever may be supposed, grant they be our own, grant they may
justly be laid to our charge, and that the Devil in this case does plough as
it were with our Heifer; and that we are partners with him therein; yet
certainly, both in regard of the despairing condition of our souls, or these
Hell-invented thoughts, doubtless as I say, we are not a little offended in an
over discontented vexing our selves, for patience in any misery is the most
pleasing and acceptable sacrifice unto God that can be, it is even a tended on
with some blessing in the end: As we may not sencelesly slight this judgment,
so we must endeavor patiently to bear it; O Lord, thou have written most
bitter things against us, thou pursuest us with intolerable judgments; and yet
we must not cease in laboring to offer up Jobs patient resolution, Although he
should kill us, (even with a thousand deaths) yet will we trust in him; O Lord
give me leave to speak it.

Thou ^halt not shake us off so, here we will lie
Before thee prostrate, if we dye we dye.
It is the Lords judgment, that we may be sure of, we are his creatures, and
the work of his own hands, let him therefore do with us what shall seem good in
his eyes; let this misery be never so bad, come never so unhappily unto us,
this is our wisdom, we cannot do better then to keep our selves calm from
preturbations, as much as may be; and as the King of Israel gave order to his
servants to give no answer to railing Rabshekah, neither good nor bad, so let
our affections, if it be possible, give no answer at all, but suffer the
thoughts, terrors, and dismayednesse of our minds, silently and quietly to
pass away again unregarded as they came; for these thundering storms and
tempests of inward troubles, when they fall down right upon us, in such a
forcelesse manner, like a violent stream usually carries down all before it, it
will by no means be stopped or contraried, until it please God thorough our own
poor prayers, and the assisting prayers of our friends, by little and little
to send it away from us as it came: For this, I say this, take notice of it,
this is always between whiles our maine stay and comfort, that there may
possibly be some hope of deliverance, at least, from those bitter troubles, in
that we strive to pray continually with such weak prayers, as we can and do
earnestly and often desire other our friends to pray for us. O Lord, though we
dare not for fear, nor cannot for weakness come unto thee our selves, being
brought so low and feeble with this Palsy of the soul, this heart-shaking and
trembling disease, yet like the man sick thereof in the Gospel, we desire to be
carried and commended unto thee by the prayers of others; and sure, O Lord,
thou know our misery and trouble right well, by the real experience of that
thine own, when thou said in thine agony, in Mark 14 My soal is exceeding
sorrowful unto the death. O thou that sufferedst the like grief, remember
ours now at this time; O thou that have dearer bowels of compassion to man
kind, then the most affectionate mother can have to her tender child, be not, O
be not so so hard hearted unto us

To thrust us from thy face with that hard word,
In the immortal censure of thine ire,
Depart from me, ye cursed of the Lord,
To dwell with Devils in eternal fire.
Well, to go further with continued experience in this trouble, we find our
minds usually to be more full of troubled thoughts and disquietnesse, as also
our breasts and stomachs to be oppressed and charged with a kind of aching pressure
and difficulty, about a pretty while after dinner or supper; the arising of
melancholy fumes from concoction being, as I conceive, a concurring means
somewhat the more to disturb us, sure there be many outward things that
increase our inward melancholy in this most melancholy time of a troubled
conscience, for behold in dark and gloomy vveather, how are we more then
ordinary solitarily sad and pensive, being altogether astonished and confounded
in our selves with confused clouds of unquiet distempers and amazement: Again,
at the hearing of doleful news of death, or any dismal accidents, how
exceedingly will our hearts swell, and be even ready to burst with a mournful
reflecting dejectedness of mind.

Cum repeto noctos queis tot mihi chara reliquis.
Labitur ex oculis tunc quoque gutta meis.
A tear does slide down on my cheeks
When I think on the nights,
Wherein I forced was to leave
So many dear delights.
According to this of the Poet here, when as we do but remember and think on
the golden times that are past, when as we do consider the deeds and pleasures
that we then enjoyed, which being now, gone have left us to remain so unhappy
behind them. How full of sadness are we to think that now we are so miserable
of what we were, speaking mournfully to our selves with Job in the 29.
chapter and 2. verse O that we were as in the months past, as in the days
when God preserved us, when his candle shined upon our heads, and when by his
light we walked thorough darkness, as we were in the days of our youth, etc.
Wishing, O thus ^ say, wishing for no greater happiness then that those times,
and that condition of comfort might return unto us again, the things and times
that are past, though never so lately, seems to us, me thinks, better then
those that are present; he that is at no ease thinks for the most part what he
feels to be the worst: such likewise is the nature of melancholy old age, ever
to praise the days of its youth, for mi^i^ familiari^as parit contemptum, the
familiar and satisfying fruition of any thing, breeds a neglect and light
regard thereof; and therefore now in our melancholy moods shall we be many
times musing alone, and sadly thinking, perchance whole days together, on
those worthy men that are dead and gone, either of our acquaintance or others,
whom we have noted and observed for their good life and conversation here,
whilst they were upon earth; accounting highly, of them, as holy and blessed
Saints, with a most reverend respect of their deeds and sayings, and making
much reckoning and esteem of whatsoever was theirs, and belonged unto them.

Our serious thoughts do Canonize their fame,
With the remembrance of a sacred name.
And as Joseph in the last of Genesis, fell upon his dead fathers face, wept
upon him, and kissed him, so do we fall upon the blessed remembrance of our
forefathers, not with a little affection of respect weeping upon them, and
kissing them with an holy love, and reverence of mind: After this manner the
Ancients in Scripture seem to express their special reguard to the pions
antiquity of their friends departed, in using to say, The God of Abraham, of
Isaac, and of Jacob, as if they would intimate their piety, and devout
affection to be the more unto him, because he was their fathers God. But O the
strange effects of Melancholy in this diseased state of the soul, our
affections are now over-weeningly moved with every thing often times by reason
of the usual passion of the heart, we are so weakened in the ordinary power
and ability of nature, that we shall even as weakly and childishly shrink in
our selves, and be afraid of any thing, as is the sucking child that lies in
its mothers arms. Again, sometimes our conceit does so much deifie the respect
of holy things, persons, and places, and we stand so far off from them in
reverence of mind, that we dare not draw near, as it were, to touch so much as
the very hemme or outside thereof. In like manner many times the common
splendour of the Sky and Element, thorough the habitual terror and
consternation of our mind, seems too bright for us; nay our spirits are
usually so much taken off therewith, that we cannot abide to lift up our eyes
to behold the luster of it: the seeing and hearing of diverse ordinary things
now and then, puts us into such strange turmoyles and distempered fits of mind,
that it is most wonderful to imagine it. In many of us the evil thoughts and
disturbances of our fancy do at length multiply into a greater and greater
variety, and we become full of all sorts of vain and tormenting imaginations
whatsoever almost savours of either rebellion against God, or the despairing
state of soul or body; it is a chance but one time or other it comes into
ourheads, besides, at length perchance many fooleries of mind and frivolous
whimsies, which verily at this time do not a little trouble and disturb us:
amongst the rest, when this trouble of mind and Conscience continues with us
long, it is so altogether tedious and irksome, that we shall many a time turn
thus our thoughts within our selves: Lord, how shall we hold out in this case?
Will this trouble continue with us as long as we live? Shall we always abide
this Hell upon earth? We have sometimes emboldened our selves to hope, and hope
again to attain some quieter temper of mind, and more contentfull condition;
all is we see utterly in vain, we shall sure never enjoy comfort any more:
Alas, this is a miserable thing.

O shall we never see an end of this?
O never, never, this does cut the heart;
This never, ah! so strange a word it is,
It kills us with a never dying smart.
Verily me thinks it is altogether in vain for us to expect any end hereof, we
shall never be otherwise; for as he that is cast upon the Sea, and when he
listetn up his head to swim out is presently knocked down again, that he must
needs be drowned; so, even so it seems to be with us, we are cast upon this sea
of trouble and despair, and when we do but even begin to lift up our heads
with the least hope of amendment, then presently do these despairing doubts,
and amazing thoughts strike us down again, that it is no remedy but we must
needs be drowned, drowned for ever, and go down to Hell, and the Grave in this
misery.

Our day is gone, our joys departed qnite,
Our Sun is set in everlasting night.
This Similitude of being drowned, after that we have been long in this case,
does so well fit us that it will, or perchance some such like, often come into
our minds, and therefore being as we suppofe in this remediless condition, out
of all hope of being settled in mind again, and being shut out as it were from
the joy of the living, and never like to re-attaine the common hope of all men,
the possibility of salvation; therefore, as I say, being thus forsaken
wretches, monsters of men, and marked out for Hell, we neglect all care of our
selves, our desolate and quite comfortless souls hardly giving us leave to
take any use of the Creatures, not so much as regarding our necessary Clothes,
the dressing our selves, our Victuals, or any thing: we are unworthy, O
unworthy to tread on the ground, our hearts are so much smitten down, and even
withered like Grass, that we forget to eat our bread; our tears are now become
our meat and drink in this day of trouble; and peradventure almost every night
we water our beds with the abundance of them: Thou have broken, O Lord, thou
have broken our hearts with grief; O remember that we poor wretches are but
Grass, and will thou pursue the dry stubble? Sometimes it may be we shall be
so far dejected with a Dove-like solitariness of mind, that we are even upon
a resolution to exclude our selves wholly out of the society of men, to be
private and alone still, continually to keep our Chamber, or the like, and
never to go abroad in company any more; thinking, what shall we do abroad to
meddle or make with any thing, who are thus as it were dead men, and out of the
common condition of men, we will set up our expectation therefore, only now to
wait and look for out end; we will do nothing else, that shall be our whole
business, as it was lobs, in his 14. Chapter, when he said, All the days of
mine appointed time will I wait, and do nothing else but wait till my change
come: thus I say, we are shut up from the joy of life, and like David in the
88. Psalm, Free, even altogether free among the dead, like unto them that be
wounded and lie in the Grave, which be out of remembrance, and are cut away
from thy hand; thou have laid us verily as in the lowest p^t, in a place of
darkness, and in the deep, thine indignation lies hard upon us, and thou have
vexed us with all thy storms.

Many times is our apprehension so dangerously out of joint, and contrary to
all good duties, especially most of all when we are at Church, when we are
going to the public Service of God, receiving the Sacrament, or the like; that
we shall ruminate thus in our minds: amongst all the rest of our unhappinesses,
how much do we dishonor God to come to this holy place, and these holy duties
with such profane impieties within us, sure we shall half think it better not
to come to the holy exercises at all then by going thereto to provoke Gods
greater Judgment against us.

Thus does Devil always 'ploy his wit,
If that he can to do more mischief yet.
But certain in the end we ever find it our best way, how cross and averse
soever our mind be to keep our constant course, and to hold on as steadfast as
may be in our outward endeavors, though it seem to be nevet so much against
our inward feeling; for we may observe, that when we have no feeling in us in
reading, praying, or the like duties of Religion, and when we find nothing in
our selves but contrarinesse to that which is in hand, yet nevertheless by the
then keeping our intention to it as near as we can; and by lif^ing up our
thoughts toward the sense to conceive and believe that which being for the
present as we are; we cannot conceive and believe we shall doubtless
afterward the more easily bring our thoughts into a due course and order
again; for if we let flag our apprehension wholly to follow our own feeling,
and suffer our disturbed soul to be its own guide herein, we may perchance fall
into a strange dis-respect and unregardfull profanation of the most sacred
things, that we shall hardly put it freely off again for the future. To
proceed, every thing during the time of our trouble is so altogether out of
order within us, and our spirits are so daily spent and wearied out with this
continual labor and toil of mind, that we are as David in his 6. Psalm, so
weary, so quite weary of our groanings and tormenting troubles, that many times
we do wish to God that our apprehensions and understandings were rather taken
clean from us, then thus to be left alone to the merciless torture of those
distractions; and truly were it not for Hell we should gladly rejoice, and
count it our chiefest happiness to dye, wishing, and often wishing with Job in
his 3 Chapter, the 11. and 12. verses, that we had never been borne into the
world, for now (as it follows in the next verse, we should have ^aine still
and been quiet, we should have slept, then had we been at rest with Kings and
Counselors of the earth: And again, as it is in the 20. verse, Why is light
given to him that is in misery, and life unto the b^tter in soul? Was it a
pleasure for thee, O Lord, to give us being that we might be miserable? Are we
like the Whales, Job 7. that thou se^test a watch over us? that thou will not
spare no^ pass by our iniquities? Will thou hunt us (as he he speaks again in
his 10. Chapter) like a fierce Lion without mercy? have thou provided us as
wild beasts are provided, to be baited with destruction?

O no certainly, thou delightest not in the death of sinners, nor in the sad
condition of the wicked, it is doubtless thy mercy that we are chastned, and
thou have compassion on our distresses; we shall think sometimes in our
extreme troubles, that it is not possible for us, that we can continue in this
state above three or four days, or a week more, but either we shall die with
the very anguish of soul and body, which it seems to us that we cannot sustain
or endure any longer, or else that we shall be quite senseless and distracted
out of our minds: O how many poor souls are there in the world, who being not
able to bear their own misery any longer, either destroy and desperately cast
away themselves, or peradventure grow utterly distracted therein; It is thy
mercy, even thy great mercy, O Lord, that we are not thus confounded; O let us
ever pray, and pray continually, upon our bare and bended knees, against this
unhappiness, Hoc erit animae me ae vetum usque ad mortem, this shall ever be
my prayer until I die, both for my self and others.

Let our lives last no longer
Then that we may serve God here;
Let affliction grow no stronger,
Then we may with patience bear,
When we do use to complain to others of these terrible thoughts and troubles
of mind, many will reply unto us, that they are the Devils, not ours, and that
he merely suggests and whispers them into our brains: But verily me thinks we
cannot believe but that they are our own truly, flowing from our sin-corrupted
souls, at least wise that they are partly our own, for did they come merely
from without, from the Devil, it could not doubtless so nearly touch us as they
do. Our Savior Christ himself was moved from without, even to the highest
impiety, to fall down and worship the Devil: But sure our thoughts are nearer
to us, even from within, and truly, not without reason, may be called ours: it
may be the Devil has his hand in them, and it is no question but God has his
hand in them also, laying them as a merciful judgment upon us: And now, O
Lord, it is high time, yea the time is come, that thou have mercy upon our
souls, for why I know it grieveth thy very heart, O Lord, it pittieth thee full
sore to see them lie in the dust thus prostrate in their own misery: And thus
have we broke the heart of our troubles, and past over the chief passages of
this tragical story of the Soul troubled in Conscience.

These troubles may perhaps continue with us two or three years before they
begin to wear away; and then when by Gods mercy, they begin to slacken the
mind and conscience, by little and little, takes some rest and satisfaction,
and though fits of disturbance do now and then come upon us, yet it is more
seldom then before.

After the strength of this storm is past, we usually feel our inner man begin
to be born again into a new condition, the former hard and stony flesh of our
hearts, like N^amons flesh, being tender and ^enewed, even as the flesh of a
young child (...) lo, we can kindly weep now with the humility of children,
think none evil with the simplicity and single heartedness of children, love
dearly and tenderly with the affection of children, cry Abba, Father, with the
comfort and confidence of children. And here me thinks we cannot but remember,
even with joy and admiration, the truth of that divine wisdom which our
Savior has spoken in John* Except a man be born again, be cannot see the
Kingdom of God, Except we be borne again, and become like little children, we
cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, for of such as he said in Mark 10. is or
does consist the Kingdom of God. Doubtless, when the soul is thus wonderfully
born again, from the depth of sin and misery into comfort and grace, although
the comfort be but little, even very little perchance in some of us; yet it is
Magna animae regeneratio, I say, no doubt a great regeneration and new birth of
the soul, and that which we have great cause to rejoice of; for you must
understand it pleases God differently to dispose of the final period and
conclusion of this our trouble according to his most blessed Will and purpose,
giving some of us much more joy in the end of it then some; as also in some of
us, continuing it like an ach in the limbs, ever now and then to mind us until
our dying day; and some of us again after a while never feel it any more. O
Lord, what reward of thanks can we give unto thy mercy that have done so great
things for us whereof we now rejoice? Verily no Tongue can speak, no finite
understanding can comprehend, it has never entered into the apprehension of
either man or Angel, the infinite goodness that thou do extend to the souls
of sinners.

O now with David we may sweetly sing, Psalm. 101. 1

Of Mercy and Judgment to our heavenly King.
And has the Lord God Almighty, that is most wonderful in all his Works done
this great Miracle for us, in casting out this foul Devil, this foming and
raging Beelzebub, this chief of all misery out of our souls? O let us then take
heed that we sin so no more least a worse thing come unto us, least he get
power to come in again, and bring seven other with him worse then himself.
Here you may take notice as I say, That in some of us this our misery is not so
fully quenched, nor this Devil so cast out, but that there remains in us ever
now and then the touches of our former misery, though the heart of it be broken
yet the being is not wholly taken away; God in his infinite Wisdom so
ordering it, perchance to exercise our patience, or some other cause which he
only knows, and we cannot fully judge; only let this be our chiefest care
sithence sin and misery must needs dwell with us whilst we live, that (if
possible) we keep our selves within the compass of patience, and humility in
all conditions of our life, let us in patience possess our souls; and though
as St. Paul in the 20. of the Acts, when he was going to Jerusalem knew not
what things should come unto him there, save only says he, That the Holy Ghost
witnesses in every City, saying, That bands and afflictions abide me: so we
that are traveling to the new Jerusalem, being sure of nothing in our Journey,
but sure of trouble, yet as Aeneas in the Poet, comforted his wandering
Soldiers, whom necessity had banished from their own Country, that the Destiny
had promised them in the end a resting place in Italy, I say as he thus
comforted them:

Pervarios casos per tot discrimina rerum tendimus in latium seeds ubi fata
quietus ostendunt. So in like manner may we Pilgrims and Strongers of this
world thus cheer up our selves in consideration of our Journies end, although
that now

Thorough many dangers, miseries and woe,
Like Pilgrims we are tossed to and fro:
Our comfort is, the Fates tell we shall come
In death at length to have a resting home.
Whilst this our trouble is wearing away we shall be for the most part full of
charitable and fellow-feeling thoughts to be lovingly affected, and doing good
unto all, especially to the distressed in what case soever, even unto our
utmost ability; as also we shall use to be frequently weeping, and condoling
our unhappy life; weeping I say, and sorrowing like melancholiy Heraclitus, and
wishing that we might dissolve out the residue of our days into tears, in
redeeming the time because our days have been so evil; and that the whole
action of our momentary life might now be nothing else but a mournful and
Swan-like Song of preparation to our end.

Our sighing soul with Dove-like melody
L^ments her sins, and learneth how to dye.
Jacob when Pharaoh asked him how old he was, answered, That his days were few
and evil; how much more truly may we say of our short and sinful days, that
they are few and evil: he was an old man, and yet his days were few, he was a
good man, and yet his days were evil. Oh the short and evil estate of man's
life! wise men have always accounted their days but few, for that their
thoughts are fixed upon God, and then says David, Min^ age is nothing in
respect of thee; and again, for that their thoughts are fixed upon the blessed
Eternity of the world to come, and then they consider with St. Paul, That they
have no continuing City here, but they seek one to come. I say, wise men thus
esteemed their days few, and they accounted them likewise evil; evil in
regard of sin, for they feel the experience of St. Paul's case, That when they
would do good evil is present with them: and evil also in regard of misery,
for Job says, Man is borne to trouble as the sparks fly upwards. And is it
not too true that man is thus borne to trouble? If not, what means that
complaining which I hear? Hark how Cai^e cries out in the fourth of Genesis,
My punishment is greater then that I am able to bear; and do you not hear
Eliah under the Juniper Tree, in the first of Kings, the 19. Chapter, how he
requesteth for himself, That he might dye: and Jonah under the Gourd, saying,
Take away my life, for it is better for me to dye then to live. Jeremy is even
blind with weeping, Lamentations the second Chapter, Mine eyes do fail with
tears, my bowels are troubled, my liver is poured out upon the earth and all
for the affliction of his people for the misery of man; Solomon in the 6. of
Ecclesiastes, thinks it far better not to be borne then to undergo the
miseries of this life; how often does Job lament his days, and David complain
of his troubles? the Shunamites. Child in the second of Kings cries out, O my
head, my head; another perchance cries out, Oh my stomach, oh my heart, oh my
Conscience, oh my belly, oh my feet; A capite ad calcem, from the top to the
toe, from the beginning to the end; for ought we can perceive there is little
true comfort or pleasure in the life of man.

With tears we came into this life,
With sorrow we go out again:
We live in trouble, care, and strife,
And have our labor for our pain.
We have seen not a little experience of the manifold changes and variety of
alterations that are Created for mankind under the Sun, and verily me thinks
the counsel of Ecclesiasticus in his 38 Chapter, and the 20 Verse, well
weighing the condition of all things is full of wisdom and discretion, that
is, To take no heaviness to heart, to drive it away, and to remember the
latter end. I say, To take no heaviness to heart; that is, Not to grieve over
much, or take on out of reason, least as St. Paul said of the excommunicate
person in the second Epistle to the Corinthians, and second Chapter, We be
swallowed up of too much sorrow; for this being swallowed up too much, this
over-yeelding up our strength of nature to solitary grief, and mournful
Melancholy gives the Devil many times great advantage of us, as he intimates
in the 11. verse of the aforesaid Chapter, Least Satan, says he, should g^t
advantage of us; for we are not ignorant of his devices, indeed we ought duly
to be humbled, and as St. Paul speaks in the first Epistle to the Corinthians,
the 5. Chapter, To deliver over our selves, our senseless stubbornness unto
Satan for a time, for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be
saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. But we must understand also, that it is not
convenient for us to grieve without measure, and without end, for certainly it
is not the sorrow of heart that does help us in such disease, it may hinder us
of help, it is the religious cheerfulness of a better desire that in time
works the cure; therefore we may herein advise our selves as St. Paul did
Timothy, in his first Episte unto him, and 5. Chapter, To drink no longer
water, that is, not to feed too much on the bread of carfulness, nor drink in
the water of affliction into our souls, but to use therewith a little wine; I
say a little wine, Wine which (as David says) makes a merry heart; to strive
to take comfort, and to be merry in the fear of God, whereby nature may be the
better enabled also, to set to her assisting hand in the deliverance: Mirth
cannot err as long as it remembers its latter end, and the fear of God, to
enjoy both our selves and Gods blessings in a moderate and cheerful manner is
not only lawful but necessary for us; Religion is no enemy to honest mirth,
neither does the Almighty desire the death of sinners, but their life; their
death of grief but their life of grace. Alas, we are but weak Creatures, and
of a short continuance. O Lord, we have sinned, as Job says in his seventh
Chapter, What shall we do unto thee, O thou preserver of men? and as he says
again in his sixth Chapter, Is our strength the strength of stones; or is our
flesh of brass? O Lord, we cannot abide the fury of thy wrath for sin, nor are
we able to behold thy sierce indignation; thou therefore that bring man to
destruction, humblest him down to Hell, and the Grave, and sweetly say,
Come again ye children of men, re-exaltest him to thy favor. O consider that
our age is short, even no more then as a span long, we are, alas we are but
Pilgrims, Strangers, and Sojourners here as all our fathers were; O spare us,
therefore spare us a little, this little space which remains of our life, that
we may recover our strength, before we go hence and be no more seen.

Before we go thither from whence we shall
Return no more, no more, no more at all.
And now me thinks I hear the Body thus speaking unto the Soul, O my love,
will thou go away from me? Alas, will thou go away from me? thou know that
I have no comfort at all but thee, thou art my joy, my whole delight, and will thou be gone, and leave me behind here to be utterly cast away, to putrify,
rot, and perish in the earth? If the Disciples were so sad and sorrowful at
the departure of St. Baul, in that he said, They should see his face no more;
how do thou think I can choose but even swoone and dye with conceit that thou will thus leave me, me poor wretch, that can have no being nor subsistence
without thee? but lo, the Soul replies. Why do thou weep my dear? though I
must go from thee for a time yet be not discomforted, I will come and see thee
again, and embrace thee with everlasting embracements, I will then never go
from thee more; O give me leave to depart, for God has decreed it, Nature has
appointed it, we cannot live together on Earth as we be, but we shall live
together hereafter in a most absolute and perfect being, we must needs submit
to mortality:

Ah, there is no continuing here, my sweet heart,
Death does the dearest lovers part;
For why? we are mortal and all must away,
To take our lodging down in the clay.
But though we lie down yet shall we rise again, and that even in a while; for
lo, but little while, and he that shall come to open the Graves, to fold up
the Heavens like a scroll, and to unbarre the fatal strength of time; I say,
he that shall come will come, and will not tarry. Oh! but a little while, and
the Son of man shall appear like the bright Lightning, with the glorious
company of his most holy An^els, to gather together the four corners of the
earth, even the people from the one end thereof unto the other unto a day of
Judgment, where we shall then stand before the Judgment Seat of God, to be
settled in a perpetual and never ending condition: wherefore let our spirits, O
let our spirits, and all that is within us with the aspiring Lark humbly mount
up to meet the Lord in the Clouds now before hand; with this melodious Antheme,
this song of Sion in our mouths, O blessed Jesus, remember us with mercy when
thou come into thy Kingdom; O thou that come ^^ judge the world
condemn^us not for our sins at the last day; O sweet Savior deliver us from
that red Dragon, which ^peneth his terrible mouth ready to devour us: O
preserve us a while here on earth, that we may be with thee for ever in Heaven.

To see the mighty glory and renown
Of him that is, and was, and is to come,
And to that end make us, O make us in these few hours which we have to live,
never to forget the words which thou faidest of thy self in the ninth of St.
John, the fourth verse, whilst thou wast on earth amongst us: I must work the
works of him that sent me while it is day, the night comes when no man can
work: That we may take this thy example for a pattern all our lives long, and
may turn this thy holy resolution into our practice and meditation
continually. First, that as thou did work, so must we work here and not be
idle. 2. That as thou did work the works of him that sent thee into the
world, so must we also work the will of our father which is in Heaven. 3. That
as thou did it in thy day, so must we do it in our day, this day of our life.
4. For as the night, the night of thy Passion comes, so our night of death is
continually approaching. 5. And then no man can work, even no man at all can
work out his salvation. O excellent rule I here is room enough for our souls
to exercise their thoughts day and night, even this day of working until that
night of rest; this day of life until that night of death, when no man can
work. To begin with the first observation, that as our Savior Christ so must
we Christians work and take pains; before Israel could come to their Canaan of
rest they did pass thorough a wilderness of troubles: no end can be attained
but by the means* there is no coming to salvation but by the way, no getting
into Heaven but thorough the Gate; and our Savior has told us (we must
believe it) That straight is that Gate, and narrow is that way which leads
unto life, and few there be that find it: if we must eat our bread with the
sweat of our brows, sure we cannot save our souls with being idle. if God will
not part from his earthly things, which in St, Paul's language are but dung,
unless we give for them our labor and travel, will he sell us that precious
pearl, the Kingdom of Heaven for nothing? No, no; the Merchant-man in the
Gospel sold all that he had to buy it, and we must not think to have it at a
cheaper rate. Quam laboren suscipimus ascendere colles quid vero ut ascendamus
coelum. So St. Cyprian, what labor do we take to get up a hill, how much more
must we take to get up to Heaven. Our Savior took not his Disciples of idle
persons, but of painful Fishermen, and from the midst of their labors to
show us, that Christianity is not a lazy Trade, an idle Profession: there is
not one of the Saints gone before us but has trod many a weary step ere he
came to Heaven, the gall of outward crosses, and the vinegar of inward
afflictions that was their portion to drink; and doubtless had there been an
easier way they had not all trod in so rugged a path. Christ is truly our way,
and he himself had no better portion in all his life, but continual labor
and travel; he was always working, as here I must work, says he, The works,
etc. he was ever all his life long walking to and fro, taking care and pains in
Preaching, doing Miracles, full of troubled and pensive thoughts, ^orrowing and
weeping even many times in the grief of his spirit, but seldom or not at all
shall we find him sitting still without employment, laughing, making merry, or
taking any recreation, and though we cannot come near his perfection, yet
says one, Deus abunde declaravit in fillio qua ratione servos suos in hoc orb
tractari veli^. God has plainly showed, that since his Son did undergo so
much trouble, his servants may not expect only to live at pleasure, in rest and
content. What a toil had Saint Paul to pass thorough this vale of misery in
watchings, in fasting, in prayer, in fightings, in all manner disquietnesse.

Nunquam bella piis nunquam certamina desunt,
Et quocum certet meus pin semper bab^t.
Trials and troubles always are at hand,
True piety of mind for to withstand.
The righteous man must not look to have his portion of good things in this
life, all that will live godly here are to make their accounts of nothing else
but difficulties and careful inconveniences to attend them; snares and
temptations from without, terrors and distress of mind from within; every day,
every hour, every moment, something is out of order; if we be not furnished
from top to toe with Saint Paul's Armor, we must look for nothing but wounds
and foyles in this spiritual life, for Congrediendum est tanquam in arie
voluptuariis rebus; so Macrobius, We must fight like Soldiers against the
temptations of the World, and as Soldiers we must not only fight, but watch
too. Watch, I say, day and night, standing in readiness against our spiritual
adversary, who goes about continually like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may
devour. What shall I say? if we look on all particulars, a christians life is
nothing for the most part, but a real purgatory upon Earth, an Hereulian
labor, the very Epitome of all difficulties. Lucian could say it, Non parum
est resistere to^ quidem voluptatibus, It is no small matter to encounter with
so many pleasures, much more with so many sins, so many terrors of mind; we
have here verily a hard race to run, a hard Battle to fight, yet so fight we,
as not those that beat the air; so run we, as not uncertainly; there is an
eternal weight of glory set before us, a certainty of comfort in the end;
fear not, our Savior has said it, it is your Fathers pleasure to give you a
Kingdom for your labor, Quodlibet opus leve est quum praemium ejus cogitatur,
says Jerome, There is no pains can be thought too much, when we consider the
greatness of the recompense. Saint Paul is persuaded that nothing that we
undergo in this life, can be worthy the glory that shall be revealed; and well
might he so think: O Lord, the utmost that we can do or suffer, is not worth
the least glimpse of that glory which thou have prepared for them that love
thee, and yet thou acceptest the weakness of our poor desires, as an ample
satisfaction; when we have done all that possibly we can do. we have done but
our duties, we are unprofitable servants, and yet so abundant is thy goodness
toward us, that thou will be pleased to impute that unto us, which is so small
a matter, that we cannot of our selves acknowledge it to be any thing, for they
shall answer as it is in the 25. of Saint Matthew, When saw we thee hungry, and
fed thee? or thirsty, and gave thee drink, etc. And the King shall answer and
say unto them again, Verily I say unto you, in as much as ye have done it unto
the least of these my Brethren, ye have done it, etc. Verily, I will accept of
this, this nothing, as it were, of yours, as a great reward, and this is the
reward, this is the price that we must give for Heaven, a purchase truly well
worth the utmost that we can do: For

Quid potes aeterno pro munere forre laboris,
Mercedi an tantae par labor esse potest.
I say,

What labor is enough? what sweat? what pain?
For to receive such an immortal gain.
Be we not startled at the difficulty of the work, for says Seneca, It is not
the part of a man, to be afraid of labor, much less of a Soldier, and much
less yet of a christian Soldier, who serves such a General, that he may be
sure will never deceive him, nor cast him off without his pay, for he serves
him with whom there is no variableness at all, nor shadow of change, even God
himself; which is the next observation, and now to be considered. As our
Savior wrought the works of him that sent him into the world, so must we
Christians work and do the will of our Father which is in Heaven, we are
taught, not my, but thy will be done, and quid melius potes velle quam qu^^
Deus vult, what is there that thon can rather desire then to do the will of
God? says the Philosopher, Gods will is the Center of all humane wills, where
they naturally enjoy their rest and quiet, and though they may for a time seem
to fix a kind of delight and pleasing satisfaction on other things, yet is
there no true, no perfect and full rest, but in Gods will. O thou soul of man,
why do thou send out thy thoughts so far, to seek rest and happiness in
rithes, in honors, in learning, in pleasure; alas, in these things it is not
to be found, intra te est falicitas tua, thou must look after it within thee,
if thou mean to find it thy understanding, thy vvil, and thine affections,
sweetly turned to the Service of God; This, O this, alone is that good which
has true content. No, S^mpsons strength, Salomons vvisdome, or David's
victories, can give any felicity at all to the mind of man* without God; in
the performance of Gods will is the whole perfection of man's good: And
therefore

When Adam did at first Gods will transgress,
He made us slaves to all unhappiness,
That was it that brought so much trouble, so many sicknesses, so much death
and hell into the World* and it is that still that keeps us in perpetual
misery; we eat and are not satisfied, we labor and have no comfort therein,
and all because we do not fully submit our selves to Gods Will; there is
nothing can do us good any further then as it is conformable to the Will of
God: for behold, we may work, and work hard all our lives long even in the best
things, and be never the nearer Heaven. Thus does our Religion make no
progress to salvation, when we will be religious only after our own fashion;
here none but such things as please our humor, practice such piety as huggs
our Genious* this is as St. Paul speaks in the third Chapter of the second
Epistle to Timothy, this is verily I say, to be lovers of pleasures, of our own
fancy and delight, more then lovers of God, having in profession a form of
godliness, but in effect denying the power thereof: and thus, when there is so
much of our selves put into the duties of Religion, our fasting, our prayers,
our alms, and the like, we may say as St. James did in another case, Sure this
Religion is vain, and altogether in vain. Tam grande malum est voluntas
propria. So great a mischief, says St. Bernard is our own will, even so great
a mischief that it breaks the neck of all religious duties be they never so
glittering, making them as the father has it only, Splendida peccata, glorious
sins, whereas an humble conformity to do the Will of God, though with the
meanest abilities is a great proficiency in Christianity, a little leaven of
our own wtll and humor in the service of God is of such an infectious
strength, that it is able to sower the whole lump of Religion; so necessary it
is for us, as our Savior says to, Beware of this leaven of the Pharisees, the
humoursome selfe-conceitednesse of our own ways, Whosoever will come after
Christ must deny himself, I say, must deny himself, and take up his Cross
and follow him; for they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the
affections and lusts; they have renounced their own wills, they have put off
themselves with that fiat voluntas tua, Thy will be done. It shall not profit
us to give away all our goods to the poor, or even to l^se our lives, unless
it be in Ordine ad Deum, to perform Gods will, and for his sake. S. Paul when
he began to live the life of a Christian, left off to live the life of a
natural man, I live, says he, Gal. 2. 2. Yet not I, but Christ lives in me.
Thus must Christianity thrust out nature because the natural man cannot please
God; O Lord, whilst we are in the flesh, we cannot serve thee as we would; but
Oh that we were delivered from this servitude of sin, that we might freely
embrace this heavenly employment, Maxiraum est munus Deo ministrare, Isocrates
counts it the best office in the World to serve God; And how can it be
otherwise? for as one notes, that Saints in Heaven do rather rejoice in doing
the will of God, then in enjoying their own happiness. O blessed work, can
we but desire that which is as good as Heaven it self.

The trade of Saints is to rejoice always
In their Creators will, and sing his praise.
For thus they say in the fourth of the Revelations, and the 11. verse. Thou art
worthy, O Lord, to receive glory and honor, and power, for thou have created
all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created, because thy will is
fulfilled, therefore we rejoice and set forth thy glory for ever, It was the
very meat and drink of our blessed Savior all the while that he was in the
World, to do his Fathers will, sure he loved it so much that he did nothing
else from his childhood to his death; and he that did so much delight in it
himself, does so much like it in us, and so highly esteem it, that for it he
does not only vouchsase us the name of friends, but we must claim kindred
with him, he has said it himself, He that does the will of my Father, he is my
Brother, and Sister, and Mother; Drexelius makes it to be the perfection of
felicity, unicam in omnibus Dei voluntatem, etc. to be observant in all things
to the will of God, is the compendium and sum of a most ^appy life; since
then we are to do the work and will of such a Master, whose service is an
happiness, whose commands are not grievous, and delights not in bloody
sacrificing of our selves, but only in a cheerful obedience: O let us not be
worse then the Centurians servants, who when to one of them he says, go, he
goes; and to another come, he comes, and to the third, do this, and he does
it.

So much for the second thing to be considered, That we must do the will of our
heavenly Father. The third is, That we must do it in this our day or
opportunity of life, while it is day. Not months, not years, not ages, are to
be expected, we have but a day for it, and no more, we may husband this short
time to our best advantage, to day if we will hear his voice we may, for this
is the appointed time, this is the day of salvation, aut nunc aut nunquim, what
we do we must do now or never, up therefore and be doing, presens tempus
operationis est futurum retributionis, so says Nazianz^n, the present time is
the time of vvorking, the time to come is the time of rest, the least neglect
at this time is an everlasting loss and hinderance to us; we shall never have
again the opportunity we now have, aliqua est rerum omnium recuperatio nulla
temporis, says one, there may be some recovering or* repairing of any thing
else that we lose, none at all of time, our money, our honor, our health, may
be restored again but our time is so precious, that if once lost, it is for
ever lost. Lamachus, a Captain, on a certain time chid one of his Soldiers
for committing a fault in the Field; the Soldier promised him never to do so
again, but he replies, in bello non licet bis peccare, good fellow thou may
not commit a fault twice in the Battle since that one fault is enough to lose
all: It is our case. Post est occasio calva, this opportunity being once lost,
can never be recalled, this day being gone no man can work* there is a time
when the Virgins may enter in with the Bridegroom, there is also a time when
the door is shut; there is a time when the poole of Bethesda is troubled by
the Angel, and there is also a time when it is not; vere poenitens de tempore
nihil perait, says Saint Bernard, the true repentant Christian omits no
seasonable time, because he cannot tell when he shall have another; the wise
man bids thee go to the Pismire thou sluggard, she ployes her time in the
Harvest, to provide against winter, this is the summer and harvest for our
salvation.

Non estas ita semper erit componite nidos.
The Summer that is now cannot long last,
O then provide before it be all past.
O let us provide, I say provide in time, Before (as Solomon says) the silver
cord be loosed, or the golden bowl be broken, or the Pitcher broken at the
^ountaine, or the wheel broken at the Cisterne; then shall the dust return to
the earth as it was, and the spirit return to God that gave it.

Dum vires annique sinunt tolerate laborem,
Iam veniet tacito curva senecta pede.
It is here good to take the Poets advice, to work whilst we have strength and
vigor, whilst we have marrow in our bones, and perfect health in our bodies;
there is a night of old age too as well as of Death, and then no man can well
work; we must consecrate the first fruits of our age to Religion, and remember
our Creator in the days of our youth.

Non semper vtolae non semper lillia florent.
The Violets, and the sweetest Lillies, they
Do soon put off their brave and rich array.
The flower and chief of our age will quickly fade, so soon passes it away
and we are gone. Have we any business of moment to be done, we will be sure to
be stirring betimes about it; the work of our salvation concerns us more then
any work, then any business besides. O let us then be stiriing betimes about
this, early in the morning, I say the morning of our youth, which is the best
time of working. Collige virgo rosas and memor esto aevum sic properare tuum, O
young man, gather the prime Rose of thy time while it is fresh, for remember
ere night the Sun will make it wither. Is there not a season says, the Wise
man, and a time for every purpose under the Heaven? a time to be born, and a
time to dye, etc. Our words here answer him, There is a day to work, and a
night not to work, a day for employment, and a night for rest: The busy Be
is hot at her labor in the Sunshine, whilst lazy man lies asleep in the
shadow. O the foolishness! O the madness of man, to lose so much time of so
little! How many excuses do we make, rather then we will take the pains to go
to Heaven? How many days do we put off with a Cras, cras; to morrow, to
moroow, when woe is us many times the last s^nd of our life is even now running
out; this is our wont, commonly to procrastinate from one day to another, from
one month, from one year, from one time to another, till at last peradventure
it be too late; the day sure is far spent, and the night is at hand, let us
take heed, it is great folly to say, We will live as we should to morrow, we
must live to day if we will be sure to live at all; he that deserreth the time
of his working in this life, shall not be able to defer his punishment in the
life to come; Et acerbissima est mora quae t^ ahit penam, And that is a most
bitter delay (says St. Austine) which increases our p^n^shment; he that does
not prevent it bef^r^ shall repent it after when it is in vain. In all other
things ^e do find the danger of delays, and we can take heed to prevent it:
we will not lose a fair day in Harvest, a prosperous gale of wind to set to
Sea, an advantage to get preferment, and the like: See in every thing else we
can be wise enough save only in this and this only unto salvation. I shall wish
that for our selves which Moses did for the Children of Israel, Deuteronomy. 32. and
the 29. Oh that we were truly wise, that we understood this, that we would
consider our lat^er end; Oh that we would remember (with David) how short our
time is, Oh that we would remember (with Sa^^mon) the end, and then we should
not do amiss; Oh that we would duly consider with our Savior here, that the
night is at hand, we would doubtless work while it is day, because the night
comes; which is he fourth Observation, and comes next to be thought on; for
the night, the night of our death comes, or is continually approaching; the
night, a long night that shall never have a morning.

Soles occider^ and redire possunt,
Nobis cum s^mel occidit brevis lux,
Nox est perpe^uo u^^ dormierd^.
The Sun sets and returns again, but man dies, and where is he? He shall
not return again from the Grave, and his place (says Job) sball know him no
more: Oh, alas, no more for ever.

From all our friends, our goods, and houses, we
By death must part to all eternity*
O woe is us that we must needs away,
Never to come back no more, no more for aye.
Never to see again, be acquainted with, or so much as to hear of any of
these earthly things any more, with which many of us are now so earnestly and
wholly taken up, as if there were no other thing or being to be thought on. O
me, what pity is it:

That most of us so lavishly do spend
Our days, as if they never should have end:
Our thoughts with death we never care to try,
Till death it self does teach us how to dye.
Till death seize upon us, and the night be at hand wherein no man can work:
for we must be assured that this long, this everlasting night continually
comes on toward us, there is no escaping of death; no Achitopbels policy is
able to bribe or put off this faithful Pursevant of Heaven: we must all, all
away to our long home, and make our beds in the dust. What man lives and shall
not see death, or shall deliver his soul from the hand of Hell? Omnes eadem
sort premimur, Mine, thine, his, and every ones Lot is cast, the hour and the
minute of our lives is limited; far off it cannot be, for it comes, or is
coming, how soon we cannot tell: Watch therefore, even watch continually since
ye know not the hour: Vitae summa brevis spem nos ve^ at incboare longam. The
whole sum of our life is but short, how then can we expect death to be far
off. David calls our life a shadow, Job a smoke, Solomon a Ship: In a Ship,
says a Father, whether we sit or stand we are always carried toward the
Haven; so our life is ever moving toward death, no hour but the Sun goes
Westward, no moment but our age hastens to its end, to its long end, it will
quickly come, the longest day has his night; Methusalem has his mo^tuus est,
and he dyed: I say, the longest day has its night, and here it puts me in
mind of that our Proverbiall saying, All the life-long day, the day fitly
expressing our life, and our life a day; a day, only a summers day toward the
evening the Sun shines out most bright and glorious, and lo presently it is
down: such is the shortness and sudden departure of our life, that David in
like manner has most aptly expressed it by a tale; We bring our years (says
he) to an end even as it were a tale that is told; for when it goes pleasantly
on, and we expect to hear more of it, before we are aware on it it is ended:
thus as it were, In the midst of life we are in death, and are cut away like
the flower which fades in a moment; verily therefore all flesh is Grass, and
the glory thereof but as the flower of the field: and yet such is most times
our folly, so to build up our thoughts here upon Earth as if we had an Eternity
to live for ever; whereas do but we duly consider it, every day that goes over
our heads bids us be in readiness for death, gives a sufficent Item of
Mortality:

Immortalia nesperes monetannus and almain etc. So many days, so many months,
so many years past and gone, so many passing Bells, so many Funerals
celebrated before our eyes must needs forbid us to expect a long time. Saint
Chrysostom says, That nothing has deceived men so much as the vain hope of
a long life; who knows the Sun may set at the morning of our life. or at
noone; if at neither of these yet be sure the Evening comes, and then it will
set. The Lord bids Moses in the 19. Chapter of Exodus, To prepare the people
against the third day, although we pass over the first day our youth, and the
second day our middle age, yet at furthest we must be ready against the third
day our old age: the first or the second day may be our last, the third day
must needs be our last: and therefore says Seneca, Omnis dies sicut ultima est
ordinanda: Every day ought so to be ordered as if we should not live a day
longer. Me thinks Saint Austines experience should be a sufficient warning to
us, for says he, Experti sumus multos 'expirasse expectantes reconciliari: We
have seen many to have been cut off, whilst they have but begun to make their
reconciliation with God. too too many alas there be whose Sun has set ere they
thought it to be their Midday. Let us take heed that death steal not on us as
a thief in the night; Lucius Caesar dyed in the morning putting on his
Clothes, Alphonsus a young man dyed as he was riding on his Horse: We need not
seek after foreign Examples, there be too many of the same nature at home
with us. How many have we seen before our eyes, some to be snacht from their
pleasures, some from their sins, some from their worldly employments; whereas
they have made their accounts of many years to come, so true is that of the
Poet:

Nemo tam divos habuit faventes,
Crastinum ut possit polliceri diem.
The Gods no man did ere such favor give,
That he was sure another day to live.
There is no certainty of this life not for a d^y, not for an hour, no not so
much as for a moment; God has many means to take us away even in an instant,
as we go up and down, as we sleep, as we do but draw our breath, any how; good
is it therefore that we have a Memento mori always, at all times hanging over
our heads, like that Sword in the Story which hung by a Horse hair over the
head of him that sat at Feast, putting us in a due fear and warning of the
continual danger that we are in; I say always hanging over our heads, and so
imprinted in our thoughts that we may seriously remember how short our time is,
how soon our night comes; It is Platoes Opinion, That a wise man's life is
nothing but a continual thinging or meditating upon death, Philip King of
Macedonia had his Page three times every morning to tell him, Philip, remember
that thou art a man, that thou art mortal, that thou must dye. O excellent
Memento, and most worthy to be imitated; the Emperor of Constantinople was
wont sitting in his Royal Throne to have a Mason come to him with his Tools
in his hand, asking, What kind of stone he would have his Tomb made of;
intimating, that he should not forget how soon all that his Royal pomp might
be buried in the Grave.

And here me thinks I cannot but repeat,
The famous Act of Saladine the great.
Who amidst his noble Victories, and conquering Triumphs, had so much mind of
his death, and the true end of all earthly glory, that he appointed his winding
shee^ to be carried upon a Spear before him at his Funeral thorough out the
City, proclaiming thus his intention of mind.

All these my Riches, glorious Pomp and Train,
When D^^th is come they are to me in vain:
This Winding sheet is all that I shall have
Along with me, to carry to the Grave.
The good Father was so mindful of Mortality, that he had always ringing in
his ears, Surgite mortui and venite ad judicium, Rise ye dead and come to
Judgment, to the end he might husband his time; so work in this day of his
life here, that he might not be found an unprofitable Servant when his night
came. Johannes Godfridus had these words engraven in Gold; Every day I stand at
the door of Eternity. And in diverse parts of his House he had set up the bones
and Sculls of dead men, that so his eyes if it were possible might have no
other Object to behold then of mortality. Sure there are no thoughts do more
concern us Mortals then those of Death; O then, Teach us so Lord to number
our days that wa may apply our hearts unto wisdom, that our souls may so
wisely esteem the shortness of this life, that we may never forget this; this
I say, in the Field, in our Journey, in our Beds, at all times, and every
where, while it is day, whilst we live; that the night, that is, our death
comes, and then no man can work; which is the last observeable thing, and the
effect of the night. No man can work. Man goes forth to his work and to his
labor until the Evening. Until the evening, no longer; we have done in this
life whatsoever we shall do. Mors ultima linia rerum. Death is the full period
of all our Actions, there remains now no more tears of Repentance, no more
works of Piety, no more sacrifice for sin, no more, I say, no more for ever:
Physic comes too late when the party is deceased. Actum est, we have acted^our
parts here whilst we were in this life, all now is done, the scene is ended.
Remember my Son, that thou in thy life time receiveast thy good things, that
thou had then the opportunity to have made thy self happy for ever if thou
would: but what can thou now give to redeem thy soul, when instead of good
works thou have nothing but pain and torment, instead of the godly sorrow of
repentance, nothing but the Hellish sorrow of despair. Oh how many millions of
years would the miserable soul be glad to work the hardest work that might be
invented, if it were but possible for her to work out her salvation; O how
precious would she esteem those minutes, and gather up those crummes of time
which she has here so foolishly neglected: and thus me thinks that lamentable
voice of the untimely departed soul does sound this warning peale in our ears*

All ye that live, by me learn to be wise,
Your precious time at higher worth to prize:
For ^oe alas, my time was past so soon,
That night was come ere that I thought it noone.
And now too late unhappy wretch Idearly lament my headless f^lly; Spes omnium
in bot or be molestiarum est admirabile lenimentum. Hope says Drexelius, is an
excellent refreshing, and comfort in all the troubles of this life; as long as
there is some hope there is some comfort, and be our miseries never so great,
we are here in possibility to have ease of them: but after death there is not
the least possibility, hope, or comfort a^ all to be expected, the Doom is
past, no man can work, all the world is not able to purchase one drop of ease
or refreshing any more. O that it is too late, too late, too late to cry for
mercy; O that the door is shut and there is no entering in. Give me says one,
a River of tears to weep before I dye: well might he wish it, for he knew
there was no weeping to any purpose when he was dead.

O let me weep, weep, weep, and never give over
My sins, till I have washed clean away:
O let me never cease for to implore
My Judge, till I come to the Judgment Day.
O let us repent now, for we cannot repent in that day, if ever we mean to do
our selves good, now is the time, because we cannot work when the night is
come: Let us therefore work while it is day, while we have time, while we may
work: Obsecro vos, O Christiant per vos perquae salutem vestram, etc. as
Drexelius bespake his Auditers, so let me bespeake our souls and selves. O ye
Christian souls, ye souls whom Christ has dyed for; let me beseech you for
your own sake, for your salvations sake, for your Saviors sake that ye
would avoid this Shipwreck, the danger is certain, if we look not to it in
time; as long as life lasts our amendment is not too late: do we fall by sin a
thousand times, we may rise again by repentance a thousand times: We may begin
any day, any hour to become better; But in death no man remembers thee, O
Lord, and who can give thee thanks in the Grave. As David did concerning
Bathsheba's Child, so whilst life is in us we may weep, and humble our selves
by repentance, but in death all hope, all possibility of recovery is cut off.
Whilst we have therefore time let us make use of it; I say, let us take it
whilst we have it, for time will stay for no man: it is but a while that we
have to work, one days labor will make us happy forever, our Fathers have
had their days and are gone, and now this is our day. I say, ours, if we lose
it not; our day and portion of time which God has allotted us to work^ out our
salvation in. Woe is us then if we work not even triplox vae, an woe, and an
Eternal woe. We would feign depart and be in Heaven, O let us do our task
whilst we are on earth. To conclude, let not the Sun set upon our wrath, upon
our lust, upon our covetuousnesse, upon our pride, and the like; alas, what a
dismal: what a doleful night must we then expect: Let us not be wearv of well
doing, for in due season we shall reap, if we saint not, let us now go on in
our way toward Heaven weeping, and we shall return with sheaves in our
bosom, let us so we in tears, and we shall reap in joy; let us be found so
working now in this day of our life, that at the night of our death, when our
Lord and Master Christ Jesus comes, we may partake of that blessedness which
is promised in the Gospel to that Servant, who when his Master comes he sball
find so doing, so shall we receive that e^ge boni servi, Well done ye good
and faithful servants, enter you therefore into your Masters joy. Amen.

Sit gloria Deo in saecula saeculorum.
A farewell to the Reader.
ANd now kind Reader, thanking you for your patience, that has vouchsafed to
peruse over this my unworthy labor, I desire you to understand.

Each man's a little world, and my Book
A Land-Skip is, this world to overlooke:
There may you ken the Cedar tops of pride,
With thorny cares, and buskets on each side.
The fruits of grace there also may you see
Like Apples, just as they grow on the tree.
And then again a River meets your eye
Of tears for sin, and man's sad misery:
Mountains of Zeal do here and there swell up,
Even to the Clouds, but it is enough. I stop.
Not presuming to borrow your patience any longer, or trouble you with many
things, only I shall entreat you to take this unum necessar^um, this one
necessary thing along with you, and well to observe it, that the way of the
Lord may be thus trackt out in the soul of man. First the sight of Gods being
seriously apprehended, strikes into us a reverend fear of his infinite
greatness, this fear casts us down before him into a condemning humility
of our sinful wre^chednesse, this humility breeds an admiring love of the
abundance of his mercy toward us in his blessings, this love makes us bold to
have trust and relyance on him, as our help and defense; this trust affords
patience to hold out and endure in all difficulties whatsoever, this patience
at length crowns us with hope of Heaven; not a foolish hope built on the
sand, but a strong hope settled with discretion, a hope built on such ground
which makes not ashamed: not ashamed in life, not ashamed in death, not
ashamed in the day of Judgment: This hope, O Lord, grant unto you, to me, and
to us all, and so preserve it in us, for thy mercies sake, that it may end at
last in the perfect fruition of thine eternal Kingdom, there that we may be
together for ever, until which most happytime, dearly beloved, I heartily bid
you farewell, in longum valete, farewell, even a long farewell.

FINIS.
Imprimatur, John Downham.

17. Febr. 1645.

ERRATA.
REad most frequently thrust. page 10. line 1. the two first lines p. 17. are
to be read as verses, for holy seam, r. holy stem. p. 18. l. 10. for his
liberality, r. this liberality, p. 30. l. 3. for the least of which is, many of
which are. p. 30 l. 27. for who gives us, gives us, p. 31. l. 15. for mind,
wind, p. 44. l. 16. for honor, humor. p. 62. l. 31. for shall he, shall we,
p. 64. l. 13. for not as yet, as yet, p. 82. l. 18. for outward souls, untoward
souls, p. 85. l. 13. for we can, can we, p. 104. l. 24. for are not a little
offended, do not a little offend, 105. l. 26. and l. 29. for even, ever. for
Devil the Devil. p. 112. l. 24. For the lesser faults I desire your favorable
construction.


