Mercurius Cambro-Britannicus. OR, NEVVS from WALES, TOUCHING The Glorious and
Miraculous Propagation of the Gospel in those parts.

Being a clear DISCOVERY and MANIFESTATION Of the late invented Trade of
TITH-GATHERING there, Intended by some Persons to be suddenly set on foot and
established over all ENGLAND.

Well worthy the serious and timely consideration of the Parliament, Army and
Nation, and every individual Member thereof.

MAL. 3.7, 8, 9, 10. Return unto me, and I will return unto you, says the Lord
of Hosts: But ye said, Where shall we return? Will a man rob God? yet ye have
robbed me: But ye say, Wherein have we robbed thee? In Tithes and Offerings: Ye
are cursed with a curse, for ye have robbed me, even this whole nation; bring
ye all the Tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in mine house;
and prove me now herewith, says the Lord of Hosts, if I will not open the
Windows of heaven, and power you out a blessing, that there shall not be room
enough to receive it.

London, Printed in the Year, 1652.

P. P. to the indifferent Reader.
THis sober honest Mercury coming to my hands, I thought it no great Error if I
gave it that entertainment which I sometimes give even the Phrantick Bedlam
Pamphlets: I must confess it was to me a kind of Eye Salve, for I looked
formerly at the wrong end of the Perspective, and the transgressions of our
Welsh Itinerants, palliated with the name of Saints, seemed but small Atoms in
a large Sunshine. This Book is a new Telescope; it discovers what we could not
see before; and the Spots in this Spiritual Moon, are Mountains.

1. These Saints have a certain pious Wawle in the Pulpit, but out of it they
are all Clutch and Claw; they are as Lucian discovered poverty, full of Hooks;
and they fish for this world, not for that which is to come: I did sometimes
wonder why they were so busy with South Wales, and was about to consult with
the Map, if Mount Sion were not there: But I understand now there is a more
present blessing in those parts; there is 20000 l. per annum, for all the
learned Ministers are ejected; the Church is a mere Carcass, which makes these
Ravens flock toward it: and now they flutter and croak over the Inheritance of
God. Certainly the Author of this discourse deserves the suffrages of all
honest men, and even some Gratulatory returns and encouragements from the
Patrones of the People; for in my opinion, the Parliament is beholding to him
for discovering the Obliquities, and dark carriages of the propagators, who
being so remote from the Cognizance of the House, have made use of their
Authority for their own private contrivances, to the dishonor of their
Masters, and the Scandal of true Religion and piety.

2. The Army is beholding to him for discovering those that swallow up that
Treasure which should either be employed for the end it was designed by
Parliament, or else for the payment of their Arrears: Those men of War that now
receive it, having scarce lost one drop of blood in the late quarrels, nor had
any greater enemy to contest withal then Black-coats, and the bridge of Rosse.

3. The Nation is indebted to him in making a timely discovery of the purpose
of these Itenerants to procure the like Propagation in all England, hoping that
the Parliament being made sensible of the sad Consequences of this Itinerary
course in Wales, may not be so easily persuaded to pass the like Act for
England, but rather to continue the public Worship of God in settled
Congregations.

4. All Wales are become Everlasting debtors to him; For a word spoken in
season is like apples of Gold: and who knows not but the Lord may incline the
hearts of the Parliament to provide for their future supply of Godly Ministers
and Schoolmasters, by appointing some other Persons by whom the Lord will have
his Work to be done. And perhaps some good men hearing of this Spiritual
famine, may out of Charity come in, and offer themselves to labor in the Lords
Vineyard, for the Harvest is great, and the Laborers very few.

5. All the Ministers and Scholars in England are not a little beholding to
him: For if this Itinerary way of Congregating persons, and Gathering of
Churches should be once settled, or permitted here, there would be little use of
Ministers or Scholars in that expedition.

6. The Lawyers of England ought to pay him Tribute: For Law and humane
learning are inconsistent with the Itineraries Principles; and they hate all
strifes and contentions, other then what arise out of their own Doctrine. If
then, Reader, thou art one of those that would be undeceived Consider what thou
read: See how one Diurnal of Aug. 2. 52. (half whereof is filled up with
some late news from Wales) is Stigmatized for an Imposture in the very front of
another of the very same ^^ate.
give me leave to invite thee to this Book with that Call in the Revelation,
Come and see. It is a sight deserves thy best considerations, and the time thou
do spend about it cannot be lost: Here thou shall see the Wolf divested of
the Fleece; thou shall see him in his own Symmetry, in his own humors, without
that Sheepish formallity, that fraudulent pretended Personated piety, which he
holds forth as a blind between him and the world: Here the Whore is stripped of
her Fucus, not she that sits on seven hills, but an other more impudent Whore
that sits on seven score hills in South-walls: Here thou shall see that
Propagation of the Gospel, is a Propagation of Land and Money; for the Saints
have advanced from 7. l. per annum to 1500. l. and he who had scarce Frize for
his breech, struts it now in Holy lace and Scarlet. Had their valorous
achievements in the field gained these goodly things, as other gallant
Commanders and Officers had done, they had been well worthy of honor and
wealth: But the mighty men of Wales found a more easy and safe way to attain
both, viz. by pretense of holiness, and outward form of piety, which has been
no small advantage unto them: but I shall forbear any further mention, because
I will not detain thee from the book it self. Read thou the Truth and assist
it; for if thou have any interest in the Church of Christ, it concerns thee;
but defraud not the Discoverer of his just Commendations. I have no more to
trouble thee withal at present, unless thou art a Britan, if so, make true
Use and Application of the two lines underwritten, Da iw'r Kelwydd tra i Koylir
Vid. 1 Esdr. 4.38, 39, 40, 41.

Pen elir ym-hell gwell iw'r Gwir.


The Authors Apology.
Courteous Reader, HAving been an eyewitness and spectator of the sad
deplorable condition of Southwales, in relation to the Work of the Ministry,
since the Commissioners for Propagation were empowered in those parts, I have
not been a little troubled with thoughts of heart what to do, and how to act
and demean my self toward the persons empowered, who being many of them my
friends and acquaintance, from whom I received civil respects, craved a silence
from my pen. Other considerations I had, that some prejudice might befall them,
by laying open these miscarriages, which might have some reflection on those
that have been least culpable therein, if at all; And the regard I have of
those amongst them (who in the simplicity and integrity of their hearts, acted
clearly for those ends they were entrusted, receiving no worldly benefit
thereby) has much obstructed my purpose; Especially, least this Treatise might
any ways give offense to those who are no titular Saints, but really godly,
who count godliness gain, and not gain godliness; But I do cordially profess, I
have no design of prejudice, nor do I bear the least ill will to those who are
truly such, but wish their number may be daily increased: That which most of
all troubled me, was the consideration I had of the use and advantage that the
Malignants and Ill affected persons to the present Government would make of
this discovery, against those who attribute to themselves the names of Saints
and people of God; Primam and perpetuam esse constat historiae legem, nihil
falsi audere dicere nihil veri-non audere.
; All which, together with self- interest and self- preservation were no small
motives to blast the good intentions of the Author. Nevertheless finding no
hopes of redress of the abuses herein complained of; but on the contrary, it
being visible and apparent that their main design and purpose was to root out
all the Ministers and Ministry, not only in Wales, but in England also; to
leave the Churches empty, and with the fatness of the Tithes, and the fruits of
other men's hard labors, to Propagate their Estates, not stumbling at
Sacrilege and Spiritual robbery, mentioned in Malach. 3.7, 8, 9, and 10.
verses: And hating all persons with a perfect hatred, who in the spirit of love
and meekness, have friendly rebuked them, and minded them of these things; It
was more then time for some good man to arise and stand up in the gap; who
although Eliah may be mistaken in conceiving he only was left, when the Lord
had seven thousand that had not bowed their knee to Baal, 1 King. 19.14, 18. He
cannot (as he hopes) in these subsequent passages, which are too well known to
the inhabitants, and all the Judges public Officers of State, and other
unbiassed strangers, who have traveled those parts. And although this small
Treatise may offend some, yet since it is the cause of God, who commands him to
speak these things, least his people die for want of spiritual bread, whilst
others surfeit on the heavenly manna: he cannot, nor may not withstand the
dictates of his conscience, nor resist the motions of his holy Spirit, choosing
rather to obey God then man, Act. 5.29.
though to his own particular and private disadvantage, counting worldly gain
but loss, in competition with the things of God, who does with all humility
acquiesce in his righteous judgment, hoping and waiting for a happy issue and
success, according to his omnipotent (...) pleasure, not doubting but the Lord
will in his due time answer our expectations, in restoring the light of his
Gospel to those that now sit in darkness and in the shadow of death; and will
preserve and continue the candlestick, where it is, and refresh his distressed,
oppressed people, with his spiritual joy and comfort; Which is the hearty
wishes, prayers, and endeavors, and the main and only end of this Treatise,
and the Author thereof

M.C.B.

Some Errata's have escaped the Printer in this hastened Impression, as Rogers
for Roberts in many Copies at the end of the Marginall Notes, page 15. for
wind r. come. page 16. l. 4. for expect r. exhibit. page 18. l. 24. etc.
These and others may be easily corrected by the Pen of the candid Reader, at
his largest leisure.

Mercurius Cambro-Britannicus.
MR. Cradock, Mr Valvasor Powel, and others of their Tribe, having seriously
considered of what great advantage it would prove unto them, in case they could
obtain a power in themselves and Colleagues, for disposing of all Tithes,
Glea^s, Impropriations, and Ecclesiastical Revenues, in the thirteen Counties
of Wales, conceived it the only way to accomplish their desires,

1. To make the Parliament believe, that their Countrymen were Pagans and
Infidels, and a People that understood nothing of God, or of the Power of
Godliness, and so had need to be converted to the faith.

2. That in order to this Conversion, they should persuade the Parliament to
pass an Act, called, The Propagation of the Gospel in Wales: And that for the
better effecting and carrying on of those ends proposed by these Priests
themselves, and some others of their Nomination and Recommendation, subject to
their commands, should be named with them in the said Act: And that to carry a
greater countenance of Authority to the intended executioners thereof, several
emminent and worthy Members of Parliament, Lawyers, and Commanders should be
named in the Frontispiece thereof, well knowing, those Gentlemen could not
disoblige their other great Trusts and public Employments to act with these
Priests and their Confederates; so that the whole game should be played by one
entire party, which being acted so far distant from the cognizance of the
Parliament, where the poor Inhabitants want Representatives to stand for them,
and represent their grievances to the Supreme Authority, they doubted not but
to manage their affairs in such a way, as nothing should thereafter arise in
judgment against them in this world. And after serious debate and
consideration had, how inconvenient it was to continue the old Ministers in
their respective benefices, which if admitted, would swallow up the Tithes, and
hinder the pretended Saints from propagating their Estates: It was Resolved
upon the question:

1. That for the better Propagation of the Gospel in Wales, all the Ministers
should be ejected and silenced, save only some of the most ignorant and
illiterate of them, that would comply, and either farm their own Tithes, and
accept of good bargains, or else accept of small inconsiderable stipends.

2. And for the more formal ejection of the Ministers, that certain blank
Articles of course, should be drawn and applied as an Engine to remove them
from their respective charges and benefices. And for encouragement of Informers
and Deponents, that the Sequestrators should offer good bargains of the Tithes
to any that would come in, and help them to do the work of the Lord, for so
they call the ruin and desolation of the Ministers and Ministry, and the
extirpation of the Gospel: And that certain Journey-men Pedlers, or Itinerant
Tobacco-mongers, and others of like quality, should perambulate several of the
Counties at 18d per diem, to make feigned discoveries of the pretended
obliquities of the Ministers, and return an account of their proceedings to the
new Inquisitors, otherwise called Sequestrators of the Tithes, etc.

3. Resolved, That the same course should be used in the ejection of the
Schoolmasters, and that some of the Commissioners Clerks and Servants, that
were in a capacity to read English, and make a warrant, should be placed and
stipended to spare charges, and the overplus of the moneys to go and relieve
the poor distress Saints. or the more needy number of the gathered Proselytes.

4. That in order to the letting and setting of the Tithes, etc. Resolved, That
certain grand Farmers or Sequestrators, Receivers and Collectors should be
appointed in every County, chosen out of their Tribe of Gad, and that they
should have power to let, set and dispose of the same to the pretended godly
party, or any of those that have congregated themselves for that purpose, at
half the value or lesser, and that none of the old Ministers, or others of the
Inhabitants, should farm their own Tithes etc. at any rate, though they offered
double the value paid by the pretended godly party. It being also resolved,
that none but those that call themselves Godly, should live by, and feed of the
Altar, it being a grand Tenet held by them, That those only who are outwardly
Righteous, ought to inherit the earth: And having taken into consideration the
great charges they would put themselves unto, in case they should supply every
County with a competent number of godly, able, orthodox preaching Ministers and
Schoolmasters, whose parts deserving stipends accordingly, would leave too small
a remnant to relieve the pretended Saints of Wales, they Resolved:

5. That three or four Itinerary Teachers should be employed in most of the
Counties, to supply the same, and because it shall not seem too hard a work for
sso few to supply a whole County, which some of them consist 120 Parishes, and
the least of 50 or 60. Resolved also, That in their expedition, they should be
supplied with fresh Had they provided horses for their Auditors to, it had not
been amiss
horses at every stage, which commonly are 10 or 20 miles, and sometimes more,
to ride post from place to place, to spread their Doctrine, which for the most
part consists of these heads,

1. Invectives against all the old Ministers and Schoolmasters, and to
persuade the people, that their calling and mission was Antichristian; and that
all the Witness a bold universal challenge of Mr Valvasor Powel, June 11 1652.
sent to Dr George Griffith, together with several letters thereupon, all
published in print for public satisfaction of the people, and vindication of
the truth, and true intent of these Itineraries.
Ministry of England were in the same condition; and that none should be saved
but Itineraries, or such as should list themselves under them; and to gain
credit and belief to what they taught, they declared, that this was the sense
of the Parliament, and that the same course should be settled all England over,
and all Parochial settled Congregations should be quite abrogated.

2. To rail against the Lawyers and Professors of the Law, and that they were
all damned and accursed, that would go to Law, either in the great Sessions, or
at Westminster Hall; and that the Propagators were the only fit persons to
decide all suits and differences: And Mr Valvasor Powel by name, did, and
usually does in his invective Sermons, rail against and vilify the Lawyers in
general, more particularly at Llandsanferad in Elvel Parish, in the County of
Radnor, on the 25 of June last, when and where in his sermon amongst other
railing expressions, he said, That all the Lawyers in England and Wales, were
worse then Thieves or Pick-pursos, and that there were but two or three honest
Lawyers in all the Nation, where he was so beset by some of his own Proselytes,
and so whipped with arguments by those spirits which he himself first raised, who
for three hours objected against the doctrine then taught by him; in so much
that Mr Valvasor Methinks Mr Valvasor you should have bred up your scholars to
better manners; But the old Proverb is herein verified, Trim Tram, Like Master,
like man.
made a hard shift to get from them to his retirement, which made the Gentleman
very sick next morning.

3. That all those that were not listed of their particular Congregations, were
little better then Pagans and Infidels, and persons that were out of the Pale
of the Church.

4. That all those Ministers that did formerly preach and officiate, were only
formal Teachers and Learned men; and therefore declared humane Learning to be
the greatest obstructor of the work of Propagation, and that acquired Learning
is an Mr W. Cradock at Presteigne.
essential part and limb of the kingdom of Antichrist.

5. That all those Ministers that should either Preach, Pray or speak any thing
against this work of Propagation, were enemies to the godly party, and
incapable of enjoying their fifths, though allowed their wives by the said Act
of Propagation.

6. That all those that were not listed of their particular Congregations (or
rather Martial Troops and Companies to execute the commands of these
stone-Priests, who ride them like Mules and Asses) were incapable of bearing
any Office or place of Trust in Wales.

These and the like Transactions being the sad consequences of the work of
Propagation in Wales, which now has reigned nigh three years, I now behold
Religion and Learning decayed, and the light of the Gospel almost quite
extinguished there, the poor ejected Ministers with their wives and families
ready to perish, particular persons enriched, and the pretended godly party in
new Dresses and Attires, having changed their poor Frizado, for rich Scarlet
and Plush, that would make Satan himself to blush to see this sudden
alteration. New sumptous, costly houses are built and erected, great purchases
made; some that were born but to 7^ a year, become puchasers of Lordships and
Manors of above 1000l per annum; and all striving who shall outvy and outbid
the other in their purchases; witness those hot incounters at the Box, in
Worcester house, Drury house, Gurney house, and other places; some purchasing
in their own names; others more subtle, in their friends and servants names.
The Gentry and all the considerable persons of Wales dejected and oppressed,
ready to sell the remnant of their estates to come and inhabit in England,
being not able to live in this sad, dark, oppressed condition their Country is
brought unto: And if this Propagation be once settled in England, good Lord
where shall we then fly for succor, but unto thee? Great thoughts of heart and
heart-burnings amongst all sorts of people, who are sadly aggrieved to pay
their Tithes more strictly then ever they did, and yet have neither Preaching,
Praying, Christening, decent Burials, or other spiritual Rights or Comforts
administered unto them; and finding no hopes of redress or relief herein (all
addresses to the Propagators, as in other cases, so in these, proving
fruitless.) The inhabitants of the six Counties of South- Wales, and County of
Monmouth resolved to make their humble suit to the Supreme Power of the Nation,
the Parliament, by Petition, setting forth the Heads and substance of these
their grievances, praying that great Council to take some course for the
future supply of their Country with such a competent number of Godly, Able,
Orthodox Ministers and Schoolmasters, such as the Parliament should approve
of: And for an Account of the Profits of the Tithes, etc. received for the two
last years, in the said seven Counties, charged to be worth 20000l per annum
and upwards. Whereupon the Parliament out of their pious inclination to advance
Religion and Learning, and in order to a Redress of the said sad grievances
complained of in the Petition, referred the same to the Honorable Committee of
Plundered Ministers, with Power for them to send for Persons, Papers and
Witnesses, and examine on Oath, and Issue forth Commissions to the Country
(where the Witnesses and matters of fact do lie and arise) to examine Witnesses
touching any of the matters contained in the Petition, and to return those
Examinations to the said Committee, who were thereupon to state matter of fact,
and Report the same to the Parliament. Which sad news coming to the knowledge
of the pretended Godly party in Wales; It was resolved by the Itinerant Synod
(nemine contradicente) as follows,

6. That the Petitioning the Parliament without their leaves and permission,
was a high breach of the Privileges of the Godly party.

7. That the Petitioning the Parliament for supply of Godly, Able, Orthodox
Ministers and Schoolmasters, such as the Parliament should approve of, was a
high contempt against the Act of Propagation, and that such the Petitioners
desires and intentions should be declared, construed and expounded, and so
rendered by them to the Parliament, to be a petitioning for the restoration of
Malignant, Drunken, Unpreaching, ejected Curates Witness those several speeches
and expressions delivered at the Committee of Plundered Ministers; March 16,
May 18. and 21. where and when the express words and true meaning of the
Petition and Petitioners were most grossly misrepresented. Where Mr Peter's,
uncalled, unsent for, and unconcerned, did voluntarily declare all the
Ministers of Wales to be drunken, debauched, ignorant and illiterate, not fit
to be trusted to keep a kennell of Hounds, or a dozen of Sheep. Are these words
becoming a holy man, Archbishop and Metropolitan of England? or do they become
a sober man and one that owns the Name of a Christian, to traduce his brethren
in general, many whereof of he never saw, having only traveled Pembrokeshire,
and sojourned at Mr Lort's for a short time: and what good he did in those
parts, with an answer to these his unchristian expressions, there will shortly
come forth a Paper from one of those he traduced, to let Mr Peter's know they
are not so illiterate and ignorant as he would render them.
.

8. That to call the pretended Godly party to account for any thing by them
received, for which they ought to be accountable to the State, to be a sowing
of sedition betwixt the Parliament of England sitting at Westminster, and the
moving Assembly of Wales. And that all the Contrivers, Subscribers and
Promoters of the said Petition, and Agents therein employed, should be declared
against as disturbers of the peace of the pretented Saints, and obstructing
them in their receiving the public Revenue of the Church in peace, and that
they should be proceeded against as Malignants and Delinquents, and disaffected
persons to the proceedings of the pretended Godly party in Wales.

9. Resolved, That Mr Valvasor Powell, Mr Cradock, Mr Jenkin Jones, and all the
wandering Priests and Gospel Postmasters in South Wales should ride Post from
County to County, and Parish to Parish, to threaten all the Petitioners and
their Agents with damnation, Sequestration and ruin. Nevertheless with this
Salva Conscientia, that those that would repent by denying their hands, and
disowning the Petition, should be taken into their consideration, and
favorably entertained.

10. Resolved, That all the residue of the ancient Divines and unejected
Ministers in South Wales should be forthwith silenced, and neither to have
liberty to Preach, Pray, Administer the Sacraments, Bury the dead, Marry, or
visit the sick, or Officiate or perform any other charitable and Christian
work, least they should promote or advance the Petition. And the better to
provide for the ejected Ministers wives and families, that they should be
turned all out from their houses and habitations, to travel into some other
Foreign Plantation, to propagate there; and for their encouragement in their
voyage, that the Fifths allowed their wives by the Act of Parliament, should
thereafter be kept back from them, and that they should, as in the Primitive
times, carry neither Scrip nor Wallett, but only live by the Alms and
Charitable benevolence of the people.

Information being given by one of the gadly Scouts, that North Wales were
resolved to take good courage and example by South Wales, and were preparing
the like humble address to the Parliament, setting forth the work of
propagation there.

11. Resolved, That Mr Valvasor Powell do ride Post to North Wales, to inform
the inhabitants there, That the Parliament had declared the Petition of
South Wales, Scandalous and Seditious, and that all the subscribers and
promoters thereof should be sequestered and proceeded against as enemies to the
Parliament and present Government; and to threaten all those that should
subscribe or promote the like Petition there, with Damnation, Sequestration and
ruin, which false Allarum has in some measure obstructed the inhabitants of
North Wales Nevertheless all North Wales are very active and zealous in
preparing an humble address to the Parliament, setting forth the mystery of
the Work of Propagation there, which will be suddenly presented by persons of
eminency, and of known worth and integrity to the Parliament and present
Government.
, from representing the Parliament with the true state of their Country, in
relation to the propagation of the Gospel there, and made Mr Valvasor Powell
Print his Letter in the Frontispiece of a Diurnall come out very lately, to
undertake to give the Parliament an exact account of North Wales, and the
propagation there, wherein he goes about to confute the Petition of
South Wales, and all that is there declared, he undertakes to make good upon
the word of a Christian, and a Gospel Minister. A bold and high presumption,
and too hard a task for him to perform: And a sober man would count it little
better then madness in a professed Christian Minister to undertake to make good
and justify the actions of all those persons entrusted therein, which are
many, amongst whom it is not very unlikely but some miscarriages I wish Mr
Powell may be able to justify himself, and I shall make bold to mind him of
his proceedings against old Hugh Lloid in Breckon in imprisoning and keeping
him there without Bayl or Mainprise, until he paid him 100l, and this done on
a bare Arrest, which proved to Mr Powell an effectual execution, for none durst
Bail him. And diverse more of Mr Powels pranks that might be instanced.
may be; for there were but twelve Apostles, and yet amongst them one Judas.
But this I observe by him, he has dealt friendly with his Countrymen in
North Wales, who calls all their Ministers and Teachers, Such as have not the
power of Godliness, and very few the form thereof, or that have been firm and
faithful to the Parliament, but most of them unpreaching Curats, scandalous in
their lives, etc. Wherein he learns of the scolds at Billinsgate, to cry whore
first: but I leave that Letter, or rather Mr Powels Creed (for it runs all on
beliefs and hearsaies) to be answered and unfolded by some of his own
Countrymen Read Mr Griffiths Letters, and a sober Reply to Mr Powels Paper
against the Petition lately Printed.
: But this i will tell him by the way, that if he preaches no more truth in his
Pulpit, then he halth broached in Print, I should be sorry to ride Post with
him up and down the Country to hear him Preach, for the best bargain that he
has procured to the holiest of his friends.

But the Gent, would fain make you believe that this Propagation in Wales will
last long, and therefore recites next his Creed, certain Proposals, tending to
bring in the like Propagation all England over. Well done Mr Valvasor, will not
the Tithes of Wales serve you and your friends, but you must creep into England
to share of the fruits of their labor also? But certainly Mr Valvasor would be
satisfied with the Tithes of Wales, if he were sure the Trade of
Tithe-gathering would long continue there, but he thinks that the Act of
Propagation in Wales has but a short time to live, expiring the 25th of March
next, unless it be supported and continued, by procuring the like Act over all
England; for his Countrymen are very angry that this way of Propagation of the
Gospel should be practiced only amongst them, and that England should be
supplied with a competent number of Godly, Able, Orthodox Schoolmasters and
Teachers. Surely Wales do conceive that the Parliament are as highly bound and
concerned to provide for the supply of their spiritual necessities, as for
England; especially if it be true what the promoters of the Act, and the
persons that reap the benefit thereof did inform the Parliament, That their
Country does abound with ignorance and prophannesse. But hold Mr Valvasor, they
are not so ignorant but they can see who those Rats are that eat up their
substance, and those Caterpillars that devour the fruit of their labors.

Information being given that that ever to be honored Gent. Coll. Edward
Freeman, Attorney General for the Commonwealth in South Wales, and a Gentleman
that has hazarded his life and fortune to serve the Parliament and
Commonwealth of England, was entrusted as Counselor for the Petitioners; It
was Resolved, That all the Itineraries should publicly Preach in all places
against the Law, and all the professors thereof, especially against Colonel
Freeman; and that their earnest prayers should be to the Lord, to punish him in
his person, power, and in his place Valvasor Powell in his invective Sermon
before the Judges at Presteign Sessions last. It is no great wonder that he
would rail against Colonel Freeman, when he durst call the States of Holland
Ambassadors, drunkards, and wish them to go home with this Answer, That Sion is
built; besides other words by him used, tending to the scandal and dishonor of
the Nation and civil Government. Well done Valvasor, to engage two States in a
bloody, cruel War against one another, to the hazard of both Nations, which all
the Holy Water wherein he dips his listed Congregators cannot appease, unless
God in his mercy do it, maugre the endeavors of these Firebrands. Factet se
miles gloriosus oratorem potentem, quoad hoc saltem vix se praebuit prudentem,
V.P.
. And shortly after Colonel Freeman falling sick of a Fever and Plurasie,
after a dinner made at Cardiff,

12. It was likewise Resolved, That public thanksgiving should be given to
the Lord in all the particular separated Congregation in Wales, for hearing the
prayers of the Saints.

Information being also given, that Mr Gunter and Mr Roberts (persons of known
integrity to the Parliament and present Government, and so had been from the
very beginning of the late Wars to this day) were employed Agents by the
Country, to agitate for them in their absence, in relation to the said
Petition; and to use their utmost endeavors to give a right information to the
Parliament and Committee of plundered Ministers, of the state of the Country,
whereby to draw it to an issue and examination, that the truth might appear by
testimonies of witnesses.

Resolved, That Mr Watkins, Mr Lewis, Mr Creed, Shony Morgan, Hugh Rogers, and
others of the best Beagles, should be employed to hunt dryfoot, to find some
Articles against Col: Freeman, Witness those frivolous false, scandals Articles
exhibited before the Lords Commissioners, by that Spawn of Religion, otherwise
called vix credo, by direction from the stony Gallory in Whitehall.
Mr Gunter, and Mr Roberts, if possible, to cloud and eclipse them, and render
them odious to the Parliament, hoping by this means to deter them from acting
for the Petitioners, according to their consciences, and the trust reposed in
them, or else to blemish the good intentions of the Petitioners: But the
Gentlemen for their integrity are so well known to Members of Parliament, and
all their Country in general, that their endeavors hitherto have proved
fruitless, and their progress therein cannot promise them success, if the
Gentlemen have equal right and justice done them.

And for the better carrying on of this their design, Resolved also, That means
be used as well by the Pulpit knockers, as by the Dreadful Sequestrators, to
force some of the Petitioners to deny their hands, and renounce the Petition:
And that it should be spoken at the Committee, how easy it is for one Welshman
to subscribe another Welshmans hand Witness a paper, entitled, An humble
acknowledgement of the Inhabitants of Southwales, and county of Monmouth, for
the blessed work of Propagation there, presented the Parliament in June, 1651.
by the chief persons that reap the benefit of this great work of Propagation,
supposed to be subcribed by 19000. 18000. whereof never saw or heard of it. A
pretty knack to blind the eyes of the Parliament, and abuse the poor Country.
.

Resolved, That all possible means be used to intercept all Letters betwixt the
Petitioners in the Country, and their Agents in London, to prevent a true
information and representation to the Parliament, of the sad grievances of the
Country; and to that purpose, orders were given at Witness the intercepting of
the very orders and special directions of the Commissioners of Haberdashers
Hall sent down to Mr. Harard, and Mr. Thomas, their sub-Commissioners, and
diverse other papers of public and private concernment, all letters being
opened, and such only intercepted, which made discoveries of the good
proceedings of the godly party in Wales: A pretty way to prevent a true
information to be given to the Parliament of their blessed doings in Wales.
Hereford, Monmouth, and all other places, insomuch that the Petitioners and
their Agents could not with safety write any Letters to or fro, either by the
Post or Carryer, or any private Messengers.

And whereas it was also informed, That the Petitioners did make a voluntary
contribution to defray the charges of Counselors Fees, and other necessary
charges incident to the prosecution of so weighty and necessary a business, as
a Petition from seven Counties, which concerned the salvation of their souls.

Resolved, That it should be construed and declared to be a raising of moneys
to levy War against the Parliament and present Government; and that Hugh Rogers
a quondam arrant Cavalier in Arms for the late King, but lately converted, and
others of the parties concerned, should exhibit an information Vide, The
foolish, inconsiderate information exhibited before the Committee of plundered
Ministers, wherein Mr. Gunter and his confederates (meaning the Petitioners,
are charged with framing, contriving and subscribing the Petition, which he
desires may be put in a way of examination: Good Mr. Rogers, you may spare this
labor, for the Petitioners and Subscribers have, do and will own it, and Mr.
Gunter, Mr. Rogers as their Sollicitors or Agents, with others entrusted
therein, act publicly, and will never deny the Petition, or renounce their
honest, pious and Christian appearance, in their civil prosecution and
mannagement thereof.
in the name of the pretended godly party, against Mr Hugh Gunter and his
confederates (for so he is pleased to call the Petitioners) of a dangerous
design in all England and Wales, to obstruct the Trade of Tyth-gathering, which
Mr Rogers desires may be universal over all England, as well as Wales. Well
done Hugo to complain first, lest your quondam Cavaliering Trade, and your late
Actions in your under Sherifft altry be ripped up, to manifest your holiness, but
all will not do, you must wind to it at last with the rest of your late
converted Brethren, who find Tyth-gathering a more safe beneficial and sweeter
trade, then plundering of the Parliamenteers, and the well-affected party, from
whom your noodle received sore knocks for your sawciness; and have since your
pretended Conversion, gained more by your seeming holiness, then ever you did
by pillage under the power of the late King. And whereas one of the pretended
godly party had abused one Captain Jones, who is a Gentleman, that was always
faithful to the Parliament, and bore Arms for them in the first and second War,
yet was by the procurement of one of the supposed Saints, and the assistance of
some of the grand Cavaliers there (with other Gentlemen of quality well
affected to the Parliament) cruelly imprisoned at Cardiff, without a Charge or
Articles proved material to warrant the same, who desiring civil satisfaction
for his wrongs suffered, and demanding a reason why he should be so dealt
withal, and so ill rewarded for his former good services to the Parliament.

17. Resolved, That the pretended godly party, were in danger of their lives;
and that this was the beginning of levying War against the gadly. And because
the Titular Saints could not sufficiently Tyrannize over the Inhabitants, nor
carry on their gainful designs without Troops of Horse, and Companies of Foot
in each County, which would also bring good gain to the Officers and Soldiers
Well done Jammy, this is a well contrived plot to enlarge your pover and
propagate your estates, by going about to abuse the Parliament, and oppress
your poor Country, by drawing a needless charge and trouble upon them.
.

18. Resolved, That a Letter be written by the gadly party, and the particular
Congregations in Southwales, directed to the stony Gallery in Whitehall, to
move the Council of State, that certain Gentlemen, Have you not already
oppressed them sufficiently with false imprisonments in Cardiff, and other
places, grounded on your own feigned suggestions and false informations, first
laying the plot, then discovering it, and making the innocent suffer? have you
more of these Devices in store in your Black Budget?
who had subscribed the Petition, should be therefore brought up by special
Messengers before them, to answer why they subscribed the Petition, and do go
about to call the people of God to an account: And that for the future security
of the gadly party in Wales, some Commissions should issue down to some of the
gadly, to raise Horse and Foot to carry in the Tithes, etc. to their Barns and
Storehouses, their own horses being unable to perform so great a service, and
the Parishioners so malignant, that they refuse to lend their assistance
therein, since they cannot Farm their own Tithes at any rate, although they
offer twice as much for the same as it is now let at. But the Council of State
had other affairs of greater concernment, and so adjourned the business till
further time.

Resolved, That the like Letter be written to put all these Gentlement that had
subscribed the Petition, out of the Commission of Peace, the Act of
Assessments, and all other places of trust and employment; the Ambulatory
Assembly at Swanzy having declared them incapable to bear any office or trust
in the Commonwealth: Which Resolve was in part executed, and Mr Gwin, Mr
Walbeith, Mr Havard, and Mr Lloyd (though persons well-affected to the
Parliament, and of considerable fortunes) immediately put out of the Commission
of Peace in Breckon shire, and several other Gentlemen in other Counties,
without Articles, Proofs or Examinations to show any cause for it, except only
for subscribing the Petition; and that it was the desire of the pretended godly
party it should be so, and diverse other Gentlemen put out of Commissions in
other Counties, and several inconsiderate inferior persons placed in their
rooms, to the dishonor of Authority, and apparent wrong and oppression of the
Country. The Committee of Plundered Ministers, having read the Petition and
Resolves of Parliament, did order the Propagators of Southwales to Answer the
Petition, and bring in their Account by the 18th of May last, which put the
Welsh Saints to a pitiful cold swet, in riding up and down, and setting up day
and night to patch up their broken accounts: And though they had several
private and public meetings for that purpose, all produced by the 18 of May
but a sheet of paper, and a few general negatives Memorandum, there was a Book
fairly written, with a hansom title to it, produced before the Committee of
plundered Ministers, purporting a particular account, but never read nor lodged
there, whereby copies thereof might be had, and the Petitioners enabled to
surcharge the same (as is usually in all other cases relating to accounts). But
the curtain was no sooner drawn to show this fair picture but as soon
withdrawn, it being unsafe to leave matters of that concernment to public
view: So that the Petitioners cannot get a copy thereof to this day, it being
resolved by the Saints to make their Accounts at the last day of judgment.
therein contained, with a confession of 20000l or thereabouts, received for
the two last years, but never say out of what received in particular, whether
they made or received, or might have made or received more of the Tithes etc.
nor do they express what is become of the 20000l nor how they have disposed of
the sum, etc. nor express any thing in paticular. It being Resolved at Swanzy,
as the only way to save their credit, to put in a few generals, stuffed up
with a parcel of godly words, to make some pretense and show to the world what
good stewards they have been, it being dangerous and unsafe to expect a
particular Account, least there should come a particular surcharge, and after
that, which is worse, a Commission to prove it: And though one of the
Propagators confessed there was a particular answer and account in Town, and in
their absence showed, yet the Petitioners could not obtain that favor as to
have it brought in, nor so much as a Copy of that general account remaining
with Mr Phelps, until the 16 of July after their particulars put in; but
instead thereof, the Petitioners required to bring in within two days after,
such particulars contained in their Petition, upon which they did desire to
examine witnesses: The Petitioners not conceiving that they should be required
to exhibit any new charge, not required, ordered or directed by Parliament,
did accordingly insist on all the particular heads of the Petition, and offered
to prove the same, and every particular and syllable thereof, so as they might
have (according to the Resolves of Parliament) a Commission to the Country to
examine where their witnesses, and matters of fact do lie, the nearest to
Westminster being an 100 miles, and some 200 miles distant, which was all as
they conceived was their duty to do, or could be required or expected according
to those Resolves.

21. But it seems the goodly party have prayed they might not account, and so
resolved at their general Meeting, whose prayers prevailed, in so much that the
Petitioners cannot proceed to issue or prove their Petition, unless they will
follow the example of Coll: Lilburn, in naming persons and crimes, and
particular misdemeanors, and make way for taking shipping to Amsterdam, or to a
worser place, for of necessity the Petitioners must needs do so by offending
such as do not love to be told of their faults, or else confine themselves to a
few particulars, beyond which they may not examine, and so leave the whole
truth of the Petition unexamined: And if it should be expected, that the
Petitioners should name all those persons that have acted by virtue of the Act
of Propagation, and received and disposed of the Tithes, etc. the qualities and
parts of the present stipended Itineraries and Schoolmasters, with their number
and stipends, and by whom paid, and where all the moneys and profits received
are lodged, with all the particular misdemeanors, neglects and miscarriages in
their not executing, and undue executing of the powers given by the said Acts
(as it seems the meaning of the particulars mentioned in the order of the 18 of
May last was rendered by some persons concerned.) It would be in the first place
a work of impossibility, especially to be done in two days, as was ordered and
required. 2. A work of apparent danger to the Petitioners. 3. A clear advantage
to the Propagators, and a means to avoid a true examination of the matters
contained in the Petition; wherefore the Petitioners are resolved to present
the Parliament with another Petition, desiring to know their pleasures, Whether
truth may be made evident as against the Propagators and Tythe-gatherers? 2.
Whether those that call themselves The godly party, are liable to account? 3.
Whether the Taxes and Impositions, etc. now imposed on the Nation, especially
poor, distressed, oppressed Wales, be so light and easy to be born, and the
Country so well able to undergo them, and the public Treasury so full, as
that the Parliament will suffer a Revenue of 20000 l per annum and more
received for two years and upward, to go to the hands of particular private
persons, to build new sumptuous houses, and buy lands without any enquiry after
the sum, or else will loose 20000 l per annum de futuro, for the Tithes etc. of
the inhabitants, who are ready to give security for that purpose, if the
Parliament will grant it within two years, comes to 20000 l more then the
Propagators have accounted in their general answer for the two last years,
which if once granted, will ease the Propagators and Tythe-gatherers of a great
deal of pains; care and trouble; and leave them to their Divine Exercises, who
have little leisure now to attend those Holy duties, performable by those that
attribute to themselves the names of Saints, and People of God, and then it
will appear to the whole world, whether they serve God for gain or godliness
sake: and by this means the state cannot be defrauded, for it will be apparent
what is paid out of the Tithes toward the Propagation of the Gospel, and
maintenance of Schools, etc. according to the Act, when there are particular
persons that are Farmers, and particular persons that are Propagators, whose
several Accounts, paiments and disbursments, being compared, will soon discover
how the State has been dealt withal the two last years, which can never be
done when the same persons are Farmors, Collectors, Tithe gatherers and
Propagators; so that it is easy, without examination of the truth where matter
of fact does arise, and where all particulars have been acted, to blind the
eyes of the Parliament with a general, plausible answer, made up of Godly
words; as one of the Itineraries answered an Inkeepers wife in Monmouthshire
near Uske, After he and his company had drunk all her drink, she called for
money for the reckoning, she was answered by the holy man, That the Saints
carry neither silver nor gold, nor scrip nor wallet: but the poor woman
replied, that she could not satisfy her Landlord for his Malt with a
Scripture phrase: no more can godly words satisfy the defect of the Preaching
of the Gospel, and want of Ministers and Schoolmasters, nor maintain Armies,
and Navies, or ease the poor Country of their Taxations and Impositions: It
being a sad thing to see so great a Revenue really intended by the Parliament,
to be converted according to the Act to be so ill employed, and no account
rendered for it; when the Parishioners and Inhabitants cannot Farm their own
Tithes at any reasonable rate, though they are ready to give double the rate,
the same are let out to the chief Farmers. Their usual course being to grant
one, two or more Churches to one of the gadly party, or other person that is
listed of a particular Congregation at less then half the value. This
Grandfarmer, or holy man, has several Subfarmours and Subtenants under him,
who let out the Tithes at the rack rent and utmost penny they can make of the
same to the great oppression and discontent of the Inhabitants, and the
apparent wrong and prejudice of the State. And because all these transactions
herein before declared, may not seem to strangers for a Romanse or a false
scandalous Libell, or Information (as undoubtedly the Goodly party will
endeavor to render it) the Petitioners of the six Counties of South Wales and
County of Monmouth, have prepared several particulars of the true State of the
said Counties, in relation to the work of Propagation of the Gospel there,
grounded on their Petition, which on the 16th of July instant, were offered and
exhibited to the consideration of the Honorable Committee of Parliament for
Plundered Ministers, which they are ready to prove and make good, and much
more, if enabled by Commissioners to be issued to the Country, where matter of
fact arises, and witnesses, reside, according to the former Resolves of
Parliament in that behalf, which Committee ordered the same should be Reported
to the Parliament, whereby Commissions may issue out for a clear discovery of
the truth thereof, in order to a Religious Reformation of all these abuses, the
sequel whereof I do promise to give you in my next. And for the further
satisfaction of the Parliament and Nation, how well the Inhabitants of
South Wales are dealt withal by these goodly persons entrusted with the
Military and Civil Government there; It is shortly intended to come forth an
abstract of their late proceedings in relation to the powers given them, as
Committee of Indemnity. Arbitrary Commissioners. Commissioners of the monthly
Assessment. Commissioners of Sequestration. Commissioners of Militia and
Justices of Peace, etc. which will be, not only averred but proved by those
that desire to give the Parliament and Nation a true account of the sad
Consequents that befell those parts of this Nation, since some persons have
been entrusted there, with the execution of the several powers aforesaid, to
this end only, That some timely information may be given the Supreme Authority
of the Nation, the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, hereafter to be
more wary and cautious who they trust, and with what Powers so far distant
from their Cognizance; The Inhabitants having so few Representatives in
Parliament to speak for them; their main and only end therein being to prevent
future mischiefs and inconveniences that may befall the present Government, and
more particularly the Inhabitants of Wales, and universally the whole Nation,
by the undue and indirect execution of these good and wholesome Powers and
Authorities that are or shall be given by the Parliament, for the advancement
of Gods glory, and the well Government of the Nation, that every one may in
peace enjoy his own, and receive encouragement to wish well and cordially
affect the present Government, and faithfully engage for the defense thereof in
the enjoyment of true Religion, wholesome Laws, and just Liberties and
Freedoms, which are the Birthright and Inheritance of the people: The
Enlargement, Establishment and long Continuance thereof being the occasion of
this Discourse, and the hearty wishes and prayers of.

Englands, (but more particularly Wales) most faithful and cordial Well-wisher
M. C. B.

FINIS.

