The great MYSTERY OF GOD: OR, The Vision of the Evening and the Morning
opened.

Whereby comparing Scripture with acts of Divine Providence, will plainly
appear that the Ruin of Mystical Babylon, and the Erecting of spiritual
Jerusalem are the ground of these present Commotions; which are not to cease
till by means of this present Parliament.

The Work being so completed, That Christ shall in and by his Saints in
tranquillity reign on earth one thousand years.

Revel. 1.2. Blessed is he that reads and they that hear the words of this
Prophecy, and keep those things that are written therein, for the time is at
hand.

Exodus 15.18. The Lord shall reign for ever and ever.

Dan. 2.22, For he reveals deep and secret things, he knows what is in the
dark, and the light dwells with him.

Revel. 22.10. Stale not the sayings of the Prophecy of this Book, for the
time is at hand.

LONDON, Printed for John Wright in the old Bayl^y. 1645.

To the RIGHT HONORABLE the House of PEERS: AND TO THE HONORABLE the House of
COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT at Westminster.
HIgh and most honored ever renowned Senators, the Lord of his free grace and
love having about some two or three years since cast my thoughts and
meditations upon that great vision showed unto his servants and Prophets Daniel
and John concerning the time of the reign and the ruin of these five grand
enemies of the Church, set forth by the Spirit of God to Daniel to be one
Image, and to John to be but one Beast, all in league together to persecute the
Saints of God, (by comparing the Words of God and the Acts of Gods providence)
one with the other, I find that these enemies destruction is nigh at hand, and
Gods peoples final deliverance near; yea, the work is begun already and will
not be long before the Lord will consummate it. Withal, I humbly conceive,
that You are those two great Witnesses which the Spirit of Christ foretold long
since should be raised up to Heaven the high place of Justice and Judicature,
though all the people and Saints of God from the year of Christ 375. unto 1639.
be reckoned for his Witnesses, and so looked upon by Christ, because they all
bore witness unto those Truths of Christ which that man of sin denied; yet
You in a more especial manner at this time, because You are not only to
protest against Antichrist and his grand lie, who said, That the power of
Churches and States belonged to him. But You are that Judgment which should
sit and take his Kingdom and Dominion from him, Dan. 7.26.
raised up to Heaven by the power of Christ's Spirit for the same end. Dan.
2.34, 45.
And by that little stone cut out of the Mountain without hands even by the
Spirit of God the day You ascended up into Heaven, by this little stone shall
you destroy all those enemies; and when You have taken all powers from them, As
will further appear in the following Treatise. Psalm. 149.6.
the Civil power will remain in Your hands as You are Christ's civil
Magistrates, and all the exercise of the Ecclesiastical power of Churches
shall You give unto the people of God, (which are the Body of Christ, whereof
You being Members) and sitting with the rest of Your Brethren in Gods House,
Rev. 21.2, 10.
shall exercise that spiritual Sword; and by Your leave and Authority the
Saints of God are to build that holy City new Jerusalem, Psalm. 149.6.
where God and the Lamb will have his Throne. Rev. 22.1.


He who is the meanest and lowest Instrument that ever the Lord Christ made use
of for so great a work, does humbly crave leave to conceal his name, and to
present these his Labors to Your Honors, that the whole world may see and
know what great things Christ will by You do for his Church and people.

The Lord make good his great and gracious promise unto You, Isa. 28.6.
who has promised to be a Spirit of Judgment to You that sit in Judgment,
and Strength to You that have turned the battle to the gate, and for a Crown
of glory, and for a Diadem of beauty unto the residue of his people.

The Preface to the Christian Reader.
THe union and oneness of all the grand enemies of the Church of God, Dan.
8.26.
from the evening to the morning, with their fury and rage against the people
of the most High, and the time of their destruction and ruin, with the time of
the Churches Captivity, with those several Titles which the Spirit of God sets
them forth by, suitable to their conditions they were to be in, and the time of
the enemies fall, and the final deliverance of the Church, together with the
ways and means of their Redemption is called The great Mystery of God, Rev.
10.7. and 5.1. Dan. 12.9. and 8.19. Rev. 1.1. and 22.6. and 5.3.
written in a little book and sealed on the back side with seven seals, and
the words closed up and sealed till the time of the end: A mystery and vision
showed to Daniel and John. But no man was found in Heaven nor in Earth, neither
under the earth worthy to open and to read the book, Verse. 5.
neither to look thereon; but the Lord Jesus, the Lion of the Tribe of Judah,
he prevailed and was counted worthy to open this little book and to loose the
seven Seals thereof. And you have this Lion or Lamb who had been slain
opening all the seven Seals 5, 6, 7, and 8. Chapters. And this mystery of God
or little book, was not finshed or opened till the seven Trumpets sounded,
Rev. 10.5.
and then an Angel that stood upon the sea and upon the earth, lift up his hand
to Heaven; and swear by him that lives for ever and ever, That there should be
time no longer, that is, that the enemies of the Church should have no longer
time to tyrannize and reign over the Churches of the Saints, nor the mystery
any longer concealed. And says further, that in the days of the voice of the
seventh Angel (when he shall begin to sound) the mystery of God should be
finished. Verse. 7.
And we shall find that this Angel did not begin to sound until the witnesses
were ascended up to Heaven, and the tenth part of that Antichristian City fell.
Rev. 11.5.
Therefore though many learned and pious men have undertaken to open this book
and to loose the seven Seals thereof, Rev. 5.4.
yet indeed were not able (because) they were not found worthy and (because
this vision was to be shut up for many days) and the words and book closed up
and sealed with seven Seals till the time of the end. Dan. 8.26, and 12.19.
Rev. 5.1.
Something indeed has bin done by way of Ecclesiastical History and
paraphrasing upon the Text: Verse. 9, 10.
but to open the book and loose the seven Seals did only belong to that Lamb
which was in the midst of the throne, and of the four beasts, and in the midst
of four and twenty Elders; he only was counted worthy because he had been
slain, and redeemed his Church and people not only from the wrath of God and
Hell, and Death, but out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation,
and has made them to God Kings and Priests, and they shall reign with Christ
upon the earth 1000. years. Rev. 20.4.
This mystery being now finished, and this little book and seals broken
open, Rev. 11, 12.
which were done the year the witnesses ascended up to Heaven 1639 when the
tenth part of that Antichristian City fell (as shall be showed at large in its
place) then the Lord commanded his Prophet to make it plain upon tables, Verse.
13.
that he may run that reads it. Hab. 2.2, 3. Dan. 12.10.
And says further, that at the end the vision shall speak and not lie: The
Lord promising they that are wise shall understand this vision at the time of
the end. Rev. 1.3. Prove. 1.6.
Now they are counted wise and blessed in this respect, to understand a vision
or mystery and the interpretation thereof, Dan. 9.2.
the words of the wise God and his dark saying; who search and read the books
and rolls wherein God has wrapped and folded up these great mystery of the
enemies ruin and the Churches deliverance: and that trace and eye God in those
secret ways of his providence as that holy man of God did, Psalm. 107. By which
acts the Lord makes his vision and mystery plain upon tables, that he that runs
may read. The Lord of his free love and grace having given some understanding
in this great mystery and vision, accordingly we will by Gods assistance
endeavor to hold forth this light, knowing that it is a great and heinous
sin inexcusable before God at that great day, either to put our light under a
bushel, or to hide that talent in the earth which the Lord has given us to
trade with for his glory, his Churches good, and our own everlasting comfort.
Therefore we will declare and make known what we understand of this great
mystery in several Chapters. What is gold and pure metal, will endure the
day of fiery trial; but what is hay and stubble shall be burned (which is my
hearts desire.)

THE MYSTERY OF God opened.
CHAP. I. The Union and Oneness of those five grand enemies of the Church,
Daniels four Beasts and little Horn, set forth by one Image and one Beast.
THese four Beasts and little Horn that carried the Church of God captive at
the first into Babylon, some 600. years before Christ, and has kept them in
bondage 1600. years, and upwards, Isa. 28.15.
all these were confederate together to break, devour, and trample under their
feet with great fury, rage, Dan. 7.7.
and malice all the time of their reign, Isa. 21.15.
are therefore said to make a Covenant with Hell and Death for the same
purpose. First, Dan. 2.31.
the enemies are set forth by one Image, the King of Babylon being the head of
it, who carried the Church of God first captive, ver. 38. is the first Beast,
chap. 7.4. The King of Persia, which is the Breast and Arms of this Image, who
took the Kingdom from the King of Babylon, Dan. 5.31. was Daniels second
Beast, Dan. 7.5. The Belly and Thighs of this Image was the King of Graecia,
who took the Kingdom from the King of Persia, Dan. 8.6, 7. and 20, 21. which
was Daniels third Beast, Dan. 7.6. The Legs and feet was the King of the
Romans, who took the Kingdom from the Grecians, Dan. 11.20. set forth by this
Character, a raiser of Taxes, as indeed he was, as we may see plainly, Luke
2.1, 2: he was Daniels fourth Beast, Dan. 7.7. and was more terrible in his
persecuting the people of God then any of the three Kings or Monarchs were that
went before him, set forth in these words, Verse 7.
Dreadful, terrible, and strong exceedingly, and had great iron teeth, who
devoured and broke in pieces, and stomped the residue under his feet. Dan. 2.41.
And in this Kings days, this great Kingdom and Monarchy was divided into ten
Provinces or Kingdoms, set forth by ten horns, Dan. 7.7. and by ten toes,
Dan. 2.41. which were on his feet, but yet all under his power and
jurisdiction, and therefore he is said to have ten horns, ten Kings that had
ten powers under him; and these ten Kings are not absolute Kings, Rev. 17.12.
therefore are said to have received no Kingdom, but reign as petty Kings
under him, and so receive power as Kings one hour with the Beast, not distant
from him, Dan. 7.8. Rev. 13.11.
but one with him. Now this little horn which Daniel saw come up amongst those
ten horns, which is that second Beast which John saw come out of the earth
from amongst the common men of the earth, as indeed he did, was Antichrist,
(for he did not come or issue from any royal race or blood) therefore called
by the Spirit of God, Dan. 11.21. verse 24.
a vile person, to whom they shall not give the honor of the Kingdom, but he
shall come in peaceably and obtain the Kingdom by flatteries, as you may
read, ver. 24. So that the Roman Monarch, who is set forth by a raiser of
Taxes, was destroyed neither in anger nor in battle, ver. 20. but this little
horn through his policy, caused craft to prosper in his hand; Dan. 8.25.
he is noted to be very deep and subtle, understanding dark sentences, ver.
23. showing signs, and wonders, Mark 13.22. Rev. 13.13, 14.
and miracles, making fire to come down from Heaven, by which signs he
deceives the whole world, and would have seduced the Elect, if it had been
possible; and by his policy and craft he began to work himself into favor with
Constantin, 320. who gave him the power of the civil sword in Rome, and the
other places adjacent in his time, Rev. 13.2.
and afterward obtained the whole Kingdom or Monarch by flattery from the
Dragon the Roman Emperor, and therefore he is said to give him his power,
seat, and great authority: Rev. 13.2. Dan. 11.23.
for after he had made a league with the Roman Emperor about 365. he works
deceitfully and became strong with a small people; therefore says the Spirit of
God, his power shall be mighty, but not by his own power, no, Dan. 8.14.
for he got the power from the Roman Emperor by flattery and deceit, and not
by strength of Arms; neither did the Romans give him the honor of the
Kingdom at the first, but he by his policy and craft, like a Serpent, wound
himself into the Roman Beast, and so became one with him; and so this
Antichristian Whore made the Roman Emperor her stalking-horse to carry her to
the Kings of the earth, that she might commit spiritual fornication with
them, Rev. 17.3, 7. Rev. 18.3.
and make all the Inhabiters of the earth drunk with the wine of her spiritual
fornication, v. 3. And this is noted in the Scripture of truth, that the Roman
Beast, and all those ten Kings under him had all one mind to enslave themselves
to this Antichristian Whore, Rev. 17.13.
and gave their power and strength to her: yea, says the Text, God has put it
into their hearts to fulfill his will, and to agree and give their Kingdom
unto the Beast nutill the word of God be fulfilled, ver. 17. So ye see he
became one with those four great Beasts or Monarchs of the whole world, all
folded and united into one, set forth by an Image, Dan. 2.31.

Secondly, these enemies of the Church of God are set forth by one Beast; The
Beast which thou saw, was, and is not, Rev. 17.8.
and shall ascend out of the bottomless pit, and they that dwell on the earth
shall wonder, whose names are not written in the book of life from the
foundation of the world, when they behold the Beast that was, and is not, and
yet is: John did see this Beast, in which of these Kings reign it was: It is
plain and evident both by Scripture and Ecclesiastical Histories, that John
saw this vision when the Roman Monarchy was extant, and therefore this Beast
(is) was, and is not. The Babylonian, the Persian, and Grecian Monarchs was;
they all had their time who were considerable with the other two grand enemies
of the Church which followed after them, Isa. 28.15.
and had made a Covenant with hell and death to set themselves against God and
his Church. These three great Beasts were once in being, but at this time, Dan.
7.8. Rev. 13.11
when John saw this vision, were gone and dead. That second Beast which John
saw come out of the earth, is not, or is not yet come, ver. 10. is not and
shall ascend out of the bottomless pit, and this is Antichrist; he was not
come at this time, for he could not come till he that did let or hinder his
coming was taken out of the way, 2 These. 2.7.
says the Text, which was the Roman Emperor: And being one with those former
Beasts that went before him, by covenant and confederacy with them, he is said
to be this Beast as well as they; but being not come the Spirit of God says,
he is not, or is not yet come, Rev. 17.10.

Thirdly, (yet is) the three former Beasts was not, they were gone, the little
horn Antichrist he is not yet come, but the Roman Monarch he was then extant,
when John saw this vision, and is still in being; and that he was extant in
John's time, it is plain and evident was the Roman Emperor, Rev. 13.1.
for he is said to have seven heads and ten horns; now none of the other three
Monarchs had their Kingdom divided into ten Provinces or Kingdoms, over which
there was ten Kings. Dan. 2.41, 42
But this Kingdom in his time, the Scriptures note, was divided into feet and
toes, into ten Kingdom which had ten Kings, ten heads over them, reigning one
hour with the Beast a short time: Rev. 17.12.
And this Roman Beast had seven heads, he was not only mighty strong (having
ten horns) but also full of subtilty and craft, set forth by seven heads; seven
is a number of perfection; to note that he was perfect and complete in pollcy,
to do hurt and mischief to the Church of Christ: These seven heads are set
forth by mountains, Rev. 17.9.
to note their great power which the Roman Emperor had to destroy the Saints
of God, not in regard of his ten horns only, but also his seven heads, full of
subtilty and craft, which were as so many mountains of strength, and therefore
says the Spirit of God, Rev. 17.9.
here is the mind that has wisdom: A wise man knows that wisdom and policy
is seated in the head, which is the proper seat of wisdom, and not any
natural power of flesh, which is set forth usually by the Arm: Neither are
these seven heads seven mountains, on which Rome is built (as some have
supposed) but seven mountains of wisdom and policy: All these ten horns and
seven heads or hills of policy, Dan. 11.21. Rev. 17.8.
did the Roman Emperor resign to the vile person, Antichrist, who is said to
come up out of the bottomless pit, because he was so deep in his subtity and
craft: The Roman Beast and his ten horns and Kings had one mind, and gave
their power and Kingdom to this Antichristian Beast, and likewise these seven
heads, Rev. 17.11.
and therefore he is said to be of the seven: so the Roman Beast furnishes him
with power and policy to do as much hurt and villainy to the people of God: as
himself did: And yet Antichrist is said to bring another head of policy and
craft with him beside these seven which the Roman Beast resigned up to him: The
Beast which was and is not (even he is the eighth, verse 11. Dan. 8.23.
he bringing another head of policy with him) and therefore he is said to
understand dark sentences, and to have policy and craft, ver. 25. and to show
such signs and wonders as to deceive the Elect, if it were possible, and does
great wonders, Mark 3.22.
so that he makes, as it were, Rev. 13.13. Rev. 17.11.
fire to come down from Heaven in the sight of men; this eighth head of
policy, the Roman Beast had not, but Antichrist brings this along with him, the
Beast that was, and is not, he is the eighth. Thus were these five great Beasts
made up into one Beast, making over their power and policy successively one to
another, to persecute and destroy the Church of Christ, and the Saints of the
most High, Isa. 28.15.
by League and Covenant made with death and hell for many years.

CHAP. II. This Chapter treats of these two witnesses, or opens those several
titles which the Spirit of God is pleased to set forth his people by in the
time of their exile, suitable to the state and condition wherein they were at
the same time.
THe people of the most High are set forth by the Spirit of God, by several
titles, while they were in their great exile and captivity under these five
devouring beasts; very suitable to that condition wherein they were at the same
time. But he sets forth the state of the Church in what condition it was in
Antichrists time, especially by those titles he put upon them.

denied the Church power to be in the hands of the Spouse of Christ, and that
Christ had not left that Ecclesiastical power of the Church with them, but
with him, and that he was Christ's Vicegerent; sitting in the Temple of God, 2
These. 2.4.
lording it over all that is called God. To this great truth of Christ's Kingly
power in his Church do they give testimony and bear witness, denying that he
or any in the world has power to lord it over the Church and Spouse of Christ
in Ecclesiastical matters, Rev. 11.3.
for this belongs only to God and Christ, and so they are called Christ's
Witnesses, I will give power to my two Witnesses: Rev. 1.1.
It was Christ that spoke here, this book being called the Revelation of Jesus
Christ, which God gave unto him, they who give testimony to any truth, though
it has been held forth by any other going before, such a one is called his
witness; thus God is called Christ's witness, in saying that he was his Son,
Joh. 5.32. John is likewise called Christ's witness, ver. 33. the Apostles are
called Christ's witness, Acts 1.38.3.15. 2 Pet. 1.16. Christ is called the true
and faithful witness, Rev. 1.5. and chap. 3.14. So the people of God and
Churches of the Saints are said to be Christ's witnesses in the day and year
that Antichrist entered into the Temple and denied the Kingly office of Christ,
Anno 375.

Secondly, Title 2. Rev. 11.4.
they are called two Candlesticks, and two Olive trees: they are set forth by
two Candlesticks and two Olive trees, to show to us that at this time they were
in a true Church State, as the people of the Jews formerly were, Zach. 4.2.
Rev. 1.20.
who are set forth by one Candlestick, and the seven Churches of Asia by seven
Candlesticks, and the Officers of the Churches are set forth by two Olive
trees, that stand before God, Zach. 4.12.
and are on both sides of the Candlestick, to empty the golden Oil of divine
truth out of themselves into the bowl of the Candlestick into the bosom of
the Church; so it is clear they were at this time in a true Church state, Why
the people of God are called two Candlesticks. Dan. 18.32.
being complete with their Officers two Olive trees, and they are called but
two Candesticks, not only to note to us that the people of God were worshipping
him aright in a Church way; but at this time when Antichrist entered into the
Temple and denied Christ's Kingly office, were few in number, even two, the
least of all numbers; for many professors at this time did do wickedly against
the Covenant, even broke that Church Covenant which was amongst them.

Thirdly, Title 3.
they are set forth by this title, The Saints of the most high, or high Saints;
Dan. 7.21. Rev. 13.7. 2 These. 2.4. Cant. 5.7. Rev. 12.6.14.
Antichrist having entered into the Temple and disthroned the Lord Christ, and
plucked the Crown from his head, stripped the Spouse of Christ of her veil,
and persecuted the Church into the Wilderness of that Antichristian world, and
taken away all their Church power which the Lord Jesus gave them in the day of
their espousall: Dan. 12.7.
And therefore he is said to scatter the power of the holy people, having so
broken them to pieces by his hot persecution in the year 375. that they could
not, neither might be suffered to hold forth the true worship of God in a
Church way, therefore are called Saints of God, Dan. 7.18.21. 25, 26. Rev. 3.7.
and high Saints, they being scattered some into one place some into another.

The fourth title by which the people of God are set forth by, Title 4.
is a woman clothed with the Sun, and traveling, Rev. 12.1, 1, 5.
and pained to be delivered of a man child that was to rule all Nations with a
rod of Iron; the Saints of God being broken to pieces by a wicked and unjust
Magistrate, and scattered up and down in the wilderness, some here and some
there, not being suffered to congregate into a true visible Church by that man
of sin, for the space of 1260. years; they having been persecuted by him
that full space of time, and afterward slain and laid dead for three
prophetical days and a half. And some of their brethren and fellow-witnesses
being raised up to the high place of Judicature and Magistracy, as was evident
in the foregoing chapter, Rev. 11.12. The rest of the godly were now with child
with this great truth of Christ in point of Civil Government, by which the
Lord Jesus in and by his Saints, was to rule all nations with a rod of Iron.
Therefore cried they earnestly to God by zealous and fervent Prayer, (and to
his witnesses, their fellow servants that sat in Heaven, by humble request and
petition) that they might have a godly Magistracy set up in the world, and
that Antichrist that wicked oppressor, who had made the world as a
wilderness, Isa. 14.17.
and destroyed the Cities thereof, and that wicked murderer which had devoured
the people of God for many ages, and slain his witnesses, Rev. 11.7, 8.
and laid their dead bodies in the streets, might be cast now out of heaven;
the place of Judicature; and the people of God, and those that would reign for
that man child Jesus, might be left in Heaven, to sit as Kings in the Civil
Throne. This birth and travel of the people of God was in the year 1641. and
1641.
And thus the Church and people of God traveled for, and took great pains to
have it come to pass, and was much pained and traveled in their minds until
they had accomplished their desires, and was delivered of this man child, the
year of Christ 1641. as shall be showed more fully when we come to speak of
those effects and consequences which followed upon the witnesses ascending up
to Heaven. Thus you see the Spirit of God set forth the state and condition, in
which his Church and people were to be in the time of their exile and
captivity, under those five grand enemies of his Saints, especially that little
horn Antichrist; by these several titles which he gave them, very fitting and
agreeable with the present condition which they were in at the same time; not
at any time mentioning some of his people, and leaving out others; but
intending all of them: For Antichrist could not deceive any of Gods Elect, it
was not possible he should. Mar. 13.22. From the year of Christ 375. to 1635.
Therefore all of them, as one man, did witness to that truth of Christ in
point of power, that he was to sit Lord and King in his Temple, and not
Antichrist; and to be Lord over the consciences of his Saints and Spouse, and
not man: So they were all scattered into the Wilderness, and there did
prophecy and speak one to another for their mutual edification, and so are
called Saints of the most High; and all of them were with child, and traveled
for a godly Magistracy, 1641. Therefore set forth by a woman in travel. So by
two witnesses ye see is meant all the people of God, and not two distinct men,
or distinct offices, the Magistracy and the Ministry, as some of our learned
have supsed, nor the two Testaments.

CHAP. III This Chapter shows the time of those five Monarchs reigning and
tyrannizing it over the Church, (especially of the little borne Antichrist)
when he began and when he ended his reign, at the same time the witnesses
began to prophecy and ended.
THose five cruel and malicious Enemies of the Church of Christ, Dan. 8.26.
were to continue for many days. From the very first beginning to the last
period and time of their end when they shall be quite destroyed, and the Church
set free from all her enemies, and set down in peace and tranquillity upon the
throne with Christ here on Earth, to rule the Nations with a rod of Iron. The
Spirit of God holds forth in Daniel, Dan. 8.14.
to be two thousand and three hundred Prophetical days, or natural years.
Six hundred years from the first time that the people of God, and Church of the
Jews. was carried captive by the Babylonians to Christ's time. And from Christ's
time, to the enemies last period or total ruin, and the Churches final
deliverance, 1700. years. Isa. 14.19.
And then the Beast and Antichrist shall be quite cast out of the World, as an
abominable branch. And this the Spirit of God notes, Dau. 8.26.
that the time of this vision is not only true, but is the vision of the
evening and morning. The evening beginning at the first time that the people of
God went into captivity, and entered upon the night of their exile and
banishment by the Caldeans. And the morning beginning not before all the
darkness of that antichristian night be gone, and the Church freed from all
her enemies, Mal. 4.2. Rev. 2.27. Isa. 24.23.
and risen with that Sun of righteousness to the thrones of his glory, to rule
the Nations with a rod of Iron; And to reign upon Mount Zion and in his new
Jerusalem, before his Ancients gloriously. From the evening to the morning
shall be 2300. prophetical days, and not natural days, for that cannot be
meant, providence has declared the contrary very evidently.

This is the full time of all the enemies reign in general, and of the people
of Gods captivity and bondage from the evening to the morning; (but Antichrist,
that little horn or power which Daniel saw come up amongst the other ten
horns; Dan. 7.8.
the Spirit of God spoke more distinctly and exactly of the time of his reign,
and of the time of his ruin, then of any of the other four Monarchs, Dan.
2.7. and 11.12.
he being the last and more cruel in his persecution against the Saints, then
any of the other; though the Roman Monarch came very near to him: the time of
his reign is set down to be a Time, Times, and half a Time by Daniel, and 42.
Months by John, Dan. 12.7. Rev. 13.5.
) Power was given to him to continue forty and two months. And the Saints
captivity under him the same time, who are set forth by the work which they
did, and the state they were in the same time Antichrist is said to begin his
reign; their work was to give testimony, and to bear witness of that great
truth of Christ's Kingly power in his Church and Temple, and to protest against
Antichrist his lie, (who said, he had the power given to him) and against his
act, sitting in the Temple of God. And they were to continue witnessing and
prophesying the same time which Antichrist is to reign, Rev. 11.3. Rev. 12.6.
set forth by 1260. days, and to be in their exile and banishment in the
wilderness of that antichristian world, nourished and fed by Gods providing
and overshadowing hand of providence, Rev. 12.14.
for a Time, Times, and half a Time, the same with Antichrist. A time may be
taken for 1000. years, times for 200. years, half a time for half a hundred
years: Or thus, a time to be one year, times to be two years, half a time
half a year; there being 1260. days in three years and a half. And so the
Holy Ghost reckons a day for a year, us he does in Daniel in the vision of the
evening and morning, Dan. 8.14, 26.
2300. days for so many years; Rev. 11.3.12, 6.
and this agrees with the other times that the witnesses should prophecy, and
that the woman was to be fed in the wilderness, which was 1260. days, a day
for a year, being so many prophetical days or natural years. Rev. 13.5.
Antichrist continuing forty and two months, being the same with the former,
every month containing 30. days, which according to the Grecian account
amounts to the same number 1260. days, a day for a year. So the time of
Antichrists reign, and the people of Gods bondage and slavery under him, is
1260. prophetical days or natural years. Now we are to find out when he
began his reign, and when he is said to end. About the year 320. Constantine
stood up, the Church and people of God having been exceedingly broken to
pieces, devoured and trampled under foot, for some 320. years by Daniels fourth
Beast, Dan. 7.7.
Constuntine standing up for the Christians, and favoring their way, Syluster
Bishop of Rome. Dan. 11.23.
thereupon resign the civil power of Rome and other places adjacent to the
Bishops of Rome; and so he began to take the power of the Emperor and the
civil sword, being noted by Daniel, that he began by a small people, and is
called a little horn; as indeed they were but very few Christians to the whole
body of that Roman Empire, neither had he any great power at this present time:
But at this time he did not begin his reign, (some say) 315. or 316. but that
cannot be. But most agree upon 365. and that the whole power of the Empire was
resigned up to him by the Roman Emperor at this time, which is very likely,
that he by his policy and craft gained the power of the Empire, at or about
this time, Dau. 11.21.23.
or the most part of it; for he crept in by little and little into the hearts
of the Roman Emperors, and so into the hearts of his Kingdom even by
flattery, and began with a small people; Dan. 11.25.
and through his subtilty and policy caused craft to prosper in his hand, and
by peace destroyed many, pretending to the Christian Emperors that he was for
the good and welfare both of their souls and bodies, Church and Empire, and if
the power of the Empire might be resigned up to him he would employ it for the
good of both. Whereupon the Roman Emperor resigned up the whole power, or most
of it, to the Bishop of Rome 365. or thereabout. And this is noted in the
Scripture of truth. That he took away the Jewa sacrifice the same year, called,
Dan. 9, 11.
The daily Sacrifice; therefore it is said that an host was given him against
the daily sacrifice, Dan. 6.12. The Spirit of God charactariseth him by a
little horn, which none of the other Monarchs were ever set forth by; and
because he is said to wax great to the host of Heaven, which none of the other
did, Verse. 12.
And by him (says the Text) was the daily sacrifice taken away, and an host
was given him by the Roman Emperor against the daily sacrifice; Dan. 11.31.
and arms shall stand on his side, and they shall pollute the Sanctuary of
strength, and shall take away the daily seerifice, and they shall set up the
abomination that makes desolate. Antichrist the Bishop of Rome could not be
against the Jews way of worship, 1 These. 1.7.
so as to destroy it and take it out of the way, nor pollute Gods House and
Sanctuary and set up his abomination, until the Roman Emperor was taken out
of the way; that is, until he had resigned the civil power of the Empire to
him, or most of it. And therefore it is said, that an host was given him
against the daily sacrifice, and armies shall stand on his part. So it is
clear, the daily sacrifice was taken away by Antichrist, and those armies and
hosts were given him by the Roman Emperor; and this he did by an host and by
the power of aims (which was the civil power of the Empire:) and he took the
daily sacrifice away about 365. as Carrion affirms. Carian Chron. lib. 3.


But the Spirit of God does not begin his time when Antichrist took the power
of the Empire into his hand, nor when he took away the Jews daily sacrifice;
for if he had not entered into the Christians Churches and true Temple of God,
and dis-throned Christ, and stripped his Spouse of her vale, and scattered the
power of the holy people by the civil sword of the Empire, but ruled for God
and Christ and the welfare of his people, the Spirit of God would not have
looked upon him as Antichrist. And therefore the Lord begins Antichrists time
when he first entered into his Temple, 2 Thessalonians. 24.
and sat as God himself, lording it over the consciences of men in matters
divine, which only belong to God and to Christ. From this time does the Spirit
of God begin Antichrists reign and the Churches slavery and bondage under him,
which he did not do so soon as he entered upon any of the power of the Empire,
either 320. or 365. for this is noted of him, He came in (says John) like a
Lamb, Rev. 13.11.
seeming to all the Churches of the Saints (and to the people of the whole
Empire, to be an innocent Lamb) one that would do no harm, which he did not
from 320. when he had the civil power of Rome and other places adjacent
resigned up to him, until he had through his policy and craft made a League
with the Roman Emperor Anno 365. or thereabouts. Ban. 11.23.
Then after this the Spirit of God notes that he shall work deceitfully; as
indeed he did now at the coming in of Constantine, that great persecution for
320. years against the Churches ceased, and the Saints had through Constantines
becoming a Christian respite and reviving, for now the Roman Beast had such a
wound given him at this time, as if that he would die presently and not live
again. But after some few years this wound was cured, and Antichrist starts up
in the former Beasts stead, Rev. 13.11. Dan. 7.8, 20.
and speaks (like a Dragon) very great things against the people of God, and
wrought deceitfully against the Saints, pretending at the first to be all for
them, but now having got the civil power in his hand, is quite against them;
and by this civil horn or power enters into the Temple where the people of
God was congregated according to the order of the Gospel and takes away their
power, and so is said to be a Lamb that had two horns, two powers, the Civil
and Ecclesiastical; Eev. 13.11.
which was done about the year of Christ 375. some ten years after the daily
sacrifice was taken away. From this time does the Lord reckon, Antichrist
begins his reign.
and thus Antichrist is said to begin his reign 375. and reigns 1260. years,
and the two witnesses to be in sackcloth, and to prophecy the full space of
time 1260. years. Then they are to end in the year 1635. for 375. and 1260.
makes 1635. until this time is Antichrist to reign and the witnesses to
prophecy. That he began Anno 375. will appear more fully when we come to
speak of the witnesses arising and ascending up to Heaven, and Antichrist his
fall; God having promised, Hab. 2.3.
That at the end the vis^on shall speak and not lie: Now it must speak by
those great acts of Gods providence by which God is pleased to open visions and
mysteries. For this time of Antichrists reigning over the Saints was hid from
all men both in Heaven and Earth, he not beginning when he took the Civil
power, as all our former writers have supposed, none looking to the time when
he entered into the Temple, and made war with the Saints which were in a Church
way, and this he took but by parcels. And in that he is said not to begin
until he enter into the Temple, and when he entered is not recorded in
Ecclesiastical History, truly (as I conceive) the reason may be, That it might
be hid.

CHAP. IV. The tyranny and cruelty of Antichrist against the people of God all
his time he was to continue, and the Saints to prophecy; and likewise when
they had ended their testimony with the work and employment of the Saints and
witnesses while they were in sackcloth.
THe tyranny of Antichrist is set forth by this, that he exercised all the
power of the former Beast, Rev. 13.2. Rev. 17.3, 7.
the former Beast having given him his seat, power, and great authority: This
Antichristian Whore now rides upon the Roman Emperor, and makes him her
stalking beast, Verse. 2.
not only to commit spiritual fornication with the Kings of the earth, and
make all the Inhabiters of the earth drunk with the wine of her fornication,
but likewise to devour, break in pieces, and stamp the residue under his feet,
even the poor Saints and Churches of Christ for 1260. years; and he is said
to exercise all the power of the former Beast, the Roman Emperor Daniels
fourth Beast, Rev. 13.14, 15 First steps of Antichrist, cruelty against the
Saints. Dan. 11.38. Dan. 11.30. Dan. 11.32. Dan. 11.28.
who did the same to the Saints as ye may see, Dan. 7.7. And fitly called the
Image of the Roman Beast, both in his malice, cruelty, and strength. First, he
breaks the Saints or Churches of Christ in pieces the day he entered into the
Temple 375. and broke that League and Church Covenant which were amongst them,
and so he and many more that were of them in the same League and Covenant, are
said to do wickedly against the Covenant, and his heart is said to be against
the holy Covenant; meaning that Church Covenant that was amongst the people of
God, for he knew very well, that so long as the people of God kept close to
that Church Covenant, that they would retain that Ecclesiastical and Church
power amongst themselves, and so have kept him from mixing his cup and his
inventions with the pure doctrine of the Church, therefore his heart was said
to be against this h^ly Covenant, Rev. 12.13, 14. Dan. 12.7.
and he brake it all to pieces, persecuting the Saints into the Wilderness,
scattering their power up and down into the world; here one Saint, there
another, and thereupon he takes all the Church power into his hand: Thus the
Church and Church Covenant was broken all to pieces by him, 2 These. 2.3, 8.
and so he scattered the Ecclesiastical Church power; for which act of his, he
is called That man of sin, and That wicked one: and says the Spirit of God,
He is Antichrist that denies the Father and the Son. 1 John 2.22.
Antichrist he sits in the Temple of God, showing himself to be God, in that
wicked act of his, in exalting or lording himself over the consciences of all
those that are Gods, and so deny Christ to have any power in his Temple, in
that he denied the Saints of it, to whom Christ had given it, saying, that he
was Christ, that he has power over men's consciences in matters of worship,
therefore says our Savior, Luke 21.8.
False Christ's shall come in my name, in my power, saying, that the power
belongs to him, and so he denies the Son; 1 John 2.23.
now says the Scripture, He that denies the Son, denies the Father, for he
denies that God or Christ has now the power in their hands, but has delivered
over to him all concerning worship in his Church, verse 22.
and so he indeed is Antichrist.

This sin of his is called The Mystery of Iniquity: 2 These. 2.7.
It is such a deep and covered sin as that it is called a Mystery, having
such fair pretenses and glosses going along with it; yea, and it may be he did
really intend to rule for God and the good of his Church, as out of doubt it
was thus with the Bishop of Rome at this time, 375. Therefore men might think,
surely God and Christ had given him power so to order things both in the State
and Church, that there might be a uniformity in Religion, that men might be all
of one mind in the worship and service of God, and so both the Church and the
whole Empire might live and be in much peace and quietness. Who would think
this to be an evil or sin? If a sin, yet not such a sin as the
Scriptures make it to be, no, indeed a man would not think it to be so at the
first view; therefore the Spirit of God says, 2 These. 2.10. Rev. 11.7.17.8.
Dan. 8.25.
That he ascended out of the bo^^omlesse pit, dug deep for this his subtilty
and craft, and that his working is after the manner of Satan, with all
deceivablenesse of unrighteousness, transforming himself into an Angel of
light through his craft and policy: pretending it is for their good and
welfare, as the Serpent did to Eve, thereby deceiving the whole world, Genesis
3.5. Mark 13.22. John 10.6.8.
and would have done the like to the Elect of God and witnesses of Christ if it
had been possible. But the Sheep would not hear him, for they know not the
voice of a stranger, but they know the voice of Christ and will follow him,
ver. 4. But Antichrist that was a stranger they would not follow, for they know
not his voice (to come from God.) Whereupon he brake them all to pieces, and
their Church Covenant, and cast the Spouse of Christ out of Gods House and
Temple, sitting as God himself over men's consciences, directing and teaching
them how to worship God after his own precepts: for which God calls him proud
Lucifer, Isa. 29.13.14.13.
who said in his heart, I will ascend up to Heaven, I will exalt my Throne
above the Stars of God, I will be like the most High, verse 14.
(Oh proud Lucifer, son of the morning:) Therefore the Lord calls him, that
man of sin, and that wicked one and his sin, 2 These. 2.3.8.
a Mystery. We do not meet with the like expressions in the Scripso high and
sublime, to note and set forth to us the heinousness of this sin: a sin
next to the sin against the holy Ghost, and the depth of his sin a Mystery.
For to take the Crown from the Kings head, and to take him off from his
princely Throne, and throw him out of his Palace against law and justice, is a
horrible thing yea further, to force his Queen, and to make her to prostrate
her self to a stranger, yea, to a vile person, this is a sin unparaleld; but
to do so to the Prince of Princes, and of the Kings of the earth, Rev. 1.5.
and to his Spouse the Church of Christ, and Saints of the most High, this is a
sin brought out of the bottomless pit by Lucifer son of the morning, even
that son of perdition, (the Lord of his free grace and mercy kept his
Witnesses from this sin, who now are ascended up to Heaven to execute
judgment upon Antichrist for this sin.) Yea, he has secretly hinted to us
in holy writ, that he will keep them from this sin, yea, they shall be so
far from this sin, that they shall give some liberty to weak consciences
for the present, Rev. 6.11.
while they are pouring forth the fifth and sixth Vial.

Mary's days.



Thus Antichrist exercised all the power of the former Roman Beast, Rev. 3.12.
and exercised as much malice and cruelty against the Saints in breaking them
to pieces, devouring and trampling those that were left, Dan. 7.7.
as the Roman Emperor did.

Object. But it will be objected; how comes it to pass that that sin of
Antichrist in breaking the Churches and Church Covenant to pieces to be so
great in him, and not in the Roman Emperor, when he did the same thing, Dan.
7.7.

Answ. The Roman Emperor did it ignorantly, Antichrist knowingly, against the
light of his own understanding, he did it as an open professed enemy;
Antichrist as a secret enemy and open professed friend, like Judas; yea, he and
the rest with him who dealt wickedly against the Covenant, professed themselves
to be the Spouse and Witness of Christ: And for them to deal trecherously,
and break this holy Covenant and Oath of wedlock, and play the harlot, and
commit spiritual fornications with the Kings of the earth; and not so only,
but to break this Covenant betwixt Christ and his dear Spouse, and take the
Crown from his head, and his Spouse out of his bosom, and cast him and them
out of his House and Temple, and sit as Lord and King, as though he was God or
Christ himself; surely this is a greater sin then that of the Roman
Emperor, for he never did sit in the Temple showing himself to be God.

The work and employment of the Saints of God, and witnesses of Christ, all
the time of Antichrists tyranny, and their being in sackcloth, Rev. 11.3, 7.
was to prophecy and give testimony. To prophecy is to speak and preach to
the mutual edification and comfort of another; this they had liberty to do
all, 1 Car. 14.31.
all the time of their bondage, 1260. years, I will give power to my two
witnesses and they shall prophecy. Rev. 11.3.
When God gives liberty and power, neither Devils nor the Roman Beast, or his
Image the Pope can hinder them.

Secondly, they are to give testimony, or bear witness to all the truths of
Christ, especially that truth which Antichrist was to deny in point of power;
that Christ was Lord and King over his Church; which they did from the first
rising of Antichrist. 375. to his end, 1635. for they are said, Rev. 11.7.
not to finish their testimony until that time, and to his Priestly office;
that we are freely justified by his grace, and not by our own merits.

CHAP. V. The witnesses are slain by Autichrist, and lie dead three days and
a half, are raised upon their feet, and ascend up to Heaven.
THe witnesses were to prophecy and give testimony 1260. years, from 375. to
1635. and had power given them of Christ so to do: when they have finished
their testimony and done their work, Rev. 11.7.
then Antichrist, that Beast that ascended out of the bottomless pit, was to
make war against them and slay them.

There is a natural, civil and spiritual slaying, we cannot suppose it to be
meant of a natural slaying: for by those two witnesses, is meant all the
Saints and people of God; and Christ will not suffer the Devil and wicked men
to slay all his people at one time, or in one age, no not in the hottest
persecution of the Roman Emperor, in those 300. years, though many hundred
have been slain at a time. And if we should understand by these witnesses the
godly ones of the Magistracy and Ministry, and to be naturally slain, so they
have been in former ages, in the days of their prophecy, as other of the
Saints have been, (as is set forth by the word devour,) and so the Spirit of
God has said no new thing, but what he had formerly spoken; therefore it
cannot be meant a natural slaying.

Secondly, there is a spiritual slaying, and this cannot be meant; neither men
nor Devils can spiritually slay the Saints and witnesses of Christ, none is
able to pluck them out of Christ's hand.

There is a civil slaying, and that must needs be meant in this place. Now by
civil slaying is meant nothing else but a taking away all their civil power
which they had, as they were free born subjects in the State or Kingdom wherein
they live, that they might not give testimony to the truths of Christ, and
prophecy to the mutual edification and comfort one of another, as they had
formerly done for 1260. years. But if any Magistrate or Minister, or private
man, did protest against that grand lie of Antichrist, saying that they had no
Power, Pope, Cardinal, or Prelate, to sit in Christ's Temple, and to Lord it
over the consciences of his people, presently they were cast out of office,
their mouths were stopped, and their bodies imprisoned or they banished out of
their own native Country. And this was very apparent here in our Island, when
most of the witnesses were so dealt withal, who did openly oppose Antichrist,
between the year 1635. and 1638. and a half: Those three ever honored
worthies of Christ, Master Burton, Doctor Bastwick, Master Pryn, (who were a
lively emblem of the rest, witnessing against the power of the Prelates,) and
others, who were forced to ^lye their own Country.

Thus were they civilly slain by Antichrist, Rev. 11.8. and 11.
and their dead bodies lay in the streets of that spiritual Sodom, three
days and a half, the power being taken out of their hands that they might
neither give testimony nor prophecy; in the Scripture sense they are said to
be not only slain, but to lie as dead bodies; that is, men made as useless in
the world: And [they would not suffer their dead bodies to be put in graves.]
That is, they would not suffer humane courtesies to be showed to them, not to
buy nor sell, no not not to have commerce or converse with any; Rev 13.17.
so bitter and cruel were the Pope and Prelates between 1635. and 1638. and a
half. We in England found it by woeful and sad experience, and our neighbor
Nation of Scotland, in both which most of Christ's witnesses were slain. Rev.
15.2.
Inde^ed there were other witnesses which the Lord Christ had in other places,
but those had got victory over the Beast, Rev. 7.14, 15.
and his Image, and mark, and number of his name, who came out of the great
tribulations, had endured great conflicts with Antichrist, but at last came out
of them, and so made their garments white with the blood of the Lamb, and now
worship God and Christ in his house and Temple day and night, Rev. 7.4.
who are the sealed ones of God; sealed, when the sixth Vial was to be poured
upon the great River Euphrates, Rev. 16.12.
when those four Angels were loosed that were bound in that River. These were
not slain by Antichrist, but are said to be upon Mount Sion with the Lamb,
Rev. 9.14.
upon the hill of his Church, singing a new Song, Rev. 14.1.
which none can singe but the 144000. who have not defiled themselves with that
Antichristian Whore, or any of her spiritual fornications, Verse. 3.
these are redeemed from amongst men, from being slain by Antichrist, Verse. 4.
that they might be the first fruits to God and to the Lamb in a Church way.

When Antichrist had thus slain the witnesses, and laid them dead three days
and a half, not suffering their dead bodies to be put in graves; then at the
end of time, which was 1638. and a half, just at that instant of time did the
Spirit of God enter into the hearts and spirits of the godly part, Rev. 11.11.
Ezra 1.1.
both in England and in Scotland, as he did into Cyrus. And they stood upon
their feet] that is, they took courage, and put liberty, life, goods, and all
to their hands, and took to them all that power and strength they had to free
themselves from that dead and slavish condition wherein Antichrist had brought
them. Thus the Spirit of life from God entered into them, and they stood upon
their feet; and says the Text, Fear fell upon them that saw them. And indeed
so there did fall a great fear upon all that saw them of the antichristian
party, Rev. 11.11.
both in Scotland and England, yea, at Rome it self, witness the Popes
Masterpeece. All that knew of the godly party rising, fear and horror seized
upon them, and when they stood thus upon their feet, Verse. 12.
ready to do any service that God should put them upon, Presently they heard a
voice from Heaven saying, Come up hither. This voice was not from the material
Heavens, or the third or high Heavens, where God and his Angels are, for then
they should have ascended up thither: neither is this voice from the Church or
Temple, for then they should at the same time have ascended up into a true
Church State; and if they had done so, Antichrist would quickly have brought
them down, and broken them all to pieces again, as he had formerly done by the
power of the civil sword, which was still in his hand. Therefore by Heaven is
meant in this place, the place of Judicature, the mount of the Congregation,
ssa 14.13.
the place of justice, the voice came from this Heaven. That wise and godly men
would now ascend to this place to do justice upon Antichrist, who had slain
the Saints of the most High, and witnesses of Christ, and by his oppression and
cruelty. This voice was heard first from the whole Commons in Scotland, in whom
all the power which is in Heaven did originally reside, and afterward in
England, both from the whole Commonweal, and likewise from the King himself,
who sat in Heaven, Rev. 11.12.
And they ascended up to Heaven, that is, they ascended to the high place of
Judicature, the same time 1639. in Scotland, and afterward here in England.
They ascended up in a cloud; Man. 4.16.
that is, in a time of great darkness and ignorance, the whole world being
overwhelmed with darkness and ignorance; Likewise by a cloud and darkness is
set forth, Joel 2.2.
a state of misery and distress. And what misery and distress was the people
of God in, and all the whole world at this very time, and therefore is truly
said, that they ascended up in a cloud in a time of great ignorance and misery.

CHAP. VI. Christ is said to come at this time in the clouds of Heaven, or in
his Saints, to execute juddgement upon Antichrist, with those signs of his
coming; very few of his Saints that have faith to believe this, only some few,
who are counted wise.
THe witnesses being in Heaven, Mat. 14.30.
the Lord Jesus is to come in the clouds of Heaven to execute judgment upon
that man of fin. By clouds is mystically meant the witnesses of Christ, in whom
he is by his Spirit, as is noted in the Scripture of truth: When he is said to
come in the clouds of Heaven, he is said at the same time to come with his
Saints, Dan. 7.13.
Daniel says, He (...) like the Son of (...) come in the clouds of Heaven,
when the thrones of those Beasts or Kings were cast down, Zach. 14.3.
And Zechariah says, when the Lord shall go forth to fight against those
Kings that carried Jerusalem captive^ meaning the Church of God, whether J^^es
or Gentil^^, and by those Kings he means those four Beasts, and the little
horn Antichrist; then says he, The Lord my God shall come; verse 5.
and all his Saints with him; and when the Lord Christ speaks of his coming to
judge the enemies of the Church, and to deliver his people, he says, That he
shall come in the clouds of Heaven; and again says John, Matthew. 24.30.
Behold he comes with clouds, and every eye shall see him, and they that
pierced him, meaning the Jews, Rev. 1.7.
who shall be brought to Christ in this age; and Enoch, the seventh from Adam,
says, Behold, the Lord comes with 10000. of his Saints to execute judgment
upon all for their ungodly deeds which they have committed, etc.

First, clouds are to keep us from the scorching and burning hear of the Sun;
so do the clouds of our mystical Heaven, the Saints of the most High, and
Witnesses of Christ keep the people of Christ from those scorching and burning
beams of that Antichristian Sun, which has burned many of the dear Saints
of Christ to a^^es, and would do the like to us at this time (being so much
enraged with malice and fury as they are) if it were not for these mystical
clouds that are fixed fast in our Heaven.

Secondly, clouds serve to carry water and moisture to water and fatten the dry
and barren earth, to make in fat and fruitful: To the same end, in a mystical
and spiritual way, serve the clouds of our Heaven, not only to the Saints of
God, but also to all other who have been dried and parched by the heat of that
Antichristian Sun, even by his oppression, tyranny and cruelty; and the
clouds of our Heaven are to carry water that may refresh the people of God and
the whole land, I mean just and righteous laws and ordinances, which may free
us from those great taxations and oppressions which we meet with from
Antichrist, which has been done in part, and were those evil spirits which
were raised by those three unclean spirits like frogs which came out of the
mouth of the false prophet, Rev. 16.13.
out of the mouth of the Dragon, and out of the mouth of the Beast, destroyed
out of our land, we should see such great floods of waters flow from our
clouds, as though the windows of Heaven, and flood gates of the great Ocean
were set open, foretold, and prophesied of by the servants of God, and
therefore it is said, The Lord will send down blessings like rain upon the
mowen grass, Psalm. 72.6.
and as showers that water the earth, the Valleys shall bring forth abundantly,
and the hills shall drop down fatness, verse 3.
the mountains shall bring peace to the people, and the little hills by
righteousness. Thus we see the Saints and Witnesses fitly resembled to clouds,
in whom the Lord Jesus by his Spirit is come, and sits upon the Throne to judge
Antichrist: we shall see it more plainly if we look into, and open those four
signs which the Lord Christ gives us of his coming to judge Antichrist. One
sign is before his coming, another just at his coming, two after he is come.
The signs before his coming is, First sign of Christ's coming to judge
Antichrist.
the Sun shall be darkened, and the Moon shall not give her light; we are not
to understand this literally: at Christ's first coming to judgment to judge
Antichrist, but at his last coming to judge quick and dead then it may be
litterall, but not now; of those two luminaries, but mystically. Antichrist is
said to have a world, Isa. 14.13.
to ascend up to Heaven: In this Heaven here is the Sun, and Moon, and
Stars, himself being the Sun, Oh Lucifer Son of the morning, Isa. 14.12.
and his Cardinals that receive their light from him are the Moon, and the
Prelates the Stars of this Heaven, for they are in this Heaven, in the House and
Temple of God, where the Stars or Saints of God were, and they lorded it over
all that was called Gods, as though they themselves had been God, and they
likewise sit in the high place of judicature. Luthers time, and in King Edward
the fixths time, and likewise. Queen Elizabeth's time, by the rising and
shining of that glorious Sun of righteousness in the preaching of the
Gospels truth: Matthew. 4.2.
and the more this Sun shined, the more those Antichristian lights grew paler
and darker, until the very time that he came in the clouds of Heaven; this
sign before Christ's coming was and is plainly fulfilled and accomplished
before our eyes.

Matthew. 24.30.
we are to keep the metaphor, not literally to be understood for those
natural Heavens, as many have supposed, and so have dreamed of a glorious
light which was to shine or break forth from those Heavens immediately before
Christ came, which may be true at his last coming: But by those Heavens or
Heaven, is meant the Heaven or high place, where Antichrist had his seat and
throne: First, he had his high place, where he sat about Ecclesiastical
affairs and Church matters, this is not the Heaven here meant. Secondly, he
had his high place and throne, where he sat to determine matters of the State
and Commonweal, Isa. 14.13.
Upon the Mount of the Congregation in the sides of the North, where the Judges
of the civil law were wont to sit in ancient time; this is the Heaven or high
place where the sign of the Son of man is to appear, immediately at his
coming in the clouds of Heaven: and this sign was nothing else but that
sudden alteration that was in this Heaven, the day or year the Witnesses
ascended up to this Heaven, in the year before 1638. Pope and Prelate sat as
sole Judges in this Heaven, over the Saints and people of God; but 1639. the
Witnesses are raised up to this Heaven in Scotland, and sit as Lord and Judges
of them, who by a solemn Oath made with the most high God, cast out Pope and
Prelate out of Heaven: never to have to do or to meddle with Church or State
affair, but to be cast from Heaven, as the Spirit of God foretold; Isa. 14.2.
How art thou fallen from Heaven O Lucifer son of the morning, and how art
thou cut down to the ground, which did weaken the Nations: Rev. 12.9.
and again; The great Dragon was cast out into the earth, and his Angels with
him. This is the sign of the Son of man in Heaven, which appears plainly by
this which our Savior notes to be at the same time: Then (says he) shall all
the Tribes of the earth mourn, when they see the Son of man come in the
clouds of Heaven. Mat. 24.30. Rev. 1.7.
Was not this very evident? did not all the Tribes of that Antichristian earth
mourn when they see the godly party not only to stand upon their feet, which
had lien dead three years and a half? but now seeing them ascend to the high
place of Judicature, they were filled with fear and sorrow, supposing some
dreadful thing would follow: The Popes Masterpiece witnesses at large, what
fear and sorrow was not only here amongst the Antichristian party, but at
Rome it self.

that the Stars should fall from Heaven. By Stars, Matthew. 24.29.
we showed was meant those lesser lights of that Antichristian Heaven, which
was popish Lords and Prelates, which were as fixed Stars of this Heaven; they
fell down to the earth (not to have any more power in the Church or State) in
Scotland, the year 1639. and in England 1641. and shall fall from Heaven in all
the other eight Kingdoms of the Beast very shortly.

The fourth and last sign of Christ's coming in the clouds of Heaven to judge
Antichrist, The fourth sign. Luke 21.25.
is the roaring of the Sea; The Sea and the waves thereof shall roar, we are
to keep to the metaphor: Antichrist had a world, in that world he had his
Heavens and lights therein, and he has an earth and sea: by sea in a natural
way is meant, Rev. 17.15. Psalm. 2.1, 3. Psalm. 149.8. Psalm. 2.6.
nothing else but many waters gathered together metaphorically, and mystically
many people, multitudes, and nations, and tongues; and these are said to rage
and roar when Jesus Christ in his Saints are about to bind the wicked with
cords, their Kings in chains, and Nobles in fetters of iron, and when God is
about to set his King upon his holy hill of Sion. And have not we seen the
Heathen and the Antichristian party rage and fume even like the waves of the
Sea, as though they would overwhelme and bear down all before them? but yet
this their rage is nothing, or but very little to what will be in all the other
eight Kingdoms: Oh how will they rage and lift up their waves to Heaven when
Christ and his witness shall come to pour forth the fifth Vial upon the seat
and throne of the Beast, and the sixth Vial upon the River Euphrates amongst
them there, which will be as soon as they have poured them forth here. Matthew.
24.30.
Thus have we seen these four great signs of Christ coming to judge
Antichrist in the clouds of Heaven in part fulfilled before our eyes, And be is
said to come in power and great glory. This glory is not an outward luster, or
glory as some have suposed to be in the firmament, Matthew. 16.27. Exodus 34.6.
Exodus 33.19.
which may be true at his last coming, but a mystical and spiritual glory at
this time, even the glory of God his Father. The same glory which God showed
unto Moses, when he defired to see his glory, which was called all his
goodness or excellency, which indeed is the glory of all his Attibutes; and in
this glory Christ is said to come at this time, when he came in mystical
clouds.

First, Rev. 11.12.
he is said to come in power: What great power did Christ manifest in raising
up his Saints and Witnesses from such a low state, a state of death, and to set
them upon their feet by his Spirit, that entered into them the year 1639. and
raised them up to Heaven and cast their enemies out. Here was the glory of his
great power seen, Rach. 4, 6.
as the holy Ghost says, not by power of an Army, or by the might of a fleshly
arm was they raised up to Heaven, but by the Spirit of God.

Secondly, Rev. 11.8.
the glory of Gods mercy did shine forth in delivering his Saints and people,
which were in a such miserable condition, who were slain, and lay as dead men
in the streets of that spiritual Sodom, and their dead bodies not suffered to
be put into graves; for the Lord Jesus to send his spirit of life into them,
and to set them upon their feet, and to raise them up to Heaven, whereby they
were freed from the rage of their enemies, and made Lords and Judges over them,
to reward their enemies as they rewarded them, yea, to return them double:
Rev. 18.6.
Oh the glory of the mercy of Jesus Christ toward his poor servants.

Thirdly, the glory of Gods wisdom was much seen in this great work, to do it
at such a time when his people could not see how or by which way they should be
delivered; and Antichrist thinking himself to be now securer, and safely seated
in peace and tranquillity, Rev. 18.7. Rev. 11.10.
rejoicing and sending gifts one to another, because those two Prophets were
slain which tormented them. The wisdom of God now stepped in at the very nick
and point of time, and by his wisdom makes this to be the only and chief
time of the beginning of the enemies downfall, and the Churches deliverance. Oh
the admirable and unspeakable glory of Christ's wisdom! his wisdom is
infinite, and there is no searching of his understanding!

Fourthly, the glory of Gods free grace and love were wonderfully manifested;
there was no worth nor desert in his servants to move him to have pity or
compassion on them in such a low condition: All that they did in the days of
their prophecy and giving testimony was but their duty, and in all they were
but unprofitable servants: and therefore what the Lord did to them and for them
at this time was of his free grace and love; Zach. 4.7.
therefore well may we with shouting cry Grace, grace, unto this great work.
Luke 18.7. Rev. 18.8.


Fifthly, the glory of his truth and faithfulness appears in making good his
Word and promises unto his Church and people, which he has made often in the
Scripture of truth, and in performing his Word and threatenings against the
enemies of his Church.

The glory of his justice and holiness shines forth with much glory and
brightness, verse 6.
in executing justice upon such an ancient enemy of the Church, which with his
predecessors has been an enemy this 2300 years almost; and so cruel and
malicious an enemy, who has magnified himself to the Host of Heaven, yea,
Dan. 8.10, 11.
to the Prince of the Host, and cast him from his Throne, taken his Crown from
his head, cast him and his Spouse out of his House and Temple, strip^ her of
her robes, and would have forced her to commit spiritual fornication, and
broken the Church all to pieces, devoured many of them, and trampled the rest
under his feet; and last of all, slain the Witnesses of Christ, and laid their
dead bodies in the streets, not suffering them to be put into graves; all this
villainy has he done to the Saints; and for the people of the Antichristian
earth, Ya. 4.16, 17.
whom he has reigned over so long; he has made the very earth to tremble, and
did shake Kingdoms, the world he made as a Wilderness, and destroyed the
Cities thereof by his tyranny and oppression, and loosed not the house of his
prisoners. Does not the glory of Christ's justice and severity appear
wonderfully in the ruin and utter destruction of such a grand, notorious,
cruel, malicious, and insolent an enemy as this? and the glory of his
holiness in destroying such a filthy Whore and Strumpet as Antichrist is, Rev.
17.2.
who has committed spiritual fornication with all the Kings of the earth, and
the Inhabiters of the earth have been made drunk with the wine of her
fornication; Rev. 15.4.
therefore says the Scripture, who shall not fear thee, and glorify thy
name, for thou only art holy, and all Nations shall worship before thee, for
thy judgments are made manifest, and again, True and righteous are his
judgments, for he has judged the great Whore which did corrupt the earth with
her fornications, Rev. 19.2.
and has avenged the blood of his servants at her hands. In the glory of these
great Attributes is the Lord Jesus come, and they have shined forth in some
measure to the joy, and comfort, and salvation of his people, and to the sorrow
and destruction of his enemies: But when the Lord Christ shall come to the end
of this great work of his in the utter ruin of his enemies, and perfect
deliverance of his Church; then will the glory of these Attributes shine forth
with such glory and splendour as shall darken the eye of the clearest
understanding, and affect the most flinty heart, putting them to admiration and
astonishment. But this the Spirit of God notes in the Scripture, Luke 18.8.
that when Christ shall come to avenge his Elect, meaning this very time, which
is the time of the enemies utter ruin, and the Churches small deliverance, he
shall hardly find faith upon the earth; he means, he shall hardly find faith
in his Saints concerning the enemies ruin and their deliverance, and not
justifying faith; intimating to us, that the Church shall be brought so low, as
they shall not have faith enough to raise them so high, as to look to God for
their deliverance through so many difficulties. Dan. 12.9.
This time and mystery was hid from all former ages, and the words closed up
and sealed until the time of the end, and written in a little book, and sealed
with seven seals, none being able to open it neither in Heaven or earth, Rev.
5.1. Rev. 5.4. Rev. 5.5. Rev. 10.7.
or under the earth, but Christ only, and it is called, The great Mystery of
God, not opened till the seventh Trumpet begins to sound; and we do not read
he began to sound until the Witnesses were in Heaven, and the tenth part of
the City fell, which was the year of Christ 1639^ at which time God promises
it shall speak and not lie, Hab. 2.3.
as indeed it did speak if we could have heard it and understood it.

But says the Lord, None of the wicked shall understand, Dan. 12.10.
but the wise shall understand; none of the wicked shall understand, Isa.
29.10, 11, 12.
Priests nor Prophets, Rulers nor Seers, all hid and covered, and the vision is
become to them all as a sealed book, if one desire them to read, they cannot,
it is sealed but the Lord gives many reasons why these wise and learned Doctors
and Rabbis could not understand the vision of the time of the end when it is
to speak, and to be made plain upon Tables. Hab. 2.2, 3. Isa. 29, 9.


First, because they are drunk, but not with Wine; they stagger, but not with
strong drink. This drunkenness is not a drunkenness with natural wine, but
it is a spiritual drunkenness with the wine of that spiritual fornication,
Rev. 17.2.
with which that Antichristian Whore has filled her cup, and made them drunk
with it, therefore they err in vision and stumble in judgment. Isa. 28.7.


Secondly, Isa. 28.10.
they having drunk of this wine of spiritual fornication now a deep sleep of
security and spiritual stupidity has seized on them, and so cannot make use
of their understanding nor learning in such a spiritual way, as to come to
understand a vision or mystery of God: It is true, there is darkness as well
as light, Zach. 4.6, 7.
but if it were not for this spiritual slumber, they might see as well as
others though the light be not clear.

Thirdly, Because they draw nigh to God with their lips, verse 13.
but their hearts is far from him. Teaching men to fear God by their own
precepts and commands; Therefore the Lord will proceed to do a marvelious work
amongst this people, even a mavelous work and a wonder, for the wisdom of
the wise man shall perish, and the understanding of the prudent shall be hid;
yea, such a mavelous work shall be done in their days, that they will not
believe it though it be told them. Hab. 1.5.


Fourthly, Verse. 15.
Because they seek deep to hide their counsels from the Lord, and their works
are in the dark, and they say, Who sees? or who knows? They by their own
policy and craft did take counsel together to mingle their own water with the
Saints wine, and their dross with the people of Gods silver, Verse. 15.
their own traditions with Gods institutions; and for this they dug deep,
wrought in the dark, and hid their craft from Gods people, and said in their
hearts, Who sees us? Verse. 16
or who knows? and by this means they are said to turn the worship of God up
side down, even quite overthrow the whole worship of God, and to make his Law
of none effect. But says the Lord, It shall be counted as Potters clay, at the
end all broken to pieces and never set together again. Thus none of the wicked
shall understand, nor but few of the Saints, (only the wise.) The wise, they
shall understand; Dan. 12.10. we are to find out who are said to be wise in
this sense, which the Spirit of God speaks of in this place: This is not that
wisdom which makes a man wise unto salvation, (for with that all the people of
God are invested,) but it is that wisdom which the wise man speaks of, Prove.
1.6.
To understand a Proverb, and the interpretation thereof, the words of the
wise, and their dark saying. Which is to be done two ways.

First, Dan. 9.2.
by searching and seriously pondering the books and the roles of the Proverbs
and Vision, as Daniel did, which speaks of the vision and mystery which God
has showed to his Prophets, and they that do so are blessed of God, and wise.

Secondly, and they that secretly eye God in those secret and hidden acts of
his providence, by which he usually makes a vision to speak, Psalm. 107.43.
and makes it plain upon tables, Who so is wise and considers these things,
says the Text, what things? why? they were the acts of Gods providence all the
Psalm over, Even they shall understand the loving kindness of God to his
Church and people. And who are those? you have seen they are none of the great
Rabbis and Doctors of our age, but such that are weaned from the milk, and
drawn from the breasts; Isa. 28.9.
those young babes of Christ that have not drunk of that filthy abominable cup
of that Antichristian Whore: Them will the Lord teach knowledge, and instruct
in the way of understanding.

Thirdly, they that have not drank or sipped of that Antichristian cup, but
has overcome that beast and Whore with all their abominable errors and
heresies, to them has Christ promised to give the morning Star, Rev. 2.28.

By Star cannot be meant Christ, as some have supposed, for there is none
able to overcome Antichrist, his mark or number of his traditions, brought in
by his power, which is called his name; but he must first be made one with
Christ by faith, and draw and derive power and strength from him to enable him
thereunto; therefore by morning Star is meant some thing else. Rev. 13.14.
The morning Star does rise before the day come an hour or two, to give notice
the day is not far off, but nigh at hand. So the Lord Christ by his Spiritin
those secret ways of his providence, will give to those his servants that
overcome Antichrist, the bright morning Star: That is, will discover such a
light to them, as shall be as the morning Star, to give them notice that the
glorious day of Jesus Christ shall shortly appear, wherein he and his Saints
shall reign in peace and tranquillity for 1000. years. Thus those that are
wise shall understand, and they that overcome shall see the first dawning of
that glorious day of Christ.

God does so loath that abominable cup of spiritual fornication, that
whosoever drinks or sips thereof; shall not lie so near Christ's heart, as to
have the vision or mystery made known to him; no, they that are the young men,
they shall see visions, even the young babes of Christ, Act. 2.17. Mat. 21.16.
that out of the mouths of babes and sucklings he may perfect praise: This
vision is both meant of Christ's coming in the flesh, and of his coming to
judge Antichrist; and none of those great Doctors and Rabbis did understand
when Christ should come in the flesh; but the young men and poor men, they
understood and believed. And so it is with this present age; who will believe
of all our great men, and learned Prelates, that Jesus Christ is come in the
clouds of Heaven, and is set down upon the throne of Judicature in his Saints
and witnesses, to judge that man of sin?

CHAP. VII. The seventh Chapter opens the seven Seals, Trumpets, and Vials;
showing that they are all about one and the same thing.
THat great mystery of God, concerning the ruin of all those enemies of the
Church, Rev. 5.1.
is written within a little books, Rev. 5.1. and this book is in the hand of
Christ, who sits upon the throne, and it has seven plagnes written within it,
(seven is a number of perfection,) a perfect number of plagues to be poured
upon the enemies of Gods Church, Rev. 5.3.45.
to their utter ruin. These seven plagues are as it were written in seven
sheets of parchment, and rolled up together, and sealed with seven seals, as
the manner and custom of the Jews was, in all businesses of great
consequence: The seven Seals could not be opened by any, Verse. 8, 9.10.
neither in Heaven, or Earth, or under the Earth, but Christ only, the Lion of
the Tribe of Judah; and he is counted worthy to open this book, by the four
Beast, and the four and twenty Elders, and to loose the seven seals thereof:
Whereupon they sing a new song to God and the Lamb, giving him glory, because
he had been slain, and had not only redeemed them from wrath, hell, and
eternal death, but also from the slavery and bondage of wicked and ungodly
men; yea, out of all Nations, tongues and people, and made them unto God Kings
and Priests, and they shall reign with Christ upon the Earth in peace a
thousand years: this is that new Song that they sung, and it is sung again by
those sealed ones of God, in Rev. 7.4. by the 144000. Which are upon Mount Sion
with the Lamb, Rev. 14.1. Hence note the quick eye of the Saints faith, as
soon as Christ takes this book in his hand, they look upon the work as done,
as though their enemies had been quite ruinated and themselves delivered; they
look from the beginning to the end of the work; Christ is to open this book,
and to break open these seven seals, and no other. But there are seven Angels
with seven Trumpets to sound, Rev. 8.2. who were to prepare themselves to
sound, ver. 6, when the seals were to be opened by Christ, to declare and make
known what was written within the Roll, even what the vial was which was to
be poured upon that Antichristian state.

And here is likewise seven Angels appointed to pour forth those seven vials
upon Antichrist, Rev. 15.6, 7. which were full of the wrath of God.

When Christ opened the first Seal, then the first Angel sounded his Trumpet,
and the first Angel poured out the first Vial, and so the second, and third,
to the seventh; the Seals, Trumpets, Vials, all about one and the same thing.

First, the seven Seals served only to keep those things secret which were
written within the rolls. The Trumpet or Trumpets, to sound and to declare what
the Vials were, that were written within the roll, or rolls: The Angel or
Angels to pour forth the Vial or Vials upon that Anthristian state.

That you may see this more plainly, we will open and explain the Seals,
Trumpets, and Vials, and compare them one with another, and see how they agree.

At the opening the first Seal by the Lamb, First Seal is opened. Rev. 6.1, 2.
John heard the noise of thunder. When the Lord Christ goes out first to make
war against those grand enemies of his Church, he thunders and is very
tertible; he had a bow given him, which notes war against that antichristian
Earth, as ye shall see by the Trumpet and Vial; and he is upon a white horse,
and he has a Crown given him, which notes both his innocence and victory,
therefore he is said to go forth conquering to conquer.

This Seal agrees with the first trumpet, First Trumpet sounds. Rev. 8.7.
that when it sounded Then came hail and fire mingled with blood, and they
were cast upon that Antichristian Earth, even the men of the Earth, that seemed
to be living trees and green grass, but were burned up by the preaching of the
Gospel. In this we are to note, that the sounding of the trumpets is nothing
else but the preaching of the Gospel.

This Seal and Trumpet agrees with the first Vial which was poured upon that
antichristian Earth, Rev. 16.2. First Vial is poured forth. Rev. 16.2.
And there fell upon the men of that Earth, which had received the mark of the
Beast, and that worshipped his Image even a noisome sore. By the preaching of
the Gospel by the Angels, or Ministers of the Churches, these men appeared
very loath some and vile unto all godly and sober minded men, even they who had
received the mark of the beast, or worshipped his Image, and thus Christ goes
out with a how in his hand, conquering to conquer, beginning first with that
antichristian Earth.

When the second Seal was opened, Second Seal is opened. Rev. 6.3.
there appeared a red horse, which betokens blood, and it was given to him to
take peace from the men of this Antichristian earth, and that they should kill
one another, as indeed they did, by their impure and cursed doctrine, as we
shall see anon, and a great sword was given unto him, which was the sword of
the Gospel as we shall see noted by the second Trumpet.

And when the second Trumpet sounded there appeared a great mountain burning
with fire, Second Trumpet sounds. Rev. 8.8.
which was cast into the sea, and the third part of the sea became blood, and
the third part of the creatures that were in the sea, that had life, died, and
the third part of the ships were destroyed.

When the second Angel preached the Gospel, then a great mountain burned with
fire: By mountain is meant power, great power was given to the Ministers in
sounding this second Trumpet, and this power burned upon that Antichrists sea
like fire; by sea is meant the doctrine of the Church of Rome, and they by the
preaching the Gospel against that sea or doctrine of the Church of Rome, the
third part of it became as blood. Bloody doctrine, so that they that seem to
live in this sea before, now dyed, yea, now it appears that they spiritually
destroyed one another by this impure and poisonous doctrine; and the third part
of the ships that traded upon this sea, or traded with this doctrine are
destroyed.

This Seal and Trumpet agrees with the second Vial fully, Second Vial poured
forth.
which was poured upon the sea, and it became as the blood of a dead man, and
every living soul first and last, that drank of this cursedand poysenous
doctrine of the sea of Rome, spiritually dyed.

And when Christ had opened the third Seal, Rev. 16.3. Third Seal opened.
Rev. 6.5, 6.
lo a black horse: which betokened death, as we shall see anon; and he that
sat upon him had a pair of balances in his hand, and a voice cries in the
midst of the four Officers of the Church, and says, A measure of Wheat for a
penny, and three measures of Barley for a penny, and see thou hurt not the Oil
and Wine, Christ here has a pair of balances in his hand, as a righteous and
just Judge, to weigh all those wrongs and injuries which those Priests and
Jesuits had done against his Saints and servants, and he will repay them
accordingly, therefore says the voice, A measure of Wheat for a penny, and
three measures of Barley, but no hurt must come to the Saints, that are the Oil
and Wine of the earth.

And this we shall see agree with the third Trumpet and Vial, Third Trumpet
sounds. Rev. 1.10, 11.
the Trumpet when it sounds, Then there fell a great Star from Heaven,
burning as it were a lamp, and it fell upon the third part of the Rivers and
Fountains of water, and the name of the Star is called Wormwood, and the
third part of the waters became Wormwood, and many men dyed of the waters,
because they were made bitter.

By Star, is meant an Angel or Minister of the Church, see Rev. 1.20. by
Heaven is meant the Church, by Rivers or Fountains of waters is meant, those
Jesuits and Priests that are set forth by Rivers and Fountains of waters, who
naturally draw and derive water from the Sea to water the Earth; so do they
mystically as Rivers draw and derive their poisonous doctrine from that
Antichristian Sea of Rome, and so water the whole Antichristian earth. The
Ministers of the Churches by the preaching of the Gospel shined as a Lamp; and
these Rivers become blood, noted by the the third Vial, Rev. 16.4. and
likewise made their doctrine to be bitter and loathsome, showing that they by
their poisonous doctrine did seduce the people, and spiritually slayed men; yea
further, by their doctrine had stirred up the Beast and his Image to slay the
Saints and Prophets of Christ, as is noted by the third Angel that poured
forth his Vial upon them, Rev. 16.5, 6. therefore they themselves became
blood; that is, their blood is shed, and they are put to death in Queen
Elizabeth's time, and since, and as Master Cotton well observes; thus Christ
weighs the wrongs done to his Saints by these Priests and Jesuits, who are
those Antichristian Rivers and Fountains of water, and so repayes them
accordingly.

This Seal and Trumpet agrees fully with the third Vial, The third Vial is
poured forth. Rev. 16.4.
which was poured upon the Rivers and Fountains of waters, so that they became
blood, not only appeared by the sounding of the Trumpet to be bloody men, such
as thirsted after the blood of Gods Saints, but their own blood was shed, for
they were worthy, as the Angel of the waters well notes, because they had
caused the blood of the Saints to be shed, therefore God was just and righteous
because he had so judged, Rev. 16.5, 6.

When the Lamb opens the fourth Seal, behold a pale horse, Fourth Seal
opened. Rev. 8.7.
which notes darkness and misery, and he that (...) upon it was Death. Now
Christ threatens death unto that whole Antichristian state, the lights of their
Heaven grow pale and dark, as is noted by the Angel that sounded the Trumpet,
and that poured forth the fourth Vial, and Death and Hell followed with him;
and afterward power was given to him over the fourth part of the Earth, to kill
with the sword, with hunger and death, and the Beasts of the Earth.

This horse was a pale horse, Fourth Angel sounds. Rev. 8.12.
betokening blackness and darkness, as is noted by the fourth Angel that
sounded, that when he sounds, the the third part of the Sun, Moon, and
Stars of that Antichristian Heaven, Pope, Cardinals and Prelates, glorious
lights of that Heaven, when this fourth Angel preaches the Gospel, the late
Ministers of our foregoing Age, these lights lost the third part of their
glory, and shined not so bright as they did before by the third part.

The fourth Angel which poured forth the fourth Vial agrees with this Seal
and Trumpet, The fourth Vial poured forth. Rev. 16.8.
who poured his Vial upon that Antichristian Sun, and so notes to us, that
all the other lights of that Heaven were darkened with it, because they drew
their lights from it in a mystical way, as the Moon and Stars do in a
natural way from the natural Sun.

The Ministers of Christ by preaching the Gospel, darkened these glorious
lights of that Antichristian Heaven; and by so doing scorched and burned them
with fire; that is, put them to as much pain and torment as though they had
scorched them with natural fire, whereupon they blasphemed the name of God;
that is, spoke more evilly of the ways and Saints of God, and proceeded more
harshly and bitterly against them, even to their civil slaying, and lay their
dead bodies in the streets.

That death and hell followed upon the fourth Seal, Trumpet and Vial, is noted
by an Angel, Rev. 8.13. which flies through the midst of Heaven, crying, Woe,
woe, woe: Three woes, because of those three Angels which were to sound, and
three Vials which were to be poured forth upon that Antichristian state to its
utter ruin.

When Christ had opened the fifth Seal, The fifth Seal is opened. Rev. 6.9.
the souls under the Altar come to see what was written within the Roll, and
there they see Christ and his Witnesses ascend up to Heaven, the high place of
Judicature, to take the Kingdoms and powers from Antichrist presently, Rev.
1.1^.
they cry for vengeance upon them that had shed their blood.

These souls are the Saints of God in our age which see themselves slain, for
the word of God, and the testimony which they held: By word of God is meant
Christ, 1 John 1. and 14. and their testimony is their bearing witness unto
those truths of Christ which Antichrist denied, their slaying was civil, all
power taken from them, that they could not prophecy nor give testimony to the
truths of Christ, as they had formerly done; they are said to be under the
Altar, by Altar is meant Christ, Heb. 13.10.

They were under his spiritual power and jurisdiction, though civilly slain by
Antichrist, and laid dead for three days and a half; these souls that see
themselves slain, had white robes given them by Christ and his witness in
that space of time that the fifth Vial was pouring forth.

By white robes cannot be meant the righteousness of Christ, inherent or
imputed for that they had before, which made them to undergo that flory try
all, and suffer civil marty dome; which righteousness is set forth by gold
tried in the fire, Rev. 3.18.
Rev. 3.18. but these white robes is that outward government and discipline
that is to be set up in all the Churches of the Saints, set forth by white
raiment: Fine gold make the Saints spiritual, rich, and enable them to endure
the fiery trial; eye salve cleares the eyes of their understandings, that they
thereby come to see the way of Christ in his house and Temple, in what way he
will be worshipped; white raiment is the government and discipline of the
Church, which is to cover the shame of the Churches nakedness, that it does
not appear unto the world; every member of the Church, and the Church her
self walking according to the rule and order of the Gospel. Matthew. 18.15, 16,
17.


We shall see this Seal agree with the fifth Trumpet and fifth Vial in the
sense of it.

The fifth Angel sounding, a Star falls from Heaven unto the Earth, The fifth
Trumpet sounds. Rev. 9.1. Isa. 19.15. Rev. 13.1^.
and unto him was given the Key of the bottomless pit. By Star is meant a
Minister or Ministers of Christ; by Heaven is meant the Church; by Key is meant
power, by bottomless pit is meant the depth of the craft and subtilty of that
nian of sin in his cursed doctrine and traditions.

So the Ministers of the Churches were invested with power from Christ in the
preaching of the Gospel, to open the depth of Satan and Antichrist in his
cursed doctrine ferched out of that bottomless pit, especially concerning the
usurpation of his power.

Whereupon comes a great smoke, noting thereby darkness, and therefore it is
said, That the Sun and Air was filled with darkness, and in Rev. 16.10.
when the fifth Vial was poured out, it said, His Kingdom was full of
darkness.

This smoke notes misery likewise, therefore Locusts are said to come out of
the smoke, unto whom was given power, as the Scorpions of the earth have
power, and they were to torment the men of that Antichristian world five
months; a certain time set down for an uncertain; and their torment is very
sore, as when a Scorpion strikes a man, that they shall seek death and shall
not find it.

This is noted further, that these Locusts were like unto horses prepared unto
battle, when Christ and his Saints take the power of Churches and States from
Antichrist, it is to be pre-supposed that Antichrist will presently raise a
very great Army to make war with them, as ye shall see anon fall out to be
so, by the sounding of the next Trumpet.

But these men that was counted as Locusts unto Antichrist, they have Crowns
of gold, to note their victory; if Antichrist should make war with them, and
they have faces like men, to note their Majesty and authority, and hair as the
hair of women, to note their terriblenesse and fearcenesse, and teeth of
Lions, to note their greediness, to prey upon these Antichristian men, to eat
their flesh, Rev. 19.17.
and to burn them with fire.

And brest-plats of iron to note their strength to encounter with him, the
sound of their wings being as the sound of Chariots, of many horses running to
battle, and their tails like unto Scorpions to torment them, Rev. 6.12.
and to put them unto grievous pain, and he that is King over them is the
Angel of the bottomless pit, even the Lord Christ, see Rev. 20.1, 2. that will
ere long cast the Beast and that false Prophet into it, Rev. 19.20. Rev. 20.10.
yea, and the Devil himself, and shut him up and set a seal upon it, binding
him for a thousand years, verse. 1, 2. Thus the first woe is past, and behold
there comes two woes more herereafter.

The fifth Angel poured forth the fifth Vial, The fifth Vial. poured forth.
Rev. 16.10.
Rev. 16.10. upon the seat of the Beast, and then they gnawed their tongues
for pain.

And all this torment was when the fifth Angel poured forth his Vial upon the
seat and throne of the Beast, Rev. 11.12. Dan. 7.26.
even when the Lord Christ and his witnesses ascended up into Heaven, 1639. and
when the judgment sat, and took his Kingdom and Dominions from him. For
wicked and ungodly men to be taken from their high places of honor, it is as
great a torment to them, as when a Scorpion strikes a man; when Pope,
Cardinal, and Prelates, are cast from the high place of Judicature, they that
do it are as Locusts unto them, and their torment is insufferable, they gnaw
their tongues for pain, and they desire to die, and death flees from them.

When the sixth Seal was opened, Behold a great earthquake, Sixth Seal
opened. Rev. 6.12.
and the Sun became black as haire-cloath, and the Moon as blood, and the stars
fall from Heaven unto the Earth, and the Heaven departed as a scroll, when it
is rolled together, and every mountain and Island were moved out of their
places, and the Kings and great men and mighty men of the Earth hide themselves
in dens and in the rocks of the mountains, that they might be hid from the
face of Christ that sits upon the throne, because the great day of his wrath is
come, and they will never be able to abide it.

Christ and his witnesses being upon the throne, takes away Antichrists
Kingdom and Dominions from him, Rev. 12.7.
whereupon there falls out to be war between Christ and Antichrist, foretold by
the fifth Trumpet: In this war there follows a great earthquake, a great
slaughter amongst the men of that Antichristian Earth, and the Pope, the sun of
this heaven, becomes black as haire-cloath, Isa. 14.13.
and his Cardinals set forth by the Moon, become as blood; and Popish Lords and
Prelates, set forth by Stars, falls from Heaven, those high places where they
had their seat and throne, even above the stars of Gods, in Gods House and
Temple, and in the civil throne, upon the Mount of the Congregation. After
they are fallen from Heaven; their Heaven fell with them, and is rolled together
as a scroll, and all their Mountains and power of States and Islands is moved
out of their place, and set in their right place. And in this battle and
earthquake Kings and the great men of the world cry to the Mountains to fall
upon them, and to hide them from the face of the Lamb the Lord Christ, because
now the great day of his wrath is come, in which he will take geance upon all
these five grand enemies of his Church, and upon that Antichristian world.

But this is noted in Rev. 7.1, 2, 3, 4. that at this time in the midst of all
this wrath and fury of Christ against this wicked antichristian crew; he takes
care of his Elect and chosen people, (especially those that are in a true
Church State) as the children of Israel was, (therefore set forth by them) and
who are said to be upon Mount Sion with the Lamb, Rev. 14.1. singing a new
Song; these must be all sealed and have the mark of God set in their
foreheads; Rev. 7.1, 2 3, 4.
therefore those four Angels that stands upon the four corners of the Earth,
to hold the four winds of Gods wrath in their hands, ready to blow upon that
antichristian World, must not let those winds blow, until an Angel has
sealed the servants of Christ, and there was sealed 144000. the same number
that are upon Mount Sion, in a true Church State, with the Lamb the Lord
Christ, their Lord and King, Rev. 14.1.

This sixth Trumpet appears to be one and the same with the sixth Seal; Sixth
Trumpet sounds. Rev. 9, 14.
when this Trumpet sounds Those four Angels which were bound in that great
river Euphrates is loosed for an hour, day, month, and year, to slay the
third part of those antichristian men, a certain time for an uncertain, as is
supposed about the space of 14. years, beginning in 1641. and ends 1655.

By four Angels is meant a certain company of men, instruments of Gods wrath
to destroy Antichrist and his great Army; the number of these men are set down
in the next Verse, to be two hundred thousand thousand: Rev. 17.15.
By river Euphrates, is meant mystically, a great company of People, Nations,
and Tongues, on which that antichristian Whore did sit; and amongst those was
these instruments of Gods wrath bound, by that civil power which Antichrist
had in his hand, Rev. 12.16.
before the witness ascended up into Heaven, but after they were ascended, and
Christ had cut a little stone out of that great monntaine, even a little civil
power out of Antichrists great power; by virtue of this did Christ and his
witnesses loose those four Angels out of this great river Euphrates, and being
loosed, they presently stand up with Christ and his Saints, Rev. 12.16.
and open their mouths and swallow up that flood which the Dragon cast out of
his mouth after the woman; yea, and they shall take part with Christ and his
Army, and hate the Whore, and shall make her desolate. At this time is noted in
Rev. 10.2. and 8. that this little book was open in the hand of the Angel,
which had been formerly shut and sealed up; yea, this Angel swears by him that
lives for evermore, that there should be time no longer; that is, this mystery
of God should now be finished and made plain, that men may now see and
understand what was contained within this little book.

This Seal and Trumpet agrees with the sixth Vial, The sixth Vial poured
forth. Rev. 16.12.
and so appears to be one and the same, Which was poured upon that great river
Euphrates, whereupon three spirits, like froggs, go out of the mouth of the
Dragon, and out of the mouth of the Beast, and out of the mouth of the false
prophets, even the Devil and the Roman Emperor and the Pope, and these are
the spirit of Devils working miracles, Priests and Jesuits, etc. who go forth
to the Kings of the Earth, to gather together many waters or people unto the
battle of the great God Almighty, now upon this great river Euphrates; or many
people does Christ and his Saints, with the men of the Earth that help them
pour forth the sixth Vial, and so drieup this great river, that way may be
made for the Kings of the East; yea, that Christian Kings and Princes may
reign upon the Earth. The second woe is past, and behold the third woe comes
quickly, Rev. 11.14.

The seventh Seal being opened, silence is in Heaven, The seventh Seal is
opened. Rev. 8.1.
the high place of Judicature, for the space of half an hour; see chap. 9. at
this time is the Prayers of all Saints offered up to God upon the golden Altar
which was before the throne in the Temple; that is, then shall the Churches of
the Saints in and upon that golden Altar, Christ offers up praises and
thanksgiving unto God, for executing vengeance upon his Enemies, and for the
delivering of his Churches from bondage and misery, which has been the prayers
of all Saints from the evening to the morning, 2300. years almost, and now
will be fully answered at this time.

This agrees with the voice of the seventh Trumpet, for when it sounded, there
was great voices heard in Heaven in the Church, The seventh Trumpet sounds.
Rev. 11.15.
saying, the Kingdoms of this world are now become the Lords, and his Christ's,
and now Antichrist is destroyed, and the powers of States is in the hands of
Christ and his witnesses, and therefore he and they shall reign for ever and
ever. Whereupon the Church, with her officers which sit upon the Seats of
their glory in Christ's House and Temple, fell upon their faces, noting thereby
their own humility and their high esteem of Christ, worshipping him, and
giving thanks to God Almighty, which was, is, and is to come, because he has
now taken to him his great power, and does reign.

Which Seal and Trumpet argues with the seventh Vial which was poured upon
that Antichristian air, The seventh Vial poured forth. Rev. 16.17, 18.
by the peaching of the Gospel, which is to be done when the fifth and sixth
Vial is poured upon the seat of the Beast, and that great River Euphrates;
Even then came voices out of the Temple, which causes a great spiritual
earthquake amongst those antichristian men; that there shall be such infinite
store of men converted to the faith, and brought home to Christ, as never was
since men was upon the face of the Earth; and then shall an infinite company,
as it were, be before the throne, singing Alleluiah, saying, Salvation, and
glory, and honor, and power, be unto the Lord our God, for executing justice
and judgment upon that great Whore. Rev. 19.1, 2. and 6.
Yea, the voice of a great multitude, and the voice of many waters of many
people, and of mighty thunderings, saying, Alleluiah, and the four Beasts and
the twenty four Elders fell down and worshipped God that sat on the throne,
saying, Verse. 6.
Amen, Alleluiah, verse. 4. Thus the third woe is come upon that antichristian
state to her utter ruin and destruction.

Thus we have seen the seven Seals, and the seven Trumpets, and seven Vials,
to be all about one and the same thing.

First, sealing up Gods judgments for a time; afterward the Seals broke
open, the Ministers of the Churches by the preaching of the Gospel declares
what these judgments are, and then the Angels poured forth their Vials upon
that Antichristian world.

The next thing we are to do in the following Chapters, is to show what the
fifth and sixth and seventh Vials are more fully, and whom those Angels be
which are to pour them forth.

CHAP. VIII. The first work of the witnesses after they are in Heaven, is
chiefly the pouring forth of the fifth Vial, and the means whereby they do
it, with those effects which follow upon it.
THe witnesses being ascended up to Heaven, and Christ come in them, and sat
down upon the throne to execute judgment upon Antichrist; Isa. 28.6. Rev.
16.10 Isa. 14.13.
the first thing we read shall be done is the pouring forth the fifth Vial,
which is poured forth upon the throne and seat of the Beast. He is said to
have his throne above the Stars of God, above his Saints in his Temple, and
likewise upon the Mount of the Congregation, the high place of Judicature; It
has appeared to all the world that he has taken all power into his hand,
both Ecclesiastical and Civil; upon these powers must the witnesses pour
forth the fifth Vial; that is, they are to take all power from Antichrist both
in Church and State; Dan. 2.26.9.
therefore says Daniel, the judgment shall sit, and they shall take away his
dominions: Again, says he, I beheld till the thrones were cast down. And
when Jesus Christ sat upon his throne, Rev. 6.16. then every mountain was
moved out of his place, meaning the powers which Antichrist had in the world.
Now the means by which Christ and his witnesses shall take these powers and
dominions from Antichrist, and so slay him as he did them, is by the power of
the civil sword, as the Lord says, He that leads into captivity, Rev. 13.10.
shall go into captivity, be that kills with the Sword, shall be killed with the
Sword.

Antichrist by the power of the civil sword, which he received from the Roman
Emperor, Rev. 13.2.
did carry the people of God captive into the wilderness, for the space of
1260. years, where they prophesied in sackcloth and afterward civilly
killed them, and laid them dead for three days and a half. The like must the
witnesses do to Antichrist, carry him captive, and civilly kill or slay him:
this was that which the Saints of God believed long since, and with patience
have they waited for it; therefore says the Lord, This is the faith and
patience of the Saints, the Saints believed it, and patiently did wait for it:
By this power shall Christ and his witnesses take the Kingdoms and Dominions
from Antichrist, Dan. 7.26. Dan. 2.45.
and consume him to the end, which is set forth to be a little stone, cut out
of the Mountain without hands.

By Mountain is not meant the Church, and by little stone Christ, Isa.
2.2.14.13. Psalm. 48.1. Mich. 4.1.
as some have supposed; but by mountain is meant that great civil power which
the four great Beasts, and little horn Anrichrist had in the world, set forth
by those ten horns. For by Mountain or Mountains, is meant power or powers;
either the civil power of States and Kingdoms, of the Ecclesiastical power
of Churches, usually and frequently set forth by Mountains. That great civil
power which these great Beasts had, is set forth by a Mountain; Dan. 2.34, 35.
and there must be a little stone or little power cut out of this great power,
that must smite this great Image of those five Beasts upon its feet, and break
it all to pieces, and it shall become like the chafe of the summer
threshing-floore, that no place shall be found for it And this little stone^
shall become a very great Mountain, and fill the whole Earth; a little stone
shall be cut out of this great mountain without hands; that is, a little
civil power shall be cut out of that great civil power which Antichrist had
in all his ten Kingdoms, and this must be done without power of hands; not the
power of an Host or Arms, but another way. And this we see fulfilled before
our eyes, in the year of Christ 1639. when the witnesses ascended up to
Heaven, and the Lord Jesus not only raised them from that dead state and
condition, and set them upon their feet, but took them up to the high place of
Judicature, and by his Spirit hewed or cut a little power out of that great
civil power which the Roman Beast and the little Horn had in all these ten
Kingdoms: By which little power or stone the witnesses in Scotland, and they
here in England, have begun to break this Image and will go on in this and the
other eight Kingdoms, till they have broken it all to pieces; and this little
stone in their hands shall become a very great Mountain, and fill the world
very shortly.

So ye see the means by which the Lord Christ and his witnesses, shall take
the Kingdoms and Dominions from Antichrist, and consume and destroy him to the
end, even by the power of the civil sword, so far as he has seated and rooted
himself in the world; but as he has ^ooted himself in the hearts and minds
of men, by his cursed errors and heresies, 2 These. 2.8. Eev. 19.21.
So the Lord will consume him by the breath of his mouth, and brightness of
his coming; even by that spiritual sword of the Gospel, which sword proceeds
out of his mouth.

The fifth Vial must be the first work which Christ and his witnesses shall
do after they are ascended up to Heaven, and sat upon their throne; and this
they must do by that little stone cut out of the Mountain, by that little
civil power, put into their hands; which we see done the same time in which
they ascended to Heaven in Scotland. Did not the godly party, by a solemn Oath
taken before the most high God, cast off Pope and Prelate, and all that whole
Antichristian rabble out of Heaven, for having any more power, either in Church
or State, but to be cast out to the Earth? And this was done by virtue of that
little civil power which they had as they sat in the place of Judicature.
This was evident before our eyes, 1639. done by the godly party in Scotland;
and it was foretold to be so by the Spirit of prophecy: Rev. 11.13.
The same hour was there a great earthquake, a great shaking and fear amongst
the antichristian party, when the tenth part of the City fell.

By City is not meant the City of Rome, but all those ten Kingdoms that are
under the government of the Beast and his Image; and the tenth part is one of
these ten Kingdoms, which was Scotland, and this fell the same hour; and in
this earthquake, when the tenth part fell, there was four great effects or
consequences which followed upon it.

First, there was slain of men seven thousand, Four effects which follow upon
the fall of the tenth part of that Antichristian City.
a certain number set down for an uncertain; this slaying is not natural but
a civil slaying, a taking away all that power which they had in Church and
State affairs; so it came to pass in Scotland at the same time when they cast
off the power of Antichrist; there was civilly slain a great number of Popish
Lords and Prelates.

Secondly, the second effect is the sounding of the seventh Trumpet, verse. 5.
which was the preaching of the Gospel, Effect 2.
the witnesses being in Heaven, gave leave to have the Gospel preached, which
was denied by Antichrist: at the sounding of which Trumpet the Lord foretold,
Rev. 10.8. that then the mystery of God which was revealed to his Prophets, and
written in a little book, Rev. 5.1. Dan. 11.9. Hab. 2.2, 3.
sealed with seven Seals, fast closed up till the end, is now finished, and is
to speak and to be made plain upon tables, The seventh Trumpet is said to
sound presently upon the Witnesses ascending up into Heaven, because they gave
liberty to have the Gospel preached, which is indeed the pouring forth of the
seventh Vial.
that he that runs may read it.

Upon the seventh Trumpet sounding and declaring what was now done in Heaven
the high place of Judicature, presently there was great voices of confidence
and affiance in Heaven, the Church, that now the Kingdoms of this world should
be taken out of that wicked antichristian Beasts hands, and given into the
hands of Christ and his Saints. The people of God seeing Jesus Christ and his
witnesses taking but the tenth part of the Kingdoms from Antichrist, they look
from the beginning of the work to the end, and were confident that the time of
the enemies ruin was now come, and the Churches sinall deliverance, and the
civil power of all the Kingdoms in the world should be put into the hands of
Christ and his Saints, and they shall reign for ever and ever.

The same thing was showed to Daniel almost 2300. years since, when he saw the
ancient of days sit, and the thrones of the Beast cast down: Dan. 7.9.13.14.
Then one like the Son of man came to the ancient of days, and there was given
him dominions and glory, and a Kingdom, that all people, nations, and
languages, should serve him; and not him only, but the Saints of the most High;
and the Kingdoms and Dominions and the greatness of the Kingdoms under the
whole Heavens shall be given to the people of the Saints of the most high, and
they shall possess the Kingdom even for ever, ever and ever.

Three terms and sections of times shall the Saints possess the Kingdoms of
the world after Antichrist has his powers taken out of his hands, as we shall
show anon: The Churches of Christ do not only express their confidence and
affiance they had in God for the accomplishment of this great work that was
now begun, Verse. 16.
but they with all humility and reverence fall upon their faces before God, and
worship him in giving him thanks and praise, which is, and was, and is to come,
who has taken to him his great power, and has reigned.

And they further declare, that the Nations of the antichristian world were
angry, Verse. 18.
as indeed they were, at his great work now begun; and that the time of his
wrath against the wicked is now come, and the time of the dead that they should
now be judged, that is, that now judgment shall be given to the poor Saints of
God, and witnesses of Christ that were slain, and lay dead for three days and
a half, and that he should give a reward unto his servants the Prophets, and
to the Saints, and to them that fear his Name, both small and great; and should
destroy them that have destroyed the Earth, which the Lord will accomplish in
this present age.

The third effect is the opening of the Temple by Christ and his witnesses
which sat in Heaven, Effect. 3. Verse. 19.
and the Temple of God was opvned in Heaven.

By Temple is meant the Church the people of God: By Heaven is meant the high
place of Judicature, so by the Temple of God; being opened in Heaven, is
nothing else but Christ and his Witnesses giving leave and liberty to the
people of God thus congregated to worship Christ in his Temple.

And this they did, first, by their connivence and forbearing to trouble them
and to molest them, as Antichrist and his faction did, and afterward they
shall give them some liberty, Rev. 6.12.
being tender over the consciences of men in matters of worship. Rev. 21.6.
But at the end of the ruin of Antichrist, Then the Temple shall be set wide
open, that whosoever will shall enter in, if they be not such as defile or work
abomination. This we have seen fulfilled before our eyes, that those that were
Christ's Witnesses, Rev. 10.
they countenanced and spared to molest the people of God, that had joined
themselves in League and Covenant to come out of Babylon, Rev. 27.
and not to meddle at all with that Antichristian cup of spiritual
fornications, and to worship their Lord and Husband Christ, according to divine
institution; but those that were of Antichrists side, though pretended
otherwise, they would be stirring up the common people against them, until
they were cast out of Heaven to the earth, even all those popish affected ones.

When the Temple of God was thus opened, there was seen in his Temple the Arc
of his Testament, that is, verse 19.
then the Lord Christ who is the Arc of Gods Testement, was seen to be in his
Temple, in the midst of those people that before was looked upon as factious
and seditious men, but the Temple being open they prove otherwise. And when the
Antichristian party saw that Christ and his Witnesses took part with these
men, then there were Voices and Thunderings, and Lightnings, and an Earthquake,
and a great Hail, that is, then there was great stirs, combustions,
hurliburlies, quakings, and fears amongst the Antichristian party. And last of
all, these grew to a great hail, or great storm and war (as weshall see anon)
between the servants and Witnesses of Christ, and those that were for the
Dragon and Antichrist in Heaven.

The fourth effect was A great wonder which appeared in Heaven, Effect 4.
a Woman clothed with the Sun. By Woman is meant the Church of God, who is
clothed with the Sun of righteousness, and which have her Officers in the
midst of her, officiating and emptying the golden Oil out of themselves into
the bosom of the Church, (...) 4.12. (...) 1.6.20.
and are as a Crown of gold unto her head, set forth by 12 Stars, after the
Tribes of the children of Israel; and the Moon is under her feet; that is,
under her feet are all sublunary conentment and delight, she contemning them
with holy scorn and derision, and being great with child, cried travailing in
birth, and pained to be delivered; that is, the people of God seeing Christ and
some of his Saints and Witnesses in Heaven, and many that were with them were
against Christ, and for the Dragon: The Church hereupon is with child, as it
were, and travailes in pain to have a godly Magistracy set up in the world,
that those which were in Heaven, the high place of Judicature, that was against
Christ and his Government, might be cast out, that so the Lord Christ that
man-child might in and by his Saints rule the nations with a rod of iron, and
this they cried and travailed in pain to God by humble and fervent prayers,
and to his Witnesses that sat in Heaven by humble petitions from the year of
Christ 1639. to 1641.

another Wonder appears in Heaven, a great red Dragon, having ten Horns and
seven Crowns upon his heads, he stood ready to devour this man-child so soon
as it was borne. The devil and satan in the Roman Beast, and his Image the
Pope, and they in and by those popish Lords and Prelates stood ready to hinder
this great design and birth of the Church by all the power and strength they
could make, which were clear and evident to all our sights, 1641. when the
people of God bestirred themselves both to God by prayer, and to the godly
party in the Parliament, that those popish Lords and Prelates might be cast out:
Rev. 12.5.
Whereupon those Petitions and prayers were heard of Christ and his Witnesses,
and so the Church did not only bring forth the man-child or government, but it
was likewise received up to God and his Throne, into the high place of
Judicature, and the Dragon and the Beast in those popish Lords and Prelates were
cast out to the earth by a wonderful and miraculous hand of divine providence.

These four Effects have been very evidently fulfilled and brought to pass
before the eyes of all, from the time the Witnesses first ascended up to
Heaven, 1639. in Scotland, to the year 1641. when the Popish Prelates were cast
out of Heaven here in England. Some say that the Church travailed in birth 320.
with Constantine, who was that man-child, and so he was taken up to Heaven, and
then the Church fled into the Wilderness. But that cannot be the meaning of
the Text; for the Churches work at that time, as the Spirit of God has
declared, was to bear witness, and to give testimony to that great truth of
Christ's kingly power in his Churches, and so to all other truth which. Rev.
11.3.
Antichrist would afterward deny, all the time of their prophecy 1260. years:
And as for Constantine, he was not to rule all nations with a rod of iron, this
only belonged to Jesus Christ, and to his Saints, Rev. 2.21.
who were to reign with him; therefore this cannot be meant of Constantine,
nor of that time, but of this very time, which we may plainly see by those
things which have been done in our sight; and for that 6. verse chap. 12. of
the woman fleeing into the Wilderness, is brought in as a seal to the
prophecy, with the 15. verse. For from the 7. verse of chap. 11. to the end of
the 12. chap. the Spirit of God sets down nothing but what was to come to
pass in our time here amongst us, from the day and year, 1635. when the
Witnesses were slain, to the year 1641. when the war fell out to be in.
Heaven, between the Dragon and his Angels, and Christ and his Angels; only
those two verses 6. and 14. of the 12. chapter, of the Church fleeing into the
Wilderness, 375. And when this man-child was received up to Heaven, and the
Dragon and his Angels cast out of Heaven to the earth, here in England by
Christ and his Witnesses, was a second degree of the pouring forth of the fifth
Vial upon the Throne of the Beast; for this casting him out of Heaven to the
Earth, is a taking away all his power from him both Civil and Ecclesiastical
in Church and State.

Thus that proud Lucifer, Son of the morning, Isa. 14.10.12.
is said to be fallen from Heaven, and to be cut down to the ground, and to
become weak, like the common people of the earth, both in Scotland and here in
England.

CHAP. IX. The sixth Vial poured upon Antichrist, with the way or means by
which it is done, and the Instrument by whom it is poured forth, the Beast and
the false prophet taken and cast into a Lake of fire, with the silence in
Heaven about the space of half an hour.
THe Churches of the Saints declaring to all the world, that the way to have
all oppression and tyranny removed, and to bring in all peace and tranquillity
was to have all those that did formerly tyrannize over them cast out of office
and place of government, and let the Civil power be put into the hands of
Christ and his Witnesses, she bringing forth this man-child into the world, is
presently received up to Heaven by Christ and his Witnesses: the devil and his
angels who ruled the world before is now cast out of Heaven to the Earth.
Michael and his angels, Rev. 12.7. The Dragon at the same time, by his tail
draws the third part of the Stars of Heaven after him, verse 4. the devil
will not fall from Heaven alone but he will draw some of the Stars with him.

By Heaven is meant the place of judicature: by Stars is meant those men that
sits in Parliament. And was not this evident? did not the third part of the
Parliament fall off at the same time, and was drawn after the Dragon, even
with his tail the popish Lords and Prelates, who are his tail, to make war
with Christ and his Church. Rev. 16.13, 14
There g^es at the same time three unclean spirits like Frogs out of the
mouth of the Dragon the devil, and out of the mouth of the Roman Beast, and out
of the mouth of the false prophet the Pope, which are the spirits of devils
working miracles. That is, those Jesuiticall spirits, which work with as much
policy and craft, as though they did work miracles, and so deceive and delude
men. These go forth to the Kings of the whole world, to gather them to the
battle of the great God Almighty: Rev. 11.15.
so the devil is said to cast a flood out of his mouth after the woman the
Church, which brought forth this man-child, a flood of wicked and ungodly men,
which he had gathered by those three spirits, This has bin partly fulfilled
before our eyes: Did not those Jesuiticall spirits go^ up and down to the
Kings of the earth, France, Spain, etc. to gather them together in battle
against the Witnesses and the Church of God? when they saw that popish Lords
and Prelates were cast out of the Parliament 1641. who are still at work with
the Kings of the earth, and will be until the work be done. Christ and his
Witnesses seeing this, presently they prepare and make ready for to wage war
against Antichrist: Therefore he is said, in righteousness to judge and make
war, and shall break them in pieces like a Potters Vessel, Rev. 19.11. Dan.
7.26. Psalm. 2.9. Rev. 18.6. Rev. 2.27. Sixth Vial poured our. Rev. 12.7, 8.
so the Dragon fought and his angels, and Michael and his Angels; but says the
holy Ghost, they prevailed not, neither was their place any more found in
Heaven. Antichrist shall not prevail, though the war be long and bloody;
neither shall he get the power of Church or State any more into his hands,
after it is once taken out.

This war which is in Heaven between the Dragon and his Angels; and the Lord
Jesus and his Witnesses that sit in Parliament; Rev. 17.15.
is the pouring forth of the sixth Vial, upon that great River Euphrates,
which must be dried up before that mystical Babylon can be taken, as that old
river Euphrates was before; literal Babylon could be taken by the King of
Persia, as the Lord foretold by his Prophet Jeremy, as ye shall see in Jeremy
50.38. so see 38. compared with Jer. 51.32. where you shall see the Lord
threatening destruction unto literal Babylon, with the drying up of that great
river Euphrates, by stopping up the passages, and by burning up the reeds
thereof with fire, which were done by Darius, who took this City from the King
of Babylon, Dan. 5.30, 31. so shall this mystical river Euphrates be dried up
in a mystical sense.

By this river is meant those great multitudes of people that shall be gathered
together into Armies, to destroy Christ and his Witnesses, and to keep the
Dragon, Beast, and false prophet in Heaven, in their seat and throne. And they
are said to be gathered together into a place called Armageddon, by the Devil,
the Beast, Rev. 16.16. Rev. 17.13, 14.
and the false prophet, and with them those ten Kings which gave their power
and strength to the Beast; these shall all make war with the Lamb, Rev. 17.4.
and he shall make war with them, and will raise a great Army against them, who
are said to be called, and chosen, and faithful. Rev. 12.6.


The called ones are the men of the earth, who are said to help Christ and his
Church; Rev. 17.16.
and the ten horns which were upon the Beasts head, are to hate the Where, and
make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire.

By these horns is meant the Commons of all those ten Kingdoms, which were
under the government of the Beast, in whom the power of States originally lies;
and these shall be with the Lamb, and take part with him against the Beast, as
we see Scotland and England has done already, and so will the commons of all
the other eight Kingdoms do, for the Word of God must be fulfilled. But those
ten Kings that were heads of those ten States they shall take part with the
Dragon, and make war with Christ.

Secondly, by chosen are meant the Saints of the most High, who are said to
overcome Antichrist.

Firstly, Rev. 10.11.
By the blood of the Lamb. Secondly, By the word of their testimony. And last
of all, They loved not their lives unto death.


The Lord Christ notes this of them that are chosen, that they shall be
faithful to him in this war, but yet he secretly hints to us, that the men of
the earth will be treacherous: This great Army of Christ shall be raised by that
little stone cut out of the Mountain without hands, by that civil power which
Christ and his witnesses has in their hands now they sit in Heaven; therefore
Heaven is said to be opened; Rev. 19.11.
that is, now there is liberty given by them that sit in Heaven. That now men
shall take up arms against Antichrist: The Lord Christ is upon a white Horse
in Heaven, as the Captain of the Lords Army; Josh. 5.14.
and the Armies which follows him, is said to be in Heaven, being raised by
that civil power which the witnesses have in their hand in Heaven; and Christ
and his Army is said to be upon white Horses, which note the innocence of the
cause, and victory over them in this quarrel; it being the custom of the
Romans to ride in triumph after victory, upon white horses, or else their
Horses and Chariots covered with white.

Again, Zach. 14.4.
the Lord Christ is said to stand upon his feet upon the Mount of Olives, in
the day he goes out to fight against those Kings that carried the Church and
people of God captive; which is meant of this very time.

By Mount is meant power, and there be but two powers in the world, the Church
power and the State power: It is not meant the Church power, for then this
mount should have been called Mount Sion, by which the Church power is always
set forth; and this Mount should have been in Jerusalem in the Church, and not
before the Church. But this Mount is that civil power of States set forth by
that Mount Olives which is before Jerusalem; so this civil power is before the
Church of God, and chiefly for the good of the Church. And upon this Mount or
power does Christ stand with his feet. By feet he means his Saints, so the
Lord Christ by his Spirit in his Saints and witnesses, stands this day upon
this Mount Olives. And this mount (says the Text,) shall cleave in the midst,
toward the East, and toward the West, toward the North, and toward the
South. This is fulfilled at this day; Is not this power or Mount cloven in the
middle? part of it is in the hands of Christ and his Witnesses, as they sit in
Heaven, and part of it in the hands of Christ and his Army, which is in Heaven
upon white Horses. And this power shall extend it self from West to East, from
North to South, to take away the power from Antichrist in all his ten
Kingdoms, and to dry up that great river Euphrates from one end of the world
to another; and this power or Mount is to be divided one part in the high place
of Judicature, and the other part in the Armies, as is at this day, until they
have poured forth the fifth and sixth Vial, and then it shall close and become
one, in the year of Christ 1655. So by that little stone, even that little
civil power which is in the hands of the Witnesses, shall the fifth and sixth
Vial be poured upon the Beast and that great River Euphrates.

This sixth Vial of Gods wrath and indignation, Isa. 34.2.
is said to be poured upon. Euphrates, upon all Nations, and his fury upon all
their Armies, upon all the ten Nations of Antichrist, and upon all their Armies
that shall be raised; be will utterly destroy them, Verse. 5.
and give them up to the slaughter. The sword of the Lord shall be bathed in
Heaven, upon the high one^ which are on high, Isa. 24.21.
upon the Kings of the Earth upon the Earth; it shall be filled with blood,
Isa. 28.18.
that the Mountains shall be melted with their blood. This is called the
overflowing scourge, which was to pass over the whole earth; and the hour of
temptation that should come upon all the world to try them; Rev. 3.10. Chap.
19.17, 18.
and the slain shall be so many, that it is called the supper of the great
God, and all the fowls of Heaven are to eat the flesh of Kings, of Captains,
of mighty men, of the flesh of horses, and them that sit on them, and the flesh
of all men, Rev. 9.18.
small and great, bond and free; Even the third part of men that are upon the
Earth shall be slain in this war, to dry up this great river Euphrates; Isa.
13.12.
that a man of that Antichristian and mystical Babylon; shall be more precious
then fine gold, even a man, then the golden wedge of Ophir. Dan. 7.11.
For by fire, and by sword, will the Lord plead with all flesh, and the slain
of the Lord shall be many, Isa. 66.16. In this war the Roman Beast shall be
taken and slain, and his body given to the burning flames, and with him the
false prophet that wrought miracles before him, Rev. 19.20.
with which he deceived them that had received the mark of the Beast. These
both are cast alive into a lake, burning with fire and brimstone, this is the
purpose which is purposed upon the whole earth, and this is the hand that is,
and shall be stretched out upon all Nations, for the Lord of Hosts has
purposed, and who shall disanull it, and his hand is stretched out, and who
shall turn it back, Isa. 14.26, 27.

Thus we see the fifth and sixth Vial poured upon the seat of the Beast, and
upon that great river Euphrates; all his powers and strength taken from him in
heaven, himself cast down to the earth, yea to hell, and his armies utterly
destroyed and given to the beasts of the field and to the fowls of Heaven.

Yet there is another Vial to be poured out, namely, upon the air, wherein
Antichrist breathed; but when the Witnesses, Christ's civil Magistrates that
sit in Heaven, have done that work which is proper for them, as they are
civil Magistrates; they shall sit still and keep silence in Heaven about the
space of half an hour, which is the full time that the seventh Vial shall be
pouring forth, though the Beasts have their Dominions taken from them. Yea,
both the Beast and false prophet are cast into a lake burning with fire and
brimstone; Dan. 7.12.
yet these are said to live still in the hearts of those men, in whom those
errors and heresies do still abide, which they brought into the world by their
Antichristian air; and this remnant of men are not to be destroyed by the
power of the civil Sword; Rev. 19.21.
but to be destroyed by a mystical and spiritual sword, which proceeded out
of the mouth of him that sits upon the white Horse, and by spiritual men sent
out of the Temple, Rev. 16.17.
therefore the civil Magistrate shall keep silence all the same time, even
about the space of half an hour, and sit and rest themselves, having done the
best work that ever was done before them, or that shall be done after them.

We cannot suppose this silence to be in Heaven strictly for half an hour; no,
nor half a day, month, or year; for the seventh Vial must be poured forth
upon that Antichristian air, all the ten Kingdoms over; in this space of time
that this silence is to be in Heaven, which cannot be in so short a time,
neither can it be meant of any long time, Luke 21.32.
because Antichrist must be destroyed in one age and generation of men, Christ
speaking of the ruin of Antichrist mystically, as well as of Jerusalem
literally: therefore we are to take this silence for the space of half an
hour, for the space of 45. years, in which time the seventh Vial is pouring
forth, as shall appear more fully when we come to speak of the time or times
of the ending of these Vials.

It is said, that this silence was in Heaven when the seventh Seal was opened;
this we are to note, that it was the custom of the Jews, to write those
things that were of greater consequence in sheets of parchment, and so to roll
them up, and seal them if they were things secret. The Spirit of God alluding
to this their custom, sets forth to us, that every Vial was written in a roll
of parchment, and every roll was sealed, seven Vials were written in seven
rolls, and every roll had a seal; and when the first Vial was to be poured
forth, then the first seal was broken open, and the first trumpet sounded.

The Seal was broken open, that men might see what was written in the roll:
and the trumpet, which was the Gospel in the mouth of the Ministers of the
Churches, was to declare to that Antichristian world, what the Judgment or the
Vial was, which God was then pouring forth upon them; and the Vial or
Judgment that they were to feel with pain and anguish, when the Lord poured
it forth.



And when the seventh Seal was opened, the seventh Vial was poured forth, and
then this silence was in Heaven.

Before we leave speaking of the sixth Vial, we are to take notice of this;
that although the Lord be come in the clouds of our Heaven, even in his
Witnesses standing upon the Mount Olives, and the judgment seat, and the
Thrones are casting down, yea, and the Lord is gone out to fight and make
war with those Kings that carried the Church of God captive, and himself
upon the white horse, and much of the work is done; yet at this time, the holy
Ghost says, Zach. 14.6. Rev. 2.28.
That the light shall not be clear no^ dark, the morning Star is but newly
risen, and a very little light does yet appear.

There is so much darkness, as very few of the Saints themselves do not see
nor know what the Lord Christ is doing, either for Churches or States; great
fears amongst most of the Saints, that sorrow and misery will come to both:
They cannot as yet see how or when the Church of Christ shall be delivered, nor
the pure way of Christ's worship in his House and Temple set up; only a few
choice ones that be wise, Dan. 12.3.
and they shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament: That is, those godly
ones whom the Lord has made wise to understand the Mystery of pure Ordinances
of worship, and the way and Government of Christ in his House and Temple, at
this time wherein the worship of God is so exceedingly corrupted and polluted
by the abominations of that Babylonish Whore, they shall shine in this
Antichristian world as the brightness of the Firmament, for the present; And
they that turn many to righteousness as the Stars for ever and ever.

When they shall not only see and be able to discern between gold and dross,
water and pure wine; Christ's own institutions and men's inventions, and the
false government of Antichrist, and the true government of Christ in and over
his Church and people; but also turn many unto those righteous and pure
Ordinances of worship, even they (says the Lord) shall shine as Stars, not
in this age and time only, but for ever and ever, their names shall be famous,
unto all the Churches of the Saints. For the first ever or term of time which
Christ and his Saints shall reign, in peace even a 1000. yerres. And for ever
to the second term or end of time; after the 1000. years are ended from the
destruction of Gog and Magog unto the end of the world, because they were so
wise to see, and diligent and faithful to turn many unto the right way of
divine worship.

But there is some light, though it be not cleard, so that those which are said
to be wise, can see and understand in part, that now the day star is risen,
and the great work concerning the enemies ruin, and the Saints final
deliverance is begun, and the Sun of righteousness, the Lord Christ, will
ere long arise with healing in his Wings. Maal. 4.2.


But at this time it is not light nor dark, Zach. 14.6, 7.
a day as it were known to the Lord, only, none else knowing or understanding
what God is doing for his people, only a few whom he has made wise to
understand a vision, the words of the wise God concerning this great Mystery,
and the dark sayings thereof.

Again, this is noted, that it is not day nor night: The day of the Churches
peace is not yet come, nor the night of her misery and bondage is not fully
upon her as it has been, but she is between the day and night (in the birth)
and upon the borders of spiritual Egypt and Canaan.

But at the even-^ide, when the work shall be almost at an end, Zach. 14.7.
then it shall be daylight, all shall see what God is doing for his Church,
and then will that glorious Sun shine forth in his full brightness and
glory, that the light of the Moon shall be as the Sun, and the Sun
sevenfold, then the eyes of the blind shall be opened to see the way of Christ
in his House so plainly, that way faring men, though fools, shall not err
therein. Isa. 35.8, and 6


And this is also noted in the Scripture of truth, that an Army out of the
North shall come up against Babyon, and be the chief cause of her mine and
destruction: They come from a far Country, from the end of Heaven, Isa. 13.5.
the Lord and the Weapons of his indignation to destroy the whole Land: which
is meant of England and Scotland. For we are a very remote Country from
mystical Babylon, from the end of Heaven as Scotland is; yea, if we look to the
men that are to be employed in this war, we shall see them to be the same
which the Lord Christ has in his Army at this day, as we may see in the third
verse: I have commanded my sanctified ones, verse 3.
I have also called my mighty ones for my anger, even them that rejoice in my
highness: The Lord meaning his own servants, who are said to retoyce in his
highness, and are set forth by chosen and faithful ones, which are now with
the Lamb, Rev. 17.14. following him upon white horses in Heaven, Rev. 19.14.
who are this day upon the high places of the field, and are said to be in
Heaven with their Army, because they are raised by Christ and his Witnesses,
who are in Heaven, and by that civil power which they have in their hands by
right, as they are lawfully called to that high place.

Again, we shall see that the Lord intended England and Scotland to come
against this mystical Babylon, if we look in Jeremy 50.9. I will raise and
cause to come up against Babylon an Assembly of great Nations, from the North
Country. Now of all Countries in the World, England and Scotland is North to
mystical Babylon.

And again, Dan. 11.44.
Tidings out of the East, and out of the North, shall trouble him.

By East, here surely (as may be supposed) is meant the Sweedes. And by North
is meant England and Scotland; so consequently they shall join together
against Antichrist.

Rut all these threatenings were against literal Babylon?

Rome is called mystical Babylon; Rev. 17.5.
and as truly as all these threatenings which the Lord has pronounced against
literal Babylon, were made good in the Letter against them; so will the Lord
do against mystical Babylon, in a spiritual and mystical way: Therefore when
Scotland and England have dried up the River Euphrates here, they shall not
then sit down on this side Jordan, to enjoy peace themselves, and leave their
brethren in misery beyond the Sea, and out of their own possessions, but shall
go over Jordan with a strong Army, to help their Brethren, that they may
likewise dry up that River Euphrates there, to the utter ruin of Antichrist,
and for the settling of a perfect peace in the ten States, that the powers of
States and Churches may be put into the hands of Christ and his Saints, that
they may live and reign over the Nations of the earth in peace and tranquillity
1000. yeaees.

CHAP. X. The seventh Vial poured forth; two great effects follow thereupon:
The first is the hringing in the fulness of the Gentiles. And the second is
the calling of the Jews, with the time when the fifth, sixth, and seventh
Vial began and ended, and liberty given to the Saints by the Witnesses, to
build that new Jerusalem.
THe fifth and sixth Vial being poured upon Antichrists seat and thrones, and
upon his Armies, the Beast and false prophet taken by Christ and his Army that
followed him upon white Horses in Heaven, and both of them cast into a lake,
Rev. 19.21.
hurning with fire and brimstone. Yet there is a remnant of that Antichristian
race left, whom Antichrist has poisoned with his Antichristian air, with
errors and heresies, in whom those five Beasts are said to live, Dan. 7.12.
though they be dead: Therefore the Lord Jesus has another Vial to pour upon
these men, as is the malady, such is the medicine; Rev. 17.10.
and as the disease, so is the cure. The disease is inward in their spirits,
their understanding is filled with mists and darkness which Antichrist brought
into the world, with which he filled his whole Kingdom. Rev. 15.10.


This Vial must be poured upon this Antichristian air and darkness by the
preaching of the Gospel. For this being an inward and spiritual work, is
fittest for spiritual weapons and spiritual men, and such will Christ have to
do the work, Rev. 16.17.
Therefore voices came forth of the Temple: The Ministers of the Churches are
to be employed in this work, and spiritual weapons or swords, therefore says
the Scripture, The remnant were slain by the sword of him that sat upon the
white horse, which sword proceeds out of his mouth. Chap. 19.21.
The way of Antichrist has been to slay such men, (as they conceive factious
and erroneous,) with the civil sword; Dan. 8.12.
therefore he gets an Host, or the power of Princes, The civil sword used by
Antichrist to root errors out of men's hearts.
and hales them before Princes and Judges for to root out errors, (as they
pretend) out of their minds; but this is a preposterous way, they may sooner
root their hearts out of their breasts. But we see Christ's way, he uses the
Civil Sword to take away all Antichrists power, which he got by the Civil
Sword, Christ uses a spiritual sword to remove and cast out all those errors
that are in men's spirits.
and so slays him, carry him captive, and likewise dry up that River Euphrates,
but spiritually to slay men, in removeing darkness and ignorance out of their
understanding, and so consequently errors and heresies, he has a spiritual
Sword fit for the work.

So the seventh Angel poured forth the seventh Vial into the air, and then
came a great voice out of the Temple of Heaven, Rev. 16.17.
from the Throne, saying, It is done.

By air is meant that Antichristian ignorance and darkness wherewith
Antichrist had filled the whole world. Rev. 16.10. Rev. 14.6.7.
By voices is meant the Gospel. By Temple is meant the Church or Churches of
the Saints, 2 Cor. 6.16. This voice came out of the Temple, that is, the
Churches of the Saints sent forth Messengers or Ministers to preach the Gospel,
Rev. 14.6.
to every Nation, kindred, tongue, and people. The Temple of Heaven from the
civil throne, Christ and his witnesses being in Heaven, the high place of
Judicature, where they have their throne; the Spirit of God joines the Temple
and this Heaven together, and Christ's civil Magistrates and his Churches go
hand in hand, and with joint consent send forth Ministers to preach the Gospel;
Rev. 14.6.
therefore it is said, I saw an Angel flee through the midst of Heaven, having
the everlasting Gospel to preach, etc. saying, It is done. These Ministers
shall declare to all the world, that now the work is done; the Kingdoms and
Dominions are taken from the Beast, Dan. 7.11, 12.
and their bodies given to the burning flame, and their Armles utterly
destroyed, and given up to the slaughter, and so the work is as good as done;
Isa. 34.2.
And another shall come after them, and say, Rev. 14.8.
Babylon is fallen, Babylon is fallen: And another after him shall come and
pronounce the judgments of God against every man that retains and holds fast
those Antichristian errors, Verse. 9, 10.
saying; If any man worship the Beast and his Image, and receive his mark in
their hands, or in their foreheads, the same man shall drink of the wine of
the wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture into the cup of his
indignation, and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone, in the presence
of the holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb.

Upon this great voice of the Gospel shall follow two great effects or
consequences:

First, the bringing in of the fullness of the Gentiles. Secondly, the calling
home of the Jews.
First, the fullness of the Gentiles shall come in, declared in these words,
That there were voices, and thundering and lightning, Rev. 16.18.
and there was a great earthquake. By voices, lightning, etc. is meant great
stirs and combustions amongst men, not in a warlike way, as were before, but in
disputing and arguing about matters of Religion. And by earthquake is meant a
great falling off and renouncing those Antichristian tenets and errors, which
they formerly held, to embrace the sincere truths of the Gospel, both for
Doctrine and Discipline, which is called the bringing in of the fullness of the
Gentiles. And this earthquake shall be so mighty and so great, as was not the
like since men lived on the earth, there will be such a general falling off
and renouncing of their errors, Romans 11.25.
and such a true and through embracing of the truths of the Gospel, as never was
since men were upon the earth; this is called the first resurection. Rev. 20.6.


And this great City is said to be divided into three parts, Rev. 16.19.
one part is to be slain civilly, to have all their civil power taken from
them, as those seven thousand were slain in Scotland, Rev. 11.13.
at the fall of the tenth part of the City, by Christ and his witnesses that
sit in Heaven.

Secondly, Another part is to be slain by the natural sword, Rev. 19.11. and
14.
by him that sits upon the white Horse, and they which follow him upon white
Horses in Heaven; upon the high places of the field, in his Army.

Thirdly, The third part is to be slain spiritually, by that spiritual sword
of the Gospel, which proceeds out of the mouth of Christ, which is that voice
that came out of the Temple. So this great City is divided into three parts,
Verse. 21.
and thus great Babylon is said to come into remembrance before God, and to
drink of the cup of the wine of the fierceness of his wrath and fury. Thus
will the Lord deal with Babylon, even deal with her as she did with the Saints;
yea, reward her double, Rev. 18.6.
she brake the Saints to pieces, so shall she be broken to pieces like a
Potters Vessel, that shall not be set together again, Psalm. 2.9. Rev. 2.27.
she devoured the Saints, so shall she be devoured; Every man that is found of
her shall be thrust through, and every one that is joined to her, Isa. 13.15.
shall fall by the sword. She slew the Saints by a civil sword, and took away
all their powers from them, and led them into captivity, so shall she be
civilly slain by the same Sword and carried captive, Rev. 13.10.
and shut up as prisoners in a pit, and civilly bound for many years. They
laid the witnesses dead bodies in the streets of that spiritual Sodom, Isa.
24.22.
so shall they lie dead and bound with Satan a thousand years, Rev. 20.3, 5.
not put into their graves; Isa. 14.19.
nay worse, they shall be cast out of their graves, like on abominable branch,
loathsome and vile for all men to behold, even as the raiment of him that is
thrust through with a Sword, and as a carcass trodden under foot; thus shall
it be done to mystical Babylon, the mother of Haroots, Rev. 17.5. rindx;
and the abominations of the whole earth; the zeal of the Lord of Host will do
all this in his appointed time: And the Lord gives the reason of all this his
fury, Esa. 37.32.
and wrath, and indignation, against Babylon; and says, Isa. 34.8.
It is the day of the Lords vengeance, the year of recompenses for the
controversy of Zion, and it is the vengeance of the Lord, even the vengeance
of his Temple; Jer. 50.28.
the violence done to me and to my flesh, be upon Babylon, shall the
Inhabitants of Zion say, and my blood upon the Inhabitants of Chaldea, Jer.
51.35.
shall Jerusalem say: Thus will the Lord plead his Churches cause, and take
vengeance for her.

The second great effect which follows upon the seventh Vials pouring forth,
is the calling of the Jews, The Lord shall set his hand again the second time
to recover Israel: Isa. 11.11.
When the Jews shall see the utter ruin of the Romish Beast, and his Image the
Pope, with the dissolution of all his Images and Idols. And likewise the
extirpation of all that cursed tradition and invention, which Antichrist is
said to bring into the world with him by his power, which are said to be (666.)

Here is wisdom, Rev. 13.18.
let him that has understanding, count the number of the Beast, for it is the
number of a man, and his number is (666.) That is, he that has wisdom to
distinguish between those traditions which that Antichristian Beast brought
into the world, and mixed his cup with, and those pure Ordinances of Worship,
which he took from Christ and his Saints, in the day he entered into the
Temple, let him but divide between the one and the other, and he shall find
those traditions to be (666.)

And when all these abominations are cast out of the worship and service of
Christ, and they likewise hear those blessed voices of the Gospel, Romans 3.25,
26. Jer. 20.37. Romans 11.25.
which came out of the Temple; and likewise hearing the same voices of the
Gospel, declaring the truth of the promises made to their fathers of old, and
Gods free grace and love, and mercy in Jesus Christ, shall thereby be brought
into the bond of the Covenant; for says the Text, blindness happened unto the
Jews, but until the fullness of the Gentiles came in, and then all Israel
shall be saved.

Here we have, first, the means of their calling; secondly, the manner of it;
thirdly, the effects of it.

First, the means or way by which they shall be called, is by the sound of the
Trumpet of the Gospel, Matthew. 24.31.
and he shall send his Angels with a great sound of a Trumpet, Isa. 11.12.
and they shall gather together his Elect (meaning the Jews) from the four
winds, from one end of the Heavens to another.

Secondly, the manner of their callings; Then shall the Lord pour upon them
his spirit of humiliation and godly sorrow, that they shall look upon him whom
they pierced, and shall mourn bitterly as one that mourns for his only
Son, yea, Zach. 12.10.
as the mourning of Hadda-drimmon in the Valley of Megiddon, which was the
greatest mourning that ever we read of Again, Jer. 13.9.
with weeping and supplication will I lead them. Thus then the manner of it
shall be with much sorrow, lamentation and humilation.

Thirdly, the effects which follow upon this their great humiliation and
conversion is, they shall enquire after the true Church Way of the Gospel,
which way the Lord Christ will be worshipped in his House and Temple, asking
the way to Sion, with their faces thitherwards: which notes, Jer. 50.6.
that their hearts shall be fully set to worship Christ after his own way, and
it notes likewise their willingness and readiness to the work, but yet not
all of them shall God take into his House and Temple; no, but one of a City,
Rev. 3.14.
and two of a Family, and bring them to Sion his Church.

Secondly, But all of them shall have their own. Ezekiel. 28.25.20.42.34.13.24.
I and given them again for an everlasting possession, and they shall dwell in
it for ever, and none shall make them afraid, and they shall be no more a prey
to the Heathen. Again, I will bring again the captivity of my people Israel,
and they shall build the waste places, and plant Vineyards and drink the Wine
thereof, Jer. 9.14, 15.
and make Gardens and eat the fruit thereof, and I will plant them upon their
own Land, and they shall be no more pulled up out of the Land which I have
given them, says the Lord. Now the Jews being scattered to the four winds of
Heaven amongst all the people in the world, therefore this is noted of them,
that they amongst whom they lived in all Nations shall bring them to their own
Land upon horses and in Chariots, and in Litters, and upon Mules, and upon
swift Beasts, Isa. 65.20.
for an Offering to the Lord, to his holy Mountain Jerusalem. Gods Covenant in
an outward way, is with all the natural seed of Abraham, to bring them all
into their own Land, and to give it them for an everlasting possession; and
they shall no more be two Nations, nor divided into two Kingdoms any more,
Ezekiel. 37.22.24.25. Jer. 3.18.
even the Lord Christ shall be King over them for ever, as he sits King over
Nations: But that Sion and Church Covenant shall be but with some of them. By
which Covenant, God is said to be married to them: Therefore says the Lord;
Jer. 3.14.
I will take you one of a City, and two of a Family, and bring you to Sion, my
Church and Temple: For we are not to suppose that the whole Nation of the
Jews, from Generation to Generation, for so many hundred years, will be all
godly men and women; no, but all indeed shall submit to that outward way of
worship as other Kingdoms shall, Zach. 14.16.
over whom Christ in his Saints shall reign a thousand years: But not all
godly and holy men and women fit to be taken to Sion into that new Jerusalem
and holy City, Rev. 22.1.
where God and the Lamb has their spiritual Throne: Therefore says the Lord
to Daniel, All thy people shall be delivered, that is, with an outward
deliverance from that captivity and slavery that wicked men kept them it; Dan.
12.1, 2.
But some of them shall awake to everlasting life, and some to everlasting
shame and contempt. Now we are to speak of the time of the pouring forth of
these three last Vials, and the end of Antichrist; with the final deliverance
of the Churches from their captivity, and the beginning of that glorious reign
of Christ and his Saints, for a thousand years; the time of the little horn,
Antichrist, and the last enemy of the Church: we have it set down in Dan. 12.
by a threefold gradation.

The Question being put by one, Dan. 12.6.
to the man clothed in linen, How long it should be to the end of those
wonders; after a solemn Oath taken by him that lives for ever. Which Oath
notes the certainty and infallibility of the thing he swear to, he gives a
threefold answer. First, That it should be for a Time, verse 7.
Times, and half a Time. Secondly, a thousand two hundred and ninety days.
Thirdly, a thousand three hundred and five and thirty days,

The first, is the full time of Antichrists reign, in which he was to scatter
the Churches power, Dan. 12.7.
called the power of the holy people. Which power he scattered from the time of
his beginning to reign (not so much over the Empire) as over the Saints, to
the end of his reign, from the year 375. to the year 1635. the full time of
1260. years, vid. chap. 3.
which is a Time, Times, and half a Time, see the third Chapter. At which time
then almost all his cruelty against the Saints shall be finished, for he did to
this very year slay the Saints, and laid them dead, and triumphs over them,
and make merry, sending gifts one to another; and at this time Antichrist is
said to finish his reign over the Saints having slain them: and so is one
time of his end come.

Second time of his end, is 1290. days, which time begins, says the Text,
when thn daily Sacrifice was taken away, and that abomination set up, which
made all desolate. Which was done in the year of Christ 365. now 365. and
1290. are 1655. which is the second time of his end, which is the end of the
fifth and sixth Vial pouring forth, Carrion. Chro. lib. 3. Rev. 12.17, 18. Dan.
7.11.
when all Civil and Ecclesiastical power shall be taken from him, and his
Armies destroyed and given to the Fowls of Heaven, and their bodies to the
burning flames. And all the civil power of States put into the hands of the
godly, but not the Ecclesiastical power, until the seven plagues of the seven
Angels be fulfilled.

The third time of his end is set down in the 12. verse, to be 1335. days. By
days, he means prophetical days, a day for a year, This time is to begin
when the 1290. began, at the year 365. so 365. and 1355. make 1700. which is
the third and last time of his end, when he shall be spiritually slain and cast
out of the hearts and minds of men, in whom he has fastly rooted himself by
his Antichristian errors; Dan. 7.12.
in whom he and the rest of the Beast was said to live after they had their
Dominions and Kingdoms taken from them.

At this time the Lord Christ is said to sit upon the Throne, Rev. 19.1, 6.
and much people in Heaven crying Alleluiah; and the voice of a great
Multitude, and as the voices of many waters, and the voice of mighty
thunderings, saying, Alleluiah, for the Lord God Omnipotent reigns. In the
year 1655. Christ and his Witnesses are to take the powers of all the ten
Kingdoms which Antichrist had into their own hands, and shall reign; but yet
Christ is not said to reign fully, Christ not said to reign until his reign
in and over his Church as well as over Nations.
until Antichrist be quite removed out of the hearts of men, and the Church
way of Christ clearly seen by all his servants, both by his Witnesses in
Heaven, and other of his Saints, that so he may reign, not only upon the
thrones of Nations, but likewise upon the hill of Sion his Church, and then
Christ is said to reign truly; which he shall do at this last term 1700.
Then shall the Lamb Christ be married unto his Church, and the new Jerusalem
built: Antichrist being quite destroyed, and cast, not only out of the would,
but out of the hearts of men, and all that Antichristian darkness and
ignorance out of the minds of men, that the way of Church Discipline at that
time shall be so plain, Isa. 35.8.
that wayfaring men, yea, though fools, shall not err therein; and so much
light, that all shall see the way of Church Discipline, Zach. 14.7.
which way the unclean is not to pass over, but it shall be for those, At
even time it shall be light, which is meant of this year 1700. Rev. 19.7. The
Spouse married to Christ by a Church Covenant.
even for those that are holy, which do not pollute nor defile, and not for
the unclean. At which time all the people of God seeing the Church way of
Christ so plain, are said to make themselves ready and prepared to be married
to Christ, not but that they were married to him before in a spiritual way by
faith and love; Else how could they have this title of Bride or Wife? But to be
married to him, is in an outward way by a solemn League and Covenant in the
sight of all the world and Nations round about them, which is called the
building of that new Jerusalem and holy City, Rev. 21.2, 10.
which is said to come down from Heaven. By Heaven is meant the place of
judicature, where Christ and his Witnesses sit; from this high place or Heaven
the Church and Spouse of Christ, who is that new Jerusalem or holy City, being
invested with liberty and leave from Christ and his Witnesses, to enter into a
true Church Way, and to set up such a Government in all the Churches of the
Saints, Isa. 24.22.
whereby the Lord Jesus may be Mount Sion, and in his new Jerusalem before his
anciemts gloriously: The Lord Jesus who is the Tree of Life, Rev. 22.2.
who is in the midst of his Church, is said to yield twelve manner of fruits,
twelve sorts of fruits, after the twelve Tribes of the Children of Israel: That
is, in him is all kinds of spiritual meats, to feed and nourish all the
Churches of his Saints, though their wants be diverse and many; And this Tree
yields his fruit every month in the year. The holy Ghost secretly hinting to
those Churches that shall live in those thousand years, that he would have
them to eat of that Tree of Life but once a month. Now by Tree of life is set
forth to us the Lord Christ in that great Ordinance of the Lords Supper, who
does fully communicate himself to his Saints by that Ordinance. In other
Ordinances there is but a communication of Christ by parcels; but in this, of
whole Christ, and a participation of all spiritual gifts and graces: and
therefore the Lord Jesus the Tree of life is said to yield his fruit but once a
month; therefore the Saints are not to take fruit from this Tree, but as it
yields it, not to pluck the Tree before the fruits be ripe: and it is likely
this will be the custom of all the Churches in the thousand years reign.

Though the Churches in the primitive times did receive it every seventh day,
because they were then in their infancy, and childhood, and so the Lord Jesus
had need to be as a Nurse with his Breasts full of Milk to nourish his young
ones every day as it were: But when the Church shall be grown up to the age
and stature of a man, and so to be fed with meat and not with milk, then
Christ will be a Tree of life in his Church, yielding meat and fruits for
strong men every month; for his Saints at that time are foretold by the holy
Ghost, to be ancient men, ancient Christians; Isa. 24.23.
such that are grown up toward the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ, Ephesians. 4.13.
before whom he is said to reign in Mount Sion and in Jerusalen gloriously.
This liberty to build this holy City, new Jerusalem, shall be to the Saints
1700. by the Witnesses in the high place of Judicature; therefore it is said
again, That this holy City or new Jerusalem comes down out of Heaven from
God, Rev. 3.12.
prepared as a Bride adorned for her Husband; the Spouse of Christ had before
her inward clothing all of wrought gold, standing on the right hand of the
King in gold of Ophir; Psalm. 45.9.13.
called gold tried in the fire, which made her spiritually rich and beautiful
in her soul, in the eyes of her Lord and Husband Christ. But this is not
sufficient, she must also have an outward raiment to make her beautiful
without, both in the eyes of her Lord that looks upon her, and the men of this
world; therefore it is said, that she shall be brought to the King in a
raiment of needle-worke, Psalm. 45.14. Rev. 19.8.
curiously wrought and imbroidered, even in fine linen, clean and white, which
is the righteousness of the Saints: That which none has right unto, or ought
to meddle with but Saints, Isa. 35.8.
it being the Government and Discipline which Christ is to set up and exercise
in his own House and Temple over his Saints and people, and this fine linen
was granted to her by Christ and his Witnesses, and it was also granted to the
souls under the Altar, which saw themselves slain for the testimony which
they held, that they should have white robes given them by Christ and his
Witnesses, when the fifth Seal was opened, which was when the fifth Vial was
pouring forth, betwixt 1639. and 1655. but not fully to all the Saints until
the end of the seven Vials 1700. Rev. 15.8.
And the holy Ghost gives the reason why no man, that is (not many) shall not
be able to enter into the Temple, because the Temple was filled with smoke from
the glory of the Lord, and from his power.

By smoke is noted Gods presence, Gods presence in his House and Temple is so
glorious and so holy, that very few shall be able to endure it, his Government
in his House will be too strict for loose and formal spirits.

By smoke is likewise noted darkness, the way of Christ's Government in and
over all the Churches of the Saints, is for the present hard to be found out,
it lies deep, and is, as it were, hid in the inmost bowels of holy writ, not
open in the letter of the Scripture, but wrapped up in the spiritual sense
thereof. And Antichrist has by his Antichristian air which he brought with
him into the world, out of that bottomless pit, so darkened the understanding
of men, yea, of many of the dear Saints of God, that they cannot see Christ's
way in his House and Temple.

Again, Antichrist having taken and kept this Church power from the Saints
1260. years, and therefore they are, as it were, quite ignorant of this
Discipline and Government (as well they may) therefore not able to enter into
the Temple, but this Church power shall be granted unto the Saints again by
Christ and his Witnesses the year 1700.

The Church being thus adorned with pure gold in her inward man, and with a
broidered garment and fine linen upon her outward man, and that by authority
from Christ's civil Magistrates in the place of Judicature, Rev. 21.10, 11
is said to descend out of Heaven from God, having the glory of God, and her
light was like unto a stone most precious, even like unto a Jasper stone, Verse
3.
clear as Crystal. And at this time the Tabernacle of God shall be with men,
even with the Saints and people, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be
his people, and God himself shall be with them and be their God, verse 3. And
God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and there shall be no more
death, nor sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain. All those
tears, or death, sorrow or pain, which came by the oppressor, shall be taken
away; for, Verse 4.
says he, the former things are past away, all oppression and tyranny of the
enemy, and he that sits upon the Throne will make all things new, new Heaven
and new Earth; Verse 5.
new Government in the Church, and a new Government in the State: In this new
Jerusalem shall be no Temple, nor need of the Sun or Moon to shine in it:
That is, the Church and people of God shall have no need of outward glory to
make them beautiful in the eyes of Nations, but God and the Lamb shall have
their spiritual Throne there, Rev. 22.3, 4.
and be their light and glory, and his servants shall serve him, and shall see
his face, that is the brightness of his glory and his Name shall be in their
foreheads. Rev. 3.12. and 22.4.
The power of Christ in his Church shall be as visible upon them, and seen to
belong to them at that day, as though it were written in their foreheads. And
in this City shall be a pure River of life, clear as Crystal: that is, Verse
1.
all pure Ordinances of worship, which proceed from the Throne of God and the
Lamb (who sits in the midst of his Church) and on both sides of those pure
Ordinances is Christ, the Tree of life, communicating himself to his Saints.
Thus shall this holy City and new Jerusalem be built by authority from Christ
and his Witnesses in the year of Christ 1700. which shall be that great work
of the Witnesses that same year throghout all their Dominions, Zach. 9.10.
Psalm. 72.8. Dan. 7.13, 14. and 18. and 27. Psalm. 2.6. and 8, 9. Rev. 5.9, 10.
Isa. 24.23. etc.
which shall be from sea to sea, from the River even to the ends of the Earth,
after they have kept silence in Heaven half an hour. At this time will God
make good all his promises made unto Christ and his Saints concerning their
reigning over the Nations, and upon the hill of him in his new Jerusalem.

CHAP. XI. The two Governments of Christ, the one over the Nations, and another
over his new Jerusalem; Christ reigns 1000. years; Satan and wicked men bound
all that same time, afterward loosed and utterly destroyed; The Saints
reigning three Terms.
CHrist and his Witnesses having taken all power into their hands both Civil
and Ecclesiastical, and being to reign over the Nations, and upon Mount Zion
and in Jerusalem, they must have two Governments set up to rule them by, one to
rule the Nations, another to rule upon Mount Zion.

That whereby Christ and his Saints is to reign and rule the Nations by, is
just and righteous Laws. Christ's government over the Nation. Isa. 32.1. Psalm.
72.2.3.4. Verse 7. Jer. 33.15.
A King shall reign in righteousness, and Princes shall decree justice, he
shall judge thy people with righteousness, and the poor with judgment; the
mountains shall bring peace to the people, and the little hills by
righteousness; he shall judge the poor of the people, he shall save the
children of the needy, and shall break in pieces the oppressor, and in his
days shall the righteous flourish, and abundance of peace so long as the Moon
endures: at that time will I cause the Branch of righteousness to grow up to
David, and he shall execute judgment and righteousness in the Land, justice
and judgment shall be the habitation of his Throne, mercy and truth shall go
before thy face; Psalm. 89.14. Jer. 23.5.
a King shall reign and prosper who shall execute judgment in the earth.

Secondly, Christ will not only give them just and righteous Laws, but he will
also give them his Gospel, Rev. 14.6. Zach. 14.16.
which shall be preached to all Nations, and they shall come up to Jerusalem to
worship, and keep the feast of Tabercacles. They shall submit to his power so
far as to have the Gospel preached to the people of the Nations: Rev. 22.2.
Which Gospel is called the leaves of that Tree of life, which is to heal the
Nations of their deadly wounds and diseases, that they may do the
Commandments of God, and have right to the Tree of life, and so enter in
through the Gate in-that holy City, Isa. 65.17.
new Jerusalem.

This Government by which Christ will rule in the world, Rev. 21.1. Matthew.
24.35.
is called The new Earth, which God promised to make (the old earth being
passed away, even that old Government of oppressions and cruelty which the five
Beasts set up, Rev. 21.1.
being now dissolved by Christ and his Witnesses; Christ set up a new
Government to govern the men of the earth by, called The new Earth, lust and
righteous Laws, and his Gospel, Rev. 14.6.
to be preached unto all Nations.

The second Government which Christ is to set up in the Churches of his Saints
and new Jerusalem, is a more stricter government then the former: Zach. 2.1.
Rev. 21.15.16. Rev. 11.1.
He shall sit upon the throne of his glory in his Church and Temple, with a
measuring line and golden reed, to measure Jerusalem, that holy City, to see
that the length and breadth and hight of it be equal; the highest Officer, and
the meanest Member of the Church must be equal in point of power: and with
this rod or golden reed he is to measure the Temple of God, and the Altar, and
them that worship therein; but the outward Court must not be measured. They
that come into the outward Court; that is, they that come to the preaching of
the Gospel, measure not them, for it is given to all the Nations of the world
to be as leaves of the Tree of life to cure them therewith; but the stones of
the Temple and Altar, and they that worship therein, must be measured.

First, Christ will measure all the stones which this holy City, new Jerusalem
is to be built withal, none is to be admitted but precious stones, Rev. 21.18.
even of Jasper, godly men and women, and the city is to be all of pure gold,
like unto clcere glass. None are to enter into a Church-league and Covenant,
to be a stone of this new Jernsalem, but such as have their clothing of
wrought gold, Psalm. 45.13.
befitting the Spouse of Christ and Queen of Heaven, those graees of Gods
Spirit which are as gold tried in the fire, Rev. 3.18.
like unto clear glass, without spot or defilement, which are so, I say, in
the judgment of Charity, for so must the Saints judge, if one be without spot,
not defilling by any outward sin, as to work abomination, or make a lie, he is
to be admitted, the Saints is to believe that such a one is a precious stone,
and pure gold, in the judgment of charity.

2. The Temple must not only be measured, that is, godly men and women which
are as lively stones, and spiritual, Psalm. 1.2.5. Ezekiel. 43.13.
to build this spiritual Temple, but the Altar must be measured, all
ordinances and instruments, with which the Saints are to worship, are to be
measured; nothing is to be admitted as an Ordinance of worship, but what is of
divine institution, which will agree with the touchstone of the Word, and
balance of the Sanctuary: Not any of that Romish trash of men's inventions and
humane traditions, with which the Whore of Rome mixed her cup, Ezekiel. 43.26, 27.
but the Altar must be cleansed seven days, seven times, as gold or silver,
and then the Lord will accept of our offerings, These are the Ordinances of the
Altar of Christ within his Temple.

3. They that worship in the Temple must be measured, Christ sits upon the
throne of his Church in the Temple, and all that come in after it is built, to
worship, shall be measured, if they do not agree with the golden reed of
divine truth, no admittance into his Temple; nay, after they be admitted, if
they walk not according to the rule of the Gospel, after the third
admonition, Matthew. 18.17.
they are to be cast out of his house: 1 Cor. 5.7.
As none shall enter into his house that defiles, so nothing is admitted to
stay there, for he would defile all the rest. A little leaven leaveneth the
whole lump; 1 Cor. 5.6.
therefore he must be cut off by the sword of Christ that goes out of his
mouth. This is that government and discipline which Christ will set up in his
Temple and holy City, Rev. 2.16.
and exercise in all the Churches of his Saints all the 1000. years, and to
the end of the world: And these are the laws, ordinances, and forms, and going
out thereof, and commings in thereof, this is the law of the house, Ezekiel. 43.12.
upon the top of the mountains, which is called that new Heaven which he will
make, A new Heaven.
that old Heaven being passed away; and there was found no more sea, no more of
that Romish doctrine or humane traditions which that Antichristian Whore
brought into the world with her; but that Roman Beast, and Babylonish Whore,
with all her abominations, is now to be removed out of the way, which she set
up in the Temple and Heaven; and now the Lord sets up pure ordinances of
worship in all the Churches of the Saints, which he calls the new Heaven, which
new heaven and earth shall ever continue, Isa. 61.17. Rev. 21.1. Rev. 20.3, 4.
Isa. 24.22.
not only for 1000. years, in which Christ and his Saints shall reign, Satan
be bound, and wicked men shut up as prisoners in a pit, and lie civilly slain,
but even to the worlds end; and then shall that be fulfilled, Isa. 16.16, 17,
18, 19, 20, 21. Thou shall also suck the milk of, etc.

So the Lord Jesus is to reign over the Nations of the world and Churches of
his Saints, 1000. years, which 1000. years begins when Antichrist is quite
destroyed, which will be 1700. years, and continue unto 2700. in which time
Satan is said to be bound and shut up, Rev. 20.3.
and sealed in that bottomless pit: Not so shut up, but he shall still tempt
and entice the men of the world, yea, and Saints too, to sin; but this, he
shall be bound from tempting men to civil war against one another, Mic. 4.3.
all that 1000. years, and therefore they are said, not to learn war any more,
that is, not all that 1000. years; and wicked men shall be civilly slain and
laid as dead men, and not to live until that 1000. years be ended, Rev. 20.5.
and shut up as prisoners in a pit; not but that they shall have as much
liberty as the Saints in an outward way, to trade and to have commerce in the
world, but they shall have all civil power taken out of their hands, and so
lie as dead men, and useless men in the State or Kingdom where they live, and
be in that respect as prisoners gathered into a pit, and shut up in prison.
Isa. 24.22.


But after this thousand years is ended, then Satan shall be unbound in the
year 2700. and the rest of the wicked, Rev. 20.7. Verse. 5. Isa. 24.22.
which were civilly dead, shall live, and the prisoners which were shut up,
shall be visited; that is, let forth out of their prison, and the Devil shall
go out to deceive the Nations of the earth, by stirring up wicked men to make
civil war with the Saints; and the wicked of the earth shall be suffered by
God to take up arms against his people, and so are said to be let out of
prison, for it is a prison to wicked men and the Devil, Rev. 20.5.
to be kept from warring against the people of God. And likewise are said to
live when the 1000. years are ended, that is, civilly, they now having taken
up Arms, have civil power in their hands, Ezekiel. 39.1.
and so live, And they shall gather together into a great Army horses and
horsemen, all of them clothed with all sorts of armor, even a great company;
all of them handling the sword, the number of whom is as the sand of the sea,
God and Magog. The chief Princes of Meshech and Tubal, Captains of this great
Army, shall go upon the breadth of the earth, and compass the Camp of the
Saints, and the beloved City. But God will destroy them with a mighty
destruction. Rev. 20.9.


First, he will call for a sword against him throughout all his Mountains, or
powers of States, all being in the hands of him and his Saints at the same time
throughout the world. Ezekiel. 38.21.


Secondly, God will turn the sword of the enemy against themselves, every man's
sword shall be against his brother.

Thirdly, God will send his pestilence into their army, Verse. 23.
Rev. 20.9. Ezekiel. 39.2, 4.9.12. Ezekiel. 28.23.
and reign upon them great haile-stones, fire and brinstone, and but the sixth
part of them shall return back, and the rest shall fall upon the Mountain of
Israel, and the people of God shall be seven months burying the dead, and
seven years burning their weapons; Thus will the Lord magnify and sanctify
his great Name in the fight of the Heathen, and in the eyes of many Nations,
and they shall know that he is the Lord, and they shall know that the people of
Israel went into captivity, for their iniquity and for their sin; Therefore God
hid his face from them, and gave them all into the hands of their enemies; and
the house of Israel shall know that the Lord is their God, from that day
forwards; neither will he hide his face from them any more, because he has
poured his Spirit upon them; And thus shall God destroy this great army of Gog
and Magog, and the Devil that deceived them shall be cast into a lake of fire
burning with brimstone, Rev 20.10.
where the Beast and false prophets are, and shall be tormented day and night,
for ever and ever. And then the Saints of God, and Churches of Jesus Christ,
shall reign in peace and quiet, never to be molested by the Devil and wicked
men, in a way of civil war more, and shall reign to the end of the world; but
when that end of the world shall be, is not known Our Savior gave four
signs of his coming to judge Antichrist, but of that last judgment of quick
and dead, when Christ shall deliver up the Kingdom to his Father, and God to
be all in all, 1 Cor. 15.24. and 28. Mark. 13.32.
of this day and hour knows no man, no not the Angels in Heaven, neither the
Son, but the Father. Only he has hid this time and season in his own heart
and breast, and it is not for us to search into it, or to meddle with it; It
may be hundreds or thousands of years after this year, 2700. when Gog and
Magog shall be destroyed.

But this is noted in the Scripture of truth, that the Saints shall reign for
three periods, they shall take and possess the Kingdom for ever even for ever
and ever. Ever is a term of time; Dan. 7.8.
the first ever begins 1655. when the Beast, and the false prophet, and their
Armies shall be destroyed, and the Saints take possession of the Kingdom to
the year 1700. unto which time the seventh Vial shall be pouring upon that
Antichristian air, and so cast out of the world, as out of the grave, as an
abominable branch.

Second Ever is from the year 1700. to the year 2700. all that 1000. years
reign of Christ and his Saints, wherein Satan is to be bound, and the wicked
civilly slain and lie dead; at the end of which term they shall assay to take
the power out of the hands of the Saints, but shall not be able. This is the
second term of time, or ever, to which the Saints shall reign.

The third Ever is from the year of Christ 2700. to the end of the world, when
Jesus Christ shall come to judge the quick and dead, and deliver up the
Kingdom to his Father, and God be all in all.

Then also who knows whether the Lord will fulfill all these things in a
literal and natural way, at his last and personal coming to judgment, as he
has fulfilled them in a spiritual and mystical sense, as has been showed in
this discourse, so that the sun shall be darkened, and the moon be turned into
blood, the stars fall from Heaven, Heaven and Earth to be rolled together as a
scroll, and pass away, and their place be no more found, and the sea not only
to roar, but there to be no more sea; and a new Heaven and a new Earth to be
made by the almighty power of God, which shall be as a great new City for the
servants of God to dwell in, and to behold his face, and see his glory, which
City will have no need of the light of a natural sun or moon, for the Lord
God and the Lamb will be the light and glory thereof.

FINIS.

