A GREAT PLOT Discovered in the NORTH AGAINST The Honorable Houses of
Parliament, and His Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX'S Army.

Wherein is declared The full proceedings of the Royalists, in raising of
Forces for the opposing of this renowned Army.

WITH The manner how they should have surprised six strong Castles in
Yorkshire, and the Names of the chief Ringleaders that should have commanded
this Party.

ALSO, A Remarkable Passage concerning His Excellency, and His sending down a
strong Party of Horse toward the Northern Parts.

DECEMBER. 10.
Published for general satisfaction, and presented to every respective County
throughout the Kingdom of England.

LONDON, Printed for William Jones, 1646.

A Great and Terrible PLOT Discovered in the NORTH.
SInce the arrival of the last Post from the North, which intimated unto us
the unhappy tidings of the great Conspiracy in the North of England, yet
welcome News, in the timely discovery of it; we are further advertised, and it
is likewise signified to the honorable houses of Parliament, by letters from
very good hands, the dangerous proceedings of the Royalists in those Parts;
wherein is made manifest, the inveterate malice, and most bloody designs of
the Enemies of England; For, having formerly been the chief Instruments of
involving this Kingdom in blood, by engaging a desperate war against the
Worthies thereof, have (since the happy sheathing of this devouring sword)
again endeavored to draw it, that so streams of blood might issue forth, and
run down the streets of our stately Towns and Cities: But God forbid, for He
having by His omnipotent Power sheathed the sword, and composed the sad
difference and distractions within this bleeding Kingdom, were now pleased to
manger their Designs, and being to light the wicked Conspiracies and
Intentions of the Enemies to Truth and Peace; as will manifestly appear by
this ensuing Relation.

The Royalists in the North of England, having for many weeks together
labored and endeavored with his Majesty for the raising of Forces, and
providing of Arms, and other Necessaries of war, having attained their
desires, began to pluck up their drooping Spirits, and to appear in a warlike
manner, diverse of them having obtained new Commission from his Majesty to raise
Forces against the Parliament; and those which have bin in Arms against the
Parliament for the King, flock thither, and promises are made that they shall
have consderation for the time they spend, till they become useful, and can
attain to the accomplishing of their Designs in agitation, by raising of an
Army to oppose the Power and Strength of his Excellency sir Tho. Fairfax.

The Names of the chief Ringleaders which had received their Commissions from
his Majesty, are, sir Marmaduke Darcy, sir Jordan Crosland, sir William
Blackston, and many others: But now they begin to despair by reason that their
main supportance, and chiefest aims has taken no effect, which was, the
surpisall of the strong Holds and Garrisons in the North (now in possession of
the Parliaments Forcces) the Names of which, together with the manner of the
Situation of them, I will faithfully communicate, as follows:

First, that impregnable Hold the Castle of Pontefract, who endured more then a
years siege by the Parliaments Forces, under the Command of the right
honorable the Lord Fairfax; which place if it had been again re-possess't by
the enemy, (as was intended) would have cost many thousand men's lives, before
the retaking of it.

But that which makes us most lament, it, that the concord and union of our
distressed Kingdom should still be retarded and meet with opposition; for it
is intimated unto us, that for the surprisall of the sorenamed Garrison, the
Kings hand and seal was not only showed but that his Majesty had also granted
several Commissions to men of eminency, for the further prosecuting of the
Design in agitation against the Parliament, as is before cited.

But if this Plot had taken effect, our renowned Parliament had lost one of the
chiefest Flowers in this little Garden; for, it is held to be one of the
strongest Castles in Europe, having ten great Towers within it, and situated
upon a high Rock, having but two Gates to enter in at, and the walls at least
seven or eight yards in breadth, being free from Battery by any Canon.

If the enemy had become Masters of this Castle, they would have endangered
most of the other Holds in the North, as Scarbrough, a place of great
consequence, and situated upon a a mighty high Rock, which if once being
repossest of again, would tend much to the prejudice of this Kingdom, but
especially to the Northern Counties.

Also the Castle of Helmsley would have been in great danger, by reason of the
innumerable sort of Papists and Malignants that are about it, it is a place of
great concernment, having cost many men's lives in the reducing of it, and much
blood spilt in the attempting thereof.

His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax at his besieging of the said place received
a terrible wound, being shot through the shoulder with a sling-bullet, weighing
about seven or eight pound, as he was viewing the ground for raising of his
Batteries, and planting of his Ordnance.

But to conclude, Skipton Castle, Knaresbrough Castle, and Sandall Castle is
supposed would be also endagered, being places of great strength and
consequence, especially the two first.

All which (is very probable) would have heene attempted, if they had prospered
in their first Design; but being frustrated in that, and many of the
Complotters apprehended, the rest despair (as men out of hopes) betaking
themselves to any corners or holes for sanctuary.

The rest of the Royailsts that have had formerly so many frequent meetings,
and diverse others of the Kings Officers and Soldiers, that lay hovering up and
down the Northern Parts, plundering and pillaging the countries, dare not
appear so publicly, nor appoint meetings as formerly.

So that it is hoped all their wicked stratagems and Conspiracies will soon
be frustrated, by reason of The confident expectations we have of a firm union
betwixt the two Kingdoms of England and Scotland, will (we hope) in a very
short time remove all fears and jealousies (magure the malice of the
adversary.) The receipt of the money is consented unto; for so far are we from
standing on punctillioes, or circumstances, which might retard matters of
greatest concernment, that it will appear to the world that we shall be most
real in our performances; in pursuance whereof, the Scots shall receive the
first 100000. l. at North-Otherton, and when they are marched out of Newcastle
the other 100000. l. accepting of Hostages for the rendition of the rest of our
Garrisons, and their quitting the whole Kingdom.

I had almost forgot to intimate unto you, that the Scots Commissioners sent a
Letter to the House, of the transactions of the treaty between them and our
Commissioners, about the matters before recited, and are pleased to declare,
that its far from their desire, that any differences or misunderstandings arise
betwixt us. We hear that a fair conclusion will be made to the general
satisfaction of all good men, and the establishment of Peace betwixt the two
Kingdoms. The money is speedily to be sent away, And his Excellency Sir Thomas
Fairfax is to send a strong party of horse, consisting of 3000. for the safe
conveighing of it to the North.

The Parliament have also been pleased to express themselves, concerning the
Covenant, as follows:

We by the Covenant in the first Article which concerns Religion are to
endeavor in our several Places and Callings.

In the second, which concerns the extirpation of Popery, Prelacy,
Superstition, Heresy, Schism and profaneness, to endeavor in like manner.

In the third, which concerns the Rights and Privileges of Parliament, the
Liberties of the Kingdoms, and the preservation and defense of the true
Religion and liberties of the Kingdoms and the preservation and defense of the
Kings person and authority in the preservation and defense of the true Religion
and Liberties of the Kingdoms, to endeavor in our several Vocations.

The 4. which concerns Incendiaries they are to be brought to public trial,
and receive condign punishment from the supreme Judicatories of both Kingdoms
respectively.

In the fifth concerning the continuing of the peace and unon of the Kingdom of
England and Scotland, We shall each out of us endeavor according to our Places
and Interest.

In the sixth and last, concerning the assistance and defense of all those that
enter into this Covenant. To endeavor according to our Places and Callings, to
perform whatsoever we are obliged to by the Covenant.

It seems strange to us, That England and Scotland being several distinct
Kingdoms, and by Covenant each one being to act in his several Place, Vocation
Call ng and Interest, that the Kingdom of Scotland should from the Covenant
entitle themselves to the right of exercising any joint power in the Kingdom of
England the express words of the Covenant being directly contrary to the
exercise of any joint power, which was several and distinct before the making
this Covenant, and the joint exercise of such power would break the Covenant;
because we are thereby obliged in our several Vocations, mutually to preserve
the Rights and Privileges of the Parliaments, and the Liberties of the
Kingdoms, and the exercise of such a joint power, which does give a negative
voice to another Nation, in the proceedings in the Kingdoms of England and
Ireland would be a manifest breach of those privileges and liberties: And
whereas throughout your whole Papers this joint interest is so much enforced
from the Covenant, neither that word Ioyatly, nor any other expression which
will bear that interpretation, is so much as mentioned in the Covenant; and the
words, each one in his several Vocation, Calling Place and Interest, which
runs through the whole Covenant, and would have cleared the meaning of it are
wholly left out by you and in all your recitals of the Covenant, or arguments
drawn from thence, there are no words to that effect.

FINIS.

