TO THE HONORABLE William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker of the Honorable House of
COMMONS.
SIR,
Our News is very joyful, even the defeat of a raging Enemy of near two
thousand men, under the command of the Lord Digby, having taken near one
thousand Foot of mine near Ferry-Briggs; my Horse under the command of Co:
Copley, fell suddenly upon them, and not only released the Foot, but God gave
us an absolute Victory, as the List enclosed will manifest, there is not above
two or three hundred of them left together, who are fled toward Skipton; Eight
hundred of mine pursuing of them, so that I am retreating to block up the North
side of Newark, and have sent two Regiments to Colonel Rossiter, to assist him
in blocking up the South side, till I receive further Orders from the Committee
of both Kingdoms: There is no considerable Enemy for me to follow, the King
being in Newark, and the Garrison cleared of most of their Horse; Its conceived
a very seasonable time to block up the same, I want only their comands. You
shall hear further from me by the next that offers so much happiness to

Your Friend to serve you, Sydenham Poyntz.
Worsop, October. 18. 1645.
Prisoners taken at the Battle at Sherborn on Wednesday October. 15. about four
of the Clock in the Afternoon.
Colonel Sir Francis Anderson. Col: Bulmer. Col: Chaytor. Col: Carnaby. Lieut.
Colonel Matthew Wentworth. Lieut. Colonel Gordon. Major Craythorne. Capt.
Leneon, Master of the Ordnance. Captain James Cholmley. Captain Marshall.
Captain Pudsey wounded, and four Captains more taken. Captain Lieutenant
Slater. Lieutenant John Turner, and diverse other Reformadoes. Mr. Duke
Tunstall, a great Papist. Mr. Clavering. Mr. Lowther. Colonel Sir Francis
Carnaby slain. Colonel Sir Richard Hutton slain. Mr. Slingsby sore wounded.
Colonel Clavering and Carnabyes colors taken, with diverse other colors. Lord
Digbyes Coach, and the Kings Surgeon in it. Much gallant Pillage. We lost not
ten men, but many wounded. The Enemy were about One thousand six hundred,
intended for Montrosse, ours about One thousand, twelve hundred and fifty.
About Six hundred of the Enemy gone toward Skipton. Three of Four hundred
Troopers taken, and about Six hundred Horses. Forty slain, and many wounded.
The Countess of Nidsdale taken.
The substance of Sir Mar. Landales Speech: ^o his men before this fight.
Gentlemen.
YOu are all gallant men, but there is some which seeks for to scandal your
gallantry for the loss of Nasby business, but I hope you will redeem your
Reputation, and still maintain that gallant Report which you ever had, I am
sure you have done such business that never was done in any War with such a
number; your March from Oxford, first beating of Rositer, and the relief of
Pomfrett, the like was never done: And I hope you are Gentlemen, that you will
still maintain it, and redeem that which you have lost: for my own part I
will not have you go any where, but where I will lead you my self.

SIR,
WE have had such a business here, as never was since these Wars began My
Lord Digby, and Sir Marmaduke Langdale had thought to have surprised our Army
again, as they did at Pomfret, but the Lord of Hosts was wonderfully seen as
always so now especially; they came of a sudden from VVelbeck House, one
thousand and two hundred Horse, and took eight hundred of our Foot at
Sherlurn, twelve miles from York, but before they carried them off the Field,
our Horse came on, and joined battle with them, Routed their Horse, Released
the prisoners, took above five hundred of them, whereof there was great
Commanders, both slain and taken. I have sent you enclosed, a List of those
were taken now, but our Horse are still in pursuit, the Lord give a blessing to
them; You shall hear more by the next post, God willing. I pray you let me
hear from you as often as you can, for it is my joy, and the only comfort
upon the earth to hear of your health and happiness; the Lord be praised for
all his benefits toward us, but for the comfort of you, the Lord knows my
inward thoughts: I pray God bless you. I rest your ever loving friend till
death.

James Hopkinsonn.

Another Relation of the late fight near Sherburne in Yorkshire.
SInce this great Victory over the Enemy at Sherburne, there came into this
City of York, several persons that revolted from the Enemy: whereof one of
them (being an Officer in their Army) gives us this particular Relation, Viz.
That on the last Sunday the King marched out of Newarke with about two thousand
Horse, and came to VVelbecke; where having drawn out about twelve hundred
Horse, gave command to the Lord Digby and Sir Marmaduke Langdale (the last of
which we formerly related to be either slain or drowned, and by this
Gentleman's relation, he was wanting for four days, and his own party could
not tell what was become of him) to march toward Montross, who as intelligence
was brought to his Majesty by Scotch Nan, (who carries Letters continually
betwixt them) has gathered a considerable Body of Foot, and wanted nothing but
Horse to join with them, to act their cruelty in these parts. From VVelbecke
Park they marched to Doncaster, where having taken the Centry, our men left
the Town and fled: from thence marching on forwards, they beat up our quarters
in several Towns thereabouts. Afterward drawing near Sherburne, they met
with a Countryman, who told them that our men were preparing for their
coming, being drawn into the field about eight hundred Foot besides Horse,
but the Enemy soon routed the Horse (being but 2 handful to them) and took
all the Foot prisoners, laid their Arms in a great heap in Sherburne street,
till they could get carriages to send them away: but before they were provided
with carriages, our Noble Colonel Copley (hearing of them) marched with all
speed, and faced them in Sherburne field; both parties striving who should be
soonest in Battalia: the Enemy being much encouraged with their former good
success, charged valiantly; ours answered them with brave gallantry: At the
first, the left wings on both sides were routed; but in the conclusion the
Enemy was forced to fly, one of their chief Commanders (the Lord Digby by
name) being wounded as we hear, and Sir Marmaduke Langdale also had four
pistols fired against him, but whether he be wounded or no is uncertain. Many
prisoners were taken, it is reported 400 at least, Sir Richard Hutton was
slain, whose corpse his kindred (having protection from our Commissioners for
War) have buried in that place he formerly desired to be laid. This great
business was done on Wednesday October-15. being a great mercy, the Enemy making
themselves sure to be in York that night or the next, but now they are
scattered (blessed be God) All our men and Arms which they had taken, are
redeemed.

Col. Copleys Letter to the Honorable the Commissioners for War.
Honored Gentlemen,
THe Enemy last night beat up our Guard at Cusworth Manor to Ferribridge this
day, took all our Foot at Sherburne, we pursued them ever since day, charged
them, at the Towns end, routed them, but not without the rout of some of our
men. And so the Lord has given us the victory, many prisoners are taken, we
are yet in the pursuit, we have redeemed all our Foot and their Arms, this is
all for the present, from

15. October. 1645. Your most humble servant, Chr. Copley.

Honor. Gentlemen,
MY have last night made my Relation short and imperfect, This I now present is
for your further satisfaction: Upon the Intelligence of the Kings advance to
Blyth with part of his Horse, We appointed a Randevouz on Tuesday morning,
purposely to have stopped his advance by Dancaster, but having heard he had a
Randevouz that morning at Worksope, and thereby fearing his advance into
Chesshire, we kept our quarters and the guard at Duncaster as usually, only
that we might be in readiness, I appointed a Randevouz of all our Horse at two
of the clock on Tuesday night. The enemy advanced beyond our expectation from
Worksope through Dancaster by day light, and beat up our guard at Cusworth
about six or seven of the clock. And in Scawsby keys they quartred, and marched
straight to Ferribridge next morning, and thence to Shurburne, and took the
Foot and their Arms, and beat Colonel Wrins Regiment at the North side
Shurburne: I had sent to Pontefract at four a clock in the morning, to give
notice to have saved the Foot, but the Messenger from Colonel Overton returned
to Pontefract, not daring to go on, so the foot had no notice, and were taken;
We marched on from the Randevouz by day met and joined with the Lord Genesis
Regiment, who had taken good store of baggage of good value and diverse
prisoners, who had lost their army in the night. We continued a speedy march
toward Ferribridge in hope to have got the Pass there, have stayed the Enemy,
and have saved the Foot. When we were marched up to Pontefract, the Castle gave
us notice the Enemy was got before us, there we hasted to draw up our Men, drew
forth a strong Party to force the Enemy to a stand, but they were taking our
Foot, by that, that Forlorn got to Betterice Hill, which we understood at
Milford, and that the Enemy was drawn up in Bodies on Sherburne Common: Here
we drew up our Horse, and ordered them into Bodies for Charges and Reserves,
as before I had given order to the Officers, here we fell into a great strait,
we durst not march through Milford, fearing the Enemy with their Dragoones
(for we heard they had such, but they had none, or their new got Muskets) might
have put us into disorder, but above the Town, through the Hedges, which was
some inconvenience, but we were forced when we came near Sherburne, and the
enemy drawing out against us, to draw over a narrow way through an impassable
Brook we knew not of, having much ado to bring in our Bodies again into
Order, which might have occasioned the loss of the day, had not the Enemy been
somewhat too late in drawing out of the Town; So I brought on against every of
their Bodies as near as I could a Body of ours, and by the help of our
Reserves, we got the day, through the blessing of God, for diverse of our Horse
were Routed, and the mischief fell most upon my Regiment, who charged the
only Gallant men, the Reformadoes; many of our men are wounded, hardly ten
slain; The Victory clear, we kept the field, pursued the Enemy three miles,
took above four hundred prisoners, whereof many are escaped, by negligence of
the Soldiers, who regard the spoil more then the glory, but for the number
and quality of the Officers, I desire you to peruse the List enclosed, taken
(for your further satisfaction) by Coll. Lilburn; The recovery of our Foot, and
Arms, was not the least part of our Victory, the loss was the right spur to
the Engagement, the Lord put on, and wrought both, for the preservation of this
County. I have sent above 100. of the Prisoners to Pontifract, how many I know
not, to Cawood Castle; 150. at least to York; For the further prosecution of
the Victory I I sent (not having time to stay for your Order) Colonel Alureds
and Colonel Wrens Regiments, both to prevent the enemies March to Montrosse,
which believe it was the maine Design, the securing of Bolton Leaguer, to
whose assistance, I have directed Coll. Lamberts Horse if the rest think fit,
but for a further addition of strength, I conceive were safe to send the Lord
Generals Regiment after, hearing you have resolved they shall not March to
General Points, who is by this time at Nottingham, but I submit this to your
wisdom, desiring your speedy resolution, to morrow our other Regiments will be
in their frontire Quarters again; I shall be with them to attend the enemies
motions again. Your desire of a full relation has made^ me tedious, I crave
your pardon, shall present your Order for the expression of your good
acceptance of our Service, and your future care of us, for the present, I rest,

Sherburne Oct. 16. 1645. Your most humble servant, CHR. CORLEY.

FINIS.

