Strena Vavasoriensis, A NEVV-YEARS-GIFT FOR THE WELSH ITINERANTS, Or a HUE and
CRY after Mr. VAVASOR POWELL, Metropolitan of the Itinerants, and one of the
Executioners of the Gospel, by color of the late Act for the Propagation
thereof in Wales; AS ALSO A true Relation of his Birth, Course of Life, and
Doctrines; TOGETHER WITH A Vindication of several places of Scripture wrested
and abused, against the present Government, and all public Ministers of this
Nation.

His Hymn Sung in Christ-Church London; With an Antiphona thereunto; and a
lively Description of his Propagation.

Raro antecedentem Scelestum
Sequitur pede Poena claudo.
Pro. 16.5. Answer a Fool according to his folly; lest he be wise in his own
conceit. Genesis 4.14. I shall be a Fugitive and a Vagabond in the Earth, and it
shall come to pass, that every one that finds me, shall slay me. LONDON,
Printed by F.L. 1654.

To the Reader.
Reader,
YOu must be pleased not to wonder that our Cry is so loud, for we beat on a
strong Quest, and must hunt dryfoot after Mr. V.P. who is the Subject of this
Discourse; a man that has passed by no Person or Profession but has either
vilified the one or traduced the other: His Cruelties have been so immane, and
his Cheats so frequent and obvious, that we should undertake too great a task
to pursue them all, having with his Errors and Blasphemies robbed God of his
Glory, Christ of his Honor, the Scripture of her Truth, the Church of her
Ministry, and the Christian People of our Nation, of the Comfort of Christ's
blessed Ordinances, every way endeavoring to undermine the very Fabric both
of this Church and State, so that the Hue and Cry is great. You must not expect
any Curiousity in the style, being the Drolleries only of his own brain, and
the reiterating of the passages of his own obscean and violent discourses,
which may not with verity be Metamorphosed from their first shape; here is not
a passage falsely related, nor maliciously aggravated, and though All that is
here is True, yet All that is true, is not here told, for we purposely
pretermit many things, that we may reserve more in store. We found out the sent
of some part of his Doctrine in Wales, and here in London more bitterness of his
Seditions, for which he was 3 times committed to the custody of the Messengers
attending His Higness Council, and being thence with great clemency released,
he became as wild Actaeon (transformed into the shape of a Deer) and knew not
where to betake himself lest he should be torn by his own dogs.

Ovid met. lib. 3.
Quid faciat? Repetatne domum, et Regalia tecta, An lateat Sylvis? timor hoc,
pudor impedit illud.

He was afraid to stay here, and ashamed to return home; but being gone he is
much lamented by his brethren for betraying their trust, and more condemned by
all honest men for violating his promise, in continuing (as we understand) as
busy and violent in the Country, as ever he was here, against this present
Government: whosoever pleases to make search after him, may soon know him by
his Characteristical marks, herein truly expressed. I am sure you shall not
find him idle.

Virg. Ecl.
Nam si non aliqua nocuisset, mortuus esset.

Let us entreat your patience in tracing his footsteps, and the Lord preserve
you from his ways:

A NEVV-YEARS-GIFT FOR The Welsh Itinerants, Or a HUE and CRY after Mr. VAVASOR
POWELL.
IF you will have first his Pedigree blazed, he was the His Birth.
Grandchild of one William Vavasor of Newtown in Montgomeryshire, a man fresh
in our memory for his hyperbolical discourses, so that by descent he has not
much degenerated from his Ancestors. This old man had a Daughter named
Penelope, a Lady not altogether as Chaste as Ulysses his Wife, who gained more
by the trade of Tippling than Spinning, And this Gossip was the Mother of our
young Donatus. She was married to one Howel the poor Ale man of Knwcklas in
Radnorshire, and a badger of Oatmeal, but Non genus aut proavos -- we like Mr.
Vavasor never the worse for that. They lived long in that house of no good
report, and the young Gentleman was no great probationer in Christ's School, by
his own confession (during his Minority) being willing to approve of all games,
were they never so wanton or vile, for his Mother or Sisters livelihood. But
tired at length Education.
with walking their Guests horses, and finding no great gain at such a petty
Alehouse, he was elevated in his thoughts for higher preferment, and so became
an Hostler (I would say Groom) to Master Isaac Thomas, an Innkeeper and
Mercer in Bishop-Castle in Shropshire.

Alas! it was impossible that so high and generous a spirit should be
captivated to horses heels; The hopeful young man continued not long in
rubbing on that Trade, but began to be so eloquent with Welcome Gentlemen, that
at last, together with the benefit of his Masters Notes, he presumed to open
Scriptures, and being then taken up by a great Gamaliel, he was for a good
space (you may think) well Educated and Principled at his feet.

Marriage.
This Gallant Spark lived a while (though not purely chaste, yet) a single life;
but at last the strength of his Flesh prevailed over the weakness of his
Spirit, being then Munkie proud, he was so taken with sweet and dear Mistres
Quarrel, sometimes a walking Pedlar, and seller of Hot-waters in Preisteign in
Radnorshire, wherewith he was often Comforted, that his inflamed spirit did
revive; and her husband shortly deceasing, though his dead Corpse had not lain a
fortnight in the Grave, they being sweetly enamored the one with the other, she
proves to be his Consort, and so he Carries her as a Dear Sister about, though
her little Child, lately deprived of his Father, and now robbed of his Mother,
raised the Hue and Cry after them; but wantonness admits neither of delays nor
entreaties.

Here is sweet Amity and Conjuntion, a couple well met and joined together, a
Walking Peddler, and an Itinerary Preacher, both very expert in their Trades.

Course of life.
His Proficiency grew on, and no sooner becomes he a Schoolmaster, but takes
upon him the habit of Sir John; and lest without Ordination (under the
Episcopal Government) he might incur the danger of suspension, borrows of an
old decayed Minister (his near Kinsman) his Letters of Orders, razeth out the
other, and inserts his own name, and under Color of these Counterfeit Letters
missive, he goes unsent, and begins to thunder out of the Pulpits (as though he
had been a fiery Spirit raised out of Hell:) but by reason of his inconformity,
and the many Errors which he broached, his Calling was questioned, and the
Orders being well scanned, were found Spurious and Counterfeit, and he bound to
appear at the next great Sessions to be held for that County of Radnor, where
appearing, and indicated for Nonconformity, forging of Orders, and Seditious
Doctrine, was with much ado reprieved from the Gallows, and very near to
undergo the danger of a true Suspension.

The Modesty of the man was such, that with old Vulpone (having Removal to
England.
escaped thus narrowly) he is resolved thence-after to harras and prey abroad,
and so, for mere shame, his Country is rid of him, and he makes his
transmigration into England: but I shall pass over with silence his great
Cheating and Seducing of poor souls in Kent and Essex, where he continued, and
spread his Errors diverse years, and sparingly discover his return, and trading
again among his own Natives and Countrymen.

No sooner did these late troubles, and intestine Wars break forth Return to
Wales to Propagate.
in England, but as soon as Wales was reduced under the power of the
Parliament, he fled thither, not only of any affection to their Cause, but for
his own designs, security, and advantage, and was as active and vigorous as the
perpetual motion of a tongue, or the invention of a wicked brain could possible
be, for the rooting out of the Ministry, branding the Calling as Anti-Christia
and rendering the persons by all scandalous aspersions, to become odious to the
people. And for the more speedy effecting thereof he, together with others of
the same Cut, (who, Tunc tua res agitur paries cum proximus ardet Vealegon.-
if they become more meek and modest, may peradventure prove namelesse)
promoted the Act for Propagation of the Gospel in Wales, so really intended by
the pious Care and Charity of those Members of Parliament; yet by the unworthy
managing thereof by these men, it proved like another Ephesian Image of Diana
(though believed to be descended from heaven) for the benefit only of this
Demetrius, and his tradesmen, the Silver Shrines taking up the whole devotion
of that Worship.

A true description whereof you shall (God willing) in the latter end herein
find to be lively delineated.

For his encouragement in the work, he had his Stipend and Salary of one
hundred pounds a year allowed unto him out of Prebends, Stipend
Dean and Chapters, and other Tithes, besides the vast Emoluments of many other
Sequestered Benefices in North Wales, which were, and continue daily paid unto
him, and received Tickets from the Commissioners in South Wales for the like
Sum, besides the wages of diverse of the Itinerants and Schoolmasters, who are
but his Journey-men and Stipendaries.

Greatness and wealth.
And yet this man has the Impudency to Protest and Vow before God and men (as
his usual manner is in his Sermons) that he never received a penny for his
Pains and Preaching.

Thus the poor Groom is become great and wealthy, having purchased some of the
late Kings, Fee-farm Rents and Lordships, though for the most part in another
man's name: And to perpetuate his memory (as wicked Absalom being Son-lesse
reared up his Pillar in the Kings Dale) has built for himself a very fair and
sumptuous house in Kerry within the County of Montgomery. We are sure that old
Howel (his Father) his Inheritance which he sold in Kuwcklas, could never had
made such Purchases and Buildings.

Itinerary way.
Being thus encouraged and warmed to the work, he rides his Itinerary Stages
throughout to some purpose, and what a rout he and his Tunto made of all the
Ministers in Wales (except some few, who either fed them, depended upon them,
or had some Correspondence with them) we make no question but some abler Pens
will shortly set forth to the uttermost.

However, because he is now under File, give us leave briefly to Limn forth the
manner of their Propagation.

And manner of Propagation.
The great Cabal of the Itinerants instruction was to render the Ministers
persons odious, and their Calling in its very basis to be Antichristian, and
so in it self unlawful and useless, and none to be protected or Countenanced
by the Civil Magistrate. This without any greater Engine was instrumental enough
to batter and eject them out of their Freeholds and Being, without any respect
either to their fidelity and ability in their Teachings, or sobriety in their
Conversations. And in what a narrow straight they were, either to be wholly
deprived of all subsistence for the maintenance of themselves and Families, or
turn Apostataes to their Ordination, we leave to that most ingenous and modest
Censure of a Noble Member of the House, in his Answer to a Narrative of the
Cause and manner of the Dissolution of the last Parliament.

2. Though he and the Itinerants cried down Tithes as Mosaical Ceremonies and
Antichristian, yet he and they, or such as are their Agents, have had the
disposing of above Forty Thousand pounds a year in Tithes, Gleabs,
impropriations, Rents reserved, and other ecclesiastical benefices and
promotions, for above four years last past in the thirteen Counties of Wales,
far surmounting the sum of One Hundred and Threescore Thousand pounds, and as
yet to our knowledge unaccounted for, and what account is given to the State
for the Tenths, since the Act of Propagation of all ecclesiastical promotions
in Wales, we refer to the better knowledge of that worthy Gent. Mr. Baker,
Master of the first fruits Office.

3. That notwithstanding all this great Revenue by them received, there are
above seven hundred Parishes in the thirteen Counties unsupplied with any
Ministers, who (we are confident) dare own the charge, and you may ride ten or
twenty miles on the Lords day, where there is twenty Churches, and not one door
opened, and for most of the Itinerants, they are such ignorant persons, that
they can neither read, nor understand English, nay some of them more scandalous
than any of the ejected Ministers, and all of them in their Principles and
Doctrines destructive to Government.

But we will not digress from Mr. Vavasor: His Preaching.
The Asp receives her poison from the Viper, and what he spits these lick up;
We shall give you an account of some of his base and spurious Doctrines, that
by his you may understand theirs.

Now his chief work is to preach and advance Christ's Personal Reign here on
Earth, false Doctrines
being the Ancient Error and Fopperie of the Chiliasts or Millenaries, hissed
and exploded out of the Church of Christ in the very Infancy thereof. And what
is his end and intention therein, may be conspicuous and apparent (as his wild
discourses against the present Government under his Highness Protection, have
evidently discovered) to be the Destruction of the Magistracy of England, as
well as the Ministry of Wales.

At Welsh Pool, a Town in Mountgomery-shire, he taught. That Christ was to
reign a thousand years here upon the Earth. And that he was to sit ne^t unto
him Behold the intolerable pride of this Creature to extol himself upon the
right hand of his Creator. We should think that our Saviors reprof to Zebedees
sons should correct if not satisfy this Ambition; Sobriety should have ushered
him to beseech a place at the Footstool of his Tribunal, and in Charity to give
some room for the poor despised Ministers, to appear with him, though here as
yet they found neither Comfort nor mercy at Mr. Vavasors hands.

At Llandetty in Brecknock shire he preached, That Christ was already come in
the flesh the second time, and that at London a Girl of twelve years old, told
her mother, that she saw him in the Chamber; and said, that a Godly man related
this unto him, and knew it to be true, and they that heard him that day should
shortly see him too.

And one John Davies his Proselyle and Journey man in Mountgomery shire, having
received the same by Tradition from him, told very lately to a justice of Peace
of that Country, That he had seen Christ, and was to go the next morning to see
him again: And being demanded by the Justice, what manner of man he was,
replied, that he was a little old man, with a small gray beard.

And so Mr. Williams an Itinerant of Mr. Vavasors approbation, preached in a
Sermon in Monmouth-shire, That Christ Jesus was such another man as old Rice
Williams of Newport, one of the Commissioners for the Propagation, and that he
had a large gray beard. Thus it seems the Tithes are their God, and the
Propagators that pay them their salaries out of the Tithes are their Christ's.

At the same Town of Pool Mr. Powel openly delivered before the Bailiff, and
the rest of that Corporation, That let them Repent, or not Repent, both Priest
and People were all damned, And did then absolutely declare, That Christ had no
Church either in England or Wales, but what he and his associats had gathered
for him. And in a disputation with Mr. A.G. in Keington in Herefordshire, he
was driven to that pinch as to maintain, That the Nation of England was a
Nation of Unbelievers; And that the words of Christ in 13th. Chap. of Matthew,
concerning the tares and drag-net were contrary to other Scriptures.

At Manavon in Mountgomery he taught, That all our Forefathers were damned,
blasphemously abusing that place of Scripture to confirm his uncharitable
opinion (I Cor. 15.18.) Then they also which are fallen asleep in Christ are
perished. A wretched and malicious Gloss, to acknowledge our forefathers to
die in the Faith of Christ Jesus, and the glorious hope of his Resurrection,
and yet that they shall eternally perish: Whereas the Apostle in that Chapter
by convincing Arguments confirms the Doctrine of our Resurrection by the
Resurrection of Christ, which he had fully proved both by forcible Reasons and
also by Signs and Wonders, which if not true as he had preached, then the
Corinthians vainly believed Paul's Preaching, and dying in the Faith of Christ
would be ineffectual unto them, If they who died therein Eternally perished.

At Baryw in the same County he taught, That Baptism was never ordained for
the remission of sins, 1 Pet. 3 21. Tit. 3 5. Act 22 16.
contrary to several places of Scripture, which affirms, that Baptism saves us,
that it is the Lavar or washing of Regeneration, which though all this be
Analogically spoken, being the Obsignation of the thing signified by the sign,
yet in the true use thereof the Exhibition and Perception of the sign and thing
is conjoined. But this Mr. Vavasors Ordinary use to vilisie that sacred
Ordinance, as he always does by his Common recital of that place of Scripture,
Gal. 5.6, 15.
In Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision,
but a new Creature, which he and all his followers scornfully apply to the
Contempt of Baptism, In which place is only meant, That the Jews called to the
Faith of Christ after their Circumcision, gain nothing by their former
Circumcision, nor the unbelieving Gentiles being called, lose any thing by
their uncircumsion, for seeing in Christ the Circumcision is spiritual, there
is no need of carnal.

At Guilsfield in the same County he preached, That Christ was not the Redeemer
of the World, and being reprehended for his blasphemy, answered, that they
should not always observe what he said, for he that speaks much (said he) must
speak some things amiss.

And how ridiculous and obseene diverse of his passages have been, 13 His
obscenity. Trefeglwys, Llanbryn-Main, Machynleth.
we are very loath to deliver to chaste Ears, yet we must beseech your Patience
to these true Relations.

In diverse parish Churches in Mountgomery shire he delivered in his Sermon
this story, That they were many in Company traveling toward London, and one
of them rid on an Ambling gray horse, and meeting another Company, where there
was a Gentleman that rid on the like colored pacing horse, when the one gray
Horse met the other, they stood still, and made much the one of the other, and
would not part Company; even so the Saints of God know one another by their
paces and colors, and will not part Company the one from the other.

And how modest the Gentleman is, may appear by his Obscene expressions in a
Sermon preached at Llunddynam in the same Country, where being willing to
justify a Sister, that had slipped, becomes her Compurgator in these words,
That he called God to witness, He never saw a Saint Occupy or F -- a Saint,
which he explained thus in the Welsh tongue, Yr ywf in Galow Duw in did, ni
welais i yr'ioed Saint in mined ar Saints.

And one Richard Powell Vicar of Llanigon in Brecknock shire, one of the
Approvers in the Act for the Propagation of the Gospel, and Itinerant in that
County (receiving the same by tradition from Mr. Vavasor) has usually
delivered in his Sermons both in Herefordshire and Brecknock shire, Concerning
the manner of Christ's Spirit entering into man, that he could not use any
sitter Comparison, than, as the seed of Man entered into the body of a Woman, so
the Spirit of Christ entered into his head. And the same Richard Powell
maintained, That God was not Creator of the World, as was proved against him by
sufficient understanding Witnesses, before a worthy, and godly Justice of Peace
of the County of Brecon. And often delivered in his Sermons, That the Lords
Prayer is a rotten Prayer. This man is a most scandalous, ignorant, covetous,
deboyst fellow; and marched before his Parishoners and others against Sir
William Waller's forces when they were at Abergavenny, reading the Letany out
of the Common Prayer, which he carried in his hands; and yet was made an
Approver in the Act, and receives Tith in kind from his three neighboring
Parishes.

Mr. Vavasor Powell, to justify another Sister of his own Congregation who had
wilfully drowned her self in Draw-well near the Welsh Pool, delivered
publicly in his Sermon there, That she was a Saint in Heaven, and they who
thought otherwise were wicked persons, and accursed; That she came to her end
by the Motion of the Holy Spirit, and that it happened oftentimes when the Saints
are filled with the Spirit, they run into great Pools, instead of green
Meadows, and so embracing their Savior they make an End of their Lives by
divine providence, and there souls are Eternally saved. Surely this Spirit
possessed Mr. Vavasor both at Christ-Church and Black-friars, which brought him
three times into Capt. Cumpton's hands, one of the Messengers attending His
Highness Council. And brought (as we understand) a Gentleman of this City very
lately to strech, unless his man (like Naamans servants) had been more
careful of his Masters neck than himself. Thus the Circumcellians of old, when
they could not solicit others, took pains with their own throats.

We must not forget his Compassion and Charity toward men, 14 His Incompassion
and especially toward the Ejected Ministers of Wales, and their Children.

In Llanyrvil in Mountgomery shire he taught, That it were a good deed to cut
the throats of all the Old Ministers: And had it not been for the charity of
some few of the Saints (as he termed them) it had been performed long ago. And
to a Gentleman in Red-Castle that petitioned him for relief and maintenance for
the poor Children of the Ejected Ministers, he answered, That their heads
should be dashed against the Walls as Babylonish brats, and so their portions
should be paid.

He preaches and inveigheth most bitterly here in London against Tithes, but
how vigorously he levies his salary in Wales, by countenancing his Agents and
Farmours to gather Tithes, may truly appear by several of his false passages
which are too tedious to relate; He pretended that the Godly party in Wales
were in danger of their lives, and that two and forty of them were slain at the
hearing of the Ejected Ministers Sermons; and so since the Dissolution of the
former Parliament, by these false and abominable sarmises, he obtained a
Commission for the raising of Forces, wherewith he did insultingly tyrannize
over the poor Inhabitants of that Nation; witness his insolent carriage
against the last years High Sheriff of the County of Mountgomery; the taking of
Mr. Owens of Machynleth out of his house, and binding him to the Great
Sessions; his seizing upon Mr. Herbert of Dolegrog without any cause at all,
which so affrighted the Gentlewoman his Wife, that she miscarried of a Child;
besides the imprisoning of the diverse of the Ejected Ministers for discharging
their duties in preaching and maintaining the truth of the Gospel of Christ
Jesus.

And with these new raised Troops enforced the people to pay their Tithes, as
evidently appears in Mr. Ralph Kinnastons Case, a Gentleman of very good
worth and quality in that County, whose fields with his armed Troops he
forcibly entered into, forced the payments of his Tithes, contrary to former
Orders, and unless the mildness and wisdom of the Gentleman had prevented his
fury, it might have been the cause of great mischief and effusion of Blood, but
I believe a Bil of indictment has been preferred in the great Session already
against his Caesar Borgias and his Myrmidons for a Riot.

15 His Cruelty.
If we should relate unto you his Pride, appressions and Cruelty, it would take
up too large a volume.

He preached at Welsh Pool publicly (where finding that few took notes of his
Sermons) That they were proud fellows, and despisers of Gods word, affirming
that if King David were then present the holy Prophet would write his Sermon:
And yet contrary to this Doctrine, at Christ Church and Blackfriers in London
he fell roughly upon an ejected Welsh Minister, whom he supposed to have taken
notes of his Sermons, being jealous of his own Errors, and afraid to have his
seditious speeches and falsehood truly displayed.

At Guilsfield aforesaid he publicly delivered these words, ( viz.) That in
respect they had not subm^tted themselves to the Saints (meaning himself and
his Congregation) they should be in a short time all destroyed with the Sword,
and that the War horses should wade up to their rains of their bridles in the
blood of the said Parishioners, and of the other Enemies of the Saints, and
doubted not but he should live to see the same performed.

16 His Oppression
His proceedings against Mr. Hugh Lloyd in Brecknock is an evident testimony of
his unspeakable oppression, whom (being a Gentleman of good estate and quality,
and sometimes a Justice of Peace of his County) he arrested in that
Corporation, imprisoned, and kept in, without bail or mainprise, until he paid
him One Hundred pounds, and this upon a bare Arrest, and none durst bail him.

17 His faithless dealing.
And his treacherous dealings with Mr. Humphrey Jones, late Bailiff of the Town
of Welsh Pool (which I often mentioned) who is a very discreet Gentleman, and
of good parts and abilities, are well worth your Observation; He being a
constant hearer of the word, a godly man, and frequently taking both the notes
of his Sermons, and of other reverend Divines who were afterward ejected,
denying Mr. Powell the Copies which he requested, that he might the better
frame most destructive Articles against them; the Gentleman (perhaps) not so
much out of any tenderness toward them, as out of his respects toward him,
being unwilling to make manifest such sad stories and Blasphemies as were there
recorded out of his own Sermons, did (as that renowned Constantine the great
dealt with the Articles against the Nicene Bishops) commit them to the fire,
which Mr. Vavasor took in such high contempt, that he maliciously framed
threescore Articles to be exhibited the next great Sessions against him, But
Mr. Jones being as provident as himself had compiled the like, to countermine
and repel his; Mr. Powell being certified therewith, did by the mediation of
Friends agree with the Gent. and that neither of them should exhibit Articles
against the other; but when Saturday the last day of the Sessions came, and the
Jury being discharged, Mr. Vavasor contrary to his promise and agreement, being
maliciously bent to render the Gent. more scandalous, and defamed, before the
honorable Bench and Country, produced (though ineffectually) several witnesses
against him, and amongst the rest one of his own Congregation, a poor man of
Guilsfield, living upon the Alms of the said Parish, whom he had kept the whole
week in Town, and fed with Venison: the fellow being thus instructed and fitted
for his purpose, swore some matters of Fact against Mr. Jones, whereof he said
he was Eyewitness, and afterward (upon the Gentleman's request) being
demanded by the Judge, whether he knew the man, he confessed, he did not,
though the Gentleman was present at the Bench: The Honorable Judge checked Mr.
Powell, for countenancing such wicked and unworthy proceedings, whereby Mr.
Jones was vindicated in the face of the Country, and what a faithless and
malicious man Mr. Powell is, we leave to the consideration of all honest men.

Mr. Powells Prosecution against a poor Dyer of New Town is most fresh and
notorious: This Dyer having (it is confessed lived wickedly with a lewd woman
in that Town, but at last repenting his former courses, was married to an
honest woman, with whom be cohabited very lovingly; This Whore becomes one of
Mr. Powell Congregation, and then challenges a former marriage with the man:
and Mr. Powell did so prosecute the Cause, that upon the bare evidence of the
wicked woman the Dyer was convicted, burnt in the hand, and divorced from his
honest wife, though it had been formerly proved before a Justice of the Peace
that this lewd Woman lay that night (in which she swore that she was married to
the Dyer,) with another Knave. The Judge did not well relish Mr. Powells
earnestness for the Dyers execution, but reproved him for his incivility, and
busying himself with such things as were excentrical to his profession, and
dissonant to his Calling: But the truth is, he was herein, as he is in all
other things so fragmatical and busy, that not one Suit in Law, or any other
difference in those parts where he itinerates, passes his Cognizance, siding
with the one party or other.

I could tell you, How he would have undermined a poor Widow in New Town
(called Widow Rose) from her house, and dwelling, that he might be
commodiously situated as Lord in the heart of the County, but that the
goodness of her Landlord, who would not consent to his wicked motions,
prevented his designs.

18 His Malignancy and sedition.
Lastly, for his Malignancy, and seditious inciting of the people against all
subordinate Magistracy here on Earth under the King of Kings Christ Jesus, his
insufferable expressions for the supplanting and undermining thereof, is a
clear demonstration that he is the firebrand, and incendiary of the Whole
Nation.

At Llandynam he publicly delivered, That he knew not who were the Keepers of
the Liberties of England, more than who were the Church of England, but that he
conceived they were neither the Parliament, nor the Council of State, but
rather the people; and it is his professed opinion, That Magistrates, and
specially Commanders and Officers, have nothing to do, or intermeddle with
Church government. As Ienkyn John Howel (alias, Capt. Ienk: Jones) that great
Clero-Mastix, or persecutor of the Clergy, who is an Approver in the Act for
the Propagation, and an Itinerant in the County of Brecknock, and has at
present sixscore Horse, with Men, Arms, and Ammunition, listed, and ready at
his Command, preaching at the parish of Llandetty where he lives, upon a day
set apart by the Parliament to thank God for the great victory obtained against
the Scots at Dunbar, told his hearers, That successful Warriers were not fit
to reform, nor to meddle with Religion, because they were men of blood; and this
his doctrine he proved by the choice which God made of Solomon to build the
Temple, and by his refusal of David. This was his doctrine, but not a word of
the Victory, nor any of the Victors.

What the aim of the holy man was, the declared Opinion of his friends (who I
am sure are men of the same Principles) concerning the present Government, has
now sufficiently unfolded, by their numerous Congregatings and meetings in
Wales, which requires speedy prevention.

But Mr. Vavasors unparallelled Raptures at Christ-Church and Black friars in
London, At Christ-Church, 18 Dec. 19 at Black-Fryars, 26 Dec. at Christ-Church
are evident and plain testimonies hereof: truly, no good Christian could choose
but be astonished to hear so many sacred places of Scripture miserably wrested
upon his brazen Anvil, for to frame his Engine to level all Magistracy and
Government down to the ground.

We will not rake up his whole Dunghill, but only lightly touch what we have
received by faithful Information.

He spared not His Highness the Lord Protectors Person, or Government.]

Mr. Vavasor, Had you been a true Minister of Christ, and Propagator of his
Gospel, you would have learnt Christ far better. He teaches you, John 19.11.
Act. 23.5. To. 13.1.5
That All Power is given from above; And the Apostle out of Moses, That you
should not speak evil of the Ruler of Gods people, But be subject unto the
higher Powers, not only for wrath, but also for Conscience sake. You should not
have Cursed, but followed St. Paul's Rule, Tim. 3.
Powered out supplications, and prayers, and have given thanks for him, That
under him you might lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and
honesty. For I must tell you, if you had been but in Babylon, the Prophet
Jeremiah would have taught you another Lesson, Jer, 29 7.
To pray for the peace of that City, for in the peace thereof shall ye have
Peace.

But you are the Diviner spoken of by that Prophet in the 8 ver. v. 8.9.


Who prophecy falsely to the people in the Lords name, whom he has not sent:

He said, That many reigned now as Kings, without the advice of the Saints, but
the Lord would bring them down again. And that this Power was not of God, and
should shortly and suddenly be destroyed; to prove this, he abused that place
of Scripture, 1 Cor. 4.8. You reigned as Kings without us.

Had you but truly weighed the Apostles drift, and meaning, in those words, you
would not have so wrested the words of Gods Spirit.

But see the Justice of God (dum vis esse praedo, fies praeda) while you would
smite another, you stab your self with your own weapon to the very heart. Let
us both examine the Text. The Apostle in the 10th v. of the preceding Chapter
speaks to some Teachers, 1 Cor. 3.10.
that Arrogated to themselves to be Pastors of Congregations, and seemed to
succeed him, planting where others labored: yet they should not presume after
their own fancy, upon gold to superstruct hay, as you do, in your own
Inventions, Prophetical raptures, and vain Revelations.

Observe moreover, how that in the Chapter which you cited, ver. 4. you are
wished not to be wise above that which is written; that is none should by his
own vain discourses, as you do, adulterate the sense of the Scriptures: For
what Gifts you have, they are received, v. 7.
and it is God that makes you to differ. Then the Apostle does indeed speak
Ironically concerning such as you are, as though he had said, v. 8.
Though you Persuade your selves, that you are in a happy condition, and want
nothing of spiritual gifts, extolling your selves above the Ministers of
Christ, as Kings, they being imprisoned, despised, and ignominiously exposed to
Misery and Scorn; yet what does he in this, but tacitly and modestly reprove
you? as the subsequent words will evince, I would to God ye did reign; that is,
You think you reign, but it is only in outward show, not truly and really.

Good Mr. Vavasor, what Application can you make of this Text to this present
Government?

It is a Text that hints, and touches you to the quick. It is you that Reign as
Kings, being full and rich, but the Handwriting on the plaster of the wall,
has now (we believe) changed your countenance, and troubled your thoughts. Let
us entreat you to read that Scripture, Dan. 5.25, 26, 27. You have applied this
part of Gods word, as you did another place out of the prophecy of Isaiah as
unhappily framed and fitted for your own throat as the other was, Isa. 14.12.
How art thou fallen from heaven O Lucifer Son of the Morning? etc. for thou
have said in thine heart, etc. I will ascend above the height of the Clouds, I
will be like the most high, etc.

We will be more modest, than to apply the Scripture according to your
exposition in the Pulpit.

But good Mr. Vavasor, we shall apply the following verse to your self, Thou
shall be brought down to the sides of the pit of your own mistakes.

The word Lucifer does not (as you suppose, and as you explained to your
Congregation there in Christ-Church) signify the Devil, Though it be true of
you according to the Proverb, Thou art as proud as Lucifer. Venus one of the
Planets is called Lucifer or the Morning Star, that brings on the daylight, we
beseech you to confer in the Original (because you often boast of your several
Languages) the 13th of this Prophet v. 10 with Job 31, 26. And Christ our
Savior is also called the Morning Star, the Dayspring, Luc. 2.78. 2 Pet.
1.19. Rev. 2.28.

But we suppose scarce any of your Neoterick Expositors comment as you do, and
few of the Fathers unless by way of allusion.

The true meaning is to represent the Conspicuous estate of the Caldean King
and Empire shining as bright as the day star in the sky. See Diodati, and the
late Engli^h observation of your reading. But you said then you would confirm
that place with the like in Timothy. I must tell you the Hue and Cry is almost
ceased, and now we must take it up again. You are caught, you are caught,
(Virus dum vomis ipse vores) your place in Timothy is, 1 Timothy 3.6. We must have
the Patience to read the words as you delivered them, with crying Victoria. Not
a Novice, lest being lifted up with pride he fall into the condemnation of the
Devil. Your Comment was, 1 Timothy 3.6
that lest he being lifted up with Pride, fall into the condemnation of the
Devil. There you said, the Effect is taken for the Cause, Condemnation for Sin.

So a Novice, and who is he? (...), one newly come to the Faith, not as yet
well grounded, perhaps one Newly Baptized or newly entered into the first
Elements and Principles of Divinity.

What must such a one not do? v. 1.
He must not desire the Office of a Bishop.

Then your Application of Lucifer in the words of Isaiah must be this, That you
who appeared as Lucifers, shining as bright as Day Stars in the Skies (seeing
you are but Novices (not Milites Emeriti) neither well grounded (some of you
not as yet Baptized) nor going on to Perfection, Heb. 6.1.
having not as yet attained the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, being
advanced to that high degree that you have waxed proud, having obtained the
office of Bishops, and with Diotrephes treading under foot the Ministers of
Jesus Christ, and being fallen into the same Condemnation of the Devil
whereinto he was fallen, which was (as one very well observes) the Calumniating
of his Brethren, you and your Brethren worthily deserve the name of Lucifers in
your own sense, being such Novices by your own confirmation, and fallen into
your Customary sins the Calumniating and traducing of the true Ministers of
Christ Jesus.

Esa. 14.15
That there is no question but you shall be brought down to the side of the pit.

Gideon
Your Example of Gideon for the discovery of Pride by the desire of Rule and
Dominion over others, Jud. 8.22.
is altogether as impertinent as the former Texts were, whether you aimed at
Persons or Governments.

You said, Gideon was a good man, a great Commander, and obtained many
victories agaisnt the Enemies of God, he had many brave Sons, and much honored
by the people, but they came not to be Colonels in a year. That the people of
God would by all means make Gideon King, Come rule thou over us, both thou and
thy Son, and thy Sons Son also, for thou have delivered us from the hand of
Midian.

But Gideon would not accept of the Government, he would not v. 23
Rule over them, neither should his Son Rule over them.

Your Example herein cannot hold, because he would not Rule, therefore others
should not.

Gideon did not refuse the Government because they desired him, but because
their desire was not regulated by Gods Rule; they preferred the Sword of Gideon
before the Sword of the Lord, but the Sword of the Lord and the Sword of Gideon
delivered them from the hands of Midian. Gideon refused their Election and
Choice, because it trenched upon the Prerogative Royal of the Lord, and the
Choice of Gideon in their sense was the Rejecting of the Lord.

But Mr. Vavasor you must observe that Judges were then raised by God in
Commiseration of the Affliction of his People, in an Extraordinary way, by the
special motion of his Spirit, fitting them for some Particular service, and
that immediately, and in an instant to be put in Execution, but not for any
settled Course of Government to be continued by Succession, but as the State and
Condition of his people did require it, still reserving the Prerogative in
himself, which was not to be entrenched upon, until according to his promises
a Choice and Succession should be Revealed unto them, which in its due time was
accomplished.

The aim of your Example is, That as Gideon refused to Rule, so you would have
none others, but that All should Reign as Kings, and Rule the Nation as Saints,
whose inheritance the Earth is; but how far herein you dishonor God, abuse the
Saints, debase and vilify Christ's Kingdom, and adulterate his blessed truth,
God in his due time may reveal unto you, and inlighten your perverse judgment.
We are assured the Lord has, and (doubt not) does reign, where Kings or
Protectors do rule and govern, the one being not inconsistent (because
subordinate) to the other. Nay we know the Lord did promise the Israelites a
King; Deuteronomy. 17 17 18 Genesis 17 6. Pro. 8.15 16. Rev. 6 15.
And to Abraham that Kings should comes out of his loins. And it is his
Ordinance, that by him they shall reign, and Princes decree Justice.

And his blessed Truth, contrary to your vain thoughts confirms, That Kings of
the Earth, and great men, and rich men, and chief Captains, and mighty men, and
bondmen, and freemen, shall continue till the great day of the wrath of the
Lord, which is the end of the World.

Your Expressions concerning Gideons Sons savor more of your wonted virulency
than of truth. Gideons Son


You said that he had many brave Sons, and were much honored by the People]
How brave they were the Scripture does not relate; but we read that he had
seventie by diverse wives, and Abimelech, (who slew them all but the youngest)
by his Concubine. They could not be as yet very valiant, as plainly appears in
the discomfiture of the Midianites, Jud. 8, 20.
when Iether his firstborn (being a very youth) was fearful to draw his sword
to slay Zeba and Zalmanna. If Gideon had made any such to be Colonels and
Commanders, we should not have commended his judgment: But that men of age,
valor, and discretion (having hazarded their Lives and Fortunes both by Sea
and Land in the Common service) should receive such Military Titles and
Commands as befits their Atchievments, is far less honor than they deserve,
let them be whose Sons you please; and we will assure you far more congruous,
than for Peter to draw his sword, and Ministers for the Propagation, to presume
to be Colonels, Captains, and Commanders, whose valiant service was none
other, but the rooting out of their deadly and professed enemies (the
formidable forlorn hope of the black coats) and gathering Tithes, never daring
to look any other kind of enemy in the face.

But we acknowledge our selves far unworthy to vindicate any man's honor and
reputation.

When you left Gideon, you fell upon his Sons parable ( Judge. 9.9.) which
speaks of the Trees going forth to anoint a King over them, Jotham's parable,
Judge. 9.^ 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
the Olive Tree, the Fig Tree, and the Vine-Tree found their condition to be so
good, that they would not Reign.

But you said you would not meddle with the Bramble.]

We commend you very much therein; for then you would have discovered your own
nature and disposition: But we will spare you that labor, and supply where you
left.

The Bramble is a most fruitless, tearing shrub; fit for nothing, but the
stopping of Gaps, and afterward to be burned: And by the Parable of this
Bramble, Jotham meant, proud and ambitious men, base in birth, wicked in life,
barren in goodness, and cruel in nature; If you examine your heart, you will
find the true Mythologie and moral of this Parable couched in your own breast.

Concerning that place of Amos 6.13. Have we not taken to us Horns by our own
strenght? Certainly, either your Concordance failed you, or your quotations
were false. For the Horns you meant, were in the 1 King. 22.11. you are the
man, that with Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah have made you Horns of Iron,
persuading Ahab and Jehoshaphat to war against Ramoth Gilead, that the valiant
Soldiers may consume one another. Good Sir, let me entreat you to draw in your
Horns, and when you push with them again, to think of your old friends, and
acquaintance.

Having only touched these places of Scriptures, which together with infinite
others, he wrested, and mis-applyed, we shall proceed upon his seditious and
invective Accusations.

Honorable Council, and called their Proclamation A Libel.

Commanders, Officers, and Soldiers of the Army; nay, their wives and families
escaped not Tongue. And told the Swordmen in general, That the Spirit of God
was departed from them; that heretofore they had been precious and excellent
men, but that their Parks, and new houses, and gallant Wives, had choked them
up.]

Well done, (Mr. Vavasor) you plead well for them who spent so much blood for
your Liberties and Protection: I am sure they deserved a better Character at
your hands, if they had not fought with more Courage than you did at Worcester,
you had ere this time lost your life, as well as your man did then your money,
by your base and Cowardly running away. If the Spirit of the Lord had forsaken
them, the Censure was too uncharitable; but without doubt he went not from them
to speak unto you: And we believe you had wished that your Fee'farm Rents,
Propagation-moneyes, New house at Kerry, 1 Kings 22, 24.
and a pint of Mrs. Quarrels hot waters had first choked up your Railing,
before you had thus traduced their worth.

That they had All revolted, and fallen from the Lord, and forsaken Fatherless;
wishing them to repent of their perjury, against their former Declarations,
Protestations, Remonstrances, Promises, and Vows, specially at Tripolie Heath:
And to return.]

But Mr. Vavasor, You must consider that all their Promises and Vows included
Conditions, and therefore might be disobligated. Have you never learnt that
Rule?

That the Obligation cease when you have the Request or Consent of the most
part of those, for whose benefit you have obliged your self.

If you had understood to whom their Promises had References, and for whose
benefit they were undertaken, then you had acknowledged, that by Request or
Consent, they might be (as they are) disobligated without perjury. But you have
vented here the seed of Sedition to the height, by endeavoring to convince
their Consciences as guilty of perjury, and so to engage the Soldiers to
imbrue their hands in their own blood, by renting their unity, and denying
their Obedience to their superior Officers and Commanders under the present
Government and Protection.

Could Absalom have dealt more treacherously with David his Father? Or Nero
more inhumanely, either in burning Rome, and translating his wickedness upon
the innocent Christians? or in renting the bowels of his own dear Mother?

They have more cause to Cry unto you for to Repent and Return. Highness
Chaplains, and great Vniversity-men, who have (as he said) had Thousands a year
to set up this New Government, shall not escape him.] Gentlemen, we know you
not; but if you had any hand therein, we wish that your Thousands were Millions
unto you. Our Pen has been too much dawbed in his filth, for to presume either
to vindicate your innocence, or set forth your goodness, (for certainly, if Mr.
Vavasor and his party had been suffered to go on in their evil Designs, they
had soon destroyed both Magistracy and Ministry, who falsely pretending (as
Saints triumphant on Earth) to Rule infallibly by a Divine and extraordinary
right, would consequently under that Notion claim right to p^ssesse all men's
Properties, as well as Govern them, and judge none meet to publish the Gospel,
but such as were principled in their ways.) We understand you are ingenuous,
and truly Godly Men, bred up in the Schools of the Prophets; God bless your
Endeavors in advancing Christ's spiritual Kingdom here on Earth, in reviving
the dying statutes of your Universities to their former vigor, that the Arts
and Sciences may flourish again in your Schools; And that both your Eyes may so
Recover their former Perspicuity to Continue such Seminaries of Learning and
Religion, as to furnish this distressed Nation with golden Plants, that -- Uno
avulso non deficit alter
Aureus and Ramus --


Esaias 34.14, 15.
One may still bud out of the stem of the other; That these Satyrs may not cry
to their fellows, nor the Scritch-Owls find a place of Rest with us; That this
great Owl may not make her nest, and lay, and hatch, and gather her shadow
among us any more: Bat that your bright Suns may descrie these Glowworms, and
dispel these. Bats, that they may gather into their Caves again.

Lawyers his ancient friends, saying, That the Judges (those Carnal Crew) were
brought in by the Soldiers to set up this Government] will nothing serve your
turn but still to undermine these Marble pillars of the Nation, they have been
the Common mark of your Pasquils, and invectives since the Ejection of your
Country Ministers, that you may level the Law as well as the Gospel. How often
have you termed them Thieves and Pick-purses, And that there was not past two
honest Lawyers in the whole Nation, as you publicly delivered in your Sermon
at Llansanfred in Radnorshire? And do you not remember how in your Sermon, at
the last great Sessions held for the same County, when you had sufficiently
vilified their Persons and Profession, you desired them not to imitate the
Devil their Master who always at his departing made clean work and swept all
away? certainly you think, that they are troubled with the same Devil, that
haunted you about the Welsh Pool, whereby distracted you were for a good while
Mewed up in your Chambe^. We could wish you to be as charitable toward them,
as they have been favorable toward you in your former indictments, and
beseech you to consider with your self, if you be left once again to the Mercy
of the Law, as (we believe) you will, Up goes Mr. Vavasor. To conclude, He
would pawn and hazard his life and his Ministry, That this Power shall
suddenly be destroyed: And that this was revealed unto him, as the Dissolution
of the former Parliament.] for the pawning of your life, we think, as you have
already forfeited it, so you are now weary enough of it, and believing that God
has numbered your Kingdom and finished it: you mould gladly become one of
Petilians Martyrs who canonized Judas for a Saint, Dan. 5 26
We know very well, you would rather have died gloriously in this City of
London, than to be ignominiously picked into your own Country as you were.
Parliament Joan handled you more roughly in White Hall yard at your departure,
Laying hold upon your skirts with terms befitting your spirit, That you may
humbly supplicated to be rescued from her Claws.

For the pawning of your Ministry, you may well expose that to the Broaker,
which was never your own, unless with the Egyptian whore (Potiphers Wife) you
pawn poor Joseph's garment, which he left in her hand to preserve his own
chastity, and fidelity to his Master.

But you say, That it was revealed unto you, That this Power shall suddenly be
destroyed.] for that, We leave it to Gods gracious Providence and
determination, For it is he that puts down one, and sets up another: But
what manner of Prophet, and Diviner you are, may soon appear by these strange
predictions: You Prophesied above two years past in your Sermons in Wales, That
Tithes should no more be paid, and above three years ago, That there should
never appear any Enemy more in the Land, And here in White Hall chapel you
Prophesied with great confidence, That all the Statues in that Garden should be
shortly drawn down by public Authority; And in all these (you must confess)
your Spirit has fowly deceived you: but to satisfy all unbiased Judges, I
shall end with a story of your own invention.

When you were in some part of Worcestershire where some of the late Kings
party lay in the field, You sent a Messenger, over night, to give you
intelligence of the event of the battle, and being informed before you went to
bed, that they were discomsited, you wrote a Letter directed to your self,
discovering the truth, and manner of the fight, and delivered this Letter to
your man, commanding him to take horse the next morning, and ride three or four
miles from the place you quartered, and to return with speed, and deliver the
Letter unto you, as you came out of your Pulpit, being to preach there the next
morning: In your Sermon you encouraged the People, assuring them, that it was
revealed unto you that night, that the Enemy should be destroyed: And wished
them never to believe that you were a Prophet sent from the Lord, unless they
should be very shortly certified thereof, nay you hoped, before you parted from
that place; And true it was, Your Man met you at the Church-door, and delivered
to you the Letter, being well instructed for the particulars thereof: I hope
this wonderful prediction confirms that you have an illuminated Spirit: but
herein was the Mischance; Your man mistaking your own, took another Gentleman's
Horse, who being much abused (by the wretched Rider) discovered your cheat.
Thus you are a foolish Prophet, like a Fox in a Desert, you have seen a vain
vision, you have spoken lying Divinations, because you have sedused my people.
Ezech. 13.3, 4, 7, 10.

And now, lest that according to your wonted boastings (being returned to your
Congregated, and Listed Troops in Wales) you should triumph that you have
gloriously past throughout all your troubles before his Highness and his
Council; As you thanked God in Christ-Church, That you escaped the bands of the
Court Catchpoles (Terms little befitting The Councils Messengers, who deserved
far better at your hands, for your Civil and Free entertainment) We beseech
them to believe your own expressions, delivered after your first enlargement in
the same Pulpit, That you were accounted by them but a frantic, fanatic, and
mad man, possessed with an evil Spirit, and under the power of darkness: We
must confess you were not taken for any other kind of man among the ingenuous
sort of people in your own Nation: And it was the great Providence of God that
he has been pleased by your Carriage here in London, to discover to his
Highness the Lord Protector, and the Honorable Council, the Truth of your mad
and malicious Spirit, whereby they may truly understand the sad condition of
those Ministers, who have been ejected and persecuted by your means, and of the
seduced people who are over-swayed and mis-guided by your turbulent and cruel
disposition, having such influence upon all those places of Wales, where you
had any power, that there is not any one in Military, Civil, or Ecclesiastic
Authority, or office, but such as condescended to your principles.

But we know that we have long wearied you, with tracing the filth of this
sent: There is neither Parish nor place in Wales, nor in this honorable City
of London, but may be a Remembrancer either of his Errors, or Blasphemies, or
Obscaenities, or Cruelties, or Oppressions, or Seditions, That we dare boldly
say, He may be a true Parallel to the grosest Heretics of old, And future
Sharks shall be but as Apes to imitate his Villainies.

And that you may have some intermixture of his Sweet mirth with his Sour
passions, we shall endeavor to recompense your patience with a taste of this
Harmonious Hymn sung in his Congregation at Christ-Church, together with an
Antiphona answering thereunto, And so close up all with a true description of
his Propagation in Wales.

18 December. 1653. His Hymn at Christ-Church.
TO Christ our King, let us praise sing,
who is our Savior dear,
Who is our Protector, and our Rock,
who will come, and soon appear
To humble his, and try their hearts,
And make them clean and pure,
To set his Kingdom upon Earth,
Which ever shall endure:
His Saints shall reign with him on Earth,
And great ones then shall bow,
The Battle, and the Battle-ax,
And men of War shall know
That he will arise, and he will rule,
And their power will fall,
And Christ our great Commander, He
Shall be our General.
Have Lord, come quickly down,
Thy Saints, do wait, and pray,
And men would saign, if they knew how,
Thy Prophets kill and slay:
But they shall live, and eke stand up,
And give their Testimony
Against the Monarchs of the Earth,
That sit, and reign on high.
THe Antiphona thereunto.
THe Devil's your King, his praise you sing,
His Spirit leads you here,
Who is your Protector, and your Rock,
And in You does appear.
It Is he exalts, and lifts your hearts,
To make you his most sure,
To set his Kingdom upon Earth,
Which shall not long endure:
His Saints shall reign with him in Hell,
And to him they shall bow,
The Battle, and the Battle-ax,
And men of war do know,
Though he be up, and his does rule,
Yet his Power will fall,
Since Satan your good Master, He
Is your great General.
The Lord will come in his due time,
His Saints for to preserve,
And all your lying Prophets slay,
Who from his Word do swerve.
His Word shall stand, his Saints shall live
To give their Testimony
Against false Teachers of the Earth,
Who strive to Reign on high.
A true Description of Mr. Vavasor Powells, and his Itinerants Propagation in
Wales.
WHat? Propagation, and root out all,
Then if you please, her Extirpation call,
Like Lucifer, that is styled a Morning star,
And yet in Hel's the blackest Fiend by far;
If then of her you will have a true Relation,
She Is the Abaddon in the Revelation,
That Apollyon, that all thing destroys,
That Epidemick Plague that Church annoyes;
That flaming Dragon, that did latel'assail,
To sweep the Stars down with his fiery tail;
That Wormwood that imbitters Sea and Springs,
And from the pit great Swarms of Locusts brings:
She was the Church-Granado, tore, and rents,
Religion, Faith, Works, and the Sacraments;
That Indian Herican that fiercely tears
The Spouses ship, while that to Heaven she stears:
She talks of Christ, like Cheaters in a throng
To pick men's purses sings a Godly Song;
And Herod-like feigning to adore the Babe,
Through Church-mens sides gives him a deadly stab:
Thus Religion proved to be ^he Cloak
Under whose shroud thousands of Frogs did croak,
With Jeroboams Priests they filled their hand,
And then like Pharaohs plagues infect the land:
Jerusalem and Sions glory razes,
Mounts Calves at Dan, and Bethels higher places,
Which bellowed like an Amsterdamian Bull
Nonsense and Blasphemy whole Pulpi^s full.
Perhaps you will itch to know the stock and root
From whence these Branches of Propagation shoot:
They Are hatched in Hell, Be'lzebub is their Sire,
Atheism their Mother, Nurse infernal fire:
Their Offsprings are Schisms, Sects, and Heresy,
Destruction, Sacrilege, and Symony;
Their Maid Hypocrisy, her daily dresses,
Shows of Godliness, and such like tresses,
Which she from Satan's Wardrope stole by night,
While they do Act good Angels parts of light:
These Frogs and Locusts wait upon her train,
By sacred Ruins thinking all to gain;
And hoping when Christs-Doves were dispossessed,
Scritch-Owles, and Zim, and Jim might build their nest:
They Cried down learned Athens, and that light,
That did destroy their Gloe-worms in the night,
While her bright Suns did glister in the Sky
Their Bats and Owls abroad durst never fly:
The Devil at Delphos was struck dumb for fear,
Til Babilas his bones away they bear.
Great is Diana, it is the Silver shrines,
That made them dig so deep in Churches Mines,
The first fool Wales, telling them a story,
That plundring God, makes most for his Glory:
No tithes, no gleabs, no offerings needs he,
Without a Priest, All taught of him shall be.
Thus many were seduced with this false glass,
And made to couch like Issachars Ass
To any burden: that spoke liberty,
Though in effect Souls-murthering slavery.
Former Monopolies went by retale,
The Church and Church men she vends by whole sale.
Empson and Dudleys projects were but toys,
Cranfield and Ingram only made a noise,
Micha'l Mumpesson soared and had a fall,
But Propagation robs our God of all.
And thus by color of this Act of Grace,
All Rights of Church and State they did deface.
But she is expired; a boon me thinks you crave,
To grant her decent burial, and a grave.
Her EPITAPH.
HEre Propagation lies, that did aspire,
Like Phaeton to set the World on fire,
Cried down Order, and Ministerial Call,
And thought to give this Government a fall:
She would have caused the Gentry flock in Swarms;
To beg relief like Cripples without Arms;
And would have made the learned Lawyers plead,
From door to door (poor Souls) for Crusts of Bread.
Lament Itinerants! this Trade is gone,
Take up your Tools, and Occupation;
Silence in Churches; you have long forgot
Your first callings, inheritance and lot.
And (Gentle Reader) because you shall not think that some Itinerants who
lately dyed wanted Epitaphs, we shall entreat you to peruse one, which a dear
friend bestowed upon Mr. L. who lately dyed, and was interred in the City of
Hereford.

In Perpetuam Magistri L: Itinerantis Memoriam
QVi Sermonavit vivus i. e. ex tempore.
sine think, sine thanko,
Mortuus in foveam jacitur i. e. sine tintinnabulis.
, sine clink, sine clanko
2. Sam 17.23. And when Ahithophel saw that his counsel was not followed, he
sadled his ass, and arose, andgat him home to his house, to his City, and put
his household in order, and hanged himself, and died, and was buried in the
Sepulcher of his Father. FINIS.

