A GREAT VICTORY OBTAINED IN THE Kingdom of Scotland BY The Marquis of Argyle,
with 5000. Horse and Foot, against the Rebellious A^my, under the Command of
the Lord Lanerick, with the number killed and taken.

AND The Declaration of the Scots famous Engenier Saundy Hambleton, against
Monro, touching his Design to have fired all the Cole-pits in Northumberland,
and other parts, and his Protestation to join with the English, to cut the
throats of all such barbarous Scots.

ALSO, Monroes retreating into Scotland, and Lieut. Genesis Crumwell, and Col.
Genesis Lambert pursuing them.

LIKEWISE, The Remonstrance of the Kingdom of Scotland, and their Propositions
to the Kingdom of England, concerning the Kings Majesty, their Army, and
Covenant.

COmmanded to be Printed and published, and read in all the Parish Churches,
throughout the said Kingdom.

Signed, A. Ker: Cler.

Imprinted at London, for G H. 1648.

The Resolution of the General Assembly of the Kingdom of Scotland, concerning
the Kings Majesty, and their Army in England.
WHereas the General Assembly of the Kingdom of Scotland, have seriously
weighed and considered of the present Engagement against England, and the
involving of both Nations in a most bloody and intestine War, the said General
Assembly in the name of themselves, and the whole Kingdom do declare.

1. That they search narrowly into the sins which have procured so great
judgments, and so sad an interruption of the work of God, that they examine
themselves, consider their ways, be much in humiliation and prayer, study a
real and practical Reformation, That they also mourn and sigh for the
abominations of the Land, and stand in the gap to turn away the wrath. Amongst
all these fearful sins, the violation of the Solemn League and Covenant,
would not be forgotten, but seriously laid to heart, as that which eminently
provokes the Lord, and procures his judgments to be powered forth not only
upon persons and families, but also upon States and Kingdoms.

Covenant-breakers though in common things, are reckoned by the Apostle in that
Catologue of the abominations of the Gentiles: But among the people of God,
where his great name is interposed, the breach of Covenant even in meaner
matters, such as the setting of servants at liberty provokes the Lord to say,
Behold I proclaim a liberty for you (says the Lord) to the sword, to the
pestilence, and to the famine, and I will give the men that has transgres^dwy
Covenant, and (expressly mentioning Princes) he adds, I will give them into
the hands of their enemies. The History of the Gibeonites, who surreptitiously
procured the Covenant made to spare them, and whom Saul some ages thereafter in
his zeal to the children of Israel and Judah sought to flay, as being cursed
Cananites, evidenced with what vengeance, the Lord follows Covenant-breakers,
whereof there wants not in profane History also both forrigne and domesticke
examples: Therefore let all the inhabitants of the Land of whatsoever rank,
seriously ponder how terrible judgments the violation of a Covenant of
recently made, so advisedly, and in so weighty matters, may draw on, if not
timously prevented by speedy repentance.

2. That they so respect and honor Authority, as that they be not the
servants of men, nor give obedince to the will and authority of Rulers in any
thing which may not cosinst with the word of God, but stand fast in the liberty
wherewith Christ has made them fre, and obey God rather then man.

3. That they carefully avoid the dangerous rocks and snares of this time,
whereby many are taken and broken.

4. That they do not concur in, nor any way assist this present Engagement, as
they would not partake in other men's sines, and so receive of their plagues,
but that by the grace and assistance of Christ they steadfastly resolve to
suffer the rod of the wicked, and the utmost which wicked men's malice can
afflict them with, rather then to put forth their hand to iniquity.

5. That they suffer not themselves to be abused with fair pretenses and
professions usual in the mouths of these that carry on this design, and
often published in their papers, But remember that the foulest actions have not
wanted specious pretenses; And if they who killed the Apostles did both pretend
and intend to do God good service, what marvel that they who engaged against
the Covenant pretend to engage for it.

At the Assemblies 1598, 1599, 1600 It was declared with many vows and
attestations by the King, Statesemen, and Ministers who are aspiring to
prelacy, that they intended no such thing as a change of the Government of the
Kirk or an introducing of Episcopacy, yet they were really doing what they
disclamed and professed not to do. And suppose that some who have an active
hand in carrying on the present public affairs, have no design either to
destroy Religion, or utterly to slieght it: for it cannot be denied, but the
very undertaking of this War, sets the once suppressed Malignants on work
again, and success therein puts them in a capacity to set up according to
their principles, abolished and abjured corruptions, which will be the more
hardly hindered, considering his Majesty's propension, and professed resolution
that way, Especially seeing his Majesty's concessions (though it has been often
desired) have never been plainly declared unsatisfactory by the Parliament.

The Kings negative voice asserted in the papers of the Commissioners of this
Kingdom unto England, which are owned in the late Declaration to the Kingdom of
England, as the sense of this Kingdom, considered in relation to Religion,
makes the danger yet the greater and more palpable, yea, may reach further to
shake and unsettle Religion established in this Land. If to the premises this
be added which is not only often declared, but also demanded: That his Maj. be
brought to one of his houses in honor, freedom, and safety, which may infer
the admitting of his Maj. to the free exercise of his Royal power, before
security had from him for Religion, or application made to him for the same,
who sees not now what hazard Religion runs, certainly greater then a good
intention can salve.

6. That they do not mistake, or misunderstand the nature of the true Reformed
Religion, and of the Government of Jesus Christ, as if thereby either the
prerogative of Kings, Privileges of Parl. or Liberties of Burges, and other
Corporations were any ways hurt or weakened: whereas indeed Religion is the
main pillar and upholder of civil authority, or Magistracy, and it is the
resisting, and not the receiving of the Government of Christ, which has
overturned civil powers. If the Throne be established by righteousness (as we
are plainly taught by the word of God) then it is overthrown by
unrighteousness and iniquity.

7. That they beware of all things which may ensnare their Consciences, as
evil council, evil company, false informations, rash promises, and
especially that they beware of taking any Oaths, subscribing any Bonds, which
may relate to the Covenant and Cause of God, unless such Oaths or bonds be
approved by the general Assembly, or their Commissioners for the public
affairs of the Kirk.

8. That they do not cast away their confidence, nor sink into despair, because
of the present dangers and difficulties, but live by faith, wait for better
times, and continue steadfast as seeing him who is invisible, firmly believing
that such a course as is not of God but against him, will come to naught.

9. To remember, that as the violation of the Covenant by some in England does
not set us free from the observation thereof, and as no Laws nor Authority on
earth can absolve us from so solemn an obligation to the most high God (which
not only has been professed by this Kirk, but in a Petition of the City of
London, and in public Testimonies of many of the Ministry of England So we
are not acquitted and assoiled from the obligation of our solemn Covenant,
because of the troubles and confusions of the times, But that in the worst of
times all those duties whereunto by Covenant we obliege our selves, do still
lie upon us, for we have sworn (and must perform it) concerning that cause and
Covenant wherein we solemnly engaged, That we shall all the days of our lives
Zealously and constantly continue therein against all opposition, and promove
the same according to our power against all Impediments whatsoever. And if
against all lets and Impediments whatsoever, then the altering of the way of
opposition, or of the kind of Impediments does not alter the nature, or tie of
the Covenant, but we are obliged to all the duties therein contained.

Signed A. Ker. Cler. Regist.

By letters from the North it is advertized, That the Marquis of Argyle has
raised a gallant Army, consisting of 5000. Horse and Foot, and has fallen upon
the new levied forces, Commanded by the E. of Lanerick, totally routing and
dispersing the same, and has killed and taken about 1000. of them as our
intelligence says; Whereupon, the Committee of Estates sent post to Monro, to
remand him back, who hearing of the said tidings, vowed reveng upon the
English, calling a Council of War at Morpeth in Northumberland, who resolved to
fire all the Coal-pits in those parts, that so they might augment the price of
Scottish Coal, and take an advantage upon this Kingdom, for their late loss.
But Lieut. Genesis Crumwells horse pursuing them so fast, they chose rather to
bear plunder and pillage, and to shift for their lives, rather then to act any
further design to retard their liberty, now hastening over the River Tweed:
Some report that the Lieut. Genesis will pursue them into Scotland, by the way of
Berwick, and Col. Genesis Lambert by the way of Carlisle, diverse of the County
people go along with them, to retake and bring back their Cattle again; sure
it will be justice to make restitution.

Dear Saundy Hambleton (so called by the Lords) the Scots famous Engineer, has
declared against Monro, saying, That such was his barbarous usage of the
English, that he hoped they would all rise, and cut their throats, protesting
that he would join and engage with them, and leave not a Scot alive, that
should execute such injustice and inhumain Barbarism: Whereupon, he disserted
them, leaving the Artillery, and all the Gim tricks behind.

FINIS.

