A GREAT VICTORY OBTAINED By Colonel NORTON and his horse, and Colonel Jones
and his foot, against Colonel Rayden, from Basing house, near Walneborough
Mill, within half a mile of Odium; where were taken prisoners Ssrjeant Major
Langley, a Mercer in Paternoster Row, that went to Basing, also his escape.
Captain Rawlet that was a Scrivener at Holbern bridge. Lieutenant Rawlet at
Holborne Cunduit. Lieutenant Ivorie a Citizen of London. Ensign Lucas a silk
dier in the Old baly. Ensign Little, a Papist of Winchester. Robinson a
Chyrurgeon to the Marquis of Winchester, a Papist.


Taken besides, 3 Gentlemen of Arms 3 Sergeants, 3 Drummers, 5 Drums, 75
Common men, 100 Arms, some horse, 4 were slain. 10 of our men which were
prisoners in Basing house escaped.
Certified by Gentlemen that were engaged in the service.

Published according to Order.

LONDON Printed by Andrew Coe, Anno Domini, 1644.

A VJCTORY Obtained by Colonel Norton, and Colonel Jones.
ON Saturday the first of June Colonel Nortons Watch of horse faced Basing
house, whereupon, as it was certified by prisoners since taken, Col. Royden a
decayed Merchant of London, who lived at clarken well, and went to Basing to
recrute, being the Governor of that Garrison, with the Lord Marquis of
Winchester a known papists called a Council of War: in Basing house, by
which Council of War it was thus agreed: 1 THat Forces should be drawn out,
and sent forth to fall upon Colonel Norton, and Colonel Jones their quarters at
Odyam. 2 That they should give no quarter, but put all to the sword. 3 That two
men should go along with them, one with a dark Lantern, and the other with
Torches to fire the Town of Odyam. 6 That they should have all the plunder of
the Town for the same. 5 That they should have each man five shillings before
the march.


By these and other proceedings of the Enemy, we may easily see the danger of
their cruel and bloody counsels.

And accordingly they drew out all their horse, and most part of their Foot,
which was able to march; about eleven of the clock at night, none being left in
the house only those which were upon the guard: or notable to march by reason
of sickness.

About two of the clock on Sunday morning, a gentleman of Colonel Nortons
Troop being Centrie, hailed them at Walnbrough Mill, being about half a mile
from Odiam, who giving an Alarm to the Town, the Watch of horse drew out, who
faced them and fought with them in the lane, a little above the Mill.

They being forced to retreat with the loss of one man only, who died
valiantly: afterward the enemy fell upon the foot in their guards, who were
all ready to give them an answer, and accordingly defended themselves very
valiantly.

Colonel Norton in all this losing no time had by this got most part of his
horse ready, and drew them into the field: leaving the rest for the Town, and
marching close to the enemy very furiously: fell upon them with great valor:
which caused the enemy presently to retreat, and upon their retreat were taken
as follows.

Major Langley, sometimes a Mercer in Pater Noster Row, was taken prisoner,
wounded, but being in poor habit, more like a Tinker then a Gentleman, was let
go again.

Captain Rowlet a Scrivener at Holborne bridge also is taken, and Lieutenant
Rowlet his brother against Holborne Conduit in London.

Livetenant Ivory sometimes a Citizen of London.

Ensign Lucas, a silk Dier in the old Baily.

Ancient Coram, son of one Coram a papist in Winchester.

William Robinson a Papist, Surgeon to the Lord Marquess of Winchester. 3
Sergeants. 5 Drums and 3 Drummers. 3 Gentlemen of the Arms. 1 Sutler to the
Army 75 common Soldiers, whereof some of them are such as have formerly ran
from the Parliament service: and are likely to receive their just reward.


There were also taken a 100 foot Arms, besides horse and Arms: every man
keeping what horse he took himself.

4 found dead upon the place, many wounded some very dangerously.

We lost on our side only one man, and about 7 or 8 shot, which was all the
loss we had, one being a Lieutenant of those were hurt of our men.

The Enemies word was Honor, Ours, GOD for us.

They that are taken prisoners report, that they were encouraged to come forth
of Basing house against Colonel Nortons forces; to take from them their buffe
Coats and new shillings, which Colonel Norton had newly paid their men, but
they were disappointed of their hopes; we showed them shalfe Crowns as well as
shillings: after they were taken prisoners.

About 4 of the clock in the afternoon Colonel Nortons horse marched again up
to Basing house, and 4 of his Trumpeters sounded first a challenge, and
afterward two or three Levets flourishing before the enemy, but the enemy
appeared not.

The same night 10 of our men, which they had formerly taken prisoners, and
used most barberously, and stripped naked to their very shirts from their
backs, having an hopbag in their prison, with the same made means by cutting
into slips to lengthen it: to let them down: made an escape and came to our
forces to Odyam, one of them being a Kentish Corporal, and most of the rest
were taken when Sir William Waller was before Basing, who tell us that there is
but 7 of our men prisoners in Basing left,

From Odyam Colonel Norton sent his prisoners to Southampton, from thence to
be sent up to London, whither in few days they will be brought, If God permit.

This is such a shake to the Garrison at Basing house, that it is believed there
are scarce so many more in Basing house to keep the Garrison.

By this time if the ^urrey and Sussex Forces be come up to ^olonel Norton:
Basing is besieged.

FJNJS.

