A GREAT VICTORY Obtained by the Marquess of ORMOND AND THE LORD INCHIQVEEN
AGAINST THE Parliaments Forces, WITH The manner of their surrounding of Dublin,
for storming of the City, their taking of Trim Castle, with great store of
Ordnance, Arms and Ammunition, 1000 killed, and diverse taken prisoners.

ALSO, The Declaration of the Irish Army; the Message and Propositions sent to
Charles the second; and exceeding strange News from Hereforashire containing
the Prophecy of a young Infant touching his Highness and the Parliament,
delivered in a speech to two Mowers in a Meadow field, and the manner how it
vanished away, after speaking of the words.

Imprinted at London for R. Williamson, August 9. 1649.

The last great and bloody FIGHT At DUBLIN in IRELAND UPON The advance of the
King of Scots Army to the Walls of the City, for a storm, with the manner
thereof, and the number killed and taken prisoners.
SIR,
THe Marq. of Ormond (we hear) is resolved for a storm, and in order thereunto,
has drawn down most of his Horse and Foot within two miles of the City,
skaling ladders, and other instruments of War being in a readiness to be put
in execution; And by our last express from thence we were advertized, that he
had made several attempts against the North side of the City, stormed Patrick
Fort, and many other places, but received so desperate a repulse, that he were
forced to quit the place and desist from any further enterprising on it, in
which conflict he lost about 50 men. Sir Thomas Armstrong is also very active
for his young Sovereign, and makes many onsets against the Out guards, and
having a choice and select party drawn forth of several Regiments, he advanced
from the Camp within pistol shot of the walls of Dublin, and endeavored to
drive all before him, but Col. Jones made a salley, and charged him with such
courage and success, that he not only regained what before lost, but killed
and took about 60 of the enemy. During which action, the L. Inchiquin played his
Guards with great policy, and by his strong allarum on the South side of the
City, kept the besieged in play, whilst another party disputed the Rings-end
who at the last became masters thereof, with the loss of 20 men; since which
time he has attempted the cutting off the Mills near adjoining to the City,
and as we hear) are resolved suddenly for a final storm. But that which adds
most to the propagation of the Work in hand, is the taking of the strong and
impregnable Castle of Trius, with many pieces of Ordnance, Arms and Ammunition,
but not without the loss of at least 1000 men since the first befieging
thereof.

Bristol 7 August, 1649.

Other Letters from Dublin say as follows.
Since the enemies receipt of the intelligence of the Lord Lieutenant Crumwels
designment for this bleeding City, they have somewhat awakened us with stronger
allarms, and (as we hear) have entered into Protestation, to live and die, stand
and fall together, and to fight it out to the last man, and that upon receipt
of the foresaid intelligence, Ormond called a Council of Officers, at the head
quarters near Fingles, the result was, whether they should prepare for a storm,
before his Lordships landing, or whether they should begirt the City,
streighten other Garrisons, take in what they could and then randezvouz and draw
into a Body, and give him battle at his landing: Upon mature deliberation
thereon, it was unanimosly declared by most of that Popish and Prelaticall
faction, That if he set footing there they would fight him; in the mean time
they would use their utmost endeavors for the reducing of those Garrisons
which the Parliament had in possession.

But the thing that our Soldiery are most doubtful and dubious of, is, that
they fear the enemy will not give them a field upon the additionall forces
landing, but that they will rather betake themselves to the Bogs and Woods.

On Thursday morning last, a party of the Marq. of Ormonds horse and foot faced
our frontier Guards, keeping a great careering up and down near the City Walls,
and making four or five desperate attempts within Pistol shot of our Line,
Spurs, and Sconces, which continued for the space of half an hour; till at the
last Capt. Freeman (Commander in chief of the new Fort) made a salley out with
a party of horse and foot, who placed the Musketeers in an obscure trench, for
an Ambuscado; he himself being the Coy, for the calling in and ensnaring of the
adverse party; but upon his first advance toward them with his horse, he found
it a Work very full of difficulty, by reason that they had used the like point
of policp: However, he resolved to dispute the place, and thereupon divided his
horse (being 60 in number) into two parties, he himself commanding the one, and
Cornet Jackson the other; Capt, Freeman charged the Van of the Enemies Forlorn,
Cornet Tomson flanked them, and upon their first charge exchanged ground, with
the loss of three men on both sides.


New Propositions to the King of Scotland,
May it please your Majesty,
WE are commanded by the Estates of Parl. of your Maj. Kingdom of Stotland,
humbly to represent to your Majesty, that as they were not wanting in giving
faithful and timous counsel to your Maj. Royal Father, for yreveuting the
dangers which were then feared, and have since to their deep sorrow and
unexpressible grief fallen out: and as they have with all care and
faithfulness contributed their utmost endeavors for preserving their late
Sovereign, as their Letters and Declarations can evidence; so they do resolve
to continue the same loyal affection and faithfulness to your Maj. and
accordingly have acknowledged and proclaimed your Maj. King of Great Britain,
France, and Ireland, with all readiness, unanimity, alacrity and solemnity;
and have protested in favors of your Majesty's just Right of Succession in the
Royal Government of your Kingdoms of England and Ireland, against all Acts
done, or to be done to the contrary: As also have commanded Us in their name,
humbly to offer to your Majesty, that they conceive it necessary for
establishing of the happy Government of that your Majesty's ancient Kingdom,
and for restoring your Majesty to the settled and peaceable possession of your
just Right of Government of your other Dominions.

First, That your Majesty would be pleased to assure and declare, that you will
by your solemn Oath under your Hand and Seal allow the National Covenant of
Scotland, and the solemn League and Covenant of Scotland, England and Ireland,
and that your Majesty will prosecute the ends thereof in your Royal Station.

Secondly, That your Maj. will ratify and approve all Acts of Parl. enjoining
the solemn League and Covenant, and establishing Presbyterial Government, the
Directory of Worship, the Confession of Faith, and Catechism, in your Maj.
Kingdom of Scotland; as they are already approven by the General Assembly of
the Kirk, and by the Parl of that kingdom: and that your Maj. will give your
Royal assent to acts of parl. enjoining the same in the rest of your Maj.
Dominions: and that your May. will observe the same in your own practice and
family, and never make opposition thereto, or endeavor any change thereof.

Thirdly, That your May. will consent and agree, that all matters Civil be
determined by the present and subsequent parl. of your Kingdom of Scotland, and
all matters Ecclesiastical by the ensuing General Assemblies of that Church
rs was formerly condescended and agreed to by your Majesty's Royal Father.

These desires are so just and necessary for the securing of Religion, the
peace of that kingdom, and for gaining not only the outward obedience, but also
the inward affection of all your May. good people, to your Royal person,
authority and government, after so great distractions and trobles, that the
granting thereof will so far endear your May. to that Nation, that they will
not only receive your May. with all cheerfulness, and most willingly render to
you that subjection and dutiful obedience which can be expected from loyal
Subjects to their gracious King; but likewise will contribute their utmost
endeavors by all necessary and lawful means, according to the Covenant, and
the duty of faithful and loyal subjects, that your May. may be restored to
the peaceable possession of the Government of your other kingdoms, according to
your May. undoubted Right of succession. In order whereunto, we humbly desire,
that your May. will be pleased to give a direct and satisfactory answer to
these our most just and necessary desires; in doing whereof, your Majesty will
be to these afflicted kingdoms, like the rain coming down upon the mowen
grass, and as showers that water the earth.

Signed by the Commissioners of Parliament.


There came further intelligence to the parliament, out of Lancashire, that one
Sunday last a Minister was apprehended, for incerting this ensuing? passage in
his prayer We pray unto thee for thy truths protector, thy young, ancient
Catholic faiths defender, thy Servant our Sovereign: defend him in it;
preserve him from it: be good to them that have the tuition of him, that with
alacrity and cheerfulness, be may at all times, but especially in the needful
time of trouble defend and provide for the fatherless and VViddows. Son of God
we beseech thee to hear us, Moreover, that it may please to thee to strengthen
such as do stand with him, to comfort and help the weak hearted for him, to
raise up (if it be possible) them that are fallen from him: and finally to beat
down Satan under his and our feet.

Letters from the West say, That in Herefordshire there was lately found a
young Child i^ a green Meadow by the Mowers which were cutting do^^ the grass,
and upon the taking of the Infant up, its said, that it uttered these
expressions, That in that field should be fought the greatest battle that ever
happened in England, which would prove fatal to many, but prosperous and
tryumphant to some, etc. having spoken these words, the Relator says, that it
vanished away suddenly, no man knowing how, nor which way.

FINIS.

