A DECLARATION Of diverse Elders and Brethren of Congregationall Societies, in
and about the City of LONDON.

Decrying and Disclaiming two Books; the one called A CRY; and the other Book
called A MODEL OF A NEW REPRESENTATIVE.

Wherein their Judgments touching the Qualifications of Electors, and Eligible
Persons, are tendered to Consideration, in way of Vindication of themselves from
unjust Aspersi^^s.

IN the year 1647. We being Accused by many, as if we were Patrons of Liberty
to sin, and as if we denied Magistracy and Propriety in ones Estate; and as if
we owned Polygamy: We were enforced to Vindicate our selves in our Declaration
then Agreed unto by our joint Consent, Printed for H. Overton near the
Exchange.
and Published then in our Names, concerning those four Particulars charged
upon us. Wherein we not only Asserted the Contrary: but have also Declared,
from the Holy Scriptures, The Rule and Standard for Faith and Obedience, what
Liberty, and what Community is owned, and Disclaimed therein. Which accordingly
we still own, or Disclaim: and what Necessity there is of Magistracy, and
what Obedience is due unto them in their places, as to an Ordinance of God. And
howsoever Polygamy was practiced in the Old Testament; that yet it is clearly
Evinced in the New Testament, to be unlawful.

Our Stating the beforesaid Cases, and our Evidencing of what is the Truth
therein, by clear Scriptures, and by Grounds deduced thence, we do still fully
Adhere unto: Howsoever some or other of the Scandals beforesaid, some formerly,
and some of late, have slanderously laid to our charge.

And now whereas of late years, the wise Providence of our God has so Ordered
it, that such readiness and cheerfulness of many Christians, that are Termed
Independents, in their Adhering to the Parliament, even from the beginning of
the late wars unto this day: and such faithfulness and diligence has been
expressed by many of them, in the State; and in the Army, as well under the
Earl of Essex, and the Lord Fairfax, as under the Present Captain General,
the Lord Cromwell; that hereby many of them have been judged worthy of Offices
and Places of Trust and Preferment, as well in England, as in Wales and
Ireland. And whereas this has occasioned (though causlesly,) the Envy of many
against them: and many have falsely said, That they seek to get all such places
into their own hands, and to exclude all others from them. (Which expressions,
though grievous to us, we did bear, as part of the Reproaches for Christ, and
his Truth.)

And whereas now of late, when some have Objected against us a Book or two,
lately Published, The one called, A Model of a New Representative: The other
called, A Cry -- With some Cautions touching the Election of a New
Representative; as if those Books were Published by us: So that we are Charged
to profess therein, that which we had disowned.

We are hereby Again enforced, thus to come forth in Public in our just and
necessary Vindication; least if now we should be altogether silent, we should
indeed seem to be deeply guilty therein. A Crime that we do utterly detest
and abhor, as injurious to many: And with one Consent we do thus Declare,
as in the Presence of the Almighty, who is the Searcher of all hearts, before
whom the Wicked and Deceitful shall be confounded at the Day of Judgment.

First, That none of us did so much as know of the making of any such Books,
until they were Printed and Published.

Secondly, That as thus we were far from appointing or approving of, or
Consenting unto the said Books before the Publishing of them; So neither did
we, nor do we Consent to, or approve of such Unjust Limitations, as appear to
be employed in the CRY page 9. (Though that Cryers good intent toward all that
fear God, be well set forth therein, page 5, 6, 7.) But are more fully
expressed by Quere's in the MODEL'S Xth, XI, XII, and XIIIth Quere's, Namely,
That the Persons to be Chosen, and the Persons to be Choosers of the New
Representative, should be limited to the Gathered-Congregationall-Churches;
[Here-in that MODEL is more like a Jesuiticall Device, to bring an Odium upon
us all; then to be any Act of ours.]

Now that we may not be wanting (what in us is,) to clear the Truth from
Scripture Grounds, and to manifest our sense thereof, Touching Civil
Governors, and the Choice of them, We must premise Two Propositions, from the
Holy Scriptures.

I. The Former Proposition is this.
That all People in Every Nation as well Members of Churches, as others, ought
for Conscience sake, to Honor such, as by the wise Disposing Providence of God,
are their Present Rulers; and are to submit to the Civil Commands, not only
of such Rulers as are faithful, but even to Infidels.

Thus the Apostle Paul Commands us from the Lord, Romans 13.1. to 8. verse. (with
1 Cor. 14.37.) Let every soul be subject to higher Powers. For there is no
Power, but of God, etc. And thus the Apostle Peter also, in 1 Pet. 2.13. Submit
your selves to every Ordinance of Man for the Lords sake: Whether it be unto
King as supreme; or unto Governors. Thus they wrote, when all the Rulers
Generally were Infidels. And Note; The Chief in Rule or Government, in what
Political State soever, are styled King in the Scripture phrase; though he were
not a King, according to our Vulgar expression. Thus Moses, that Judged Israel,
is called King in Jesurun, in Deuteronomy. 33.5. And when its said, There was then no
King in Israel, it intends, there was then no Judge in Israel; Thus Jud. 17.6.
and Jud. 18.1. and 19.1. and 21.25. And thus in Rev. 17.9, 10. The 7 Heads are
7 Mountains;-And they are 7 Kings: Five are fallen, (-and) one is, and the
other is yet to come.-11 And the Beast-is the Eighth, and is of the seven; and
goes into Perdition. 12 And the ten Hornesare ten Kings. 16 They shall hate
the Whore, and make her Desolate. Here speaking first of the great City, that
reigned over the Kings of the Earth, ver. 18. that is Rome, which stands on
seven hills; He says, They are 7 Kings, five are fallen, etc. The meaning
seems to be this; That City, which before John's time, had had five sorts of
chief Rulers fallen, and had another sort, the sixth, then, viz. Caesar's. The
seventh, the Pope, was to come; who also is the Eight, (by his Exercising of so
great power; first Ecclesiastically, and then Civilly also;) That same City is
the City spoken of in Rev. 17. Now that Rome had then had 5 sorts of chief
Rulers fallen, and that Caesar's ruled in John's time, is Evident by Historians:
So that Cornelius Tacitus, a Heathen, (that lived in John's time,) in the very
beginning of his Annals, thus reckons them up; In the City Rome at first were
Kings; then (2) Liberty and (two) Consuls. 3. (one) Dictator (added to them.)
(4) Decemviri. (5) Tribuni [ plebis; [that is, the Government by Ten. And then
by Three.] (6) the Power fell to Caesar. And as for the Ten Kings that should
hate the Whore, be it generally expounded to include England, and the
Netherlands, as well as others that forsake Rome. Thus by Kings, in Romans 13. 1
Pet. 2. Rev. 17. We are to understand such, as are Chief in Rule, in any
Nation.

Rulers, and Laws, are for the Nations good. This Salus Populi is the End, and
to be most aimed at, and sought after. When those of the Netherlands, by the
Spanish King, were Tyrannized over, the States cast off the Tyrant, and have
Governed since. And when King Charles left the Parliament, and prepared war
against it; the best Ministers in London, and elsewhere stirred up the People
to Contribute and Act to their utmost, to raise and maintain an Army against
his Proceeds. And by the Army, (which was empowred by the Authority of the
Nation to their utmost to seek for the End beforesaid) there has been such
subduing of Enemies and Obstacles, as that by the wise Providence of God, we
are now reduced to a Commonwealth, wherein the Rulers, are now to be Honored.
For if Caesar, and Pagan Rulers under him in Judaea, and elsewhere, were to be
honored and submitted unto; as both Christ taught, and his Apostles, ( Matthew.
22.21. Mark. 12.27.) (And yet they came in by the Sword, and kept Gods Church
in Bondage;) How much more should our Governors be Honored by all people in
our Nation?

II. The Second Proposition is this;
That all that profess themselves Christians, or Gods people, ought to
endeavor, so far as their place and power reaches, that all Rulers amongst
them, should be men truly fearing God.

Our Ground is, the Express Charge of the Almighty. 2 Samuel 23.3. The God of
Israel said, the Rock of Israel spoke unto me; HE THAT RVLETH OVER MEN, Must be
JUST, RVLING IN THE FEAR OF GOD.

Secondly, Suitable thereto, is that in Exodus 18.21. Provide out of all the
People, Men of ability (or Courage,) such as FEAR GOD; Men of Truth; hating
Covetousness. These should be preferred, before all other Qualifications, of
Birth, Riches, or Parts; as we will Answer it before the Great JEHOVAH.

Thirdly, The fear of the Lord is the Beginning of Wisdom, Psalm. 111.10.
Prove. 1.7. These will Pray, and God will give them Wisdom, Jam. 1.5, 6. Prove.
2.1.-4.

Fourthly, Because when men Fear not God, they are more obnoxious and liable
to all wickedness, Injury, Tyranny, Oppression, Romans 3.11. They-seek not after
God-Their Throat is an open Sepulcher. Their feet are swift to shed
bloud-Destruction and misery are in their ways, and the way of Peace they have
not known. And what is the Root of all this? There is no fear of God before
their Eyes. Hence when Abimelech asked, What saw thou, that thou have done
this thing? Abraham said; Because I thought, surely the fear of God is not in
this place; therefore they will slay me, for my Wives sake, Genesis 20.10, 11.

These two being premised:

III. Our Third Proposition is this;
That in our days, wherein Persons truly fearing God are of diverse Forms,
dissenting in Church Government, etc. Some that are termed Presbyterians, some
Independents, some Anabaptists, and some that are not so resolved with any of
these: the Power of Choosing Rulers, or of being Chosen, should not be limited
to any one of those Forms or Persuasions, to the Excluding of others:
[excepting such, See p. 1. lin. 3.
who either deny Propriety, or Magistracy, See the first Declaration.
or who assert carnal Liberty, or Polygamy: whom we have witnessed against in
our former Declaration.] Or such as have opposed, or do not own this present
Government.

Which Proposition,

1. We Explain thus,

Such Persons do Fear the Lord, that endeavor to keep a good Conscience
before God, and before men: Such as through grace Deny ungodliness and worldly
lusts, and live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present World, Tit.
2.12. Now among such whose Fathers had all been drunk with the Babylonish Cup,
and the dreggs and darknesses thence, are not quite dispelled from us. And but
by Degrees do we attain to further knowledge of the Mystery of Christ and of
Antichrist) there are no doubt many such persons, so fearing God as is
beforesaid, that have not all attained to the same degree: and they must all be
fully persuaded in their own minds, in what they practice. Now if merely for
Conscience sake, and for their so practicing or not daring to practice, if any
such should therefore be Excluded from being Chosen, or from being Choosers: or
if the Chosen, and the Choosers should be so limited that all of them should be
only of one sort and size, excluding all the rest; This might be a great
wrong, both to God and to Men.

2. We Confirm this Proposition thus.

First, This course is a wrong to God, when his Children, whom he loves so
dearly, and who are so accepted of him, are for his sake so rejected by men: As
in Isa. 66.5. Your brethren that cast you out for my Names sake, etc. And this
is a wrong to Jesus Christ, who is in all his: and will say to such as so
reject them, at the great Day, on this wise, In as much as ye did it to the
least of these that believe in me, you did it to me, Mat. 25.45, 46.

Secondly, Repl. This Course were also a wrong to Men.

First, To the Persons so rejected, that upon the like Ground and Principle are
liable to be Persecuted by them, and worn out, so as to occasion the Exile of
many out of our Nation, as it fared with many of our Brethren here under the
Prelacy.

Secondly, It were a Wrong, or Damage, to the Persons that so alone are fully
Empowered to Choose, and to be Chosen: Whereby they are most liable to such a
Temptation, as is to be Prayed against by Tender Souls, as Wise Agur did
against being Enriched, Least I be full and deny [or bely] thee, Prove. 30.9.
The Coveting of such a Monopoly, were a Coveting an evil Covetousness to
himself, when it is to the wronging of others of their due, that have equal
right, Habak. 2.9.

Thirdly, Thereby it may be a Wrong to that City or Nation: where,

1. Many being partakers of the Sin, are like to partake also of the Punishment
due thereunto; even the Sin and Punishment of Babylon and Antichristians, Rev.
18.4. One of their Sins being this, Persecuting of Saints for not Conforming to
them; rigorously pressing to Uniformity.

2. Hereby many others are the More hardened against all Professors and
Profession, when they see Professors so opposing Each other.

Thirdly, How little cause there is for any of these to seek the Excluding of
the other, may further appear by these Considerations.

1. All those that fear the Lord amongst us, are all the Children of one God
and Father.

2. They are the Redeemed of one Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who has loved
them, and given himself for them.

3. They have the Holy Spirit their Sanctifyer and Comforter.

4. They have One Faith, and hope of their Calling, Ephesians. 4.4, 5.

5. They have all of them one and the same Inheritance, which is immortal,
undefiled, uncorruptible, which fades not away, which is reserved in Heaven
for them, who are kept by the power of God through faith unto Salvation, 1 Pet.
1.3, 4.

6. They have the same Common Enemies to them all; the Flesh, the Devil, and
the World: and in the World not only Pagans, Turks, and Papists abroad, but
generally all persons that are in their Natural, Carnal, and Corrupt estate
at home.

7. All these have also the very same Weapons and Arguments, wherein they all
generally with one mind agree together against all those their Common Enemies,
etc. These have More with them then are against them, 2 Kings 6.

8. The Time is coming, and we hope is near at hand, when all that fear the
Lord shall be of one mind and of one heart, and shall worship him with one
consent. Zeph. 3.9. Then they shall have such external Visible Union and
Communion that shall Convince the World (that are not convinced by internalls)
that the Father has loved them all, as he has loved his Son; as our Lord
Jesus prayed: and therefore it shall certainly be effected, because the Father
always heard him, John 17.21, 23. John 11.41. Therefore should all these be
far from excluding each other, either from being Choosers or from being Chosen
unto places of Power or Authority.

Thus have We with one Consent Declared our selves touching the Books
aforesaid, being such as we never consented unto, nor owned: and also our
Grounds and Reasons why We are far from approving of them. And the sincerity
of our Hearts in what We have Declared herein, We take the Almighty God to
Record upon our Souls.

The IX. Month called November. the Tenth Day. 1651. William Greenhill. Richard
Shute. John Simpson. Thomas Hutton. Robert Turpin. Thomas Brooks. Christopher
Feake. Richard Woollaston. Thomas Sherman. Henry Jessey. Emanuel Middelton.
Samuel Nash. John Foche. Hanserd Knolly's. William Kiffin. William Consett. T:
Harrison. Thomas Whalley.


LONDON, Printed by M. Simmons for L. Chapman, at the Crown in Pope's Head
Alley. 1651.


