A GREAT Overthrow: Given to Sir Ralph Hopton's whole Army by Sir William
Waller near Farnham, with only six Troop of Horse, and some Foot, the rest
of his Army being stated in several quarters in other places.

With many Remarkable Passages, which deserve everlasting memory.

LONDON, Printed for John Hammon, This is Licensed and entered in Stationers
Hall, according to order. 1643.

A Great Overthrow given to Sir Ralph Hopton's: whole Army, by Sir William
Waller, etc.
ON Tuesday last, being the 28th. of November, one thousand six hundred forty
three, Sir William Waller having stated his Army in several Quarters, to
prevent the passage of Sir Ralph Hopton into Surry and Kent, which he has much
labored for ever since he came to those parts; Sir Ralph Hopton marched with
the whole body of his Army toward Farnham, where Sir William Waller then was,
having only six troops of his Horse then present with him, besides the Foot,
the rest were quartered at other places; but Sir William Waller having a
watchful eye about him, had some Scouts which first discovered this great Army
of the Cavalliers marching toward him, the which caused Sir William Waller
to address himself to fight, and accordingly ordered the station of his Army.
Sir William let the Cavalliers march up very close to him before he would
take notice that he had discryed them, and then let fly a piece of Ordnance
against them, which did good execution, and after that another; the Cavalliers
let not many bullets fly against our Army before they began to retreat, and as
they retreated, Sir William Waller marched upon them; but through the loss
of many men in few hours the Cavalliers began to retreat in great disorder, so
long that Sir William Waller marched up to their dead Corpse, where many horse
lay dead, and the Riders by their countenance and habit seemed to be of worth;
but by this time, which was about two of the clock in the after noone the
Cavalliers began to fly, some one way, some another, but the greatest part of
them toward Basing; Sir William Waller having no more but six troops to
pursue them, which did notwithstanding follow on as full of valor and tourage
as ever; and the service which his horse did in the pursuit of them was most
wonderful, and the Fight most desperate, yet did nothing daunt their
resolutions; Sir William pursued them five miles, and is still in the pursuit
of them. Sir William Waller has slain in this fight many hundreds of the
Cavalliers, amongst which it is thought there are many Commanders; and by the
Prisoners that Sir William Waller has taken; It is reputed that they saw Sir
Ralph Hopton carried away as if he had been dangerously wounded: there is but
one man yet missing in our Army, and very few hurt. Sir William Waller is
still in Pursuit of them, and is resolved with his whole Army not to leave
them, although they be already routed, but follows the Execution against them
so close, that he will not permit them (if it be possible) any time to gather
to an Head again in any place.

News being come by a Letter from Sir William Waller to the Speaker of the
House of Commons on Wednesday the 29 of November 1643. the Parliament then
being at St. Margarets Westminster hearing Master Bridges to preach the Fast
Sermon in the afternoon; which Letter certifying that Sir William Waller had
routed Sir Ralph Hopton, and given him so great an Overthrow with so small a
strength, there was great rejoicing; and after the Sermon was done, the House
of Commons went to the Parliament House, and there sat very late.

One thing very remarkable is this; That as Master Bridges was preaching unto
them this Doctrine. viz. Though God do suffer the Enemies of his Church to be
Great and exceeding many, yet God will raise up a Power to withstand and
Overpower them. Even at that very instant this Message came in a Letter from
Sir William Waller to the Speaker, as if God was pleased to send our Senators
a sign from Heaven of the certainty of the fullfilling of his promises.

FINIS.

