GALLANT NEVVES FOR LONDON.

FROM His Majesty's Royal Court at HOLMBY;

Wherein is set forth, three remarkable Passages, to be presented to the
Citizens of London, VIZ.

The 1. Conceerning the Kingdom of Ireland. The 2. Concerning General Fairfax.
The 3. Concerning the Kingdom of England.
two flautists

Printed and published, and to be presented, to the view of all His Majesty's
loyal Subjects, 1647.

JOYFUL NEWS FROM HOLMBY.
THe Clouds of England are now dissolved, and her bright Star begins to appear
in its full luster, having steered its Coast toward the Southern Climate; so
that this poor disconsolated Kingdom, does now begin to discern a glimpse of
that glorious light which formerly she enjoyed, who for these four or five
years, last past, has been over shadowed and eclipsed, by many poisoning
Fogs, and unsavory Vapors: And had it not pleased God (out of his abundant of
mercies) to enlighten this poor Kingdom with many pure and bright Stars, (by
calling a blessed Parliament) this languishing Nation had been in a most sad
condition: But by the great wisdom and care of these renowned Patriots, the
great Pillars of obscurity are quite broken and cast dow, and a most pure and
clear Lanthorn set up with in this Kingdom, that so the light of the Gospel
may shine forth in abundance through out all the dark corners thereof.

But for the more full and firm establishing of this Gospel Light, the Estates
of both Kingdoms does humbly beseech his Majesty to give his Royal assent, for
the enacting of the Government of the Church of England, now set up and
established by the great Council thereof. But as yet his Majesty cannot approve
of the Directory; and says, he cannot join in saying Amen. to such praying as
is against his Conscience: his Majesty will not as yet condescend to hear the
English Divines preach, but says, he does (in part) approve of their prayer,
if they would but insert the word (Queen.)

There were great triumph at Northampton upon Tuesday last, when the tidings
were, brought, that his Majesty were near Holmby, the Bells rang, and the
great Guns went of, insomuch, that a gallant echo made its appeal at Holmby,
and the sound thereof did much rejoice his Majesty's heart; who little thought,
that the joy of his subjects would have been so great at the arrival of his
Royal person.

Multitudes of people resorted to welcome his Majesty, the Road from Harborow
to Holmby being adorned with thousands, and thousands of spectators, crying
with a loud voice (God bless your Majesty) the King smiling upon them, passed
along cheerfully, saying, he hoped this Journey would prove a prosperous
voyage, both to him and his Posterity.

Many hundreds of the Gentry of Northhamptonshire, met his Majesty two miles on
this side Harborow, and accompanied his Majesty to Holmby.

The bells rang in every town that his May. passed through, which annexed a
double joy to his Royal heart, causing many a smile from his Princely
countenance.

At his arrival at Holmby, there was a gallant guard appointed for his Majesty
to pass by, who entered in at the great Court Gate, being accompanied by the
Commissioners of both Kingdoms, who deport themselves with much gallantry,
performing the trust reposed in them faithfully, and their obedience to their
Liege-Soveraign most loyally. He entered the house in great triumph, and in a
most sumptuous manner, taking some delight in conferring with the Commissioners
about some points concerning the Directory; they leave no means unassayed,
that may any ways prove effectual, for the persuading and gayning of his
Majesty's Royal assent, to sign the Propositions, and take the Covenant.;
which we hope, will, ere long prove effectual, desiring to hear that tryumphant
sound, and comfortable echo, of the uniting both of Prince and Subject, that
so peace and truth may flourish within his Majesty's Dominions.

Provisions is very dear at all the adjacent towns near the Court, especially
at Northhampton, where Butter is sold for six pence a pound, a loaf for two
pence, that wants above three Ounces of the ordinary weight, Corn at an
extraordinary rate.

One thing I shall here insert, which is very requisite for public view,
concerning several remarkable passages and Propositions which passed between
the King and his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, which I will intimate as
follows.

Propositions between the Kings most excellent Majesty, and his Excellency sir
Thomas Fairfax.
UPon his Majesty's advance to Holmby, his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax had
some conference with him, and after some dispute together, his Majesty enquired
much after the Lord Lisle, and concerning the business of Ireland, and the
Forces desired for that Service, and other things in relation to preparations,
and prosecutions of that War, His Majesty also declared his will and pleasure
to the English Commissioners, intimating his good affection toward his
Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, saying, that he was a Soldier, and a Gentleman
of honor, his fidelity and renowned actions, being apparent to the world,
further inaimating, that he had proved faithful to the trust reposed in him,
and like a noble General, had performed all Articles, according to the
condirions agreed upon, for the surrender of his Majesty's towns and castles
to the Parliament, and that he had kept his word faithfully with him; for his
performance herein, the greatest Monarchs will approve his fame.

FINIS.

