The Game is up: Or, XXXI New QVAERIES AND ORDERS;

Fitted for the present State of Affairs, and recommended to the Council of
Officers.

Together with an Old Prophecy, newly found out.

Printed in the year 1659.

THE GAME IS UP. Or, XXXI New QUAERIES AND ORDERS.
1. WHether, when the Parliament first sat, and a Question arising, what name
the House should be called by; and Alderman Atkins giving his opinion, that it
should be called a House of Office, were suitable to his judgment? For at that
time they had not voted him into a Place in the Excise, and so, by consequence,
he had not done his business.

2. Whether Prideaux, when he left the world, did not, by order from his
Fellow Members, ride post to hell, to tell their Patron, they would not be long
behind?

3. Whether, when that Rump of a Parliament sent Lambert that Present, they did
not give him a knife to cut their own throats? Or, when he melted it into
Liquor, and bestowed it upon his Janissaries, whether the Army drank more for
the Rump, or Lambert?

4. Whether, when Atkins was called to sit as a Member in the House, it was not
prophetical, and signified, that businesses were like to go backward?

5. Whether, when the City-Slaves invited their Chains to dinner, it was not
well and conscientiously done of the Army, to let the Parliament dine before
they gave them a purge; and to let their bellies be full, before they sent
their bones to rest?

6. Whether Lambert may not fitly be made High Constable, having lately laid so
many Gentlemen by the heels; or whether he ought not rather to have that
Office, because he has got the better end of the staff?

7. Whether the Lord Mayor, by shaving his detestable chops, did not put a new
affront upon the City, and thereby showed them, that after all his impudence,
he was not ashamed to show his face?

8. Ordered by the Common-Councill, That the Lord Mayor, for that elaborate
Oration which he made to the Parliament, and which he emphatically expressed by
the bowing of his body, be sent forthwith to the Army, to congratulate this new
change.

9. Whether there be any thing like a Blush in the whole Army, besides their
Coats?

10. Whether mad Sedgwick, when he was prophaneing Scripture, and mocking God
with a Fast, when he said, It was a Lambert that first compiled the Laws, and
it is a Lambert that must reform them, did not intend, that Lambert would
cudgel the Laws into better manners; because, when they gave rules to other
men, they did not, by a particular exception, leave him to do what he list?

11. Whether the Army Officers want any thing, but their heads to be shaved,
and their heels to be fettered, to make them fit for Bedlam? And whether those
hair-brained fellows, did not therefore, at their private Fast, do well, to
choose a mad, man to whine, and carry on the sins of that day?

12. Whether, by reason of the shutting up of the House of Parliament, (a place
lately infected with the Plague) the Citizens of London may not write over
their doors, The Lord have mercy upon us?

13. Whether Henry Martin, if we should go to Wars with the Whore of Babylon,
would not be the man that should fling the first stone?

14. Whether Henry Martin was fit to be made a Parliament Man, being he could
never meet with a smirking Wench, but he was ready to reveal his Secrets?

15. Ordered, That if Henry Martin should lose his hair, by reason of the many
hot services, to which he had exposed his body; the Lord Mayor, to repair the
loss, should chop off a corner of his beard to make him a Periwig.

16. Ordered by the Army, That whereas in their Address to the long and short
Parliament, they did then acknowledge, that by the wonderful goodness of God
their eyes were opened, be intended to be only a mistake in the Printer.

17. Whether, when Satan removed his household stuff from Westminster, he did
not take up his Quarters at Wallingford-house? And if he did, Whether the Army
ought not to go a house-warming thither? And whether Sir Arthur Hair-brains,
and Alderman Beardlesse, larded with a load or two of Atkins's grease, ought
not to be sent to the Devil for a Breakfast, and that Doctor Owen be appointed
to say Grace.

18. Whether Vane's name does not agree with his nature, being he can so well
comply with the Times, and turn according as the wind blows?

19. Whether if Baxter should bring sufficient witnesses to prove, that Lambert
was a Jesuit, he were like to get the better? because Lambert is a man of such
a turbulent and unruly spirit, that the Judges will not believe it a thing
possible, that he could ever find in his heart to enter into Orders.

20. Ordered, That the City-Cuckolds do from henceforth maintain their Militia,
and put themselves into a posture of War; and that Alderman Ireton be appointed
to lead up the Van.

21. Orderdered by the Commission-Officers of the Army, that a trick be put
upon the Third Commandment; viz. That forswearing is not to take the name of
the Lord in vain, but to good purpose.

22. Ordered, that from henceforth none be accounted honest, unless they be
first approved of by the Officers of the Army.

23. Ordered, That Acts of Oblivion be henceforth generally practiced, by the
good people of these Nations, till every man has forgot his duty as well as
the Army. And for farther amendment of the Bill, let no man dare to teach the
art of Memory, besides a Redcoat, when he comes for Taxes and Contributions.

24. Whether Alderman Atkins, ought not to be confined, being he is so apt to
fly out? or whether it be a fit or discreet thing of the City, to admit him
into the scarlet Counsel, being he is so generally known to be a loose-liver?

25. Whether God can endure to look upon the Nation, without holding his Hand
between His Eye, and the Army?

26. Whether if Ferdinando the Jew were now to fish for the Devil, he would
not choose to bait his hook with a Lobster?

27. Whether Deus dabit his quoque funem, were not a fit Motto for the Army?

28. Ordered, That whereas Bradshaw being now ready to leave England, and sail
into the Low Countries, Hazlerig be forthwith sent to New Castle, to trade with
the Devil for coals, that so he may be welcomed with a fire equal to his
merits.

29. Whether the godly Army have not made the people of England truly feel what
the Scripture only told them in a figure, That the Word of God is a two-edged
sword?

30. Whether Titchburn, being a neat timber'd Lad, if he were at Tiburn
tottering in his Chain, would not swing with abundance of Discretion? and
whether he being a man that deserved as well as any, it were not a great deal
of pity but his turn should be served first?

31. Whether Monck will not, by all persons, be accounted an Ape, if he offer
to comply with the present Juncto of the Army.

Ordered that H. Martin, the Lord Mounson, and Mr. Scot, be Commissioners of
the Bawdy-Court, and that Wat Long be chief Register, and that R. Smith, and R.
Harper, be his Deputies.

An Old Prophecy newly found out.
When the Monck shall unvaile his hood,
And fifty Thousand here shall reign,
And Traitors Heads shall swim in blood,
We shall be happy then again.
Till then expect no Settlement,
From Army or from Parliament.
The Numericall Letters are L. M.

FINIS.

