Great News from the NORTH: GIVING A True Account and RELATION OF THE Seizing
of several Great Officers, Soldiers, and other Eminent Persons; Particularly,
One of the late King's Domestic Servants: TOGETHER With their Horses, Arms,
and other Considerable Booty; designed, as is supposed, for Ireland.
Licensed, and Entered according to Order.

SInce Almighty Providence has so Signally manifested its Power, in the
Preservation of these Kingdoms, from the Bondage of Popery and Slavery; we
cannot but wonder, that there should be any of that Faction remaining to
Support so Tottering a Cause. And yet it is too Evident, by the Sedulous
Endeavors of our Implacable Adversaries, that we have still too many
^ncendiaries and Beautifeus amongst us, as to raise that Fading Smoke into a
Flame. These are the people, whose very Rudiments and Fundamentals distill unto
them the principles of Cruelty and Rebellion; that have Commission for Murder,
and Dispensation for Destroying Heretics. But all their Stratagems are ^n
vain: nor can it now be expected that any reasonable person should be so
Insatuated, as once to suffer it to enter into his mind to bring us back from a
Flourishing people, a settled Throne, and a Unanimous Establishment, to a
Voluntary Bondage; or Subject the Serenity of a Halcyon Galm, to the Storms and
Tempests of a threatening Tyranny: Yet notwithstanding the Tranquillity which
these Nations sensibly feel and possess under the Benign Influence of so
Gracious a King and Queen, Established in the Throne, and the Assurance we have
of the Protestant Religion, confirmed to us with all our Rights and Liberties;
there are yet a sort of Malcontents amongst us, that, like the Murmuring
Israelites, despise the Manna, that Heaven showers round about their Tents, the
true Religion, and Light of the Gospel that shined upon them; and Lust after
the Onions, and Fleshpots of Egypt. These are the Murmurs, that are
unadvisedly desirous to bring us back to the Fleshpots of Egypt; The Bondage
we have ^o lately and miraculously Escaped. Of this sort are those, who by a
Treacherous Revolt, (at least Neglect) betrayed their Trust in Ireland, to the
great prejudice of the present happy Establishment of this Nation, and the
Protestant Interest in that Kingdom; that Interest which they thought to have
utterly subdued, crushed and oppressed by an Insulting power of French and Irish
Papists; and thi^ with all the Demonstrations of Cruelty, that could be
expected from a mo^^ Incensed and Barbarous Enemy. And not only in Ireland, but
the Kingdom (...) Scotland, where some have fallen under the suspicion of
Undutifulness and Di^loyalty, and yet some of them professing themselves
Protestants. But that an^ Hero English Soul should so Degenerate, is to be more
admired, if not deplored Yet it seems amongst us, there are not some wanting,
who after so great a Deliverance, are desirous (if it lay in their power) to
inflame their Native Land and appear Reprobates to the Grace is offered to
them. This is the Subject (...) our present Matter, and appears by these
Gentlemen and Fugitives mention'^ in this Narrative, who have endeavored to
get off to the professed Enemy, an^ Disturber of the Peace and Tranquillity of
these Kingdoms: and labor to brea^ the wholesome Measures, hitherto taken for
our Security. And though these Incendiaries of the Nation, and disturbers of our
public peace, have found al^ their Attempts hitherto unsuccessful, through the
Vigilance of those who are in Authority; Yet do they still, like Cataline,
attempt higher ills, although (...) be to their own Destruction.

Amongst this numerous Train, whose Persons as well as Intreagues have been
from time to time detected, the following persons have been lately Discovered,
with a Design of going over into Ireland to join Arms with those Combinated
Rebels, the French and Irish, against the present Government.

The Principal of these Persons now taken and secured, was Col. L -- gg,
Brother to an eminent Peer of this Realm, with whom was one Hay^ood, another
Eminent Officer, and several more. Enquiry was made into that matter, and it
appearing more and more suspicious, that there was some design on foot to raise
Commotions, or to get over to the Popish party in Ireland, such diligence was
used by the Officers of the Militia and others, that for the preventing the
Mischiefs that might arise through neglect, the said Colonel, and above twelve
persons of Note more were secured, in order to their being examined, and
brought up to London; their Horses were likewise seized, with valuable
Materials and Furniture: And amongst the number of those taken, we have an
Express by a Letter, that upon scrutiny and strict Examination, one of them
appears to be, or very lately to have been, the late King James's Domestic
Servant; by whose further Examination, it is not doubted a great Light may be
given into the dark Contrivances, and underhand Dealings; so that the secret
Intreagues of the Papists, and their Agents may be blasted, and utterly
defeated in these Kingdoms; and that as they all along have experienced, they
may find, that they are but vain Projectors, since their Wisdom is ever luckily
turned into Foolishness; and that God being on our side, it is evident, that
Man's Counsels and Devices cannot prosper against the Strength of an Almighty
A^m, who has Power to Will and to Do what ever he pleases in Heaven, and in
Earth.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for Thomas Rogers, in the Year 1689.


