A GREAT VICTORY AT SEA Against the Irish Rebels, by Captain ROBERT DARE
Commander of the ENGLISH: WHERE Were taken the Earl of Antrim his great Ship,

22 Pieces of Ordnance, 3 Barrels of Gunpowder, 100 Muskets, 200 Halberts,
Pikes, and other weapons, Diverse Arms and Ammunition, 20 Barrels of Beef, 40
Barrels of Beer and Wine, Good store of furniture for the Ship, Diverse Chests,
Trunkes, and Boxes, 25 Of Captain Dares men slain, and sore wounded.
Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson in Smithfield, near the Queens-head
Tavern. 164^.

HONI SOIT QVI MALl Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
A Great VICTORY At SEA, Against the Irish Rebels, by Captain Robert Dare,
Commander of the English, where were taken the Earl of Antrim his great ship,
and 22 pieces of Ordnance.
Sir,
HIs Majesty seeing that His Attendants must be reduced, is not well-pleased.
He is loath to be hindered from the Common Prayer, and his old Friends; But
Collonell Hammond is resolved (to his utmost) to put in execution such Orders
as shall be sent to him from the Parliament, and the Generals Excellency.

His Majesty went forth this morning to walk about the Castle; and Collonell
Hammond was with him: Collonell Harbert and some others attended him. He was
merry at Dinner, and afterward went into his privy Chamber, where he is still
private.

We had news here of a Design in hand to invade this Island, and that
Van-Trump with some Dutch ships should join with some Dunkerks, and Irish to
come hither, but we fear them not, the Vice Admiral Rainsborough having left
us a strong guard at Sea, and the Governor having had a great care to
strengthen us in the Island.

There have been some suspicious persons lately put away from hence. We want
(now) moneys most to supply some defects.

There was a great ship of the Irish Rebels, upon the South-west of Ireland,
that rid toward Galloway, that is taken by Captain Dare as is certified by
Letters come to the Commanders of the ships that ride upon our Guard, which was
thus.

Captain Dare Commander of the Constant Warwick (one of the Parliaments ships
that carries 28 piece of Ordnance, having notice that there was some Irish
ships that had taken some Merchants vessels passing near the South of Ireland)
saled that way, and disclosed (at last) some vessels, which he perecived to be
Irish, and thereupon he made toward them.

But none would endure engagement with Captain Dare, until at last he forced
a great ship of theirs with two and twenty piece of Ordance to engage.

Captain Dare made shot at him and the Rebels shot again at the Constant
Warwick, and it grew to be a very hot dispute, and both vessels was battered.

At last Captain Dare boorded the Rebels, and took her, but not without great
loss, having 25 of his men killed and wounded.

But Captain Robert Dare has taken the Rebels ship, which is one of the best
Friggots that the Earl of Antrim has, and it was a gallant piece of service
by Captain Dare.

We have news here that Prince Charles, the Prince of Wales should have gone
into Holland, but they have denied him there, supposing that it would be
charges to them, and perhaps occasion the Queen to follow, The Prince is now
well.

His Highness is still with His Mother in France, the Earl of Yarmouth, and
the rest of the Grandees, are with the Queen of England at St. Jermans but all
very poor, and want money much.

Carisbrooke Castle the 5 of Feb. 1647
THE Copy of a Letter sent from CORK in IRELAND.
Noble Sir,
OWen Roe showed some discontent to the supreme Council of the Rebels, that
the Lord Taffe should receive immediate Command from them, and having been
destroyed by the Lord Inchequin, they were constrained to content Owen Roe, and
made him Generalissimo, all General Officers, and Brigades, being wholly put
under his command, in all Counties, he is designing Forces against Munster of
which the Lord Inchequin has received advertisement, and prepares to oppose
them,

The Rebels threaten to put all men, women, and children to the sword that
oppose them.

They are strong at Sea, and have taken diverse Merchants ships, it is said
here, that the Earl of Antrim has some Design against England, it is good to
be in readiness with the English Navy.

Captain Robert Dare Commander of the Constant Warwick (one of the Men of
War for the Parliament of England) had a great fight with an Irish Frigot,
Manned by the Earl of Antrim, with the veriest Rogues that ever were put into
a ship. But Captain Dare has taken the Rebels, but not without loss of men;
I pray God that the eyes of the English may be opened (in time) to relieve this
poor Kingdom, which is all at present from

Your faithful Friend, Francis More.
Cork the 4 of Februar. 1647.
Taken by Captain Robert Dare Commander of the Constant Warwick, as follows.
22 Pieces of Ordnance, 3 Barrels of Gunpowder, 100 Muskets, 200 Halberts,
Pikes, and other weapons, Diverse Arms, and Ammunition, 20 Barrels of Beef, 40
Barrels of Bear and Wine, Good store of furniture for the Ship, Diverse Chests,
Trunks and Boxes. 25 Of Captain Dares men slain, and sore wounded.
FINIS.
Feb. 9. 1647.
Imprimatur

Gil. Mabbot.


