THE HOLY LIFE OF PHILIP NERIUS Founder of the Congregation of the ORATORY.

To which is Annexed A Relation written by S. Augustine of the Miracles in his
days, wrought many of them in or near the City wherein he resided and
well-known to Him.

AND A Relation of Sundry Miracles wrought at the Monastery of Port-Royall in
Paris, A. D. 1656. publikcly attested by many Witnesses.

Translated out of a French Copy published at Paris. 1656.

At Paris 1659.

THE HOLY LIFE OF PHILIP NERIUS Founder of the Congregation of the Oratory.
Translated out of the Latin Copy by Jacobus Baccius.

1. Joh. 3. 22. Whatsoever we shall ask we shall receive of him: because we
keep his Commandments, and do those things which are pleasing before him. Joh.
15. 15. Now I call you not Servants but Friends, for the Servant knows not
what his Lord does. Genesis 18. 17. Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I
do? The Translator to the Reader.
Christian Reader,
AS Precepts direct, so Examples encourage, obedience: and the latter, upon
most men, have much more effect, than the former. Hence nothing (commonly) to
Christians more beneficial, than the Histories of the Lives of Holy men: and
both the most frequent; and the most perfect, Conversions to God have been
effected (next to the Holy Scriptures) from these read, or seen. Now; eminent
holy practices cannot be severed from eminent divine favors (God exceedingly
loving and honoring those, who greatly serve him). And hence are these latter
ordinarily in such histories found mingled and interwoven with the former. And
perhaps this not unprofitably; because nothing more inciteth men to the
imitation of the virtues of so pious persons, than the belief of their
receiving such extraordinary divine consolations and favors. Not a few such
very miraculous (I confess) occurr in this present Story of Philip Neri (though
my principal intent was, to propose his virtues and piety to your practice
(and therefore I chiefly recommend to your reading the second Book of this
Life.) rather than these to your admiration). Which passages, that this may not
seem to you, either too incredible, or extravagant; after that you have
recollected your self, whether many like and parallel instances may not be
easily found in Scripture-Story; be pleased to review some of the lives of
those Holy men of former times, written by persons of a more universal credit
with Christians. As the life, of S. Antony written by S. Athanasius: [out of
which life when Pontitianus had related some very strange stories to S. Austin;
which effected his Conversion suddenly after to the Church Catholic (see
Confess 8. L. 6. C.) he says there: Stupebamus audientes tam recenti memoria,
and prope nostris temporibus testatissima mirabilia tua in fide recta and
Catholica Ecclesia. Omnes mirabamur, and nos, quia tam magna erant; and ille,
quia inaudita nobis erant.] Of Paul the Anchoret; Hilarion; Malchus;
Nepotianus; Paula etc. by S. Hierom: Of S. Gregory Thaumaturgus; Theodorus;
Ephrem; by S. Gregory Nyssen: of those Eastern Monks and Hermits, by Theodoret,
in his Historia Religiosa: and those Egyptian, by Palladius in his Historia
Lausiaca: of S. Martin, by Severus Sulpitious: of S. Ambrose, by Paulinus, his
servant: of S. Austin by Possidonius, one of his domestich society, of diverse
Saints and Martyrs, by S. Gregory Turonensis: (all these writers before Anno
Domini six hundred.) since; of S. Benedict, by S. Gregory the Great (D^alog. 2.
lib:) of S. Malachias, by S. Bernard: his intimate acquaintance: and S.
Bernards Life, by Gulielmus and Bernardus, Abbots, and Gofridus Clarevall: all
of them his contemporaries. In which you may discover many things not less
strange, not much unlike, to what is here presented you: and therefore, if you
yield any belief to the one, you cannot justly withdraw it from the other:
unless (perhaps) the same austerities and devotions cannot be performed, or the
same divine gifts and graces returned in the sixteenth Century, which have been
in the third, fourth, or fifth. At least, if you have not leisure, or books, to
peruse some of those, be pleased to consider well those pieces of S. Austin,
which (faithfully translated) are annexed to the end of this History. From
which (I think) will sufficiently appear to you the conformity of the more
modern ages with those more ancient; and that these latter, differ not so much
from the opinions and practices, the events and experiences of former, times,
as some would fain persuade.

Now whereas this Life has been, by diverse Authors, at several times, written
both in Latin and Italian, this Translation follows that Latin Copy set forth
by Jacobus Baccius, and printed at Rome, One thousand six hundred forty five.
But (for the greater credibility of the truth of the things here related) know;
that the first Edition thereof (though somewhat more compendious) was, within
six years after the Death of this Holy man (He dying 1595. and that being
published 1601.) written by Antonius Gallonius a Priest of the same society,
one much conversant, and intimately acquainted, with the Holy Father: published
in the same place, where Pbilip Neri lived (namely in Rome); and that not only
in Latin, but Italian (the vulgar tongue, understood by all) and that relation
as much, or more, punctual, in the particular circumstances, of time, place,
persons, etc. than the latter Editions were: (a strange impudence, in a Priest
especially, if the matter were forged). Besides; in the margent of that first
Edition, to many of the relations, and some of those as strange and incredible,
as any of the rest (so that, the one granted, the other may not reasonably be
denied) are set down the Names of those, who, in public, upon oath, testified
them: of whom many were then living in the same place, where this History was
divulged; by which any falsification might easily have been discovered. Amongst
which witnesses are found many persons of eminent quality; and some also, of
noted holiness of life: of whom it may be reasonably presumed, that they would
not conspire to swear an untruth; nor go themselves to hell, to make another a
reputed Saint on earth. Amongst the rest, Baronius, one much present with
Philip, and, for some time, his Confessor, is often cited as a witness upon
oath to many things therein. Out of the m^rgent of that Edition of Gallonius, I
have here inserted, for the more satisfaction, some of those attestations:
Concerning which, if the words of Gallonius himself may have any credence,
hear what he professes in his preface to the Reader, in that first Italian
Edition printed at Rome. 1601. I write (says he) things, many of which I have
seen my self with my own eyes. And a little after. This which I have written
(to take away all doubt from him, who shall read this present History) is
received from well-nigh three hundred witnesses, all persons of integrity,
examined solemnly and upon oath, by Jacobus Butiusda Gallese Secretary to the
Congregation, etc. Amongst these Witnesses are six most Illustrious Cardinals,
who had with this servant of God, Philip, great familiarity, and much
conversation. Namely; Alexander de Medicis, Cardinal of Florence, afterward
Pope Leo XI. Octavius Paravicinus, Augustinus Cusanus, Fredericus Borromaeus,
afterward Archbishop of Millain, Franciscus Maria Taurugi, and Caesar Baronius.
Thus he in his Preface: after which I desire you to review, what in this
present Edition is said by Jacobus Baccius in the fourth Book, ninth Chapter.
sixteenth paragraph [Five years after his death etc.]

Card. Baron. lib. Anal. Tom. 8. post Epist. Dedicat. Clem. VIII.
QUo pariter symbolo tu mecum agens, manui meae debili tuam validissimam
jungens, obtusum stylum in sagittam salutis Domini, contra insultantes Assyrios
convertisti. Quod sicut verum, 4 Reg. 13.
ita pulchrum, ac jucundum est mihi de republica profiteri. Pugnasti tu quidem,
s^^l aliena manu, usitato more tuo, qui cum admiranda operari consueveris,
mirandus tamen nunquam volueris apparere, nihil tam solicit cavens, quam ne
quid de te magnifice diceretur, operimento stultitiae saepe operiens
sapientiam, juxta 1 Cor. 3. 18. 31.
pervulgatum illud, and celebratum mentique tuae infixum penitus 1. Reg. 21.
Apostolicum paradoxum; Qui vult sapiens esse, stultus fiat. Ita quidem, ut
nullis compedibus blandientis saeculi tenereris, exemplo David ad tempus ora
mutantis, magna dona spiritus occultares, quae sunt infirmitatis humanae foris
ostentans -- Sed quam tu vivens in Christi aerarium copiosissime intulisti,
post migrationem ex hac vita aucto Judic. 7.
multiplici faenore, ipse rependit. Siquidem ubi laguncula terrea fracta est,
que latebat intus sua charitate refulgens, lampas apparuit, and quae a^sconsa
erat sub modio lucerna ardens, and lucens, super aeternitatis altum candelabrum
exaltata perspicua facta est mira^ulorum fulgore coruscans. Nunc enim, and quae
vivens edideras, sed occultaveras, mirifica, signa, sunt cognita, and alia quam
plurima recens edita patuerunt. Splendit, vile licet adhuc, utpote temporarium,
sepulchrum tuum votivis tabellis, and ex precioso metallo signis affixis,
tuorum miraculorum indicibus, quibus magis quam preciosorum marmorum crustis,
vel Aegyptiis pyramidibus, and obeliscis effulget, majus decoris indies
accipiense incrementum ab iis, qui nova beneficia consecuti, inferunt nova
signa.

THE FIRST BOOK, of the LIFE of PHILIP NERIUS.
His Actions before his going to Vallicella.
CHap. 1. Philips Birth and Infancy. 1 chapter 2. He is sent to his Uncle's in
Campania. 5 chapter 3. His going to Rome: and first fervors in Spirit. 7 chapter 4. His
studying Philosophy and Divinity. 8 chapter 5. Quitting his studies he devotes
himself wholly to Christ. 10 ch..6 The miraculous palpitation of his heart. 12
chapter 7. His good works, and pains for the converting of others. 16 chapter 8. He
erects the Fraternity dedicated to the H. Trinity. 19 chapter 9. He is made Priest,
and authorized to hear Confessions. 21 chapter 10. The original of the Spiritual
Conferences. 23 chapter 11. His first Penitents. 25 chapter 12. His zeal for
propagating the faith of Christ. 33 chapter 13. He puts Baronius upon compiling his
Annals. 40 chapter 14. The foundation of the Oratory. 44 chapter 15. He undertakes the
charge of a Church of the Florentines, 49 chapter 16. The persecutions and affronts
he suffered. 54 chapter 17. The Congregation of the Oratory erected at Vallicella.
61 chapter 18. He removes to Vallicella. 65 chapter 19. The Rules of the Oratory. 66
chapter 20. The obedience and reverence given him by his Sons. 73


THE SECOND BOOK.
Of the Virtues of Philip.
CHap. 1. His Devotion and Love to God. 81 chapter 2. His devotion to the B. Virgin
and the Saints. 87 chapter 3. He transmits holiness and devotion unto others. 90
chapter 4. His Gift of Tears. 93 chapter 5. His Prayers. 97 chapter 6. His zeal for the
saving of souls. 103 chapter 7. His singular prudence in governing of youth. 109
chapter 8. His care for the Sick and Dying. 113 chapter 9. His comforting of the
Afflicted. 120 chapter 10. He frees diverse of their Scruples of conscience. 126 chapter
11. His Alms. 131 chapter 12. His Tender heartedness and compassion. 136 chapter 13.
His unstained Virginity. 139 chapter 14. His Abstinence. 147 chapter 15. His contempt
of Riches. 149 chapter 16. His declining of Honors and dignities. 155 chapter 17. His
Humility. 160 chapter 18. His Mortification. 167 chapter 19. The mortifications he
imposed on his Sons. 173 chapter 20. His Patience. 180 chapter 21. His Perseverance.
189


THE THIRD BOOK.
Of the Gifts bestowed on him by God.
CHap. 1. His Ecstasies and Rapts. 194 chapter 2. His Visions. 202 chapter 3. He
foretells diverse of their deaths. 211 chapter 4. He foretells the recovery of
diverse. 216 chapter 5. Several other Predictions of His. 220 chapter 6. He foretells
others of their being made Popes and Cardinals. 226 chapter 7. His beholding
things absent as if present. 231 chapter 8 His understanding men's thoughts. 236 chapter
9. His Prudence and Discerning of Spirits. 246 chapter 10. He frees persons
Possessed by the devil. 259 chapter 11. His appearing to persons far remote from
him. 265 chapter 12. He raises a Dead Boy to life. 270 chapter 13. The opinion men*
had of his Sanctity. 273


THE FOURTH BOOK.
CHap. 1. Philips last sickness and the apparition of the B. Virgin. 287 chapter 2.
He foretells his own death. 291 chapter 3. His Death. 295 chapter 4. He appears to
diverse after his Death. 298 chapter 5. The concourse of people that came to see his
Corpse. 301 chapter 6. The strange cures wrought before the interring his Corpse. 304
chapter 7. His Body is opened and Buried. 307 chapter 8. His Body is translated to a
Chapel built to his honor seven years after his Death. 310 chapter 9, The
Elogies and Titles of Honor given him after his Death. 314


THE FIFTH BOOK.
Of the Miracles which he did whilst he lived.
CHapt. 1. Miracles done by him with the sign of the Cross. 322 chapter 2.
Miracles wrought by the touch of his Hands. 3^5 chapter 3. Cures wrought by his
Prayers. 335 kh. 4. He drives away Diseases by his command. 342 chapter 5. Various
miraculous cures wrought by him on diverse. 344 chapter 6. He helps diverse women in
Childbirth. 347


ERRATA.
PAge 18. line 23. read Infirmaries. p. 155. l. ult. r in his ear. p. 210. l.
14. r. crafty. p. 321. l. 14. r. HCities, l. 18. r. Convocation. p. 322. l. 15.
r. gain, p. 339 l. 9. r. Rheum, p. 365, l. 33. r. in Hippocrates judgment, p.
367. l. 16. r. voisinage, p. 391. l. 7. r. too much p. 392. l. 22. 8. cap.

The HOLY LIFE OF PHILIP NERIUS: Founder of the Congregation of the ORATORY.
THE FIRST BOOK. His Actions before his going to Vallicella.
Chapter 1. Philips Birth and Infancy.
PHilip Nerius was born at Florence in the Year of our Lord 1515. On the Vigill
of the B. Mary Magdalen after midnight, Leo the Xth. then Pope: and at his
Baptism in the Church of S. John Baptist, was after the name of his Grandfather
called Philip. His Father Francis Nerius was a man of good repute with all, and
of great integrity in his pleadings in the Law. His mother Lucretia Soldia a
Noble and Religious Matron, whose Ancestors had formerly managed the prime
offices in that Commonwealth.

Francis had by Lucretia four Children; two Daughters Katharine and Elisabeth,
and two Sons, Anthony, that dyed an infant, and Philip; who was of a pregnant
wit, an affable disposition, handsome features of body and and a strange
sweetness of behavior; furnished with all the excellencies wherewith those,
who from Heaven are designed unto the good of Souls, are usually beautified.

His virtuous Parents virtuously educated him whilst yet a child: first entering
him timely What is Writ concerning his Childhood is from the relation of his
Sister, of his own mouth, of Ludovico Parigi his most ancient and familiar
friend.
into Grammar, wherein he not only outwent, but became also admired by his
School-fellows. He studied Rethorick too under an able Master, through whose
discipline he proved a good proficient.

Among other essays of his after-piety, which at times from his very infancy he
discovered to the world, a mavelous inclination to things divine, a rare
modesty, and very great reverence to his Superiors were remarkable in him. He
was so dutiful to his Father, that, but once in all his life, was he known to
move him (in the least) to anger; viz. when he very lightly struck his Sister
Katharine, as she disturbed him at his prayers: which fault (if at those years
it may be termed a fault) being reproved for by him, he a long while after
bewailed.

His Mothers commands he was so careful of, that being at any time bid to stay
any where, he would not stir from the place without her leave. She dying, and
his Father marrying anew, his Stepmother, out of a reverence to his Sanctity,
loved him entirely, as her own; and when he afterward left Florence, wept sore
to part with him. Yea in her last most desperate Sickness, being at the point
of Death, she often redoubled his name, ever and anon calling him thereby, as if
the very mentioning of it were a kind of ease to her.

Nor only was he thus respective to his Parents and betters; even his equals
and inferiors found him so pleasant, as if he had no mixture of Choler in him
at all: so that for his excellent temper, and innocent carriage he was (by
contraction of his name) styled Pippus bon^s, Pippus the Good.

By which amiableness both of Nature, and manners, he not only deserved the
love of men, but was protected by God, even to a miracle: For being some eight
or nine years old, and (as boys are) eager of riding, he got up on an ass that
was in an outer court; and on a sudden together with the ass fell down a pair
of stairs into a cellar, where a woman presently running took him up sound* and
well, whom she supposed to have been bruised to pieces.

These rare accomplishments of the mind were attended with a special care of
religion, and the service of God: and his devotions argued in him a strange
maturity, and carried with them much of authority. For they consisted not in
erecting little Altars, as is usual for children at that age; but in sending
up prayers, reciting Psalms, and devout attention to the word of God:
concealing still in his talk his intention to become a Priest, or betake
himself to a Cloister; and even in his childhood growing reserved in his
designs; as perfectly detesting all manner of ostentation.

Such a forwardness in virtue, and so childlike innocence procured him already
that favor with God that whatever he requested of our Lord, he instantly
obtained: So that it often happened, when he had lost any thing upon recourse to
his prayers he presently found it.

He drew his first breathings of the Spirit from the Friars predicant, whose
Church dedicated to S. Mark, he much frequented, insomuch as living afterward
in Rome, when any of the Fathers of that Order visited him, he would usually
say; Whatever good I have by Gods blessing received from my Infancy: I owe it
all to the Fathers of your Society; principally to Zenobius de Medices, and
Servantius Minius: of whom he was wont to relate this passage.

These two had agreed together, every night, before they went to Mattens, to
confess their sins to one another, but the enemy of mankind envying them so
great a good, knocks at Zenobius's chamber one night, two hours before
ordinary, and cries, O ho, rise, it is high time: whereat he awaks, and leaping
out of bed hies him to Church, where he finds the counterfeit Servantius
walking hard by the seat of Confession. Zenobius taking him for Servantius
indeed devoutly kneels to make his confession, the devil sits by, takes it,
and at any fault the Penitent confessed, answered, Pish, this is nothing, no
fault, this: then discovering some worse offense, still he replied, These are
but trifles. Zenobius hearing that, mistrusting the devils wiles, crossing
himself thus bespake the Father of lies; Art not thou that fiend infernal? at
which he vanished away, both disappointed of his hope, and confounded with shame.

Besides these he resorted to an eminent Preacher of the Order of the
Humiliati, called Baldoline, whom he greatly delighted to hear; of whose
Sanct^ty, he gave a very fair Character, affirming that Florence was saved by
this man's prayers; in the Year 1527. What time the Duke of Bourbon passing with
his army through Italy, assaulted Rome.

The Holy Youth thus taken up with Spiritual employments, this divine
privilege was granted him, that burning with the love of all virtues he even
flamed with a Zeal of suffering for Christ. He was then about fifteen years of
age, when he fell into a burning fever, which he endured with that patience and
resolution, that though his body lay under the strokes of the disease, his
Spirit seemed in a sort above it: therefore secretly hiding the matter, his
chief care was to conceal from the family his being Sick.

No less bravery of mind did he express, when his Fathers house being on fire,
he bare with such moderation the loss of no small quantity of goods; that he
thereby raised in all a very great opinion of his future piety.

Chap. 2. He is sent to his Uncles in Campania.
THere was an Uncle of Philips named Romulus, a man very industrious, who going
from Florence into Campania, and living a Merchant at S. Germans had there got
an estate to the value of 22000 Crowns, and more: to him therefore was Philip
at eighteen years old, by his Father dispatched, with design, that applying
himself to Merchandise, he might make him his heir, especially having none
nearer a kin to him then he. So coming to S. Germans, he was by his Uncle
kindly received, toward whom he so demeaned himself, that observing his
ingenuity and manners, he purposed to make him his heir; but that God who had
destined him to nobler ends, defeated the contrivances of his Uncle: and Philip
within a while perceiving himself called forth to a far better course of life,
began to consult of altering his condition: to the perfecting which project of
his, that which now comes to be related did conduce.

At the Port of Caieta, not far off S. Germans, there rises a Mountai^, famed
by report for one of those that ren^ asunder at the Passion of our Savior.
This mountain parts it self into three huge clefes from top to bottom, of which
the midlemost is much the widest; where on a high and stately Rock stands a
Chapel remarked for an ancient Crucifix in it, which, as they pass by, the
Seamen are wont to salute with volleys of Shot.

Hither ofttimes Philip retires, the better to contemplate on the mysteries of
the Passion: where loathing daily more and more the varnished follies, and
gilded roctenness of this world, he resolved, quitting his Merchants affairs,
to make choice of a life, wherein he might freely serve God, with a mind
disinteressed from worldly cares. His Uncle soon discovers his drift, and
labors might and main to alter his Resolutions: First promises to leave him
sole Heir to his whole estate; then minds him of the Nerian Family, like to
fail utterly in him; which he should do well to think of; and neither hastily
nor unadvisedly determine a matter of that consequence; Lastly tells him, he had
not deserved so ill at his hands, as not to obtain one favor from him, in lieu
of so many bestowed. Philip as was fit, modestly replied; He should never be
unmindful of his favors indeed; but as to the rest, he rather commended his
affection, then approved his counsel.

Chap. 3. His going to Rome: and first Fervors in Spirit.
WHen he had been at S. Germans two years, moved by impulse of the H. Spirit,
he comes to Rome, not so much as acquainting his Father therewith, lest he
might divert him from his intentions.

At his entrance into the City, he met with an opportunity (to his own wish) of
devoting himself to Christ: for going to one Galeottus Caccius a Gentleman of
Florence, whom possibly he formerly knew, he seeing the modesty of the youth,
took him into his house, and pitying his necessity, allotted him a little
chamber, allowing him yearly a quantity of Corn, which Philip gave to a Baker,
to whom he repaired daily for a loaf to sustain life with.

This his kindness the pious young man was not wanting to requite, even with a
greater; taking upon him the instruction of Galeottus's two Sons, both in
Learning and Manners; whom in a short time he brought to that pass, that in
innocence and purity they seemed Angels rather than men.

Here for diverse years did Philip lead a most austere life, shunning all
Company and commerce; so that there be, who affirm him to have lived an
Anchorets life even in the heart of the City. His diet was so spare, you would
have said, Hunger could not pinch, nor Thirst parch him; for when the Servants
used at first to save him a share at meals, yet would he go down into the yard
to the well, and dine or sup with bread and water; adding sometimes a few
olives or herbs: yea oftimes fasting three days together. His chamber was
slightly furnished, for except a little Bed, and a few Books, you should scarce
find any thing there. His necessaries both of linen and woollen hung on a
line tied cross the room. He was much in Prayer, wherewith he was so delighted,
that he needed no external inducement, his own inclinations did so hurry him
thereto, spending sometimes whole nights and days therein. This his emment
course of life became so notorious, that not Florence alone, but most of the
Cities of Italy heard the fame thereof.

Chap. 4. His Study of Philosophy and Theology.
ANd the better to attain the perfection of divine knowledge, and contemplate
on heavenly things, he annexeth to the exercises of Piety, the studies of
Philosophy and Divinity. And applying himself first to Philosophy, he therein
so acquitted him, that not without cause he was ranked amongst the learned
Scholars, eminent in those days in the College at Rome. His Praeceptors were
the chief in all the City, Alphonso Ferrio, and Caesar Jacobellius, afterward
Bishop.

He studied Divinity among the Augustine Friars; wherein he made such a
progress, that he gained enough to serve him for his whole life: insomuch that
when he was old, he would answer the deepest questions in Theology as readily,
as if he had come from his studies but the other day: sometimes discussing such
points with his Sons, who were versed in them; both to endear them the more to
him, and by these allectives, further and promote them in Christian Devotion.
At other times (but that seldom) he would discourse thereof with the most
judicious Divines of that Age; of whom were Ambrosius de Balneolo, afterward
made Bishop of Nardo by Pius the V. and Paulus Bernardinus of Luca of the Order
of S. Dominic, famous for Wisdom and Learning, with whom he was very intimate.
To others he carried himself with such Modesty, as though he had scarce been in
the Confines of Learning. Whereupon a wise Prelate visiting him, and conferring
at large with him, said at his parting: I took this for an ignorant and
unlettered man, but in truth I find him excellently qualified for virtue and
profound knowledge: the like befell Alexander Saulius, Bishop, first of Aleria,
then of Pavie, famous for holiness and learning, who propounding some
Theological questions to him, wondered at his sharp understanding, and gave him
the like testimony.

Hence it was his custom, that if any of His had in his hearing delivered any
thing, either unwarily or obscurely, in their ordinary Sermons, (of which
course more hereafter) he would presently up into the Pulpit, and explain it
with such weight of reasons and significancy of terms, you would have said, his
Doctrine was rather inspired by God, then acquired from Art.

In Theology he mostwhat inclined to the judgment of S. Thomas, whose Sum he
had still by him: nor was he less a proficient in the H. Scriptures; by
continual reading whereof, and daily meditation, he was able to interweave the
sacred Oracles with his discourse, to the great advantage of his hearers.

Nor in his younger time did he neglect Poetry, as well Latin as Italian, in
which he grew so dextrous, that on a sudden he would compose excellent verses
at pleasure. Yet while he thus intended his studies, he did not for this omit
the exercises of Religion and Charity; but resorted to the Infirmaries of the
City, carefully tended the sick, taught in the Cathedrals the principles of
Faith, and the like; in brief, refused nothing that any way conduced to the
good of Souls. Yea, for the time he studied Divinity, whenever he fixed his
eyes on the Crucifix which hung up in the Schools, he was not able to forbear
sighs and tears. So that, as at Florence he was surnamed Pippus bonus, so at
Rome he gained the title of Philippus bonus, Philip the virtuous.

Chap. 5. Quitting his Studies he devotes himself wholly to Christ.
AS soon as he had gathered from Sciences, and reading Holy Books what he
thought might suffice to the promoting his own and others Salvation, taking S.
Paul's advice; Non plus Sapere, quam oportet sapere; That none presume to
understand, above what is meet to understand; all business set aside, he
determined to know nothing but Christ and him Crucified. Hereupon he sold all
the Books he had, and bestowed the Money on the Poor: which act of Charity
performed, he betook him to his Prayers with more fervent devotion; even to the
spending days and nights therein, and continuing sometimes in it full forty
hours.

And for his better progress, he began more severely to afflict his body,
sleeping on the ground anights, beating himself every day with small Iron
Chains, declining the Company of men, daily frequenting the seven Churches of
the City, especially the Caemitery of Callistus; where carrying with him only
one loaf for his provision, he would many times pass whole nights in
supplications: which strange course of life he led for ten years together.
Which Francis Cardonius, a Dominican (who then in Rome had charge of the
Novices in the Monastery of S. Maria supra Minervam:) observing, to encourage
others to the practices of stricter holiness, would frequently tell them;
Phil^p Neri indeed was a right holy person; who, besides many wonderful things
done by him; lived ten whole years in S. Sebastians Grots.

If he chanced at any time to find the Church-doors shut, when he repaired to
those holy places, he was won^ to stand in the Porch; and there employ himself
in meditation on heavenly things; oftimes in reading some pious book by
Moonlight. Here was he enriched with such celestial treasures, here was he so
ravished with delights, that when he could no longer sustain those overcomming
pleasures, he would cry out; It is enough, good God, it is enough, withhold I
entreat thee, withhold the excesses of thy Grace, for I cannot ^ear them: and
falling flat upon the earth, he was fa^n to roll himself too and fro. No wonder
therefore, if being big with him, who fills heaven, and earth, he did diverse
times affirm, that nothing was more irksome, more a burden to him that truly
loved God, than life: often using that memorable and common saying, That Holy Men
endured life, desired death.

Yet God not only thus feasted his Champion with Spiritual Dainties, but on
the other side exercised him with the encounters of devils that assaulted him.
He went once to the Lateran Church, and passing the Amphitheater of Vespasian,
an evil spirit in the likeness of a naked person comes out and meets him,
suggesting filthy and impure thoughts to him: but the chaste youth knowing the
wily artifices of that old Serpent betakes him to his wonted artillery of
Prayer, with which he shamefully worsted the fiend.

One night also, not far from S. Sebastians Church, on a sudden three devils
with ugly and grim visages (the more to fright him) met him praying, and
meditating as he walked, but he, as one disdaining them, discovering no sign of
fear went on undauntedly, continuing in prayer with great tranquillity: at which
they fled, frustrate of their expectations. And with many other combats in this
kind did those wicked spirits assail him, over whom notwithstanding this
valliant Soldier of Christ victoriously triumphed. Of which in their proper
places.

Chap. 6. The miraculous Palpitation of his Heart.
HAving lived thus a long time, and now 29 years of age, among other
privileges wherewith God honored him, the miraculous beating of his heart,
the fracture of two of his ribs, so that they stuck out, were not the meanest:
which befell him after this manner.

A little before Witsuntide, a festivity dedicated to the Holy Ghost, to whom
Philip having long since piously surrendered up himself, now more intensely
prayed; Lo! on an instant he perceived himself seized with such a passionate
fervor of Divine Love, that flinging himself on the earth, like one in a swoon
gasping for air, he was forced immediately to bare his breast: when, the extreme
heat somewhat allayed, he rose, and transported with extraordinary joy, putting
his right hand to his left side, found a kind of rising where the heart is and
seated, swollen to the bigness of ones fist.

What the cause of this tumor was, plainly appeared when he was dead, in the
view of diverse: for as the Surgeon opened his Corpse before skilful Anatomists
that were by; they found two of the five lesser, which they call the short,
ribs, broken clean asunder, and sticking forth like a bow, which for fifty
years afterward that he lived, at no time ever closed again: and yet (which
seems incredible) he never found from it, either then, or afterward, the least
pain or trouble.

At the same time, though he were in very good temper of body, and perfectly
free from any grief or passion, yet was he suddenly taken with a palpitation of
the heart, that held him from that moment to his last breath: Yet it used to
seize on him only when he was conversant in matters of Religion; as when he
said Mass, gave Absolution, ministered the Body of Christ, prayed, or performed
the like offices; at which his heart would so leap within him, as though it
would have broke its prison, and have forced its way through him. Then should
you have seen the stools, bed, and the chamber it self shaken and tossed, as
with an earthquake; so once at the Cathedral of S. Peter when kneeling down
upon a great and heavy board, his whole body did so quake and tremble, that the
board he rested on moved up and down, like a thing of no weight at all. From
that time was Philip so devoted unto the Holy Ghost, that after he was Priest,
he would every day (except the rites of the Church were against it) use that
prayer in the Sacrifice of the Mass; Deus cui omne cor patet.

Hence it was likewise, that if any Penitent coming to Confession chanced to
lean against his breast, he should (even to admiration) feel that throbbing of
his heart, and, if his head touched him, sometimes perceive it recoil, as if
struck with a hammer; and he in the mean while freed of all Temptations. So
that Tiberius Ricciardellus, Canon of the forenamed Church of S. Peter, who
voluntarily served the H. Man four years together, left this upon record.

What time I served the B. man (says he) I was surprised with a lewd and foul
imagination, which so soon as I had disclosed unto him, he bade me come nearer,
and join my breast to his; I approached, did so, and was instantly rid of it,
never after being molested with like impurities. Thus Tiberius. The same do
Marcellus Vitellescus, Canon of S. Maria Major, one very gracious with Philip,
and sundry others avouch.

Besides, that part of his breast burned with such extreme heat, that it
diffused it self over all his body; and even when he grew in years, and was
almost spent Many have seen this, and fourteen witnesses, persons of credit,
have confirmed it by Oath.
with incredible abstinence, yet in the depth of Winter, in the in the middle
of the night was he forced to uncover his breast, open Windows, and by several
ways, (as he could) let in the cooler air. Which immoderate heat grew so great
at some times, that not only his hands grew exceeding hot, but his throat was
dried up and scorched, as it had been on fire: that in winter, when all things
are chill, and stiff with frost and snow, you should have seen a man worn out
with old age, walk open-breasted through the City.

But when the Physicians, in regard of the differing Symptoms, which he found
from this panting, applied several and contrary medecines; he jestingly said, I
would these men knew but the cause of my malady* intimating that he was not
distempered by any natural sickness, but wounded rather with Divine Love: and
therefore used to say, Vulneratus sum Charitate ego, I am wounded with love. As
likewise finding himself ensnared in the love of Christ, he would sing in
Italian.

Vorrei saper da voi, com' ell' e fatta
Questa rete d'amor, che tanti ha preso?
I would fain be by you taught
How this Net of Love is wrought,
Where so many have been caught.
In like manner he would oftimes throw himself upon his bed, and there
languish, surcharged with the too delicious Gusts of the Spirit. So truly was
that in the Canticles verified in him, Fulcite me, etc. Stay me with flagons,
comfort me with apples, for I am sick of love. But to conceal his secret from
the notices of any, he gave out, those Fits arose either from indisposition of
body, or long custom; and therefore purposely wore a Hankerchief on the left
side of his breast, that the extension of his Ribs might not be perceived. This
also in his palpitation was attributed to a miracle, that it took him not by
constraint, but by consent; as he more then once declared to Cardinal Borromeo
his most intimate friend. And therefore Andreas Caesalpinus, and Angelus
Victorius, with other able Physicians, set forth several Tracts about it,
showing how this thrusting forth his Ribs befell him by a special Providence of
God; that his heart (likely otherwise to be oppressed in so violent a motion)
having by this means a larger circuit, might beat freelier, and gather air the
better.

After he had received of God this favor, he began more than ever to visit the
seven Churches; whom, as he was going one day, the Spirit of God so strongly
seized on, that cast down to the ground, he was fain to cry out; Depart from
me, O Lord, depart; for lo! I die; and except thou help, I can no longer bear
it. From which time the Merciful Lord somewhat abated and lessened those
impetuous violences of Holy Love.

Chap. 7. His good works, and pains for the Conversion of others.
HAving now a long while lived thus, severed from the society of men, and now
called forth by the supreme Lord of all for the good of Souls, he applies
himself wholly to the conversion of Sinners. To that end he resorts to public
meetings, the company of Scholars, frequents the Academies, intrudes into the
assemblies of the profane, diligently repairing to the chief places of
business: where on all occasions, without any regard of their persons, treating
of divine things, he wan many, whom by degrees he gently led to Christ.

Among others, whom he converted, was Henry Petra of Placentia, who by his
persuasions forsaking his Merchandise, was made Priest, and lived very
exemplarily at a Church of S. Hierom's, where he made a Holy end. This was he
that amplified and enlarged the Congregation of Christian Doctrine in the City.
Next he gained unto Christ Theseus Raspa, who likewise leaving the profession
of a Merchant took Orders, and died full of years and good works at the same
Church with Petra. He reclaimed also John Manzolius, who, though a Laique, yet
aspiring to perfection, gave a great example of virtue unto many. Besides many
others, whom he reduced to the paths of life, of whom hereafter.

And as his Charity increased, he (no doubt by directions from the H. Spirit)
began to consort with the most lewd recreants in all the City (but being of
that age, not with women at all) many of which he persuaded to better courses.
Of these there was one of the chief Bankers, who inveigled with the Love of
pelf, and mired in Sottish and carnal pleasures led a most dissolute life. He
being by Philips means incensed with a Zeal to the service of God repaired to a
Priest, for absolution of his sins, who repulsed him, for that he refused to
abjure committing the same again, he, coming to Philip something sad, relates
what had happened, beseeching him to pray to God for him, though most unworthy.
Philip chearing his dejected mind, and making light of the difficulties said
Go: I am now hasting to pray for you; and will not desist till I have moved the
most High to pity: and so he did: for shortly after, upon his withstanding the
next occasions to those sins, he was absolved according to his desires by the
same Priest, who had formerly rejected him; and became a great observer of
Philip ever after.

And here must not be forgot, that when he was young, being very handsome, he
was by some debauched persons enticed to villainy as he came from Sermon; but he
immediately discoursed to them ex tempore of the ugliness of vice, and dignity
of virtue, with such courage, that they went away his converts, who came to
pervert him.

He drove diverse to several Religious Orders. Whereupon S. Ignatius Loiola
Founder of the Society of Jesus living then at Rome, used to call him the
Saints-bell of that time; for that he excited others to Regular Discipline,
while himself led a Secular life: just as the Bell that tolls others to Church,
and it self the while abides in the Steeple. Ignatius was desirous to have made
him his own, but God had otherwise appointed.

Philips Sons observed, that those who despised his counsel for the most part
came to an ill end. So it chanced to one that professed Philosophy, whom Philip
had chid for some heinous fact, but he slighted his admonition; and no sooner
went from the place, but was unfortunately murdered. The like happened to another,
whom once, or twice he had wished to repent, who growing obstinate, within a
few days was imprisoned, convicted of a notorious crime, and adjudged to dye,
but at the earnest suit of his friends was condemned to the Galleys.

Yet whilst employed in the cure of Souls, he neglects not other acts of piety,
he often visited Hospitals, where with his own hands he made beds, cleansed away
all filth, swept the floor, served in meat, and did such like offices; but in
the first place commended to God the Souls of dying people; not leaving them
till they either recovered, or died.

These instances of Christian charity so inflamed the hearts of many unto
Piety, that not only the Clergy, but even the Laity, and Nobility began to
frequent Infirmities and places of charity (a thing not common in that age)
where, as every one stood affected they releived the fick, or strangers and
pilgrims. Hence the Order of those that minister to the Sick had its Original;
whose first Instituter was Camillus Lellius, a man renowned for his virtues,
and a great admirer of Philip. Here it must not be passed over, that Philip
affirmed, how when two of this order were one time commending to God the Souls
of the dying, he saw Angels wispering words in their ears: which thing he had
often related to them, to encourage those religious persons to so important a
duty of piety; as is mentioned in their Chronicle.

CHAP. 8. He erects the Fraternity dedicated to the H. Trinity.
BEsides these the H. Man contrived otherways for the good of his Neighbors;
for in the year 1548. on the 16th. of August, together with Persianus Rosa a
devout Priest (his Confessarius) he instituted the Society of the most H.
Trinity in the Church of S. Saviors in the Camp.

Here Philip and about fifteen more met, where besides the frequent use of
Sacraments, and other religious exercises, they communed about spiritual
matters with great devotion, provoking one another to Christian perfection. The
first Sunday of every Month, and yearly in Holy week before Easter, according
to the custom of the Church, they for the space of forty hours exposed the B.
Sacrament of the Eucharist in most solemn manner; at the performing which
Philip discoursed of heavenly things (sometimes at each hours end) with such
fervency of Spirit, as there was none so hard and inflexible, but relented
while he spoke: and once it fell out, that at one throw (letting down the net
of Divine exhortation) he drew up thirty young men together who stuck fast in
the mudd of an impure conversacion: yea diverse that came to jeer, seeing a
Layman preach (a thing then unusall) struck with the force of his words betook
them to the practices of a holy life.

During the time of these prayers, he for the most part spent a day and a night
in heavenly contemplation; and at the end of each hour by a signal dismissed
them that prayed, calling up others, and saying, See Brethren, the hour indeed
is spent, but never the time of doing well.

The Institution of this Society (which continues at this present) was, that
Pilgrims coming to Rome out of devotion, might be hospitably entertained: which
in the Jubilee following under Pope Julius the third began to grow to a perfect
work. For the number of those that came to the City being in these years much
greater, and no place settled for poor and strangers to lodge in, Philip and his
associates moved with charity courteously received them: and the resort
increasing exceedingly, there was a necessity of hiring a larger house to lodge
the many comers the more conveniently.

This charitable work excites diverse to the like: in such wise, that every day
you should see, whilst whole multitudes of travelers flocked in from all
parts, some washing their feet, others bringing them victuals, others making
their beds; some comforting the distressed, instructing the Ignorant, all
diligent in doing all offices of charity and piety. So that the good savor of
this Order diffusing 'its fragrancy abroad far and wide, sundry were ambitions
of entering into it.

The first of this fraternity (who all reverenced Philip as their Father)
though but meanly accomodated with temporals, had nevertheless a rich
furniture of their own virtues; for he that had the lowest office among them,
serving in the Kitchen, arrived to so high perfection, that going many times at
midnight from his lodging, looking up to heaven he would be even rapt with the
meditation of things divine. Another likewise of the same society foreseeing
the day of his death, sends for his Sister, and bid her write, such an hour on
Friday I shall depart: and departed the same hour as he had said.

Further these pious, and compassionate men, observing sick men turned out of
the Hospitals, before they were quite recovered, oftimes relapsing with greater
peri of their lives, appointed that such for some days should be relieved
here, till they were perfectly well. All which, being daily augmented, and
enlarged, was for convenience removed from the Church of S. Saviors to that
place where the Temple of the H. Trinity is now erected, at the Bridge Xistns.

And to what greatness this work has rise, within these three last Jubiles,
both our Fathers and our selves have beheld. For not only the chief Prelates of
the Court, and Cardinals of the Church of Rome; not only men, and women of
principal note (the one toward the men, the other toward women) have bin seen
performing services of all kinds; but there also you might behold the Pope
himself (both to the admiration, and for the imitation of the beholders)
washing the feet of Pilgrims, serving them at table, giving them Alms, and most
devoutly doing such like offices; insomuch as the fame hereof was bruited
throughout the whole Christian World.

CHAP. 9. He is made Priest, and Authorized to hear Confessions.
GOd therefore having determined the work of his Servant to the Cure of Souls,
and Philip in that condition being incapable of such employment, inwardly
excites Persianus Rosae his Confessor to persuade him to the taking H. Orders.
At first he opposed it, objecting his weakness, and endeavored by many reasons
to divert Persianus from those thoughts: but he peremptorily demands his
obedience.

So in the year 1551. (the Council of Trent not then broken up) Philip at the
age of 36. in March at S. Thomas's Church in Parione, but upon several days,
received his first Tonsure, the four inferior Orders, and Subdeaconship: and
the same month and year, namely on the Saturday in Holy week was made Deacon
at the Lateran Church: and on the 23d. of May the same year, Priest, at S.
Thomas's.

Soon after he went to dwell at S. Hierom's a Charitate, where lived some few
yet holy Priests: viz. Bonsignorius Cacciaguerra of Siena, a man eminent for
his Sanctity, and Learned, Persianus Rosa Philips Confessor; Francis
Marsupinius of Arezzo, one of great simplicity and integrity, who next after
Persianus was Philips Confessor; one Francis surnamed the Spaniard, no whit
inferior to the rest in virtue; and Peter Spatarias of Arezzo too; one of
extraordinary piety, and the last of all the Priests at S. Hierom's that were
his Confessors. For these dying he chose John Baptist a P^^usian of the society
of Jesus for some years; and last of all Caesar Baronius to his dying day.

These servants of Christ, lived in the same house together, united fast in the
same bond of mutual charity and respects; without any other particular
constitution of government, save only Love, none superior to other, nor having
one table, but keeping their order of seniority, cared for nothing but to outvy
each other in the serving of God, and helping their Neighbors. Which Order
continues still, and flourishes to the great example of virtue: and here was
Philip Authorized for the taking Confessions; whereby he daily gained
opportunities for promoting the good of Souls.

CHAP. X. The Original of the Spiritual Conferences.
BUt for that most then neglected the things pertaining to salvation, and
counted it enough for them to confess their sins once or twice a year: Philip
observing, that the bane of souls principally arose hence; employed all his wit
and pains to animate and stir them up to more frequent use of the Sacraments,
and the discharge of other religious duties: which with those devout persons
already mentioned he restored, or at least promoted at Rome.

And to effect it the better, laying all aside, he gave himself wholly to the
hearing Confessions, having no small number of Penitents, and considering what
great advantages accrewed thereby, bestowed part of the night also herein: and
betimes in the Morning gave audience to others confessing to him in his
Chamber; for whose convenience he laid the key of his door in a constant place,
that they might have access to him at their pleasure.

As soon as ever the Church-doors were open, he straight betook him to his seat
of Penance, which he left not usually, except to say Mass, or when some urgent
occasion called him away. When none came he stayed there either meditaring, or
walking before the Church Porch; that if any needed his help they might
presently have recourse to him, as being at leisure. He was so delighted in
hearing Confessions, that he would often say, he took exceeding pleasure in but
fitting in the Penitential chair; and therefore as long as he lived he omitted
not this service. And when any asked him, Father, why do you over-burden your
self with so great pains taking? his answer was, I am so far from thinking it a
burden, that I find it an ease and recreation to me.

Neither was it enough in his opinion to allure many by these artifices, but he
also labored to strengthen and confirm them in the ways of God. To which end
he took order for their meeting in his chamber after dinner, (for at those
hours the wise man knew the incursions of the Noonday devil were most of all
to be avoided and withstood) where gathering round about him, he either sitting
or resting on the bed, proposed some moral subject, as the beauty of virtue, or
deformity of vice, or else the life of some Saint, whereto every one
contributed his part. Which pious discourse ended, Philip repeating what was
said, followed the argument with such a Monte Zazzaro testified this upon oath.
eagerness, that he a shook the whole room with his action, and oftimes his
body was seen lifted up into the air, and he standing as on the Ground.

At first there were present at these Conferences but seven or eight: viz.
Simon Grazinius and Montes Zazzara, Florentines; Michael a Prato a Shoemaker,
two young men Goldsmiths; and a Roman, one of the Maximi: but the number
afterward increasing, the H. man at his own charges provided a larger, and more
convenient room in the same house.

CHAP. XI. His first Penitents.
WIth these religious exercises did He win many of the prime of the City, which
became famous in all manner of virtues. Among which the principal were John
Baptist Salviatus, Sisters son to Katharine de Medices, Queen of France; who
was not ashamed to stoop unto the meanest services for Christ's sake, even to
attendance on the Hospitals, an employment then thought (but thought unjustly)
ignominious for a Noble man; all which he managed with such evidences of his
Charity and and Humility, that the sick out of respect to his Person refused
his service, which many times he was fain to force upon them. One day making
the beds in an Hospital (as his manner was) he found one sick, which had
formerly been his servant, who (when he would have made his bed) sick as he was
opposed him: the Master urged, the Servant refused; so that a great quarrel
began betwixt them, till after a hot contest the Masters Piety got the victory
of the Servants Modesty.

This man was such a master of his affections, that he who lately stalked
through the City, gorgeously arrayed, attended with a numerous train of
servants, having once relished the Spirit, began now utterly to abandon the
empty ostentation of such State; yet Philip wished him to go well habited, and
keep a competent Retinue for the Honor of his house. By these and the like
virtues he so pleased God, that at his death, armed with the Sacraments of the
Church, and spreading forth his hands to Heaven, he sang that of David,
Laetaetus sum in his quae dicta sunt mihi, in domum Domini ibimus: I was glad
when they said unto me, Let us go into the house of the Lord: and so breathed
out his soul in the arms of Philip his most tender Father.

Before this, Philip had long since brought Portia the Wise of this Salviatus,
one of the Maximi, to a wonderful height of Piety; for living a Widow at
Florence, she resolved on some stricter course of serving God; and thereupon
withdrew unto a Monastery of Religious Virgins: but not having her health well
at Florence, returned to Rome, where, entering into the Nunnery of S. Katharine
of Siena on Mount Viminal, being very aged, as she had lived virtuously, so she
died holy and lamented.

Next Salviatus was Francis Maria Taurusius Politianus, allied to two Popes,
Julius the third, and Marcellus the second; a man of great parts, and for his
excellencies and abilities of mind by the Princes highly esteemed, and of much
repute at Court. He, upon occasion of a certain Indulgence at that time
published, went to the Church of S. Hierom a Charitate to Confession, and found
the good man, never unprepared to such offices. When he had done Confession,
Philip had him to his chamber; where, after many and several discourses, he
took an occasion to desire him to go and pray with him one hour. Taurusius
yielded to it; and found in that space such a gust of heavenly things, that the
hour seemed less then a minute to him. And when afterward coming to Philips
lodging, he often saw him hoised up into the air whilst he prayed he began to
have a venerable esteem of him, and inflamed with more ardent affections unto
holiness, thought of prescribing to himself a new course of life. But withheld
by some obstacles from those purposes of serving God, he acquaints Philip with
them; who bids him Go, and rest contented; for those lets that now hinder you
within a month will be over: and at the months end returning to the H. man
well quieted and at ease, he confessed to him, with great contrition and
remorse, the sins of his whole life; and finding in Confession that Philip
could discover his very thoughts and imaginations, became such a lover and
admirer of him, that foregoing the Pomp and splendor of the Court, he resigned
up himself wholly to his conduct.

This man had so burning a zeal, and fervent devotion, as needed more
correctives to allay, than incentives to excite it: and he so wholly depended
in every thing upon the Divine pleasure, that he never lost the tranquillity of
mind, which he had at his first conversion. He highly reverenced Philip; so
that being fourscore years of age, and dignified with the Cardinals purple, he
gloried most, that he had laid his groundwork in Christ's School under Nerius
for above fifty years. He was famous for the gift of prayer and tears. He was
so excellent at making familiar Sermons, that he is styled by Baronius in his
Ecclesiastical Annals, Dux Verbi; the Chieftain of the Preachers. Clement the
eighth created him first Archbishop of Avignion: and then conferred on him the
Cardinal Dignity: when he was in years he earnestly besought the Fathers, that
he might return to them, and end his days in the Congregation, they all
assented; so, not long after, in the year of our Lord 1608. and of his age the
82d. and the eighth month, he devoutly ended his life, and lies buried in the
Church.

There was besides, among the sons of this H. Father, Constantius Tassonius,
Nephew to Peter Bertanus Cardinal of Phanum, who being so great a Courtier as
he was thought never to be weaned from the world, yet by his converse and
acquaintance with Philip, retired from Court, and arrived to a most eminent
piety, there being not the meanest duty of charity which he would not most
willingly undertake: Thrice a week, and for the most part, every day, he opened
himself to his Confessor, and fed on the Bread of Heaven: went every day to
Hospitals and Almshouses; refusing no means of conquering his own will,
imposed on him by Philip. When he was made Priest he said Mass every day: so
averse to riches and Church-preferments, that being offered a Benefice of a
considerable value, he rejected it. For his extraordinary Sanctity and Virtue
he was by S. Carlo solicited to come to Millain, where he continued in his
family to his dying day in high estimation; at last being dispatched to Rome by
that H. Cardinal, he dyed in the bosom of Philip, who foretold his death to
him, as after will appear.

One of the eldest of Philips Scholars was John Baptist Modius, a Calabrian by
profession a Physician, one learned and virtuous, that writ excellently of the
waters of Tiber: and completed some Notes of the B. Jacoponius upon the
Canticles. Once Philip came to see him almost dead with a fit of the Stone; and
exhorted him to patience; when going out he stepped into the next Church, and
prayed to God most fervently for him; and at the first tear the H. man shed,
Modius voided the stone. Thereupon This was publicly attested by John Francis
Bordinus Archbishop of Avignion.
being recovered, not unmindful of the blessing, he put himself into his sole
patronage and tuition. He was of a mild temper, soon affected with the
miseries of others; very ready in preaching; who by Philips appointment (whilst
yet a Layman) with much banefit and content unto the Auditors; rehearsed the
lives of the Saints over in the Oratory: of which hereafter. When he died,
Philip appointed to that employment Antony Fuccius of Tifernum. a Physician
able and pious, and one of the H. man's disciples, who had agreed to go with him
into the Indies, for propagating the Christian Faith.

There was also one Martius Alterius greatly devoted to Philip, a Roman; one
who was so good a proficient under his discipline, that Moses like, for the
exuberances of the Spirit, he could scarce frame to speak of Divine matters. He
was also so compassionate to the poor, that he gave them his very bed.

Add to these Matthew Stendardus, Nephew to Paul the fourth, Bernardinus a
Valle of Com^, Fulvius Amodeus, James Marmita, John Antonius a S. Severina,
Lewis Paris, who lived with Philip as his menial servant almost thirty years:
and many others of the prime families of Italy, all of which gave singular
proof of their profiting by his Discipline, before the whole Court of Rome.

Beside these he had other Sons, of mean rank indeed, but of illustrious piety.
Of which the first was Steven a shoemaker of Arimium, who lately living a
Soldier led a dissolute and profane life, in the abetting quarrels and
maintaining of sends: being at Rome he happened to go to the Oratory of S.
Hieroms to the sermon there, and in civility to the rest sat the lowest of all;
but Philip though he neither knew nor had seen him before, brings him to the
uppermost seat kindly inviting him to sit down; when the company was gone
coming to him again, he used him with such respect, that being wone partly with
Gods Word, partly with these, courtesies he frequented the sermons every day,
by the constant use of which and of the Sacraments he by degrees cast off his
long accustomed evil habits, and by little and little attained unto the height
of virtue. He was so propense to works of mercy, that albeit he lived poorly,
yet of that he got weekly in his trade, abating necessary diet, he distributed
the rest among the poor. He continually meditated on his latter end, preparing
himself thereto, no less than if he had bin to dye that day: yet his daily
thinking thereon made him not alter his countenance, nor leave his wonted
cheerfulness. He was strict in his obedience, and much in prayer, in which he
received many and great favors from our Lord; particularly this that in the
Church of the H. Trinity he was seen to shine with a marvailous brightness.
Thus sequestered from all kind of company, lived he in a small cottage about 23
years, and being advised by his friends (suspecting he might dye suddenly
without notice taken) not to live alone, he made answer, that he relied on the
B. Virgins patronage, and doubted not, but that pious Mother would assist him
in such an exigent. Nor was he mistaken in the event, for one night being like
to dye on the sudden, he went out and called some of his neighbors to stay by
him, and fetch the Curate of the Parish; and going to bed again, when he had
fitted himself in due manner with all the Sacraments, he quietly surrendered up
his Spirit.

Next to Steven was Francis Maria firnamed Ferrariensis an honest and upright
man, one who could smell a filthy stench in sin, and sometimes had heard the
music of Angels: when he communicated (which he did every day) or discoursed
about heavenly matters he would even melt into tears. Withal so ambitious of
suffering for Christ, that once in grievous tortures of the stone he prayed
God, if he saw it good to inflict more on him; upon the uttering which words he
was presently cured. He was so desirous of the salvation of others, that after
3 years tears shed for a certain Jew he at length procured his conversion of
God. Taurusius found him once weeping fore, and demanding the reason of it, I
could almost drown my self in tears, says he, when I think of the words of
our Savior, Cum haec omnia feceritis, dicite, etc. When we have done all these
things, say, we are unprofitable servents: for if the Apostles suffering so
much for Christ, must call themselves unprofitable, what shall I poor wretch
say, that remember no good ever done by me? The same Taurusius found him
another time very intent in prayer, going backwards still as though some huge
mountain had bin coming upon him, and asking why he did so: I was says he,
meditating on Gods immensity and greatness, which appearing still greater and
greater to me caused me even with my body to retreat likewise.

Another of Philips disciples was Thomas a Sicilian, who through his managery
attained to such a pitch of humility, that he took it for a high honor to have
but the office of sweeping So Peter's Church in the Vatican: which when he
obtained, he discharged with all diligence and care. In the day time he never
went out of the Church; In the night he would fetch a light nap on the steps of
some Altar: having lived in this office diverse years, the devil, enduring his
unshaken constancy, put him into a fright, that by being terrified he might
desert his emploiment. So, as he rested securely one night, the evil spirit on
the sudden made a great noise in the Church, that he verily thought all the
seats had bin taken up and presently dashed against the ground; herewith
awakned he rose, and taking a wax-light looked round the Church, but found
nothing misplaced at all: and prying narowly into the private corners and
holes; lest some thief might lie ^id there, he spied a devil skulking hehinde a
pillar in the likeness of an ugly More; Thomas boldly ran to him, lifting up
his hand to strike him a box on the ear, but the Father of pride ashamed,
vanished; so, he unappalled returned to his place, and slept on quietly.

Among other of Philips Scholars was Friar Lewis of Spoleto, so called, not for
that he entered into any Religious Order, but for that in honor of S. Francis
he always wore hair cloth. He sustained great temporal poverty, but was
requited by a spiritual opulency, and the most precious virtues, especially
purity. For which reason Philip allotted him the care of the Virgins of S.
Katherinede Rosa; of which; when for certain causes he desired to be
discharged, he could never get the B. man's consent, as having sufficient
experience of his chastity.

Of the number of his disciples must Peter firnamed Molinarius be also
reckoned, one who lost his sight with excessive weeping; which he is reported
to have recovered afterward by miracle from Almighty God. Sundry other children
in Christ had Philip, which died in high reputation for Sanctity; of whom some
are for brevities sake omitted here, some, as occasion offers, shall be
inserted in due place.

CHAP. XII. His Zeal for propagating the Christian Faith.
NOw while the children of this B. Father were conferring of divine things
daily in his chamber, where were sometimes read letters, that used to be sent
yearly from the Indies to the Fathers of the Society of Jesus; Philip casting
with himself how plentiful a harvest, and how few laborers there were in those
parts, resolves (so he were ascertained it would be acceptable to God) to go
into the Indies, there to his utmost to propagate the Christian faith, and, if
need were, shed his blood for the truth of Christ.

His intents he declares to some his chief familiars, in number about twenty,
of whom was Taurusius; of these some he wishes to become Priests, only that
thereby having procured the Apostolical Benediction they might take a voyage to
the Indies. But because he would not enterprise nor determine any thing of
moment but by advice, prayer, and the advantage of time, using longer Prayers
then formerly, he went to a Monk of the Order of S. Benet, that dwelt in S.
Paul's Monastery without the City, and advised with him, as being in repute for
his life and learning: he remitted him to another Monk of the Order of
Cistercians, called Augustine Ghettine Govenourr of the Monastery of the H.
Martyrs, Vincentius and Anastasius at Aquae Salviae.

This man was in esteem for knowledge and sanctity, by his parents dedicated to
God and Religion ere he was born into the world. For his devout Parents, having
duly confessed, and received the B. Sacrament, were wont to consecrate to God
their issue, as often as it befell them, yet unborn. He was famous likewise for
the Spirit of Prophecy; and exceedingly devoted to S. John the Evangelist; by
whose means, he said, he had received very many favors: insomuch that being
near his end he cried out, My dear S. John (so he called him) has assured me,
I shall die on his Festival. And indeed as he said Mass on Christmas day, the
Evangelist forewarned him, that next day after he should die: so, Mass being
done, he hastened to bed, and arming him with the Sacrament of extreme Unction,
the day following died.

To this Reverend person Philip relates what he had designed, and requests his
advice aceording as the matter imported, he deferred in it, and bids him come
again, that so he might give him a more punctual answer. At the day appointed
when Philip came, he returned him this answer; S. John the Evangelist had
appeared to him, and told him plainly, that his Indies should be at Rome, and
that God would use his service there for the good of many: telling him further
that the Three Fountains seemed to him of bloody tincture, which, as S. John
expounded it, presaged a great calamity on the City. Upon this Philip gave
over, determining to settle at Rome, and addict himself altogether to the
furthering and promoting the salvation of others, as long as he lived.

Yet did not this ardent Zeal of propagating the Faith chill in him at any
time: for what he could not do among the Indians, he to his uttermost
endeavored in the City. When a Jew, Heretic, or any other Infidel met him,
he could not refrain weeping at the first sight, he was so earnestly desirous
of his conversion: and therefore neglected nothing that might further it.

One time he traveled with Prosper Cribellius, one of his Sons, whom he loved
well, to S. John Laterans; into whose company a Jew chanced to light; as they
went into the Church, reverently kneeling before the Altar, where was the H.
Sacrament, the Hebrew stood with his hat on, turning his back upon the Altar,
to whom Philip; Friend, let me entreat you to pray with me a little in these
words, O Christ, if thou be the true God, grant that I embrace the Christian
faith: Far be that from me, replied the Jew, that were to question my own
Religion. Thereupon Philip spoke to them that were by, Pray ye for him, for
doubtless he shall receive the faith of Christ: and so it proved; for a while
after, at the prayers of Philip, with other spiritual means, the Jew was
baptized, and listed in Christ's Militia.

On the Vigil of the H. Apostles Peter and Paul, Marcellus Ferrius, one of
Philips Sons, happened on two young men, Hebrews, in the porch of the Vatican
Church: who saluting them courteously, began to discourse piously and
profitably (and not in vain) of both the faith and glory of those Hebrew
Apostles: thereby gently and by degrees persuading them to visit Philip at
their leisure, who lived then at S. Hieroms. They did so, and were kindly
entertained by the H. Father, whose sweetness and civility so transported them,
that for some months together they constantly called on him at certain times;
afterward when they left coming, Philip sends for Marcellus, bids him
carefully look out those young men. He goes to their house, enquires of their
Mother, if they were well: she tells him one of them lay dangerously sick; he
desired to have access to him, and, as God would have it, was admitted: when he
came into the Room he finds him like to dye; his disease having taken away his
stomach quite, so that he refused all meats. The woman requests Marcellus to
offer him meat if happily he would take it from his hand: he did, and the young
man accepts whatsoever he offers. Marcellus when he saw his time, whispers in
his ear. Philip remembers him kindly to you: at which, he was much pleased and
smiled. Then Marcellus, Remember you promised Philip you would become a
Christian; I well remember it, said he, and will stand to my word. Marcellus
informs Philip hereof, who over joy'd said to him, Doubt not, let us but fall
to our prayers, and be confident, he will receive the faith. In fine, the sick
party recovered and both he and his Brother were Baptized.

He converted also to the Christian faith, one of the wealthiest of the Jews,
who was baptized in S. Peter's Church. And because his Father who was still a
Jew was more familiar than was meet with the Son so lately become a Christian,
Gregory the XIIIth. then Pope, fearing lest by this daily converse this new
Soldier of Christ's might receive harm, told Philip he liked not that kind of
intercourse. The H. man replied, he therefore suffered their society, for that
he hoped by the sons means to gain the Father to Christ also. And he was not
deceived in it, for as soon as the Son but brought his Father to Philip, he
discoursed with such fervent charity, and forcible eloquence of true faith in
God, that being enflamed therewith he quickly was baptized, and admitted into
the number of the faithful.

Some years after, when Philip went from S. Hieroms to Vallicella, the same man
having four Nephews, Orphans, was solicitous to keep them from conversing with
the Jews, that so being instructed in the mysteries of religion, they might be
trained up in the faith of Christ: these therefore, their affectionate Uncle
commits to Philip, who lovingly and friendly, as his manner was, received them,
but said nothing of religion. A while after he bid them pray unto the God of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, to enlighten their minds with the beams of his
truth, promising the next day at Mass to set upon God by violence. And though
the young men, who had bin often assaulted by arguments and exhortations,
continued This is attested by diverse sworn Witnesses.
unshaken, it was observed at the time Philip said Mass, they inclned to
embrace the Christian faith; whereupon those, who were there the day before,
and heard what Philip said, namely, That he would offer violence to God,
remembered his words.

Meanwhile that the lads where learning the principles of Religion at
Vallicella, one of them fell into a fever, and the sixth day the disease being
at the highest, the Fathers fearing he would dye, consulted about baptizing
him; but toward Evening Philip came to see him, and lightly stroaking his
forehead and breast, My son I should be sorry, said he, you should dye of this
sickness; for the Jews would give out, the Christians had bin the cause of your
death: therefore to morrow before dinner s^nd to put me in mind, that at Mass
I pray to our Lord for you. Which when Peter Consolinus, Philips chief
favorite, heard, he told the youth, Son you will recover this sickness; for
this good man has by his prayers to God restored diverse to health. That night
he had a shrewd fit, and the Physician that had the cure of him, sent to his
Uncle to make all have if he meant to see his Nephew alive; but when the hour
for Mass came, Consolinus asked the young man if he should mind Philip, as was
agreed; who was willing. When lo! scarce had the H. man done Mass but the young
man rose up perfectly well, and sat upon his bed, and his Uncle coming found
him rid of his fever. After dinner when the Physician came and felt his pulse,
as his manner was, crossing himself at the strangeness thereof he cried out,
have ye Physicians at home, and do ye fetch them from abroad? at evening came
Philip again to see him, and told him, Truly son you had died, but that your
Mother might not impute the cause of your death to us, I have obtained of our
Lord your recovery by prayer. Whereupon as soon as he was thoroughly well, some
two months after, hoth he and his Brothers, to the great joy of the devout old
man, were baptized by Pope Clement the eight in the Lateran Church, on the
feast of the Apostles, S. S. Simon and Jude.

But because they as heartily desired the conversion of their Mother, they
never left importuning their superiors, till they got her placed with a Lady
of great quality: and asking Philip still, what hopes were of her; the good man
answered, She shall not yet embrace the faith of Christ; nor is it now so
expedient: but it shall fall out more seasonably both for you and her. And so
it was; for, about six years after, she and others to the number of 24. were
baptized together.

He gathered into the bosom of the Church many heretics also; whose names
are purposely omitted. Yet how he caused one Palaeologus to renounce his
heresy, may not be passed over in silence. He was kept as an Arch-heretique in
the Inquisition, and, persisting obstinately after all ways used, was condemned
to be burnt. As he was led to execution, Philip then living at S. Hieroms,
being acquainted therewith, forthwith runs and meets him, leaping into the
crowd; and making his way resolutly through the guard, when clasping about the
condemned person, he friendly counsels him to retract his error. When they came
to the stake, Philip (by the authority God vouchafed him at that time with
them) bid the officers stay: they did so: meanwhile Philip in few words, yet
such as had their weight from heaven, persuaded this errant to the
acknowledging of the truth: willing him to get upon a form and there publicly
disclaim his heresy, who heartily did abjure and detest his impious opinions in
the view of all the people. At last Philip prevailed so far, that he was
brought back to prison, where to mollify the mind of this penitent, he
procured him of Gregory the thirteenth a very liberal gratuity, besides what
the Masters of the Inquisition allowed him for diet: and that he might not
relapse from his good resolutions, visited him every day, treating with him
only about matters of religion. And for the subduing and curbing in him the
spirit of arrogance and pride, wherewith heretical minds use to be possessed,
he gave him the lives of S. John Columbinus and Jacoponius to read, saying,
that this sort of men are easilier won by the example of holy men, and their
innocent behavior, than subtilties or disputes: so that Palaeologus was sorry
he had not light on Philip before, and bin acquainted with him. Yet he lasted
not long in this good mind, which Philip foretold in these words: This man's
conversion does not altogether like me: yet by his prayers and tears he
obtained of God his return and repentance: but at length relapsing again he
was put to death, not without signs of hearty contrition; Caesar Baronius and
John Francis Bordinus at the instance of Philip affording their assistance for
settling his mind in the faith being then at the brink of death.

CHAP. XIII. He puts Baronius upon writing his Annals.
THis so vehement zeal of propagating the faith would not be confined to the
limits of Rome, but diffused it self far and wide unto the most distant
quarters of the Christian world. For perceiving that in some Northern
countries the enemies of the Catholic faith daily broached new and infectious
doctrines, he, on the contrary pitying the great ruin of Souls, resolved to
oppose himself. Thereupon by special directions of the spirit of God he
enjoined, that in the Oratory (of which anon) one of his Scholars as often as he
preached, should bring down the Ecclesiastical story in order, from the
Incarnation of Christ; that so, the beginning, truth, and progress of the
universal Church exposed to open view, and the craft and cheats of heretics
discovered, neither the Ignorant might be led into error, nor the Learned
pretend any excuse.

For this task he made choice of Caesar Baronius of Sora, Doctor in either Law,
a man renowned for sacred story, and noted for good life, who being but a
private person was so liberal a benefactor to the poor, that he bestowed all
his houshould-stuff, to a silver cabinet of a good value, and of much esteem
with him, yea his very apparel toward their maintenance: and so great a
despiser of honors that he tore his privilege of Doctor, merely in contempt
of himself. Him therefore the H. Father designed for publishing the History of
the Church so often recited in the Oratory, having well digested it into Method:
a labor, which being begun out of obedience, and after vast pains and
continual watchings perfected, came happily forth.

Which so noble and admirable work is to be ascribed rather to Philip than
Baronius, as in his preface on the eighth Tome he has left upon record, for
the clearing of which, his own words are set down at the end of this treatise.
Add hereunto, that Philip himself a little before he died, calling Baronius to
him, said, Think but meanly of thy self, Caesar, for these works are not the
issue of thy pains and study; but a gift of the Divine Bounty rather: when
repeating the same again and again, True Father, replied Baronius, for whatever
is in them is all next God owing to your prayers.

The same is confirmed by a vision from heaven, which appeared to him not long
before he set about the compiling his Ecclesiastical History. For when first he
began to preach in the Oratory, he used to thunder out the terrors of de ath
and hell: which after he had a while practiced, Philip by direction of the H.
Ghost, foreseeing that, if he changed the subject of his discourse, it would
prove more beneficial both to himself and others, advised him to apply himself
to the composing his Ecclesiastique story, and leave preaching death and hell:
at that time Baronius did not oppose, but his genius carrying him the other
way, afterward neglected his admonition: so that Philip by virtue of his
authority commanded him speedily to go about the task he had set him. Which his
injunctions Baronius thought hard, and urged thereto one while by the virtue of
obedience, another while discouraged by the reluctance of his nature, he was
extremely troubled, but the Good Lord to allay these tempests in him, thus made
known his mind to him.

As he was asleep one night, he thought he was discoursing with Onuphrius
Panuinus, who also applied himself to Ecclesiastical history, when being very
pensive, and intimating what Philip had imposed upon him, he desires him not to
refuse the finishing such a work: and as he heaped up arguments to persuade his
friend, on the sudden he hears Philips voice saying yield Caesar, now yield,
and stand out no longer, for that the Ecclesiastical history must be written
by you, not by Panuinus. At which Baronius awaked, and perceiving it to be the
Divine will, immediately resolves to run through the Church Annals in the
Oratory: which when he had brought along from Christ's, we near to his own
times, Philip enjoined him to rehearse them once or twice from the beginning to
the end: so that in the space of thirty years (as in the preface mentioned he
affirms) he went over in public, the whole story from the beginning seven
times, ere he printed the first Tome; and at last put forth the whole work
divided into twelve Tomes. For this his great service to the Church he was by
Pope Clement the eightth advanced to the dignity of a Cardinal; which eminency
with what unwillingness and regret he received, is there recorded by him;
besides his refusing before that three wealthy Bishoprics. So, worn away with
continual study and long weakness, living in hi^ Tusculan retirement, when he
found his end approaching, Let us go to Rome says he, for it beseems not a
Cardinal to dye in the Country. Being brought therefore to the City in a
Litter, his sickness increasing, he died the last of June 1608. In the 69th.
year of his age (which number he had with his pen marked in many pages of his
books; as being prescribed for the term of his life) in a house near the
Oratory, not far from S. Philips Chapel, the Fathers of the Congregation being
present; and was buried with great concourse of people.

For the same cause, to wit the refuting obstinate heretics fondly rejecting
the worshipping of saints, Philip enjoined him to annex some Annotations to the
Roman Martyrology. And for this reason also Thomas Bozzius of Eugubium, and
Anthony Galloni^s of Rome, both Priests of the Congregation, published their
writings with great commendation and liking; the first, of the marks of the
Church of God, the other of the Lives of the Saints.

CHAP. XIV. The Foundation of the Oratory.
Seeing therefore Philip determined to bestow his pains at Rome, in winning
souls to God, and the number of penitents daily increased, that the place
though large could not hold them: in the year 1558. He obtained of the deputies
for the chief convent of S. Hierom, that part of the Church, which lies on the
right side of the Chancel above the body of the Church; where he erected the
Oratory, whither he removed the Conference held before in his Chamber.

That Oratory is yet to be seen, but more sumptuously and neatly built; to
which the R. R. Fathers daily resort to prayer, and on Holy Days preach to the
great benefit of souls.

Hither therefore did Phiiip with his Sons retire every afternoon to their
Spiritual exercises; which ended, he would lead them, on worky days to some
open place of the City or Suburbs; on festivals to some Church or other: and
hence came the custom of having the daily repast of the word of God, and that
familiar way of preaching instituted by the H. Father.

But these beginnings of the Infant Oratory none better can delineate, then he
who knew them so exactly, and described them so copiously, Baronius. For in the
first Tome of his Annals, treating of holy meetings, such as the Apostle
mentions to the Corinthians. Certainly by the Divine wisdom, says he, was it
brought to pass, that in our times, thirty years since, by means chiefly of
the R. Father Philip Nerius a Florentine, who as a wise Master Builder laid the
foundation; and of his disciple the R. Father Francis Maria Taurusius
Politianus, who amongst them seemed the Chieftain of the Preachers, Assemblies
were instituted in the City, much what after the form of those Apostolical
conventions, such especially as by the Apostle were appointed for the
discoursing of divine matters, both for edifying the hearers, and for
propagating the Church. By the care therefore and industry of these was it
first agreed on, that the Zealous Christians should meet adays at S. Hieroms
Oratory (for from it came the name of the Congregation of the Oratory) and
there a religious meeting should be held after this manner. First silence being
made, they began with prayer, and one of the Brothers reads some pious lesson.
At the reading of which the Father used to interpose upon occasion, explaining
more fully, enlarging, and vehemently inculcating upon the minds of the
Auditors, the things read: continuing his discourse sometimes a whole hour
(with great satisfaction to the hearers) dialogue-wise* asking some of the
company their opinions of such a thing. Afterward by his appointment one of
them went up into the desk raised upon steps, and made an Oration, without
flourishes or varnish of Language, composed out of the approved and choice
lives of Saints, Sacred writ, and sentences of the H. Fathers. He that
succeeded him discoursed after the same manner, but on a differing matter. Then
followed a third, who related some part of the Church-story in the order of its
several ages. Every of these had his half-hour allotted him, and performed all
with marvailous delight and approbation: then, singing some Hymn, and going to
prayers again the company broak up. All things thus ordered, and ratified by
the Pope, as far as the times would suffer, that beautiful face of the
Primitive Apostolical assembling seemed to be revived again; whereat all good
men rejoicing, and many taking their model from them, the like exercises of
piety were set up and practiced in other places. Thus far Baronius to show the
rise and original of the Oratory.

To these daily duties he added others to be performed on Holy days. First he
enjoined them to confess duly, and spend some time in prayer before they went
to Mass; after that to receive the Sacrament. Then he sent them severally to
diverse Infirmaries, some to S. John Laterans Hospital, some to S. Mary's de
Consolatione, others to Santo Spirito in Saxia, where they did each of them to
their power help the sick both by word and deed. Some of them virtuous above
the rest (in number about thirty or forty) to the singular example of piety to
the beholders, went every day to perform these offices of charity.

Besides some of them every Saturday evening, and on Holiday eves came to
Philip, whom he took with him by night from S. Hieroms, to the Churches either
of S. Maria supra Minervam, or S. Bonaventure on Mount Quirinall, (for then a
Covent of Capuchin^ dwelt there) where they went to Mattens with the Friars in
the Quire, and spent all the night in prayer and meditation, that so in the
morning they might receive the B. Sacrament with greater gusts and relishes of
devotion. The number of them was sometimes so great, that you should see the
Quires of the Regulars and Religious filled with secular and Lay persons.
Philip for diverse years used almost every night to frequent those Churches,
whom, upon a signal that was betwixt them, the Porter let in; and the
Dominicans freely granted him the keys of their Monastery, to come in at
pleasure.

But not content with these works of piety (thereby to withdraw his Sons
especially the younger, from the occasions of sin) he was wont at certain times
of the year, as Shrovetide and after Easter, to go with them to the seven
Churches of the City, though now those of the Oratory visit them at shrovetide
only. At first very few went, five and twenty or thirty at most; but the
company soon increased, that even in Philips life time there went oftimes no
less then two thousand of them together. All were admitted of what rank so
ever, except women: very many of the Regulars came, especially of the Orders of
the Capuchins and Dominicans, from whom there flocked thither whole troops of
Noviees.

The manner of their journey was thus. On the day appointed they all came
single, or in companies to S. Peter's in the Vatican, or the Cathedral of S.
Paul without the walls, where putting themselves into ranks, they went forward
to the other Churches: as they passed they spent part of the time in meditation
on some set subject out of the sacred mysteries (the multitude being
distributed into Classes, unto every of which a Priest was assigned) the rest
of the time was taken up in singing Hymns, Psalms, Spiritual songs, and
Letanies, the Musiques attending them: if any of the day remained over, they
conferred of religious matters.

In every Church, except those two mentioned, one of their own, or some other
made a short sermon to the people: but when they came to S. Sebastians or S.
Stevens Church, Mass was celebrated with all solemnity, where all of them well
nigh received the Sacrament. Thence they went to the gardens of the Maximi or
Cresscentii, and sometimes to those of the Matthaei in Mount Caelius (yet at
this day they (with their permission) visit those only of the Matthaei) in
which every one sitting in his order, a table was furnished with bread and wine
sufficient, and an egg, a piece of cheese, with an apple added thereto. At
dinner the Singers entered singing and playing to some holy Antheme: when table
was taken away, they went to the other Churches; and so home, every one greatly
rejoicing.

These religious processions were wholly governed by Philip, who took such
pains therein, that by overmuch wearying himself he sometimes fell into a
fever, but in his latter years, both by reason of age, and because the
Institution was already sufficiently settled, he staid at home and performed
other pious duties.

How pleasing a work unto God that was, though it appeared not by downright
miracles, yet was notably declared by sundry divine intimations. Once as his
manner was, he went about Carnevall-time to these Churches, and in the way from
S. Paul's to S. Sebastians arose on the sudden so great a tempest, that all
thought of betaking them to their heels; but Philip bade them, Stay and be
confident for I will warrant,-none that goes with me shall suffer much by this
storm.

These devout usages so piously introduced by the R. Father were commended by
diverse reputed both for gravity and learning: among which John Rubeus in his
book dedicated to Philip honors them with these elogies.

Among other right famous things (says he, bespeaking the H. man) which I
beheld the last year, being 1568 in Rome; it most pleased me to see the Oratory
of S. Hierom a Charitate thronged with such a multitude of devout persons:
which reflecting more seriously on, I reckoned to be the goodliest and noblest
of all the rarities in the City. And so much the more I both wondered and
rejoiced, for that I saw Personages of the best rank, and of several nations
attend so cheerfully to the word of God, dispensed with that simplicity and
integrity by You. Whence it falls out that almost infinite numbers of people
abjuring the world, as the whole City can witness, consult of giving themselves
up to Christ, where devoting themselves to the Cloisters of the Religious, and
other Holy Orders, they steadfastly persist in their vowed sanctity. Thus Rubeus.

CHAP. XV. He undertakes the charge of a Church of the Florentines.
NOw some of the chief Florentines duly weighing the abundant advantages that
accrued to many by the above mentioned exercise, as likewise with what
diligence and discretion Philip governed his society, they endeavored might
and main to get him to undertake the government and care of S. John's Church
among them. To which purpose in the year 1564. they sent some to request him in
the name of them all to accept of the employment, and to tender him a dwelling
with all requisites: His answer was, that he must consider of it and make his
prayers to God; and if he found it to be Gods will, he would soon satisfy
their desires. Within a few days when they came again he told them plainly, he
could by no means leave S. Hieroms, where he had resided so long. At which
answer, Bernardine Cyril at that time Master of the Hospital of the H. Ghost
in Saxia, and John Baptist Altovitus with Peter Antonio Bandinus, who were
employed in the business, repair to Pope Pius the fourth, entreating him to
make use of his authority therein; whom having assured to them, they return,
and acquaint Philip that the Popes mind was, he should govern that Church:
when, with all submission to Christ's Vicar he accepted of it; but on condition,
that he should not be compelled to leave S. Hieroms, which was granted him.

Meanwhile he caused three of his to take Orders; the first was Caesar
Baronius; the second John Francis Bordinus; an eloquent Roman, afterward made
Bishop of Cavaillon by Clement the eighth, then Archbishop of Avignon; the
third Alexander Fidelius of Transona, one of great integrity and purity. These
Philip transplanted to the Florentines Church, alloting to some others the care
of the Parish; of whom was Germanicus Fidelius Nephew to Alexander; a Youth of
16. years of age.

Not long after were added to them Francis Maria Taurusius, with Angelus
Vellius of Praeneste of an unblemished and even Angelical life, who was the
third Prefect of the Congregation after Philip: and being fourscore and five
years old died in peace the tenth of December, after he had seen the solemn
Canonization of the R. Father.

These excellent men with great zeal and courage began to cultivate the Lords
Vineyard; for betimes in the Morning every day they went from S. John's to S.
Hieroms Church to confess their sins; after dinner, thither they returned,
either to preach, or hear sermons; in the evening again they came to their
usual prayers, never omitting these wont ed exercises either for Summers heat,
or Winters cold, for wind or rain. For matters in the house, they were certain
years their own Cooks, every one in his week: and that so willingly and
contentedly, that Baronius left written over the Chimnypiece, Caesar Baronius
Cocus perpetuus: Caesar Baronius everlasting Cook: and oftimes Noble men and
Scholars, found him with his apron on, washing dishes. At meals they used
reading, which lasted two parts of dinner or supper: they read the Bible, or
some devout Author; which done, one of them propounded a question either of
morality or Divinity to go round. Germanic^s Fidelius and Octavius Paravicinus
both of an age, were readers together at the table, the latter of which for his
rare merits was made Cardinal by Clement the eighth. Every Saturday they swept
the Church: on Holy days some were employed in taking Confessions, others in
giving the Sacrament.

Mass was also solemnly celebrated; which ended, Baronius and Bordinus, at the
suit of the Florentines, with Philips consent, preached publikly by turns. At
the usual hour Vespers were sung in the Church, after which they either met
the B. Father at S. Mary's supra Minervam, or S. Mary's ad Martyrs, or where
else he appointed; and there Philip or some other propounding some pious
subject or theme, sometimes one, sometimes another, answered at the pleasure of
the Father, so passing the time in divine conferences, and spiritual exercises.

Hence grew a custom after Easter day of going to that part of the Janiculum,
where S. Onuphrius's Monastery stood; a place open to the Sun, and pleasant for
its overlooking the City lying beneath: yet as the heat of the weather
increased, they resorted to some selected Church to perform these services.
Where after the melody of voices, a little Boy makes a pious Oration to the
Auditors, got by heart, and straight two of the Priests of the Oratory (the
Musiques at whiles interposing) make some short discourse to the people. But in
winter viz. from the first of November to Easter, they begun about evening in a
small Oratory with mental prayer, singing the Letanies and the Antheme of the
B. Virgin; then a Boy, as before, repeats a devout exhortation, after which one
of the Society preaches for half an hour, with Musiques before, and after.

These first Fathers kept up this custom of going thrice a day from S. John to
S. Hieroms ten years. Which is therefore mentioned particularly in this place,
that posterity might take notice with what sanctity and humility these men
served God, who both for their literature, and noble extract, were so generally
known to deserve the chiefest promotions the Church of Rome had to bestow.

Ten years had now passed, when the Florentines observing the many and great
inconveniences those Priests sustained, requested Philip, that the service in
use at S. Hieroms Oratory might be transferred to S. John's, He assented. So in
the year 1574. on the fifteenth of April in S. John's Oratory enlarged for that
purpose the Fathers began their accustomed familiar sermons. In such wise that
Juvenall Ancina afterward Priest of the Oratory, then Bishop of Saluciae, a
holy man (about annexing whom to the Catalogue of Saints, writings were drawn
by Apostolical authority, and his course of life and virtuous deeds of late
years writ) much conversant in those duties, and taken with Philips piety, and
Institution, writes thus in a certain letter to Friar John Mattheo living at
Fossanum.

Some days ago (this was in 1576) I used to frequent the Florentines Oratory
dedicated to S. John, where every day were sermons made by 4 or 5 concerning
vice and virtue, Ecclesiastical History, or the lives of Saints exceeding
profitable. Hither come Persons of honor; Nobles, Prelates, Bishops, etc*
Sermon ended, they add some harmonious Airs to recreate the Auditors. A while
since they very excellently and lively exemplified the actions of S. Francis,
and S. Antony of Padua: and the truth is, the hearers receive much spiritual
comfort and content by the explication of such stories: and I am sorry, that I
heard no sooner of those wholesome and laudable exercises. Their Preachers are
the choicest men, such as are in H. Orders, and reputed for holiness and
virtue. Their Chief and Governor is a Venerable Priest named Philip, of sixty
years of age, one eminent in many respects, principally for his holy life,
prudence, and singular dexterity both in contriving and promoting such
religious performances. He is reported to be the Author of that famous custom,
which we beheld last Jubilee practiced with so great devotion and charity at the
Church of the Most H. Trinity, which has its name from Pilgrims: withal, the
Fathers Toletus, Possevinus, and diverse others highly honor him: lastly,
sundry persons have recourse to him as an Oracle, not from the City only, but
out of Italy, France, and Spain, and other remote Provinces. So Juvenal. By
which may be gathered in what reputation the Institution of the Oratory then
flourished.

CHAP. XVI The Persecutions and affronts he suffered.
YEt, to take our rise a little higher, these religious usages, which should
rather have gained him respect and love with all, did to some forlorn
miscreants administer matter of spite and calumny. For, when at first he held
discourses of Spiritual things in his chamber, every day after dinner; and
applied himself to hear Confessions, many that maligned him began privately to
whisper and in time openly decry him, prating what came next. The Ringleader of
them was Vincentius Teccosius of Fabrianum, a Physician, one of the four
Deputy-Governours of the place, to whom gathered two Apostates, that lived
there disguised under a religious habit; these at Teccosius's instigation used
all means to drive Philip thence. For being Sacrists by place, as soon as they
saw him coming to the Vestry, they would shut the door against him, deny him
the Vestments, or bring him such as were torn, sometimes take the Chalice or
Missall out of his hands, or hide them; otherwhiles make him pull off the H.
garments being vested, and go from one Altar to another to and fro; as soon as
ever he was gone forth of the Vestry to say Mass, call him back again; by these
injuries and provocations to make him leave S. Hieroms.

All these disgraces the servant of Christ took no notice of, but carrying
himself courteously to them both in word and deed prayed to God for them every
day: and being desired by some of his own to remove somewhither else: Not so,
replied he, I will not seem to shun the cross God has allotted me here. And
still the milder he, the more insolent they; though he strove, as for his life
to soften their perverseness. Till, seeing he availed nothing he flies to him
that helps his servants destitute of all humane assistances; and as he was
saying Mass one time, looking on the Crucifix, he thus bespake his savior: Why
not, O good Jesu, why do thou not hear me? so long, yea so ardently have I
importuned thee for the virtue of patience: why, I beseech thee, do not thou
favor my petition? Immediately he hears a voice saying within him: Did thou
not beg the grace of patience; know, thou shall obtain it, but through injuries
and affronts. Animated therefore with this reply, he ever after more patiently
and contentedly endured reproaches: so that, they who offered wrongs were
sooner wearied, then he that suffered them. And thenceforward, when at any time
he was reviled, he would either contemn the offense, or excuse the offender.

Some two years after, one of these Apostates set upon Philip one day, railing
and inveighing against him with such inveterate malice and rancour, that the
other who was by, pitying the good man flew with so great violence upon his
fellow, catching him by the throat, that, but for Philip he had throtled him.
Whereupon considering how villanously he himself also had dealt by him, and
remembering his former Religious vows made, he discloses the whole business in
order to the H. man; and by his directions betook him to a Regular life again,
always after crying up the Sanctity of Philip.

Nay Vincentius Teccosius himself was overcome and vanquished by the patience
of Philip, craving his pardon before diverse, and surrending himself up to the
servant of God; whom choosing for his Confessor, he so dearly affected, that
there passed not a day, wherein he came not in courtesy to see him.

Yet was not all malice against him thus extinguished, all calumnies laid
asleep; nay he was afterward worse abused by other profane persons. For they
objected, that it was out of pride, that he went to the 7 Churches, with such
sholes of people; that it suited not with one, who despised the vanity of the
world, by gathering multitudes to turn the eyes of the whole City on himself.
Others looking only on the sums of money spent then in victuals, not
regarding the number of persons, ascribed all to revellings and gluttony. The
Politici^ns blamed him with pretensions of care unto public peace; for that so
great a confluence would occasion uproars and tumults. All which was told
Philip again, who took it patiently without any disturbance.

The bruit hereof increased daily, till it came at last to the Prelate that was
Deputy of the City, who, moved by the reports of them that bore a spleen to
Philip, sent for him, and reprehends him sharply: Is it not a shame, says he,
that you who profess a contempt of the world, should hunt for popular applause,
and walk through the City guarded with troops, with such nets as these fishing
for Church preferments? When having shrewdly taunted him with such like
expressions, he prohibits him the hearing Confessions for fifteen days; and to
use the customs of the Oratory, but by leave first obtained; or to lead about
with him any companies of men; threatening imprisonment upon his disobedience.
Neither would he let him depart, till he had put in security for his
appearance. Philip with a pleasing and ^omposed countenance answered; That as
he had begun all things, which he had instituted, with the glory of God, so
likewise was he ready to desist from all, for the same glory of God, that he
ever should prefer his Superiors directions before his own desires: that he had
taken up that usage of visiting the Churches, out of no other end, but to
divert his from those dangers of sinning, which at such times as Shrovetide,
use to be most rife. The Deputy replied, Come you do all this, not for the
glory of God, but to make a party for your self. At which, Philip wistly eying
the Crucifix that stood there, said, Lord thou know whether I do it to make
me a party; and so went his way. But because he highly prized the virtue of
obedience, especially to his Superiors, he presently forbade his sons to come
to him at all.

Meantime, while the good man was commending himself to God, having entreated
diverse Religious persons to be instant in prayer about this business: one day
on the sudden appeared a Priest in a rough garment tied about with a rope,
neither known by face, or seen ever before or after that day, who said, I am
sent to bid you expose the H. body of our Lord, for the people to adore, with
the solemn supplication of the forty hours, by the Sovereign patronage whereof
all persecutions shall be chased away, for so it was revealed from heaven to
certain servants of God. Then coming to Francis Maria Taurusius he whispers in
his ear these words; This trouble shall be quickly over, and the work that is
begun be more strongly confirmed; they who resist now, shall assist hereafter;
and if any one shall dare to oppose it any longer, God shall speedily avenge it
on him: the Prelate that is your chiefest adversary shall certainly dye within
fifteen days: this said, he vanished out of sight. And it fell out precisely as
was foretold: for the Prelate (the Popes Deputy) relaing the proceedings to
his Holiness somewhat partially dyed suddenly; which coming to Philips
knowledge, he pitying his sad end would never let any of his utter so much as
a word to his disparagement.

For it became the servant of Christ to arm himself with no other weapons,
against what he stood charged with before his Superiors, save the shield of
his own innocence. Giving himself therefore more to prayer, he often told his
Sons, This storm arose for my sake; not yours, that by this means I might be
taught the virtues of humility and obedience; and when I have received the good
which God intends me by them, these slanders questionless will have an end.

But when Pope Paul the fourth heard the whole cause, and evidently discovered
Philips integrity, he sent him, as a token of his good affection, two wax
tapers, of those that use to be light up in the Popes Chapel on Candlemas day:
letting him know that he not only granted him free leave to visit the seven
Churches, but to exercise all the duties belonging to his institution: and that
it was his unhappiness, that he could not be present at those religious
performances. At which his sons were overjoyed, and a while after went with the
B. Father (as they were wont) to the 7 Churches, to render thanks to the Divine
goodness, that the tempest now blown over, they might freely observe the Orders
of the Oratory.

No sooner was this blaze of persecution out, but a much fiercer was kindled
against the Order; for, under pretext of piety and Religion, some possessed
Pius Quintus of B. Memory, that the preachers of S. Hieroms many times
delivered things ridiculous or unsound; which argued either high indiscretion
or Ignorance, and must needs endanger their hearers.

Hereupon Pius like a faithful and Vigilant Pastor culls out two Dominicans,
and severally enjoins either of them to go to S. Hieroms, and mark exactly what
was said or done, and to bring him word, if there were any thing repugnant to
faith or good manners.

While these religious persons were busy about the Popes commands, the Pope
himself tells Alexander Medices, Ambassador for the great Duke of Tuscany, that
he had heard, how the Fathers, Preachers at S. Hieroms had unwisely or unwarily
let some things slip them; particularly, out of the A^ts of S. Apollonia, that
she voluntarily flung her self into the fire, without adding, that she had
done it, by special impulse of the H. Ghost. Alexander dismissed by the Pope
goes to S. Mary's supra Minervam to hear a sermon, where Germanicus Fidelius
meets him, and entreats him from Philip he would vouchsase to visit him as soon
as might be, for he would fain speak with him; praying his excuse, being so
lame on one of his feet that he could not stir out of bed. After dinner he goes
to Philip, but first to sermon; where came up Francis Maria Taurusius, who so
handsomely interpreted that action of Appollonia, with its due caution and such
facility, that he untied the knots of all those difficulties which the Pope had
communicated to Alexander. Sermon ended, the Ambassador went to Philip, who
immediately questioned him, what passed betwixt the Pope and him, that morning,
about the affairs of the Oratory. He astonished which way he came to know any
thing of it ingenuously confessed all to him.

But those Religious men, the Pope sent to the Oratory, after a strict view of
all that was done there, acquainted his Holiness, they heard nothing but what
consisted well with piety and Learning; He rejoicing exceedingly, that there
were even in his days men at Rome, that so profitably dispensed the word of God
daily to the people; and thence forward both Philip and his Sons were in such
favor with him, that he joined Taurusius in commission with his Nephew the
Cardinal of Alexandria, going Ambassador to the King of Spain, France, and
Portugal, giving him instructions at large of all that was to be treated of.

Moreover those Dominican Fathers so esteemed of the Order after that, as for
diverse years they came almost every day to the sermons, and oftimes preached
there themselves: as also the most eminent preachers of other Orders ever and
anon used to do.

CHAP. XVII. The Congregation of the Oratory erected at Vallicella.
BUt though Philip, thinking ever meanly of himself, never dreamt, as he said,
of instituting the Congregation, yet at last, his sons earnestly importuning
him to it, he gave way: but to the establishing such a work, they thought it
most imported, to purchase a seat of their own, where they might lay the
foundation of the Congregation, and execute their own laws and statutes.

As the H. Man was musing thereon, two Churches very fit for that purpose were
propounded to him; S. Mary's on Monticellae, and S. Mary's in Vallicellae and
being in suspense, which to make choice of (the better to understand the mind
of God in a business of that concernment) he determined to refer the matter to
Pope Gregory the thirteenth to be decided; who wished him to choose the
Vallicellan, as being in a place of great resort, and fitter for service. He
perceiving it to be Gods will, presently cast about to procure it, committing
unto Taurusius the managing thereof, who obtained of the Pope not the Church
alone, but what ever else the Fathers could desire. So this servant of Christ,
backed with the Authority Apostolic, instituted at Vallicella the
Congregation of secular Priests, which he entitled of the Oratory; and got
liberty for framing Statutes and Constitutions, but with proviso, that after a
certain time they should be ratified by the Sea Apostolic.

Having possession of this Church, he appoints over it, Germanicus Fidelius and
John Antony Luccius, men of known integrity: but because it was too narrow and
something ruinous, they thought of bringing it to some better form; they were
desirous indeed to rebuild it from the foundation; but their money being short
they waved that. When suddenly one day, betimes in the morning Philip by divine
inspiration commands the old Church to be utterly rased, and a new one raised
in the form and bigness as we see at this day.

So the old Church being levelled with the ground, as Matthew of Tifernum that
famous Architect in those days, was casting with his line the breadth of the
new Church, Philip, then about to say Mass at S. Hieroms, sends a messenger to
bid him let all alone till he came. When Mass was over, he dispatches for
Vallicella; and as they were concluding on the latitude, he bids lengthen out
the line further; Matthew does so; he bids enlarge it more; he obeys him again;
the B. man considering still the place was to narrow commands a third time to
extend the line further yet. As soon as he came to the place that had been
revealed to Philip; Here stay, faith he, here break up the earth. And as they
were digging they light upon a hard wall, old and hid under rubbish, on the
right side of the Chancell, some ten handfulls broad, and longer than the
Church; besides a huge pile of stone and brick, enough for the foundation, and
for raising the wall on the right side. So on the 19 of September. 1575. the
first stone consecrated with solemn rites was laid by Alex. Medices, Archbishop
of Florence, Cardinal of the H. Church of Rome, who after translated to the
Popedom was named Leo the XI.

As the building went up their enemies raged still worse, hindering the
workmen, slandering the society; with cross-bows and stones pelting John Antony
Luccius Overseer of the work: but alas! seven Brothers there were that opposed
the business mainly, who died all within two years through the Divine vengeance.

The Church now almost finished, in the year 1577. the third of February, on
which day fell Septuagesima Sunday, the same Alexander Medices sang Mass
publicly, and the Fathers performed divine duties there, and to enhance their
beginnings with the greater devotion, the Pope granted a plenary indulgence to
those who confessing their sins, and receiving the H. Eucharist were present at
Mass, or visited the Church at all that day. And the same year in April
quitting the Church of the Florentines, they removed their usual sermons to
Vallicella; Philip still tarrying at S. Hieroms.

But because the house was not big enough, the Fathers advised about buying a
Monastery that joined to the Church; for that the Nuns of the place, by command
of their Superiors, were to remove to another Monastery of the Recluses: Philip
looking farther then the rest, no way liked their counsel of buying it. Yet
some of them attempted it on grounds of natural prudence, but the business not
succeeding, says Philip, Did not I often tell you, this Monastery was not for
our turns? ye shall indeed obtain a Monastery, but another way than ye dream
of. He said true; for five months after Peter Donatus Caesius Cardinal, out of
his great munificence bought that and other adjoining houses which he frankly
bestowed on the Fathers to dwell in.

The wonderful confidence in God which Philip had for his atchieving this
enterprise, may be concluded from hence, that when there was no stock he
adventured on so costly a structure, and completed it in two years: often saying
when his money was spent, God will supply us; and coming sometimes to a prime
Lady in Rome he would tell her, Madam, you must know the B. Virgin and my self
have made a bargain, that I shall not dye till the Church be covered. Many
therefore imagined that, seeing he never craved of any, and yet daily disbursed
such a deal of Money, either God furnished him, or miraculously increased his
store.

The first moneys laid out in beginning the work were 200 crowns, given by the
bounty of S. Carlo Borromeo; whereto Gregory the XIII. added 8000. and above,
for the building and beautifying the forepart of the Church; besides 4000. for
erecting a Chapel in memory of the Presentation of our Lady: likewise
Cardinal Frederic Borromeo gave 4000. and the rest, amounting to above a
hundred thousand crowns, God other ways provided.

And to show that he never asked any ones benevolence, it is not amiss to add
this which follows. One of the Congregation, who had to do with the building,
on a time told him, Father, the money is spent, and yet the walls reach not to
the roof: Doubt not, says he, God will never be wanting to his Children. He
replies; There is a rich man in the City that uses to distribute a large part
of his revenues to pious uses, if he were acquainted with our wants, he would
happily help us with a good sum; at which Philip; The man knows in what need
the building is, if he be minded he may freely contribute, for hitherto I have
asked none, and yet have found no lack of any thing: and so it fell out, that
within a few months a noted Lawer dying bequeathed to the Congregation 4000
crowns, and more; and soon after another Lawyer died, and left 8000 by Will.

CHAP. XVIII. Philip removes to Vallicella.
THings thus settled, Philip, though he governed the whole Congregation, yet
would not quit S. Hieroms: for which he gave many reasons; chiefly, that he
might not be called Founder of the Congregation, a title which he ever
disclaimed. Besides, lest he might seem to shun the Cross, which in love to him
God there offered; and that he might lose the benefit of his so long
perseverance in that place and duty, having lived there three and thirty years.

But the Fathers, considering how much it imported to have a head to their
body, and seeing all means of changing Philips mind ineffective, repair to
Cardinal Peter Donatus Caesius, and beseech him that he would impart the matter
to his Holiness, and by Authority from Him procure, what they neither of
themselves, nor by others could obtain. Caesius very readily undertakes it,
certifying Pope Gregory XIII. of the Fathers request: who assenting to it,
forthwith enjoins the Cardinal to tell Philip from him, that he must to
Vallicella. As soon as Philip understood the Popes pleasure, bowing his head,
without dispute he presently obeyes. And in the year 1583. on the 22d. of
November, being the Anniversary of S. Cecilia Virgin and Martyr, to the
incredible joy of his, he went from S. Hieroms to Vallicella: but though he
shifted his station, he held the old course of life, he had prescribed himself
at S. Hieroms: and that he might the better attend on the contemplation of
things celestial, he chose him a chamber in the higher and privater part of the
house.

The day he went to Vallicella, that he might inure himself and his to the
mastering their inclinations, he commanded that they should carry, openly as
they went in the streets, all their household stuff, either on their shoulders,
or in their hands. And he was so in love with S. Hieroms his whole life after,
that he always kept the keys of his chamber by him, and himself went often,
or sent some of his to see it, he was so pleased with the remembrance of his
old dwelling.

CHAP. XIX. The Rules of the Oratory.
AS soon as Philip was come amongst his Sons, with joint consent of the whole
Congregation, they chose him Provost: a place he was most unwilling to have,
desiring by his example to show them what to do after his death, viz. either
choose or confirm their Provost every third year, which Law he intended first to
submit unto. But the Society disliking to have any other Superior but him,
meant to except him from that Rule: and therefore on the 19th of June 1587. the
Fathers elected him Perpetual Provost of the Congregation.

Which charge having accepted of, he enacted, that all who would be admitted
into his Congregation should retain the state and condition of Priests Secular,
not binding themselves by any oath or vow: alleging, that if any had a mind
to a more perfect kind of life, there were Houses of Regulars, where they
might consummate those holy desires; but it was enough for them of the
Congregation of the Oratory to serve God in the bond of mutual Charity, and
aiming at the Salvation of themselves and others, to apply themselves wholly to
prayer, the administration of the Word, that heavenly repast, and promoting a
more frequent use of the Sacraments.

Some other Statutes he likewise made, by consent of the Fathers, and advice of
men famed for their worth and skill, especially Cardinal Hierom of Ruvere, a
very knowing man, as any of that age; which afterward upon the experience of
above 30 years, and mature deliberation about them, were at length confirmed by
the Letters Apostolic of Pope Paul V.

Now for that the ends of the Institution of the Congregation are handled at
large in the foresaid Statutes, it shall suffice to inform the Reader here, how
the most wise and Sovereign Lord of all, by means of his servant Philip,
introduced a new and differing, that is, a plain and familiar way of preaching
Gods word in the City of Rome. For having both at S. Hieroms, and the Church of
the Florentines observed, how exceedingly the Auditors edified by this popular
kind of Sermons; as soon as ever he came to Vallicella, he ordered, that every
workiday, except Saturday, reading some godly lesson before, there should be
four Sermons, each for the space of half an hour; which ended, they concluded
with some musical consort, and dismissed the Assembly.

At these four Sermons he was present every day for diverse years, as were other
both Priests and Scholars of the Congregation: and whilst the Oratory was at S.
Hieroms, he was not only present, but preached there himself every day.

Those whom he called forth to this employment, he principally wished to avoid
Subtilties and School-questions, and to propose common Subjects, easy and
suitable to each ones capacity. To which end he assigned the Lives of the Saints
to some of them to rehearse; to others, the compiling the Ecclesiastical Story;
to others, the reciting S. Gregory's Dialogues: advertising every of them by a
familiar and easy style to stir up a love of virtue, and hatred of vice in the
affections of their Auditors. He counseled them, if they sought the good of
Souls, to interweave some choice examples still in their discourses. If he
heard any propound too difficult subjects, or too curious and quaint in their
language, he would command him down out of the Pulpit, as one not only having
respect with, but authority over them.

And lest they should forsake this low and facile way of preaching, he would
not suffer them to dwell long at their studies: so neither would he release
Baronius from these usual exercises, although his Annals were then in writing.
Not that he would have Learning neglected, but rather that they should apply
themselves to the reading of such things as best suited with the Orders of the
Oratory; for he would say, The servant of God must indeed learn the Sciences,
but principally must avoid ostentation: adding That the knowledge of the H.
Scriptures was to be got rather by prayer than study.

To these daily Sermons he added frequent prayers; for he gave order that the
doors of the Oratory should be opened every day for all sorts of men, but no
women: where for half an hour they used mental prayer, recited Letanies and
other prayers, as in the Constitutions is mentioned more at large, and so
dissolved their meeting. He enjoined that on Mondayes, Wednesdayes and
Fridayes, they should scourge themselves with cords, in memory of the Passion
of our Lord, yet every one at his own discretion.

As touching the Sacraments, he desired the Priests of the Congregation might
say Mass every day: although for exercise and trial of their virtue, he
sometimes forbade some of them the doing it daily. He admonished them in the
time of celebration not to tire the standers by; but rather study brevity then
prolixity; always allowing a competent time to so weighty a matter. He warned
them, that if any found himself transported with holy inspirations in the time
of celebrating, he should say, Not here, Lord, not here, but I desire thee to
reserve thy self for me in my chamber. Those who were not Priests he wished to
confess thrice a week at least, and to receive the Sacrament by appointment of
their Confessor: he advised all Confessors to take Confessions publicly in the
Church every Holy day, Wednesday, and Friday; on other days he would still
have one of them there for that purpose.

For matters of the house, he desired his should choose a mean, doing nothing
that was singular. At times of refection, besides the usual reading, which
lasted somewhat above half the meal, the rest of the spare time was spent in
propounding a couple of Questions by turns, morning and evening, either
pertaining to Morality, or taken out of Sacred Writ, or the heads of Positive
Divinity; which were modestly and briefly answered to by them at table,
according to every ones sense.

These are the main of those Orders Philip made in the Congregation: an
Institution since planted in many Cities of Italy, and other Provinces. The H.
man was absolutely of opinion, that each House that was erected should,
resembling his, give Laws to it self, and be obedient to the Ordinaries of the
place, independent on the Roman Congregation. Of which two Bulls are extant of
Paul V. and Gregory XV.

Yet ambitious he never was of augmenting his number. For when the finest wits,
and hopefullest youths daily flocked to him, he would persuade them either to
go into some of the Regular Societies, or live as they were; thereafter as he
thought best for them; but never would he entice any to his own Order, either
by entreaties or commendations of it. Yea if all should have forsaken the
Congregation, it had not a whit discouraged him; who used to say, God has no
need of men, for of stones he raises up Children unto Abraham. If any
attempted the like to his design of the Oratory, it troubled not him: when one
told him how some Regulars had taken up the custom in their Churches to make
familiar discourses, and that they were to be opposed; he wisely answered, And
whose gift is it that any prophecy?

In other things he governed his Body with much prudence and caution, and so
demeaned himself, that he cemented his own fast together in indissoluble bands
of love and concord: affirming it was harder then men imagined to preserve long
unity among such as were otherwise at liberty, and out of subjection; which
nothing does more facilitate or sweeten, than gentle conduct and moderate
commands. Yet did he never, when there was need of it, slacken or remit the
reins of government; having some of his so at command, that with a look or beck
he could rule them as he pleased: and it was usual with him, whenever he
would reprove any of them, but to look sternly, and 'twas enough.

The detestable vice of disobedience he so perfectly hated ever, that if any of
his were found guilty therein, they were straight discarded the House. To which
purpose he left in writing these words under his own hand: If any think he
cannot hold out, by reason of, the meanness of diet, the services to be
performed at Church, or the like, but will disturb his fellows, let him freely
and speedily quit the place; if not, after a first, or second offense let him
be expelled: for I am resolved (o ye Fathers) they shall not continue amongst
us, who refuse to observe these so few Orders. Thus Philip.

And that all his might learn to deny their own understanding, he sent them
forth on business at such unseasonable times and hours as seemed against all
reason; and if they demurred never so little, he redoubled his commands, that
so taming and mastering their own wills, they might the sooner arrive at the
height of true humility. But what progress in piety he expected from his, and
what an enemy he was to the refractory and perverse, the Letter which Cardinal
Baronius sent from Ferrara, while he tarried there with Clement VIII. to
Consolinus then Master of the Novices at Rome, sufficiently testifies; where he
writes.

I must accuse my self indeed for writing nothing to you all this while, were
it but to thank you for your prayers to God for me. I now defray that debt; and
as effectually as, I can, both thank and entteat you, together with your
Scholars my dearest dear Children, to whom I daily wish greater increase in
virtue, hereafter to do the same still. Cherish Good Father, cherish those
young and tender plants, dressing them to the likeness of their fair Precedent,
the Tree of which they are Branches: the same way and course You steer, conduct
them: and be assured, Our B. Parent still lives, sees, and orders his, holding
a scourge in his hand to chastise the unruly. For my self, I beg of you, R.
Father, to rank me among your Novices, punishing my faults without favor or
delay. I would to God I could thus grow young again, verifying that of the
Prophet in me, Renovabitur ut aquilae juventus tua. Thy youth shall be renewed
like the Eagles. For this, I take it, is the meaning of Abishags cherishing
David spent with travail; namely, when the heat of the spirit meets with old
age. Certainly Abishag (as you well know) lay with our H. Father, who in his
very last years felt such heats, as he thought himsef in a manner burnt up
therewith. Not furrs, nor purple can warm the aged, but Abishag alone: O let me
obtain this favor of God, let me procure this by prayer to enjoy her embraces
in this last cold season of my life; since this alone has induced me to write.
So God bless and sanctify you. Ferrara. August 14. 1598. Caesar Baronius
Cardinal.

Lastly, as to domestique affairs, He was very cautious not to wast the goods
of the Congregation, being the Patrimony of Christ, and stock of the Poor:
wherein he was so careful, that he would let nothing be disbursed more than
needs must: alleging that which Cassian writes of a Cook, whom the Fathers
sharply reproved, for but wasting three grains of Lentils: and that of S.
Antonine Archbishop of Florence, who went into the Church a nights, and studied
by the light of the Lamp, lest (as he said) he should impair the Poors
maintenance. And if any judged it too great rigor, he replied; Away with that
nicety: so the goods belong not to the Church do what you will with them.

CHAP. XX. The Obedience and Reverence given him by his Sons.
THe Congregation being reduced into this model, the Religious Father in the
first place recommended obedience to his; a duty which not only those of his
House, but even strangers most readily paid him, nothing being so hard or
irksome, which upon his commands they would not attempt. For this reason
Cardinal Taurusius avouched some of them little short of the Egyptian Monks in
point of obedience, though neither by vow nor oath thereto obliged; and that
none of the Founders of other Orders, that he knew of, were more punctual
observed and obeyed than Philip by his. Nor was it spoken upon slight grounds;
for some did so revere him, that had he bid them throw themselves down
headlong, or into the fire, immediately they would have obeyed. To which
purpose the following instances may serve.

As he was once discoursing of the virtue of Obedience to his Sons, by a
certain fishpond; Which of you, faith he, will come to such a pitch of
Obedience, as to fling himself straight into this water at my bidding? He had
scarce said it, and that occasionally, not in earnest, but one of them, not
staying for a command, fetching his leap skips in, to the certain danger of his
life, had not they which were by run in speedily to his help.

One time he commanded three of them to walk naked through one of the notedst
parts of the City called the Bank. Strange! they begin to lay away their Coats,
unbutton them, pull off their shoes, and without delay to fulfill his pleasure;
and had done it, but that he made them forbear and put on their clothes again.

Another time, as he went by Vespasians Amphitheatre, to visit the sick in S.
John Laterans Hospital, as his custom was, he light on a beggar lying on the
ground very sick, and all dirty, whom compassionating, he beckens to one of his
Sons to take him out of the dirt, and carry bim on his shoulders to the
Hospital. He presently takes up the poor man on his shoulders and to the
wonderment of all brings him to the place.

Baronius was ill at his Stomach, and if he eat never so little, it became very
offensive to him; besides such a headache that Philip for bad him to use much
prayer, or do any thing that might take up his thoughts. So coming one day
after dinner to the B. Father, as he used, there lay in the Chamber by chance a
Limon and a pretty big loaf: Philip bad him, Caesar, take that limon and that
loaf and eat them up. Baronius thinking on the merit of Obedience, crossing
himself forthwith did so, and recovered of either infirmity, both that of his
stomach and his head. The same Baronius testifies, that for 9 years together
going every day to attend the sick at the Hospital of the H. Ghost by Philips
appointement, coming thither with a fever oftimes upon him, he went home
perfectly well having performed those charitable offices.

Again, whatever was done by Philips advice succeeded prosperously, Fabritius de
Maximis one of his Pupils whom he loved entirely, had two sons that had been
long sick, one of which fed only on Broths and liquids, the other could hardly
swallow at all. Fabritius, hoping if they went from Rome to some better air,
they might possibly escape danger, consulted the Physicians about it, whose
opinions was, if they were removed from the City they could not live. It was
July and in the dog days, when Philip, being visited by Fabritius and
acquainted with all that passed, bids him Go, and fear nothing, let them be
conveyed in a Litter, and they will recover without fail. Fabricius followed
his counsel, and the next day had them to Arsolum 28 miles from the City:
whither when they came they straight mended as Philip said. And one of them
being hurt in the carriage, taking horse rid out the rest of the journey,
without ever being weary.

Vincentius Crescentius, Cardinal Crescentius's own Brother, a hopeful youth
asked leave of Philip to go to a certain Church with some civil associates
about his own age (for without his leave nothing might be done) and it being
granted, went: when in the coming back Vincentius fell out of the coach, and
the coach wheel ran over his leg; but he got up unhurt, and hying a foot to
Philip told him of it, who bid him, Attribute it wholly to your obedience for
had you not desired leave you had doubtless broak your leg.

Another, a Roman lately married affirms, that as often as he was at feasts or
shows with Philips permission, he was never anoyed with lewd imaginations; on
the other side, if he went of his own head, he was perpetually molested with
filthy thoughts.

Mark Anthony Maffa was troubledat nothing more than his preaching, and could
never frame to it, yet at Philips command, which he highly reverenced, he
performed the duty with such approbation, as he was not inferior to the
choicest Preachers.

On the contrary, many observed that those who slighted Philips counsel or
directions, most what came to an evil end. Francis Maria Taurusius full of
holy Zeal had often importuned Philip to let him rise a nights to prayer, who
regarding his infirm constitution denied him. He neglecting his advice, and
rising one night to pray, was taken with such a distemper in his head, that he
was forced for XI. Months after to forbear it quite.

Another of Philips sons without acquainting the Father whipped himself a days,
and being troubled in conscience about it, asked his leave, who told him I not
only forbid you to do it every day, but for doing it at all. Yet he often
beseeching him for his consent, Once aweek then, says Philip, I give you
leave. Lo! within a little while after he falls down at the Good man's feet,
crying, It repents me Father it repents me, for when the day comes for whiping
me, I am so loath to do it now, that I cannot endure it once, and therefore I
acknowledge, what I did before with much delight, was but the content of
satisfying my fond will.

He once forbad one going to Tiber, another to Naples; both were disobedient:
for which the one broak his leg, as his horse stumbled; the other falling into
the sea had like to have lost his life.

A young man, whose name is purposely omitted, contrary to the H. Fathers mind
had contracted acquaintance; which he hearing presaged he would come to an
unfortunate end. Within few days killing his fellow he fled from Rome, whither
none knew.

Fabricius de Maximis had put forth a great sum of money, for a yearly revenue
for the life of his Daughter Helena: at Spring being to go into the Country, he
comes to Philip, as his manner was, who bid him, Secure your money settling it
on some other besides your daughter. He neglected it, for that Helena was young
and lusty. In September following she sickned and died: and her Father lost all
his money: which chance befell diverse others. On the contrary, those that took
his counsel saved their estates.

Further, the H. man excited his sons to this virtue of obedience not with bare
words, but mainly by his example: for besides his constant and indispencible
observance of the Prelates of the Church, above mentioned; at his entering on
Vallicella (where he was Governor) as often as he was called either to the Gate,
or into the Vestry and the Church, presently and at all hours laying every
thing aside he would be there, using to say, That it was better to obey the
Sexton or Porter than to be at prayers in his Cell. And if any objected a
Priest must have time to prepare himself for Mass; his answer was, Then is he
prepared aright, when he so lives, as, for the spotless purity of his
conscience he may celebrate it at all hours.

When he was sick, he was so observant of his Physicians, that although he
found much trouble in taking medicines, yet whatever they prescribed him he
willingly and cheerfully received. Yea though they enjoined him to suspend his
prayers, or omit Mass (which most grieved him) yet he did acquiesce in their
Judgments. As once, a Physician forbiding him his Canonical Hours, though
otherwise most devoted to Prayer, he immediately obeyed.

To this purpose he was wont to produce select Aphorisms. as first: That those
who intended to proceed in Christian discipline should submit themselves wholly
to the commands of their Superiors: those that were under no tie of subjection
should be ruled by some able and discreet Confessor, and do naught without his
advice; alleging, that they which did so, should render no account to the
Supreme Judge for actions of that sort. Yet he willed every one seriously to
deliberate on the choice of his Confessor, after which election not to leave
him, except for very weighty and necessary reasons: for (says he) the devil,
unable to engage men in horrid crimes, strives amain to make Penitents
distrustful of their Confessors; that, whom he cannot apparently subvert,
having stolen from them their Spiritual guide, he might secretly supplant. He
said further, That the shor test cut to Perfection was Obedience; more valluing
them who for love to so noble a virtue lived but an ordinary kind of life under
Obedience, than those who voluntarily practiced the most rigid austerities.
Withal he wished them, to accustom themselves to Obedience in the least
things, for by this means it would become easier to them in the Greater.

One time he sent Francis a Molaria a Noble Roman to S. Hieroms about some
business, who coming thither assayed with his key to open the door but could
not, he was returning back again, when abashed and going the second time his
key would not in; but he was fain with shame to come away to acquaint Philip
what had happened. He charge him yet to return and reattempt the business: he
does so, and at last opens it: so filled with admiration and joy together he
came back to Philip, who said to him, son hereafter learn to acknowledge the
efficacy of Obedience.

As touching them in special of the Congregation, he required of them, first,
that without delay as often as any service either in the Church, or Oratory, or
at home was to be done, to quit all business. He counseled them, not to have
any thing in the Vestry belonging to them in particular, not a Surplice, not a
Chalice, not an Altar, not an hour, but to be at the Sacrists appointment. He
said it pertained to true and regular Obedience, without the discourse of the
Understanding, to follow the injunctions of Superiors: assured, that nothing
was so expedient, and so conducing to us, as what was imposed by them. And he
exhorted those that were under Regular obedience, though they did much good
where they were, if their Superior disposed of them elsewhere to no such
seeming advantages, instantly to submit. He would likewise say, We should
diligently examine, whether some good we intended, was yet required by God in
just such a manner, or such a time, and whether of us or of others rather:
which only the virtue of Obedience could distinguish.

Lastly, he willed Confessors to labor mostly with their Penitents in this
virtue, and train them up to the mastering their Understandings, and breaking
them of their wills: teaching them rather to lay down their own opinions, and
to deny themselves, than to afflict their Carcasses with ungentle usage:
adding, that such, who either through neglect, or other weak grounds,
discharged not this duty to their Penitents, should render a sad account
thereof to God.

The Second Book, Of the Life of Philip Nerius. Of the Virtues of Philip.
CHAP. I. His Devotion and Love to God.
INtending to decipher the Virtues of Philip, it seems congruous to begin at
that, which is the root, and ground of all the rest, his Love to God: wherewith
he was so fired that the inward flames lodged within his Soul broke out visibly
in his very body. So that rehearsing his Office, or discoursing of heaven, or
the like, certain fiery rays were seen to flash out at his eyes.

This ardour of Divine Charity so scorched his heart that sometimes the B. man
would even languish for love; and at other times whether he stood or walked,
his tongue would fly out in various expressions of holy affections. For once
beginning (though not heeding it) these words of the Apostle, Cupio, stopping
on the sudden he suppressed the rest; Dissolvi, and esse cum Christo. i. e. I
desire -- to be dissolved and to be with Christ: another while ravished with
the excesses of the Spirit he brak forth into that of S. Paul; repletus sum
consolatione, superabundo gaudio. I am filled with comfort, I overbound with
joy.

When he went to Church to his prayers, he felt such over flowings of the H.
Spirit, that as soon as ever he kneeled down, he was forced to rise again, for
fear of an Ecstasy. Sometimes his eyes were so set on heaven, that who so had
seen him must needs have taken him for the blessed S. Martin, fixed in that
posture of Prayer.

But though he were thus transported with these Divine favors, yet had it so
pleased God, his desire was to have served his H. Majesty without the gusts of
such sensible devotion. But to proceed.

First, He was carried with such a longing desire unto the H. Eucharist, that
being yet a Layman he took this heavenly refection every day: and being made
Priest said Mass daily, if he were well; if not, he received after the manner
of Laics: most what at midnight. Therefore toward the end of his life, that he
might not be too troublesome to his Associates, he procured of the Pope to have
the Fucharist reserved in a certain little Room near his chamber, dressed after
the manner of an Oratory; which Room when he was Canonized began to be in great
veneration with all, and to be honored with celebration of Mass there, and
resorts of the religious; and lastly was of late years with solemnity
translated to the new erected Church, as is to be seen.

As often as he was sick, and the B. Sacrament brought him, as it used to be,
after midnight, if the Priest came not just at the time, he was so disquieted
in himself that he could not rest: insomuch as being once dangerously ill, and
hearing the Bell for Mattens, none having brought him his heavenly repast; for
Taurusius delayed the time lest he might disturb his rest, he knowing the
reason calls Taurusius and tells him, Think not that this will be a means to keep
me awake, but reach hither my Lord, and I shall instantly fall asleep. So
receiving the Bread of Angels, having soon after slept a while he began to be
bettter, and quickly recovered. Another time being ill, as Antony Gallonius
held the Eucharist in his hand, tarrying longer than ordinary ere he gave it
him, he not able to wait longer said, Ah, Antony, why keep thou my Lord in
thy hand, and give him not to me so passionately desiring him? when having
taken the H. Communion he fell into a pleasing slumber.

The same mind and affections he desired to implant in all his; exciting all
Priests of the Congregation to say Mass every day, unless they were hindered by
some urgent occasion or let; nor would he take the excuses of those, who for
some relaxation to their minds remitted the frequency of saying Mass. For says
he, who ever looks for recreation but from his Creator, or consolation, but
from Christ, shall never find either true recreation or solace. He was very
desirous that Lay-persons should often partake of this Sacrament: therefore at
his instance some of them every eighth day, some every Holy Day, others, but
those were few, every day feasted on this Angelical food. Yet he more
frequently persuaded them to the Sacrament of confession, than of the Altar.

Being to say Mass he was so rapt in contemplation of celestial things, that
he was fain to divert his mind another way, for fear of Trances: and oftimes
you might have seen the Good man stand still awhile, His rapts at Mass were
testified by the Cardinals, Paravisini and Tarugi, upon oath, and by above
twenty more Witnesses.
and give over at the time of celebration, by several sleights and actions to
shun those surprises. Wherefore if he said Mass publikly in the Church, he
admited none in attendance but such as were familiarly known to him. And yet
nothing indecent or unseemly fell from him in such fits and Violences; but he
rather provoked the standers by to piety and devotion.

When he came to that part of the Mass called the Offertory, This was known in
a manner to all the City.
his heart so leaped for joy within him, that albeit he was of full strength,
of a good age, and free from any inclination to Palsies, he could never power
the Wine into the Chalice till he rested his elbow on Card. Tarugi Testified
this upon Oath.
something: yet did he at no time spil the least drop of either the Blood or
Wine.

At the Elevation of the Host, many times his hands would continue a long
while together held up, and sometimes Card. Tarugi witnessed this upon Oath.
he was raised a handful or more from the ground. Therefore to avoid such like
accidents, which he suffered against his will; he set down the Host as soon as
ever he had but lift it up.

In receiving of the B. Bread he found such delicacy, and such a flavor, as if
swallowing the pleasingest sweetmeats: and therefore he picked out the
thickest wafers for that purpose, that so the H. Species might last the longer,
and he thereby enjoy more of the presences of his Savior.

But when he drank the blood of his Lord, he did so fasten on the Chalice with
his lips and teeth, that he not only fetched off the gilt of it with hard
sucking, but left in the very Plate the prints of his teeth.

Notwithstanding in this sacred office he was rather quick than tedious: yet
with so great a passion of devotion, that he would draw tears many times from
those that were by.

Mass ended, and thanks duly rendered, as he returned to his chamber, he would
be so entranced, as not to be able to discern those he met; and of so wan a
visage, that he resembled one rather dead than living.

In his latter years, advising with some eminent both for their piety and their
parts, he procured of Gregory XIII. that little chamber above mentioned, to
celebrate Mass in, with greater privacy and freedom. Where, when the time of
receiving the Sacrament came, dismissing the company and putting out the lights
all but one, the dovr and windows shut, he staid behind alone: then his servant
fastened a note at the door with these words in it, Silence for the Father is at
Mass. About two hours after, the Servant came again, and knocked at door; when
if Philip called or answered, he straight unlockt the doors, opened the
windows, and light the tapers, so the Father dispatched the rest of Mass. But
what passed there betwixt God and him, themselves only knew.

Besides, administering the Sacraments to others, he was so enflamed with pious
ardours that his whole body trembled. Insomuch as a Woman then but newly
converted to the faith, reports that she saw the Servant of God holding a Pixe
in his hand, whose body did so shake, that the H particles were seen raised up
on high out of the Pixe, and he himself with an aspect like fire, who presently
grew pale as ashes.

The like befell Nerus de Nigris a Roman Lord, and a Patrician of Florence, one
very much beloved of Philip; who came on a time to Church and brought one
Barsum, Archdeacon of Alexandria with him, who was then Ambassador from
Alexandria in Egypt to the Pope, both of them receiving the Communion at the
Fathers hands. Who, as he held the Pixe, was taken with such a trembling, that
Nerus feared lest some of the H. particles should fall down, and therefore with
a beseeming reverence caught his right hand and held it till he had taken the
Eucharist. When they were gone, he told Nerus; You raised a great heat in me to
day: for he perceived himself affected with an extraordinary fervor, by the
presence of the Archdeacon.

In like sort when he reached forth the Host at the Communion, to Julia Vrsina
Rangonia a Noble and religious Lady; she with those that were presen saw a
consecrated Wafer parted out of his fingers hanging in the air to the amazement
of all.

He was ravished with devotion to the most sacred Passion of our Lord. And
therefore had he by him a brazen Crucifix, the body whereof he could take from
the cross, and by putting it to his lips or breast satisfy his devout
affections. From this continual meditation on our Saviors Passion, grew his
so vehement desire of going to the Indies to lay down his life for Christ. But
not obtaining this wish of his, the Merciful Lord answered his desires in
another kind, for, like that H. Virgin Luthgarda, he was Christ's Martyr in
design, though not in event, shedding blood for blood. Yea he bled at the
mouth so excedingly all his life, that he seemed many times to have quite lost
his sight and pulse. In which most sweet languishment he was wont to say; O
Good Jesu, that I could for thy sake pour out my blood, till, at least in
part, I have answered thy incomparable love.

Withal he was so devoutly affected unto the most sacred Name of Jesus that at
the very sound thereof he was even ravished. He was also hugely delighted in
repeating the Apostles Creed, being himself full of faith. He said the Lords
Prayer with such deliberation and devotion, that sometimes he could hardly
finish it.

CHAP. II. His devotion to the B. Virgin, and the Saints.
BUt the signal reverence and ardent devotion with which he honored the B.
Mother of God, no language is sufficient to express: styling her suas delicias,
Amoresque suos, his Darling, and his Love; often uttering with his tongue the
Name of Mary, which he ever carried in his heart: nay so tenderly did he affect
her, that many times (as children use) he would lispingly call her Manima.

He spent whole nights in prayer to her. At S. Hieroms he fell so desperately
ill, that his Doctor, appointed one to watch with him; who one night heard the
H. man (supposing none nere him) in most friendly and familiar expressions
talking with the Virgin of Virgins; that the whole night seemed to him gone
like a minute; and when in the morning it rung to the Angels salutation, he
mistook it for the evening.

Two short Prayers (among other) called Ejaculatory, he commonly used in honor
of the blessed Virgin: the first; O Virgin Mary, Mother of God pray to Jesus
for me: the second; Virgin and Mother. With which forms of Prayer repeated
threescore times together he counseled his (to no small advantage of their
Souls) to present the Virgin as a sacred Chaplet.

And the Divine Goodness strangely approved this way of praying: for one of the
Congregation being tempted, though unwillingly, about the unstained purity of
the H. Virgin, and intimateing so much to Philip, he prescribed him the
forementioned form, wherewith to salute the Mother of God; who assaying it, was
soon freed of the trouble of the temptation.

He professed many favors done him by the Virgin: one was, that whenever he
was disquieted with evil spirits, or frighted with ugly sights, presently
repairing but to her image, his fear left him immediately.

When the Fathers were busy in pulling down the old Church, he that overlooked
the work, bid the Masons by no means deface that part of the building where was
kept a very ancient Pourtraicture of the B. Virgin: but Philip one day betimes
in the morning commands them without delay to take down that Roof, for he had
seen our B. Lady that night holding, it up with her hand, they did so, and
viewing the place they espy a beam hanging in the air loose from the wall, and
amazed at the miracle, they shouted, and applying their engines took down the
roof. This is that Image of our Lady which at this day is seen on the great
Altar.

He was likewise favored with diverse Visions and apparitions of her; let one
serve for all; that famous one a little before his end, of which in its place.

As concerning the other Saints, he always gave them singular veneration: and
would have their Lives read daily to him for some hours together. He chose for
his Patrons Mary Magdalen, on whose Vigil, he was born, and the H. Apostles
Philip and James, the one for that he bore his Name; the other for that his
Solemnity was kept upon the same day. On the greater Festivals he likewise
received greater celestial favors, and would say, It was a bad sign, not to
relish spiritual things more than ordinarily on the extraordinary Solemnities
of the Church.

He had a high esteem of the Saints Relics; yet would very hardly suffer any
of his Disciples to reserve them in their private custody, both because ^o in
tract of time they find less respect, and for that they are often lost by
unskilful heirs that know not their worth. For, says he, Churches and places
consecrate are most proper for them. Yet was he not absolutely against it, for
one to keep them decently and devoutly by him: nay himself had in his chamber a
box full of Sacred Relics. And here must not be forgot what happened after his
decease, while the box was in Baronius's keeping. Antony Francus a Regular
Clerk fell ill at Rome, and the Physicians giving him over he received the
celestial Viaticum; when Baronius coming to see him brought those Relics
mentioned, putting them unto his breast, and for his ease and satisfaction left
them with him. That night being in a dangerous fit, taking the Box he prayed to
God, that of his goodness, and for the merits of the B. Philip, he would help
him: in the midst of which thoughts he falls asleep, and in the morning when he
wakn'd found his disease gone, and in short time perfectly recovered.

Lastly his devotion toward H. Relics was eminently seen, what time the
Bodies of the holy Martyrs Papias and Maurus were conveyed from the Deaconry of
S. Adrian to the Congregation, and honorably interred under the great Altar.
For going in solemn Procession as soon as the Good man beheld the Bier draw
near to the Church-doors, he began for gladness to skip with his feet, to clap
his hands, to lift up his eyes, and to shake all over, melting inwardly, and
languishing away for joy. When the Translation was finished, he enjoined
Gallonius to compile the History of their Acts carefully and exactly, which he
did at large.

CHAP. III. He conveys Holiness and Devotion unto others.
STrange it was, that not only himself flamed with Love to the Divine Majesty,
but through the special gift of the H. Ghost, wonderously enflamed those he
conversed with: as on the contrary, those that left his acquaintance, by little
and little lost all relish of spiritual matters.

Lavinia de Rusticis, Wife to Fabricius de Maximis, had somewhat a mean opinion
of Philip, before she chose him for her Confessor; but when she heard him
discourse of heavenly things with such zeal and ardent affection, she fell in
love with Christ presently, and put her self under the tuition of the Servant
of God; yea she, who but now intended matters the world, having once tasted of
the Spirit, confessed her sins thrice a week, and as often received the H.
Sacrament. And having learnt of Philip to despise the world, and afflict her
self, she gave her mind so much to prayer, that she had many times Raptures,
and when she died, Philip affirmed that she enjoyed the Glory of the Blessed in
heaven.

Constantia Draco, Crescentia, and her Maid stood by him once, as he said Mass,
and on the sudden they both found themselves glow with such spiritual ardors,
and even dissolved into tears, that the Mistress turning to her Maid said, Do
you perceive what this is? Yes replied she: for observing more narrowly, they
imputed it solely to the merits of Philip.

Nerus de Nigris, the first time he heard Philip say Mass, being formerly wont
to be much desquieted in his mind, averred, that he felt himself, so well
disposed unto heavenly meditations, that he wondered at himself, which thing he
afterward oftimes experienced.

They that prayed with him were so enamoured on religious duties, that
continuing in prayer for many hours together, they thought the time nothing.
One of them having spent an hour in prayer, deemed it but as a minute, saying,
O that I were always thus piously affected, how gladly would I pray with
Philip continually

He was at hearing Confessions, many times so enkindled with sacred fire, that
diverse of his Sons as often as he held them close to his breast at the instant of
Absolution, felt themselves revived with unutterable spiritual sweetness and
delight.

John Atrina a Campanian, and most intimate with the B. man, has these words.
As often as I entered within Philips chamber, though I were possessed with extreme
joy, yet I confess I shook all over: as often likewise as his Sovereign hand
either touched my shoulder, took me by the locks, or plucked me by the ear,
straight my mind swarmed with holy and devout cogitations; as though some
special inspiration of Divine grace had from heaven breathed upon my heart,
whereby I was driven in a sort to the Altar of the H. Sacrament to Prayer.

Mark Antony Maffa says thus. Ever since I came acquainted with Philip I
always honored him as a Saint; and, as far as I might, contrived still to be
with him. When he gave me Sacramental Absolution, there issued forth almost
ever from his body a certain ardor of devotion, that forced tears from me,
which never befell me when I Confessed to others: being under any pressures or
temptations, assisted by his prayers and counsel I went away replenished with
joy, and they were presently dispelled. After his death, I never had recourse
to him in my thoughts, in any streights, but I found my self fortified with
divine consolation; and when I put on the Vestments, in which he, when he was
living, used to say Mass, I cannot but weep abundantly. Thus he.

CHAP. IV His Gift of Tears.
ADd to this, that the heart of Philip pierced with the Love of Christ became
so exceeding soft, that when any ones discourse tended either to grief or pity,
he could not hold breaking forth into Tears. He would so bitterly bewaill
offenses committed against God, and the offenders, that by report of Cardinal
Frederic Borromeo, you might have seen him weep like a Child corrected by his
Parents.

A Young Noble man had for shame concealed some sins of his in Confession,
Philip observed it; and looking earnestly on him lets fall a shower of tears;
whereby he procured of God for his Penitent such hearty sorrow for sin, that he
likewise burst out into tears very plentifully: they both wept, were both
silent; neither of them left weeping for a good space, at length the young man
falls down on his knees, detects all the foul corners of his conscience to him;
whom the B. Father affectionately embracing, and accepting his Confession,
dismissed, assoiled of his faults, and satisfied in his mind. But Philip, being
of a most mild temper, had not wept enough; till hying to his chamber, he there
let lose the reins to his sorrows, to the full. After which the young man
discovered to his former confessor the sins of his whole life; and within few
days comes and tells Philip, how he had disclosed all: to whom the Father
answered, Though I heard not the Confession of your life, yet be sure, I
exactly know all and every of the faults you have ever committed. Nay more then
that, I tell you, now you carry a good face with you: (which kind of expression
the H. man used when he saw any of his reclaimed:) he replied, I beseech you,
Father, that you would obtain sincere contrition for me by your prayers to God;
and had scarce spoke the word, but he was immediately struck from heaven with
so profound a grief, as he said, he never felt a greater in all his life.

The Good man one time went to a Noble man's Manor with Caesar Baronius, Joh.
Franc. Bordinus, Thomas Bozzius, and others. In the afternoon, about the time
when usually the sermons begin in the Church, Philip on the sudden enjoined
Bozzius to preach to them ex tempore, that those who were there might not be
wholly without benefit of the word of God. He did, when straight Philip adding
somewhat in confirmation of what he had said, as he was speaking, there fell on
him such a trembling all his body over, and such abundance of tears and sobs
came from him, that he was fain to break off his discourse. This used to happen
almost as often as he spoke of spiritual matters.

A certain Prelate surprised him once on the sudden, as he was reading the
Lives of Saints, weeping excessively; who asking him, Father, what does this
weeping m^an? he jestingly answered, May not I grieve, who am an Orphan bereft
of both my Parents? at which the Prelate smiled, and he both handsomely and
wisely smothered the cause of his sorrowing. Another time Angelus Victorius a
Physician, one, whom the Father loved, took him reading and crying over the
lives of the Saints, when demanding the reason of his heaviness, I lament
says, he, that this Saint, whose story is in my hands, renounced the world,
whereas I have never yet done the least good: and added, what, O Angelus, If
thou should see me beaten with cudgels through the City? Thou would say,
spare, O spare that Good Philip, who professed so great Sanctity. Nay rather
lay on, Executioner, lay on soundly: and as he uttered these words the tears
trickled down his cheeks.

If he but read, or spoke at any time of the Passion of our Lord, presently the
tears ran down. Once in Holy week he read the Passion of Christ at Mass, as the
custom is; when perceiving himself Rapt, he strove by all means to divert his
thoughts another way; but coming to the Sacred History of Christ's Death, unable
to contain any longer, he gave scope to his sighs and groans, all that were
present wondering and weeping together with him. Yea very often upon the hearing
one word only of the Passion, he would melt into tears: otherwhiles wax pale,
either hearing or speaking of that Mystery. Sometimes he could hardly breathe,
other times he trembled every joint: So that he was about to forbear preaching
publicly; and being asked, Why? his answer was, Because he had not such ready
parts: yet he abstained not formerly, for that the number of Preachers being
but small, what nature was defective in, God supplied.

He went to dinner once to the Refectory of S. Praxede, erected by S. Carlo
Borromeo, and with him the Cardinal of Vercellae, a most holy and learned
person: and when, according to their custom after meals, the Spiritual
Conferences began, each one being to answer in order, Philip, on occasion
offered, beginning to treat of the Love of Christ, the Tears and Sighs broke in
so fast upon him, that his voice being stopped, he stood stone-still without
moving.

When he was once very sick, they gave him Cock- broth to drink, but taking the
Porrenger in his hand, he wept exceedingly; saying, Thou, o my Savior,
hangedst on the Tree, and am I served in my bed, amidst so many delights, so
many conveniences, so great attendance? which as he repeated again and again,
such a flood of Tears followed, that he was not able to drink.

When he administered the H. Communion to his Penitents, the Tears fell in such
plenty, that he was often forced to desert the employment.

At Divine Service he was so affected with the Melody of Church-Musick, that he
many times cried all the while. Being once in the Q^ire among the Friars at S.
Mary's supra Minervam, he wept so, that he wet all the forepart of his clothes

Last of all he was so inclined to grief, that on all occasions of Piety he
would shed Tears: and it was reckoned for a Miracle, that by continual weeping
he lost not his fight, which he retained perfect to fourscore years of age,
without using Spectacles; though he had diverse pairs by him, to preserve and
refresh his sight, as he said, which after his death were affirmed to have done
many strange Cures, being used in diseases.

Among others, Lucia Marzana, a Recluse in the Monastery of S. Lucia in silice,
in the City, being much troubled with the Headache, applying but the H. man's
Spectacles to the place affected, fell into a gentle slumber, and when she
rose, her pai^ was gone.

CHAP. V. His Prayers.
THis fervor of Charity, and abundance of Tears he obtained only by his
frequent exercise of Prayer: which he was continually so much addicted to, that
he directed all those Religious exercises he had instituted in the Oratory to
this one; and therefore entitled it the Congregation of the Oratory.

To this Divine Study he so vigourously set himself, and made such progress
therein, that standing, or walking his thoughts were still fixed upon God; more
naturally soaring heavenward, then the doters on this world tend grovelling
toward earth.

Many a time, whilst his Scholars were discussing several and serious matters
in his Chamber, be disengaged from their affairs, either cast up his eyes to
heaven, or crossed his hands, or sometimes fetched groans from the bottom of
his heart. As he walked the streets he was so swallowed up of contemplation,
that ever and anon he must be plucked by the sleeve, and put in mind to offer,
or return, Salutes. After dinner, that he might not injure the health of his
body by too much intention of the mind, when he had a desire to slumber or to
rest him, he was wont to call Gallonius and tell him, You know what to do, if
you would have me sleep: meaning, that he must call off his thoughts from the
consideration of things supernatural, by variety of discourse, or some
pleasant reading for that purpose. Indeed he felt that in himself, which he
used to apply in general to others: to wit, That a man enflamed with the Love
of God must arrive to that height of Chariy, as to be constrained to cry out;
Let me alone Lord, let me rest a while: for whoever is indisposed to pray even
at Noon, and after meals, has not yet received the Gift of Prayer.

He never went upon any business that was not ushered in with Prayer either by
himself or his: whence he gained so strong a confidence, that he spared not to
say, Give me but time to pray, and I am sure to obtain of God what I ask. And
at other times, Hoc volo, Hoc jubeo: This I will, this I command: and as he
said, it fell out still. Briefly, by his perseverance in prayer he attained
even to supernatural illuminations, that he knew exactly which of his had
prayed that morning, and which not.

But though his whole life might truly be termed one continued Prayer, yet he
prescribed himself some set hours, to increase his devotion there in. For in
Summer, except some work of Charity hindered, he retired himself to the top of
the house; morning and evening, where he might view heaven and earth: to that
end, not only at S. Hieroms, but a Vallicella amongst his own he built him a
Closset on the very Roof, a story higher than the rest. And in his latter days
he went up to the leads of the Church: where he spent a good space in holy
Cogitations: yet if at any time he were called forth to any pious work, he came
down straight, and quitted his spiritual exercise, till having dispatched his
business he returned again; saying, He did not therefore reject Meditation, but
left Christ for Christ; and that the force of Prayer was not hereby diminished,
but augmented rather.

In the Winter after Sunset, he prolonged his Prayers to the second or third
hour of the night: and going to rest, that he might rise again to prayer just
at his time, he hung his Watch at the Beds head, by feeling of which he knew
what a clock it was: and hard by his Crucifix he laid the Rosary of our Lady,
that when he wakened he might fall to his Prayers.

At some special times in the year, as the principal Festivals, and when
public or private necessity required, his prayers were both longer and more
intense. He watched, fasted, and prayed, on Good Friday all those hours that
the sacred Body of our Lord was kept apart by it self in memory of his Burial.

He devoutly and attentivly recited his Canonical hours, for the most part
joining a Companion to him, for he could not dispatch them alone, by reason he
was subject to rapts. He almost ever had his Breviary lying open, being
wondrous careful that no error passed in saying it; and if any chanced,
though he seemed as one bereft of sense, he presently corrected the mistakes.
When he was fourscore years old, Gregory XIV. remitted him his Office upon
repeating the Rosary of the B. Virgin; which favor he at no time made use of.
Nay if he were extreme sick, he appointed the Canonical hours should be
rehearsed in his hearing at least.

To Prayer he added Reading, and the daily perusing Saints Lives, alleging
that, There was no better incentive to Piety then the Examples and Rules of
Saints. Besides those lives gathered by Lippoman, he commonly used Cassians
Collations; the Imitation of Christ, fathered on Gerson; the Life of S.
Katherine of Siena; and above all, the Acts of the B. John Columbine. For the
Books of H. Scripture: he delighted much in S. Paul's Epistles. Those whom he
designed for preachers he counseled to read their works chiefly whose names
began with S. as S. Augustine* S. Gregory; S. Bernard; and the rest.

And because he was desirous that People should rise from prayer rather cheared
than tired, he wished such, as he thought less able to pray long together,
that they should often raise their devotion by certain short Ejaculations: some
of which more frequently used by him, are here annexed.

Create in me a clean heart, O God; and renew a right Spirit within me.
O God, make speed to save me: O Lord, make have to help me.
Teach me to do thy will.
O Lord, hide not thy self from me.
O Lord, I am oppressed, undertake for me.
Thou art the way, the truth, and the life.
Thy will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven.
Jesus, be thou to me Jesus.
Remember not, Lord, mine iniquities.
When shall I love thee with a filial love.
O Holy Trinity, one God, have mercy upon me.
Kindle in me the fire of thy love.
As yet I know thee not, because I seek thee not, O my Jesu.
What might I do to be pleasing to thee, O my Jesu?
What might I do to perform thy will, O my Jesu?
Give me grace to serve thee, not for fear, but love, O my Jesu.
O my Jesu I would fain love thee.
I am distrustful of my self, and trust in the, O my Jesu.
I cannot do well, except thou help me, O my Jesu.
I will do nothing, but thy most holy will, O my Jesu.
I never have loved thee, yet would I fain love thee, O my Jesu.
I shall never love thee, if thou help me not, O my Jesu,
I would fain love the, but find not the way, O my Jesu.
I seek thee, and do not find thee, O my Jesu.
If I knew thee, I should also know my self, O my Jesu.
If I should have done all the good in the world, what great matter had I done,
O my Jesu?
If thou help me not, I shall fall, O my Jesu.
Cut away all impediments, If thou will have me, O my Jesu.
Do with me, O Lord, as thou know, and as thou please.
That shall become of me which shall please the Lord; I put my trust in God.
O Blessed Lady, Obtain for me the grace to be alwaves mindful of thee.
Maria Matter Gratiae, matter misericordiae, tu nos ab host protege, and hora
mortis suscipe.

But Philip not herewith content, inroduced a custom in most families in the
City, of having a private Oratory in every house, where the whole number both
of men and women might assemble to Prayers. Nay some had not only Oratories,
but followed the same orders and courses observed in the Congregation.

The Instructions given by him upon this subject were these. First, he said,
The best Preparative to Prayer was for a man to think himself unworthy of so
high a Service. Next, the frequent using to master our affections: being wont
to say He that went to pray, and could not bridle and subdue his Passions, was
like a Bird not fledged, yet offering to fly. Being entreated by one of his
Penitents to teach him to pray, Be humble and obedient, says he, and the
Unction of the H. Spirit will teach thee. He advised men to follow those
inspirations God gave them at times of Prayer; as if he incited them to
contemplate on the Passion of Christ, it were not fit to fly from it, to the
Mystery of the Resurrection; no nor to desist from prayer, if their desires
were not presently granted; but courageously to persevere, till they obtained
their suits. He affirmed, that if in Prayer any one found his mind quiet and
at ease, it signified either that what was asked was already bestowed, or
without fail would be very speedily. He wished his Sons to be ambitious of
performing the greatest services for the love of Christ, not contenting
themselves with any mean degrees of Piety; but outvying (in Charity for
example) if it were possible, the Apostles Peter and Paul: that so, what they
could not attain to in in the work, they might in some sort arive at, in their
intentions. Further, he warned them who gave themselves much to Prayer, not too
earnestly or too long to gaze on holy pictures, both because it did offend the
brain, and brought on illusions. To such as lay under any spiritual aridity,
he prescribed this remedy; that they should prostrate themselves before God and
his Saints like beggars, craveing with equal importunity and desires their
sacred Alms as the ordinary sort of Poor do corporal food: and therefore they
should resort sometimes to one Church sometimes another, as it were to beg men's
Charity from door to door. He counseled young Persons to meditate especially
on the four last things; saying that, Those who went not to Hell in their life
time, were in great danger of going thither at their deaths. He willed his
humbly to recommend themselves to the prayers of others: and at no hand to omit
Evening Prayer, and the Whippings used in the Oratory. A man without the use of
Prayer, he said, was to be ranked among the Beasts. When the Physician once
enjoined him to forbear his Meditation a while, for his health; after a few
days, Wretch^d I, said he, who am already, me thinks, degenerated into a Brute
beast! Lastly he averred, that the devil dreaded nothing so much as Prayer, and
therefore labored to his uttermost to disturbed it.

CHAP. VI. His Zeal for the saving Souls.
AS this H. man was thus enflamed with fervent Love to God, so he burned with
vehement desires of assisting his Neighbor; addicting himself wholly to the
converting Souls. Therefore he sought to endear every one to him by offices of
amity, and affection; and he that once came to him, could hardly afterward be
kept from him. Lewd and debauched Persons, he, like a pious Father, first wan
to leave Mortal sins, so by insensible degrees to bring them to that Mark of
perfection he aimed at.

One came to him once intending to disburden himself of the Load of his sins,
though so ensnared in old habits of evil, that scarce a day passed, wherein he
fell not into some offense; him Philip enioined no other Penance but to come
and confess his faults to him, as soon as ever he committed them. He did so;
and still as he came the Father imposed no other punishment: and so! in a few
months the Penitent took courage, and so manfully resisted, aspiring unto
Christian perfection, that Philip himself testified of him, that he came near
unto the purity of the H. Angels themselves.

With the same spirit of meekness he reclaimed a most dissolute youth bidding
him only to salute the B. Virgin a days, with the Antheme that begins Salve
Regina; and kissing the ground say to himself, By to morrow I may be dead.
Which he performing accordingly, in short space attained to a virtuous course
of life, 14. years after dying by all likelihood in a happy condition.

Another of a very bad life came to confession to Philip, and after Absolution
according to the custom of his country would have given him money but having
none about him, Pardon me, Father says he, I want money: He smiling said, Alas
Son it shall serve me instead of Money, that you come again to me next Saturday,
The Penitent did so, and won by the Sweetness of the H. man soon proved a good
Convert.

John Thomas Arena, one steelled with impudence went sometimes to S. Hieroms
Oratory, not to receive benefit by the excellent Sermons there, but to deride
the Preachers: which they of the Society not endureing complain to Philip, who
told them, Sons, let him alone, and ye shall shortly see what God will do.
Well, the young continued thus shamelesly affronting them, till on a sudden
reflecting on his villainous course, and relenting, he resigned up himself
absolutely to the B. Fathers commands: soon after in a holy Zeal entering a
house of the Dominicans, where he died in his Noviceship.

Pet. Focilius a Neopolitane, a rare Wit, but something picquant and excessive
in jesting, very difficulty and in a manner by force was brought by his
companions to the Oratory; where espying himself eyed by Philip with a look
percing as the keenest javelin, yet he staid out the whole Service, with which
he was so taken, that presently his mind changeing, when he came out of the
Church he seemed a new man. Afterward he came often to the Father to
confession, who rejecting him, heard others Confessions, but bid him be gone.
Two months together he constantly came; at last He took his Confession, and in
a little while by the blessing of God reduced him to an eminency in virtue. He
foretold him, that he should die in great want; and was not mistaken; for he,
who in his youth had a most plentiful fortune, was in his age brought to such
scarcity, as he hardly had Bread to keep him alive: yet as he had lived
religiously, so he dyed.

A Priest, one honorably descended, had very fair revenews from an
Ecclesiastical Benefice, yet went brave and in colored clothes like a
Layman. Him a young di^ciple of Philips (as they both walked in the Cloister
at S. Mary's supra Minervam) spying tells him, Sir, be pleased to know, there
uses to come hither a Priest named Philip, whom if you but once speak with,
you were a happy man. The Priest, liking his motion, consents, waits his
coming, speaks with him. The good man said nothing to him, save that he should
go to S. Hieroms to hear the Sermons: he did; went every day: mean while though
Philip conferred much and often with him, yet not a word passed concerning his
Garb, or tonsure, his chief care was, to breed Remorse in him. When behold!
some sixteen days after, he voluntarily lays a way his Lay-habit, comes to him
shaven, confessed his sins from the first dawning of Reason in him; surrenders
himself entirely to the R. Father, and being made one of his Sons traveled
apace in his pursuit after Holiness, till at length full of years, he died, a
little before Philips Canonization.

With like tenderness of Spirit and zeal of charity did he reduce great numbers
to Christ; insomuch that it grew a saying among many; As the Lodestone
attracts Iron, so does Philip, Souls: others cried, Happy the day and hour
wherein I was first acquainted with Philip. For, the Reverend and Prudent Man
liked not those, who laid down the way of virtue too difficult, and laborious
to their Penitents; for that, being thereby discouraged with the tediousness of
it, either they would not enter upon it, or soon retreat.

And therefore he never much inveighed against those garish dresses worn by
women, but letting that pass, labored chiefly to make them in love with
Christ; knowing that if once the flames of Divine Love were kindled in them, of
themselves they would cast off all such lightnesses. When a Noble Lady once
asked him, whether it were any offense for her to help her low Stature by
wearing Chapines; his answer was, Take heed, you fall not. One of his Scholars
wore a Collar plaited in great folds, He gently taking him about the neck told
him, I should hugg you oftener, but that that these wrinkles hurt my fingers:
and by this means both the the Lady left off her high Shoes; and the young man
his fine Colars ever after.

From the same exuberant Charity it was, that his Chamber Door stood always
open to all comers, reserving for himself neither time, nor place; yea though
he were sick, yet did he admit any and at any hour. Many times when he was a
bed disposed to sleep, he refused not to hear the Confessions of as many as
came, not enduring that any one should go away from him sad or disquieted.
Therefore he charged his Disciples never to say; Philip is asleep, or retired
to his Chamber: taking it very ill, if any tarried never so little for his
coming, for which he often and soundly too chid Gallonius and others. And if
the Fathers objected, that he too freely exposed himself to all comers, he
replied, I would have you know, that by spending whole days and nights for
them, and no other way, have I brought unto Christ, those who at this day are
the most forward in his service.

Hence was it, that he boggled not at the unseasonableness of weather, rain,
cold, heat, nor the hazarding his own life for the saving souls. It was told
him once, how a young Noble person went in danger of his life by haunting the
company of a principal Lady in the City, on whom he was desperately enamoured;
and though some of eminent rank had attempted, but in vain, to change his
resolution, yet Philips diswasions prevailed so with him, that he not only
desisted from his purpose, but ever after avoided her house; and if at any time
the Coach that carried him made thitherwarap excusing himself to the Company he
would leap out, and take another way.

Thus the Servant of Christ, becoming all things to all, in a care of every
ones Salvation, caught both poor and rich, noble and ignoble, learned and
ignorant, young and old, men and women, suting his baits to each of them till
they were drawn to Christ: whereby he so endeared his own to him, that some of
them came to him almost every day, some again for 30 or 40 years visited him
twice aday, viz. mornings and evenings, all whom he welcomed with large
expressions of kindness and affection: so that his Chamber, not without cause,
was termed, The School of Sanctity, and Christian mirth. And, though there
wanted not some that blamed him for it, men of otherwise able judgment and
integrity, yet he both learnt by experience and taught it his, That men are
more Kindly and more easily brought to Christ by gentle and fair* means, than
roughness and Severity,

Yet when need was, he knew how to show his Authority, and use rigor. For,
being sent for to do some good upon a malefactor that was to be hanged, and
coming into the Chapel, where he lay roaring on the ground; he, led by a
Divine hand, catching him by the throat and dashing him against the floor,
cried aloud to him, Peace; at which word he became silent, trembled, and was
converted; and soon after confessed twice to one who came to him, dying very
patienly.

CHAP. VII. His singular prudence in governing Youth.
PHilip well understanding that in the Proverbs; Adolescens juxta viam suam,
etc. Train up a child in the way he should go, and when he is old he will not
depart from it: bestowed special care and pains in reclaiming young persons,
preventing sin in them, and promoting them in the studies of Holiness. For
which cause, he was not ashamed, though he were stricken in years, and through
continual extreme labor decayed in strength to lead them in troops along with
him, and march through the Streets: disputing with them in the several arts
and Sciences, they were versed in; that so ingratiating himself with them, he
might have them at his beck: often would he take them to the Highest and
stateliest places about the City, where they might best have a most pleasant
view. of it; there did he play at Quoits with them, a sport invented by him.
After which himself retiring from them to a place more remote, he read with
meditation a little Book of the Passion.

If any of his neglected frequently the Oratory, or the use of Sacraments, he
presently sent for them, and with all tenderness and respective love won them
to their wonted exercices again; Whereupon they many times proved more zealous
in the Worship of God.

His succesfull pains in training up Youth was so famed among the Regulars,
that the Superiors would send their Novices to him for directions, as he
thought best. Sundry times in the year he led all the Novices of the Dominicans
to the 7 Churches; and sometimes to beautiful green Plots where they were
merry and dined; He, Good man, overjoyed that they had so handsomely, and
withal harmlesly, recreated both their bodies and minds; saying often to them as
they were at dinner, Eat, my Sons, eat and make no scruple now; for it does me
good to see you cheerful and pleasant. After dinner sitting on the ground he
excited them to all sorts of Virtue, but especially to Constancy and
Perseverance. So the day being spent, he brought them home from their innocent
recreations.

He was singular in tolerating the sports and pastimes of Children; who played
close by his chamber, making a noise both with their tongues, and hands, and
that almost every day; yet he an aged man, and full of thoughts about important
affairs, endured all with patience. Yea if any reproved them for it, at any
time, if it came to his ear, he returned them this mild answer, Go, play; this
only I desire of you, sin not.

A Noble man that used to come often to him, on a time hearing this bustle
asked Philip how he could endured such a stir, who answered, Though they cl^ft
wood upon my back, I could bear it willingly, so they will forbear sinning. to
which purpose, one of the prime men in all the City, calling to mind how
friendly Philip formerly had used him, told his companion weeping; When I was
young and went much to Father Philip, I remember I was never polluted with any
deadly sin, but as soon as ever I left him, I fell foully into this wretched
kind of life, you see me in.

Moreover the H. man would have young people by all means cheerful; being
offended, when he saw any sad; therefore he would strike them a box on the ear
sometimes bidding them, Be merry: saying that, Those who were naturally
pleasant were more tractable in the way of virtue, than the melancholique. Two
Capuchins, an old and a young man, came one time to him, who looking upon them,
and conceiving the younger, to have made farther progress in Piety, he purposed
to make trial of his spirit; so, taking occasion, for that he had spit
undecently in his presence, he began to reprehend him sharply and looking
angrily at him bid him, Hence away Sloven, where were you bred? and taking off
his Shoe made as if he would hit him on the head. But he retaining the same
chearfullness of countenance, held his peace, and gave him the hearing. The
Elder of them, unconcerned the while, took it hainously, as being naturally
sad. But Philip not satisfied with once chiding, went on, Off with your Cloak,
for you are not worthy to walk the Streets in such a habit. With all my heart,
said he, especially having well dined to day, and being not as yet acold.
Philip at that seeming to be more enraged, thrust him forth of the Chamber, who
bore all patiently and without show of dislike took his leave and departed. No
sooner was he gone, but the H. man calling him again, hugging and embracing him
said, Cheer up, my Son, go on in this sprightly and cheerful temper, for by
this means you will soon attain to the top of Perfection: and so dismissed him.

But though the R. Father approved of plesancy, and alacrity in young folks;
yet abhorred he light jests, ridiculous mirth, and the spirit of railing;
saying that, Scurrility kept divine inspirations from entering, and by degrees
quenched the good Spirit, if any were.

He loved to have the younger sort busy still and employed about something, and
therefore would bid them either sweep the room, or make the bed, or carry a
trunk or table to one place or other; sometimes read, otherwhiles string beads
for Rosaries, and such like; that so they might never be assotted with
idleness, a vice he was always an enemy unto.

He was rather desirous likewise, that they should frequent the Sacrament of
Penance, then of the Altar; and gave two reasons for it. First, because-when we
receve the H. Communion, says he, we are subject to more violent assaults of
the Devil, which young men are foiled by, as not steady or confirmed in their
virtuous purpose, and so do the greater indignity to the Sacrament. A second
was; for that the more earnestly we long after and pursue, the more reverently
and devoutly we approach to this heavenly reflection. Therefore if any of his
at any time desired leave to communicate oftener, he would say, Sitientes,
siitientes venite ad aquas, Come ye thirsty, ye thirsty come to the waters.

At Shrovetide, the better to restrain them from public Shows, he gave order
to have some Religious Actons of sacred Story represented. And upon this ground
wisely instituted that laudable Custom of visiting the seven Churches of the
City about that time.

And to preserve them unspotted from all impurity, he advised them, not to be
alone in their Chambers after dinner; but meet together to refresh their minds
with some virtuous communication: affirming that that time was the Noonday
devil mentioned by the Royal Prophet. One thing also he seriously pressed
them to, that they should avoid the touching of one another, as they would the
Plague; under whatever pretense of either kindred or kindness to each other:
and that two alone should not be together in a place, especially that were both
of an Age; which thing he enjoined to be observed most strictly, principally
between the two Sexes. A certain Boy and his Sisters used to play together,
which having once or twice discovered to his Confessor, he warned him ever
after to forbear it. The Lad knowing his own innocence, was troubled that his
Confessor should urge it so much upon him: and being bid to consult Philip, he
acquaints him with it: who asked him, what he studied? Logic says he: Then
know, said Philip, the Devil is a subtle Logician, who can teach men craftily
to abstract and say, she is a woman, not Sister. He straight acknowledged the
inference, and thence forward left to sport himself with his Sisters.

CHAP. VIII. His care for the Sick and Dying.
WHen any of his fell sick, he constantly visited them; using at his entering
into the Room to desire those that were present to join with him in Prayer a
while. And if they were dangerously ill, he never left them, till either they
died or mended.

Sebastian a Musician of the Castle of S. Angelos, one of Philips Sons, and a
very devout religious man, was sick of a disease that killed him; as he lay
drawing on, the Devil appeared to him in an ugly and terrible shape, which
apparition so affrighted him, that he in a despair of mercy cried out, O
miserable wretch that I am! O woe is me! now has God Of this are four Witnesses
upon Oath, who were present; two of them Priests.
forsaken me, now am I consigned to Hels eternal flames, woe unto me forlorn
creature! woe unto me! When he had lamented thus sadly some two hours, and found
comfort from none* they called for the Curate of the Parish, whom the sick
party would by no means see or hear, but saying he was undone, protested he
gave no credit at all to the Priest. Those of the house dismayed hereat sent
for Philip, who hying thither, as soon as ever he set his foot within the
Chamber, asked, What Is the matter? what is the matter? Fear nothing. He
presently being put in hopes at that, cries aloud; Father Philip chaseth the
Devils; they fly, and Philip drives them before him. O miraculous power of
Philip! Live Christ for ever, Live Philip, by whom I am recovered from the Pit
of Hell; let the Oratory flourish. And then filled with consolation he sang
some of the H. Lauds; at last stretching forth his hands, he broke out into
these words, Behold the Angels, behold the Archangels! reckoning up the
several Quires; and in September on the Vigil of the Archangel S. Michael, he
breathed out his Soul in the arms of the H. Father.

Persianus Rosa, Philips Confessor, being likewise very sick, was grievously
assaulted by the Devil, and in the midst of his conflicts and temptations would
This was attested by an eyewitness.
say, Tu judica me Deus, tu discern causam meam: Judge me o God, and plead my
cause. Lying on his bed, for fear tumbling to and fro. Meanwhile in comes
Philip whom Persian looking on, said Holy Philip pray for me; adding, O thou
Servant of God drive away, I beseech thee, that foul looked dog that leaps upon
me, lest I be torn in pieces, he forthwith kneeling down, desires those that
were by to pray with him. Scarce had he bowed the knee, but Persian cried out,
God be thanked the dog is gone, the dog is fled, see he stands at the door. So
rising from Prayer, he sprinkled both the sick man and his chamber with H.
water; and the devils being expelled, the next day he quietly and joyfully died.

Gabriel Tana of Modena, one of Cardinal Politians Gentlemen, and of Philips
first Scholars, who confessed his sins twice a week, and received the
Sacrament; fell mortally sick when he was 18 years old: and having bin ill
about Of this Jacobus Marmita writ a relation, who was present; as were
likewise diverse of Philips Sons.
20 days, and now about to dye; the devil instigating him thereto, he began
most vehemently to wish he might recover his health. Philip coming every day to
see him, asks him how he did; Very well said he, for I hope I shall out grow
this disease. He foreseeing his death, said to him, My son, give me your Will
and your Nill, that when the Tempter comes you may answer, my Consent or
Dissent is no more in my hands, but Christ's. Gabriel assented; and Philip
departed. When Mass was done, he returns to the sick person, and finds his mind
changed; insomuch as he that a little while since was too desirous to live, now
said with the Apostle, Cupio dissolvi, etc. I desire to be dissolved and to be
with Christ: and putting the Crucifix to his breast and kissing it: he exhorted
them that stood by to contemn the gaudy vanities of the world; Believe me, said
he, I disdain life, I desire heaven; Pray therefore, Father, that God would
satisfy my longings, and before the fifth hour of the night I may fly hence
unto my Savior, You shall, replied the Father, obtain your requests, yet let
me advertise you of this, that the Devil will use many stratagems to undo you;
telling them all to him; and when he had done went his way, that he might give
himself to Prayer. An hour after Philip was gone, comes the Enemy and tempts
the Young man to presumption on his own worth; of which this was a mark. The
Letanies for the dying, as the custom is, were rehearsing, and when they came
to those words, A mala morte libera eum Domine: Free him from an ill death o
Lord, Gabriel smiled, and shaking his head said; O he cannot dye amiss who
carries Christ in his heart; when presently perceiving the wiles of the subtle
Fiend, I beseech you says he, pray to Christ for me, for what I spoke just
now, was by suggestion of the devil. No sooner was he rid of that temptation,
but the adversary redoubling his blows, labors with all his might to keep him
from uttering the H. name of Jesus: thereupon he cries out; Alas, Brethren, I
cannot possible express that which I most desire. What is that? said they, does
the Devil hinder you from mentioning the name of Jesus? At which he nodded, as
being so: then they replied Keep Jesus in your mind and that is enough. In the
encounter he was fain to summon up all his powers, so that what with perplexity
of mind and motion of his body, he was all in a sweat. Then was Philip
fetched, who showing the B. Crucifix, whispers softly in his ear the most
delicious and sacred Name of Jesus; which he often repeated freely and readily at
his pleasure: yet did not the wicked spirit depart; for not long after he
sought to seduce him from the Catholic Faith; persuading him, that he should
escape this sickness, all which he related to Philip, who bids him, Slight my
Son, slight those Satanical cheats, and say the Creed with me. He pronounced
the words often over, but seemed to himself not to pronounce them; which Philip
perceiving bids those that were present rehearse the Symbol of the Apostles,
which done, straight the temptation ceased. The sick person the while
recollecting himself and resuming courage defies his enemy in these
expressions, whether thou will or no, O thou damned apostate I do believe. At
last the wily Tempter storms him afresh and more fiercely, employing his utmost
to engulf him in a Hell of desperation. So assuming a deformed shape, he
appears with a dreadful aspect to the sick man, who appalled at the spectacle
trembled every joint of him, changing his color, rolling his eyes, and unable
to maintain his standing, roars out in bitterness of Soul, O caytive that I am!
ah what a number of horrid crimes have I committed? Beat away, Father, beat
away those ugly Curres. Whereupon Philip laying his hand on the Patients head,
thus bespake the Devil; And O thou Monster dare thou still oppose* I command
thee hence immediately, for these very hands have this morning handled the H.
Body of Christ; and turning to the sick party, Take courage my Son, said he,
and say with me Discedite a me, etc. Depart from me all ye workers of iniquity;
which being done twice or thrice, Gabriel for joy cried out, The Dogs run away
at Philips bidding: and pointing to them with his finger, do ye not see, says
he, with what speed they fly? we have overcome, O good God, we have overcome.
Then turning his eyes to the Crucifix he began to pray to our Savior with such
devotion, that all the standers by fell a weeping, and taking it in his hand,
lifting up his head, he uttered many pious speeches; at length triumphing over
the Devil, he upbraids his cowardice; but Philip fearing lest by these
intensions of his mind his end possibly might be hastened, bad him, Peace, now
peace, and be quiet, let us leave the devil. He was silent instantly, and the
bystanders hearing him speak so heartily conceived he would live to the next
day; but Philip told them, No, he will not, for as soon as ever he stirs but
out of his place, he will depart straight. Scarce half an hour after he turned
him on his right side, and naming the B. Name of Jesus, dyed.

James Marmita, one of the forenamed Cardinals Secretaries, a man eminent for
prudence, learning, piety, and of Philips familiar acquaintance, being now in
the last stage of his life, and through the infirmity of frail flesh fearing to
dye, greatly complained of the violence of his disease. Philip, who was by, bid
him, Be of good cheer, and imploring the Divine aid, say, Deus noster refugium,
etc. God is our refuge, and strength, a very present help in trouble: he did,
adding these words following, Quae invenerunt nos nimis: which as soon as he
heard he went to prayer, and continued there not long, before Marmita, b^ing
marvelously cheared, peaceaby departed.

Nicolas Lilius, Priest of the Congregation, almost at last gasp encountering
with the devil, thus obtained victory over This is commonly known.
his adversary. Philip was saying Mass, it seems in the little room above
mentioned; and praing more fervently than usually, on the sudden great noises
were heard over the Dining Room, as if huge stones had bin hurled too and fro:
Philip then alone in the Chapel, calls Petrus Consolinus, and bids him, Go
and bring him word how Nicolas does: away goes he, and finds him sick, with his
hands clasped and lift up to heaven, reiterating these words; Gratias agamus
Domino Deo nostro; accessit, recessit, victus est. Let us give thanks to our
Lord God, he came, he is gone, he is overcome. Consolinus informs Philip of
all; who as his fashion was, said, It Is enough; and hyes him straight to
Nicolas, who looking on him wistly, asked him passionatly, Ah, Father, why was
not I acquainted with you before? Why Father, thus late? intimating hereby,
that he had learnt sufficiently in that combat, what prevalency and favor
Philip had with God. Lilius was a Frenchman by birth, one to be admired for his
strange contempt of himself, far from the love of terrene things, from doting
on his friends or kindred, insomuch as when their letters were brought him he
would throw them unread into the fire. He was of a wonderful patience in
hearing Confessions; and foretelling the day of his own death, after he had
lived 20 Years in the Congregation, deceased: whom Philip so exceedingly
valued, that he kept his goods instead of Relics, as an argument of his
incomparable Virtue.

Carolus Mazzaeus likewise, one of Philips Sons being at the point of death,
sustained shrewd conflicts by the temptations of the Devil: for an evil
angel presented himself to him in his sickness; and that he might sink him in
the Gulf of despair, laid open before him all his wickedness committed; whom
the sick party answered twice together only thus, I appeal to Philip; and
straight the Devil vanished: and Charles soon after very quietly departed.
Philip averred his Soul went to heaven: affirming that if a sick person
disputed with the devil any while, he was sure to be surprised by his sleights.
By this time it was sufficiently known, that as soon as the B. man set but his
foot within the chamber of the sick, and asked, Who is here? the devils
immediately fled away; so that diverse when they lay a dying sent for Him.

And not only to his friends and acquaintance, but even to his very enemies did
this Good Old man discharge these offices of Charity. Among others, he had one
inveterate adversary, whom he was not suffered to visit: so one day after Mass
retiring into the Vestry, he said, I felt my self much constrained at Mass, to
pray for N. And it was found, that the same hour Philip said Mass, the man fell
sick of a disease whereof he died. Him the H. man loved so well that if any
chanced to speak of him, he would weep, out of his tender compassion.

To this purpose, he in the last place forewarned men of two things; one was,
that those who lay a dying were rather to be assisted by the strength of
Prayer, than store of words: the other, that men should not spend their
Verdicts lightly either about the Patients recovery or death. He said, he knew
some that were mightily displeased at the amendment of such as they had doomed
for death.

CHAP. IX. He comforts the Afflicted.
BEsides the special care He took in helping such as were sick in body, He
likewise miraculously raised up such as were dejected in spirit and oppressed
with sundry temptations.

Marcellus Benejus Politianus was in danger of committing a grievous sin; his
Confessor wished him to seek help of Philip: and as he was opening his case to
the H. man, he felt himself eased of his trouble, by that time he had ended his
relation.

Antonius Fantinius a virtuous good man, who lived by Merchandise, and for
about 30. years or more confessed almost daily to the H. Father having married
a young Wife sharply checked a Noblemans Servant, for blemishing his honor, and
threatened to kill him: the Servant not yet forbearing, he vows to embrue his
hands in his blood. Three days after upon the return of some Festival, as his
manner was, he comes to Philip to Confession; shows him the indignities he had
suffered, and his purpose of killing the Servant; the Good man laying his hand
on him said no more but, Go: and presently all thoughts of committing the
murder forsook him; and, which was yet more strange, that Servant never after
durst walk near his house.

A certain young man, who lately entertained Philip for his Confessor, could by
no means be brought to forgive one that had offended him, though the Father
used several arguments to change his obstinate mind, but he grew every day
more inflexible than other. At last Philip taking up a Crucifix in a holy
Passion said to him; Look here, thou wretched creature, and see the blood
Christ shed for thee, not only pardoning those who crucified him, but begging
mercy also of his Father for them. Fall down therefore upon thy knees: using at
that instant some speeches that strangely represented to him the hardness of
his heart, and made impression upon him, so that the Youth kneeled down
astonished; at length rising up on the sudden, Father, says he, Paratum cor
meum, etc. My heart is ready, my heart is ready, I forgive all the injury, tell
me what I shall do. By which means the R. and Religious Father, wisely regained
his Son.

Petrus Focilius, spoken of elsewhere, being shrewdly chid by Philip for
neglecting a business entrusted to him, took it very heinously, and began to
mutter to himself, Ha! what is this? Is their never another confessor in this
City but he? and away he went and got him another Priest, but the first time he
confessed to him he was taken with such a sore Melancholy that he could have no
rest, or quiet: till Philip who knew all that had passed, three days after
sent a messenger to him, at the news whereof he found himself restored to his
former peace; and running joyfully to his Father at the very sight of the B.
Old man broke out into tears. But Philip after his wonted manner, putting his
head to his breast mildly charge him with his disobedience, to whom Peter
answered, You shall never, Father, hereafter, never find me guilty in this kind
again, for from my Soul I promise you, that my actions shall manifest me every
way answerable to my expressions. And as he spoke it the temptation ceased.

A certain Woman was almost 4 months, miserably afflicted with a violent
temptation. Her Confessor advised her to acquaint Philip therewith, who seeing
her said, O poor Soul! thou art afflicted indeed: for none can lightly have a
sorer temptation, than that thou art tormented with: at which she being amazed
that he should know the secrets of her heart (for she had discovered her mind
to none) fell down at his feet; he laying his hand on her head, and trembling
as he used to do, said, Be of good cheer, Daughter, I must say Mass and I will
pray for thee then: and the same instant that he went away her temptation left
her.

Mutius Achileus, of S. Severines, observing that when he Confessed to the H.
man, he knew his very thoughts, became such an exceeding honourer of him, that
returning into his Country he would enterprise no difficult action before he
advised with him by letters: nay he had so high an opinion of his Sanctity,
that he recommended himself to his Prayers, as if being deceased he had been
Sainted: and not in vain, for coming up to the City once, and falling into
Tyber from a steep rock, upon his devout invocating the assistance of Philip,
he was suddenly secured from the danger. The same person testifies, that as often
as he but in thought addressed himself to him, he was freed of all trouble of
temptations: as also others witness they were, by bare imposition of his hand,
and some, only by calling on his Name.

But He not only helped the needy in matters of their Souls, but in secular
businesses and things of the World. Julius Petrucius an honorable Person of
Siena, and intimate with S. Carlo, hearing the same of Philips holiness, being
involved in much intricacy of affairs, comes to him, hoping he might aid him
some way, and was not deceived, for discovering his condition to him, he found
himself quit of his trouble: whereupon putting himself under his obedience, he
never after went from him, but continuing in the Religious services of the
Oratory, even to a great age, left behind an excellent Pattern of Virtue for
his Companions to follow.

Bernardine Cotta, and Gerard Caraccio, contended, as for life, to be the Popes
Apothecary; insomuch as Antonia Gerards Sister coming to the B. man told him
all, who answered as he was wont, It Is enough, Go, be confident, I will say
Mass and pray for you, As he said Mass the Woman stood by him and going home
finds the quarrel between her Brother and his Rival peacably composed, and
her Brother in possession of the office; all which she attributed to the
Fathers prayers.

John Baptista Magnanus lost a vast sum of Money at Dice, so that he grew into
despair upon it, and as he was walking, lighting on Philip, the H. man though
he had never seen his face very courteously taking him by the hand, bid him
Have a care, do not despair, Confess your sins and God will help you. So,
bringing him to S. Hieroms, as soon as he had taken his Confession, laying his
hand on his head, he reduced him to his former cheerfulness and quiet; so that
considering what had befallen him, he proclaimed it to all he met, saying
Philippus vere magnus, Philippus vere sanctus: O right great, right good Philip!

Boethius Junta of Senogallia being sore troubled in mind, came to S. Hieroms to
cnofession; and seeing Philip fitting there, kneeling down and crossing himself
begins his Confession. At which the H. man looking up to heaven said, Indeed
this soul is in grevious perplexity: and adding nothing more, he was
miraculously released of all his anguish and tribulation.

Bartholom. Manticus a Priest of Rome, who revised and corrected the Errors of
the Press for Baronius's Annals, hearing that his Father was taken by the
Bandits, in his heaviness of spirit repairs to the H. man, relating the hard
misfortune of his Father, He bid him doubt nothing, for no harm shall befall
him. The next day the Priest tells Philip how the Bandits threatened to kill his
Father, unless he ransomed himself at 1500 Crowns; he hearing that pitied the
man, bidding him, Go to the Capuchins Covint, and recommend your Fathers sad
condition to their Prayers. It is says Manticus, sufficiently presented to
them already. What stay you for then? said he, God who best knows how to
succor his, will doubtless return you your Father safe. In brief, within a
few days Manticus received letters, that his Father had made an escape in a
very strange manner.

A Lady of Noble extract being much perplexed about living a Recluse, according
to her profession made, upon a letter of the H. man's, received such
satisfaction, that as she said, she was much pleased with her course of life,
and would not change places with any Queen upon earth.

Prudentia Diaz, a Roman Matron of quality, molested with multiplicity of cares
so that she could neither read nor pray quietly, and, which grieved her more,
could gain no comfort from her Confessor; at length by his directions applies
her self to Philip who before ever she spok word to him, told her all she meant
to say, and laying his right hand on her head whispers a few short prayers,
then signing her with the Cross dismissed her. Scarce had the B. man done, but
the woman departed replinished with joy.

The like happened to Livia Vestria Vrsina a devout woman, who being sent to
Philip for ease of her sorrows had scarcely related This she testified upon
Oath.
her troubles which for 6 months together disquieted her mind; but at the H.
man saying merely, It is nothing, she was freed of those passions not only for
that present, but all the days of her life.

Camillus Pamphilius studying all night about a certain difficulty, at his
going to Philip when day dawned, was quit of his pensiveness in these words, I
was with you to night and helped you. This was Father to Pope Innocent X. Last
of all Hieron. Pamphilius Cardinal, and brother to Camillus, left upon record
this testimony of the R. Father; In all my affairs and anxious solicitude, as
soon as I betook me to his Prayers and Counsel, I was assoiled of all my
scruples; insomuch as I feared nothing, as often as he but prayed for me.

CHAP. X. He frees diverse of Scruples of mind.
HE was excellent at removing niceties and doubts, and allaying the several
passions of the mind, as will appear upon a Survey of these following
instances. A Noble Roman for certain reasons retired into a Monastery of S.
Gregory's ad clivam Scauri, who, as a Corpse was carrying to Church to be
buried, one that was possessed following the Bier, as soon as the Funeral Rites
were ended, taking the distempered person aside, began with an itching
curiosity to ask him many questions about certain matters, with whom after he
had talked a while, he with a dreadful look, and thundering voice cries out,
And you also are possessed. At which the man fell into such horror, that fearing
indeed he was possessed by the Devil, he sent presently for a Priest, and had the
Exorcisms of the Church read to him: when being adjured of the Priest about his
name, he repeats the names of diverse Devils, so that many supposed him really
possessed. But the strength of the Melady increasing by the continual reciting
the Exorcisms, he committed himself to four of the ablest Physicians in the
City for cure, who the more experiments they tried, the more his distemper was
augmented, that he fell away to a mere skeleton. So leaving the Doctors, and
going on a time to Turris speculorum, relating to a Sister in the Monastery
there, which was allied to him, the whole story; she willed him to ask counsel
of Philip, living then at Vallicella; but he being bashful, and not daring to
go himself to the R. Father, she importuned Philip, if the pains were not too
much, to repair (of his goodness) to the young man; who frankly consented, and
being come, affirmed that he was not at all possessed with any impure Spirit;
then commands him with Gallonius, whom he took with him for company, to sing,
and drive away Melancholy with some witty recreation: withal bids him come
sometimes to Vallicella. The young man did so, when the Father kindly receiving
him put his head to his breast, asking him how he did: who answered he was
well. Then Philip advised him to disburden his conscience by a general
Confession of his sins; which he quickly did, and afterward came daily to
Philip, by frequent converse with whom, he attained to perfect health, without
either the Physicians medecines, or the Priests Exorcisms. One thing may not be
passed by, that whilst he made his general Confession, unable to shake off that
strong imagination settled in him, that the Devil had seized on him, he pressed
Philip to Exorcise him; to whom the Father, Doubt nothing, at night I will.
Herewith the man was satisfied, and one night as he was asleep, he seemed to
himself to disgorge a great multitude of Devils forth at his mouth; and ever
after lived quietly, free from any such troublesome apprehensions.

Dominicus Saracenus one of the notedst Physicians in the City, falling into a
most tedious Melancholy, and having tried all remedies of Art, was strongly
opinioned, that by the merits of Philip he should recover his health. To him
therefore goes he; the Physician for Physic: to whom Philip as his custom
was, said, Doubt not, you will do well again: by which alone without any other
help, he was absolutely cured of that distemper of his mind. The same happened
also to a noble Personage, one of the Grandees of the Roman Court, who
languishing away in extreme heaviness, at his only saying, Despair not,
recovered his former courage.

No less re^^rked was he, for removing those anxious Jealousies, arising out of
the excess of Religion, termed ordinarily Scruples, Julian Fuscherius a most
virtuous Priest of S. Hieroms a Charitate had a certain Penitent that was
tormented with these Passions in such wise as he could not use Sacramental
Confession for them; and having sent him to diverse pious and skilful men for
help, but in vain, at length he bethought him of Philip: who at first sight
eying him steadfastly said, I understand well your case, you are assaulted sore
by the Devil: for he discerned that these Scruples proceeded from a secret
Spirit of pride in the Penitent. Thereupon he questioned him before Fuscherius
after this sort: Have you courage enough to confess your sins to two at once?
he answered, I have. Then Philip, Kneel down, and begin the Confession of all
your sins. He did, and the Father having taken his Confession, bid him, Kiss
the Earth and shame the Devil: which done, he immediately enjoyed his former
peace of conscience, and confessed his sins afterward devoid of those fears
without disturbance.

Cardinal Frederico Borromeo witnesses, that a certain man, who was molested
with many doubtings in the saying his Canonical hours growing every day worse,
coming to Philip for cure of his infirmity, He bid him, Go, I will pray for
you. And returning to his house without any let he repeated his office, and was
never more annoyed with those fond imaginations.

Besides these, the prudent Father prescribed sundry salves for such as
labored under this disease. He said, in the first place; that such persons
having once discovered that they gave no consent, should enquire no farther as
touching their Consent; for the same things often thought on would take too deep
rooting in the mind. And for discerning the assent of the will, he proposed two
things to be principally noted. The first, that a man should think seriously
with himself, whether in time of temptation he retained the love of the
opposite Virtue; for if so, he might then be sure he consented not. The second,
whether he would swear that he assented, for if he say he will not swear it, he
may certainly believe in like manner that he gave no consent. Further, to that
General Rule usually alleged (...) men expert and skilled in these matters,
viz. That we are to stand to the judgment of a Prudent Confessor absolutely in
all things: he added a Special one of his own: That these kind of Scruples
were altogether to be slighted, and nether often, nor yet lightly be arraigned at
the bar of Repentance. Therefore whenever he perceived them to rise in his
Penitents at Confession, he would bid them come to the Sacrament even
unconfessed. Lastly he concluded with that common Maxim, That this kind of
malady might admit a truce for a while, but true solid peace was attainable
only by Humility.

And not only did His words and advices allay these tempests of the mind, but
his holy hands with the very touch thereof afforded ease and relief. Tiberius
Ricciardellus, of whom elsewhere, affirms that as often as Philip did but gently
pluck him by the hair, he immediately felt himself sprightly and vivacious. And
Cardinal Baronius, that he was much recreated, when being a Youth the B. man
did but clap him on the Cheek. Cardinal Octavius Bandinus gloried in it, that
the Servant of God gave him a box on the ear, when he was a stripling. And
Fran. Puccius of Palestrina avouches, that as often as Philip laid his hand on
his head, his heart seemed to leap and dance within him. The same do almost all
others testify, whose Confessions he was wont to hear.

Peregrinus Altobellus a Canon of S. Marks Church in Rome, could hardly be kept
away from him; for as soon as ever he was in his Company he overflowed with
consolations: and one time when the B. man meeting him, asked him, What do
thou here good Peregrine? he was so extremely joy'd at it, (...) as though in a
manner drunk with the delicious gusts of the Spirit, he knew not so much as
whither he went. He affirmed also, that the H. man's hands cast forth a fragrant
sweetness almost continually.

Nay not only himself, and the parts of his Body, but his very clothes,
household goods, Utensiles, and his Chamber were marvellously refreshing. ^or
which cause, Martius Alterius a Roman said, that Philips Cell was rather a
Paradise than a Cell. The like did Julius Benignius Archbishop of Thessalonica.
Cardinal Frederic Boromeo thought himself happy, if he might only stay in his
Chamber. Alexander Medices, (who when he was Pope was called Leo XI.) used to
go thither once or twice a week, where he spent 5 or 6 hours, sorry many times
that the time went away so fast. Fabricius de Maximis, if he were oppressed
with any grief or care, stood still before Philips chamber door, and by that
means alone was eased of his trouble. Last of all Nerus de Nigris, even after
Philips death, found out this special remedy for his pensiveness and
encumbrances, to repair to his Chamber.

Neither wanted there those, that merely by looking Him in the face regained
their lost joys: for Montes Zazzara by his very Company oftimes was excedingly
revived: and Rodulphus Silvestrius a Physician said, that what time he tarried
but with Philip, he was most pleasantly affected and delighted. Some also
affirm, that even in their dreams they saw Philip instilling joy and
consolations into them.

CHAP. XI. His Alms.
BUt not only to the Souls of others, but even to their Corporal necessities
was He helpful to a ^reat degree. For visiting the Poor he supplied them not
with money alone, but all other necessa^ies for preserving of health; which
thing he often ^id unsought to, and many times fore knowing their extreamities
by a Divine instinct, abundantly furnished them with all requisites.

He relieved some unasked as often as they needed: which he knew by supernatural
Revelation: so he gave Anton. Fantinius 16. Crowns without asking: and
maintained a Nobleman with Diet and Clothes for a long time together, being
reduced to extreme misery. He distributed not slight but liberal Alms, both in
money and other things; for when a prime Lady sent him a rich suit of furniture
for a present, he sold it straight, and gave it all to the Poor.

Yea he relieved not private Persons, but whole Families with his Charity: for
he kept a poor woman and 4 children with the Grandmother four years together,
sometimes sending them twenty Crowns at a time, more or less toward their
maintenance.

He provided both apparel and victuals for the Wife of Vincentius vulgarly
called Miniator, or the Limner, of whom hereafter; she was a woman of rare
Virtue, and among other her Acts of devotion confessed every day, who had
lately lost her Husband, the care of 6 Sons lying upon her hand: besides he
bought all necessaries for her Daughter* who was then devoting her self to a
Religious life.

Further, he maintained at his own charge the family of Gabrielia of Cortona, a
woman of admirable worth, and raised a portion for her Daughte^ then
marriagable at his own cost; and bestowed he^ in wedlock.

And though he opened his Bowels in bounty thu^ to all, yet did he show himself
most liberal in relieving Maids. He distributed among the Necee^ of Joh.
Animuccio, being in extreme want, about 600 Crowns, besides diet. Two
Florentine Maid^ living at Rome to the peril of their Chastity, after their
Parents death, he supplied with all things fitting; till a competent dowry
being liberally assigned either of them, he sent them home into their Country
to spend their days in a Monastery: he alloted them fourscore Crowns apiece to
live in a Nunnery and serve God. Three other poor young Maids he gave in
Marriage appointing them portions: and on one of their Husbands besides a
portion he bestowed a 100 Crowns: Beyond all this he undertook the charge of
twenty Virgins; which a certain Widow without his knowledge had got together,
when they were ready to sterve; these he kept and brought up, till each of them
in time were conveniently and handsomely disposed of. Briefly, the Tables made
for his Canonization do amply testify, that by his care and direction almost
an innumerable company of Maids were provided for: besides that he is by the
testimony of diverse averred to be the Author of the Nunnery of S. Katherine de
Rosa. And how should it come to pass, think we, that almost forty years after
his death, we should behold in this City such Troops of Holy Virgins warring
under the Colors of Blessed Philip, were it not for his sake and merits, who
while he lived, was a Patron, and Protector, to so many of them?

He went twice a week to all the Prisons, carrying them money, and when he was
unfurnished sometimes for such contributions, he would put others, who were
richer, upon the office. In like manner he persuaded diverse Lawyers and
Prelates with much importunity to undertake the Patronage of prisoners causes,
or at least to favor them when by others undertaken: he was also very liberal
to those who, as it is in the Gospel, could not dig, and were a shamed to beg:
for he full well knew, how heavy and sad a condition it is for one formerly
rich and Noble to be brought to poverty and indigence.

He apportion'd a monthly allowance to certain Religious Houses beside the
Alms he dispensed every day. Nay more he kept the particular names, of
Religious places hanging at his Chamber door, and many times sent them money.

It was his custom, if he saw any pregnant youths that for want of subsistence
were forced to quit their studies, not only to find them food and raiment, but
buy them books too, such as were necssary for attaining liberal Arts and
Sciences. Of these two so acquitted them in the profession of Learning, that
for their deserts they were advanced to the dignity of Cardinals. And Antony
Gallonius affirms no indigent Person ever came to him that went a way
empty-handed. yea some were of opinion that He was many times furnished with
money from above, some extraordinary way.

This so prodigious bounty, or profuseness rather, God was pleased to approve
by most evident miracles. For going one night to carry bread to an honorable
but poor man, whilst yet among the Laity, for have to avoid a Coach that was
in full speed, he fell headlong into a deep pit, when an Angel catching him by
the hair of the head miraculously preserved him.

About the same time an Angel met him in the likeness of a poor man, desiring
an alms; to whom He offered willingly all the money he had; when the Angel
seeing his good will, refusing the money told him I came but to try what you
would do: and straight vanished out of fight.

For this his Charity to the poor, and care of saving souls, he was generally
termed, The Father of souls and Bodies. And many after his death recounting
with themselves the charitable Acts done by him in his life, their hearts
melting in them at the remembrance thereof, could not but weep: and diverse did
frequently and openly affirm, Posterity would never have his equal for
liberality and munificence.

Therefore Cardinal Robert Bellarmin a man renowned as well for Learning, as
virtue and holiness, whom the H. Congregation of Rites commissioned to see him
entered in the Calender of Saints, perusing the evidence of public
Testimonies, and seeing such a Catologue of Charities, did not stick honorably
to entitle him a Second John The Almoner.

A woman named Mary going to S. Peter's Church that day the B. S. Francisca of
Rome was Registered among the Saints, and calling to mind the Alms she had
received of the H. man in his life time, the tears running down, And when,
says she, shall my Father Philip be reckoned among the Saints too? for if S.
Francis carried faggots on her head about the streets to warm the Poor and
needy nigh frozen with cold; my Father Philip has come to me a hundred times
laden with bread and other kind of victuals to keep me from famishing. This
woman, the Good man instructed in Mental Prayer, by teaching her to meditate
largely, and dilate on the first words of the Lords Prayer; Pater Noster.

Nor was He only merciful and compassionate, but exceeding thankful and free.
So Cardinal Hieron. Pamphilius reports; The H. Father, when he lived, was even
in the smallest matters most grateful to all sorts of men, and so mindful of
any good turn done him, that he ever returned more than he received. Marcus
Antonius Maffa says thus; Philip was so civil a Person, that you could scarce
ever fasten any kindness upon him, which by mutual offices he requited not
more than double. It was once my lot, says he, to present him with a thing of
small worth, for which he sent me a brazen Crucflix of a great value, which I
keep by me as a most precious Relic, coming to me through his B. Hands. Thus
Maffa.

Yet although He showed such exemplary charity to the Poor he could not endure
to have them go begging about the Church: therefore sometimes would he rise
from his Chair where he took Confessions, and make them wait at the
Church-doors: as likewise he was very careful there should be no noise to
hinder the worship of God, or disturb that silence that ought to be in the
Church.

CHAP. XII. His Tender-heartedness and Compassion.
PIty grew up with him so naturally from his Infancy, that if he saw one in any
misery or adversity, it not only grieved him, but out of tenderness of Spirit
he could hardly look him in the face: therefore though he loved not to carry
money about with him, yet did he not utterly prohibit himself that convenience,
because he might relieve the daily necessities of the poor. He once heard of a
woman, who for want of clothes could not go to Church, and presently taking off
his cloak, bad it should be carried her. If he at any time saw Boys or Girls
in torn or ragged apparel, he forthwith took order for decently clothing them.

Again if he knew of any one unjustly imprisoned, he never left mediating for
him, till he were released. He so stoutly defended a Roman Nobleman unto the
Pope, being wrongfully accused of Murder, that he got him cleared of the
Calumny. A Priest falsely impeached of heinous crimes, whereof he knew him
innocent; was through his means also delivered from the malice of his enemies.
In like manner he in commiseration to certain Vagrants or Gypsies, called by
the Italians Cingari, freed them, when they were condemned to the Galleys. He
also protected a Roman Lord from the wickedness of his Subjects that came to
Rome to implead him before Sixtus V. and accommodated the differences betwixt
them.

He was exceeding charitable to poor Priests, and especially if they were
foreigners. In the year 1551, there being a great dearth at Rome, Philip had
six loaves brought him, which he immediately carried to a Priest that was a
stranger, living himself on a few Olives: and being demanded why he kept never
a loaf for himself, replied, Because I am better known here than he, and can
shift better then a forreigner.

He found out diverse ways of helping Mechanics and Artizans, such as earned
their living by manual trades, and could neither put of their work nor get
employment. There were two Brothers, Frenchmen, very expert Watch-makers, but
grown old and having a great charge of Daughters that were marriagable, for
whom they could not provide Husbands: the Good man persuades some friends of
his who were well-money'd men to buy those Watches, by which means the Maids
had fair Portions raised. This a certain man, one wise for himself, had
observed, and seeing a wealthy person buy such store of Watches upon Philips
persuasions, muttered privately, what means this waste? but finding afterward
that by these sleights Philip as it were beguiled the Rich to maintain the
Poor, he was no more Offended, but thence-forward highly reverenced the B. man.

One time one of those that cry Succory about the City came to S. Hierom's to
the Service of the Oratory, and being very wet weather, so that it growing now
toward night, the poor man could not go about the streets to sell his herbs;
the Father out of pity, that he might not go home sad, bought some of his
Succory, wishing them that stood by to do the like, and so sent away the man
joyful and glad with his money in his purse.

This his tender-heartedness and compassion appeared not only to reasonable
creatures, but even brute beasts. One of his trod on a Lizard once, at which
said he, O thou hard-hearted Wretch! what harm did that poor creature do thee?
Seeing a Butcher wound a Dog with his axe, he turned away his head moved with
compassion, and cried, O thou Barbarous creature! One of his Scholars brought
him a Bird to delight him with the fight and singing of her: but he restored
her to the heaven where she was bred. When he took Coach he would charge the
Coachman to hurt no living creature as he drove on the way: and if any were
presented him, he would not let them be killed, but either return them back, or
keep them very carefully, if any came into the house of themselves, he let them
forth at the Door, or the Windows without doing them any harm.

This his goodness and pity even the dumb creatures through the disposal of
Providence requited with manifold tokens as it were of gratitude again.
Aloysius Ames a Frenchman presented Philip with two fine singing birds which he
accepted, upon condition that the donor would every day bring their food: the
Good man desiring by this means to contract further familiarity with him. So
one day Ames coming suddenly into His Chamber espies one of the Birds* got out
of the cage, fluttering about Philips face, and pleasing his ears with her
delightful tunes. The Father asks if she used to do so, No, replied he; at
that Philip with a stern look beat her from him three or four times, but she
would not leave, all the while chanting her pleasant notes till bidding the
Cage should be brought to her, she presently flew in, as if understanding the
meaning of his command. Diverse instances of this nature are purposely omitted.

CHAP. XIII. His unstained Virginity.
HAving thus entreated at large of the H. man's Charity and Meekness, intending
to take a view of his other Virtues in their order, the first that offers it
self is his inward Purity, and Virgin-innocency. For the B. man well knowing
how greatly God delights in Chastity both of Body and Mind, employed, so soon
as he came to the use of Reason, all his art and industry in quenching those
sparks of lust that began to kindle in him; and although by occasion of the
affairs wherein he was daily exercised all his life long, he met with many
temptations to dishonesty, yet preserved he the flower of his Virginity
unspotted to the last.

For proof whereof, besides the undoubted public Testimony of Cardinal
Baronius, to whom the H. Father, with many tears accusing himself of
unthankfullness, disclosed the secret a little before he died; and besides what
Persianus Rosa his Confessor while yet a young man, averred; yea and besides
the common fame that went of him always both at Rome and Florence for his
Chastity, that one might serve instead of many, which the Sacred Congregation
of Rites gave concerning Him, having duly weighed the Reports of both Witnesses
and Records, viz. That they had had proofs of Philips Virginity more then
needed. And it is not to be forgotten, how one time He discovered as much to
one of his Penitents at Confession, to procure his love also to this Virtue,
and to convince him, that not only the purity of Continency, but Virginity too
by the Grace of God might be preserved, as he himself had preserved it.

This precious treasure he hid close under the Cover of profound humility,
guarding it every way by a most strict watch kept over all his Senses. For in
imitation of that Great Antony, he never let any part of his body be seen
naked: nor ever let fall a word that savoured of the least immodesty. He turned
away his eyes from beholding vanity, insomuch that a beautiful woman, whose
Confessions he took for 30 years together, affirmed, he never so much as once
looked her in the face. At first when he was Confessor he always looked sour
while he spoke to women, not giving them so much as a coutteous word, though in
his latter years he forbore that custom.

Such and so purely white and unblemished Chastity did the impure Fiend labor
by all means to defile. One night forced by necessity, whilst yet a Laique, he
lodged at a friends of his, where the Daughter of the house, one of a fair
body, but most deformed Soul, watching a fit occasion came into the Chamber
where the H. young man lay: thinking by that privacy to entice him to folly,
but he Divinely assisted repulsed her impudent assaults, going away victor over
the unclean Spirit.

About the same time certain debauched persons, not believing his Chastity to
be such as the rumor bruted, sent for him on pretensions of piety, and getting
him into a private room, where two lewd women were provided to entrap him,
locked the door upon him: but he betaking him to his main Fort, his Prayers,
expressed himself therein with such devotion and zeal, that they durst neither
approach near, nor so much as once speak to him.

Being after made Priest, and appointed to take Confessions, he was more
craftily assayed, as it were by Ambuscado. For a notorious Strumpet, called
Caesarea, hearing of his renowned Continency, and being her self very handsome,
proclaims, she would effect her will on him; so pretending a desperate sickness
she sends for Philip, as to take her Confession; He at first refuses, fearing
to bring a scandal on himself: for not without cause, being of those years, he
always denied to come to women; but upon very much importunity, earnestly
longing after the good of Souls, he went; when no sooner was he entered within
the doors, but the audacious harlot meets him with a transparent Veil cast over
her naked body: he perceiving the subtle wiles of the Devil, crossing himself
turns his back on her, and leaping down stairs breaks away. She finding her
self cozened of her expectation, takes a stool up and throws after him with all
her might to hit him, but in vain: so the Servant of Christ by Gods providence
escaped the danger both of Soul and Body.

This resolution of his for preserving his Chastity God so rewarded, that he
never after felt himself annoyed with inclinations to Lust, or illusions of the
night. Insomuch as he told Baronius once: Be assured Caesar, if any such thing
should befall me, though asleep, I should even dye for grief. Yea he had
brought himself to that pass, that as though he had been made of wood or stone,
his body was in a manner senseless. And Gallonius speaking of his rare
Continence writes thus. I do really believe (for he was intimate with the H.
man) Philips Virginity and Purity was no whit inferior to that which by
special privilege from God was confered on Eleazar Count of Arian, and Simon
Salo, whose Praises are recounted by the Metaphrast in Surius for either of
these led the lives of Angels amidst the Society of Men.

Moreover wonderful were the effects of his his unstained Chastity, For first,
the brightness of so singular a Purity sparkled forth at his very eyes, which
from his Infancy to an extreme Old age continued quick and lively; so that one
could scarce look steadily on him, nor was the most exquisite Painter able to
pourtray their glittering beauty.

As also his unpolluted Body cast forth so sweet a fragrancy, that such as came
nigh him where wonderfully refreshed by it; and many affirm they received
increases of Devotion by the odoriferous perfume that breathed out from his
Breast and Hands.

Fabricius Aragonius a Nobleman of Mantua coming to Philip to Confession, and
finding him sick abed, was unwilling to approach near, thinking he might smell
strong by reason of age; but going nigher him, as soon as the H. man put his
head into his bosom he was so amazed at the delicious sweetness of the Odor
that issued from him, that he would have imputed it to some perfumes he knew
not of, But afterward learning that, the Religious man was divinely endued
with the Blessing of Chastity; Now, says he I understand the matter more
fully; and that this fragrant scent proceeded from that incomparable flower of
his Virginity. The same happened to others as they received Absolution.

Yea this Maiden-man was so far favored by God that he could by the smell
distinguish who had kept their virginity, and who not. Therefore if any
lascivious woman met him as he went, though she were a stranger to him, he
smelling a stink presently either put a handkerchief to his Nose, or held it
with his hand, saying that Nothing smelt more odious or noisome than
uncleanness. He would say to his Penitents that came to him polluted with this
filthy sin; Thou stinkest, Son, thou stinkest: so that they who knew it durst
not come to him, whilst they stood defiled with such impurities. Nay by the
very looking on the visage he discovered the vice; a thing so common with him,
that even in beasts, that are without all fault herein, he could discern the
like rankness.

Further, He obtained of God this privilege that by the bare imposition of his
hands he freed diverse from sensual provocations, that troubled them; many also
by being only acquainted with him were persuaded to Chastity; some he enflamed
with the love of Purity by only putting them to his breast: others he made
victorious in those strong encounters by but touching them with any thing he
used.

Antonius Fuccius of Tifernum, a Physician, was determined to leave his
Profession, for that when he attended sick women, he found himself violently
tempted; but wanting a competent livelihood of his own, he opens his mind to
Philip, who pitying his grief reached him his Garter, which Antony taking, and
wearing constantly about him, became quit of the like temptations ever after.

But what needs there more? the very Name of Philip torments the damned
spirits, and abates their fury; for Exorcists adjuring the possessed but by the
Chastity of Philip, have bin known sundry times to cast out the devil.

A young Widow much disquieted with the enticing blandishments of the flesh, who
had often revealed as much to her Confessor but found no help, being sent to
Philip, was prescribed a remedy in these words; Daughter, as often as you are
molested with unchaste imaginations, bespeak the Devil thus. I will complain of
you to Philip, that Ass, the worst of men. The woman did as she was directed,
and was rid of those fleshly desires. Which thing also happened to very many, who
falling in like sort upon the Devil in the same terms, were straight freed of
their temptations, yet he advised them to utter those words with all possible
confidence and simplicity, and not discoursing things too much with reason;
knowing how much the devil is awed by the harmless integrity and plain dealing
of holy persons.

Besides, he lesson'd his with several Documents for the preservation of
Chastity. First, he counseled Confessors not to take the Confessions of Women
but through a grate, to shun all discourses with them, not purposely to look on
their faces, to show themselves severe in conversing with them, not to be in
company with one either in the house or any private place, but upon extreme
necessity, and when a third person was by. Therefore when a certain Priest one
time entered the Church, unknown to him before, he forthwith by a Divine
impulse, calling the man to him, said; It befits not a Priest, though otherwise
devout, to converse so familiarily with women; therefore see you forbear it
utterly hereafter. He astonished hereat wondered how he should enter so far
into him, being either of them strangers to one another. Being also one well
experienced, He dissuaded them from too much confidence in themselves, either
by reason of age or the constant exercise of the habit of Chastity; and that
they should propose him for their pattern: For said he, God has bestowed some
things on me, which he uses not to dispense to all. He had short Rules for
Youth to learn; as, to avoid bad company; not to pamper their carkase too
deliciously; to fly idleness; to be much in prayer; lastly, to keep up the
frequent use of Sacraments, of Penance especially.

And generally he would say, That Christian Humility was the safest Guardian of
Chastity. Therefore if he chanced to hear of one that had fallen into that sin,
he said, We ought rather to pity than to scorn him; for he that cannot truly
compassionate his fallen brother, has reason to fear lest himself likewise
fall ere long: adding, That no peril is greater, than dangers unfeard.

A young man that had long frequented the company of a lascivious woman, but at
length grown staid, conceiting it no hard matter to reclaim his Mistres too,
resorted to her still upon that ground: but he that went to convert, came away
debauched, by a lewd harlot; and so relapsing durst not return for shame to
Philip: till at last he forced himself and came; Philip presently placing his
Scholars in a Ring, and the young man among them took occasion thus to bespeak
them, there are amongst you my Sons, who think, as soon as ever they have begun
to walk in Gods way, they can convert the whole world, and yet after they have
fallen are ashamed to return to their own Confessor. At which the young man
changed color, but Philip without discovering that he meant him, laying his
hand on his head, and making much of him reduced him to his former course of
Piety.

He alleged also that it conduced much to the preservation of Chastity to
disclose ones whole mind to his superiors, not concealing from them the least
matter. For wounds laid open to the Physician are most easily cured. He greatly
commended for removing this kind of temptations the Ejaculatory Prayers, so
highly approved by the Ancient Fathers, such as that, Deus in adjutorium meum
intend, Domine ad adjuvandum me festina; i. e. Have the o God to deliver me,
make have to help me o Lord: and that, Cor mundum crea in me Deus; Create in me
a clean heart o God. Above all, for the subduing all the allurements to the
flesh, he principally exhorted Christian Soldiers to flight, saying, That in
the battles of Chastity, to run away is to win.

CHAP. XIV. His Abstinence.
BEsides, he brought under his body by perpetual austerities, and abstinence,
the chief preservative of Chastity. For above what has been already spoken of
his rigid course of life, after he was made Priest, he eith^^ did eat nothing
at all a mornings, that is, for his breakfast or dinner, or else, without
sitting, a morsel of bread dipped in wine. At evening he was content with a
Salad and an egg for supper, or two at most. He had no bread brought him at
night, but the pieces he left in the morning at breakfast: he had fruit
according to the season of the year; he scarce ever eat any thing made with
milk or furmety, seldom fish, but more seldom flesh: and though he kept thus
mean a diet, yet he always left something.

When the Physicians prescribed him some nourishing broths, he complained he
was surcharged with overeating; and in his latter time having received the H.
Eucharist, he left of breakfasts, being asked, why? he said, He quite forgot it.

He did most what eat alone, shutting himself into his Chamber, and laying a
napkin over a stool used the attendance of no servant, he came not to the
Refectory with the rest, both to color his purposed abstinence the better and
for his healths sake, having for so many years together used so slender a diet
at S. Hieroms.

For his drink likewise he was very sparing, the Pot he used not holding above
one draught; besides his Wine so dashed, that it tasted most of water, and
sometimes he drank only water.

Indeed he was so abstinent, that by the joint opinion of Physicians he could
never have lived so long by the strength of nature, and therefore many thought
him rather nourished be the Bread of Angels, then fed with the ordinary food of
men. But though he lived this strict and retired kind of life, yet would he not
let his do any thing unusual about their diet, but willed them to be content,
with the meat which was set before them, and especially abhorred to hea^ one
say, This I like, this I dislike. He forbid making any private entertainments,
or special exceedings, save in cases of necessity; and was against the eating
any thing between dinner and supper: telling one that had offended in this
kind; you will never get a fervor of the Spirit till you mend this fault.

He slept but little, some four or five hours at most, all the rest of the
night he spent in Prayer: his bed and Chamber suited with his Christian
simplicity; much-what like those used ordinarily by Secular Priests: he
commonly went to sleep about midnight, and though last in bed yet he was first
up.

As for his apparel, he always followed the garb of other Secular Priests;
neither sumptuous nor sordid in his attire; but observing S. Bernards rule, he
hated slovenliness and loved cleanliness, though he never wore Silks.

His course of Fasting he left not so long as he lived, yea the older he grew,
the more still he abated of the conveniences of life: and if any counseled him
to favor himself now he was old, he either turned his discourse to some other
thing, or smilingly answered, Heaven stands not open for sluggards.

Yet though thus severe to himself, to his Sons none more tender and indulgent
always: persuading them rather to feed a little too freely, than too sparing:
it being easier to substract somewhat from too full a diet, then to repair with
nutriment the body well nigh pined: affirming that, sometimes Religious Persons
had bin instigated by the devil to inflict too sharp chastisements on their
Bodies, that so being disable by sickness they might chill in holy duties; or
dismayed through the violence of their disease recede from the way of
salvation. Therefore this Rd. Sage person made more account of those who with
moderation tamed the wantonness of the flesh, rather teaching the chief Powers
of the Soul, as the Understanding and Will obedience; than of those who were
over-rigorous to their bodies, taking little or no care of regulating the
unruly affections of the Mind.

CHAP. XV. His Contempt of Riches.
TO the Virtue of Temperance he annexed a most profound Contempt of Riches; for
though he had not vowed Poverty, yet kept he his mind loose from the love of
wealth: So that to let pass his refusal of inheriting his Uncles estate; and
that slender provision which he found, being then young, with Galeottus
Caccius: when he was ordained Priest and Confessor, though he were offered
diverse thousands of Crowns by some Noble Persons, he ever refused to take any
part thereof.

He had some goods at Castle-Franco a Town of Tuscany, whence his Ancestors
were descended, and being much solicited by a friend of his to recover them out
of the hands of those who wrongfully detained them, he made answer, You will do
me a courtesy to forbear speaking of them any more henceforward.

When he lived at S. Hierom's without any allowance or pension serving the
Church, hearing that his Father Francis Nerius was dead, and had left his
Sister Katherine his heir passing him by, and therefore the Will was void; he
nevertheless confirmed all that his Father had disposed of by will, readily and
willingly giving place to his Sister.

His other Sister Elizabeth wanting issue writ to him often to accept of being
left her heir, which he also denied, by Letters sent her.

For threescore years together, he never received the smallest matter of his
kindred, while he was at Rome. When his Sister sent him a couple of shirts for
a token, he never so much as took care to have them fetched from the
Messenger's that brought them.

At S. Hierom's, where he lived thirty three years he refused the money that
was wont to be paid by the Governors unto other Priests, and contented himself
with a bare Chamber.

He was so averse from having to do with men's Wills or Testaments, knowing that
those, who intermeddle in such matters, give secular persons occasions of
offense or suspicion, that when he visited the Sick, as soon as he heard but a
word of making a Will, he would immediately be gone, and scarce come any more
to see them, unless they had done settling their estates.

Vincentius Teccosius bequeathed Him one hundred Crowns and some other
Vtensiles: but when the Testator died, He becoming an Executor rather than a
Legacer, gave all his share to the Testators Neeces.

Constantius Tassonius left him a great sum of money; but when the Schedule of
the Will was brought him, he in sport made it serve for a cover to a dish,
never after mentioning word of the money.

Prosper Cribellius was once sick, and out of his exceeding affection toward
Philip, purposed to make Him his a This is testified upon oath by Card. Tarugi,
the same Prospero and diverse others.
Sole heir: which He senting out left coming to see him. But growing worse and
worse, and having newly received the H. Unctions the pious Father moved with
compassion comes to him not forsaking his Penitent in apparent danger of death:
Prosper as soon as he saw him he so wished for, cries out; Ah, Father, why come
you so late? He replies: Though I be late, yet have I omitted nothing, which
had I been present, I could have done for you: but because it was noised about
the City, that you had made me your heir in your Will, I forbore coming to
your house thus long. The truth is, I will none of your Estate; and that you
may be sure I speak from my heart, I am now going to S. Peter's in the Vatican
to pray for your recovery; which if God deny to grant, I shall most earnestly
request him, to lay this very disease on me: so laying his hands on the sick
man's, he went away weeping; and when Prosper had slumbred awhile, awaking, he
found himself perfectly well.

From this his Contempt of wealth proceeded that most vehement desire of
Poverty wherewith he burned continually, for though he could not exercise the
Virtue of Poverty in that state of life wherein he then was; yet was he so
enflamed with the love thereof inwardly, that these expressions often fell from
him; Would God I were forced for to beg my bread from door to door! Would God I
had never a penny, nor none to give me! O how great a favor should I count it,
to end my days in an Hospital! and many the like speeches did this passionate
Lover of Poverty often utter. Yea and that small pittance of meat (as has been
said already) which he did eat, he begged sometimes of one, sometimes of
another of his Sons in the name of Christ,

Yet we affirm not that Philip at no time kept any thing for himself; that
being both contrary to the condition of Secular Priests, and the Institution of
the Congregation; only the Reader may see by what has been spoken, that he was
far from the love of wealth, and likewise most ambitious of this Virtue.

And as he himself thus despised riches, so did he desire that his should scorn
and contemn them too. Therefore understanding that one of his had horded up a
certain Stock by himself a little too greedily, Son, said he to him, before you
gave your mind to this same money, you had a face like an Angels, and I was
taken with your looks; but now your visage is quite altered, and all that
beauty of your countenance withered, and sadness sits upon your brow. See I
beseech you, what you do, and beware. Whereupon he blushed, and changing his
mind, employed all his pains and industry in purchasing heavenly treasures to
himself.

Once He asked a Scholar of his, whether he loved money? who answered, No, he
abhorred it. Be it so, be it so, replied Philip, we shall go into the house of
the Lord; for look how much love is bestowed on the creature, so much is
withdrawn from the Creator.

A certain young man, out of an aim to be rich, and get a reputation in the
City, applied himself to the study of the Civil Law; him the H. man began to
accost and extol, saying, O happy you! you study hard now, and within a while
will proceed Doctor after which by your Law practice will gain a Mass of Money,
increasing both the wealth and honor of your House, and who is there but
expects you to mount to the Highest and most eminent dignities? O what a happy
man are you! and then being made a great man you will scorn to look upon me a
mean shrub. The young man thought all this had been spoken by him in good
earnest, when Philip embracing him whispers in his ear, But what after all
this? That word sunk so deep into his mind, that going home he did nothing but
repeat to himself, but what after all this? which weighing seriously in his
thoughts, he resolves thence forward to labor only in search of celestial
Riches and Honor. So putting himself under Philips institutions attending his
pleasure in every thing, he enters himself as a Servant into his family, and at
last, Philip being dead, was admitted into the Congregation of the Oratory.
This was Franc. Zazzaro a Priest one of singular Virtue and exceedingly beloved
both of pious and honorable Persons, who deserved well of the Congregation,
and being entrusted with the managing the Canonization of the B. Father,
pursued it with such rigor and pains, that at last he brought it to the
wished-for period: when having obtained of the H. Congregation of Rites that
the office for him being approved should be recited at pleasure, and performed
the obsequies for the most R. Father in the year one thousand six hundred
twenty six, on the twenty sixth of April, being fifty years old, he dyed in
peace.

The like befell a certain Merchant, who bragging what huge store of money he
had got together, and much more he would gain, upon Philips only whispering in
his ear, But what after all this? laid aside his employments, and entering into
H. Orders betook himself wholly to the service of God.

But though the B. man desired to have all his free and unspotted from the love
of Silver and Gold, yet did he mainly wish those of the Congregation to outvy
others herein. Therefore as soon as they were allowed to hear Confessions he
warned them especially to receive no money from such as came to them, often using
to say; If ye aim at the good of Souls, never seek the gold in their purse: and
frequently repeating that of the Apostles; Non vestra, sed vos. Not yours, but
you. Nor did he only thus advice and counsel Confessors, but all of the
Congregation; and that they should by no means have to do in making Wills; as
understanding how easily some jealousy or displeasure might hence arise. He
hated avarice, as one would the plague; calling it an incurable vice: therefore
he affirmed, That incontinent persons were sooner brought home to Christ, than
covetous: for which reason he enjoined his Penitents whom he perceived most
addicted to money, not Fasting, but Alms, as a proper and befiting Penance;
saying, Let the young man keep himself from the mire of uncleaness, and the old
from the filth of covetuousness, and we shall be all holy. And again, Pick me
out but ten men free from all love of worldly things, and I will undertake to
convert the whole world. To them of the Congregation he would say; God will
hereafter enrich you with temporal goods, but take heed, lest while ye
increase your fortunes ye lose the Spirit.

CHAP. XVI. His declination of Honors and Dignities.
NOr was the B. Father less averse to Honors and Preferments then he was to
Riches. For having lived in the City sixty years, and gained an opinion of rare
sanctity, not only with the Plebeians and private Citizens, but among the
Nobles, and with the Popes themselves, yet did he continually retain very low
and mean thoughts of himself. He never would take any Church Livings, stipends,
or preferments, though freely offered him, nay, he used such cunning and art in
refusing and declining them, that one could scarce tell that he at any time
refused them: yet is it evident and apparent that the H. man both cautiously
and modestly had diverse times rejected the wealthiest Prebendaries and
Bishoprics in the City, ye and the sacred Purple too, as shall appear.

Gregory XIV. whilst yet a Cardinal loved Philip entirely; whereupon being
newly preferred to the Popedom, the Servant of Christ came ^o kiss his feet;
the Pope straight running to embrace him, tells him he had a purpose to make him
Cardinal. At which the Good man whispered somewhat in his, and putting it off
with a jest went his way. Yet was not Gregory removed a whit from his intended
resolution, but within a while sends him a trusty messenger to confirm it to
him, and carry him a Cardinals Hat; he returns the messenger, praying him to
present his humble thanks to the Pope, and acquaint him, that he would certify
his Holiness further what time would be fittest for the reception of such an
Honor. And by this means he deseated the Popes intent and skreened off the
Luster of the dignity proffered him. And that none reckon this a mere
Complement of the Popes, and no real offer, it is attested by those who were
admitted to all the Popes privacies, and by Philip himself, who often related the
same to his Sons, to dissuade them from the Ambition to Honors.

But this truth became more illustrious under Pope Clement VIII. for Philips
requesting the Popes Bull for a certain Maid, and by indisposition of body
unable personally to attend him, he sent him a petition to this effect.

Most Holy Father, who am I that even Cardinals should come to me? and much
more the Cardinals of Cusa and Florence who were with me yester evening: the
latter of which, I then needing a little Manna, such as is gathered off leaves,
caused two ounces to be brought me out of that large store which he had sent to
the Hospital of Santo Spirito; and the same day he staid with me till the
second hour of the night, who so highly and so frequently extolled your
Holiness, as he seemed to me too immoderate therein; for as much as a Pope
should be all Humility. At the Seventh hour of the night Christ came to me, and
fed me with the Sacrament of his own Body; but you never vouchsafed to come so
much as once to our Church. Christ is God and Man, yet he disdains not to come
to me as often as I call on him; you a mere man, descended of a holy and virtuous
Father, but Christ of God the Father; your Mother Agnesina is a devout woman;
but Christ had the Virgin of Virgins for his Mother. I want not cause of
complaint, had I not rather repress this passion of Anger. I do therefore
command your Holiness to obey my pleasure concerning this Maid the Daughter of
Claudius Nerius, who I am very desirous to have admitted among the Devota's of
St. Francisca: you long since engaged your word to take his Children into your
care; remember it is beseeming a Pope to keep Faith. Therefore your Holiness
may refer the business to me, to make use of your Authority so far as is
requisite, the rather, for that I am not unacquainted what the resolutions of
the Maid are, being most certain, that she is now hastening to the solitude of
a call of God. And in the mean time with all due submission I most humbly kiss
your Holiness's feet.

Hereunto Clement writ back in the same leaf with his own hand thus. The Pope
makes you this answer: He says your paper in the very front savours of a
spirit of Ambition, while you certify him of your being so frequently visited
by Cardinals, except you did it, that he might know they were holy and
religious persons, which no man ever questioned. As to that, that the Pope
never visited you, he retorts it upon you, who never deserved it at his hands,
having so often refused him the acceptance of a Cardinals Hat when freely
tendered you. For the commands you lay upon him, he gives you leave, if the Nuns
oppose, to check them according to your accustomed jurisdiction: and he
commands you to have a care of your health and not to take any more Confessions
without his Permission. And that when Christ shall come to you next, you
remember to pray for the Pope, and for the urgent necessities of all
Christendom. Thus Clement. Whereby appears evidently that Philip had often
avoided the dignity of the Purple.

To the same purpose was that which fell out some three months before the
Servant of Christ died; when speaking to Bernardine Corona, one of the
Congregation, with whom Philip was familiarly and frequently conversant; The
Pope says he, will make me one of his Cardinals, what think you on it? He
replied; You must needs accept of it, if it be but for the good you may do for
the Congregation. At which Philip lifting up his cap and looking to heaven
cried out, Paradise, Paradise.

Yea the H. man did so constantly refuse dignities and promotion, that somtims
he brake out into such expressions as these; In truth I had rather dye, nay to
be struck with lightning from heaven (pardon me my Children) than be entangled
in the love of these worldly things: I do indeed desire much the Virtues of
Cardinals and Popes; but their Riches and pompious splendor I tremble within
my self to think of. So he.

Not without cause therefore did Marc. Antonius Maffa the Abbot utter these
words: It may be said of Philip, as S. Hierom does of Hilarion: Let others
admire the wonders he did, his incredible abstinence, learning, and humility; I
admire nothing so much as that he should so nobly spurn reputation and fame;
especial seeing Philip living in the City, and in the throng of honors even
scorned honor. So Maffa.

But the Right humble man rejected not only the preferments offered him by such
as were Strangers; but even those honors presented by his own, as Father and
Founder of the Congregation. Insomuch as being chosen perpetual superior, two
years before his death, he was extremely importunate that they would let him
lay down the Office, but they strongly opposing it, he by assistance of the
Cardinals Borromeo and Cusanus procured of Pope Clement VIII. that the Fathers
should condescend to his entreaty. So on the twenty third of July in the year
One thousand five hundred ninety three, Caesar Baronius succeeding him, did
this vowed Lover of Obedience, to the great joy of his heart, resign his
Superiour-ship. Yet neither did his abate any thing of their duty and
observance toward him, nor again did he in the least withdraw, so much as for a
minute, his care and providence for the benefit of the Congregation.

And as he demeaned himself herein, so would he have all his to behave
themselves; those peculiarly of the Foundation of the Oratory, being much
displeased when any adventured but to step into the Courts of Princes, except
only in cases of necessity: so that he oftimes severely reprehended Germanicus
Fidelius for frequenting so much company of Courtiers, saying to him, Unless
you quit the Court, you will be made a Courtier, and yet shall you never attain
unto the dignity of a Prelate; and he spoke true. For Clement VIII. committed
his Nephew Silvester Aldobrandinus for his instruction in manners to
Germanicus, and confered on him a Canons place in the Vatican, which he at last
resigning died, as Philip had told him, without any degree of eminency.

Besides the Servant of Christ would not willingly suffer any of his to hold
above one Ecclesiastical Benefice; and on no terms would take the Confessions
of such Prelates, as, contemning the Refidence due unto their Sees, without
color of Canonical excuse, lived in the City; a thing wherein he would not
dispense with Cardinals themselves.

In his discourse he would so sharply reprove the counterfeit Pageantry of the
world, that he was often repeating such sayings as these: Vanitas Vanitatum,
and omnia vanitas. Vanity of vanities, all is vanity. There is nothing at all
in this world good. The contempt of Riches and honors is in all places
necessary, but at Rome most of all. I find nothing in this world that pleases
me, but this pleases me most that nothing pleases me; and the like. At which
diverse being awakened and rowsed made after heaven with all their might.

CHAP. XVII. His Humility.
THis so matchless Contempt of wealth and honors had its rise from his
profound Humility, which being deeply rooted in his Soul made him with S.
Francis heartily and without hypocrisy profess himself the greatest of sinners;
which he spoke with such powerfulnes of expression, as witnessed that he really
meant what he said. Therefore if he had heard of any horrid crime done, he used
to say, Pray God I have not committed worse! And for this cause he read the
Life of S. Mary the Egyptian much; whose austerities he practiced with great
rigor, though not guilty of heinous offenses. He every day complained in this
manner to God; Lord do thou beware of me, for except thou assist me with thy
help, I shall this very day undoubtedly betray thee. Sometimes he would say; The
wound of Christ's side is wide enough already, but unles God prevent me, I shall
make it wider. When he received the Body of Christ in the Eucharist, he said; I
confess, Lord, I confess, I am inclined to nothing but evil: he prepared
himself in this wise to say Mass; I offer up my self to thee, O Lord, of my
self prone to all manner of evil. When he was a young man, if at any time he
were sick, he used to say; Lord, if I recover, I will lead a better life: but
bethinking himself better in his latter time, he used this saying; If I should
chance to grow well, I shall, as far as in me lies, be but the worse, for I
have so often failed in performing what I have purposed, that I dare not trust
my self hereafter any more. He had so firmly imprinted it on his Spirit, that
he had never done any good, that when he saw young men, thinking on the time
they had for their progress and advance in Gods way, he would say O Blessed, o
happy you, who have time before you for the doing good in! sometimes he brake
out into this speech, I despair: so that meeting once two Dominicans, and
making his way on purpose between them he said, Sirs let a despairing man pass
quietly by you: they, supposing him to be indeed hopeless concerning salvation,
labored to repair his confidence, but he smiling told them; I despair of my
self, but I trust in the Lord: and so went on his journey.

Yea he had so fixed his mind on the sense of his own baseness and
unworthyness, that on a time a woman requesting of him a piece of his garment,
as reverencing him for a Saint, he in great wrath bid her, Away I am no Saint,
but indeed a Devil. Another time being asked by the Embassadress for Spain;
How many years since he had renounced the world: his answer was; Truly I know
not that ever I renounced it. Being once sick and desired by some holy persons
to repeat those words of S. Martin; Lord, if I may be useful to thy people, I
refuse not the Labor: he made this ^t art reply. Alas, I am no Saint Martin,
nor ever thought my self such a one: and should I esteem my self useful, I
should account that I were undone. Another time being sick, and requested by a
Noble man to pray for the continuance of his life, that he might not leave his
so soon without providing for them, he angrily replied, He never judged himself
worthy to provide for any. A Person of quality seriously reflecting on the
daily wonders done by him, said, Father, Saints do very strange things; speak
not so, replied he, but say rather with the Prophet; Mirabilis Deus in Sanctis
suis: God is wonderful in his Saints. Another telling him, I am tempted to be
believe you are not the man the world takes you for: says he; Know, that is no
temptation but a truth; for I am nothing more than other men.

In this Humility of Spirit he used to commend himself to the Prayers of all;
and was wont to send to diverse Houses of the Regulars to desire the Religious,
the Novices especially, to remember him in their Prayers to God: he likewise
requested such as were Priests to afford him a share in their Suffrages when
they said Mass in their Churches, and chiefly on their prime Festivalls. In
like manner he entreated that he might bear a part of the Penances enjoined
Penit^nts in Confession; the Humble man hoping by this means through the
prayers of others to obtain what he least expected from his own.

He also took it ill that any accounted him a virtuous or holy man: and if he
heard himself called Saint he would say; wretched I! how many rude Clowns, how
many silly wenches shall go to heaven before me? One of his telling how he was
held a Saint by all, he cried out Alas, Alas!

He was always averse to estimation among men: for when being young the Arms
of his Ancestors were brought him, as a memorial of his family, he presently
tore them. A little before he died he caused all his papers to be burnt. He
would suffer none, were they of never so mean quality, to stand bare to him.
Nor would he ordinarily let any kiss his hands, although he permitted some,
that they might not go away sad. He never used to discourse with Spiritual men
about Spiritual matters. He could not endure that any of the Congregation
should call him Superior or Regent, but took much delight in the title of
Father: that name importing rather Affection than Authority. Hereupon being
afterward Superior of the Congregation, he was by his still called Father.
For this cause also he would not be styled Founder or Institutor of the
Congregation: professing that he never intended the erecting a Congregation. He
was far from all contention and emulation, abhorred complementing language and
fine cloths. He extremely disliked some Courtfashions, but approved Christian
simplicity ever in every one. He retained no familiarity with the dissembling
and worldly politic, and above all deeply detested Liars.

In determining matters appertaining either to himself or the Congregation, he
always asked the opinion of others: advising not only with sage and prudent
persons, but even those of inferior rank, desirous they should tell him
plainly their opinion. He was much pleased when he heard himself undervalued as
a weak Person; remembering that of S. Paul, Si quis videtur, etc. If any man
among you seem to be wise, let him become a fool, that he may be wise: so that
of Philip it may be truly said, as Gregory Nissen of S. Ephrem; He had rather
be, than seem holy.

If it happened, that God did any thing supernatural by him, he took such care
to conceal it, that none or very few came to know it: for as the B. Francis de
Paula used herbs and the like in curing diseases, thereby to disguise the
miracles he wrought; so Philip as it were jestingly used to do strange effects;
what he thus did seeming to the beholders quite another thing then indeed it
was; in such wise as diverse believed that like another Simon surnamed Salo, he
by his prayers obtained of God, that the many Miracles daily done by him should
pass undiscerned by the eyes of lookers on.

Hereto belongs that he once told Baronius, when he commended him, though
sparingly and discreetly; Know Caesar, that I am extremely grieved, when I am
in any esteem with men, and therefore pray, that God would not suffer any thing
at all whereby men may account me better then I am: since if he has effected
ought by me beyond the ordinary course of Nature, that is to be ascribed unto
the faith of others. Therefore being desired on a time to lay his hands on the
sick for their recovery, he said something angrily; These people would certainly
have me work miracles, which I am altogether unfit for.

In fine the Servant of Christ shone most glorious in his Christian Humility
toward all and on all occasions, being gentle in commanding, moderate in
tasking, pleasant in behavior, affable in converse, at no time offensive to
any; as appeared in that he wore woollen socks in his Chamber, lest he might
disturb them under him with his walking. So far from self-conceit, that, as
it is reported of S. Thomas Aquinas, he never in his life felt any provocation
to Vain glory.

He took all care possible, that his Sons likewise might ascend the top of this
Virtue: and as S. John the Evangelist often inculcated those words unto his
Disciples; Filioli diligite alterutrum; My little Children love one another; so
did Philip often ingeminate this one thing still; Humiles estote Filii, humiles
estote. Be humble, Sons, be humble. Whereupon as Taurusius was preaching once,
with such zeal and vehemence that his Auditors applauded him, Philip on the
sudden steps forth, fearing the man might affect popularity, and falls to
thumping the wall with his fist, till he drew the eyes of all upon him, by this
means diverting Taurusius from being puffed up with applause. Then going into
the Pulpit cries out, There is no reason (o ye Auditors) any of us should
boast, who as yet have not spilt the least drop of blood for the love of
Christ; nay rather have gained much honor and estimation by being in his
service: and enlarging thereon a while came down. He said, none should mention
his own praise openly either in earnest or jest at any time. And that a man
should rejoice, at least not take it ill, if he did ought worthy commendation,
though another had* the credit of it, forasmuch as he should be a double gainer
thereby; to wit, for the work, and the Humility. He also advised his, to beg
earnestly of God, if he bestowed on them any Virtue, not to discover it unto
them; lest they took occasion of growing proud thereby; often repeating those
words; Secretum meum mihi, etc. My secret to my self, my secret to my self.
Withal he affirmed, it was a token of apparent danger wilfully to incurr a
danger: and therefore wished his often to say, Trust not unto me Lord, for
except thou help, doubtless I shall fall. He forbade them to vaunt of
themselves at any time, saying, If I were tempted this would I do or say; but
rather, What is to be done, I know, what said, but what I should say, or do, I
know not. In general he counseled Penitents, at the very entrance upon their
confession to disclose their foulest crimes: saying this was the way to shame
the devil: but he exceedingly faulted the mincing a sin, and transferring the
blame upon others: adding, that he who meant to reach the highest degree of
sanctity, must never stand to excuse himself, save in cases excepted by the
Canons of the Church; calling them Eves who still I excused themselves from
being faulty in every thing. He further affirmed, the best course to keep one
from sin, was to lay aside all haughtiness of mind: again, he that is reproved
for a fault, should not be too much disquieted at it: for, faid he, it often
falls out that the grief is more blame worthy, then the offense it self,
insomuch as such excessive sorrow most commonly proceeds from nothing but
Pride. Therefore if one had offended, he wished him to upbraide himself thus;
Had I been humble, surely I had not sinned: but he neither readily nor
generally liked their opinion, who over-confident of their own strength desired
to be afflicted by God, whom he willed rather to beg Patience. Nothing was more
perilous, he said, then to carry themselves like Masters in their spiritual
Apprentiseship. That divine consolations were to be expected in the privacy of
the Closet, not in the society of men: that a Spirit of singularity was
especially to be avoided: and good works were at no hand to be omited for the
suspicion of Vain glory. Therefore consonant to the Doctrine of the H. Fathers,
he divided vain glory briefly into three heads. The first he termed the
Mistress, namely that which not only precedes a good work, but likewise
disposes that Action to a vain end: the second he named the Associate, for
that it accompanies the deed, not without a kind of fond complacency: the third
the Maid; when a man has temptations to vain glory but extinguishes or abates
them presently: hereupon he bad them Take heed that vain glory become not your
Mistress. But hereof enough, not to cloy the Reader.

CHAP. XVIII. His Mortifications.
TO the virtue of Humility he added Discipline and Mortification, wherein he so
transcended, exercising both himself and his therewith, that justly he was
reputed the Great Master of this Virtue. For himself; his whole study and
endeavor was to be disesteemed and vilified of all; for which cause he used to
do, and many times put others upon the doing of, such things as carried with
them a semblance of a fickle or rather frantique mind.

In the first place therefore he was most vigilant in depressing all
haughtiness and exaltation of mind, as far as he might and could, both
publicly and privately, at home and abroad. To descend methodically to some
particulars. He would sometimes dance with much eagerness, and that not in
corners, but open Courts, in Porches, Highwayes, Streets, Marketplaces, and
where the thickest crowds of people were gathered together; in the presence of
Princes, Prelates, and Cardinals. Insomuch that he was seen dancing publicly
before all on the first of August in the street of S. Peter ad Vincula, where
the whole City was solemnly convened, and when one of the spectators cried out,
away old fool, he rejoiced extremely, dancing and leaping so much the more for
very gladness.

One time going about his occasions he happened on a man that sold water in the
City, whose beast being laden with vessels, as the manner is, he desired him,
Prithee friend, let me drink a draught of water out of your Tub. He consented;
So Philip setting his mouth to the Barrel drank what he pleased, all the
standers by gazing on him, and wondering at him.

Meeting by chance the B. Felix of Cantalicium a Capuchin in the Street called
the Bank, then full of people, saluting each other, he asked him, if he were
athirst? who answered, Indeed I am. Felix replied, Now will I try whether you
have truly learnt the habit of Mortification: and straight reached him the
bottle that hung at his back, bidding him, Take it and drink: Philip took it
and drank, the multitude looking on, and saying, Look ye one Saint drinks to
the other. But now, said Philip, I will see whether you have this virtue too,
or not: when pulling his Cap off, he put it on his head, and bad him Go. See, I
do replied the other, but if any body take away your Cap, look you to that, the
loss shall be yours. So Felix going away with the cap, Philip soon dispatched
one after him to fetch it back. Which done, each went his way; the beholders
being in suspense whether of them had shown greater self-denial.

Cardinal Alphonsus Jesualdus presented him with a coat of Sables conditioning
that he should wear it, Philip promised him, and wore it a full month within
doors and without, stalking with a stately gate as being brave and gallant, on
purpose to be derided, looking first on this side then on that, as one proud of
his attire, till taken for a frantique he was laughed at by all.

The Cardinal of Alexandria, Nephew to Pius V. of B. Memory, had invited
Philip to dinner: who boiling a few Lentills first, put them in a pot, and gave
one of his to carry to the Feast with him, for trial of their mortification: as
they were all set, he commands the pot to be placed in the midst of all their
dainties; himself tastes it first, then invites the rest, and distributes it;
that neither the Cardinal nor the Company, knowing the holiness of the man,
could refuse his proffer, but all fed very heartily on it.

The day that the Bodies of the H. Martyrs Papias and Maurus were translated to
the Church of Vallicella, both Streets and Church thronged with the concourse
of people, Philip attending the coming of the sacred Relics nigh the gate,
falls to complementing with a Switzer, a Soldier belonging to the Popes Guard,
pulling him by his large broad beard, they that saw it partly wondering, partly
laughing thereat.

Another time to expose himself the more to scorn, he made half his beard be
shaven of, and going immediately into the Sreet began to dance and caper, as
his guise was, very pleasantly, that so like another David, becoming more Vile
thereby, he might erect the Trophies of victory gotten over himself. And not
unlike to this was it which he did once or twice in a great company of people
causing one of his to cut his hair and beard; by this one invention for the
subduing of his spirit, both He, and that his Barber learning the contempt of
themselves,

The Humble man likewise went often through the City with a huge train of
Disciples accompanying him, carrying a large posy of flowers in his hand, and
sometimes without his Cloak, by this means attracting the eyes of all unto him,
that he might be scorned as an Idiot or Natur^ll: yea oftimes in reading, he
for the nonce used barbarisms and incongruities, especially when able or
skilful persons were by, that they might take him for one not only void of
judgment, or profound learning, but unable so much as even to read right.

At home he was ever contriving ways still to make himself contemptible; of
which among several others that occurr, the Reader may take these few
examples. In the first place, you should ordinarily have seen him, when he was
private in his Chamber, with a Crimson shirt on reaching to his knee, huge big
shoes, and those white too, upon his feet, a straight Cap on his head; in which
Dress he would entertain Noble Personages, and men of quality, to make himself
hereby ridiculous unto them. Yea he would sometimes go to Church in this habit,
and that upon Festival days. It once happened that he came abroad thus attired,
on the Anniversary of the B. Virgins Nativity (to whose honor the Church was
dedicated) as Vespers were a singing, where were present many Cardinals, which
all rising up at his entrance, in reverence to one of so rare holiness,
honorably welcomed the Good old man, entreating him he would be pleased to sit
down with them; who smilingly answered, It was enough for him to find room
below at their foot-stools, among such as bore up their Trains.

For the same reason he had by him Romances and books fraught with fables, that
he might be taxed for his levity and vanity; and when either Noble, Sage, or
Learned Persons resorted to him, he would make one of his read them; showing
both by looks and gesture that he was exceedingly pleased therewith.

Once Clement VIII. sent some of the most eminent of the Kingdom of Poland to
him, that they might behold an example of Virtue for their imitation, and by
his conversation and conference in things spiritual might also conceive a due
estimation of his great sanctity: He having notice of it aforehand, that they
were a coming, calls one of his Sons to read him one of those books, and not
leave, till he bad him. Anon they came, when without ceremony or respect he
tells them; I would have you hearken till this Tale be ended: to which they
willingly yielding; Mark ye, says he, whether I be not choice to have books of
a grave subject read to me; without mentioning one word of spiritual matters.
So having tarried a while, looking one upon another, and wondering at what had
passed, they said nothing but went their ways; Philip bidding his Scholar; lay
away the book now, for I have done what I would with it.

An honorable Roman going once with the Physician Angelus Victorius to Philip,
observed him somewhat too sportive and light in his behavior, and wondering one
so highly reputed should demean himself so vainly, at his departure told the
Physician; Your Old Man (my Angelus) has, I must confess, not a little
offended me. He did it replied he, to dissemble his sanctity. So the next time
the Physician went to Philip he desired, if that Noble Person came again, he
would carry himself more gravely. What, says he, would you have me set my self
in an artificial posture and tone? and pour out fine smooth sentences of
Rhetorique? that the bystanders may cry, This is that wise, that holy Father
Philip: I tell you, if he come to me again, I shall use him more scurvily, and
play the fool worse. Afterward it chanced the Noble man often visited Philip,
and by daily conversing with him found such vast wisdom in him, lost and
shrouded under the disguise of levity, that thence forward he was wholly
addicted to him. Not to mention how sometime he challenged his Scholars to run
for a wager; sometime to try which should run fastest up stairs: some he
admitted and talked with in a red cap: and diverse like things he continually
did, Which designs of his, tending to Christian Mortification even in such
petty matters, are therefore offered the Reader, that men, too much addicted to
the reputation of humane wisdom, might both by the doctrine and example of
Philip learn to suppress these haughty passions of the mind, and bridle their
affections.

CHAP. XIX. The Mortifications he exercised on his Sons.
BUt forasmuch as he not only endeavored to advance forward in Gods way
himself, but to further others in the same, like a wise Master he continually
disciplined his in the School of Mortification. Examples whereof there are
innumerable, those which were most usual with him shall here suffice.

First therefore, he sometimes enjoined them (although of Noble extraction) to
stand at the church-doors, and there beg Alms of such as came; sometimes to
sweep the church porch, and carry away the dust; one while to go from door to
door for a crust of bread; otherwhiles to be at Divine service in the Quire
among the Monks lying flat on their faces all the time; sometimes, the Juniors
especially, to walk up and down the City with Spectacles upon their noses.

He once sent a young man, one well descended, through the City ringing a
little Bell, whom the Tradesmen and Children supposing to be drunk, or
distracted, hooted at with insolence and clamor. He caused a Paper to be
affixed to the back of another, wherein was written in Capital letters, how he
had eat up certain sweetmeets, and sent him with it so about the City.

One time he went with some of his to the Cardinals of Alexandria upon
business, and at taking his leave said, My lord, have you nothing to bestow out
of your bounty on me and my Sons? The Cardinal perceived his drift straight,
so opening a Chest takes out a good big Cake, and gives him: Philip, as soon as
he was without the Palace, divides it into pieces, distributing each Scholar
his share; bidding them eat it as they went, telling them, Sons, do but in
these trifling matters use to pull down a high mind, and you will more easily
master your selves afterward in things of greater moment.

One of his asked him leave once to wear a little hair over his fore head, whom
he not only denied his request, but likewise enjoined he should be Cut every
where alike, and to cross him the more; Go to Friar Felix of the Capuchins
Order, says he, who will do you that service for nothing. He did so; Felix,
having agreed with Philip before, cut off all his hair to the very Skull, which
he patiently endured.

A Carpenter named Albert desired the H. man that he might wear hair-cloth a
days, I am content, says Philip, on condition you wear it over your clothes.
He consented, and every day put on his sackcloth over his coat, which he used
to his dying day, insomuch as he was ever after called Bertus a Cilicio for
that reason.

A certain Noble man was very fond of a Dog he had, which it chanced a Courtier
carried along with him to S. Hieroms where Philip lived, whom making much of
him the Beast so affected, that he could never after be got away from his
Chamber. Being by force had home, he staid no longer than he was tied, and when
he could slip his chain presently returned to Philip: at first the Lord took it
ill, but understanding that the Dog ran of himself to him as soon as ever he
wa^ ^^t loose, he pleasantly asked; What is it not enough for Father Philip to
inveigle so many of my Attendants, except he get away my Dogs too? for the H.
man had persuaded diverse of his House to a Religious life. This Dog would
Philip make some of his carry in their arms, and sometimes comb him carefully
with a soft comb, and then wash him; many times lead him in a string about the
City, and the like; which kind of Mortification he used almost twelve years
together: so that Taurusius termed that Dog, the Plague or scourge of Rational
minds.

When he went from S. Hieroms to Vallicella, he left a Cat there, and for six
whole years he every day sent one of his Sons morning and evening to give her
meat, and when they came back, would ask them before all, even Nobles and
others, how the Cat did, whether she did eat and rest well, or no; as though it
had beeen a matter of huge consequence.

He dilivered a Flaggon once to Baronius, holding well nigh a Gallon, and sent
him with it to the Tavern for a small quantity of wine, bidding him be sure the
Drawer washed his Pot well first, and that he went down into the Cellar with
him, and staid till he had drawn his wine, then give him a piece of Gold to
change, but that he be careful he made the Vintner pay him his due again to a
farthing: all which when Baronius had done, they of the house thinking he came
to jeer them, not only railed at him, but threatened to cudgel him: yet Philip
often thus employed him. He also many times enjoined him to carry the Streamer
with the Cross before the Priests, as the Dead were publikly had forth to
Burial. Othertimes he took him to Weddings with him; making him, as they sat
at Dinner, sing out the whole Psalm, Miserere: which things the H. man did, to
keep down in him the affectation of an empty name.

He commanded Bernardine Corona, one of Cardinal Sirletus's Gentlemen,
perceiving his virtuous inclinations, to take his horse's bridle, and walk him
in sight of his Lords Palace. Which, though it made him blush, he refused not
to do. He enjoined also the same Bernardine, for that he had a neat and large
beard, to shave it half off, who presently going about it, Philip charged him
to forbear. And to what an eminent purity this Person arrived by such kind of
Mortifyings, those who lived a long time with him in the Congregation, can
sufficiently testify.

Once in the heat of Summer he was seen openly in the Church clad in a furred
Coat; which being put off, he dressed up one of his Sons in, with the wrong
side outward, and sends him on an errand so to Caesar Baronius, as they were
singing Vespers: the young man ashamed to go in such a habit skulked privily
behind the Priests seats and delivered his message. Philip who at a distance
saw the carriage of the business, as soon as he returned sent him again,
bidding him go through the midst of the Quire; he observed his commands though
much against his will.

He made Anton. Gallonius wear a furred garment over his Coat a Summer
together, although he was of so hot a constitution, that in the depth of Winter
he used only a Cloak. He would also not only civilly entreat, but imperiously
compel him to sing before such Noble or Honorable Persons as came to
Vallicella; for that he knew he could tune certain Ballads as the Balladsingers
use, though otherwise he were a very serious man.

He invented a smart and witty Penance for Austin Mannus a Priest of the
Congregation. He had, it seems, made a choice sermon to his Audience, which
Philip observing, commands him to preach over the same word for word six times;
he obeyed him; insomuch as those that were present looking one upon another and
laughing, cried; Look there is he that always sings the same note.

Besides, as one that could dive into the in most recesses of the Soul, he
used, for the subduing highmindedness, to enjoin them (though seldom) openly to
disclose the secrets and cogitations of their hearts. Which special Antidote
he made use of for reducing troubled and oppressed consciences to a tranquillity
and calm. One of his had entertained some thoughts against Philip himself,
which the R. Father caused him particularly and openly to discover upon his
knees in the Hall: who having done so was eased of all his disquiet mind. But
this course he took with none, but such as he found very tractable and
obedient. A Dominican Friar, who before his entrance into that Religious order,
was assailed with violent and strong temptations having this one remedy of
Philip, but to make known his grief, was cured in his mind of all those
perturbations.

But forasmuch as Philip mainly exacted of all his, that they should submit the
internal motions of their Understandings and Wills to the direction of
another, it will not be amiss to recount here that which befell Baronius to
this purpose. The Pope had allotted him a certain pension for the completing
his Annalls; which coming to Philips ear, He thereupon injoyn^ him to pay out
of the moneys assigned him such a yearly value, as the rest formerly used to
defray toward the benefit of the Congregation. Baronius thought it hard
measure, and was much troubled at it, especially not having wherewith to
discharge the Transcribers of the Vatican Records. Therefore he alleged many
and several Arguments to alter the Fathers intention; but he being peremptory
and resolved on it, could by nothing that was propounded be brought off,
whereat Baronius began to be much dejected. So sending for Thomas Bozzius he
entreats him to deal with the Father effectually and to change his resolutions,
protesting that he would rather leave the Congregation, then bear that charge.
Bozzius gratifies him herein, but finds Philip more resolved than before,
requiring him in plain terms, either to pay or to be gone, for God needs not
the help of men. At that, Thomas counseled Caesar, and earnestly besought him
to yield himself up in every thing to the commands of the B. Father; remembering
that next under God he was indebted unto him both for his Spiritual and
Secular knowledge. At length he, following his good counsel, repairs speedily
to the H. man, and falling down at his feet in most humble manner begs his
pardon, offering not his money alone, but himself, and all he had to his
service cheerfully. To whom Philip; Had you but done your Duty we needed not
your money: only learn hence-forward to yield more ready obedience, and soften
the hardness of your refractary mind. For his greatest desire was, that his
should enure themselves to suppress the too nice inquisitions of the Intellect
which he called the Rationale: and therefore he said, All virtue was comprised
within the compass of three fingers; putting his hand upon his forehead while
he spoke so, and adding, This is the abridgment of all Spiritual life, to lay
aside Reason and arguings.

And withal he diligently trained up his Sons in the daily and constant
practices of Mortification. For many times when one of them was a preaching, he
would command another to go up into the Pulpit, and bid him hold his peace:
sometimes he made them speak ex tempore to the people, who at his command did
much better on the sudden, than if they had premeditated. Otherwhiles he would
send them to the Booksellers, bidding them ask aloud for the Jests of Plebanus
Arlottus, or the Sonnets of Matthew Boiardus, or if they had Esops Fables to
sell. He made them more than once go backward and forward from Vallicella to S.
Hieroms without a Cloak, or else in torn and ragged cloths: whereupon it once
fell out, that one of his wearing by his appointment tattered Sleeves, met one
that offered him a newer pair, which he refused, Philip hearing thereof
presently dispatches him to the man, to tell him, how he denied to take them
then, as not lacking them, but would willingly now accept them, for that he
needed them: the Scholar did so, and having gotten the sleeves wore them till
they were all to pieces. Lastly, he would make them dance in the presence of
Prelates and Cardinals; sing diverse Songs; wear a linen Bonnet on their heads
openly; walk the streets in a broad old-fashioned Hat, tied under their Chin;
carry Rosaries, made of the biggest sort of Beads, hanging about their necks,
like Hermites; tie silk Scarfs edged with gold athwart their breasts, like
Soldiers; and many things of the like nature, thereby to cross their inbred
pride and thirst after estimation; telling them often, My Sons, accustom,
accustom to Deny your selves in small things, that ye may be able to do it
more easily in greater.

Yet although he disciplined them daily by these exercises, he treated them not
all alike: for some at the very first he clogged with sundry and severe
Penances; on the otherside he enjoined others no such thing at all. For being
Divinely inspired he knew who were fit to undergo them, who not; and what kind
of Austerities every one needed. He also made such account of this Virtue, that
he had often in his mouth that of S. Bernard: Spernere mundum, spernere nullum,
spernere seipsum, spernere se sperni: to which he added, Et haec sunt dona
superni.

Despise the world; yet despise none;
Despise thy worthless self alone;
Despise this too, to be despised:
Gods gifts these, highly to be prised.
Concluding; I am sure, I am not yet come to this high pitch of Mortification.

But though he were at first more frequent in chastening himself, and his, yet
in his latter years he seldom used these external exercises: alleging, that
inasmuch as the use of this Virtue became now sufficiently known, as in some it
might beget Humility so to many it might prove an occasion of pride and
ostentation.

CHAP. XX. His Patience.
LEt us descend now to the virtue termed by the Saints the Touchstone of the
rest, to wit, Patience: and we may truly affirm of Philips whole life, that it
was a daily and continual exercise thereof. For first, omitting what has been
already spoken on this subject, He was the mockery for Courtiers in every
Noblemans palace; who in de^ision enquired of his Scholars how Father Philip
did; what Regalos he had eaten that Morning; how many Capons had been presented
him; what delicate Cawdles the women his Penitents had sent him in; prating
every day diverse such things of him: So that the idle people throughout the
City, in all the chief shops and Streets, talked of nothing else almost, but
Philip and his Sons. All which came to his ear again, who not only bore it
patiently, but even joyfully, that he leaped thereat; and many astonished and
admiring his mild deportment, others, who with the Rout had abused the B. man,
all repenting of their rashness, magnified and renouned his rare sanctity.

But some out of spleen, having an evil eye at the Institution of the Oratory,
watched all occasions to defame and and asperse him, under color of pretended
Piety and Religion. It happened that one, Philip living at S. Hieroms, in
Service, was for his Society with a woman clapped up in prison by the Seriants,
whereupon his Enemies gave out in the City that F. Philip was cast into Prison
about a matter of women. This the B. Father hearing of pitied the men, and in
patience and silence passed it over.

He went to a Prelate one time, to mediate for a Noble Roman that lay in
durance, unjustly charged with a Capital crime. He not only refused to hear
the truth, but so despitefully reviled the Servant of God, that they who were
by could not but admire at the malice of the one, and meekness of the other.
The like happened betwixt him and a Cardinal, who abused by the tales of
informers, had an ill opinion of the H. man: and meeting Philip in the City,
sharply reproved him in the hearing of all He Good man undisturbed therewith,
quietly laughed to himself, and coming a little nearer whispers the Cardinal
in the ear; at which abating his former roughness, he used him, whom before he
looked on as an offender, with civil respect. There was at S. John's Church of
the Florentines, a Servant of some Noblemans, who on a sudden, without any
cause offered, began with so much impotency to rail at Philip, that a Canon of
S. Peter's in the Vatican accidentally being by, not able to brook his
incivility, would have laid hands on him, but that he saw Philip take all so
cheerfully; concluding, he was a very holy person, however he were unknown to
him.

Yea the Servant of God was not only affronted by strangers, but even those to
whom he had done favors. There fell out once a business of importance in the
Congregation, and a Letter coming to Philip (at that time Governor) about it;
one of his Scholars, fearing it might carry with it somewhat concerning him
repugnant to Philips liking, took the paper by force out of his hand; which
indignity he endured with such moderation, as he never discovered any tokens of
displeasure for it, as long as he lived. Yet when he was near his end,
imitating herein the Royal Prophet, he gave charge that the party after his
decease should be rebuked, yet in love, that so he might both acknowledge his
fault and obtain pardon of God. In short, that one commendation of his Patience
might suffice, which Francis Rosanus an able Divine gave him in these words:
Very suitable it was that Philip had his Residence at S. Hieroms; seeing he
sustained no less brunts of opposition, than S Hierom did from his detractors.

And here it will not be unseasonable, to show how almost all those, who most
bitterly maligned him, either out of remorse of conscience soon desisted from
their malice, or became spectacles of Divine Vengeance very shortly. A certain
man one time spoke contemptibly of him, and indeed out of no ill will to him;
the next day going abroad he fell headlong into a Ditch, and broke his Leg
miserably, with the hazard of his life: confessing, that he had certainly
died, if out of hatred he had inveighed against the H. man; of whom ever after
he could not endure any should speak ill.

A Lady of great Quality was dangerously sick, whom the R. Father resorted much
unto, being her Confessor: hereupon her Nephew, fearing she might leave the
Congregation her Heir, forbade Philip coming any more to see his Aunt; yet did
not the Devout man abstain from his charitable service. In such wise, as he
enraged thereat charged, none of the Servants should let him in: He still
neglecting all discourtesies he met with, continues to visit the Matron. The
Priests of the Congregation, in the mean time doubting lest any mischief should
befall him, were instant with him to forbea^ going thither: whom he answered;
Brethren, ye know I have no other ends in going, save only the good of the Sick
Persons soul; and for that, as often as need is, I shall not spare to lay down my
life: for what can fall out more gloriously for the Servant of Christ, than to
dye for Christ? But because they urged him so importunately; See, says he, I
shall indeed avoid the danger, for she who is now a drawing on, shall
perfectly recover, but her Nephew, that is well, within fifteen days shall
assuredly die. And not a tittle of his sayings failed, for fifteen days after
he di^d.

He went one time to the Seven Churches of the City with his Sons; which a
profane fellow hearing of spoke on this wise to his Camerade, one, of the same
stamp: Do not you know that the Hieronymians (for so the Fathers of the
Congregation of the Oratory were at that time called, especially by strangers,
from S. Hieroms a Charitate) go this morning to the Seven Churches, and have
taken with them seven Asses lad^n with several sorts of Junkets? with these
and the like fancies of their own, pleasing themselves and slandering the
Servant of God. But within few days, by the secret judgment of God, he that
belched out these impious calumnies was slain with the sword; and he that
listened to him sickned and dyed.

A certain Prelate, whose name for modesties sake is omitted, had most foully
accused Philip to one of the Cardinals, to the intent, that the matter being
publicly taken notice of, the Order of the Oratory might be utterly ruined:
and so heinous were the imputations, that the Cardinal made the Pope
acquainted with them. But Philip, though he knew all this, said never a word;
Yea went often to the Cardinal, and though he were shrewdly and frequently
reprehended by him, yet bore it patiently ever. In the mean time it happened that
the Monks of the Order of Mount Olivet impeached that Prelate of Apostatizing
from their Order, which he took so to heart, that for very grief he fell sick,
and in short space deceased. Yet Philip forgetting all injuries visited him
much in his sickness, and hearing of his death lamented, bidding the H. Bible
should be brought him, and presently opening the Book light upon those words in
the Proverbs: Homo Apostata vir inutilis etc. A backsliding person, a wicked
man walks with a froward mouth, he winketh with his eyes, he speaks with
his feet, he teaches with his fingers, frowardness is in his heart, he
devises mischief continually, he sows discord; therefore shall his
destruction come suddenly, suddenly shall he be broken without remedy. To
mention others, who persecuting the B. man accordingly felt Gods revenging
hand, is not thought convenient, in regard it may distaste Posterity, and is
therefore omitted.

But to proceed in the relation of Philips Patience: this Virtue had taken so
deep rooting in his mind, that he not only quietly sustained injuries, but even
loved his Adversaries with all his heart, praying most fervently to God for
them. Besides he was of so sweet and affable a nature, that he was never known
to be angry in good earnest, except against notorious debauchery, and the
habits of Vice: for albeit he carried a stern countenance toward his Scholars,
the better to further their progress in piety, yet as soon as he, whom he had
chidden, had but turned his back, the meek-spirited man cleared up again and
looked as cheerful a sever. He checked Ant. Gallonius somewhat severely, and
perceiving him troubled at it, coming nearer him, pleasantly said to him, Give
me a kiss, Antony, for so it is my will and pleasure: which the Good old man
did, to remove from his mind all sadness and grief. He never looked sad; nay
his excellent company pleased all: he was of so settled and untroubled a mind,
that his Sons would say: Do what wrong so ever to Father Philip it never moves
nor disquiets him a jot. When it was told him, how some called him an Old
bearded Dotard, he laughed, and even capered for joy. Another time hearing one
inveigh against the Order of the Oratory, as he preached, he showed not the
least sign of dislike thereat.

His Meekness and Patience appeared also in sustaining infirmities and
indispositions of Body; for being often sick, and that for no little while, but
sometimes fifty or threescore days together, insomuch as he was four times
anointed with the Sacred Oil, yet he always showed cheerfullness in his looks
without any discovery of pain at all. So that once when the Doctors had given
him quite over, and he perceived his Sons to be in great heaviness for him,
with a stout heart and loud voice he cried out, what is the matter Fathers,
what is the matter, I say, that you are disquieted so? Eqidem paratus sum, and
non sum turbatus; Truly I am Ready and not dismayed.

All the time that he was sick, he never spoke of his disease to any but
Physicians. He was never known to complain; though his malady grew upon him,
yet he scarce changed the tenor of his voice; such as came to him he
entertained with his wonted courtesy; rather administering comfort to such as
visited him, than receiving rom them. He ever took the Confessions of
Penitents, except he were prohibited expressly by the Physicians. If his Sons at
any time wished him to forbear for a time, for his healths sake, his answer
was; Let me alone, nothing is more pleasing to me than to hear confessions. It
was ascribed to a miracle also, that being on the sudden freed from his disease
he returned immediately to his charge; lying sick almost to death, as it might
be to day, and to morrow betaking him more vigorously than before to the wonted
offices of Religion. Which he attributing to a Divine hand, told the Physicians
often; Not you, but that same Box of H. Relics (pointing to it with his finger)
has recovered me. They were given him by S. Carlo.

At S. Hieroms he was like to dye once, and being very thirsty modestly
entreated Julius Petruccius, a Nobleman of Siena that was by, to give him a cup
of water with juice of a Pomgranate in it. And as Julius was about to sugar it,
to abate the sharpness of the Pomgranate, suddenly appeared a young man whom he
had never seen before, or after, who offered him a lump of Sugar, and so
vanished. Julius gives Philip the drink, who, having drunk it up and slept a
while on one side of the Bed, awaked, and said, I am well: Julius thinking of
the Boy, and seeing none knew him, concluded it was an Angel sent from heaven
to take care of the H. man: and Philip the day following went about his
Spiritual affairs in as perfect health as ever.

Another time he was sick in the same House, so that the Physicians said there
was no hopes of life, and they had newly given him the H. Eucharist, and
prepared him by Extreme Unction for his departure hence; there was present Pet.
Victricius of Parma, an honorable Person, and one of the special and most
intimate friends of Cardinal Boncompagnus, who afterward being Pop^ was called
Gregory the XIII. he of his own accord was assistant to Philip: who desiring
him to reach him the Cup to wash his mouth, he did so; when Philip, Hezekiah
like, turning his face to the wall, lay still for the space of a quarter of an
hour, not stirring; at length changing from that posture, he found himself
well, and recovering his full strength rose, and followed his employments.

To come at last to his Rules of Patience, which he laid down. First he said,
Nothing was more Noble or becoming a Christian, than to suffer for Christ; and
that it was the sorest affliction, to want affliction. Therefore if his
Scholars at any time complained, that they could not bear tribulations
courageously; Say rather, quoth he, we are indeed unworthy of such an honor;
for know, Gods love is to be measured by our sufferance. He alleged, that
there was no speedier way to attain to a Contempt of the world, than by
suffering adversity, and misery: styling those unhappy men, that were not
admitted into the discipline of this School. Moreover he affirmed (yet in a
good sense always) that there was no Purgatory among the living, but either
Paradise or Hell: for those who contentedly endure afflictions, enjoy the
felicity of Paradise; but such as are impatient under them, feel after a sort
the torments of Hell. He said likewise, the unusual joys and favors of the
Spirit were the forerunners of a future temptation; that man's life is
interwoven of comforts and tribulations; and that such as avoided one cross,
should light upon another worse; that Virtue, as it is said, was to be made out
of necessity; and for the most part men create themselves troubles. By these
and the like wholesome sentences the B. man did both animate himself and his to
the pursuit of Patience.

CHAP. XXI. His Perseverance.
TO conclude at length this Argument of the Virtues of Philip; He knowing, that
no work be it never so laborious, never so laudable, unless it be consummate
and crowned with Perseverance, may be rightly termed an act of complete Virtue;
resolutely persisted in a constant and even tract of Piety to his End. So that
as soon as he came to Rome, and understood that he was called thither to Labor
in the Lords Vineyard, for the space of threescore Years, he went not so much
as once without the City walls, except out of devotion to visit the Seven
Churches. And though his friends often urged him to go to this or that place
for his recreation, and especially his kindred, that he would come to Florence;
yet could he never be persuaded to leave the City.

Being in obedience to his Superiors, made Priest and Confessor, he said Mass
every day, and constantly to the last heard Confessions. When the Congregation
afterward was instituted, he would not take upon him any other charge but that,
to the end he might more carefully and effectually intend the Services he had
set up in it; nor did he introduce a multiplicity of Exercises in the
Congregation; contenting himself with three principally, as he said, to wit,
Prayer, Administration of the Sacraments, and the daily Repast of the Word of
God.

He did ever and anon inculcate that lesson to his; Non qui inceperit, sed qui
persever averit usque in finem, hic salvus erit. Not he that begins, but that
endures unto the end, shall be saved. And the better to excite them to so
excellent a Virtue, he instilled into them that Golden Mean of Discretion,
saying; Every thing must not be attempted in one day; nor all the Stages of
Holiness be posted over in three: adding that it was a harder matter to
regulate such as were too venturous, than to quicken the timorous or sluggish:
also, that the external work was not so strictly to be stood on, nor the means
so eagerly to be pursued, as to forget the chief end and scope thereof. Again,
that the body should so far be kept low as that the Passions of the mind might
not rebel. He further affirmed, that the exercises of Piety were not lightly
to be omitted, whereto a man had formerly obliged himself; therefore those that
tasked themselves with too many duties of Religion did not wisely: for they who
so over-burdened themselves either desisted as being tired therewith, or
dispatched them too fast. Therefore he wished his to choose a moderate course
for Spiritual matters, which having once entered upon they should never lay
aside: inasmuch as the subtle Enemy of mankind, if once he can interrupt one
duty of Piety, will not surcease his assaults, till he have destroyed all.
Therefore he often repeated this document to his; Nulla dies sine linea. No day
without some stroke.

He exhorted them likewise to reinforce and strengthen their resolutions of
Holiness every day; never despairing under trialls, seeing God first suffers
him, whom he intends to advance to eminency in any Virtue, to be assailed with
encounters from the oposite Vice. He taught them, that the Spirit of devotion
was conferred plentifully at the first, but afterward God made show of
withdrawing himself, that the Soul, thus berest of celestial consolations,
might learn to grow and feed on more solid meat. Moreover he said there were
three kinds of spitituall life. The first he called the Animal; wherein men
are attracted with a certain sensible devotion as beasts are by their fodder.
The second he termed the Rational; when without any allectives of pleasure,
men contend for virtue in continual opposition of the Passions. The third he
entitled Angelical; when the heat of Passion being allayed, they enjoyed a
quiet serenity and peace in the contemplation of God. Of these three be bid his
chiefly aim at the second assuring them, that in time they should by Gods grace
attain the third.

He counseled young people to be as cautious of avoiding the society of lewd
Persons, and of consorting with the civil, as they would be careful of
receiving the Sacraments, yet he trusted not much to young Persons; for if he
heard of any such who were reputed in their youth very forward in the ways of
God; he would straight reply; Let them be fledged first, before you judge of
their flying.

Those who intended themselves for a Religious House he tried first with
several sorts of Penance; that they might better persevere in their vowed
retirement. Whereupon diverse of them, which upon his approbation devoted
themselves to that course of life, have, when occasion served, avouched, that
had not the H. man first proved and examined them thus, they should not long
have kept their Cloister.

He was always jealous of those, whether Laics or Regulars, that kept not
their Stations, but shifted to this and that and then to a stricter kind of
life: for the devil, quoth he, transforming himself into an Angel of light,
labors under the false disguises of a more perfect life to seduce men from the
right path. Maximianus Burgus of Verona was by a certain Lord entertained into
his House, on conditions he should not be put to some employments, that he
might have the more leisure to serve God. But the Nobleman breaking his word
with him once or twice, Maximianus purposed to leave him; whom the B. man with
many and several arguments persuades to stay, telling him at last; If you run
away from this cross, you shall certainly fall into another worse. And so it
was; for when he went from his Lord he wandered up and down in continual
unsettlement.

But though in general he wished to all this gift of Perseverance, yet did he
more especially recommend it to them of the Congregation. Therefore in the
first place, he seldom suffered any of them to go out of the City: as may
appear by that which follows. A young man of a very good family was admitted
into the Order of the Oratory, he being of excellent parts had raised huge
expectations of himself among all. But, growing somewhat sickly, his friends
advised him for his health to change the air; which thing the H. man liked not
of, but overcome with urgent entreaties gave him leave to go, the rather for
that another of the Congregation was to travel upon earnest business into
those Quarters. But he whispered some in the ear which were by; Two indeed shall
go hence, but there shall come back but one of them. And his prediction proved
true, for the one having dispatched his business returned to the City, but the
young man settled himself in his Country: as may be seen by Philips letter sent
him, part whereof was to this effect.

Indeed I could have wished, N. you had not parted hence so soon, that so you
might have conversed the less-while amongst flesh and blood distracted between
the love of your Mother and Brethren; taught by the example of S S. Marcus and
Marcellianus, who valiantly resisting the tortures inflicted, yet moved with
their Parents prayers and cries, had well nigh denied Christ, but that the B.
Sebastian fortified them in the faith with his pious exhortations. And at the
bottom of his letter he added; But now it is in your choice, either to stay, or
return, since we detain no man against his will.

John Antonius Luccius, intending to go from Rome into his own Country, asked
the H. man's consent, who would by no means yield to it, nay opposed it; using
that of S. Paul; Puto ego quod Spiritum Dei habeam. And I think that I have the
Spirit of God. Yet he went, and never afer returned to the Congregation. The
same happened in like manner to others, who going to their Countries without his
likeing, either died there, or else deserting the Congregation betook
themselves to some other course.

Nor could he willingly suffer them to go from the City so much as to found
Congregations in the neighboring Towns, or to settle such as were already
erected: but by his good will would have them abide constantly at Rome. Which
besides that our Fathers do often inculcate this to the Juniors of the Society,
may be gathered from his Letters writ to S. Carlo Berromeo; for the wise
Prelate desiring one of Philips Sons to labor in his Vineyard, he made this
answer. In regard some of them (speaking of the Priests of the Congregation)
are but newly entered upon their Studies, and are yet raw, it passes my
understanding to conceive how it can be convenient, to take them from their
Studies without a fault. And a little after, such as are fitly qualified we can
in no wise spare, for we our selves need their help most of all; so that if at
any time I be forced, upon occasion, to send one away: I even tremble to think
on it, and humbly commend my self to the Lord Christ. Whereby may evidently be
seen, what his opinion herein was.

THE THIRD BOOK. of the LIFE of PHILIP NERIUS. Of the Gifts bestowed on him by
God.
CHAP. I. His Ecstasies and Rapts.
ALmighty God, having thus adorned his Servant with the embellishments of so
many and so rare Virtues, was not wanting to him in those unmerited favors,
called by Divines Gratia gratis datae, Graces freely given men, which he also
most liberally conferred upon him. First he had many Ecstasies and strange
Raptures, bathing himself daily in the delicious pleasures of celestial
contemplation; though Good man he labored to avoid them all he could, out of
his deep Humility.

There was once a weighty cause to be debated before the Pope, whereupon the
Fathers Dominicans who were concerned therein exposed the B. Sacrament of the
This is ave^red by three sworn witnesses, all Priests.
Eucharist for the space of forty hours, within the precincts of their
Monastery, where Philip and Franc. Maria Taurusius with some others met. And as
the H. man was in most fervent prayer, on the sudden he fell into a Trance, his
eyes (...) fixed on the Sacrament, and his who^^ (...) unmoved. They run
presently to him, call him by his Name, and feeling his hands, face and b^est
find them as cold as ice; so that suspecting some dangerous disease had seized
him, they carry him between their hands to his Chamber. Wh^^ ^e had continued
so a pretty while, coming at length to himself he cries out, Parta est nobis
victoria, exaudita est oration nostra: The victory is ours; our prayers are
heard. At which they being amazed ask the reason of his Trance, and what
victory he meant. He at first wa^ shy of declaring himself, but at the earnest
instance of those which were present, Know then, quoth he, the business that
was prayed for shall succeed well. And being questioned about his Ecstasy, he
answered, That he saw Christ Jesus in the H. Host stretching forth his hand
and blessing them that prayed and therefore they ought to render unto God all
bounden thanks. And that very instant in which the servant of God recovered his
senses again, news was brought, that the Pope had given sentence for them.

Paulus Recuperatus, Referendary of either Seal, and one whom the Father much
esteemed, went one Evening to Confession, he then living at S. Hieroms; and
found him at Supper with Joh. Animuecius a Scholar of his, whom he loved
excedingly; He entertains the Prelate very courteously, and hears his
Confession, but laying his hand on his head as the manner is, to give him
absolution, fell into a most pleasing Trance, that deprived him both of sense
and motion; in which posture both of them surprised with wonder and delight,
atentively eyed him. Philip at length recovering finished the form of
Absolution and quietly dismissed the Prelate. Fabricius de Maximis likewise
repaired to him to Confession, and finding his Chamber Door not quite shut,
opening it softly espies the H. man standing on Tiptoes, with his hands and
eyes lift up to heaven in several kinds of gestures: he stays, he looks on a
while, and observes what he did. Then approaching nearer salutes him as he used
to do; Philip neither seeing nor speaking to him. So Fabricius with great
content views the Good old man standing in that manner: till at last he
returning from his Ecstasy, and seeing Fabricius there, asked him how he got in?
who told him, he found the Door half open and so came gently in. Philip sits
down, and takes his Confession but without mentioning a word of the Trance
dismissed him. The like happened to diverse others, who comeing to Confession to
him, found him senseless.

Once Antonius Gallonius took him in bed like one that had been dead, and
presently sends for the Physicians, who through mistake judging it to be an
Apoplexy caused his head to be opened with a hot iron, and several causticks
to be applied to him: John Franciscus Bordinus, supposing he was a drawing on,
anoints him with the H. Oil. When coming to himself again he demands of them
why they used him so; they replied; O Father, you are in a dangerous disease.
He smilingly told them; Sons, know, a worse mischief could not befall me than
this you have now done. By which they gathered, that it was a Trance, not a
disease, that fell upon him.

As he was at Mass he was often in Raptures; as, besides others who aver as
much, Cardinal Octavius Paravicinus can testify: who attending on him when he
was about Twenty years of age, was an eyewitness thereof.

When ever he addressed himself to the Pope, fearing he might be surprised,
whilst he was with him, he would say to his Sons; Look, that during the time I
am with his Holiness, I commit nothing preposterous, or unbeseeming such a
presence.

Some there were likewise that saw his whole body hoised up into the air; among
others Paulo Sfondrato, Cardinal, Priest of the Title of S. Cecily, saw him
raised up to the roof of his chamber at his Prayers: See the twentieth chapter
of the Life of S. Teresa, where she has these words.

[And so extreme is the violence of these Rapts, that many times I have
endeavored to resist them, and have put all my strength to it, and especially
when they came upon me in public, and often also in private (fearing lest I
might be deceived) but seldom could I prevail, and that also but very little.
And it cost me a very great deal of harrassing and toil to my self, just so as
if an ordinary person had been fighting with some strong Giant; and afterward I
should find my self very weary. But at othertimes it was altogether impossible
for me to hinder it; for my Soul would be carried absolutely away, and
(ordinarily) even my head (as it were) after it; yea and this sometimes so far,
as that my whole body would be transported so, as to be raised up from the
ground. This last has happened rarely to me; but once it was upon the very point
to arrive, whilst we all were assembled together in the Quire; and I being then
upon my knees (and at the point of going to receive the blessed Sacrament) it
put me to an extremity of trouble, because it seemed to be a very
extraordinary thing, and that instantly there would be much notice taken of it,
and so I commanded my religious women (for at that time I was Prioress) that
they should not speak of it to any creature. But at other times when I began to
discern, that our Lord was going about to do the same again (and once, in
particular, when diverse principal Ladies were present; and it was upon the
Feast of our Patron when there was a Sermon) I did even spread my self all
along upon the ground, and though the religious women came then about me, to
keep my body down, yet the thing was easily perceived. Upon this I humbly
prayed our Lord in most particular manner, that by no means he would do me any
such favors, as might carry any of these exterior demonstrations with them;
for already I was very weary of being continually so wary and watchful over my
self: for that such kind of favors could not possibly be done me by his Divine
Majesty, but so that every body would come to know it.

And it seems that through his goodness he has been pleased to hear my prayer;
for since that time I never had any Rapts of that kind, and to that proportion;
but it is true, that it is not long since I had the last. Moreover when I
endeavored to hinder such a Rapt, so strong a hand and power from under my
feet seemed to lift me up, that I know not what to compare it unto: for it was
done with much greater force, than in those other things that belong to the
Spirit: and therefore I remained as it were bruised and dismembered with it.]


which he, as a spectator thereof, related again to Pope Paul the V.

Joh. Baptista Modius being sick and speechless, so that they thought he would
dye, was visited by Philip; who after some expressions of piety and affection,
retired to prayers in another private room. At Midnight some of the house
seeking for him, whither he was gone, found him in a Chamber, his body
elevated, and darting forth Rays of light, they seeing This Bernardine Corona
a Citizen of Rome, and others witnessed upon oath.
it shrieked out, the rest at the noise hereof came running in, and beheld him
hoised up from the ground, that his head almost touched the Ceiling, casting a
glittering brightness round about him. Returning to his senses he visits the
sick again, as though nothing had intervened, and laying his hand on his head,
bad him; Be of good cheer, for you shall not die of this sickness. He had scarce
said so but the bed rid person recovered his speech, spoke to the B. man, and
within a few days after grew perfectly well.

He was once at Prayer in the Vatican, before the H. Co^fessionall, as they
call it, of the Prince of the Apostles, when on a sudden he was seen upon his
knees caught up into the air, his body and habit remaining still in the same
posture, as if he prayed kneeling upon the earth; till by degrees he came down
and took his former place. But fearing the praise of men he stole away thence
privately: and that the like might not befall him again, he was wont, at his
entrance into the Church with his Sons, to rise up and to be gone, so soon as
ever he had kneeled.

He was seen, as he said Mass, not only in almost continual Ecstasies, but many
times born up on high, as the Religious women of Turris Speculorum had often
observed: some of whom affirm, that they have seen him taken up into the air
four handfulls high. A Girl likewise saw him lift up two handfuls from the
ground; who being somewhat silly, turning to her Mother, said, See Mother the
Priest is possessed, do you not mark how he is taken up on high? who answered;
peace fool, that Priest is a Saint, and therefore is entranced thus.

Sulpitia Sirleta, seeing the Servant of God raised about a handful from the
steps of the Altar thought with her self; Certainly this man is moved by some
evil spirit: but coming afterward to Confession to him, and being ashamed and
afraid to discover as much, she begins in a low voice to mutter thus; Father I
said; and her voice stopping there, she uttered no more. To whom Philip; Go on
thou Madling what troubles thee? have thou conceited any ill of me? That is it,
replied she. What was it then? said he. Sulpitia answered; Some three days
since as you were saying Mass and I saw you lift up into the air: at that, he
putting his finger to her mouth said, Peace. But she went on; I said in my
heart; This man sure is led by some evil Spirit. With that he smiled and told
her; it is true daughter; it is true indeed, I am moved by an evil Spirit.

Another time Aurelius Baccius of Siena beheld him with a celestial splendor
shining like a Crown about his head. He was celebrating Mass at the high Altar,
and as he came to that part of the Canon where the Living are commemorated,
Aurelius saw him surrounded with a bright Glory like a Diadem: and suspecting
it might proceed from some indisposition of his sight, to refresh them he
diverted his eyes to some other object, lest they should dazzle, and looking on
Philip again sees him in like manner encompassed with a golden luster; then a
third time wipes his eyes with a handkerchief and his fingers, marks the heads
of others that were present, but sees no such thing. And fixing his eyes on him
again espies the very same splendor as before, which lasted till he had done
Mass: but when he had communicated, presently the light disappeared.

Mutius Achilleus also, a Priest of S. Severines, living at Rome, observed him
at the celebration of Mass to dart forth glittering beams from about his face.

Vincentius Lanterus, Archbishop of Ragusa, kissing Philips hand once, whilst
yet a youth, perceived it all gilded with resplendent Rays; so that his eyes
dazzled with the brightness thereof, and being astonished at it went forthwith to
his Confessor, Thomas Bozzius to acquaint him with it. Who bid him, Not think
strange for that diverse had beheld Philips hand like burnished gold.

Last of all a Maid of some twelve years of age had many times seen the H. man
at Mass inveloped in a bright cloud, and though he wore a Cope of a different
color according to the diversity of the season, yet she had never seen him but
arrayed in white still. These and diverse other Rapts and Ecstasies he sustained,
of which enough at present.

CHAP. II. His Visions.
FUrthermore God honored him often with celestial Visions; such as these that
follow. First, while he was yet a Laick, and desirous to understand the will of
God, having not yet determined what course of life to take, he earnestly
besought God to make known his mind to him: when lo! about Sun rise, S. John
Baptist appears to him, who having first comforted and refreshed him by his
presence, tells him (as Himself afterward certified Cardinal Frederico
Borromeo) that he must dwell in the City, no where else, and laying aside all
business whatever, should addict himself wholly to the conversion of Souls at
Rome. The same was intimated to him in a Vision by the Souls of two Saints,
Citizens, that were in Glory; one of which pretending to eat a Crust of dry
bread, brake out into these words; The will of God, O Philip, is, that you live
in the very heart of the City, as in the solitude of the Desert. By both which
apparitions, and what Augustinus Ghettinus, as is before rehearsed, told him at
Aquae-Salviae, he was sufficiently advertised concerning the choice of his
condition.

He prayed once in Christmas time at Church, his sons Constantius Tassonius,
and Sebastian the Musician being with him, and while he was in deep meditation
on our Lord. behold! Jesus appeared upon the Altar in the likeness of an
Infant. And supposing his Companions had also seen it, he said; Do not ye see
the Child Jesus standing on the Altar? They saying No, he perceived the Vision
was not discovered to the rest, so quietly went on in his Prayer, without any
more words of it.

One time saying Mass, after he had shown the people the Body of Christ,
laying the Host down, he staid a good space ere he elevated the Cup; so when
Mass was done, as he went from the Altar, he was discerned going to the Vestry
to look merrily as one that laughed. Being asked thereupon, why he paused so
long between Elevating the Host and the Chalice; and why he returned to the
Vestry so pleasant; he smiled and laying his hand on his head that put the
question to him, hushed up the matter in silence. Yet afterward wearied by
urgent entreaties, he at last answered him; Son, when I say Mass, I oftimes
behold the Glory of Paradise; but be sure you never open your mouth to any
concerning it.

He was divinely favored with the sight of the Souls of diverse, as they went
to heaven. Marinus Tosinus, one of the first of the Fraternity of the Most H.
Trinity, a Person of great Virtue, whose Life was writ by Bonsignorius
Cacciaguerrius, as soon as he departed this life appeared to Philip, calling
him twice by his Name; who looking up saw his Soul ascend to heaven wrapped about
in light. In the morning he understood that the man died about the same hour
the Vision happened.

Vincentius the Limner, as he was called, a Holy man, and one of the first of
the same Society, presently after his death showed himself to Philip all
glittering with light, who beheld him as he went to heaven; and going the next
day to comfort his Wife, Your Husband, says he, knocked at my chamber door to
night, and came and recommended you and your family to me: at which words the
woman was revived, whom together with her Children, Philip thence-forward
relieved with all things necessary.

Marcus Antonius Cortesellus of Como, one whom Philip loved well, died; a man
devoted much to Prayer and works of Piety, the Depositary for the Alms
conferred on the Capuchins, who had presaged of the H. man thus: This man is
known to but a few as yet, but hereafter it shall appear to all, how great a
Saint he is. When his Coarse was laid forth on the Beir in S. Katherines
Church, nigh unto S. Hieroms a Charitate, Philip went with Antonius Gallonius
another Priest accompanying him, to see the body; and having viewed it a while
sends for a Painter, and wills him to draw his picture to the life: The other
his companion wondering at it; Gallonius bid him, Think not strange of it, for
the R. Father had related, how the night before he had seen his Soul in great
Clarity appearing to him, holding discourse with him about four or five hours,
and passing thence into the heavens.

Fabricius de Maximis had a Daughter of some thirteen years of age, named
Helena, a Virgin deeply wounded with the Love of Christ, and rigidly obedient
to her Confessor; thrice aweek she received the Body of our Lord, having more
appetite to her Prayers than repast: she would bitterly weep over the Passion
of our Savior; and did so much endeavor the vilifying of her self, that she
made it her ambition to be a Servant to all; and was exceedingly desirous to
suffer for Christ's sake, that at least in part she might testify her gratitude
toward him; in her last sickness, after that Baronius had given her the
heavenly Viaticum, she saw the Lord Christ besprinkling her Soul with blood;
and foretelling the hour of her departure piously deceased. Her Philip saw, as
she hastened to the heavenly mansions, Angels singing and attending on her.

His Sons knew likewise, that the state of Penitents in the other world was
revealed to him, as soon as they were dead. When Virgil Crescentius died, going
to comfort his Children he said to them; Be of good cheer: for your Father is
received into Glory by Almighty God; I know well what I say: repeating it again
and again. All had so strong an opinion, of his knowing by Revelation whither
the Souls of His went, that diverse resorted to him for satisfaction therein.
John. Antonius Luccius had lately lost his Mother; and requesting Philip to
pray to God, and to acquaint him whether his Mother were in a state of Bliss or
no; he bid him, Rejoice, for your Mother is certainly in heaven adding; the
same thing in a manner befell me, that happened at the Funeral of my Father as I
was praying. By which it would seem, Philips Father, in all likelihood obtained
a place of Blessedness at the Prayers of his Son.

There died Joh. Animuccius Master of the Music in the Vatican, who came
every day to the Oratory, and when the sermons were done, ordered the Music,
for he was excellent in that Art, a man of so unblemished a Chastity, that
after he had begun by Philips directions to serve Christ, he lived with his
Wife as with a Sister: and obtained of God such favor that having all his life
been much tormented with scruples, toward his latter end he was absolutely
freed from them. Now it happened, that three years after his death (...) Sermons
were ended on a certain day he appeared to one Alphonso a Portuguese; and as
they walked together questioned him on this wise: Is the Oratory newly broke
up, It is, replied Alphonso. Then I pray says he, entreat Philip from me, to
pray to God for me: and therewith vanished. At that Alphonso calling to mind,
how Animuccius had been dead long since, stepped back to see if it where he, but
finding no body comes trembling and quaking to Philip and relates to him the
whole story, who enjoined him, the day following to draw it up into a brief
Narrative, and recite it in the Oratory. Next he gave order that in several
Churches of the City, Masses should be said for the deceased Soul. When all was
thus performed, He tells them publikly. Our Animuccius is now gone by:
intimating that he passed from Purgatory to Paradise. And hence was it that
having often beheld the Souls of Holy Persons, he affirmed, the Beauty of them
was unexpressable.

Besides, being one full of Divine Light, he was able to discern an excellency
and luster in Souls whilst they were yet in their Bodies. And therefore speaking
of the incomparable brightness of S. Ignatius's Soul, Founder of the Society of
Jesus, while he was yet living; he said, it was so illustrious, that sometimes
he could perceive beams flash from his countenance: and that the like happened to
him as he looked in the face of S. Carlo Cardinal Borromeo. He also saw a
young man's face sparkle in like manner, who being afterward admitted into the
Order of the Dominicans, and called Peter Martyr, was made their Vicar
General, dying in great reputation for Holiness. Some of the Carthusians also
he beheld with sh^ning visages, as they went by couples out of the Quire from
Prayers with the rest.

Yet was not He thus only recreated with celestial apparitions, but, for the
instruction of others, many times terrified with the sight of Devils. He had
given charge once to Anton. Luccius, to read the Exorcismes of the Church over
a woman that was possessed, and, to shame the Devil the more, whip her; which
he presently did. Whereupon the proud Fiend, enraged at this scorn put upon him,
appears the next night to Philip in a horrid shape, vomiting forth a most
loathsome stench, which filled the Room, and lasted for a long time after.

Another time, while he lived in S. Hierom's Oratory with his Sons, among whom
was Gabriell Paleottus (after ward honored with the Purple) and, as his use
was, conferred about spiritual matters, on the sudden he cries out; O my
Brethren, take heed, the Devil stands there. At which words they all kneeled
down, but He defying the wicked spirit with the sign of the Cross, roared
aloud; Thou shall not enter here: and straight the Fiend vanished.

He went sometime to the Baths of Dioclesian, to see the Church of S. Maria
Angelorum and looking This was published by Vincent Daffabriano who was present.
up he spied on part of an old stone wall an evil spirit, shifting himself
into several forms, now of an old, then of a young man, one while handsome, by
and by ugly. Philip knowing that he assumed those shapes to delude him,
imploring the Divine aid commands him to be gone, at which he immediately
departed, polluting the air with noisome vapor: for the impure Spirit used, as
often as he showed himself to the H. man, to annoy him with these filthy stinks.
It was most what a smell of Sulphur, and continued long, and only he smelt it;
yet sometimes, though but seldom, some of his were affected with it. He once
laid his hands on a woman that was possessed, as the Priests manner is, and it
seems they retained that filthy sent, so that though he washed them in sweet
water, and scoured them with Nitre, yet they would not be clean; he made his
Penitents smell sometimes to this stink, that so being offended with the
lothsomness thereof they might more carefully learn to abhor and avoid the
filthyness of sin.

As he was on a time at Church, a devil in likeness of a Boy came and mocked
him, blowing his Nose with a handkerchief; but Philip with a menacing
countenance looking on him, put him to flight and shame. Then asking Gallonius,
if he saw the Boy, he answered; yes, Know, quoth Philip, it was no Boy; but the
Fiend, that came to tempt the faithful who were at Church.

Indeed the Envious spirit was so malicious against him, that he continually
wrought him mischief: appearing to him in hideous and ugly shapes; sometimes
fouling his apparel; otherwhiles removing huge Logges and Beams of timber to
and fro; then putting out his Candle, and making a noise; lying in wait
perpetually for him night and day. All which by the help of the B. Virgin he
easily overcame with undaunted courage.

By these frequent apparitions, both from God and from the Devil unto him, it
came to pass, that as often as he spoke to his Sons of this Argument, he
constantly asserted that Doctrine of the Saints; That they were not things to
be stood on. Neither could he by any means approve their spirit, that eagerly
sought after such things; neither did he think it sufficient, for one to say: I
regard not Visions; therefore such as are illusions shall not befall me:
because these many times happened also to those, who are no ways desirous of
Visions. That it was a hard matter, not to be puffed up with them; a harder, to
count ones self not worthy of them; but most difficult of all, to judge ones
self utterly unworthy thereof, and not to prefer such Visions before Virtues
and a solid piety. He said likewise, those Visions were to be rejected, at
least, with much caution to be received, that neither profited the Church, nor
ones self, promoting neither the public nor private good of others. He
forewarned Confessors, that they should make but light account of the
Revelations of Penitents, of women especially, for that women presently imagine
themselves at the top of perfection, but in process of time you will find the
Sanctity they pretend to, savours either of vanity or hypocrisy: and that many
such have fallen foully, and ended unhappily. Therefore going once into the
Pulpit to preach, finding himself beginning to be in an Ecstasy and laboring by
all force to suppress it, he struck his hand upon his thigh, saying, He that
pursues after Visions and Trances, knows not what he does: so bursting forth
into tears he departed. Another time when a Scholar of his preached about some
such subject to the People, getting up into the Chair on the sudden he began
thus: I know a Religious woman, that had many Trances, at length by the Divine
Providence so it was, she never had any more. When think ye, O my Auditors,
that I prized her most? Then certainly when her Ecstasies ceased: and having so
said went out of the Desk.

Some had told him, how a Virgin of the third Order of S. Dominic had seen
Christ diverse times, but frequently the B. Katharine of Siena; his answer was
Doubtless women are easily seduced: therefore bid her from me as often as she
sees the like shadows again, spit boldly in their faces. The Maid observed his
directions, and acknowledged she received much benefit thereby.

One night the Devil, in the likeness of the Mother of God, came to Franc.
Maria, called Ferrariensis, one of Philips first Sons. Which relating early in
the morning to Philip, he told him; That was not the B. Virgin, as you thought,
but the Devil which appeared to you: therefore when you see him again, spit in
his face, and fear not. The cafty Devil coming again, he confidently spat upon
him, which the proud Feind taking in scorn vanished straight into air. When
forthwith behold the H. Virgin indeed discovers her self to him from heaven;
and he assaying to spit at her; Spit says she, if thou can. Which he trying
to do felt his tongue so dry, that he could by no means spit. Then she added
farther You did well in obeying your Confessor; and therewith departed, leaving
him affected with exceeding great joy.

Ant. Fuccius a Physician, formerly named, had the charge of a certain Nun much
famed for piety. She on a time fell into an ecstasy, he watching, her till she
came again to her senses: when waking suddenly, says she to him; O with what
wonderful light did I see thee encircled in the heavens! All which Antony
diligently observing relates again to Philip and the same day sickened; his
disease increasing on him, the Father of Lies like a Physician comes to him to
deceive him, promising that he should speedily recover, and live a long time
after. The patient acquaints the H. man with what had happened who being
enlightened from above tells him it was not a Physician, but Satan, who had
vainly assured him his life. Fuccius understanding the Devils subtilty hereby,
resigns up himself to the Divine pleasure, dying very happily soon after. So
that Philip used* upon occasions still, carefully to admonish his, not lightly
to credit Visions, such especially as promised longer life; saying, It was far
less danger not to believe true, than to believe false o^^s.

He affirmed it was a pernicious error, to give credit to the events of
Dreams. Matthias Maffeus, a Priest who beyond the power of Nature, being
restored to health, upon the B. man's prayers, dreamt a dream, which he came
with a purpose to tell Philip as a pleasant and regular one, and much conducing
to encouragement in virtue: the Father preventing him, asked, Whether he
believed Dreams? He taking that opportunity presently relates his dream: but
the B. man looking sternly on him demanded, To what purpose is all this? Away
with it: It is necessary, he that would be reckoned among the celestial Saints
should be a good man; but not, that he heed any Dreams, that he shall be so.

CHAP. III. He foretells the Deaths of diverse.
MOreover also was he enlightened with the Gift of Prophesy, by the Father of
lights. For to begin at that first, which men fear most, He foretold the Death
of sundry persons. Constantius Tassonius, often mentioned above, being called
from Millan to Rome by Pope Pius the V. of B. Memory, coming directly to S.
Hieroms alighted off his horse, whom one Of this Cardinal Taurusius, and
Germanicus Fidelius are sworn witnesses.
of Philips Sons, spying out of a window, informs the H. man, how Tassonius was
at the Gate. He commands Octavius Paravicinus and Germanicus Fidelius, both at
that time Young men, to ly at the Threshold of the Door, where Tassonius was to
pass, as though they were dead. They did so, and Tassonius seeing them laid all
along in that fashion was something troubled, and stopped: at length desired of
them room to pass by, they lay still, till the Father bid them rise; when
Constantius ran to the embracing of Philip. And shortly after sickned and died;
as the Good man by that passage had hinted to him.

This was testified by three witnesses of credit.
Joh. Angelus Cribellius, being very well, came on a Maunday Thursday to the H.
man to Confession; who looking wistly on him said. Prepare your self; for God
requires something of you. Let him replied he, do whas seems good in his eyes:
my heart is ready for all. What if God, says he, should in the highest manner
afflict you? I should willingly undergo all, by the grace of Christ; answered
Cribellius. Then be ready, quoth Philip, for this Easter God will call you. So
departing he was taken that Evening with a Fever, of which he died within four
days.

He once called to Franc. a Molaria upon the sudden, asking him; What would you
do, if your Wife should die? her Name was Fulvia de Cavaleriis. I know nor,
says he, Then consider on it with your self: quoth he. Away went the man; and
his Wife, though young and lusty, within ten days was seized with a violent
Fever, and the fifteenth day died.

Hieron. Cordelius's Wife sent the Good man word that her Husband, one whom
Philip loved, and an able Physician, This was attested by sworn witnesses
was sick. And while one of his Sons went down to the Gate, to know what the
Messenger would, Philip said to himself; O Hierom Cordelius! alas be will
certainly die; his hour is now come: repeating it often over. Those who were by
admired at it; for he that went to the Gate had not yet told him of Hieroms
being ill; but the news of his sickness coming to him soon after, he continued
in the same Note still: insomuch that they who were present, said; Then Father
if the body be past hope, let us at least take care for the Soul. At which he;
True indeed, let us take care for the Soul; About eight days after, one
bringing him a light, as he used to do, before day: What says he, Cornelius
died to night, at such an hour did he not? but perceiving, that he knew nothing
of it; he talked of something else. In the morning they found, that Hierom died
that very hour the Father mentioned. Yea once, in some words that passed
between him and Cardinal Augustinus Cusanus, He averred, that he was
miraculously present, as he lay a dying; saying Though when Cordelius died, I
staid in my Chamber, yet was I by him at the instant of his departure.

Orinthia, the Wife of Pompeius Columna, one eminent for her Noble Extract, but
much more, for the accomplishments of virtue, visiting frequently the sick
women in Hospitalls, especially the Incurable, and doing them all charitable
offices, fell dangerously ill. Her chief Doctors told her, it was but a slight
malady; but she sends for Philip, as relying more upon him; He after a long
discourse about divine matters, as he was about to go away, dipped his finger in
a little Holy water, and crossed her as she lay; recommending to her Meditation
the Passion of our Lord. Going from the Palace the Physicians met him, He tells
them, Orinthia is very ill. They laughed, Do you make a jest of it says Philip
take it from me, she will die such a day. At that they burst into a louder
laughing. But the day Philip had named, Orinthia died.

Helena Ciba, and her Husband Dominicus Mazzeus fell both sick. When Tamiria
Cevola, Helen's Mother, going Of this Tamiria is a sworn witness.
to the H. man about them, told him I fear Father I shall lose both my
Daughter, and son in Law. He answered, One is enough: and said no more. The
event made good his words; for Dominicus died, and Helena recovering forsook
the World, and betook her to a Monastery.

Her Sister Victoria came once to Philip to Confession; and being asked, how
long it was since she saw her Sister This Tamira publicly affirmed.
in Turris Speculorum; she answered, Not a great while. See quoth he, you visit
her ofter, for she will die ere it be long. And within few days after, she that
was so healthy and strong, took her Bed, and in Eighteen days space died.

Marcellus Ferrius had appointed to accompany the Cardinal of Gambara, that
was to go from the City on an Embassy; Philip bad him; Do it not, for your
Father will shortly die. Marcellus took his counsel, and some twenty days
after, h^s Father, who was then very well, de^ased.

The like befell Alexander Crescentius, and Joh. Franc. Bucchius; to the former
he said; Fit your self, for you will Of this are two sworn witneses.
suddenly die: to the other; Your brother shall not out live this sickness. And
so it was, for the first died, soon after, and the others brother never
recovered.

Virgill. Crescentius fell sick, and though at first his disease was made light
of, yet the H. man, coming to see him, said to his Wife Constantia: you must
rest contented with the will of God. She being a discreet woman apprehended
what his speech did portend: and taking him aside kneeling and weeping together
she begged of him, that he would be pleased to pray for her husbands health.

Then the Children, coming all This three sworn witnesses attested.
about him, together with their Mother requested the same of him: He plainly
tells them; It is best for Virgil, to die now; and therefore you must be
satisfied. A few days after he died. Philip afterward affirmed, that, as often as
he went to pray for his recovery, he found no access, but it was answered him
from within, that he must needs die, for his Soul's good.

The like happened to Patricius de Patriciis, who seemed to be but slightly ill,
and said, he would rise next day; whom Philip commanded to be forthwith
prepared with the Sacraments, which having received he died, his Will scarce
finished. The B. Father so highly esteemed of this man, that, after his death,
He recommended himself to his intercession.

Desiderius Consalvius, of the Order of Predicants, was sick of a violent
Fever, which drove him into a Frenzy, and he This Desiderius and J.
Comparottus, with two ey-witnesses more publicly attested.
now lay a dying. At the same time Franc. Bencinius fell ill in the same
Monastery, but in less peril: Philip visits them both; presaging death to
Bencinius, to Consalvius life; and so it happened; for this, recovered, the other
died

Last of all He foretold the Cardinal S. Carlo Borromeo's death; long before
it came. Ceccolinus Margaraccius of S. Severines, the Pope's Protonotary, whom
the R. Father preferred to the family of S. Carlo, writ to Philip to procure
him leave of the Cardinal, to go into his Country for four months. He writ
him word again thus: It shall not need to move the Cardinal herein, for there
will an accident happen, which shall forbid your return to that family.
Margaruccius knew not then, what Philip meant, but the death of S. Carlo
following soon after, he fully understood the purport of his Letter The H. man
wrote his Letter a full month before the B. Cardinal died; when, as yet,
there was not the least suspicion of any disease.

CHAP. IV. He foretells the recovery of diverse
ANd lest any, should think Him a bringer of ill news only, and a Messenger of
death, 'twill be worth the while, in a few instances to observe, how he oftimes
proved to many the welcome Harbinger of life and health. A high Fever, with a
Flux of blood, had seized on Cardinal Franc. Sforza, then retired unto his
Country House, which in two and twenty days so increased, that he could take no
sustenance, but discovered very desperate Symptoms of approaching death, for
which he was prepared by the Sacramental Refection. His Mother Katharine
dispatches straight a sure messenger to Philip. to desire him, to remember her
sick Son in his Prayers to God. He sends word again, the Cardinal should not
die of that sickness; upon which answer he began to mend, and in short time was
restored to perfect health.

Pet. Mercator Miniatensis the Physician judged that his Son Michael was in
great danger of death, who was also well skilled in Physic: Philip affirmed
the contrary. The next day Peter pronounced, his Son could not escape; but
Philip cried: Believe, thou of little faith; for God has reserved him to a
longer time. In short, Michael not only regained his former health, but, was
many years after Physician to Clement the VIII. and chosen into the number of
Prelates. Whose recovery now, and afterward his end was foretold him by the H.
man.

Joh. Baptista Altovitus lay sick, whom the Doctors affirmed to be past cure.
But Philip, after he had prayed for him, This Cardinal Taurusius publicly
attested.
calls Franc. Maria Taurusius, bidding him; Go tell Altovitus from me; you
shall not die of this sickness, but to morrow you shall mend, and in a short
time be well again. He went, and did so; and he recovered.

Bartholom. Dottius, of Modena, was ill of a Fever once, and having an office
at Court, being one of the Guard, his Nephew desires Philip to pray for his
Uncle, chiefly upon this intention, that so he might confer his office on him.
The H. man told him; Your Uncle shall not die now, but upon his next sickness
shall, and yet not leave you his place. So Dottius got rid of that malady, but
died a few years after of another; without conferring his Office on his Nephew.

Olympia de Nigris. the wife of Marcus Antonius Vitelleschius, fell dangerously
ill, being taking with a successive triple Fever. Hieron. Cordelius, who
attended her in her sickness; told her husband, none ever recovered of such a
disease. But Philip, going to see her, said, he would by no means Olympia
should die, for that, her death would turn to the great detriment of that
Family; adding, that he would so effectually solicit God that she should be
perfectly restored. No sooner was Philip gone, but Olympia found her disease
gone too; and her self in a short space well, beyond the opinion of the
Physicians and those about her,

Hierom. Pamphilio, not yet Cardinal, lay sick unto death, whom the H. Father
visited twice aday; but the violence of his disease growing upon him, moved
thereunto by the H. Spirit, holding the sick man's head in his hands, He prayed
over him, trembling every joint. When he had done praying, Now quoth he, be of
good courage, for you shall not die, having said so, the patient soon after
reattained his former strength. The same Cardinal also has left in writing,
that the like befell his Nephew Alexander.

Faustina Cencia, Wife to Car. Gabrielius, having bin long sick lay a drawing
on. Philip coming to see her lays his hand on her head, saying, Doubt not, for
you will not die of this sickness, She replying O Father, I am even dead
already: he answers; Be of good cheer; I warrant you, you shall not die of this
disease. And his promise was not in vain, for the fury of her malady having
spent it self, and being assuaged, she grew as well in health as ever.

Constantia Draco as it were breathing out her last, says Philip to her; Doubt
not; for ere long you shall grow Of this are two sworn ey-witnesses, besides
Constantia herself.
strong and lively again, and come to S Hierome's. She finding it so indeed,
thereupon chose him for her Confessor.

The like happened to the wife of Joh. Franc. Bucchius, who being at the last
gasp, the Brothers of the Confrateruity of the Florentines being sent to, about
burying the Corpse, Philip bad her Husband; Cheer up, your Wife will not die of
this disease. He believing him, was not disappointed of his expectations; for
to the astonishment of all, she that lay nigh dead was restored to longer life.

Joh. Anton. Luccius, often mentioned already, aged about threescore going to
Rome, his Horse flung him, and with the fall put his shoulder out of jont,
leaving him for dead to all men's thinking, upon which followed a Fever. He
straight sends for Philip, both to give him Absolution for his sins, and to
pray for him, withal that he might not die intestate, his malady growing so
fast upon him. Philip lovingly embracing him says; Doubt not, you will have
leisure enough to make your will in, and dispose of your estate to your own
wish. So when he had made an end of his Confession, he began to mend and in a
few days was very well; who surviving the H. Father distributed well nigh his
whole means upon the Poor.

Upon his pronouncing the same words, Doubt not, Joh. Franc. de Bernardis,
Priest of the Congregation, presently revived, This the same Francis, and
Alexander Alluminatus, who attended him in his sickness witnessed upon oath.
beyond the apprehension of all, when he had been anoined with the Sacred Oil
as he lay a dying. Agnesina Columna, one of the most eminent Matrons in Rome,
both for Nobility and Piety, recovered of a disease, in which the Physicians
judged her past all hopes, upon his mere saying, Doubt not, as he used to do.
So likewise did Joh. Babtista Cribellius, in a Fever; and diverse others, in the
very pangs of death recovered, whom he had foretold should live. As is attested
by the experience of Montes Zazzara and many others.

CHAP. V. Sever all other Predictions of His.
SUndry other Predictions there are of Philips. Sulpitia Sirleta, the Wife of
Pet. Focilis, had a Daughter, of some four years old, which was very sick; the
Mother sends for Philip, beseeching him again and again with tears, to procure
her Daughters recovery; Forbear your weeping, says he, now God calls her, it is
sufficient for you, that you have nursed her up for Christ. Sulpitia paused at
this, as loath to assent to him: to whom Philip; are you not contented? you
shall have a Son, but shall be unhappy in him, he will so vex you. Two years
and a half after, she was brought a bed of a Boy: who when he was grown up,
never left disquieting and grieving his Parents, till he came to an ill end.

Helena Ciba, being in violent throws of Childbirth, sent for the B. man to
confess to; and after Confession, desired him to be Godfather to her child
when it was born; it will not need, quoth he, any Godfather: and so departed.
That night Helen was delivered of a still-born Child.

A Brother of the Congregation was earnestly importuned by his Father to leave
the Oratory; for that he had got four or five thousand Crowns by wagers and
Bets, a thing then in use; and he hoped to procure some fat Benefice for his
Son being a Scholar. He to avoid his Fathers solicitations, desires Philip, to
let him retire to Naples, for a time who assented to it. So packing up for his
journey, and hiring a horse, when he was ready to go, Philip better considering
of it, denies him leave, bidding him Doubt not, And some three months after,
his Father, having lost all the money he had won at play left troubling his son.

Olympia de Nigris, having had seven Daughters, desired a Son; so coming to the
H. man, confident of speeding, she said; Father I have seven Daughters: Doubt
not, quoth he, you shall have no more Daughters. And within three years, she
had three Sons; who, thinking her Charge too great, comes again, and tells him;
Now Father, I have three Boys. Go, says he, hereafter you shall neither have
Sons nor Daughters: and it fell out just as he spoke.

He went one time to the Religious House Turris Speculorum, and out of Devotion
visited the old Church, seated in the innermost part of it, four of the Nuns
attending him. As he went, he bids one of them; Go to Prayer: who answered, she
had no leisure, by reason of her many employments. One of the four, Maria
Magdalena Anguillaria, then in her Prime, asked him; Father what say you to me?
who neither follow my Prayers, nor do any thing else. You, quoth Philip, indeed
do nothing now; but yet you shall be an Abbess: at which the rest burst out in
laughing. The Good man merrily asked; What, do you laugh? one of these days
you will say, Philip long ago told us as much: and turning to Magdalen, who
laughed louder then the rest, he said frowning; And do you laugh? Remember
Philip told it you. So it fell out, forty years after this, in the year one
thousand six hundred thirty five. Those that had been Abbesses all dying,
Hieronyma Taschia, who then governed losing her fight they were forced to choose
another; which was Maria Magdalena Angaillaria, as Philip had presaged.

Marcus Antonius Columna, that renouned Genenerall, and Felix Vrsina his wife,
were in a great heaviness, because Fabricius their son had no Issue: whereupon
Anna Borromea his wife, Sister to S. Carlo Cardinal Borromeo being very
desirous of Issue, recommended her self most devoutly to the prayers of Philip,
who bid her, Be contented, for shortly you shall have two Children. Within a
year after, she bare a son named Marcus Antonius; and next year another, whom
for the blessing obtained them by the H. man, they called Philip. Yea being no
less reputed for holiness, than for her extraction, she termed them both
Philips Sons, on the same grounds.

Thomas Minerbettus and Pet. Anton Morellus, came to him once, from a Priest of
the Society of Jesus, to advise with him about matters for the Soul. Pet.
Antonio had a mind, to go into a Monastery of the Cassinenses; Thomas to be a
Priest: and both expecting his answer. Philip touching Morrellus with a staff
he had in his hand, told him, You shall not be a Monk: then turning to Thomas,
Nor you, quoth he, a Priest. And so it proved; for Thomas married, and Peter
Antony died an Ordinary Priest at S. Flora's.

Othonellus Othonellius a Commander came from Modena to Rome, to consult with
some there, about instituting a Nunnery in his own Country, but meeting with
many rubs, at last Germanicus Fidelius brought him to Philip: who, though he
never knew him, yet at first sight said to some Priests that were by; Take
notice of this man, he shall be one of your Fraternity. Then asking him, What
Profession he was of: he answered, a Soldier. You shall not long be a
Soldier, replied he, but a Brother to these here: and laying his hand on him
dismissed him. He was then a Soldier, and Married, having diverse children, both
Boys and Girls; yet after the B. man's death, his Wife, Sons, and most of his
Daughters dying, and the rest going into a Monastery, in the year one thousand
six hundred and nine, he entered into H. Orders, and soon after putting himself
into the Covent of the Scholae piae, as he had lived very virtuously, so he
made a holy end.

In the year One thousand five hundred siventy six, four of the Congregation
went to Millan, upon some business for Of this (to omit others) Cardinal
Taurusius is a sworn witness.
the Oratory: and while they staid there, Philip on the sudden sends for
Taurusius, bidding him, Dispatch and write to them at Millan, to make all have
to Rome presently. Taurusius answered, it was not for certain reasons
convenient, that they should just then return: the H. man replies leave
Disputing, and without demurrs, do as you are bid. Strange! the Letter was no
sooner come to Millan, but the City began to be infected with the Plague, which
raged so sore, that two of those four, though they staid but a very small
while, were scarce able to get to Rome; yet when the Letters were writ, there
was not the least suspicion of Pestilence at Millan.

A certain Priest had a suit in the City about the Title of a Living, and
because he could not carry it against This himself (whose name was Peter Philip
Lazarettus) witnesed upon oath.
his adversary, who overbore him, he intended to Pistol him; upon which
resolution omitting both the saying Mass, and the recital of his Office, he
comes one time to the Church of the Oratory, where beholding Philip he
perceived himself so sensibly attracted by him, that he could not choose but go
to him; Philip, twitching him lightly by the left ear, said; you are tempted,
are you not? I Father, says he, I am; and so violently, that except God
prevent me, I am like to commit a heinous crime. Doubt not, says Philip, you
will be freed of that trouble within these fifteen days. With that the man
startled, and at the time appointed, his Adversary meeting him, said, I yield
you the cause, for he that was my chief Friend is displaced. The Priest admired
at i^, and calling to mind, what Philip had told him, thanked God, for keeping
him from so foul an act.

The like befell Horatius Riccius a Jerusalem Knight, an intimate friend of
Cardinal Frederic Borromeo's. He being much displeased at some Courtiers, that
had touched him somewhat too near in point of Honor, rose very early to walk,
and by chance met Philip, who asked him, whither he went; he answers, to
recreate my mind a little: Philip understanding the reason by Divine
illuminations, takes away the Knight with him, to some other business he had;
but coming too soon, they were fain to tarry there two hours; in which space
the Father falls a reading to himself in a devout Book. The Knight who came out
to walk, chafed extremely, that he should in courtesy be kept there against his
will, when Philip coming to him, bids him; Doubt not: all shall go well; say I
told you so. The Knight hereupon took courage, out of a confidence he had, upon
the H. man's words: and fifteen days after, Cardinal Borromeo, being informed
of the proceedings, discarded them his Court who had wronged him, and in favor
to him, preferred him to be one of the Bed Chamber to Pope Clement the VIII.

Dominicus Rodulphus, a Regular Priest, traveling through Rome from Naples to
Cremona, and hearing of the great sanctity of Philip, repairs to him: so taking
him attending on the hearing Confessions, he salutes him, to whom the H. man,
Go on, whither Duty of Obedience calls you; and there watch for the good of
Souls; and know, in due time you shall be a Bishop: but let me forewarn you of
an eminent danger that awaits you in your journey, which by Gods Blessing, and
the Virgins Aid, you shall escape. So as he went to Cremona, coming to the
Alps, which looked toward Florence, he sunk into a Bog on the sudden, with his
horse under him, where he stuck fast mired up to the throat. In which peril,
those who were by, unable to help him, commended his soul to God, as the manner
is: then Rodulphus, remembering Philips words, craved his assistance; bestirring
him with his hands, and etching out by degrees, till at length he by little and
little crawled half-dead out of that clammy mud: his horse they could scarce
draw forth with the strength of four Oxen. When he came to Cremona, he addicted
himself to the exercise of Piety, and devotion, till the year one thousand six
handred nineteen, in which, as Philip foretold of him, he was elected Bishop of
Auria.

CHAP. VI. He foretells others of their being made Popes and Cardinals.
ONce Peter Aldobrandine, James Abbot Crescentius, and Marcellus Vitelleschius,
with some others were together at the B. man's chamber, who commanded Peter on
the sudden, thus to bespeak his companions. Philip wills me to tell you, I must
shortly be honored with the Title of Illustrissimo, (which was then given to
Cardinals) and that hereafter ye shall hardly have access to me. Peter out of
the reverence he bore to the H. man, did so, yet not without blushing. A while
after, no man suspecting ought, Pope Innocent the IX. dies, Hippolitus
Aldobrandinus being elected Pope, and Peter made a Cardinal with the Title of
Illustrissimo. A little before, Philip had said to him jestingly; See to what
straights I am driven, that must be forced to call you, the Most Illustrious.

John Francis Aldobrandin, General in chief of all the Ecclesiastical
Militia, seeing one time in Philips chamber two Cardinals Escucheons hanging
against the Wall, whose bearing was Two Deaths-heads, he asks what those Deaths
heads with the Cardinals Hats beto ened. They s^gnifie, says he, that when I
am dead, two of my Congregation shall be chosen Cardinals. And indeed after
his decease, Francis Maria Taurusius of Monte Pulciano, and Caesar Baronius of
Sora, Priests of the Congregation of the Oratory, were by Clement the VIII.
dignified with the Purple. Yea twenty years before Philip told Francis Neri as
much, who asking him further, whether Baronius should be Pope, he answered; He
should not. And upon the vacancy of the Sea, by the death of Clement the VIII.
when Baronius was by all salu^ed as Pope, Francis stood stiffly in it, that it
would never be, for Philip had so assured him long before.

In like manner he foretold Hierom Pamphilio of his being Cardinal, as he
himself testified in these words. Going once to the B. man, as he lay sick in
bed, to disburden my conscience to him, he thus spoke to me; You are desirous
to be a Cardinal. I answered; I never had any such thought he replied; Indeed
you shall be one: at which I laughed to my self. And he often with an
asseveration affirmed; You shall certainly be a Cardinal. Thus Hierom. who
long after the Fathers death was advanced to that dignity by Clement the VII.

Innocentius Cardinal de Bubalo avouched this upon oath. The B. Father often
told me I should be chosen one of the Canons of the Vatican, which I, as being
unknown to the Pope, and seeing no liklyhood for me to expect such a
preferment, put off with a jest: and the more he averred it, still I the less
believed it. When lo! in the year One thousand five hundred ninety four, If I
mistake not, about the first of August, Cardinal Aldobrandi^us unexpectedly
comes to me, and tells me the Pope had conferred a Prebendary of S. Peter's that
was vacant on me, at that time neither seeking, nor so much as thinking on it.
Some few days after, as I staid with the B. Father, he seeing me very joyful
upon the obtaining my Canonry, said; These are but petty matters, you shall be
taken into the College of Cardinals, at which I laughing aloud, because it
seemed not only unlikely, but to me impossible, yet Philip daily had it up
still. And when afterward I was by the Divine Providenc^* and the favor of
Clement the VIII. made Cardinal, I perceived the H. man had often presaged this
my advancement unto my Sister Silvia, a Devota in Turris Speculorum: who when I
once lay sick in France, would still confidently say, I should not dye of that
sickness, forasmuch as the B. Philips prediction must be first fulfilled.

Cardinal Francis Diatristano left written in Latin to this purpose. When I
lived in Rome at Pope Clement the Eighths Court being one of his Bedchamber,
and his Gentleman, the Most Illustrious and R. Cardinal Peter A'dobrandin, the
Popes Brothers Son, at that time Governor of the Castle of S. Angelo, took me
with him one day to the famous Church of S: Mary's of the Oratory, and so to
the House. Where after he had visited the Father, the now Blessed Philip Neri,
I was brought in to him; so soon as the Venerable old man beheld me, presently
stepping aside into another Room, he takes out of a Chest a Cardinals red Hat
old and worn, which laughing he puts upon my head, and looking on them who were
by, he said in Italian; O che bell Cardinalino: O what a brave Cardinal he will
make! I not knowing the Illuminations by which he afar off discerned things to
come, blushed, and was a little displeased, that I, because a youth, should thus
be mocked by the Old man, (I confess my folly and infirmity herein) but my own
modesty, the authority of the Person, and the respect due unto the Company,
gave check to my Passion: and not long after, the success hereof confirmed the
action of the Religious Father, and condemned my heat: yea I my self condemn
it, who* now requested thereto, have, to thy honor Most B. Philip, with my own
hand subscribed this relation, and do declare it for true, witness my hand and
seal.

And for Popes; He, as often as the Sea was vacant, still used to hear a Voice,
that distinctly told him, which of This Cardinal Taurusius ( to o^ it others)
testified upon oath.
the Cardinals should be Pope. Insomuch as when Pius the IV. died, about. four
or five. days before a new Pope was created, on the sudden Philip looking
earnestly up to heaven, said, in a kind of Rapt: On Monday we shall have a
Pope: one of his Sons asked him, Who? I will tell you, says he: On Monday
toward evening, the Cardinal of Alexandria shall be elected Pope. Which was
Pius the V. of B. and Glorious Memory, whom long before he had said should be
Pope.

After the death of Pius Quintus, in the vacancy of the Sea again, the foresaid
Penitent, remembering, how the Cardinal of Alexandria was nominated by the H.
man, to be the next Pope, asked him Who should now be Pope: Why, quoth he, whom
do the people talk of? Moronus, says he; It is not Moronus, replied the
Father, but Boncompagno. Who was Gregory XIII. of Pious and Happy Memory.

Again, when Xystus Quintus died, Cardinal Nicholas Sfonderato coming to
Vallicella, the Father sent one to desire, that he would be pleased to tarry
below in the Hall, till he came down to him; for there were with him Pet.
Paulus Cresentius, afterward Cardinal of the H. Church of Rome, Abbot James,
his own Brother, Marcellus Vitelleschius and others. As soon as Philip came
down, before he did any thing else he made them all humbly Kiss the feet of
Sfondrato: a day or two after, the same Cardinal coming to the Oratory again,
Francis de Molaria acquaints Philip that he was come; who asked; Who, the Pope
is it not? for the H. man by Divine Inspiration saw him as it were sitting
already in S. Peter's Chair. And not only when the Sea was void, but even in
Xystus's life time, as Sfondrato was with him in his Chamber, he said to one of
his Sons; Open that Trunk there quickly, and give me out thence the Popes Hat
(being one of Pins the Fifths of Glorious Memory) which when he had taken of
him, he reached forth his hand, to put it upon the Cardinal, saying; Let us
try how well this Pontifical Cap fits your head. And Urban the VII. dying,
Sfondrato stepped up into the Apostolical Chair by the name of Gregory the XIIII.

But strangely remarkable was his Prediction of Cardinal Hippolytus
Aldobrandinus's being Pope: for the said Cardinal being with Augustine
Cardinal of Cusa, in Curtius de Maximis his Gardens, by the Way Septimia,
where Philip by chance was; Curtius coming a little nearer said; Father I would
entreat you to prefer me to the acquaintance of Cardinal Aldobrandine. That I
will, answered Philip; and I tell you further, Aldobrandin shall not die a
Cardinal, And some four months after Innocent the Ninth dying, Hippolitus was
advanced unto the Sea. And which is more yet to be wondered at, he not only
affirmed he should be Pope, but told his Name too,; for speaking to Abbot Maffa
one evening, Aldobrandin, says he, shall be made Pope, and his Name shall be
Clement.

That of Leo the XI. who succeeded Clement the VIII. in the Popedom is also
observable. He was then a Laick, and Ambassador for the Pope to the Great Duke
of Tuscany, whom Philip told openly; You shall be both Cardinal and Pope, but
soon after shall die: comprising a threefold Prediction in those words
concerning him; that he must be Cardinal and Pope and not live long: for he
was Pope but twenty six days. These things although this B. man most evidently
and clearly discerned, yet he uttered them most what in a jesting way: charging
his Sons, at no time to give credit, or very rarely, to such things as these in
regard they so extremely tended to, and opened a gap for, Illusions.

CHAP. VII. He beholds things absent, as if present.
FUrther, this B. man, full of Divine Revelations, beheld things far distant,
as though they had bin near at hand. Once Baronius came to him to Confession
whom he This Cardinal Baronius affirmed upon oath
in no wise would hear, but bid him; Go to the Hospital of Santo Spirito, and
visit the Sick; he answered; that the usual hour of ministering to the Sick was
past. Break off these delays replies the Father, and do your Duty. So he went,
and prying among the Beds of them that were Sick, he found one having a
Crucifix, and a Taper burning by him, as being in the pangs of death, who, by
reason that he came into the Hospital at the hour, when the Confessor of the
place had newly performed his office, and was gone, lay there without having
made his Confession. Baronius, coming nearer, demanded, whether he had
confessed his sins? he answered No. Thereupon he took care for a Confessor to
come and hear his Confession, give him the H. Eucharist, and administer unto
him what was requisite; which was no sooner done, but he departed: Baronius
returning and acquainting Philip with what happened, says He, Caesar, hence
forward learn more to prize the Virtue of Obedience.

Taurusius came once to Confession to him, who asked him; Ho you, what is become
of that honest and virtuous This Card. Fr. Maria T^urusius himself avouched
upon oath.
woman? how long is it since you saw her? Make have quickly, for I am much
troubled for the saving of her Soul. She was ^ very diligent and careful
Attendant on the Hospital of S. James of the Incurabili. Away ran Taurusius,
and finds the Woman with a Cross at her Beds-hed, breathing her last: whom,
what by his Prayers, and Exhortations, he greatly relieved in that her last
Agony. The like befell a certain Commander, to whom Philip dispatched some to
look him out, who found him a drawing on, and were assistant to him in his last
Conflict.

As Antony Fantinio was going to Vallicella one time, something happened to him by
the way, for which Philip chid him shrewdly, so soon as he came home; telling
him the whole carriage of the business, and the particular circumstances. At
which he was exceedingly appalled, as being confident, Philip could no ways
come to the knowledge thereof, but by Divine Inspiration, both because none saw
what was done, and likewise because he could not possibly, in so short space of
time, have learnt so large a story from any ones Relation.

Once the Servant of God was going along with his Scholars, among whom was
Marcellus Ferrius, who attests this. As he went, on a sudden the Spirit excited
him, he put his hand to his mouth, and asked Ferrius; What Guests were those
you entertained at your house of late? He told them who they were: Take heed,
says he, for they came to do so^^ outrage, and except you remedy it speedily,
there will murder ensue. Marcellus looked pale at that, and hastening home,
narrowly sifts into their counsels, and discovers it to be as Philip certifyed
him, so rendering thanks to God, wisely dismissed them, and secured his house.

Paulus Recuperatus Referendary of both Seals, had spoken privately over night
with a Residentiary of S Peter's about business, who going next morning to
Philip to S. Hieroms on some other occasions, He immediately repeated the whole
discourse, word for word, that had passed between them the evening before.
Paul, admiring greatly at it, asked the Residentiary at his next meeting, if he
had broke the business to any, which the day before they had privately
conferred on. He said No: whereupon Paul concluded the H. man had notice
thereupon by some Revelation.

Mutius Achilleus, of S. Severines, returning from the City into his Country,
inclined to the believing Dreams, and Visions, and began too greedily to affect
spiritual Favors, and sensible devotions, so that, though he had neither writ
of it at any time to the Father, nor acquainted any therewith, Philip
notwithstanding, after a friendly and Fatherly sort, counsels him by Letter, to
cease his ambition unto that Spiritual Dotage, rather than Delight; it being
possible, that the Devil might delude him, and likely, he thereby incurr some
notable inconvenience to his health: advising him, by all means to forbear a
certain usage he had lately taken up, not so much out of lewdness, as
indiscretion; adding, that such as aimed at perfection, must especially beware
of those Rocks. All which, Achilleus alleges upon oath, could not be known to
him but by some supernatural means.

John Baptist Lambert, understanding by letters from his Father, that his Uncle
died at Messana, having an estate of some Forty thousand Crowns, which he had
often promised to leave him, hereupon repaires to Philip; and after his
confession, tells him in short his business, desiring his leave, that he might
go to Messana. At which, the Servant of God catching him by one ear, pulled his
head into his bosom, where he held him awhile, then letting him go again, with
a cheerful aspect, fixing his eyes on him, said: Be not troubled, for you
shall not need to go hence, your Uncle is well again; and will write to you by
the first, and with his good wishes, send you a token of his love. All which
came to pass accordingly.

Not unlike hereto was that which befell John Atrina of Marsico, who receiving
letters of his Mothers death, whom he continually commended to Philips prayers,
for grief scarce able to speak; For shame away, says Philip, your mother is
well. And soon after he had news, she was in health.

Julius Savera one of the Bothers of the Congregation came one time to him to
Confession, and as he was in the way, letters were brought him signifying his
Mother was dead, though he had not heard word of her being sick. Having read
his letter he comes to Philip, who before ever he informed him of ought, taking
his cap off, puts it on his head and hangs the Rosary of our Lady about his
neck; wishing him not to mourn for his Mother; For she is gone to heaven
before, says he, and therefore you should rather rejoice, then give way to a
vain sorrow. Savera was amazed hereat, being confident, that he could not know
this, but by Inspiration from heaven; which he the less questioned, in that he
held him to be a Holy man: so that he not only refrained weeping, but
exceedingly joyed, that his Mother was received into the number of the Saints.

And here it will not be impertinent, before the close of this chapter, to
recite a pleasant passage, not unlike that related by the Great S. Gregory, in
his Second Book of Dialogues. Marcellus Vitelleschius, heretofore mentioned,
had sent Philip two Bottles of Orenge-flower water. But the servant that
brought them, either by mischance or carelessness, broke one of them, and gives
Philip the other, who smilingly said to him, Ho you have drunk up one of the
two as you came, have you not? At which he blushed, and having no other answer
ready, confessed how it was. When he came home, he asked His Master, whether he
had before hand acquainted Philip with the sending those Pots to him; Marcellus
said, No: so telling him what had happened, they both concluded, it must needs be
made known to him from above.

CHAP. VIII. He understands men's Thoughts.
BUt he grew so famous for discerning the innermost Thoughts of the Heart, that
he became a Wonder and a Prodigy to all. For he could so subtly penetrate Of
this (besides the oaths of the Cardinals Fred. Boromeo, Fr. Maria Taurusins,
and Caesar Baronius) are threescore witnesses upon oath persons of known
integrity.
into the mind of his, that he exactly knew not only whether, and how long,
they had prayed, but even what sins, and how often, they had committed in places
most secret and retired: which they were so well acquainted with, that as often
as their consciences accused them, they were not able to endure his fight: on
the contrary, the innocent thought themselves in Paradise. So that if at any
time they talked misbeseemingly, they would straight say one to another; Away
with this discourse; for the Father knows all. And himself, upon occasion, of
times affirmed, that he could tell when his served God heartily or
dissemblingly. For example.

Raphuel Lupus, a Roman youth, one very much estranged from the way of Virtue,
was by his Friend once brought to S. Hieroms to the Sermons: which being ended,
he at last has him to Philip, that so this Wolf might become a Lamb, telling
him; This young man, Father, intends to frequent the Oratory more; but would
first disburden his Conscience of his sins. At which Raphaell grew extremely
enraged at his companion, as being so far from any intention of confessing,
that he was most averse from it. But that he might not displease his Friend,
nor render himself suspected for his lewdness, he pretends a kind of Feigned
Confession to the Father; who holding his head gently betwixt his hands, as his
manner was, told him, I understand by Revelation from the H. Ghost, that you
have hitherto made a false Confession of all you have said. Whereat the young
man, being cut to the heart, within a while after made an entire Confession of
his whole life to him; and by his directions entering himself into a Religious
house piously lived and died there.

Once there (...) woman to him to Confession, He looking on (...) said; Bethink
your self seriously of your sins. She going aside a while, and making a strict
scrutiny in her conscience, having called to mind diverse sins, returns to,
Philip, and confessed all, adding, For as much as you Father, know the most
inward thoughts of the heart, I beseech you tell me, whether I have done any
thing else, which I should confess. He replied, Be at rest, for there is
nothing more. From that time she began to doubt, whether really or
conjecturally only he discovered such things: so diverse days after, coming
again to him though she had mentioned nothing of her doubt to any, says he,
Hold thy peace, for I will recount thy faults my self: and named them all
particularly to her, as she had intended to relate them. So being quit of that
temptation, she ever after honored him as a Prophet.

A Noble Roman, whose most intimate thoughts Philip had sundry times detected,
asking him once to help him, if he omitted ought in his Confession, the H. man
answered; Be of good cheer, for as often as you leave out any weighty matter,
either through defect of Memory, or ignorance, besure God will make it known to
me.

Another Noble man of Rome likewise, made his General Confession to Philip,
and returned, as the custom is, to be absolved after the usual Form, He asked
him, Have not you committed such an offense? Yes quoth he. Why then did you not
reveall it? said he: I had thought I had confessed it before. Know for certain,
replied the H man, you never informed your Confessor of this fault. And
searching more diligently, he remembered, he had never disclosed it to any.

Joseph Zerlius, a famous (...), who entered the Congregation in his old age,
an^ there died, affirms that the B. Father has not only told him his
thoughts already past, but told him likewise, what he should afterward
imagine; saying, that none knew the secrets of his heart, next God himself,
more than Philip.

Theus Guerrius of Siena, a man of singular piety, coming to Rome about
business was hospitably entertained by This Guerrius witnessed upon oath.
the Fathers of the Congregation, toward Evening he spied Philip playing
somewhat merrily with certain Prelates and laughing, when thinking such
behavior to argue too childish levity, he was tempted to call in question,
whether he were in reallity one of such sanctity, as the common people
surmised. So coming next Morning to him to Confession, he concealed his former
conceit he had of him; to whom he, Take heed O Theus, that you dissemble not
your Confession, or for secular ends conceal the very least offense: and why
did you not confess, that Yester evening you entert ained ill thoughts of me?
Theus stranged at it, confessed it, and reverencing his Holiness, had a high
esteem of him.

A poor Woman came to him once, as he was hearing Confessions in S. Hieroms,
and kneeling down feigned a kind of Confession, that she might get one of the
Alms-loaves. But Philip bid her, Away, for you shall have no bread given you:
and would not take her Confession. For the Prudent man was exceeding Vigilant,
lest any for temporal advantages and respects should abuse or profane the H.
Sacaments. Thence was it, that he did not ordinarily give Alms to Penitents
himself, especially when he sat in the Chair ^^ Penance, but privately
furnished some Religion Persons with moneys, who, as need required, supplied
their wants, they not knowing whence.

Hector Modius was used to leave out of his Confession unchaste thoughts, in
suppressing whereof he was too neglective, This Hector Modius witnesses upon
oath.
whereat the H. man was much displeased. So coming one time to Confession, and
as he had formerly done, burying them in silence, says Philip; Why do you not
confess such and such impure cogitations? and which is worse to be endured, you
have not hitherto so much as accused your self as guilty herein. He wondering
and repenting of his fault, became more careful for the future.

A certain Youth, being one night assailed with strong temptations which he
resisted not as he ought was in the Morning ashamed to go to the Father, so
deferred his Confession to some other time: but coming to the Oratory This was
confirmed by the person himself.
after dinner, and skulking close in a corner, Philip seeing him called him,
and asked Why he avoided him: then taking him aside, after he had mildly
rebuked him, reckons up in order all his thoughts the night past, making him
thereby both sorry and ashamed.

Another confessing to Philip smothered out of mere shame some notorious
crimes, that none knew of; when he had done his Confession says he to him,
Wherefore have thou lied to the H. Ghost? rehearsing particularly all his sins,
which he craftily had hid from him. Whereupon he acknowledging his Sacrilegious
offense, began bitterly to bewail, and in time made a General confession of
the actions of his whole Life.

Once a Priest came to him to Confession, who being conscious of a very heinous
crime, as he kneeled down, intending to express his sin, was taken with such a
trembling, that he could not speak a word: the Father asked why he was silent;
I am ashamed, said he, to utter the Villainy, I have committed. The H. man then
taking him by the hand, bid him; Fear not, I will repeat your fact for you: and
declared to him the whole passage, as it was, and he went on Cheerfully, the
rest of his Confession.

The same befell another, who, for very shame, betook him to another Confessor,
but at length returning to discover what remained, said Philip to him, Son you
have committed a fault which you would not have me know, and have disclosed it
to another Confessor, but God has manifested it all to me. At which the
Penitent was struck with great remorse, acknowledging it was true and with the
tears of unfeigned Repentance, washed off the stains of his polluted
Conscience. But what needs any more? huge numbers might be produced, that out
of bashfulness concealing their offenses, and temptations, at times of
Confession, were by him convicted thereof. But we go on.

Vincentius Begerius went forth one day, not thinking at al of a Religious
life, but as he was going, perceiving himself inwardly moved to enter into the
Order of the Dominicans, he repairs to the Monastery of S. This Begerius
himself witnessed upon Oath.
Mary's supra Minervam, and there conferred with the Master of the Novices
about his Call. He bid him; Go to Father Philip Neri at S. Hierom's, and impart
to him all you have told me: and if he say, you are called to this kind of
life, come again to me and I will take all care, to make you master of your
wishes. Vincentius presently makes such have thither, that none could prevent
him. Philip, who was then talking to another, as soon as he saw him; willed him
to stay a while, for I know, said he, what your business is. When he had
dispatched what he was about, coming up to him, he gently plucked him by the
hair and by the ear, saying, I know well enough, you were sent to me from the
Master of the Novices, to have my opinion, whether 'twere best for you to enter
into some Religious Order or no: therefore tell him from me, that your Call
thereunto was from God, He in a great wonder returns to the Monastery, and
relates the Story to the Master; adding, how he had found a man, that* as
Christ to the Samaritan woman, had discovered to him welnigh all the privacies
of his heart. At which he smiling, and crossing him on the forehead, says, I
well understood the man I sent you to. And not long after, in the presence of
Philip, he took the habit of a Regular, and was named Hierom: the Master of the
Novices afterward assuring him, that he had never dealt with the B. man
concerning him, but that he came to know it all from above.

Dominicus Scopa, going to Rome with a purpose to become a Clerk Regular, at
the persuasion of Taurusius, consulted Philip; who plainly told him he should
without delay put himself into that Order, and as he was speaking on, whispers
in his car; As touching the obstacle you stick at, take no care, for when once
you are admitted into their Religion, it shall trouble you no more. Dominicus
stood amazed to see one discover to him the secrets of his own breasts; and
which was more, foretell, that what he thought an impediment, should prove none
at all: which yet fell out punctually as the B. man had said.

Blasius B^ttus a Clarke Regular, being for above a year perplexed with certain
scruples in mind, and having often prayed God to free him of them, chastising
his Body with scourgings by direction of his Conf^ssor, and yet finding no ease
at all, at length determined to go to Philip, whom, b^ing then busy, he
expected, walking in the Court. Blasius had not walked above three or four
turns, but Philip, before ever he spoke word, told him, I understand what you
come about, do as your Confessor bid you, and that is enough. He departed
silent, and as he returned was discharged of all that perplexity of his mind,
to the joy and wonder of his heart.

Lodovic Torres, Archbishop of Mount-Royal, and Cardinal of the H. Church of
Rome, being then but young, yet very well acquainted with Philip, seeing his
Cloak torn one time, meant to bestow a new one on him, so taking a sum of money
with him, he goes to S. Hieroms, and it being Sermon-time in the Oratory, staid
till the Sermons were ended; which done Philip knowing beforehand what Lewis
had designed, brings him into his Chamber, and unlocking a Press; Look, says
he, I want none of your cloths. Whereat he was surprised with wonder, as having
made none privy to his purpose: and being afterward Cardinal, was wont to
recite this passage in his discourse, as an argument, that Philip could dive
into the most reserved thoughts.

Claudius Neri a Roman was so distracted with some anxious cares, that for the
trouble thereof he was forced to omit many works of Piety, contrary to his own
inclinations, and even to forbear the H. Eucharist; and intending diverse times
to acquaint Philip herewith, yet he was fearful and durst not. But visiting him
once, as he lay sick, after a great deal of discourse, Philip asked him; what
was that you meant to tell me? nothing, says Claudius; but the H. man still
urging him to a Confession, and he still denying it, at last Philip taking This
Claudius, his Wife, and Children, all affirmed upon oath.
upon him a third person, continued his speech thus; There was a man, whom I am
well accquainted with, that was much infested with cares: and so began by a
fiction of the Person to reckon up all the grievances which molested Claudius;
upon which he not only perceived that Philip meant him, but for that he applied
a Remedy suitable to his Sore, he accordingly making use thereof, was ever after
rid of the like vexation.

Another such purpose of his also Philip discovered to him. He had a mind to
place his Daughter with the Nuns of Turris Speculorum: but was loath to make his
intentions known to the B. Father, for that the Maid seemed unwilling thereto.
Philip understanding by Revelation his Penitents desire, without his knowledge
procured his Daughters admission among the Nuns, and obtained likewise of
Almighty God, that she changing her mind most contentedly put her self into
that House.

Francis de Rusticis a Noble man rested not all night for musing how he might
compound a certain difference with his Sisters Husband, and being minded to
consult with Philip about it, the Good man said, as soon as ever he saw him; I
know what you would, come again two days hence, He did so, and found the
business transacted, and concluded of according to his wish, having neither
spoken of it to Philip, nor any else.

Joh. Andre. Pomius Lucatellus of Bononia, Priest, a Divine of much account,
read often in Philips hearing Books of School-questions, and as he read, the
Father would many times tell him; Lucatellus, thy mind is upon something else
while thou art reading, and such and such things distract you; naming them to
him; so that the man for very astonishment had like several times to have gone
beside himself.

Constantia Draco, as the H. man. came to comfort her in her Widow-hood,
thought with her self; This decrepit old man lives, when as my Husband died a
young man. He smiling, as apprehending what she imagined, said; Indeed I am
alive, who have lived to old age, and your Husband is gone in the flower of his
youth. The woman wondering, that he should utter the same words, she had been
thinking on.

The same person meant to attempt a matter, which she imparted to none, but
afterward changed resolution: and coming to the Servant of God to Confession;
Why, quoth he; are you so soon gone back from your purposes? The woman was
amazed, which way he could enter into her secret imaginations, and reverenced
him still more and more.

A Nun in the Monastery of S. Martha, named Scholastica Gazia, had an earnest
desire to open her mind to Philip, being at the Grate, who before, ever she
spoke word to him about it, said, How do thou Scholastica? how do thou?
Paradise is undoubtedly thine, Nay ^eplied she, I fear the contrary, for in my
own apprehension I am already consigned unto Damnation. Yea, said Philip,
Paradise is sure thine own: which I thus prove. Pray tell me; for whom did
Christ dy^? For sinners, said she; And what are you? A sinner, quoth she.
Therefore, inferred he, repenting of your sins, Paradise is yours, it is yours.
Upon which argument of his she regained her former Peace, and was disturbed no
more with the like fears. Nay she thought she always heard that expression of
confidence sounding in her ears, Paradise is thine, it is thine.

Two other Nuns likewise in the same Monastery the Servant of God helped by
this means. Discovering to one a secret pertaining to the direction of her
Soul, whom he with good words encouraged: to the other an impetuous temptation
which happened before her entering the House, whom he antidoted against the fury
of it, for the time to come.

Before the Constitutions of the Council of Trent were in full force, a
certain young man of some sixteen years of age, meets the Father, in the habit
of a Laick, his name was Thomas a sancto Geminiano. Philip looking wistly on
him said, Pray tell me are not you a Priest? At that he wondered, confesing he
was, and briefly told him on what occasion he was made Priest, his kindred
compelling him thereto by force, that so they might get to themselves the
inheritance, amounting to Six thousand Crowns. Philip commiserating his ill
hap, took care both to have him well taught in point of learning, and made his
friends allow him a constant annual Provision: and after a certain time sent
him into his own Country abundantly well satisfied. He afterward told
Taurusius that he knew, him to be a Priest, because he saw the Sacerdotall
Character shining in his forehead.

Now that it may appear, what has been hitherto said, was rather sparingly
mentioned, than with design of amplifying ought; it will be worth the while to
view the Testimonies avouched by sworn Witnesses before Judges. The first is of
Cardinal Frideric Borromeo, in these words. Philip was a man so famous for his
discerning secrets, that at first sight he could tell, who had passed over from
a state of sin to Grace; and again, who had fallen from Grace to sin: insomuch
as he once said to one that came to him, Son you have not a good look. He
straight withdrew himself, and exercising some Acts of Contrition, returned to
Philip again, who eying him said; I since you went hence you have betterd your
look.

Cardinal Taurusius says: diverse times Philip seeing me would nam^ me the
sins that lay hid in my heart, before ever I disclosed them to him, saying,
Son, you have been in such a danger, or have fallen into such or such a sin.

Cardinal Octavius Paravicinus thus: I can witness upon my own frequent
experience, how miraculously Philip would enter into the thoughts of standers
by, having admired with my self, which way he should come to know the inward
conceptions of my mind, which I remember I have heard, has befallen diverse
others.

Cardinal Hieron. Pamphilio thus: Being on a time desirous to reveal to the B.
Father a purpose which I had kept from the knowledge of any; he taking me by
the hand in the Vestry before ever I spoke of it, said, I am willing we
dispatch that business. And repeats to me beforehand, what I came to inform him
of, at which I stood amazed. Besides as often as I came to the Servant of God to
Confession, he understood at first glance, what I had to say and sometimes
inverting the Order, changed parts with me, He being the speaker, I the hearer.

Cardinal Pet. Paul. Crescentius affirms: That Philip could penetrate into the
very thought of the heart my own experience confirms to me, since he has
manifested things to me, which no man could possibly know besides my self, the
same have many others asserted too.

Marcellus Vitelleschius has left upon record thus: As I was once in
Confession, it chanced, I felt some difficulty, I know not how, In the
mentioning some sins; whereupon he, before I had expressed them, questions me
particularly about them: as he did often. And whenever I was troubled with
scruples in Conscience, if he but looked pleasantly upon me, I was straight rid
of them all. Nay if any thing, either through ignorance or inadvertency, much
disquieted my mind, I was sure to have all discovered to me by him.

Paulus Magius says the same: it fell out that as I went to the Good man to
Confession, he would say Before hand to me sometimes, Son you have committed
this or that offense. And I was many times possessed with admiration, because
none was able to acquaint him with it.

Marcellus Ferrius has these words: As I was disburdening my Conscience in
Confession to Philip, he fixed his eyes steadily upon me, and related to me in
order, as though he had ^ayen in my bosom, all the sins I had done. And as often
as he laid his hand on my head, either giving me Absolution, or dismissing me,
I was abundantly replenished with pious affections.

Mutius Achilleus asserts this which follows: I found indeed upon trial, that
the B. Father was wont to pry into the most secret recesses and every corner
This Mutius himself testified upon Oath.
of the Conscience, and one thing I well remember, which I noted down in my
Book, as then it happened. In the year One thousand five hundred seventy three,
living at Rome, I concealed some sins, which I was ashamed to confess to him.
It chanced on time, that he sharply reprehended a certain old woman in my
hearing, out of Confession, and said, The pains of hell do even wait for thee,
at which I out of a foolish lightness laughed to my self, but he turning to me
said; And you likewise shall be damned in Hell. Which as I suppose, the Wise
man threatened me with, to bring me to repentance, but being young and foolish,
I least minded what most concerned me. And afterward when I came again to
Confession, he openly and distinctly rehearsed the faults I had purposely
before kept close. So acknowledging my heinous crime there in, I resolved for
time to come to lay open ingenuously and sincerely my faults, without the least
dissimulation.

Mar. Anton. Vitelleschius testifyes the like in these words: I often resorted to
the H. man, who declared to me things, which none but God and my self could
possibly know, except by miracle. And as often as I had come to him with any
guilt upon my Soul, I trembled every joint of me, for fear he should discover
any thing openly, that I had done in secret. As on the other side, if no sin
lay upon my Conscience, me thought his presence gladded me like the joys of
Paradise.

Angelus Victorius the Physician added this: When I came to Philip upon
occasion, to desire his prayers for me, he would pleasently forewarn me to
beware of such and such a fault, or business; and would orderly recite the very
sins of my thoughts, which he could not come to know, being none of my
Confessor.

Pet. Focilius affirms: many times has Philip recounted to me all my hidden
thoughts, and the devious inclinations of my heart, and that a^ soon as ever I
came, before I had begun my Confession to him: all which were so reserved and
secret as they were known to none but God and me.

A Woman named Cassandria, Sister to Antonia Raida, whose Virtue is else where
recited, says, I ever accounted Father Philip as a Saint, because coming to
him to Confession, he would reckon up all my private thoughts to me, which it
was impossible for him to know, had he not been a Saint. Yea he has repeated
my Prayers, and related the very drift and scope they tended to.

Antonia de Pecorillis thus: Two years before the B. man died, as he spoke one
time to me, he discovered some of my thoughts, which I had made known to none;
at which I was struck with amazement: this certainly he could never have
received but from heaven, for they were the very secrets of my heart.

Lastly, not to cloy the reader with a huge Mass of Allegations, the whole Book
of the Acts containing the Canonigation of Philip, compiled by public
Authority, is full fraught, with dispositions of witnesses to this purpose:
from whence it may sufficiently be evinced, what Grounds the H. Congregation of
Rites had, to restify of him, that in discerning the hidden thoughts of men's
hearts, non sit inventus similis illi: his like was not found.

CHAP. IX. His Prudence and discerning of Spirits.
HOwever Philip always loved to be thought foolish and ridiculous amongst
others, yet was he always reputed one of the Sages of his Time, not only in
things pertaining to the Soul, but in matters of Government, whether of
Domestique or of State Affairs. Hence was it, that not only people of inferior
rank, but even Persons of highest dignity repaired to him as the Living Oracle
of profound Wisdom. Yea and diverse Popes themselves have highly prized his
counsel and advice. Gregory the XIIII often used his help in weighty and
difficult cases, and in business of great trust; and Clement the VIII reposed
in him so much, that upon his persuasions he reconciled Henry the IIII. King of
France to the Church.

When Leo the XI was Cardinal, he would often in the week come to Philips
Chamber, and spend four or five hours there with him; both to recreate and
revive his spirits, and take counsel of him in matters of great concernment:
who, being a man of singular prudence, and called to give in his Testimony of
Philip, among other Elogies wherewith he honored the H. man, testified his
eminence in this Virtue.

S. Carlo Borromeo, besides that he would tarry with him in his Chamber many
hours together, to conferr of Spiritual matters, such especially as concerned
the Pastoral Office, committed to his care his most Dear Sister, Anna
Borromeo, willing her to observe his counsel and directions in every thing,
being one whom he had on all assays found to be a most Prudent Person.

Claudius Aquavipa, the fifth Superior General of the Society of Jesus, a man
of rare Prudence and sagacity, never came to the H. man, but he staid four or
five hours, conferring both of public and private matters.

Yea the Regulars, and chief of all Orders flocked to him for his advice.
Insomuch that Theius, a Siennois forecited, used to say; I have indeed been
acquainted with many, especially the Regulars, but never met with any, that
gave so safe; so pious, and so prudent counsel as Philip. And which was most
remarkable in him, his Answers seemed to be made casually as it were, and yet
the event sufficiently demonstrated, that they proceeded from the greatest depth
of Reason, and maturity of Judgment.

Hence was it, that in his transactions he was searching, not precipitate;
courteous yet not too flexible; and though by nature very respectfull, yet no
way farther, then was fit, officious. So that being moved once by a Noble man
to mediate with the Pope for him, in a certain business, he plainly answered
that he would not, both for that another might better effect it; as also, lest
he might lose an apportunity of helping others that stood in greater need.

But to come to that branch of Prudence called by the H. Fathers the Discerning
of Spirits; he was so divinely illuminated from above, that he could
distinguish what best conduced to every ones condition. Hereupon it came to
pass, that as many, as by his means or directions turned Religious, for the
most part persevered therein with great approbation; when such as against his
mind be took them to the Cloister, soon returned again to the pompous vanities
of the World. Which was constantly observed by those of the Oratory: they who
with his full consent were admitted into it, persisting gloriously; those few
which were not, being either discarded by the Fathers, or voluntarily forsaking
the Congregation. The like befell such, as he, herein questionless
Prophetical, out of any special motives persuaded to a Secular life; and they
proved eminent amongst others in the practice of Virtue.

Among whom, besides those already named, John Baptist de Fulginio became
famous. Who being very desirous to know, what course of life he should lead,
repaired to Philip, whose piety was much famed throughout the City; so kneeling
down, to make a General Confession, as they term it, of his sins unto him,
Philip takes the paper wherein he had marked down his faults, and tears it,
which he patiently endured: and much admiring the wisdom of the man, ever
after was directed and led by his conduct in all the actions of his life, as if
he had been, as himself said, a mere carkase: neither after made he any more
words, concerning the General Confession. Meanwhile he put up his prayers to
God, that what he pleased to appoint for him, Philip* might discover to him:
and lo! as he was in prayer at S. Bonaventures Church under Mount Quirinall, he
heard a voice bidding him; John Baptist return to Fulginium, return to
Fulginium. At the hearing of which, although he were wont to communicate all
things unto the H. man, yet would he not presently acquaint him with this, lest
he should suspect him to long after his Country. But Philip, who knew all by
Inspiration from God, said to him: I command you, that you return into your own
Country, for thither Christ calls you, yet be in a readiness to come hither,
whenever I shall remand you. Whereupon he travells to his Native soil, where
he made such Progress in Holiness and Virtue, that while he lived he was
commonly termed a Saint.

With no less advantage, both to himself and others, did he detain Caesar
Baronius among the Seculars, when having often desired Philips leave, to enter
into the Order of Capuchins, he could never get his consent; insomuch as some
hearing how the Father opposed it, and diverted him from it, not duly weighing
things were scandalized thereat, that he should discourage any from a Religious
State. But the sequel evidenced how much they were deceived, and how judicious
his caution was: seeing every one knows how renowned for his life and learning
Baronius was in his Secular course; and what incomparable service he did the
Church of God both by his Writings and Example.

He persuaded Franc. Puccius of Palestrina to live a Secular too. For he
contemning the specious vanity and emptiness of the World, was most
passionately desirous to become a Capuchin, so that he minded nothing else day
nor night, and whenever he saw any of that Order, he thought him an Angel. So
advising with Philip, he tells him what he had been designing; You, says
Philip, are not fit for a Religious life; therefore live at Palestrina, where
you are like to be most beneficial. Puccias was not satisfied with this, but
wearied the Good man with continual requests, to procure an answer to his
mind. At last he bad him; Go, but withal know you shall not stay long among
them. The young man posts away to Viterbium, to accomplish his desires, but by
the way fell so desperately ill, that after a tedious languishing sickness he
was fain to return home again; where growing more resolved, and supposing it
ill done of him to return into his Country, he vowed if he recovered, he would
assay once more to put himself into the Capuchins Order. So when he was well
again, he comes to Philip, tells him, he had lately made a Vow; the H. man
cries; God forgive you, did I not foretell you, that a Religious life would not
suit with you? Therefore look you get a dispensation of your Vow, as soon as
may be. He did so, but not resting there, the Father repairing to the General
of that Order, first instructs him what answer to give Puccius, then sends him
to him. The General asks him; what I pray, Good friend, have you vowed our
course of life? I have so, quoth he. But, replied the other, though you have
sworn our Rule, yet we have not sworn to receive you in, therefore go some
whither else, for here is no room for you. At that Puccius was quiet, and
returning to Palestrina, being first made Priest, then Archpriest of that City,
performed such, and so many services tending to the good of Souls, both in his
Country and at Latium, and the Frontiers of Campania: that he was generally
styled the Apostle of those parts.

He prevailed likewise with a Noble young Roman, that came to ask his advice,
about taking a Religious habit, to live quietly at home, saying, Some evil
Spirit would amuse you with these kind of thoughts that he may ruin you and
your whole Family. But I tell you further, you not only shall be none of the
Religious, but in time shall marry. All which to a syllable came to pass,
though out of respect to the party, his name be concealed.

Yea the B. man was so Divinely illuminated in the discerning and determining
each man's condition, that he many times would say to his Sons; Do this, or
that, for this is the will of God: which when Cardinal Fred. Borromeo heard,
he would say, Few or almost none can use this speech, and not be mistaken.
Otherwhiles he was wont to say; you indeed shall persevere, but not he: and the
success in tract of time showed his predictions were true. Two of his, the one
named Francis, the other Ioh. Baptista Saracenus, intended to betake them to S.
Dominic's Order; to whom Philip, John Baptist indeed shall be taken into this
Institution, and there continue: but Francis though be enter upon it, shall ere
a year come about, return to a secular life. And so it happened.

Some of the Fathers had a desire to have a certain Youth admitted into the
Oratory, Philip was unwilling, yet, being desirous to gratify the Society,
permitted him; but a while after, the young man, out of a kind of Levity, left
the House of his own accord.

There were two, whose Confessions the H. man used to hear, the one an Italian,
the other a French man, but the Italian seemed the more devout. Of these Philip
This is delivered in upon oath by four persons.
thus divined: The Italian, that appears so zealous, shall cool in his piety,
but the Frenchman who is flower to spiritual things shall bold out to the last.
And so it was.

Another young man also came sumptuously attired to S. Hieroms to hear the
Sermons, not to gain benefit by the Word of God but to jeer at the Preachers.
Where one time he made such a noise, that he disturbed those that were near
him; who not enduring his sauciness and impudence, spoke to Philip to reprove
him. He smiling said to them; Let him alone, for he will prove a better and
devouter man than any of you. So, when the young man came to understand
himself, he entered into the strictest of the Religious Orders, where persisting
in Holiness, and abounding in Virtues he ended his days.

He had a certain Penitent a Portugues, about 17. years of age, who was well
known to the Cardinal a Monte Politiano, one that had attained to such a
measure of devotion, and that spoke with such a Gust of heavenly matters, that
he made even the most learned This Cardinal Taurusius witnessed upon oath.
stand amazed at him. This man begun to be very zealously affected unto a
Regular life; and though Philip approved not thereof, yet tired with his
uncessant importunity, he became unwillingly willing to his admission. But as
he was putting on his Religious habit, the Servant of God being by went aside a
little, and turning to the Wall wept exceedingly. Taurusins seeing it asked why
he grieved; who answered, that he deplored the Virtues of that young man.
Taurusius then knew not the meaning of those words, but after some revolution
of time plainly perceived it: for the Portuguese did not indeed quite throw of
his Regular habit; but degenerating, and abandoning all piety, spent his days
wandering, becoming the burden of the earth, and a Scandal to all.

Moreover it was so known abroad that Philip excelled in the Gift of
Discerning, that Gregory the XIII desirous to prove a certain Virgin named
Vrsula Benincasa, which came from Naples to Rome, and was in almost continual
Ecstasies (for she was Entranced thrice before the Pope, to whom she had
addressed her self upon business) judged none fitter than Philip for that
purpose. Who at his Holiness's command undertaking it, tried her by severe
injunctions and several afflictions. First debarring her the B. Sacrament;
seeming to slight all her trances and raptures, calling them illusions: then
dealing more rigorously with her, till he had made diverse experiments of her
sincerity. After all which he gives the Pope a very good account of her,
commending to him her virtuous simplicity and innocent conversation. She
afterward returning to Naples, remembering how the B. man had treated her, both
in word and deed was wont to say, that none knew her heart better than Philip.
She died the Sixteenth of January, in the year One thousand six hundred and
sixteen, leaving fresh the memory of her exemplary piety behind her.

He used almost only the experiment of Mortifications, to try whether the
Spirit were of God or no, supposing that where there was not the greatest
demission of mind, there could be no grounds of true religion laid. Alphonsus a
Capuchin surnamed Lupus, an excellent Preacher, and of known Virtue, was to go
into the Pulpit, when on a sudden in comes Philip, who without any Apology or
Preface, as one having Authority, asked; Are you Lupus, that famous Preacher,
who by reason of the airy applause of men, conceit your self above all others?
Are you he that Peacock-like displaying the bravery of your painted tail,
vauntingly boast, you have preached in all the eminentest Assemblies of the
City? and so went on upbraiding him with such bitter language, that those who
were by admired at it. Hereupon prostrating himself on the earth, he with many
tears and great remorse cried; O Father, you worthily admonish, and reprove me
justly. Whom Philip forewith laying away his severity, and clearing up his
countenance, with his wonted affection embraced and kissed, biding him, Go on,
Father, go on, as you have begun, and publish the Gospel of Christ. And when
he had done speaking went his way.

He went once to see a Good woman that had lost her sight, and lay Bedridden,
being highly honored at Rome for her piety. Her the B. man diverse ways makes
trial of, by word and deed, who bore all cheerfully. He to show those that
came with him the rare Virtue of the woman, ere he departed, taking a Priest
that was then present by the ear, bids him kneel down before her, and then
says he to her; This man is possessed by the De vill, and therefore has need be
adjured by the H. Exorcismes: to that end let us pray, that the poor wretch may
be freed. She having paused awhile, kissing the Priests hand that kneeled,
said; This man is not possessed, My Father, but a Priest that said Mass this
Morning, to whose Prayers I humbly betake me. At which Philip departed silent,
not so much as bidding her Farewell.

One Philip of the Third Rule of S. Francis's Order, for his many works of
Charity and austerity of life reputed a man of great Holiness and integrity was
sent to the B. Philip by Cardinal August. Cusanus, at that time Protector of
the Franciscans that he might thoroughly search and examine the Spirit of the
man. When he was come, the H. Father knitting his brows and looking with a
sour aspect on him, as though he scorned him, asked what is he? and straight
calling for his Box in which his small money was kept, bid him, Take as much as
you please He, making as if he would have emptied the Box, took but a half
penny: whereat Philip cried out; Ho sirs, this man has more need of meat, than
money, bring him a Loaf. When he saw the bread come, pretending to have more
mind to that, he bites it before Philip, as though he had been almost famished,
and puts it up into his ^ouch. Then the Father asked him what life he led, and
what prayers he made to God. He chattering his teeth, and knocking his feet
together, answered that he knew not how to make any other Prayers but such.
Philip seeming to take that answer ill, thrust him away in displeasure; who
said at his departure; This Old man has much of the Spirit of Mortification.
And Philip afterward told Cusanus, that he was no contemptible Person.

For his Scholars instruction and information, he was wont to give them many
Precepts and Advices. First he counseled such as were Confessors, not by
violence to guide their Penitents the same course which themselves had taken;
since some Holy exercises are beneficial for one, which to another become
pernicious: for said he, they must not be suffered to try at pleasure what ever
comes into their heads, it being sometimes most advantageous to interdict them
the practices of Devotion, both for relaxing the mind, and to enure them by the
exercise of Mortification, to master their own desires by little and little, if
they affected any thing overmuch. He would not have Penitents for every cause
change their Confessors; as on the otherside, he was offended that Confessors
admitted other Penitents besides their own. For he would not entertain Nerus de
Nigris, one whom he loved exceedingly, for his Penitent, but always remitted
him to his own Confessor, while he was at Rome. He also made Peregrine Altobell
return to his former Confessor again, in whose absence he for a year together
had taken his Confession.

And for preserving peace and union between Man and Wife, and the better
governing of Families, he greatly commended the having but one and the same
Confessor: so that it were done* voluntarily, not out of any motives from fear
or aw, as knowing full well, how free the use of Sacramental Penance ought to
be. For the reclaiming any one fallen, to his former state of piety, he
affirmed no better remedy could be found, than to discover his offense to some
one of approved sanctity that was his confident, it being not impossible, by
this one act of Humility, to repossess himself of his formerly lost Virtue. He
likewise advised Confessors, not to permit such of their Penitents as were
Novices to practice all kind of Penance they perhaps requested; that so they
might proceed with more alacrity in the Service of God, neither overburdened
with multiplicity of Penances to weary them, or make them grow desperate and
careless, and so withdraw their hand from the Plow. He wished Penitents not too
violently to urge their Confessor to yield to them, wherein he was unwilling:
and said, it was very expedient, when they had not the benefit of a Confessor,
to imagine him directing them, and to square their actions, as they conceived
he would enjoin them.

He disliked, that any should whip themselves with Scourges or small Chains, or
do any such thing without acquainting their Confessor: that who so did
otherwise, would either suffer in their health, or likely were seduced with a
spirit of Pride. He would not have Vows made without the advice of Persons
discreet; for fear lest what is lightly promised God, be as lightly recalled.
He could not give way that any of his should leave any Virtuous course of life
they had once chosen; desiring much, that every one should abide in his own
calling: adding that even Secular men might attain the state of Perfection, for
that Trades and Arts did not hinder the acquisition of Virtue. Whereupon though
he sent innumerable companies welnigh to several Orders of the Religious, and
especially to S. Dominic's; insomuch as the Fathers thereof styled him a Second
Dominic: yet was he most pleased to see people Religious in their own houses.
And for this reason, he would hardly consent that such as lived in the Courts
of Nobles, with good example unto others, should depart thence; saying, that a
man to alter from evil to good needed no directions, but he that intended to
ascend from good to better had need of Time, and Counsel, and Prayer.

For the conservation of quiet and concord betwixt Neighbors and Friends, he
advised never to speak of men's natural defects: as also in admonishing
Princes, or Great Personages, not to proceed directly; but in the third person
still, so tempering the reprehension as, Nathan to David. He likewise
counseled, that if any had received discourtesies or affronts by Persons of
Quality, they should not bewray any signs of displeasure, but look affably as
though there had passed nothing of discontent between them; that by this means
all jealousies and surmisings of malice and revenge might be removed. He wished
women to tarry at home, not to go much abroad, nor gadde to other folks
houses; but upon necessity, and urgent occasions. So that one time as he was
highly extolling Martha Spoletana, a woman of that Age remarked for her holy
conversation, some of his asked him, Why he so much commended that Woman?
Because, said he, manum suam misitad fortia, and digiti ejus apprehenderunt
fusum: She lays her hauds to the Spindle, and her fingers take hold of the
Distaff. This woman was a great honourer of Philip, kneeling and prostrating
her self at his feet, as often as she came to Rome; and resorted to him: having
that Privilege granted her by God, to discern the Beauty of the Soul: and
seeing the brightness of this B. man's Soul, she was ravished therewith into an
Extaticall joy and delight. Much more to this effect was He wont to allege,
which to avoid prolixity, is here omitted.

CHAP. X. He freeth Persons Possessed by the Devil.
THough Philip were not very forward to make use of Exorcisms, yet he obtained
of Our Lord that singular Favor, as by his Prayers and commands devils were
cast out.

Testified upon oath by Car. Tarugi and diverse others.
A Maid named Katherine was brought from Campania to Rome, that by His means
she might be released from the Devil. For she spoke both Greek and Latin, as
though she had been brought up in an Academy, whereas she was ignorant and
illiterate, without the least smattering of learning: besides she had such an
incredible strength, that many stout men at once were scarce able to master
her. By help also of the Devil she many times foresaw at what hour Philip would
send to adjure her, saying, That Priest has now sent one to bring me by force
to him: and presently ran away, and hid her self in the secretest by-places of
the honse. Her did Philip free of those unclean Spirits, by only Praying to God
for her, at S. John's Church of the Florentines, and returned her safe again to
her Parents.

Lucretia Cotta, a Roman, being bewitched, was so tormented by the Devil for
eight years, that the Balls of her eyes were drawn down to her Nose and she
almost wholly deprived of her sight; besides that she had such a pain at her
heart, that the Curate of the place, finding her sometimes half-dead, meant to
anoint her with the Holy Oil: otherwhiles she felt her Bowels so torn and
wrung, attended with such a trembling; that many women lying upon her breast
could not stop the motion thereof. In these tortures of body and mind she could
neither eat, nor sleep, nor stand, nor walk at all, but as she was held up
betwixt two. At last, brought to this extremity of misery, she repairs to
Philip, who pitying her condition bids her kneel down, and applies one hand to
her heart, the other to her eyes, in this sort continuing his Prayer the space
of half an hour. Which being ended, she was released of her pain at the heart.
A while after coming to Philip, much troubled still in her eyes, for that she
could not use them about Women's works being her self poor, he said to her:
Doubt not, for by the grace of God your eyes shall he well again. And, laying
his hands on her eyes, he prayed for a quarter of an hour: then asked her, How
she did? she cries out; Alas Father, you have made me quite blind. At that he
laughed; saying, Be not afraid, for you shall not go away without your sight.
About an hour after, the Woman perceived a kind of filme fall from her eyes,
and straight regained her sight, never afterward being ill of her eyes; yea
she could thread a Needle, and perform the finest Seamsters work.

In the Church of the H. Cross of Jerusalem, a Woman, descended of a Noble
House in Germany, was to be adjured by the Exorcismes of the Church, Philip
being present. And as the Wood of the H. Cross with other Relics were shown
the party possessed, she began to be so troubled with Convulsions, that they
said, now the Devil was gone; but says Philip; Know ye, that the Woman is
still possessed with the Devil, chiefly for that one of them, who are here,
does not believe. The H. man approaching nearer constrained the Fiend to
certify him, what day he would be gone from that Body: which when he had set
according to Philips, appointment, he the very day that was prescribed departed
from the woman, at the command of the H. man, in the Church of S. Maria ad
Martyrs.

He went another time to S. John Lateran's, where, as the custom is, the Heads
of the H. Apostles Peter, and Paul were shown to the people: and the Body of
the Church being filled with the confluence of such as flocked thither, on the
sudden a Woman, whom those Sacred Relics had provoked cries out aloud. Philip
perceiving her moved by the Devil, catching her by the hair, in derision of
Satan spit on her, saying; Ho, do you know me? Would I did not, replied she;
immediately falling into a swoon, was perfectly quiet of all annoyance from the
Devil. But Philip, seeing the people coming in apace to him, instantly skipped
a way, thereby to decline all popular applause.

Moreover the Servant of God had such authority over the Devils, that if the
possessed were by them hindered from the Sacrament of Penance, or receiveing the
Eucharist, he could so master them, that they should no further retard them
from such holy Duties. Once a Women of the Capuchins Order came to the Church
at Vallicella with some others, her Country-Woman; and as she approached to
participate of the B. Sacrament, the Devil so disturbed her, that she was not
able to receive it, when it was reached forth to her. At which the B. Father,
who from the Seat of Confession had observed it, coming nigher laid his hand
on her head, and she presently received it without any difficulty.

There happened another like example. Two poor old Women came one day to the
Oratory, one of them asking to speak with Philip. The Sacrist answered, He was
old and feeble, and could not come down so low; Pray, call Him; said she again;
for this woman my Companion is troubled with an evil Spirit: and I would fain
have her make her Confession to that Holy Priest. The Sacrist again refused,
she redoubles her requests and reinforces her suit again, till at last she
prevailed with him to go, who relating, what had passed, to Philip; he bid,
Turn her out; for what have I to do with them that are Possessed? Yet afterward
pitying her, went down into the Church to her; the Woman, as soon as ever she
saw him, shook, and was unwilling to come nigh him, but as she was brought by
force; to whom the Father only said in a still Voice; Woman kneel: she quietly
kneeled down and confessed her sins. After that she received the H. Communion
of him: and thenceforward came often to him, and devoutly received the
Sacraments of Penance, and the Eucharist, without the least molestation from
the Devil.

But the proud fiend, unable to bear this Vassalage unto the H. man, bewrayed
his rage and madness against him sundry ways, whenever he was either
commanded to come forth, or be silent. Joh. Anton. Luccius at Philips
appointment had adjured one that was possessed, and, in scorn to the foul spirit,
scourged her sharply; which mockery so offended him, that he appears to Philip
that night in a black and hideous shape, threatening to mischief him; but, when
he could not hurt him, went away enraged, filling his Chamber with most a
stinking Vapor.

Besides, the Wicked spirit could not abide, that, when Philip was sent for, he
should depute another to the Exorcisme, counting himself much undervalued
thereby. Thereupon the Servant of Christ sending a Priest one time to adjure a
Maid that was possessed, and he doing it accordingly; when the Priest came home,
as he was knocking up a nail in the Wall, the Devil overturned the stool he
stood upon with such a force, as had like to have cost him his life; and at the
same instant spoke out of the mouth of the Maid, and said, I thought I had
killed him.

But though God bestowed on him this prerogative of dispossessing Devils, yet
he seldom, except upon necessity, would undertake that employment, affirming
that many times those who seemed possessed by the Devil were not so indeed:
adding, that these kind of fits proceeded oftimes from nature; as from the
excess of Melancholy, or distemper of the Brain, or such like causes. And in
Women frequently from infirmities peculiar to them, and sometimes
counterfeited, for certain reasons and ends they purpose to themselves.

For example, once he was sent for to a Maid, that was thought to be possessed by
them that lived with her; for she would run up and down a nights, and roar out,
break the earthen Vessels, and throw the household stuff about: He looking on
her, and finding her not possessed; but transported with strong and corrupt
affections, told her Brother: Would you have your Sister cured of this disease?
whenever she is thus mad hereafter tame her with whipping. He did so, and she
soon left playing her pranks.

Another time a young Wench was in like manner brought to him, who dissembled:
as soon as Philip saw her, he told her Parents; This Maid is not possessed, but
fains her self so. And so it proved in the conclusion, for when she was married
she left her counterfeiting.

It chanced much about the same time, that another Woman named Sidera, whose
friends thought her possessed, was removed from Sabini to Rome, that by the
visiting those Holy places, and by the Exorcismes of Holy men she might be
regained from the Devils power. So her friends appointed to have her one day to
S. Peter's Church; that she might be present at the Solemn Benediction of the
Pope; but she stealling away privately flung her self headlong into a Well,
whence the people of the house took her out, without any harm, bringing her
safe to S. Peter's, and back again. Many Priests had often Exorciz'd, and torn her
flesh with scourgings, almost suffocating her with continual somentations and
perfumes, but nothing succeeding, she was at last had to Philip, who looking
upon her, and praying to God, said; This woman is not possessed, but Lunatique:
therefore use her gently, and do not torture the poor wretch with Exorcismes.
They followed his directions, and conveyed her home again: who continued a kind
of Idiot ever after, as long as she lived, and though she did not rave so much
afterward, yet she doted still at certain times. Hereupon the Father advised
his Sons, not to believe too hastily that people were Possessed, and that, except
in extreme necessity, they should forbear Exorcizing, for many and great
inconveniences that usually ensue thereon.

CHAP. XI. He appears to Persons far remote from him.
THis favor also was by the Divine Donor conferred on the H. man, that, whilst
he lived hereupon Earth, he appeared in several places to them that were
absent, and remote.

A certain P^^est of the Congregation, that dwelt at Vallicella was afraid of
incurring the hazard of a sin, in some kind of employment enjoined him by
Philip, then This the Priest himself witnessed upon oath.
living at S* Hieroms. And being one night much troubled at it, on a sudden he
heard his Chamber Door open, which was bolted on the inside, and presently
beheld the B. Father, who asked him, How he did? not well, quoth he. Philip,
laying his hand on his Breast and crossing him, said, as his manner was; Doubt
not, and so departed. The Priest immediately took courage at it, and became
cheerful, ever after unmolested in that matter; and in the Morning, when he
rose found his Chamber Door fast shut, as if none at all had ever come in.

One of his Sons being in suspense, whether he had best pass over to Naples or
no, consulted with the Father, who wishing him, by no means to go for he would
be in danger either of being taken Prisoner by the Turks, or drowned. But the
young man slighting the Old man's advice shipped himself: by and by the Turks
board the Vessel in which he was bound, and diverse of the Passengers, for
their own safety, threw themselves into the Sea; he following their example did
so too. When being not able to swim, and seeing himself in apparent danger of
death, he remembered what Philip had for ewarned him of: and cries out,
beseeching him to deliver him from that so imminent peril, and anon the B. man
appears to him on the waters, and calling him, bid him, Doubt not, so taking
him by the hair of the head, brought him safe a shore.

An old man, one of his Scholars, was coming out of Egypt into Italy, and as he
crossed the Sea, two Turkish Galleys surprised the ship he was in, and bound
him in chains; who betaking him to his Prayers, with a holy affiance besought
God, for the merits of his Confessor, Father Philip, that he would be pleased
to deliver him from those Pirates. And the same instant he thought he saw the
H. man saying after his usual manner; Doubt not, you shall certainly be loosed
of your Bonds. He had no sooner done praying, but some of them told the Master
of the Gally, they thought it better to release the old infirm man, than detain
him almost dead already. The Master pitying the poor creature freed him
straight: who coming to Rome was informed, that at the same time when he was
taken Prisoner at Sea, and in Prayer, the H. man said; Let us pray for N. who
is now in great peril of Slavery.

A Noble Roman Lady, being very angry with her Husband, in so much as she would
not speak to him, and for the same reason abstained from the Sacrament of
Penance; Her self testified this upon o^th.
about three days after toward Morning felt a blow given her, between sleeping
and waking, at which starting she hears Philip saying to her; Ho you? how long
shall anger possess you? Whereat she trembled, and forthwith rising and
acknowledging her fault, goes to S. Hieroms Church, where she relates the whole
proceeding to the B. man, who dissembling the matter gave her never a word.

Once he enjoined Lucretia, Wife of Joh. Animuccius, a Woman of singular Piety,
to rise at a certain hour of the night to Meditation, who ever and anon
favoring her self slept out her Prayertime, hereupon he chid her, saying,
Unless you amend this fault, I will raise you a nights her after to your
Prayers. And so it came to pass; for whenever she overslept her time, she
heard the B. Father calling her; Lucretia rise. Yea many times when she came to
Confession, he would ask her; Was not I fain to waken you to your prayers to
night, as I promised you?

When Caesar Baronius lived at S. John's of the Florentines, he fell so
desperately ill, that being void of sense, they procured him to be anointed
with the H. Oil; when falling into a sweet sleep, he sees Philip standing by
him, who then dwelt at S. Hieroms, and praying for his health to Jesus Christ,
at whose right hand stood the Virgin of Virgins, shadowed with a pure white
Veil, and saying; Save Caesar; give me Caesar; restore me Caesar; I must needs
have him well again. When the Good man had prayed awhile in this manner, he
perceived Our B. Lord to turn away his face from Philips prayers. Whereupon
Philip addressing himself to the Virgin humbly requests her, that what of
himself he could not procure from Our Lord, by Her intercession he might
obtain; she piously enclining to his Petitions never left entreating her Son,
till Philip having his wish granted him, left praying. Meanwhile Baronius
waking found himself secure from all fearof death, and in short time recovered;
which being not unmindfull of, he gratefully acknowledges in many leaves of
his Book, that both his life and learning were all owing to the Prayers of
Philip.

Matthias Maffe^s Priest lay sick, and the Physicians being hopeless of him,
Philip comes to see him, bringing along with him two little Boxes of Relics,
and, as his custom was, bad him; Doubt not, you shall recover: then laying his
hand on his heart, pressed it hard, and giving him his Blessing went away. The
Patient herewith greatly cheared falls asleep, and hears Philip in his sleep
call him thrice; Matthias rise. The Voice was so strong, that it somewhat
affrighted him, and as soon as he was fully awake he found his Fever quite
gone, and two days after got up, and was very well.

Cardinal Frederic Borromeo relates how one had a Vision in this wise. A great
Mastive, or such like beast, seemed to ly about the Bed, at the sight whereof
being greatly dismayed, as soon as he was awake, he felt himself bruised and
sore all over as if he had bin cudgelled, in the Morning coming to Philip, he
informs him of all that happened the Night before. To whom the Father; know Son
that I was with you last Night, and fought for you; and God for the good of
your Soul sent you this prodigious sight; yea I desired you might meet with
some such accident, and therefore think not scorn to benefit thereby.

A certain Abbot, whom Philip entirely loved, retired from the City to a place
belonging to his Abbey, where for two years together he was so troubled with a
flegmatique humor, that his Limbs becoming useless to him, he was fain to keep
diverse Servants to help him. His disease was by Physicians held incurable, yet
were there almost infinite applications made to him by Physic, which proving
ineffectuall, by direction of the same Physicians he was in a Litter carried to
Rome, where he was so impaired by sickness, swooning, and fainting away
oftimes, that he seemed to suffer many deaths in a day. In this plight he
earnestly prayed to God, that, if he saw it good, he would now let his Servant
depart in peace: mean while one of the Oratory comes to see him, telling him,
Philip would visit him toward Evening, and afford him present ease and
refreshment. After he had supped, his wonted pains coming upon him with extreme
violence, about Midnight falling into a quiet slumber, he sees Philip putting
his hand on his face as he lay, standing by silent. At that the Abbot wakes;
and struck with affrightment and terror, could not speak a word; but was the
more afraid for that he observed, he came into his Chamber, the door being
shut. Philip asks him, How he did? the Abbot made him answer, taking notice of
the H. man, withal desiring him, if it were expedient for him to live, he
would pray for his restorement. Then Philip taking his hands in his own, placed
them across: the Clinick, not knowing what it meant, awaited the success, when
at last he heard the Servant of Christ cry out aloud; Rise. At which he,
sitting up in his Bed, which for diverse months before he could not do,
presently thrusts his feet out of the Bed to rise? Philip asks him; Do not you
see now that you are restored to health? look you revealy it to none and
vanished away. Upon this apparition the Abbot grew so in health, as that Week
he went abroad.

Joh. Animuccius. of whom before, traveling to Prato in Tuscany, visited
Katherina Riccia a Florentine, one of the Nuns of S. Dominic's Order, commonly
called S. Katherine de Prato, whose life is written by Seraphinus Razzius, one
of the same Order: and in discourse asked her, If ever she knew Philip Neri?
She answered, by bearsay she had, but by face never; yet she desired both to
see, and speak with him. The next year Animuccius came to Katherine again, who
confidently averred, she had both seen and spoken with him; though neither she
had been from Prato; nor Philip from Rome in all that time. Which likewise
Philip affirmed to be true, at A^imuccius coming back to Rome. yea and after
her death, some talking of her Excellencies, and Virtues, in the Chamber of the
B. Father, he exactly described to them her Physiognomy and features: and yet,
as was said, neither had he been at Prato, nor she at Rome.

CHAP. XII. He raises a dead Boy to life.
NOr was Philip only accomplished with all sorts of Virtues and dignified with
sundry kinds of Gifts, but conspicuous likewise for the fame of his Miracles.
Which, though by what has been said, it be sufficiently manifest, will yet, by
what is still behind, more evidently appear. Suffice it here, to instance how
he raised the dead to life: referring his Miracles to be hereafter exemplified
in two distinct Books by themselves.

Fabric^us de M^xi^^s, having already fi^^^ Daughters by L^v^nia^d Rusticis,
who was again big, and in the pangs of Childbirth, went to the B. man* to
desire his Prayers to God for her safe Delivery; He musing a little to himself,
tells him; Your wife shall be brought a This Fabricius Maximus a Noble Roman
and Violantes his wife; and Francisca wife of Antonia a Castro, who were
present, testified upon oath.
bed of a Boy, whom I would have you name according to my mind: are you
content? He assented; then replied the H. Man; You shall Name the Child Paul.
When Fahricius came home, they bring him news, that his Wife had bore him a
son, whom as he had promised Philip, he Christened Paul. Lavinia dying, the
youth, being some fourteen years old, was taken with a malignant Fever, of
which he lay sick threescore and five days, till he was even at deaths door.
Philip loved him exceedingly, both because he had taken his Confessions from
his Infancy, and because his carriage amongst his equals was so innocent and
amiable, and his Patience extraordinary: for he endured his sickness, with so
rare moderation, that being asked, whether he desired to be restored to health
he answered, No. In this condition he continued so weak, that, being at the
last gasp, his Father sent for Philip; who could not possibly come, being then
at S. Hieroms saying Mass. Meanwhile Paul dies, his sad Parent closing his
eyes; and the Priest, that applied the Extreme Unction to him, and commended
his Soul to God, having performed his office, went away: then the Servants
brought water to wash the Corpse, as the wont is, and raiment to array it in. So
Mass being ended, Philip comes, whom Fabricius meeting tells, Our Paul is dead.
Philip goes directly to the place where he lay dead, and resting against the
bed^ide, continues in Prayer about half a quarter of an hour: then sprinkles
the face of the deceased with Holy water, and taking a little into his lips
breathed it into his mouth: which done, putting his right hand upon his
forehead, he cried twice with a loud voice, Paul: who, as though he had been
awaked from sleep, immediately opened his eyes, and answered; What would you
Father? adding soon after, I had forgot a sin, which I desire to confess.
Philip bid the standers by withdraw a while: and holding forth a Crucifix to
him received his Confession. When the people of the house came in again; the
Father discoursed with him familiarly, and he in like manner answered him, as
though he had been well, in a distinct and strong voice, yea his face and
cheeks so ruddy, that those which saw him thought him not sick. They spoke one
while of his Mother, another, of his Sister who were dead. Having talked some
half an hour, Philip asks him; whether he were willing to die? very willing;
replied he. He asks him a second time; are you willing indeed? Most willing;
quoth he, the rather that I may see my Mother and Sister. Whereupon Philip,
giving him his Blessing, said, Go then, my Son, and pray to God for me. And as
he spoke it Paul expired in his arms.

But happily it may seem not less strange, for one by virtue of his command, to
bereave a living man of life, than to restore one dead to life again: both
which Philip did, even as in the Acts of the Apostles we read, the Prince of
the Apostles did to Ananias and Sapphira. A Noble Roman Matron fell sick, and
having continued so a month together and more, to the great peril of he^
life, Philip coming to see her, labors as well by his persuasions with her, as
his prayers for her, to cheer her up, being exceedingly troubled both in Body
and Mind. At length He with his departed to return to Vallicella: he had gone
but a little from the place, when stopping he bethinks himself, saying, I am
forced to go back to the sick woman. So returning and coming to her Bedside,
he dismissed the Matrons that were about her. Anon some of his standing by he
laid his hand on her head, saying, I command thee, O Soul, in the Name of God
that thou presently leave this Body. He had scarce said it but straight the
woman surrendered her Spirit. the Women being afterward called in, Philip told
them; Unless this Woman had died as she did, she would certainly have consented
to the temptations of Satan; therefore it was but necessary to hasten her End.

CHAP. XIII. The opinion Men had of his sanctity.
PHilip thus enriched with these so many and signal Favors by Almighty God,
procured himself such admiration and esteem amongst men, that almost all who
knew him judged him a Saint: not only those of inferior rank, but even Nobles,
Princes, and Popes themselves.

For first: Paul the IV. made such account of him, that he not only commended
himself frequently to his Prayers, but professed, that he was sorry his
Pontifical dignity detained him from being present at the Exercises of the
Oratory.

Pius IV. honored him so, that in his last sickness, as he lay a dying, he
would have him by him to commend his soul to God, as one who knew his singular
Merits: besides that he always testified very frankly his respect to him in
several particulars.

Pius V. of B. and Glorious Memory, being well assured of the benefit and
advantage accruing to the Faithful, from the Foundation of the Oratory, was,
as he said, exceeding glad, that in his days there should be men in the City,
that should appear so forward to promote Religion and Holiness in Devout
minds. As on the other side, Philip, to quit the Good Pope, had so firm and
settled an opinion of his Sanctity, that he kept his Pontifical Slipper among
other of his Saints Relics: which the H. man applying once to a Sick Person,
he began to mend, and perfectly recovered.

Gregory XIII. much used his advice in difficult matters, and for his Piety so
esteemed him, that he would never suffer him to Stand in his presence, but made
him both cover his head, and sit very familiarly with him.

Sixtus V. highly prized him, as appeared by his constant liberality toward
him. For he freely bestowed on him the Bodies of the H. Martyrs Papias and
Maurus: annexed a Rich Benefice among the Samnites to the Congregation; granted
them many Priviled Ses, and Immunities, with other Acts of Graces.

Gregory XIIII. not only advised with him in matters of importance, making him
sit covered before him, but so respected him, that upon his Entrance to the
Popedom, the H. man coming to kiss his feet, as the manner is, he by no means
would suffer it: but meeting and very lovingly embracing him, burst forth into
these expressions: Although, Father, I be greater in Dignity, yet in Sanctity
you are far the more Eminent.

Clement VIII. in almost all his affairs of moment recommended himself to his
Prayers; and when he was pained with the Go^t in his hands, he used to say;
Sure Father Philip does not pray to God for us: intima^ing that if he did but
pray for him, he should not suffer those tormenting pains. Besides, as often as
the Father vi^i^e^ him he, like his Name, in his affable and mi^d d^portment,
courteously embraced him; and as his predecessors had done, made him sit
covered in his Presence. To say nothing of his chu^ing him for his Confessor,
and when he grew aged, substituting Baronius in his Room. Again when he was
Auditor of the Sacr^d Rota, he said by way of Prediction; Philip is
questionless a Holy man, and in due time shall be inserted in the Catalogue of
Saints.

And in how great Veneration he was among the Cardinals of the H. Church of
Rome, is apparent both by what they have written of him, and by their public
Testimonies. Aug. Valerius Cardinal of Verona, made a Book, and entitled it
Philippus, sive de Laetitia Chritiana, Philip yet living.

Cardinal Gabriel Paleottus, the first Archbishop of Bononia, whose Confessor
Philip was, proclaimed him, then al^ve, to the World as the Exemplar of a
Virtuous and Pious Old man, in a Book which he writ De bono senectutis, to this
effect.

And truly it were easy to produce, out of the Ancient Records of Story,
especially of Ecclesiastical Antiquity, many old men renowned for Holiness,
and adorned with those Eminencies, which in their proper places are mentioned.
Nevertheless, since those things make deeper impression on the mind, which
occur to sight, and ^re much in our hands, the truth being hereby made more
evident and invincible: I thought good to offer to your View, as an express and
lively Precedent of an excellent Old age, a Man yet living, and conversant in
the eyes of all, who has dwelt at Rome, the Theater of the Universe, above
fifty years in much reputation, animating and promoting others strangely to a
good and virtuous life. I mean Father Philip Neri a Florentine, who now
fourscore years old, like a tall and goodly Tree sheds the various fruits of
his Virtues among the people. He was the First Founder of the numerous
Congregation of the Oratory in the City; whence sundry others have very happily
been propagated in several places and religions unto this day. Whom heretofore
many Popes particularly Gregory XIII. and XIIII. of B. Memory, and at this day
Our H. Lord Clement the Eighth of times were wont to call to their assistance
in matters of Religion and Spiritual conference. To whom the Most Illustrious
Cardinals, Bishops, and Prelates daily resorted, with others of all Ranks both
for performance of Penances, and other weighty affairs, as for his pious
discourses and communication with them. Who despising all terrene felicity,
aspires after only celestial honors and dignity: although he has born a
great sway with Popes, and the Prime Cardinals, and been in esteem with them.
Lastly, one in whom the Images of Prudence, Piety and Devotion, joined with a
rare mildness, Chearfullnes, and Christian simplicity, do so gloriously shine,
that whoever has once beheld this Venerable old man and observed his long
confirmed Discipline and Life can have no grounds left to doubt ^^ question the
Benefit of Old age. Thus Paleottus.

Augustine Cardinal of Cusa was so devoted to him, that he loved to be
continually in his Chamber. Who speaking of his Holiness says: Indeed I never
knew any, whether Regulars or Seculars, that were both by Plebeians and Nobles
so highly reverenced as Philip; not only for a real opinion they had of his
piety, but for his huge success in reclaiming such as went astray to a holy
life: and I ever wonderfully prized his incomparable Virtues; which by so much
were the more conspicuous in him, by how much the more concealed.

Cardinal Frederic Borromeo, who together with the forenamed Cardinal Cusanus
were called Father Philips Soul, speaks of his extraordinary Sanctity in this
wise. All the time I conversed with the B. man me thoughts he was so divinely
qualified, and endowed with such admirable Gifts by God, as I doubt not, but he
might be compared with most of those admired by the ancient Writers. For he was
so well experienced in the knowledge of Spiritual things, that he may truly be
said to have perfected all, that either Cassian or Climacus, and Richardus de
S. Victore have writ on this argument. Besides of all that ever I knew, there
is none has answered my expectations as he: yea he so satisfied me herein,
that bethinking me sometimes, what I could wish more complete in him, I could
find nothing. So far Borromeo.

Cardinal Octavius Paravicinus thus. By the Merciful Providence of God, I
have been acquainted with Philip from about six years old, till I was twenty
eight when I went into Spain, being present at his usual conferences, and one
of his intimate familiars: in all which time, and after my return from Spain,
as long as he lived, upon an exact Scrutiny of all his actions, expressions,
and behavior, I found him indeed flaming with an ardent love of God. And a
little after* I render Eternal thanks to God, that I had a Master, whose
Virtues are diffused and famed all the World over, and whose Glory no age shall
ever impair. Hitherto Paravicinus, one who was so passionate a Lover of Philip,
that he could scarce live without him, spending frequently whole days and
nights with him; and whenever he lay sick, attending him, as if he had been
his Servant, though he were a Cardinal.

Once when he was ill, being one of his last sicknesses, send^ng away them that
were by, he called the Cardinal saying; Octavius, I desire much to talk with
you, but when my Cough comes, that I must spit, I would have you put the Basin
under me as you have used to do. Good Humble Soul he did not in this despise
the Purple but satisfied the impatient longing of the man. Thereupon Octavius;
be pleased to know, Father, that I account it a special honor and privilege to
do you service. Again, I so willingly did attend on Philip, that though
sometimes I suffered great inconveniences thereby, yet I was always requited
with far greater content. Yea whilst I recount them, I am so del^ghted with the
offices I heretofore did him, that nothing troubles me, but that I could not
further serve him.

Cardinal Octavius Bandinus esteemed it a high honor, that, while he was yet
a Boy, he waited on him, as he said Mass: and, speaking of his estimation for
Holiness, has these words: The opinion of Philips Virtue was such, as not only
most honored him for it, but diverse conceived it necessary, for their better
progress in the Service of God, to use his conduct. Therefore to him, as to an
Oracle, resorted men of all degrees, for direction in a Spiritual course. etc.
And after: He that has bin acquainted with the B, Philip, and accurately
observed his procedure in the way of God, and what a life he led for so many
years in eminent Holiness and Religion, shall not need to doubt, but that those
mervailous Benefits, which so many obtained by his Prayers, were indeed so many
visible and real Miracles. And for that they were both so numerous and
notorious, I always reverenced him as a true Servant of God, and do at present
repute him as a Saint worthy of all honor.

Cardinal Franc. Maria Taurusius, then Archbishop of Avignon writes thus in a
Letter: I should be glad to be one of them that have the first place in the
Chapel, where the H. Father says Mass, although it be so small (it is the
same that is at this day removed to the other side of the Church, as was
formerly said) for how ever I seem so far distant, yet, by the Blessing of God,
I am always there, both by Faith and the Love I bear to my Most dear Father,
and by the peculiar Seat I reckon my self to have in his Soul. For whilst He
there displays his Mind in the Contemplation of things Divine, I deem my self
ranked in not the lowest place within it. Katherine of Siena built her self a
Cell in her heart, where she would sit alone with Jesus amidst the concourse of
a Multitude: so would I erect me a Lodging in the middle of Philips heart; not
fearing but I should find Jesus there, and behold at once all the Progress of
that his stupendous Life, which he has led here on Earth with us now this
thirty three, years: and so as often as the Father exults, and his swollen heart
danceth, out of the plenitude of his Love of Christ, I also there should dance
and exult together. Afterward again: Enjoy ye therefore, while ye may, that
Bliss, which I long since enjoyed and long together; but, unworthily neglecting
my best use of so happy a time, am now by the just judgment of God unwillingly
deprived thereof.

Cardinal Hierom Phamphilio, one most intimate with the B. man, thus reports
of him: Philip out of his exuberant Charity, would so endear, solace, and
assist every one, that none ever went from him but he was cheared, and
confirmed in the opinion of his sanctity: My self especially have accounted him
always, and confidently held him for a Saint, and adjudged him absolutely
furnished with all the Virtues, that can be desired in a true Servant of God:
yea I have found by experience in all his actions that he was every day better
than other, to his very death.

Cardinal Lud. Madruccius was so addicted to him, that he not only frequented
his Chamber, there conferring with him a good while together, but was so much
taken with their Method of Preaching, that he often came to the Oratory at S.
Hieroms to Sermon. Michael Bonellus Cardinal of Alexandria, Nephew to Pius V.
knowing how much his Uncle tendered Philip, loved him entirely; whom for his
singular piety he revered, often going, or sending to him for his Company.
Alexander Medices, Cardinal and Archbishop of Florence, afterward Pope, under
the Title of Leo XI. visited Philip at least once a week, and spent the whole
day in courtesy and friendly familiarity with him. Cardinal Pet. Donatus
Caesius was also a great observer of Philip, and conferred many Favors upon
the Congregation. Cardinal Guil. Sirletus so much both loved and honored him,
that he seemed wholly taken up in his commendations. As also Cardinal Antonio
Caraffa, and Julio Antonio Sanctorio, Cardinal of S. Severines; and diverse
others for brevity omitted.

The Regulars likewise held him for a Saint, and especially the Fathers of S.
Dominic's Order, insomuch that, whenever he went to any Monasteries, the
Religious flocked to him by troops, kissing his hands, and humbly craving a
Blessing on their knees, and entertaining him as an Angel of God. And not only
the ordinary Friars, but the choicest among them, famous for learning and
piety, and those the most Eminent Preachers too, did thus reverence him: among
whom was Father Francischinus of the Order of the Conventuall Minors, a knowing
and devout man. For he advised much with the H. Father concerning his affairs,
and came to the Sermons with great delight, many times preaching in the Oratory
himself. Father Evangelista also surnamed Marcellinus was an admirer of him,
being a noted preacher, who died in the Monastery of S. Maria de Ara caeli, and
lies buried in the Church there, well esteemed of for his good Life. Franc.
Panigorala, an excellent Preacher of the same Order, and Bishop of Asta, had so
high an opinion of the Servant of Goa that he called him a Living Relic.
Alphonsus surnamed Lupus a Capuchin, prized him so exceedingly, that he
depended on his very looks, and as often as Philip met him, would fall down at
his feet. Magister Paulinus, a Dominican, one of extraordinary Virtue and
Parts, did so repose in him for his Counsel, whom he held divinely inspired
with Truth, that on a time refusing to undertake a principal office in his
Order, yet when Philip urged it, he immediately obeyed.

In fine, how great a value his own Sons, set on him, besides what has b^n
above related, may by that which follows apparently be seen. For first; they
honored every thing that was his as Relics; yea they secretly and
Religiously pilfered a way the hair of his head and beard, when he was barbed,
to keep for Relics: which once the Good man spying he commanded them
presently to be flung out of the Window, yet they, privily gathering them up,
had them in great estimation. Some of them very carefully preserved in Glasses
his Blood, which, toward his latter End, issued forth at his mouth in
abundance: and some, herein perhaps too zealous, tied themselves to say
privately every day threescore times, Sancte Philippe ora pro me; i. e. Holy
Philip pray for me; whilst he was yet alive. Others had his Picture hanging in
their Chambers, he yet living, which they daily bowed unto, before they went
abroad: others appointed to go to him every day, either to ask his Blessing, or
kiss his feet; or at least to tarry by him in his Chamber. Moreover they
reposed in his Prayers so much, that they would sometimes say; I hope
undoubtedly to obtain whatever I shall beg of God by Philips Intercessions.
Others; If I look on the guilt of my life past, I even despair; if to Philips
Prayers, I am already in the Harbor of safety. Some again; Though I should
hear, that he had raised the dead, or were my self present and beheld them
raised, I could not have a higher esteem of his Sanctity. Yea I can witness,
that I have heard many say, that the publication of his being Sainted, nor yet
his Canonization, added nothing at all to their opinion of his Holiness: for
they said; Whatever the Pope has designed concerning Philip, our hands had
handled long before.

But the Elogies afforded him, extolling him to the heavens, may seem perhaps
incredible to such as read them; styling him an Angel, Moses, a Prophet and
Apostle. One friend was heard to say to another, going to Rome to see Philip:
You shall see the Apostle, you shall see Peter, you shall see Paul. Who then
thinking the expression too hyperbolicall, after once he grew acquainted with
Philip in the City, said My friend did not speak a jot too lavishly.

Franc: Cardonius, a Dominican well known to Philip for some forty years, gave
Him this testimony; Philip was great in Humility, rich in Poverty, in Chastity
an Angel.

Further the fame of his Piety was such and so divulged, that many did not
stick to affirm, that he had arrived to the highest pitch of every Virtue; yea,
and that he had the perfect command of the first motions of his Mind, as they
call them. Insomuch that the Chiefest of the Nobility thought it a dignity and
privilege to serve him, to make his Bed, to sweep his Chamber, to wipe his
shoos, and perform such like offices for him. His sayings were reputed by most
as Oracles. In the Public Tables drawn up for his Canonization, there was not
one Witness, but with most ready suffrages would write him Saint. They jointly
agreed in this, that in due time he would be Registered in the Calendar: and
some of them affirmed that his very looks had a kind of Holiness with them.

Mark Antonio Maffa writes thus: I indeed, though the vilest of sinners, ever
since I came acquainted with Philip have respected him as a Saint. And as often
as I went to him to the Sacrament of Penance, I perceived, as it were, a breath
of Holiness come from him, especially as he gave me Absolution, which never
happened, when I confessed to others. So Massa.

Lastly, even by Saints was Philip deemed a Saint. Carlo Borromeo when he came
from Millain to Rome, used to visit the H. man first of all, and stay oftimes
four or five hours with him: when he was away, to consult him by Letters:
otherwhiles to kneel down at his feet, kiss his hands, and repeat the
Canonical hours with him. And that he proposed him as a Saint to all his, is
most notorious; so that he sometime said, Philip is a man of admirable
sincerity, and rare Purity. And those which knew them both can testify, that he
frequently recommended himself to his prayers. Withal he was extremely pleased
with his Rule; and once spent a whole day at Vallicella, one S. Francis
Festival; where after Mass, he administered the H. Communion from Morning till
Noon, to almost infinite numbers of the Faithful; among whom Martin Navarrus
abstained from saying Mass, that together with the rest he might, after the
manner of Laics receive the Body of Christ from him. Besides he would needs
view the new Fabric of the Church, take notice of the Foundation and Rule, go
to the public Sermons after Dinner, come into the Orntory toward Evening, sup
with them, Lodge with them, and strictly observe every thing; and at his
departure in the Morning said; O happy you! that have light on a man, who has
fortified you with so Noble an Institution.

Felix a Cantalicio a Capuchin, whom Urban the Eighth Canonized, besides that
which is above said, was so extremely devoted to the H. man that he would often
come and ask his Blessing on his knees. Once spying Philip a far off walking on
Mount Quirinall, he ran and overtook him and kneeling down kissed his hand,
where mutually embracing each other in most friendly sort, they stood mute
there for a long space together; at last also parting each from the other
silent, like S. Lewis the French King and S. Giles. Another time Felix
kneeling, as he was wont, Philip kneeled too and begged his Blessing: which
contention lasting awhile they parted. Yea almost always both Felix and
Ra^nerius his Companion, one of approved Integrity, when ever they met Philip
fell on their knees.

The H. Woman Katherine Riccia de Prato, elsewhere recited, sent simdry Letters
to Philip as to a Saint, recommending her self to his Prayers.

Vrsula Benincas^ a Virgin of Naples well reputed, of whom before, so honored
him, as she uttered this Elogy of him: By command from Gregory XIII. I was
consigned to Philips Fuition, and though I was not much skilled in spiritual
matters, yet I knew the Charity of this H. man, and that his heart was
transfixed with Divine Love; for one might perceive, when he spoke he did not
only wish, but passionately long for the conversion of Souls. And he took no
small pains to make trial of my Spirit: for first; after he had soundly rated
me, he enjoined me at the same instant, as I kneeled, to retort those very
expressions back upon himself: which he again and again requiring of me I
clearly discerned his profound Humility. And being sometimes in Ecstasies before
him, as I am wont, and profess it to be my Cross, although in such Trances I
never could hear the Voice of any, albeit he cried to me, yet when first he
called me by my Name, his Blessed Voice so pierced my breast, that I straight
awaked from my Ecstasy; by all which I understood the Finger of God was with him.

Again once at S. Hieroms a Charitate, as I received the B. Body of Our Lord at
his hands, and, after my wonted manner, fell into a Trance, when Mass was done,
he commanded me to walk a long with him in the Church, and though I could very
difficultly do it, being so weak and withal abstracted from my Senses, yet at
his command I walked to and fro with ease. Thus far that Holy Virgin.

Francisca a Serrone, of S. Severine's in Marca de Ancona, whose Life one of
the Oratory has accurately writ, coming to Rome in the Jubilee under Gregory
XIII. and discoursing much with the H. man affirmed that Jesus Christ resided
in Philips Soul, and that he had drunk of the same Spirit with the B. Katherine
of Siena. She treasured up his sayings as the choicest Pearls: and out of
reverence to him, would not wear but laid up the Veil, which his hand had
touched while he gave her absolution.

Lastly, the Sanctity of Philip was so blazed abroad every where, that People
resorted to him, not from the City, nor out of Italy alone, but from all
Quarters of the World. And even Infidels, after once they had conversed with
him, reverenced him with great Veneration.

THE FOURTH BOOK, of the LIFE of PHILIP NERIUS.
CHAP. I. Philips last Sickness, and the Apparition of the Virgin.
THe B. Father filled thus with years and merits, and drawing now to a Period
of his Life, about a year before he died, in April fell into a Fever, of which
he was scarce quit in May; but began to be troubled with such pains and torture
in his reins, that his pulse left beating, yet he bore all with an invincible
Patience. No complaining, no stir, no groans were heard: only these words came
softly from between his lips; Adauge dolorem, sed adauge patientiam: Increase
my pains, but increase withal my patience. The Physicians coming and feeling
his Pulse pronounce him a dead man. So they that stood about him drawing close
the Curtains, sadly bewailed the approaching End of their most Dear Parent. Yet
smothering it to themselves they held their peace, when This whole fact was
witnessed upon oath by those five who were present, Angelus Victorius,
Ri-Alexand. Alluminaty, Franc. dolf. Silvestri, Zazzara, and Anthon. Gallonius.
on the sudden Philip cries; O Fairest Mother, B. Mother, who am I, that thou
should honor me thy most unworthy Servant with thy presence? which word he
spoke with such vehemence, that the very bed shook under him, whereupon they
drew back the curtains and came about him, whom they saw lift up into he air
above a Cubit high, with his hands, spread abroad, one while stretching out his
arms, anotherwhile putting them together, as though he were embracing some
body with great joy: repeating often over the same words; Ah Sweetest Mother,
which way have I ever deserved, that thou should condescend to visit and
restore me? I am not worthy so high a Favor; Holy Mother I am no way worthy.
Hereat all wondering, some out of a pious affection wept, others more inwardly
grieved, the rest expected the event of so strange an accident. Then the
Physicians coming nearer, enquire what news? He lying in his bed overjoyed asks
them; Did ye not see the H. Virgin, who came down from heaven to mitigate my
pains? But perceiving a great many about him, he covered himself in the Bed,
and melting into tears continued a while so: the Physicians fearing lest by
immoderate grieving he might heighten his disease told him. It is enough,
Father it is enough. To whom he replies; You may go your way, for I have no
need any more of your help: since the B. Virgin has restoed me to my former
health. They presently feell his Pulse, and find him not only rid of his Fever,
but perfectly well: and the next day he went about his ordinary employments, as
if he had not been at all sick. And all that Evening the Religious Father
exhorted his Sons to apply themselves in their devotions especially to the
Virgin Mother, saying, Believe it, there is nothing more effectual for the
procuring favors from God, than a Holy affection to the Mother of Our Lord.
The Physicians, when they were gone noised abroad the strange Apparition of Our
Lady, so that it came to the hearing of the Cardinals, Cusanus, and Borromeo,
and at last to Clement the Eighth, And lest any part thereof should be forgot,
Angelus Victorius carefully writ down the whole passage.

The next year, that is, in One thousand five hundred ninety five, on the
thirty one of March he fell sick again, in so dangerous a manner, that the
Cardinal of Verona coming to see him, he was not able to answer him a word: he
lay ill of this sickness all April, and on the first of May he earnestly
besought God, that for the honor of the H. Apostles Philip and James, whom he
had chosen for his Patrons, he might celebrate Mass, and God hearing his
requests he immediately recovered, and not only said Mass, but communicated the
B. Sacrament to some of his. Yet that he might not seem refractory to his
Physicians, he forbore Mass three days, and that time expired, on the twelfth
of May he continued to say Mass daily.

Afterward on the return of the Solemnity of the H. Martyrs, Nereus,
Achilleus, and Flavia Domitilla, whom the Congregation honors with a more
peculiar Veneranion, He bled so extremely at the mouth, that all gave him for
dead. Whereupon Baronius then Superior of the Congregation, upon a strong
suspicion of his near approaching End, duly applies the Sacrament of Extreme
Unction to him: by the administration of which Sacred Remedy he presently
seemed to be somewhat better. Then C^rdinall Frederic Borromeo, being there,
purposed to give him the H. Communion: and as he was bringing the Celestial
Bread to his Chamber, the Good ol^ man, who a little before lay hopeless,
forthwith opening his eyes, and raising his voice, wept and said En amor meus,
en utique omne bonum! Lo there my love? Lo all that good is! Whereat all that
were by fell a weeping. Afterward when Borromeo came to those words Domine non
sum dignus; i. e. Lord I am not worthy: Philip repeating them added; Nor ever
worthy was; nor hitherto have I done any good at all: but as the Cardinal put
the B. Viands into his mouth he said; Come Lord come; and so with enflamed
devotion received the H. Eucharist saying; Now indeed have I ententained the
true Physician of the Soul: Vanitas vanitatum, and omnia vanitas: Vanity of
vanities, and all is vanity; He that seeks any thing but Christ knows not what
he seeks, and thus spent the rest of the day joyfully. About Evening he was
taken again with his wonted bleeding, and through extremity of pain three or
four times vomited blood in abundance, yet unappalled at it, looking up to
heaven, Thanks be to thee O Christ, says he, that at least this way I can
repay blood for blond. This loss of blood was attended with such a Cough and
Asthma, that he could scarce breathe, but looking cheerfully repeated often, I
die, I faint; and though many remedies were tried yet none availed. In the
morning when the Physicians came to him, he told them; Now I need none of your
help, for my medicines have proved better than yours; and since break of day,
when I sent my offering to the Monasteries of the Religious, to say Mass for
me, I have not bled at all; but find my self mended, I breathe freely, and am
so well, that I seem fully restored to my former strength. The Doctors by his
Pulse finding him to be as well as he gave out, amazed thereat, affirmed it was
done by Miracle from Almighty God. And from this day to the twenty sixth of May
he continued in good health, repeated his office every day, said Mass, heard
the Confessions of his own, gave them the H. Sacrament; and performed his duty
in everything as he used to do: so that all imagined he might undoubtedly live
yet some years.

CHAP. II. He foretells his own death.
PHilip had long before presaged not only the time and day, but even the hour,
and kind of his death; and the place were his body should be interred.
Therefore This Francis Zazzara witnessed upon oath.
first was he in all his former sicknesses peremptory that he should not dye;
as in the year One thousand five hundred sixty two, being suddenly taken with a
violent pain and a Fever, insomuch as it was determined by his to prepare him
for death, by the B. Sacrament and Extreme Unction, he calling Taurusius said,
Know I am most willing and ready to participate of those Holy Mysteries, yet I
shall not die of this Sickness, for the Most Merciful God, who has bestowed on
me already so many blessings, will net suffer me to depart out of this life
thus devoid of the Gusts and Fervor of Devotion. So they confirming him with
those Divine Remedies, straight his grief was assuaged, his Fever left him, and
regaining his former strength, he followed his employments.

In the year One thousand five hundred ninety two on the twentieth day of
November he again fell into a Fever that continued upon him, and so raging, as
Hierom. Cordelius, one of the principal Physicians, affirmed it would end him,
but toward break of day coming again to see the B. man, he told him; I shall
not die, My ^ordelius, of this disease, as you imagine. And the next day he was
seen going about his occasions sound and perfectly well. His Sons also, having
desired his leave to confess themselves to other Con^essors, because of the
Festival of Our Lords Nativity approaching, he answered, I will take your
Confessions my self: and being fully recovered, did so.

Three years after, on the thirty one of March, he caused Letters to be writ
for remanding Flaminius Riccius of Firmo, Of this Germanicus Fidelius is a
sworn witness.
who was then at Naples, being desirous to see him ere he died. He was on whom
Philip dearly loved, who was the Third Superior of the Congregation next to
him, a great despiser of himself, having refused a Bishopric offered him. He
writ back, that he was very willing to return, but, for certain reasons was
forced to defer his journey till September following. Philip by Letters urges
him to lay aside all business, and return speedily: he answers that some
principal Persons of Note, and in special the Archbishop impeded his coming.
He commands him to be writ for the third time, but added, that he should come
too late. And so it happened, for when Flaminius was come to Rome, Philip was
newly dead.

Twelve days before his death Nerus de Nigris coming to congratulate his
recovery; Indeed, says he, I am now very This Nerus himself delivered upon
oath.
well, and have no bodily pain upon me, yet know, that within these few days I
shall die. And for that he was confident he must shortly die, he would often say
to his every day; Sons, I must die, I must die: which he frequently reiterating
to them, they were troubled at it, and replied; We know, Father, you must die,
but what of that? he, as his manner was, answered; It is enough, I say I must
die, and you do not believe me.

About the same time that he bled so much, above mentioned, Mark Antonio Maffa
exhorted him to cheer up, saying he should live many years yet, and save many
Souls: he jeastingly answered; If thou can but make me live out this year, I
promise thee I will give the something.

He had engaged himself to Francis Zazzara, then a youth, to tell him before he
died, what he would have him do after his death: and he had often importuned the
R. Father to perform his promise; who bid him; Be not disquieted, for I pray to
God for you every day I say Mass, and will reveall to you ere I die, what I
shall receive from above. Meanwhile, though Philip had bin often sick, yet he
never declared, what it was he would request of Francis: but the nineth day
before his death, calling him unexpectedly, told him what he had promised;
whereupon he burst out into tears, as conceiving the B. man would shortly die.

In like manner, Ten days before he deceased he called Joh. Baptista Guerrius
one. of the Oratory, and asked him, This Jo. Baptist himself testified upon
(...).
what day of the month it was? he answered the Fifteenth. Ten and fifteen,
says Philip, make Five and twenty, and then we pass hence. Nor did he speak
amiss.

He had a little before told Germanicus; You have taken a great deal of pains
thus long for my sake, but hereafter you shall have no more toil and trouble
about me. Then holding him fast by his right hand, as loving him most
affectionately asked; What O Germanicus, what will thou see a few days hence?
at which he began to fear some Calamity might befall Christendom; but the B.
man dying soon after, he understood the meaning of those words.

The same Germanicus being to go to Carbonianum a Town near the City, on the
ninetenth of May, a place where is These things were witnessed upon oath by
Germanicus.
a Manner belonging to the Oratory said to Philip; I am unwilling to go,
Father, except you can assure me, at my return, I shall find you alive. How
long will you be away, says Philip, But till Corpus Christi Eve, at furthest
replied he: at that the Father paused a while, and then bid him, Go. So
Germanicus departed, and the night before that Vigill, he dreamt that he came
to Rome, and sound the B. Father sick a bed, and that he said to him; Lo I dye.
When he awaked, fearing the H. man was dead indeed, he posts to Rome, and
finds Philip well, who told him; You did well indeed to return at the time
appointed, for you had missed if you had tarried longer. And the night
following he died.

The same day he sent to Pet. Consolinus, Priest of the Congregation, and bad
him put his hand on his breast, and feell his Ribs sticking out, with all
desiring him to say a Mass for him. He told him he had just (...) said Mass.
But said Philip, the Mass I desire of you is none of those you mean, but one
for the Dead.

That very day a Woman, almost fourscore years of age, lay a dying, the Priest,
that attended her in her extremity, besought Philip to pray for her. He
answered; This dying woman shall recover, but I shall depart out of this life.
And that instant she began to mend, and the night ensuing Philip deceased.

His place of burial he thus foretold. He had said to Franc. Bozzius, that he
would take up his Residence with him: who answered; Father my Chamber is not
fit for such a Person as you. He replied, What needs there any more? I am
resolved to dwell with you. After the H. man's death, it happened that his Body
was interred in a place which lay next Francis's Chamber, of which hereafter.
This was the last Priest that died, of Philips old acquaintance.

Joh. Baptista Guerrius forementioned, being Overseer for the building, came
and told Philip, that the Burying-place both for Priests and the rest of the
Society was finished; the Father asked, whether he had reserved a place for him
or no? he answered Yes. Says Philip; you will not let me ly there. Yes there
quoth he. Philip rejoyned; Indeed you shall lay me there, but believe it, yo
shall soon remove me thence. Guerrius said little then; but the event showed,
whither those words tended; for when the B. man died, Guerriis interred the
Corpse in the foresaid place of burial but the next day conveyed it thence, by
appointment of the Cardinals, Alexander Medices, and Frederic Borromeo, into a
Chapel which was nigh Francis Bozzius's lodging.

CHAP. III. His Death.
WHen the H. Festival of Corpus Christi was come, which that year fell on the
twenty fifth of May. the B. man gave order betimes in the Morning, that as many
of his Sons, as came should have admittance into his Chamber: whose Confessions
he took, as one in perfect health; and desired diverse of them to repeat the
Rosary of the B. Virgin for him, after his death. Withal he exhorted them to
frequent the Sacraments, to be present at the Sermons, and to read oftener the
Lives of Saints: then Caressing them more than ever. When he had done hearing
Confessions, he attentively and devoutly rehearsed the Canonical hours: after
that he said Mass in the Chapel almost two hours before he used to do it. And
as he began, he fixed his eyes, as though he had seen some strange sight, on
that part of the Janiculum where was a Monastery erected to S. Onuphrio, which
place is seated directly opposite thereunto, and when he came to the Hymn,
Gloria in excelsis, he sang it out with a loud Voice to the end, which thing he
never had done before. As soon as Mass was ended, he administered the H.
Eucharist to some: and having given thanks; drank a little of a Potion which
they brought him, and said; These think me very well, but they are much
mistaken. Then he again applies himself to the hearing Confessions. But upon
the return of the Cardinals Cusanus and Borromeo from the Pontificiall solemn
Procession and supplication of Christ's Body, he passed the time till Dinner in
pious discourses.

After he had broke his fast, he rested a little, as he used to do, and soon
after with a more fervent devotion than ordinary, reciting the Vespers and
Compline, he divided the rest of the Day partly in receiving such as came to
visit him, partly in hearing the Lives of Saints: above the rest he would needs
have the Life of S. Bernardin of Siena read to him, and made them repeat over
and over his Passage hence. About two hours before Sunset came Cusanus,
Hierom. Pamphilio, and some others; with whom he said the Mattens, ready now to
complete the rest of his Office in Heaven with the Holy Angels. Meanwhile comes
the Physician, who feeling his Pulse said Really, Father, I have not found you
better these ten years. So taking Cusanus's Confession at his going away he
accompanied him, which he never used to do, as though he would give him his
last Farewell, and gripeing his right hand at his departure, dismissed him, The
remainder of the time till Supper he employed in hearing Confessions.

Then as his custom was, he Supped alone; after Supper again he took the
Confessions of those of his own House At the third hour of the Night he gave
his Blessing, as he was wont, to those about him, and, having concluded his
usual Devotions, went to Bed very well, without the least sign of distemper,
repeating still those words; I must suddenly die. And knowing the last Act of
his life was now at hand, he asked, What a clock it was? they that were by
said, Three. So, counting the hours to himself, he inferrs Twice three makes
six, and then we shall go hence. Then, turning to them that staid about him, he
bid them; Go you to sleep: For the B. man was desirous to spend that little of
his Life that was behind only with God, whom with all his Soul he longed for.
Anon at the fifth hour of the Night he rose out of his Bed, and walked about
his Chamber; Gallonius, perceiving him to walk, straight gets up, and finds him
laid in his Bed, and that some blood and phlegm together had fallen down into
his mouth: he asks; What ailed him? I die says Philip. At that Gallonius
calling in some other of the Fathers to his aid, sends straight for the
Physicians. They thinking it to be his wonted flux of blood, try their ordinary
remedies; when the course of the blood stopping for the space of a quarter of
an hour, he spoke freely, and seemed to return to his former strength and
vivacity. But knowing himself now with in the borders of death, he desired them
to forbear their medicines, as it were only staying his departure till they
were all come: who when (every one kneeling down,) they had made a circle
round about his bed, fell a bewailing the loss of their Most Tender Father with
sad laments. Caesar Baronius Rector of the Congregation solemnly recommended
his departing Soul to God: who seeing the B. man even ready to expire, exalting
somewhat his Voice, Father says he, do you leave your Sons thus, and not spend
one word at least, in praying in some good thing for them. I beseech you bestow
your last Benediction on your Sons in Christ. Then he lifttng up his hand a
little, continued with his eyes fixed upward to heaven. And when he had
remained so awhile, letting down his eyes, as though he had obtained of God the
Blessing that he prayed for, without any other sign or gesture, he quietly
surrendered up his Spirit.

CHAP IV. He appears to diverse after his Death.
NO sooner had He given up the Ghost, but he visibly appeared to diverse of his
Sons. At Siena in Tuscany Theius Guerrius thought he saw Philip between This he
himself publicly attested
sleeping and waking, with rays glittering about him, saying; Peace be to thee
Brother; for I am now wafting to those spacious and delightful Mansions of
Heaven. When he waked he heard the same words again; and straight the Vision
ceased. A few days after he understood by Letters from his Friends, that about
the same time Philip departed.

In the City at S. Cecilia's a certain Virgin in her sleep saw him clothed in
white, and sitting in a bright Chair This the Virgin herself witnessed upon
oath.
between two Angels born up to heaven; saying, I go directly to the joys of
the blessed but that you may come whether I am now hastening, see that you keep
close to the Injunctions of our Rule: and doubt not but I will pray to Our Lord
for you, much more than heretofore I have done. The Nun meanwhile awakes, glad
and amazed, casting in her mind what this vision might betoken; at break of day
comes a Messenger with news that Philip died that very night.

Much about the same time; onother of the Sisters of the Monastery dedicated to
S. Mary Magdalen on Mount ^uirinall, saw him likewise in her sleep, and being
very desirous to have his direction about some things, prayed him to stay; who
answered; Let me go, for I have been kept too long already by others: and so
ascending up on high disappeared, In the morning she had word, that the B. man
was dead.

In the Monastery of S. Martha in the City too, he appeared to an other Nun,
and said, I am come to you, to give you my last Farewell. You ar hastening to
Paradise; says she. With that he shows her a field beset with thorns on every
side; telling her; You must pass this way, if you intend to come whither I am
going. She startling out of her sleep cried, O my Father, my Father whom I
shall never see again. And so weeping sore recommended her self to his Prayers,
believing confidently she should hear of his death by the Morrow; as it happened.

In Morlupo, a Town that stands about a days journey from the City, a Religious
Woman of the Third Rule of S. Dominic, receiving the H. Communion, before
Philips Body was buried, immagined that she saw an Old man in a Surplice
sitting among the Saints, in a Chair curiously adorned, whereon his Virtues
were displayed in Golden Characters: she saw besides a huge number of Souls,
and heard a Voice saying to her; These are the Souls of them, that have
attained Salvation by the Merits and means of this Blessed Man. And with these
words the Sight vanished. The Nun relating this to her Confessor, he demanded
of her; What age the Old man seemed to be of; or what a Phys^ognomy he had? she
delineates him forth exactly. Whereupon her Confessor showing her Philips
Picture; The Old man I saw, said she, was just of this favor. Soon after came
letters, purporting that Philip died the very day before.

And here may not be forgot, what a little after the H. man's death was spoken
by a Maid, hearing her mother commend Philip, to this purpose: Truly I esteem
Philip a very worthy Servant of Gods, but if I should see him restore life to
the dead, sight to the blind, limbs to the lame, I should then indeed with a
loud voice proclaim him a Saint; for there are many things reported of him,
which I never beheld with my eyes. The night following betwixt sleeping and
waking, she conceived she saw a high Scaffold in S. Peter's Church, that reached
up to the top of the Roof and Philip sitting upon it; and a little higher
toward the Roof she observed a most exquisite fine round Table, and hears him
saying to her; Look thou incredulous Woman, what I will do now: and straight
raising himself from the Scaffold upon the Table went out of sight. The Maid
when she rose, told her Mother what passed in her sleep; and in humble manner
asked God forgiveness. The Vision happily imported, that the B. man should in
time be Registered among the Saints at S. Peter's as the sequel manifested.

CHAP. V. The confluence of People to see his Corpse.
THe Body being according to the custom washed, and vested in a Priests habit,
was at the seventh hour of the night brought to the Church, attended by the
Priests and the rest of the Congregation. In the Morning, as soon as the
Church-doors were opened, and the rumor of his death spread, there resorted a
vast multitude of People. The aspects of the sacred Corpse carried with it a
great deal of Majesty and devotion; drawing the eyes of all to the beholding of
it; so that the Hearse was not stuck with so many flowers, as the spectators,
out of their zeal and affection to him, were ambitious to have carried away
with them. At a convenient hour, having duly concluded the Office for the Dead,
they sang Mass, many Prelates and Nobles being by.

While this was a doing, Antonio Carratio, coming into the Q^ire among the rest
in his Surplice, having formerly been long troubled with Scruples of
Conscience, was immediately released of them, upon his pious recommending
himself to Philip.

Afterward came some of the Cardinals, and among them Aug. Cusanus, and
Frederic Borromeo, with many tears kissing the hands and feet of the Servant of
God. Gabriell Paleottus beholding him breathless, whom in his Book he had set
forth as a Pattern of an excellent Old age, for Old men to imitate, lamented
him with great affection and veneration. Octavius Parav^cinus seeing the H.
Father dead, whom he so entirely loved, fell a weeping and bewailing his heavy
loss. Besides Princes and Ladies flocked thither, kissing his hands and his
very clothes, and calling him Blessed. Yea the Spanish Ambassadors Wife,
coming to do her Reverence to his Body, publicly and often termed him Philip
the Saint.

It is also worth the nothing, that Caesar Baronius, bethinking himself, what
kind of Prayers she should say for Philip, whom he doubted not to be in Glory,
lifting up his heart toward heaven, and opening his Breviary; pitched upon
those words; Respice de Caelo, and vide, and visita vineam istam, quam
plantavit dextera tua. Look down from heaven, and behold, and visit this Vine,
and the Vineyard which thy right hand has planted. So taking that occasion, he
wished the Fathers of the Congregation from thence forward to use this
Antiphona unto him, as often as they commended to God the affairs of the Society:
which they accordingly observed a long while after.

The like befell Marcellus Vitelleschius, who hearing of Philips death, instead
of the 129 Psalm, De profundis, sang the 116. Alleluia, Laudate Dominum omnes
gentes, etc. used to be sung at the Funerals of Children.

Hierom. Begerius, a Preacher of S. Domin^c's ^rder, being in his Serm^n that
very day the H. man dyed openly proclaimed that he reigned among the Saints in
Bliss; affirming, That the Masses said for his soul, should not benefit him,
but the Souls in Purgatory, many the meantime crying out, as he was speaking
that Philip should be inserted in the Catalogue of Saints.

For two days together, while his Corpse lay uninterred in the Church, there
resorted abundance of people, many touching it with their Rosaries; kissing his
Hands and Feet; reverently handling the Hearse, by stealth pulling of pieces of
his garment, secretly clipping hairs from his Head and Beard; with sundry other
like arguments of their Piety and Devotion to him. Yea some of the Nobler
Ladies pulling of their Rings, and putting them on his finger, would devoutly
kiss them, and put them on their own hands again.

You should here have heard some applaud and enumerate his rare and solid
Virtues; some aver, that the Lively Example of true Sanctity was gone;
others, observing the good he did both at Rome, and in other parts of the
Christian World, complain that the Church of God was deprived of so stout a
Labourer; some extolling him up to heaven, that living among so many Nobles at
Court, and being familiar with so many Popes, he notwithstanding had not the
least Ambition after honor or preferment; diverse with admiration speaking of
his profound Humility, who with such Wisdom, and reservedness could conceal so
Holy a course of life, and such numberless numbers of Miracles; as many more
magnifying and commending him, for modelling so Noble and pious an Institution,
as was that of the Congregation of the Oratory; lastly, here should you have
seen the indigent and necessitous on all hands lame^ti^g, that the Father of
the Poor was taken out of the Land of the living; with diverse more, who
beholding the liveless Corpse, and calling to mind how friendly, in his life
time, they had been treated by him, wept, that the Tears ran down their Cheeks.

CHAP. VI. The strange Cures wrought before the interring his Corpse.
FUrther the Celestial Donor was pleased to honor his Servant with evident
Miracles, even about the time of his death, while his Body was yet unburied.
Aug. de Magistris, a youth of some twelve years of age, who, Six sworn
ey-witnesses attested this
for seven years together, had been troubled with the Evil, and a dangerous
Ulcer in his Mouth, hearing of his School-fe^^ows that a Holy Priest at
Vallicella was dead, which had done many Miracles, presently repaired to the
Sacred Corpse, and praying a while before the Hearse, put the B. man's hand to his
throat, and straight was healed: for before he got out of the Church the
Sear-cloth, that was laid to his throat, fell off of it self, the sore skinned,
and there was not the least appearance of any swelling at all. So that
Cardinal Paleottus, having intelligence of it, both viewed the part affected
with his own eyes, and felt it with his hands for his further satisfaction.

Upon this, the Boy going home tells his Mother what befell him; she straight
brings her younger Daughter Margaret to Vall^cella, who had bin six years
diseased with the Evil in her neck. And for that the Maid could Six
ey-witnesses affirmed this.
not come near the Corpse, her Mother carried her, and strokeing one side of her
neck with the B. man's hand, she was well immediately; she had not time to do as
much to the other side, in regard, the Spanish Ambassadors Wife with a great
Train was approaching to the Hearse. Besides, her Daughter being weak in her
legs, the pious Mother, when she came home, boiling some of the Flowers she had
taken from the Bier, washed her legs twice or thrice therewith, and the Child
walked as readily after it, as if she had never had any such feebleness in her
joints.

Alexander, Father both to the Boy and Girl, a man of above seventy years old,
seriously weighing what had thus Himself and three more eye witnesses testified
this upon oath.
miraculously happened to his Children; and having bin troubled with sore eyes*
for about two months, so that they ran continually, and he feared exceedingly
that he should lose his Sight, came at last to Philips Corpse, and rubbing his
eyes with his hand, presently found himself eased of his grievance, and in
short time was thoroughly cured of his distemper.

About the same time another Youth lay ill* of a Pleurisy, whom the Doctors all
despaired of, his Brother taking some of the flowers from off the Hearse,
wherewith the H. Body was strewed, devoutly placed them under his head as he
lay; meanwhile comes his Mother, who seeing her Sons face look black, supposing
him to be dead, runs up and down crying. The Brother follows his Mother, and
tells her of the flowers he had put under him; she forthwith returning finds
that dead color all gone, and he who had lost his Speech, and knew no body, on
the sudden spoke, laughed, leaped out of his bed, and played. Anon comes the
Curate to anoint him with the H. Oil, who thinking him even at the point of
death, finds him restored to his former health.

A Woman of Recinetum, that had bin seven months sick of an Asthma, so as she
could hardly fetch her breath, by Three that were present affirmed this upon
oath.
no means go up stairs, nor take any manner of rest; comes to Vallicella,
Philips Body lying yet above ground; where, being strongly persuaded of effect,
she puts to her breast some of the Flowers that garnished the Coffin, and
presently was freed of her difficulty of breathing. About the same time, the
same Woman being tormented with an Itch, so grievous and loathsome, that her
flesh looked like Ink, as soon as she did but apply the same Flowers to her,
on the sudden her whole body became as clear as ever.

Maria Justiniana had her head broke out into such foul blisters that no
Medicines could cure her. Her Mother, This was a vouched by the oaths of
e-ywitnesses.
hearing of Philips death, has her immediately to Vallicella with her; where,
having done her Reverence to the Body, she with her Scissers clipped off some
of his hair, and went home, not doubting but she had gotten a sufficient Remedy
for her Daughter: so rubbing her head with his hair, she said; I beseech thee,
Blessed Father, by those heavenly cogitations which lodged in thy Mind, whilst
yet alive, heal my Daughter. She thereupon began to mend, and in a while after
her head grew perfectly well.

Dorothea Brumana had a Son about three years old, that had crooked legs, his
knees bending so inward, that he must sit or ly continually, or be carried
about in Arms. And though they tried all means to make him set but one step
forward, yet they could not effect it. His Mother had a long time wished, that
Philip, when he lived, would have laid his hand on him, but never obtained it
but so soon as news of his death was brought her, she bid the Nurse carry the
Child to Vallicella; whither she her self also went: and taking the Boy out of
her arms, put his bare legs to the H. Corpse, and then made the Nurse bring him
home. So, having prayed a while in the Church, she returns to her house, where
the Nurse meeting her, shows her her Son walking, who from thence forward could
use his legs, and go very well.

CHAP. VII. His Body is opened and Buried.
TOward Night the Physicians and Surgeons came to open him: many of the House
being present. And as they were diffecting him, there fell out a strange
Accident; for while they turned the Cor^s to and fro, He This seven
ey-witnesses attested upon their oaths.
with his own hand covered his Secrets, a^ if he had been sensible and alive.
Which Angelus Victorius observing, cried out; O Admirable Chastity of a man!
Mark and consider, I beseech you, how much he prized and loved Purity in his
life; who being dead still retains such Virgin Modesty! They of the Society had
taken notice of the like passage, when the Body was washed. When they had
opened him, they discerned the Tumor, that rose from his left side, proceeded
from the two Spurious Ribs, which were almost broken, and thrust forth about
the bigness of ones fist. His Inwards and Bowels were all entire and sound;
only the Vena arteriosa was twice as big in him, as natutally it uses to be:
the Membrane about the heart was found without water. So his Bowels were put
into an earthen Pot, and buried by themselves in the common place of Burial.

But, before any thing be said concerning the Interring of this sacred Pledge,
it may happily seem pertinent, to describe the Person and Favor of the B.
Father. He was of a middle Stature of Body, his Complexion somewhat pale, a
pleasant Aspect, his Forehead broad and high, yet not bald; of somewhat a
hooked Nose, little eyes and something sunk, but quick, and gray: his beard not
very long, and black, yet in his latter years snow-white.

When they had embowelled his Body, it was laid again on the Bier, where it was
exposed to be seen all the day following. Soon after on the twenty seventh of
May by the unanimous consent of the whole Congregation he was, toward the
shutting in of the Evening, buried in the usual Burying-place of the Priests,
Which coming to the knowledge of the Cardinals, Frederic-Borromeo, and
Alexander Medices, they considering that a Common Grave suited not with the
Eminence and Sanctity of so worthy a Person, ordered that He should be laid by
himself, till it further appeared, how God would dispose of him. Then they
caused his Name, Age, and the mention of his Excellent Virtues to be engraved
on a Tablet of Brass, enclosing his Body in a Chest, made of Nut-tree: which
they decently placed in a little Chapel, that looks full upon the Organ, on
the left side of the Chancell. All the time he was taking up again, no
putrefaction, no corruption, no ill Scent breathed from him. His face kept its
comeliness, his joints were pliant, and limber, his hands especially, so that
you would rather have said he was asleep, than dead.

As soon as the Body was translated hither, instantly there gathered multitudes
of people about it, Offerings were brought, Tables hung up, and a most fragrant
sweetness was by diverse perceived to come forth of the Grave: which among
others Julia Vrsina Rangonia testifies she smelt, as she was in Prayer, and
that it was like the Scent of Flowers, and Roses, wherewith both she and others
were exceedingly delighted. This Noble Lady Gallonius terms a Second Paula,
both for her charitable offices to the Poor, and for her extraordinary
proficiency in the Worship and Service of God. Innumerable more besides there
were, that only coming to the Sepulcher of the H. man felt their Spirits
cheared, and enflamed unto the practices of Holiness

And it is not be buried in silence, how Augustine Cardinal of Cusa, desiring
to have some small part of the Bowels, made them be taken up; which were found
as fresh, and as white, as if they had been buried the same day. So after they
were well washed and dried, he took what he thought good of them: and the
Fathers likewise very honorably preserved a reasonable Quantity of them in a
Silver Casket of a rich Value.

CHAP. VIII. His Body is Translated unto a Chapel built to his Honor Seven
years after his Death.
IN the mean time Nerus de Nigris, one who always honored and highly respected
Philip, having a fair fortune, and no Issue Male, intended to have a Silver
Coffin made to keep the Corpse in. Acquainting therefore the Priests with his
purpose, they judged it meet, to see first in what condition the Sacred
Relics of his Body were. So, on the seventh of March, four years after his
death, breaking down the Wall, and opening his Tomb, they found the Corpse
covered all over with Rubbish, his clothes so mouldred and consumed, they
looked more like a heap of dirt, then apparel: yea the plate of brass,
wherein was contained a Memorial of the B. man, had taken rust: and every
thing that was but touched fell in pieces straight. Insomuch as the Fathers
thought all was vanished into Dust.

But when they had taken away all that was decayed, they disovered the Body not
only unconsumed, but the Breast especially so clear and whole, the skin so
tender and soft, that they fell into extreme admiration and joy together: the
Physicians confidently maintaining it to be done by Miracle.

After all this, Abbot Crescentius, often heretofore mentioned, procures a
Cipress Coffin to be made; into which, being decently provided, with a Purple
Silk Counterpoint over it, taking the Body out of the old one, they laid it,
about Evening on the thirteenth of March. All both Priests, and others of the
Congregation came to do Reverence to the Body of their deceased Parent. Thither
repaired also Alexander Medices, and Frederic Borromeo to render all bounden
thanks to God, that the Body of their Master was seen so fresh and lively. But
on the thirteenth of May following Alexander commanded it should be attired in
the habit of a Priest, and the same Cope put on him, wherein he said Mass, that
day he dyed. Then the Cardinal put a Chaplet on his head, made of Gum-Flowers,
and pulling off his own hand a Ring that had a Sapphire set in it, puts it on
his, strewing the Body over with Silk-flowers. At his Breast they placed a
Silver Crucifix: his Face which the Dampness of the Grave had a little touched,
they covered over with Silver. And so it fell out, that what the B. Man in his
life time said; in the end proved true: namely, That his Head should be covered
with Silver, and Body be worshipped with no less Veneration, than the other
Relics of Saints. The Coffin thus made was placed in the same Chapel with
great state, being hard by the Organ on the left side of the Chancell: where it
continued to the twenty fourth of May in the Year One thousand six hundred and
two.

Meanwhile Nerus de Nigris, having chosen the Servant of Christ Patron to him
and his Heirs, adopted himself and his into Philips Family by Legal Process:
quartering his own Coat, whose Arms were a white Dog, with Philips in a Field
Azure three Mullets Or. But as was said, Nerus having never a Son, betaking him
to the Intercession of the H. man, soon obtained a Boy, whom in memory of the
Blessing received, he named Philip. Thereupon altering his mind about making a
Silver Coffin, he resolves to build a Chapel in honor of him, beautified
with those Ornaments, and that Costliness in Jewels, as is at this day seen.
The first stone of the Foundation was laid by Cardinal Francis Maria Taurusius
together with XII. Brass Coins, and one Silver one; every one stamped with the
Image of the B. man, and this Inscription following. Beatus Philippus Nerius
Florentinus, Congregationis Oratorii Fundator, obiit Romae Anno, 1595. The B.
Philip Nery a Florentine, Founder of the Congregation of the Oratory, died at
Rome, in the Year 1595. And on a larger Medall of Lead were graven these words,
Sacellum hoc in honorem Beati Philippi Nerii Florentini, Congregationis
Oratorii Fundatoris, Nerus de Nigris Nobilis Florentinus ob singularem in
Beatum Virum pietatem a fundamentis, suis sumptibus magnificentissime
extruendum curavit, anno Jubilei 1600. mense Julio, die octava, Festi Sanctorum
Apostolorum Petri and Pauli, Clemente VIII. Pontifice, Pontificatus anno nono.
This Chapel, in honor of the B. Philip Neri of Florence, Founder of the
Congregation of the Oratory, Nerus de Nigris a Noble Florentine out of his
singular affection unto that B. man, caused to be most magnificently raised
from the ground, at his own charge, in the Year of Jubilee 1600. in the month of
July, the eighth day of the Feast of the H. Apostles Peter and Paul, in the
nineth year of Clement the Eighth, then Pope.

As the Chapel was a building, Nerus's Son fell sick of a disease incident to
Children, called by the Italians Variolae, or the Measils, which took away both
his speech and breath at once. The Father unable to endure the sight of his
dying Son, went aside into a By-Room, and flinging himself on the bed
expostulates with Philip in this manner, Is it possible, Blessed Father, that I
should lay my Son my only Son in the Chapel, which I have but lately built to
thy honor? Scarce had he spoken these words, but the Child called his Father
three or four times, as Children use to do; at which, the Countess of Pitilian,
the Child's Sister, comes and acquaints her Father, how her Brother called him.
He running presently to him, the Child cried Babba I am well, for my
Grandfather has made me well (so he used to term Philip, because the people of
the house, showing him Philips Picture, would say This is your Grandfather.)
They ask him, who, his Grandmother? the Child cries out aloud; No, not my
Grandmother, but my Grandfather. And showing him his Picture, This said he,
this man made me well. They asked him how? the Child putting his right hand on
his head, signified that Philip cured him by the touch of his hand Afterward
falling to suck, and so into a pleasant sleep, there came out of his ears such
a deall of corrupt matter, that they perceived an impostume was broak in his
head: and the purulency of the disease purging for diverse days together, at
last the Child recovered beyond all expectation.

Nerus, upon the receipt of so eminent a mercy, finished his Chapel: into
which, thus every way completed the Venerable Corpse was conveyed with great
solemnity and devotion, out of the forenamed Chapel, on the twenty fourth of
May in the year One thousand six hundred* and two being full seven years after
Philips death. There were present at this Holy Translation, though privately,
some Cardinals, diverse Prelates, with all the Priests, and Brethren of the
Oratory. The next Morning Cardinal Taurusius said the first Mass there, and
from thence forward was the daily Sacrifice offered here to God, with great
resort of the Faithful thereunto.

CAHP. IX. The Elogies and Titles of Honor given him after his Death.
THe fame of Philips Holiness, who while he lived was for his great Merits, and
the Glory of his Miracles, the Wonder of his Time, became after his death so
general and confirmed; that immediately Votive Tables were brought unto his
Sepulcher. The first whereof was hung up by Marc. Antonio Maffa the Abbot, and
Apostolical Visiter, being likewise Chief Overseer for the Examination of
Bishops.

For a little after Philips death being taken with a Putrid Fever and growing
every day worse than other, the Physicians affording him no relief, he dreamt,
that he saw, as he lay, the House all on fire the Walls utterly demolished by
Carpenters, and two men, that were with him, crushed by the fall of a Wall,
lying for dead. The Abbot affrighted hereat on the sudden hears Philips Voice,
chiding those that destroyed the building, and Saying; Servate Abbatem: Save
the Abbot, O Save the Abbot: and forthwith he found himself out of all fear of
danger. Nor was it a fond imagination, as the sequel manifested; for when he
awaked he was better, and, the day after, as well as if he had never bin ill at
all. Whereupon, as a Testimony of his Gratitude to the Servant of God, he
presently hung up the foresaid Table at his Monument.

The same Abbot also hung up the first Lamp before his Tomb: which when the
Priests, to lesson the Pomp, caused to be removed, he, complaining to the Pope,
had it placed there again; which a Nob^e Lady hearing of, straight gave another
Silver one of a great Value.

The same year by Permission from Authority was his Statue erected at Rome,
with the Title of Blessed to it, and a Glory round about it, and speciously set
out with figures of his Miracles on the Sides. Besides diverse others of
Plaster, which Noblemen and Ladies kept privately in their Chambers; of which
Clement the Eighth had one upon his Desk, and another hanging on the Wall,
among the Images of the Saints,

As soon as ever he was dead, his Chamber began to be in much honor among all;
and to have the Veneration of a Consecrated place; being frequently resorted
unto by Cardinals, Prelates, Nobles, Plebeians, and men of all orders. But the
Chapel where his Body was, had so great Reverence done it by such as came
thither, they kissed the very Walls, and plucking pieces of stones out of them,
carried them in devotion home with them, yea some gathered up the Dust off the
Pavement to keep. There you might have seen some striving to get the Flowers
that bedecked his Grave; others daily visiting the Chapel, some barefooted;
all which affirmed, they had received many Divine Blessings through his means.

The Year ensuing on the return of his Anniversary, in the presence of many
Bishops and Cardinals the Mass for the day was in solemn manner, and with
their costliest habits on, sung: and after they had done singing the Vespers, a
Panegyrique was made in honor of him.

Many were the Elogies published in praise of Philip, by men remarked for both
knowledge and Piety. First, Cardinal Gabriell Paleottus, in his Book, De ^ona
Senec^ut^s, gives him these commendations: These things, O Religious and
well-affected Reader, were some while since not only written, and digested into
this Method by us, but together with the whole work perfected, so that nothing
else was wanting, but to Print them. But see the Eternal counsel of the Grand
disposer of All! The B. Man, who a little before had bin somewhat distempered,
yet not so, as to keep his bed, or intermit his ordinary employments was
snatched from us in an instant, and on the twenty sixth of May fetched from
this his Banishment here below to his Celestial Country. Whose so sudden and
unexpected End notwithstanding, we have held our former purpose of proposing
this Excellent Old man, as the lively Mirror wherein to behold the advantages
of Age. Since although to our Eyes he seemed to dye four months sithence, yet
as by his Religious and renowned actions we have cause to hope, in the region
of the Living he still lives. He lives no less upon Earth in the Memory of
Virtuous and Holy men. He lives especially in the City of Rome, where he left a
numerous Issue of Spiritual Children of all degrees, whom he begot in Christ.
He lives among the Sons of the Congregation severally dispersed abroad; of whom
some are sent into remote Lands by Christ's Vicar and Supreme Pastor on Earth,
to govern his Flock. And a little after: Which his so Noble Acts being to
spread farther daily, and as is to be hoped, to come to the knowledge of all,
we have here pourtrayed him to the Life, to revive such as loved him as their
Father in Christ; and that others, stirred up by the Glory of his Name, might
be awakened to the imitation of his Virtues: last of all that Posterity might
have a perpetual Monument in their view, whence they may learn to know the
happiness of Old age, and to reverence it also, as is due. For of his Death and
departure to the Lord, the End of his Pilgrimage being agreeable to the whole
course of his most holy Life foregoing, and he, as he had led, so concluding
his life, not without undeniable arguments of his Sanctity, let others, to
whose care that is committed, make report. Thus Paleottus.

Cardinal Frederic Borromeo in a Letter to Ant. Gallonius writes thus: 'You
best know, how great respect I have always born to this Person, and I cannot
believe you ignorant of my love to him, which since his decease is so far from
being lessened, that I would most willingly sacrifice my Blood to his Memory,
if need required.

Cardinal Aug. Cusanus thus: It has pleased Almighty God to take unto Glory
that Blessed Soul, adorned with so many Christian Virtues, after wellnigh
fourscore years spent in the service of Christ; concerning whom that saying of
H. Scripture may be applied; Qui ad justitiam erudiunt multos, fulgebunt quasi
stellae in perpetuas aeternitates. And they that turn many to righteousness,
shall shine as the Stars for ever and ever. And that Longitudine dierum replebo
eum, and ostendam illi salutare meum: With length of days will I satisfy him,
and show him my Salvation? So Cusanus, whose devotion to Philip was such, that
not long after his death, being to make his Will, he next God himself, and the
B. Virgin, the Princes of the Apostles, and S. Augustine, recommended his Soul
to the B. Philip.

Cardinal Octavius Bandinus thus: In Philip alone me thinks the Summary of all
Virtues was comprised: and all those Excellencies met as concentred in him,
which we wonder at apart in other Saints.

Cardinal Caesar Baronius, in his Notes on the Roman Martyrologe, the twenty
one of August, speaking occasionally of the B. Philip, Benitius a Florentine,
thus falls upon the praises of Philip Neri. Nor is that Noble City of Florence
famous only for one Saint Philip, there being another of that Name, the Founder
and Father of Our Congregation of the Oratory in the City: that B. Philip
surnamed Neri, renowned for his Purity of living, and incomparable Charity
toward God and his Neighbor; whose frequent Miracles sufficiently testify,
that he now enjoys the the Society of the Saints in heaven.

Cardinal Hierom Pamphilio: Far and wide does the fame of this B. Father daily
spread, by reason of the apparent Miracles which the Lord shows on such as
fly for help to him. Indeed the continual favors he has done me, make me
hope for his aid on all assayes: therefore I resign up my self to him, to his
Tuition I wholly commit my self, and beseech him daily, not to deny me at any
time his Protection.

But of the Virtues and Accomplishments of Philip have diverse written: the
chief of which are, Rutilius Benzonius Bishop of Loretto, in a Book which he
put forth, Of the H. Year of Jubilee: John Baptist Tuphus Bishop of Cerra, in
his Annals of Clearks Regnlar, Silvanus Razzius in his Lives of the Saints in
Tuscany: Alphonso Vilegas in his Flos Sanctorum: Archangelo Giano in his
History of the aforesaid Philip Benitius of Florence: Thomas Bozzius in his
Book, De signis Ecclesiae Dei and de Ruinis Gentium: and Francis Bocchius, in
his Treatise Of the Praise of the Citizens of Florence: with sundry others here
omited. Several Monuments also were set up in Memory of him, here and there;
but especially at Rome, Julius S^ncedonius, before he was Bishop of Grosseto,
had his Picture drawn, and set in the Gallery at S. Hieroms a Charitate, with
his Sons in a Ring about him, and this inscription on it: B. Philippo Nerio
Florentino. Vt ubi triginta tres annos eximia Sanctitatis and miraculorum laud
claruerat, innumerisque ad Christi obsequium traductis, prima Congregationis
fundamenta jecerat; ibi aliquod ejus rei monumentum extaret; Templi hujus
domus, ac Sacerdotum Deputatus, annuente piissima Congregatione Charitatis,
Parenti in Spiritu optimo been merenti posuit. Kalend. Septembris. 1605. That
is: To the B. Philip Nerius of Florence. That where for thirty three years he
had flourished, in great reputation for Sanctity, and Miracles, converting vast
numbers to the obedience of Christ, and laid the first Foundations of the
Congregation, there might remain some Memorial of the same, the Deputy of the
Church, and Priests of this House, with the consent of the Religious
Congregation of Charity, erected this for their Best, and Best deserving
Spiritual Father. September 1. 1605. And it is memorable, that when, some
years since, that House was fired the to ground, so that another was fain to be
built, the Gallery, where that Picture was, had no hurt at all.

Besides, presently after the death of the B. Old Man, abundance of Offerings
were brought to adorn his Sepulcher. Cardinal Augustine Cusanus bestowed a
Canopy curiously wrought in Needlework* Cardinal Alph. Vicecomes, one of the
Congregation gave a Rich Silk furniture for the same purpose. Withal a decree
was made by the People of Rome, whereby they were bound every year to bring a
Silver Chalice and some Tapers on his Festival to him The Duke of Bavaria gave
a Silver Lamp of a thousand Crowns value, to burn continually at his Altar. And
Charles Cardinal of Lorreign hung up another Lamp of Silver: yea and daily
after that, diverse rich Presents were brought thither by Persons of Quality,
both men and women.

Five years after his death, Ant. Gallonius writ and published his Life, being
one intimate with him; it came forth backed with the Popes Authority, and the
Title of Saint: Clement the Eighth made it often be read to him. Besides that
five Illustrious Cardinals approved it with their Suffrages subscribed thus: J.
N. do avouch that whatsoever is here written of the B. Philip Neri, I have
partly seen with my own eyes, partly have received from the sure Testimony of
very Credible Persons. N. etc.

Clement the Eighth dying, his Successor Leo XI. was requested by some of the
Nobility to Canonize Carlo Borromeo: to which he answered; Indeed I am content
to Register the B. Carlo among the Saints, but will at no hand omit Philip
Neri: though, being prevented by death, he did neither.

What esteem of the H. Man Pope Paul V. had, appears by this, that he Sainted
him by his Bull: and gave leave for the Office to be said, and Mass to be
celebrated in honor of him: yea and by sentence from his own Mouth proclaimed
a Plenary Indulgence to such as on his Holy day devoutly visit the Church of
Vallicella.

Gregory XV. likewise expressed his abundant love, respect, and esteem of
Philip, in that being yet Cardinal, he gave out, not only in words, but by
letters, that if ever it pleased God to call him to S. Peter's See, he would
without delay enter him, among the Saints in the Calender. Which so falling
out, he afterward performed; for in the Year 1622. on the Feast of S. Gregory
the great, he with the liking and joy of all, Canonized Philip, together with
Isidore, Ignatius, Xaverius, and Teresa.

After his Canonization Peoples piety, and devotion toward him began to grow,
and diffuse it self farther daily; so that not only throughout Italy, but even
in France, Spain and Germany, public Prayers and Orations were made in honor
of him. Nor may it be concealed, that Elizabeth Queen of Spain caused Philips
effigies, set forth with most costly Jewels, to be carried about with the rest
in Procession, the same day the other four were Solemnized at Madrid.

Temples likewise were built, Altars erected, Images set up, and Decrees passed
by diverse Towns and Pityes, which had made choice of Philip for their Patron,
that his Festival should be as regularly observed by the Inhabitants, as if
enjoined by public Edict. And the Order of the Dominicans in a General
Ponvocation decreed, that on his Anniversary they would say their Office for
him every year.

Last of all, to what a reputation and fame for holiness, his Name is at this
day arrived, the numberless Vows hung up at his Grave by Suppliants, and the
frequent evidence of Miracles testified from all Parts do abundantly show.

THE FIFTH BOOK, of the LIFE of PHILIP NERI. Of the Miracles which He did
whilst he lived.
CHAP. I. Miracles done by him with the Sign of the Cross.
HAving in the preceding Books spoken of Philip from his Birth to his Death;
and brought down the relation of his Virtues thus far, intermixed with many
strange Occurrents; it now rests, that we particularize, which on purpose was
before ommited, the rest of the Miracles wrought by his means: not doubting,
but they that read them, may again no less, than by perusal of his Life. That
so those who read and see the Sanctity of the B. man confirmed by so many and
so manifest signs and wonders, may be the more easily won to the imitation of
his Virtues.

First then, to begin with our own, Prometheus Peregrinus a Priest of the
Congregation was so miserably wrung with the Cholick, as if his Bowels had been
pulled asunder from him. His pains increasing still, Philip comes to visit him,
and laying his hands on him, crossed This Promotheus testified upon oath.
the part affected, saying in a jesting srot, it is nothng: easing him thereby
of all his grief and torment.

Antonia Caraccia was desperately ill of a Putrid Fever, and a pain of her
sides, whereof she lay sick fifteen days This Antonia and her Husband
witnessed upon oath.
and was now not able to stir, her Husband, desirous of his Wifes health,
acquaints Philip with it who bid him; Go we will pray for her. But, her
dissease still growing upon her, she could neither rest, nor eat: her Husband
returns to Philip and tells him; Antonia is a dying, I bid you quoth he, not
long since, doubt not, it will come to nothing, go, and I will follow: and
straight way coming to her he asked, Where is your grief? she showed him her
right side. He laying his hand on it, and crossing it, told her, This is
nothing, it is gone. Scarce had he turned his back but forthwith her disease
left her. The people of the house would have noised the Miracle, but Antonia
bid them; Hold your peace, lest the Father take it ill: for he charged me to
keep my Bed two or three days, that I might not seem to recover so quickly.

Angela Lippea for diverse years had been troubled with a pain in her Shoulders,
so that she could scarcely breathe, and was so disabled in her right arm, as
she had no use of it. Her Daughter Julia told her, Mother, pray go to Philip,
and entreat him, but to sayt he Lords Prayer once over you, or the Angelical
Salutation, and you will be well. She did as her Daughter counseled her.
Philip asked her; Why does not she that sent you do as you say? at which the
Woman went away sad; but he pitying her said: Go to, let us pray together; and
griping her hand hard, where her gteatest pain lay, he made the sign of the
Cross upon the place, and presently the Woman was restored to her health.

Virginia Martellia had very sore eyes, and coming to Philip she desired him to
procure her help from Almighty God. The Servant of Christ, dipping his finger
in a Basin of water that was by, and stroking her eyes, made the sign of the
Cross on them, and they were instantly cured.

Maria Paganella affirms, that she was many times cured of the Headache, with
Philips crossing her forehead only with his finger: insomuch as passing through
the Church, she would come to him, and desire to be marked with that sign, and
saying nothing at all to him of her malady, was healed straight. The like she
said befell her, as often as she was ill at her Stomach.

In Turris Speculorum, Isabella Mareria had a Chamber hard by a Lime-pit, which
had been newly watered: and it chanced, about midnight the steam of the Lime
evaporating filled her Room all over, so that rising to Mattens, as she used, a
Dizziness in the head took her, that she fell backward, and trying twice or
thirce to stand up, she failed still. So being had to bed, she lay there for a
Month; and as often as she ventured to rise that Giddiness seized her. Her
Physician, fearing she might go away on the sudden, gave order, she should be
watched: in the meantime the H. man comes thither on some other occasions;
which she hearing of, gat up, and went to him, acquaints him with her disease:
says Philip to her: Be of good cheer, you will do well: and holding her head
hard betwixt his hands made a many Crosses on it: whereupon a filthy matter
issued out at her Nostrils, which afforded her present ease, and in short time
she was perfectly well.

CHAP. II. Miracles wrought by the Touch of his hands.
A Noble Roman had an Ulcer broke out upon him, that put him to such anguish
and torture, as he could not rest for it; and fearing it might prove the
disease called S. Antony's fire he in a fright comes to Philip for direction,
who looking at him, as he made toward him, before ever he had spoke a word to
him, said: Shut the doors and show me the part affected. he did so, and the H.
man lifting up his eyes to heaven, and praying, fell a trembling, as he was
wont, then stroking the Boil with his hand twice or thrice, healed him
immediately of his pain. Whereupon he cries out; Thou art a Saint indeed,
Father, I will into in the City, and proclaim thee Holy in every Street. He
clapping his hand upon his mouth enjoined him silence; and would not let him
stir thence, before he promised him, that he would not speak of it. The Noble
man engaged to him: but Philip dying, he declared the whole proceeding, and
that upon Oath.

Peter Victricius of Parma, while he was Servant to Cardinal Boncompagno, who
was afterward Gregory the Thirteenth, fell so dangerously ill that the Doctors
left him, as despairing of his Life. To him comes Philip, and after he had done
praying in his Chamber, he lays his hand upon the sick party; who strangely and
suddenly recovers, publishing it to all, where ever he came, that at the
Prayers of Philip he was made whole. Whereupon, he was so addicted to the B.
man, that he chose him for his Confessor; using to disburden his Conscience to
him thrice aweek, and receive the B. Sacrament: he died rich in good works, in
the ninety seventh year of his Age.

Mauricius Anerius also lay very desperately sick, being so grievously pained
at his Stomach, that he was bereft of his speech, and his Pulse had left
beating, the Physicians giving him over. To him repairs Philip, who kneelling
down at his bed side, and praying, as he used to do, said to them that were by,
I pray repeat the Lords Prayer once, and the Angels Salutation, for I should be
sorry he should dye of this disease. Having so said, laying his hand on the
Patients head and stomach, he went away silent; scarce was he departed, when
Mauricius felt himself quit of all pain, recovering his Pulse and his Speech,
and the next day rose, and was perfectly well.

Before he was acquainted with Philip, he was much encumbered with Secular
business; and seldom going to Confession himself, had interdicted his Wife the
so often going to Confession; yea he forbid her particularly to repair to the
H. man. She relates all to Philip, who wished her, not to give over her course
begun; for her Husband should shortly become a most Religious and devout
Person. And so it proved, for not long after Maurice chose Philip for his
Confessor, and was most ready and forward to works of piety all his life after.

Maurice had a son, named John Francis about fourteen years old, who fell into
so violent a Of this were four sworn ey-witnesses (beside Jo. Francis) of whom
one is that Noble Lady Julia Ursina Rangonia
pestilentiall Fever, that the Doctors would come no more to him. Lying thus
for seventeen days without either eating, or stirring, or any sign of Life,
save that he was discerned to breathe somewhat softly, Julia Vrsina Rangonia,
the Marchioness, hearing of it comes to the dying Person, desirous, as she
said, to see this prodigious Miracle. Philip foresaw all this, who anon coming
into the Room, and praying after his usual manner, requested the standers by
to say the Lords Prayer once, and the Salutation of the Angel. Then putting his
hand upon the Child, and squeezing his forehead hard, he calls his Mother, and
after a jesting way said to her; It is well done, to let your Son perish for
want of Victuals, bring him some Wine. They did so he puts a little into the
Boys mouth, which as soon as he had tasted, he drank up a whole cup full: and
instantly came to his senses again, grew better, and some few days after got
out of his bed, and was as well as ever.

Carlo Vrsino, of about thirteen years of age, was sick of a Pleurisy, whom
the Physicians gave for lost; his Mother This Carlo and his Mother Livia
Vestria both publicly attested.
comes to Philip, desiring he would take his Confession, as he lay a dying. He
went and approaching near his Bed side, dismissed the Company, and asked the
Youth, where his pain lay? he answered, on the left side of his stomach. The
Servant of God kneeling down pressed the part with his hand, that it seemed to
the patient to go to his very Intrals. Then after his Confession taken, Philip
perceiving his disease more violent, the Penance which he had enjoined the sick
party he undertook to perform himself; and bid him; Doubt not, for you shall
not die of this sickness; so went his way. He was no sooner gone, but the youth,
calling to his Mother, said; O Mother I am well: she would not believe him: he
tells her a second time; Indeed I am well they bring him meat, he eats, and
slept soundly. And the Physician coming to him found him in perfect health.

Fabius Vrsinus likewise fell into a pestelentiall Fever, which brought him so
low, that he was deprived of speech, and being anointed with the sacred Oil
lay drawing on, but having before hand told his Aunt, the Marchioness of
Rangonia, that he reposed much in Philips prayers, she desirous to satisfy her
Nephew, caused him to be sent for. He came, and taking the sick parties head in
his hand, held his breast to his own, the patient asked who is it? Philip
answered, it was he; asking, Where his pain was? At my heart; quoth he. The H.
man laying his right hand upon the place, pressed it hard, which Fabius felt
colder than Ice, and presently told his Aunt, He was well: so he rose from his
bed quite cured, to the admiration both of the Physicians, and the Neighbors.

John Baptist Boniperto was extremely tormented with the Headache; Philip coming
to him laid his right hand upon his Head, and fetched a great groan from his
Heart twice together, when immediately he was quit of his pain, without using
any other Remedy.

In the year One thousand five hundred and ninety, Mark Antonio Maffa, often
heretofore recited, disceases being at that time rife, by reason of Tyber
overflowing, was in great danger of death, from a malignant Fever, and a pain
in his head together. The B. man, coming to visit him, and as he used joining
his breast to his own holds his head hard between both his hands, his heart
leaped, and prayed a while and went his way: at which the Abbot forthwith was
released from his grief.

John Baptista Crescius was in such a burning Fever, and violent pain of the
head that he thought his Temples even This himself testified.
beaten in pieces with hammers; insomuch that he was minded to throw himself
out of his window into a well, The B. man being sent to, came, and as soon as
the sick Person saw him, he earnestly besought him, since he was not able any
longer to endure it, that he would obtain for him either a mitigation of his
torment, or speedy death. With that, Philip laid his hand on his head,
counselling him, to recommend his condition in devout manner to the assistance
of the B. Virgin and forsake his sins; as soon as he had done speaking to him,
his pain was gone, his Fever abated and he within few days restored to his
former strength, him had Philip cured of sore eyes, when he was an Infant, by
the mere touch of his hands in like manner.

Livia Vestria, Wife to Valerius Vrsinus, being very subject to a dizziness in
her head had lien above a Month in grievous Testified by her self.
pains of her head, and being something eased one day, she forced her self and
went to Vallicella. Where as she was in Confession, she felt her head on a
sudden run round, insomuch as He that Confessed Her sent for Philip. He coming,
and laying his right hand on her Head, said, No harm; and instantly both her
dizziness and her pain left her, and she was never after taken so any more.

Sigismunda de Rusticis, the Wife of Alexander Vitelleschius, was pained with a
continual headache; the H. man at that time used, after the exercises of the
Oratory were over, to resort, together with his Sons, to the Gardens belonging
to this Family, there to recreate themselves: where it so fell out, that as he
came, Sigismunda was in the place, and being more vehemently tortured then,
than at other times, she ran toward Philip, and humbly craved help of him. He
taking her head betwixt both his hand, and squeezing it, cured her, who never
after complained of the Headache more.

Katherine the Daughter of Hieronymo Ruissio, some five years old, had certain
Scabs grew about her Nose, and having tried several Medicines, her malady,
that Of this (besides Katherine herself) are three sworn ey-witnesses.
seemed to be lessened at first, in a while returned worse than ever. Her
mother hereupon brings her to Philip to be healed, who seeing the Child in such
a miserable case, struck with compassion, touches her infected Nostrills,
saying Doubt not, it will be nothing; and straight that Scurf began to fall
off, and in short time she was restored as whole as ever.

Peter Ruissius, Katherines own Brother, had a grievous headache, his Father
importunately requested Philip to cure him of it, he told him; It were bet-for
your Son to die; but because I pity you, I will do all I can that Almighty God
may restore him his health; and immediately laying his hand on his head, he
freed him of his pain. Hereupon Hieronymo began to attribute such honor to
him, that he confidently sent another of his Sons, who was exceedingly troubled
with the same pain and other infirmityes, to be healed by him. And his hope was
not frustrate; for as soon as Philip but touched the Child with his hand, he
became presently well.

Victoria Varesia was taken with a pain in her left shoulder, which so
disquieted her, that she could neither sleep, nor Her self witnessed this.
ly in her Bed. And remembering how she had formerly been cured by the Holy man,
she repairs to him, acquaints him, how afflicted she was. He pleasantly
answered; Away, you are always troubling me; and presently asked her; Where is
your grief? she touching her Shoulder, showed him there her disease lay. At
that Philip thrusting out his Arm, struck the part affected with his Fist
saying; Never doubt it you are well. And presently the Woman found ease, and
before she got home, was wholly freed of her distemper.

Ersilia Bucca lay desperately sick, by her Physicians doomed to death, and by
her family lamented as already dead. This was received from her husband; and
witnessed by Ersilia her self upon oath.
Her Husband requesting Philip, to vouchsafe to come and see his sick Wife, he
consented, and when he was come said; Ersilia shall not die of this disease;
then approaching to the Bed, laid his hand upon her head, saying; Put away your
fear, you shall not die. At which she was very joyful, and her sickness abating
presently, within three days she was quite well.

Lucretia Garzia had such a dreadful Ulcer broke out upon one of her Breasts,
that the Physicians determined to sear it with a red hot iron. She dreading the
torment of fire though she were enjoined to keep her Bed, goes to, Philip, and
tells him the whole passage. He pitying her asked, Where was her sore: the Woman
shows him; who touching the part with his hand, said, as his fashion was Doubt
not, for hereafter you will do very well, When she was come home, as she sat
at table, on a sudden she cries out; What is this? my pain disturbs me no more,
and, if I mistake not, me thinks I am perfectly recovered. She looks, and
tries, finds her self completely cured, and the Surgeons coming, to sear her,
were amazed to see her well.

Laura Hier. Moronus's Daughter, about thirteen years of age, fell so
dangerously ill, that her Parents bewailed her Of this (besides Laura her self)
are three sworn ey-witnesses.
as dead. So, being prepared by H. Unction, the Habit, and all things else
provided for her Funeral, it came in her Fathers mind to send for Philip, to
assist her by his Prayers, as she lay adying. He comes, and she, having her
eyes shut, was not able to speak a word, when the B. man exulting in the
Spirit, and shaking with his wonted trembling, breathes in her face, and as it
were sportingly hits her a Box on the ear and taking her by the hair of the
head jogs her to and fro, bidding her recite the Venerable Name of Jesus: at
which she, that was ready to die, opens her eyes, and pronouncing the Name of
Jesus, begins to mend, and in short time regained her former health.

Julia Lippia for almost two years was woefully tormented with pains in her
head; which, when they came, held her two or three days together. And going to
Mass one to day to Vallicella, she was suddenly so surprised with them, that
she could not stir from her place; therefore she sat; and when Philip went by,
she said; Father, I am taken with such a huge pain in my head, that I am not
able to return home. Then he, holding her head betwixt his hands, being seized
with his accustomed trembling, asked, How she did. Better, replied she, but yet
not quite well. Then the B. man held her harder, and asked her again, How she
did. who answered, She was very well; and so returned to her house without any
pain at all.

Katherine Corradiana lay sick of a most dangerous disease, and being already
anointed with the H. Oil was now drawing on; Philip coming thither lays his
hand on her, and made certain Singers which he brought with him, sing some
pious Verses wherein the Name of Jesus was often repeated. They did so, and upon
their singing the Woman felt her self eased, and in a short time recovered. As
she was beginning to mend, the Devil annoyed her ever and anon, and appearing
to her asked; Why does this Paltry fellow Philip come to you? But she wisely
answered him never a word, and merely by her Prayers vanquished the wily
Adversary.

The B. Father one time had heard, that Clement the Eighth then Pope kept his
Bed sick of the Gout; so to him he This was taken from the Cardinals, Cusanus,
Borromeus, Taurusiu, Baronius: who had it from the Pope himself.
went, whom as soon as the Pope saw entering his Chamber, he charged him not to
come near him, as not enduring, that the very sheets should be touched, by
reason of the anguish of his disease. But he notwithstanding passing along the
Room, the Pope cried out again, Touch me not. Philip replied, Doubt not Blessed
Father: and therewith taking him by the right hand, where lay his pain, he
griped it hard, trembling as he used to do. As soon as the Pope felt him; Go on
Father, says he, and touch me so again, for I am extremely pleased wi^h it: so
his pain left him. This Clement himself often attested, and especially in the
Congregation for the Examination of Bishops.

It pleased Almighty God to renew the same Miracle again, by his Servant
Juvenall Ancina, Bishop of Salucioe, of whom we have formerly spoken, and
written his Life in Italian some years ago. For in the year One thousand six
hundred and two it chanced, in the City of Fossano, Thomas Baua then Governor
of the place, and after a Senator of Taurini, was sick of the Gout; whom
Juvenall coming to see, without any Ceremony presently tells him; This disease,
Baua, was thus cured by my Father Philip: and at he same time labors to take
hold of his hand that was diseased; but the Patient pulled it away, fearing he
would pain him worse. Juvenall bids him, Be of good cheer; for thus, said he,
catching him by the diseased hand, my Father Philip cured Clement VIII of his
Gout. He had no sooner said those words, but Baua was quit of his pain, and
could use his fingers at pleasure, clutching his Fist diverse times together,
being never after affected with that Malady.

The like happened to Attilius Tinozzius; who being pained so with the Gout,
that he might not be touched, was visited by Philip, who asked him, How he did;
Very ill, says he, but have a care you do not touch my foot. Doubt not,
replies Philip, and on the sudden taking him by the foot, crossed it, and
immediately he was cured; yea he who had been often troubled with the Gout
before, never had it after.

John Manzolius aff^rms, that whenever he was ill of the Gout, he used no
other Remedy but to go to the H. Father, and entreat him to touch the
distempered part but with his hand, and thereby was instantly healed: the same
diverse others do testify to have befallen them.

In brief, it was so usual for him to cure diseases, by the bare touching the
sick with his hands, that Cardinal Taurusius was wont to say, That Sacred and
Soveragin hand of his, by the mere touch thereof did both comfort the sad, and
cure the sick. And Angelus Victorius, Philips Physician having been often freed
of the Headache by him, said; That he rather gained Remedy from Philip, than
gave any to him.

CHAP. III. Cures wrought by his Prayers.
LAurentius Christianus a Priest Beneficed in the Vatican Church, whose
Confession Philip was used to take, had a most violent Fever, which brought him
so low, that being fortified by receiving the B. Sacrament and Extreme Unction,
he lay a drawing on. The H. man being assistant to him, falling into his wonted
tremblings, and exultation of Spirit, kneels down by him and prays: which
done, Laurentius, says he, shall not die now; and coming nearer, lays his hand
on his head, calling him by his Name. He straight opens his eyes, knows Philips
voice, and by and by lost his Fever.

Barth. Fuginius, a Roman, lying desperately sick was anointed, and by the
Physicians left as past hope. Philip Of this are two sworn ey-witnesses,
besides Bartholomew himself.
asked Angelus Vellius, who was his Confessor, before many that were by, how
the ^linick did; this was about Evening: he answered He is a dying; for the
Physicians said, he would scarce live till Morning. At that says Philip to his
Sons; Will ye have the Man live or, die? they all answered, Live, if it be
possible. Then quoth he; Let every one say five Pater Nosters, and as many Ave
Marias: they did so, and in the Morning Fuginius was perfectly recovered.

Barsum Archdeacon of Alexandria began to be affected with a consumptive Fever,
for he spit blood, and the Doctors This is attested publikly by two
ey-witnesses, besides the Archdeacon himself.
gave him over. Hier. Viecchiettus, who brought Barsum from Egypt to Rome,
repairs hereupon to Philip, desiring him to recommend the sad condition of the
Archdeacon to God. And as Philip was at Mass, they perceived Barsum in a quiet
sleep, who for three days and nights had not so much as slumbred: afterward
the B. man appointed Barsum should be brought to Him; Hierom tells him, he must
get up, and take Coach, for says he, Philip has commanded so. He answers, He
could not possibly. Hierom was urgent with him to rise, if it were but only
because Philip required him. So Barsum takes heart, and rises, and is had in a
Coach to Philip: the Good man goes to meet him, kisseth and embraces him,
where they spent some time in mutual Caresses. Barsum meanwhile, finding his
strength come to him, entreats Philip to continue his prayers for him hoping by
this means to obtain health from the Most high God, as he called him. The
Father promises him, and bids him go to Cardinal Frederic Borromeo upon some
certain business: and as they went, See, says Barsum, I am perfectly well. For
so he was, and in few days became so lusty, that those who had seen him sick,
not knowing him by his looks, said in merriment; This is not Barsum, but some
other like him.

He not long after returning to Alexandria, when Philip was dead, came again to
Rome, where in an Oration to Clement VIII. recounting the particular Favors,
he had received in the City, he made a large and honorable mention among the
rest, of his Health restored to him at at the prayers of Philip.

John Manzolius, being about seventy years of age, was taken with a Flux, and
Fever, and anointed with the H. Unction, as unlikely to live, who calling his
Nephew to him, bad him go to Philip, and pray him from me to send Of this
(besides Manzolius) are witnesses sworn of those that were present.
a Priest, to commend my soul to God, now I am a dying, and to assign me a
place of Burial when I am dead, as he shall think fit. His Nephew did as he
bid him, and Philip sent Matthias Maffeus, a Priest whom he loved entirely. Now
the Phisicians had declared, that within two hours he would certainly dye, and
his kindred had provided Mourning ready; nay the Brothers of the Society of
Misericordia were invited to his Funeral, and Montes Zazzara, one of them, in
the Morning told Philip, that Manzolius was dead. The B. man replied, Manzolius
neither was dead, nor would die of this sickness: and therewith sends for
Maffeus, and asks, How he did; be times this Morning I hear he dyed, says he.
You are much mistaken, replied Philip; go again, and be sure you see him your
self. He goes and finds him alive, and well. For that night the H. man had put
up long and most fervent Prayers for him, and knew very well what he had
obtained of God. Manzolius had long before desired Philip to be with him at his
death; who answered; I shall die before you. And so it proved, for Manzolius
survived Philip two years.

Alexander Corvinus a Noble man, who had lived much in the Court of Rome, fell
dangerously ill; whereupon says Philip to his Sons; We must take some care of
Alexander. So he presently repairs to him, as he lay and says Mass with him,
for there was a Chapel there; but whilst he was celebrating those Divine
Mysteries, he began to be transported with such a Fervor of Holy Love,
showring down such plenty of Tears, and sending forth such Vollies of sighs,
that you would easily affirm he must needs procure health to the sick Person.
So soon as Mass was done he bid the Clinick cheer up, and assuring him of his
recovery went away: two days after Corvinus left his bed, and came to the Court
and showed himself in as good plight as ever.

Pompeius Paterius Priest of the Congregation falling into a violent Fever,
Philip comes to him, hears his confession, and Himself witnessed it.
being seized with his wonted trembling, having prayed awhile, laid his hands
on his head, saying as his manner was, doubt not: at which very words he was
instantly eased, eat his meat with his usual appetite, and regained his Former
strength.

Another time going into *S. James's* Hospital of the Incurabili, He found a
sick man senseless, and speechless, with a Crucifix, and a lighted Taper set by
him, according to the custom, adrawing on. Philip fervent in Spirit, falling
on his knees prays, and excites all that were present to do the same;
whereupon he forthwith returned to his senses. Then He made the Sickman be lift
up, and fit upright in his bed and meat to be set before him. The next day one
of his went to see the man and found him perfectly recovered.

Victoria Varesia was unsufferably tormented with an Humor that fell down into
her right hand, and swelled it, which, though she had tried several Medicines,
yet every day grew worse, insomuch that the Sinews and Nerves waxed stiff; so
coming to Philip, she told him. This Rehem that troubles me, runs almost all
over my body, and I am afraid my right hand will be benumbed. He looking up to
heaven, and shook with his wonted trembling, presses the grieved part with
his hand, bidding her hope well and so dispatcheth her. As she went home, she
bethought her self, whether it were best to chafe her hand with Ointments, as
she used to do, or throw away the Sear-cloth; as she was thus in suspense, she
said to her self; What dare I not trust the Sanctity of Philip? Have I not
placed all the hope of my recovery in him? Why do I yet stick at it? And
immediately pulling off her Searcloth, she flung it into the fire, and
presently was able to turn her hand as nimbly, and follow her employments, as
she did formerly, in a short space regaining her lost strength.

John Baptist Guerrius, a Brother of the Congregation, as he was one evening
putting up Silk Hangings in the Church, Of this are nine sworn ey-witnesses;
among whom Angelus Victorius is one who ascribed the cure to a miracle.
fell of the Ladder which was some twenty five handfulls high, dashing his head
against the Marble Pavement, where he lay for dead. The People running in, take
him him up, lay him into his Bed, send for the Physicians, some of which
affirm, he was past cure; others, that hi^ wound must be searched; and his
Skull opened. Meanwhile it comes to Philip, who immediately be takes him to his
Prayers, and bids the rest do so too. After this Angelus Victorius the
Physician sends for him, telling him the wound was mortal: at which Philip
smiled, saying; I would not have him die now, therefore I will beg him of God,
by fervent and effectual Prayer. And he made good his words, for that night
Guerrius slept well, and in the Morning rose, and went about his occasions,
though they would have had him keep his bed, and when the Physicians came
thinking to find him with his Fever and Convulsion upon him, he was in firm
strength.

Bertinus Riccardus of Vercellae, one of the Congregation too, was taken with
an acute Fever, which brought him into a Frenzy, and extreme peril of Death;
whom, for that he had neither received the Sacraments, nor ordered his affairs,
Philip pitying, earnestly besought God, that he might partake in the
Sacraments, and settle all other business. After Prayer the man instantly
returned to his right mind, confessed his Sins, took the H. Eucharist, made his
Will, and having disposed of every thing relapsed into his Frenzy, and duly
prepared by H. Unction ended his life.

The like happened to one that was sick in the Hospital of Santo Spirito. Philip
coming thither with his Sons, said; Let us go, whither God calls me: and went
directly to a man, whom he found speechless and a dying. So he betook him to
his Prayers, and in a little while the sick party recovered his Speech,
disburden^d his conscience, received the Celestial Viands; and rendering thanks
to God, peaceably died. For he came to the Hospital, but was not able to make
his Confess^on, for the violence of his disease.

In short, what ever the H. man by his Prayers and Supplications procured for
others, he ordinarily obtained, when he was in dangers, for himself. Whereof
take these two of many instances. He sometimes went with his in a Coach to the
seven Churches, when on a sudden fell such a fierce storm, that he was forced
to go back; And as they came to the Bank of Tiber, beneath Mount Aventine, the
Rain had so overflown the ways, that the Coach fell into a deep trench; but
before they were far sunk into it, through the Mercy of God they all got out at
the hinder end of the Coach: Philip going to his Prayers at the next Church,
the rest to get Oxen, to draw their Horses forth. But no sooner had the H. man
kneeled down, but the Horses with the Coach came out safe of themselves.

Another time, going with his in a Coach to the seven Churches, those that were
with him leaping out, he alone stayed in it. In the way was a Narrow Bridge,
where as the Coach came, the Wheels of it were seen carried upon the air by the
side of the Bridge, which they that went on foot beholding cried out, O Jesu!
but the Coach went over secure; they all attributing it to a Miracle.
Afterward a Gravell-pit in like manner was in their way, which he passed over
without any harm, beyond all expectation: and yet some Noble Matrons, presently
after falling into it, were shrewdly hurt, their Coach breaking, one of the
Horses killed, and one of the Ladies having her Arm, the other her Leg broke.

CHAP. IIII. He drives away diseases by his Command.
ANna Morona lay very ill, and her desease proceeded so far, that those about
her dispaired of her life. To her comes Philip trembling, as he used to do, and
lays his hand on her, calling her by her name, and saying; Anna, say with me,
Lord, Philip bids me live still. And as she repeated the words, she revived,
and immediately grew well.

In Turris Speculorum, Maria Felix a Castro had been sick of a Fever about one
hundred days, and being even at last gasp almost, sends for the Servant of God,
who coming in hastily asked, what was her disease. A Fever; says she. Cheer
up, quoth he, doubt not, and withal laying his r^ght hand on her, said; I
command thee O Fever, to depart from this creature of Gods. He had no sooner
said so, but the Fever went away, and never troubled her more.

In the same House, Sigismunda Capozucchia for five Months together had a
Quartan Ague, and Philip accidentally coming thither, she desired his Prayers
to God for her health. He lifting up his hand said; I will not have the, any
more tormented with thy Ague. Philip departs, and with all the Fever straight.

He was once in company with his Scholars, when on a sudden comes a man,
earnestly recommending to him one that was sick. The Good man smiled and
turning to those that were by, asked: Will you have this sick man well? they
all answer, Yea. Then quoth he to the Messenger, Go tell the party, Philip
forbids you to die. He went and did so, and the man believed him, and recovered.
The same many confess has befallen them.

The Cook of the Congregation one time fell sick: a man so virtuous, and so
favored of God, that when ever he dressed any fish, and went away in have from
them, he would leave them to the Cats to keep, who punctually obeyed his
commands. Philip bearing much affection to the man, wished Caesar Baronius to
take care of him, and be with him, who by reason of the continual pains he
took, fell into a Fever. The Father bids him, command the Fever in his Name to
be gone; he relying on the B. man said; In the name of Philip, I charge thee, O
Fever, to depart from me. And as he said those words, he put on his cloths, and
rose, diligently attending the Cook, as well as ever.

Once he said to Anto^ina Raida that good woman Look you be not sick, before
you ask me leave first. Insomuch that as often as she felt any grudgings of a
disease on her, she would go to Philip, and say: Father, is it your pleasure, I
should be sick? if he answered, It is: the disease increased; If he said No: it
went away presently. Which she affirmed, she had often tried.

Another Woman, alike virtuous, had many days kept her bed, whom Philip
visits, enjoining her to go to the next day to Church to hear Mass; and lo*
that night her fever left her, she was well, and went to Mass in the morning to
S. Hieroms Church, being never after troubled with her disease.

Alexander Illuminatus, a Brother of the Oratory, one appointed to wait on the
H. Father, had a vein sprung in his Stomach, that he spit blood. So Philip one
day calling to him said: I will not have you molested any more with this
malady: upon the very uttering of which words he never after voided blood.

The like betided Pet. Focilius, to whom Philip came, as he lay a dying, his
Mother coming to meet him, said; Father, help me: he answered; Doubt not, for
your Son shall not die; for I would not have him die now. And straight way he
began to mend, and recovered.

One Ambrosio that lay Bedridden, insomuch as he could not sit up in his Bed, but
as he was lifted by others, Of this Julian Fuscherius a Priest, who was
present, is a sworn witness.
upon Philips coming to him, and saying, Ambrosio, Rise; presently sat up, and
within a while after was restored to his former health.

CHAP. V. His various Miraculous Cures wrought on diverse.
TOrquatus de Comitibus lay sick of a grievous disease, so that Taurusius
persuaded him to confess his Sins to Philip, hoping by that means he might
recover his health: he followed his counsel, and thereupon the H. man was sent
for. When Torquatus, being in the middle of his Confession, perceived himself
presently cured.

A Country man, that was in a very sad disease, came from Palumbaria, a Town
not far from Rome to Philip, desiring him to pray to God for him, either to
procure him health, or a mitigation of his pain. To whom the B. Man only
prescribes Sacramental Confession, upon the performance whereof he soon
recovered. Going home into his Country, and proclaiming abroad what had
befallen him, his Country men seeing him so well, being themselves affected as
he was, came diverse of them up to Rome to Philip: saying; And we likewise would
gladly be healed by you, as you cured our Countreyman of late: the Good man,
taken with their Simplicity, hears their Confession, and sent them home joyful
to Palumbaria.

Eugenia Mansueta was exceedingly afflicted, almost a year and a half together,
with a grievous Boil; which so Of this (besides Eugenia herself) are two sworn
ey-witnesses.
swelled her Nose, that she not only could not go abroad, but was even ashamed
to be seen at home. And having used many Medicines could have no ease: but
being wont to wash the Clouts and Rags which Philip used for an Issue; and
taking one of them, more bloudied then the rest, she put it to her face with
great confidence of help, and immediately her Ulcer left her for ever after.

Lucrecia Citara, a Roman having been four Months with child, grew so ill by
reason of an Issue of blood, that no Remedies she tried would help her.
Cassandra Raida, who had the H. man's Linen by her to wash, hearing of it and
pitying the Woman brought her a Cap of Philips, without his knowledge, telling
her: This Cap is Father Philip Neri's, and if with faith you do apply it to
your grief, I doubt not but you will find help. Lucrecia did so, and was
instantly freed of her Malady. Philip knowing by Revelation what was done, and
hating humane Applause, sharply chid Cassandra, and made her presently fetch
him his Linen.

Steven Calcinardus, for about a Month, had a continual Fever, at last his
Stomach grew so weak, he could retain no nutriment, but being anointed with the
H. Oil lay for dead. Francis Zazzara coming to him, and bringing him some of
the B. Fathers hair, then living, said: If you think you may recover your
health by the Merits of Our Father Philip, I will lay these hairs to your
breast: So I do; quoth he. When the hair was applied to his Stomach, he
presently fell asleep, and after he had rested an hour he waked, and eat his
meat with a good appetite, and it staid with him, his Fever straight left him,
and within four days after he was in perfect health.

Hercules Cortisinius of Carpium, living at Rome with Montes Zazzara, and
hearing so many and Marvailous things of Philip, had a huge desire to see and
conferr with the H. man. Francis Zazzara takes him with him to the Father, who
as soon as he saw the Old man, shook with a pious awe, and kneeling besought
his Blessing, heartily betaking him unto his Prayers. Departing thence after
Philip thus seen, he was so in love with him, that he said; To day have I seen
a Holy man indeed. And being to return into his Country a while after, out of
devotion to Philip, he desired some of his clothes with him, whom some of the
House presented with a pair of his woollen Socks, and Philip also gave a Rosary
of Our Ladys. So he returned to Carpium: and in August, as he was walking, a
pain in his head took him, that he was not able to stand for the very anguish
of it: and remembering that he brought some things of Philips from the City with
him, he calls to his Wife, and bids her, Fetch me that I brought in a bag from
Rome. She laughed, when she saw the woollen Socks, and asked; Husband, have you
any need of such things as these? Hold your tongue, quoth Hercules, only do as
I bid you. She obeys him, and he putting the Socks to his forehead made this
prayer; I beseech thee, O Lord, for the devout affection I bear to Father
Philip, free me of these pains. No sooner had he said so, but his headache was
gone. Not long after the Nephew of Hercules being in a Pleurisy was like to die;
the Servants of the House did but apply one of those Socks to him, and his
Pleurisy ceased, the Fever left him, and he was restored to his former health.

Patricius Patricius, else where named, kept his Bed, being ill in his Stomach,
and troubled with the Colic, Germanicus Fidelius going from Philip to see him,
courteously salutes him: who presently tells him: O Germanicus, hearken to a
strange but true Story; this Night being in great torment, destitute of all
help or direction, Our Philip came in my mind, to whom commending my self, as
if he had been present, I said: Father Philip help me; pray for me. I had
scarce spoke the word, but my pain quite ceased, and I was well.

Germanicus himself being troubled with a Rupture, and having used many
Remedies, which made him rather worse, at length coming to Philip, like him in
the Gospel, he said, Father, if you will, you can make me whole. He answered,
Doubt not, you shall be healed. He depending on those words of Philip without
any Medicine was cured straight.

CHAP. VI. He helps diverse Women in Childbirth.
THe like Audience had he, when he prayed for such as were in Childbirth,
freeing them ofttimes from the perils thereof. At Novaria, John Baptist
Boniperto's Brothers Wife, having gone eight Months of her time, miscarried to
the hazard of her life: which Boniperto hearing of by Letters, he went to
Philip and acquainted him with it. He bad him; Write to your Sister in Law,
that I will not have her bring forth any more abortives: she upon the reciet of
those Letters, not only escaped the danger wherein she was, but in her whole
life after was very happily delivered still, although she had no less than
twelve Children.

Delia Buscallia, of Vicenza, after having been with child more then seven
months was half delivered of a Still-born This Delia her self, and Gaspar her
husband affirmed upon oath.
Child, and falling into a Swoon her body grew stiff, only her heart panted a
little; the Midwife hearing that they sent for the Physicians, cries out; What
for? help must be fetched from heaven, and not from men; and this I assure you
of, if ye pluck away the Child by force, it must necessarily be torn in pieces,
and then the Woman is irrecoverably lost. Above two days was Delia tortured
with these pangs, at last her Husband sends for Philip, who, as soon as he came
into the Chamber, put his Cap on her; then kneeling down, and looking up to
heaven, wept and said: Ho, you there, repeat the Lords Prayers, and Angelical
Salutation five times. Afterward rising he put his mouth to her ears, and cries
out, Delia: she asks Father, what is your will with me? That all study
Holiness; quoth he: God grant it; replied she: but Father, I am very ill. Doubt
not, you will do well again: says Philip; and signing her with the sign of
the Cross went his way. He was not quite at the bottom of the stairs, but he
bid her Husband, that followed him, Go back, for your Wife is recovered. He
returns, finds her in health and that Night she went about her business in the
House, as if she had never bin ill at all, and left her bed. The same Delia,
when she was sick of a Pleurisy, at another time, was by the H. man restored to
health.

Faustina Capozucchia, the Wife of Domitius Cecchinus, having been with Child
now seven Months, fell into such a violent sickness, that after twenty two
days, she seemed past all hope of cure. The Servant of God coming to her, lifts
up his Eyes to heaven, and lays his right hand on her forehead, saying: Lord, I
will have the Soul of this Child, I will not be denied it, Lord; and so went
away. By and by he returns, and saying the same words again, departs.
Mean-time Faustina was brought abed of a Daughter, which being Regenerate by
Baptism, both It, and the Mother after died.

Olympia Trojana lay for dead, in the throws of a hard travel, her Servants
all bewailing her; and there remaining no expectancy of aid from men, she made
Philip be sent for, whom she reverenced for his Holiness, having heard of the
many Miracles done by him. The H. man pitying her, and especially that the
Infant might not die unbaptized, m^de have to her, and being come into the Room,
having prayed, he only laid his hand on her, and went away. Being gone, the
woman had a very quick delivery, and was well; the Child also, being
Christened, was added to the Number of the Heavenly Quire.

Ersilia, formerly spoken of, was strongly conceited, she should die of the
Child she then went with, wherein she was so peremptory, that none could
persuade her out of her opinion. Being much perplexed about it, as she was
going out of the Church one day, she light upon Philip, who said softly to her;
See what a silly Woman fancieth to her self! and laying his hand on her, bade
her hope well: and immediately she became cheerful, left grieving, and in a
few days after had a very easy Labor.

Besides diverse others by the Prayers of Philip became joyful Mothers of
Children, which are here omitted, Yet may it not be passed over, that though
Philip used to crave Temporal Blessings of ^od under a Condition, he would say
absolutely in the case of Women in Childbirth; Lord I will have this granted
me, namely, that these Infants, which are to be born, be likewise Born anew by
H. Baptism. He was wont also, that the Miraculous effects, done daily by him
at the Labor of Women, through the Blessing of God, might not be ascribed to
his Merits, to carry about with him a certain Pouch very helpful to Women in
Travel, saying, that there were Relics in it, and that he never applied it
to any in Childbirth, but it availed much either to the Mother, or the Child.

Cleria Bonarda, the Wife of Claudius Neri, had always very difficult Labors;
and being near her time, she was exceeding fearful. Her Labor coming on her,
Philip sent her that Bag, which she devoutly applying, had so easy a Delivery,
that she scarce knew she was brought abed. The like is reported of many more.

When the B. Father was dead, some of his Sons, desirous to see what was in
that Pouch, pulled forth a great many Beads, but found nothing at all, save a
Handkerchief, in the middle of which was a little Cross, wrought with purple
Silk, and a small Medall of S. Helen's, such as they use to hang about
Childrens necks. Whereby they perceived, that the Holy Man carried it to
Traveling Women, to the end they might not attribute, as is said, the Miracles
to him, but to those Holy and Sacred Relics.

FINIS.
The Testimony of CARDINAL BARONIUS concerning PHILIP NERI. Lib. Annal. Tom. 8.
after the Dedicatory Epistle to CLEMENT VIII.
FOr what concerns the first Original and progress of my writing the
Ecclesiastical Annalls, I have as yet scarce had the freedom to glance at
some few particulars; and those rather hudled up in obscurity, than manifestly
declared, forasmuch as He, of whom we were to speak, was then alive: who, not
only contemned, but professedly opposed whatsoever tended to his own praise. He
having (since) exchanged Earth for Heaven, our discourse, now disengaged of
those ties then upon it, may freely traverse the spaces of that most copious
subject; the Munificence and Favors received from Him.

Indeed we are often admonished in Holy Scripture, that in general, whatsoever
prosperity or happiness befalls the Children, is all of it to be ascribed unto
the Parents: particularly, in that signal Blessing, which the Grand Patriarch
Jacob bestowed on Joseph, among other oracular truths contained therein. Sedit
in forti arcus ejus, etc. His Bow abode in strength, and the bands Genesis 49. 24.
of his arms and of his hands were broke asunder, by the hands of the mighty
Jacob; from thence went forth the Shepherd, the Stone of Israel. Seeing
therefore all Joseph's felictiy is attributed to the puissant hand of Jacob;
who, not only was far distant, but had already wept for him, as one dead, and
bewailed him, as slain; what may we say of this Father, who being present and
assistant unto all, first in his Apostolical spirit, traveled oftimes of us
again; and checking our younger years with the reins of government, restrained
the precipitancy of that in constant age, Gal. 4. 19.
which hurries fast to ruin, till he made the untamed Ass-colt obedient Matt.
21. 2.
to the Laws of God, and fit for Christ to back?

But in regard we are many ways deeply obliged unto him, let this public
Thanksgiving remain as a perpetual and lasting Monument, ever living, ever
speaking for him: at leastwise touching whatever appertains to compiling the
Annalls, which we have now in hand, He being the sole Author of all our pains
and labor undertaken therein.

For, by the oft-redoubled commands of this our Father, did we adventure on so
difficult a work; and however loath and unwilling, as distrusting our own
strengths, undertook it though, in obedience to the Divine Will, whereto he did
so vehemently enforce, that if at any time, surcharged with the weight of so
heavy a burden, we desisted from our purpose, he would with his severer
reprehensions spur us forward.

When You, Blessed Father (for unto you do I direct my speech) enflamed,
enflamed I say, with zeal for the declining Church, did with the eyes of your
mind divinely irradiated, and inspired with a Prophetic spirit (for so it was)
foresee the Bands and Musters of Satan going forth at the Gates of Hell, for
the destruction of the Church; You on the other side, standing up for the House
of Israel, to fight the Battles of the Lord, were not minded to determine it
by a pitched field, wherein were equal, or greater, numbers; but, well
knowing, that God chooses the weak things of 1 Cor. 1. 27.
the world, to confound the things that are mighty, selected one of your
Children, the least among his Brethren, and of a shallower capacity, to
confront even single and unarmed so many armed hosts. And pretending to do
something else, prepared no spacious field for the Encounter, but a narrow
place for wrestling (in, as it were to try the Mastery) S. Hieroms Oratory;
where amongst the daily Conferences about Spiritual matters, it was given me
in charge, to rehearse the Acts and Monuments of the Church. Which being once
begun at your appointment, was for thirty years together happily continued; the
whole entire order of the affairs, as they were related, having been seven
times repeated in the Oratory.

You were continually assistant to the design; promoting it by your presence,
encouraging it by your exhortations, always a rigid exactor (pardon me for
saying so) of my daily task; so that you accounted it a heinous offense, if I
never so little digressed to any other matter; not suffering me in the least to
decline my intended course. Many times I confess I was somewhat troubled, when
not yet understanding that the business was transacted closely between God and
you by Prayer, but Measuring my own strength, I complained, that I was too
hardly dealt withal, not only for that none of the Fraternity was joined with
me, in bearing the same yoke; but that although no Straw were given, as the
labor increased, the double task was still required: when I say greater loads
of employment Exodus 5.
were yet added to the charge I had undertaken, as the Cure of Souls, Public
Ministry in preaching the Word of God, Governing the House, besides sundry
other affairs and encumbrances unexpectedly thrown upon me every day by the
importunity of those that resorted to me: so that whilst you either did, or
permitted others to do such things as these, you seemed to intend nothing else,
than what you most of all intended.

Wherein you followed the Precedent of Elias, in his contest with the Priests
of Baal, who when he would convince them by 3. Kings 18.
fetching fire from heaven to consume the Sacrifice, contrary to the
imagination of all, caused it to be drenched three several times with four
Barrells of water, that the Sovereign power of God might more eminently appear.
Yet on the other side, when you were pleased to lend your helping hand, by
affording the assistances of your Prayers, you imitated the Prophet Elisha, who
laying his hand upon the Kings 4 Kin. 13.
hand in shooting the Arrow, made him Conqueror of Syria. Semblably hereunto
did you in your dealing with me, putting your victorious hand to my feeble one,
turn a blunt Pen into the Arrow of the Lords salvation against the insolent
Assyrians. An observation no less true, then pleasing, and delightful to me in
so known a case to profess.

You fought indeed, but with the hands of others, after your wonted manner, who
would never suffer your self to be remarked, when you did things most worthy of
praise; avoiding nothing with so much caution, as to hear ought spoken in
favor of your self; under covert of folly many times shrouding profound
wisdom, according to that famous, known, Apostolical Paradox firmly seated in
your breast: Qui vuit sapiens esse, stultus fiat. He that will be wise, let him
become-a fool. 1 Cor. 3. 18.
Insomuch that not all the Smiles of a fawning world could ever ensnare 1 Samuel
21.
you; who, David-like, changing for a time your behavior, concealed your
extraordinary Spiritual Gifts, making show only (abroad) of humane infirmity,
as one that knew, according to the Apostles speech, to abound, and suffer need;
that so you might say with Phil. 4. 12.
him, Whether we be besides our selves it is to God; or whether we be sober, it
2 Cor. 5. 13.
is for your sakes: and by the Example of the Deacon of your Name, Philip, Act.
8.
as occasion required, you could sometimes consort your self with men for their
good, sometimes with full sails in retirement receive the Gales of the Spirit
blowing strongly on you.

But the Glory and honor, which you so abundantly brought into the Treasury of
Christ, he repaid after your decease with large Interest. For as soon as the
Earthen Pitcher was broken the Lamp that lay hid within it appeared Jud. 7.
in its respendent brightness; and the burning and shining light, which was
covered under a bushel, being set up in the high Candlestick of Eternity,
became conspicuous to all, dazzling their eyes with the glory of its Miracles.
Then the wonders and signs, which had been done in your life time, but yet
concealed by you, were manifest, and many others lately wrought came to light.
Your Sepulcher, though yet but mean, as being but made for the present, is
famous for the Votive Tables, and Memorialls affixed of the choicest metal,
intimating your Miracles, which make it more illustrious than Pillars of the
most curiously polished Marble, or Egyptian Pyramids and Obelisks could do; it
daily receiving greater increase and accession of beauty from them, who upon
the obtaining new Favors add new honors still unto it.

Yea, let me also find room, O ye my brethren (for I speak to you that
encircle his Monument with a Round of your sacred and Religious Persons as with
a Crown) that this my Thanks giving, albeit far inferior to the Bounties
received from him, may have admittance to his Grace; but so, that likewise
where ever throughout the world these Annalls shall be transported, it may pass
too. Let this be a moveable, and vocal, yet graven Column, proclaiming him in
large Characters the first Author and Architect of these Annals, and what
benefit soever men reap thence, let them thank him chiefly for it, let thi^ my
acknowledgment, I say, serve as a lasting Ep^taph upon his Tomb, never to be
rased out. Yea and I my self desire to remain fixed there, as a living Tablet,
that limned by the Pencill of his Prayers, I may represent the perfect Image of
his Sanctity. Do ^. Fath^^ (for once mo^e I will b^speak you as present, seeing
you behold him who is present at once to all places) do, I say protect your own
work: and that the Victory in all things be attributed to you alone, (as Joab
writ to David) come and dispatch the War that is yet behind; 2 Kings 12.
excite that heavenly Militia above by your Prayers, till at last, having
totally vanquished all enemies, we may sing the triumphant song of Deborah:
They fought from heaven against them, the stars in their courses Jud. 5.
fought against Sisera. And for me your Son, whom with your continual
protection you have guarded, fortified by your vigilance, conducted by your
counsel, sustained with patience whilst you sojourned here upon Earth, defend
me with your much more powerful Patronage now resiant in Heaven: and let me
receive more copious supplies from that now perfect and completed Charity of
yours. Yea what Gregory the Divine affirms he obtained of Basil Greg. Naz. in
land. Basil.
the Great, who after his decease became his Monitor, that do you in a more
eminent manner for me; that so, through your managery of my life, I may
inoffensively pass the remaining stages of this old age, and in fine, after my
labors happily achieved, attain that Blessed rest, which you now possess with
the Father, Son, and H. Spirit: to whom in perfect Unity be Everlasting Praise,
Honor and Glory for evermore.

Amen.
Certain PIECES of S. AUSTIN Communicated To the Reader for the Vindication of
the continuance of Miracles, in the Church; wherein he relates the many
Miracles, done in his days within his own Bishopric, and certainly known to
Him.

August. de Civit. Dei. 22. l. 8. c. Etiam nunc fiunt miracula in ejus nomine,
sive per sacarmenta ejus, sive per orationes vel memorias Sanctorum ejus.
Retract. 1. l. 13. c. Non sic accipiendum est, quod dixi, ut nunc in Christi
nomine fieri miracula nulla creduntur, nam tam multa etiam istis temporibus
fiunt, ut nec omnia cognoscere, nec ea quae cognoscimus, enumerare possumus. De
Civit. dei. 22. l. 8. c. Multis (quod nobis certisssimum est) non datis
libellis de iis quae mirabiliter facta sunt, illi ipsi, qui dati sunt ad
septuaginta ferme numerum pervenerant, quando ista conscripsi. August. De
Civit. dei. 22. l. 8. c. Epist. 137. Clero and plebi Ecclesiae Hipponensis. De
cura pro mortuis, 12..16, 17. Cap.


S. Augustini De Civ. Dei. Lib. 22. Cap. 8.
Of the Miracles, which have been wrought, and are not yet ceased, that thereby
the World might believe in Christ.
WHy, say they, are not those Miracles wrought now adays, which ye bragg of in
former times? I might indeed answer, they were necessary before the World
believed, that so it might believe. He that still requires Miracles for his
Faith is a Grand Miracle himself, for not believing when the World believes.
But this they allege, that it might be thought those Miracles were not then
done. No? whence then is it, that Christ's Ascension into heaven in the flesh is
so publicly, and so religiously averred? Wherefore in those learned Ages,
which would at no hand admit of Impossibilities, did the World without any
Miracles at all, too too miraculously believe things so incredible? Will they
say, happily they were credible, and therefore credited? Why then do not they
themselves believe? Our Argument is briefly this. Either this incredible thing,
which was not seen, was confirmed by other incredible things both done and
seen; or being so credible, as needed no Miracles to enforce it, it condemns
their gross incredulity. This I would reply, to silence such shallow Persons.

For, we cannot deny, but there have been many Miracles done, which attest that
one signal, and saving Miracle, of Christ's Ascension into heaven in that flesh
wherein he a rose again. Which are all written in the same Records
unquestionable for their truth; both what was done, and in confirmation of
what: being divulged for the propagating the Faith, and by the Faith propagated
are so much the more divulged. They are solemnly read, that they might be
believed, yet should not be read solemnly, but that they are believed. Yea even
now are Miracles wrought in his Name, either by his Sacraments, or by the
Prayers, or Memorials of his Saints: which, being not commemorated in so
public a Register, shine not altogether with so bright a fame. For, them the
Canon of Sacred Scripture, which was to be generally published, causes to be
read in every place, and imprints in the memories of all: whereas these are
hardly known to the City where they are done, or to any the adjoining Quarters.
And commonly they are few, that know thereof, and many that do not, especially
if it be a large City; and oftimes, when they are related to others, the
Authority, that recommends them, is not such, as that they should be believed
without scruple or demurr, although they be conveyed from one beleiving
Christian to another.

The Miracle done at Millain, while we were there, what time one blind received
his sight, might be taken notice of by diverse: both for that it is a vast City,
and the Emperor at that time being, there, the matter was transacted in the
eye of a numerous multitude, which flocked unto the Bodies of the Martyrs
Protasius and Gervasius. Which lying concealed and unknown to any, were in a
dream discovered to Ambrose the Bishop, and found; in which place the blind
man, freed from his former darkness, beheld the light of day. But who except a
very few, knew of the Cure done at Carthage upon Innocentius, Advocate to the
Deputy Governor, at which I was present, and saw it with mine Eyes? For, being
himself very Religious, as likewise his whole house, he had entertained me, and
my Brother Alipius, coming from beyond sea, not yet Priests, but
Lay-Christians, and at that time we dwelt with him. He was under the Surgeons
hands for certain Fistula's, of which he had many, and very painful to him,
arising in his hinder parts, about the bottom of the Trunk. They had newly
lanced him, and tried other experiments of their Art upon him: who endured both
continual, and horrid tortures in the Cutting. And yet one Cavity, among so
many, which should have been lanced, escaped them, lying so undiscovered that
they never touched it at all: and, all the rest that had been searched being
healed up, that one remaining only defeated their pains. He, jealous of their
delays, and very much dreading a second incision (as a Physician that lived in
his house had told him beforehand, whom they would not suffer so much as to see
how he was cut, when they did it; and himself in a rage had thrust out of
doors, and with much ado admitted again) burst out into these words: Will ye
cut me again? must I come to his saying, whom ye would not permit to be by?
They scoffed at that Physician as a Novice, allaying his fears with fair words
and promises. Thus several days passed, but all they did availed him nothing:
the Surgeons still persist in their promises, that they would perfect that Cure
by Plaster, not by Incision. They called in likewise to their assistance one
Ammonius, then living, an ancient, and eminent Surgeon, who, having viewed the
place, warranted, what they out of their practice and experience had affirmed.
Hereupon confident, upon his assurance, as though he were out of danger, he
jeered the Physician that lived with him, for saying he must be lanced anew. In
short, after they had trifled away diverse days to no purpose, they were fain,
wearied and ashamed, to confess, it was not possible to cure him, but by
Incision. Struck with the extreme horror hereof, he trembled and grew pale,
but recollecting himself, when he was able to speak, he bid them be gone, and
come no more at him: when, drowned in tears, and fettered in an insuperable
necessity, he could think of no course, but to send for a certain Alexandrian,
who was at that time reputed for an excellent Surgeon, to do, what for mere
anger he would not suffer them to go about. He, when he was come, and
Artist-like had by the remaining skars observed their endeavors, doing the
part of an honest man, advised him, to let those have the credit of that Cure,
who had been at so much trouble already about it, as he both saw, and wondered
at: adding, that unless he were cut, it was utterly impossible, ever to heal
him: that it was exceedingly contrary to his nature, to defraud them of the
glory of so great labor, for a small matter that was behind, whose skillful
pains, industry, attendance he saw even to admiration in his very skars. Then
by his appointment they were fetched again, and he requested to have the
Alexandrian by, when they lanced that head, which in the judgment of all was
otherwise thought incurable. Which business was deferred to the next day. No
sooner were they gone, but there arose such a doleful lamentation throughout
the House, out of immoderate grief for their Master, that, as though they had
mourned over his Hearse, we could hardly pacify it. Holy persons daily resorted
to him, the then Bishop of Vzala Saturninus of B. memory, Gelosus Priest, and
the Deacons of the Church of Carthage. Among whom was, and he the only one at
this day alive of them, the now Bishop Aurelius, not to be named by me, but
with all honor and respect; with whom I had often conference hereof,
recounting the wonderful works of God, and found that he remembered very well,
what I am now mentioning. Who coming usually to see him about Evening, he
bitterly weeping besought them, they would be pleased to come next Morning to
his rather death, than torment: for the former pains he had undergone so
terrified him, that he made no question, but to dye under the Surgeons hands.
They comforted and animated him, bidding him trust in God, and courageously
bear his will. Then we went in to Prayer, where we, as the manner is, kneeling
down upon the ground, he with* such violence threw himself prostrate all along,
as if one had flung him down, and began to pray after such a sort, with such
vehemence, such fervor of spirit, such a flood of tears, such groans, and
sobbings, shaking every joint about him, and even stopping his breath again, as
what man living is able to express? Whether the rest prayed, or in their
thoughts were taken up about these things, I minded not; for my part I could
not pray at all, only thus much I on the sudden uttered within my heart: Lord
what prayers of thy Servants will thou hear, if not these? For, me thought it
was not possible to have added ought thereunto except he should have died
praying. At length we rose, and having received the Bishops Blessing, withdrew;
he entreating them to be there in the Morning, and they exciting him to
Patience. The day so feared was come, and so were those holy men, as was agreed
on, In came the Surgeons, all things suitable for the occasion were in
readiness, the fatal Instruments are brought out, all continuing silent and
amazed. The while, the graver sort of them, and more considerable raising his
dejected Spirit with words of comfort, as he lay in bed, his Body was put into
a posture fit for his hand that was to cut him, the cloths that bound him were
untied, the place bared, the Surgeon views it, and narrowly searches for the
head of the disease, ready with his Incision knife to lance it. He looks
diligently with his eyes, feels for it with his fingers; assays all ways and
means, till he finds the mark of a wound that had been firmly closed. Whereupon
what rejoicing and praise, and Thanksgiving unto the Merciful and Omnipotent
God issued from the mouths of all, even weeping for joy, is not for me to
relate: being more easily imagined than expressed.

In the same Carthage, Innocentia, a most virtuous Woman, one of the chief in
that City, had a Cancer in her breast, a Malady, as Physicians affirm, not
curable by Physic: and therefore they use either to cut off the part in which
it breeds, and sever i^ from the body; or to prolong life awhile, and a little
retard the full carrier of death, all attempts of cure must, in Hippocrates,
judgments be said aside. Thus much she learnt of an able Doctor that came often
to her house, and so betook her self only to God by Prayer. But in her sleep
she had directions, at Easter following to wait at the Font, on that side the
women were; and observe which of them, that were then baptized, first met her,
that she might sign the part affected with the Mark of Christ: which she doing
was immediately cured. The Physician who had counseled her to forbear taking
Physic, as she loved her life, seeing her afterward, and finding her well,
whose disease he had but a little before observed and known, was very
inquisitive and earnest to learn of her the Remedy she used, and as near as
might be, what Receipt it was, that had put down Hippocrates's Aphorism. When
he heard what it was, seeming both by his looks and talk to slight it, so that
she was afraid he would have spoken blasphemy against Christ; he with a
facetious Urbanity piously yet pleasantly answered; I thought you would have
told me some great matter. Whereat she trembling for fear, he went on? What
huge business was it for Christ, to heal a Cancer, that raised to life one four
days dead? This I no sooner understood, but I chafed exceedingly, that so
famous a Miracle, done in a City, on a Person, neither of them obscure, should
be smothered up: and thought to advertise, and in a manner chide her for it.
She told me, she concealed it not; then I enquired of the Women her ancient
friends, at that time with her, if they knew as much before. They said they
were utterly ignorant of it: Look you, then said I, whether or no are you
silent, when these your most intimate acquaintance heard not a word of it? And
asking her briefly of particulars, I made her relate the whole procedure of the
business in order as it was done, they listening, and wondering, and Glorifying
God mervailously at it.

A Physician in the same City that had the Gout, having given up his Name to be
Baptized, the night before it should have been done, was in his sleep forbidden
by certain curled Negro Boys, which he knew to be Devils, to be Baptized that
year: but he not obeying them, who trod on his feet, putting him to such
intolerable torture as he had never felt, went and made the more have to
perform his Vow of Baptism, that so he might vanquish them in the Laver of
Regeneration, and at the Instant of his participation in that Sacrament was
quit, not only of that extraordinary pain, which tormented him, but likewise of
the Gout in his feet ever after, though he lived long. This who knew? besides
our selves, and some few of the Brethren, to whom it might be notifyed by those
of the Vicinage.

One of Curubis, upon his being Baptized, was cured both of the Palsy and a
monstrous Rupture, of both which maladies he went discharged from the Font of
Regeneration, as though he had never had any aile in his whole Body. This who
knew, except the Inhabitants of the place, and a very few besides, who might
possibly hear it by some chance spoken of? But when I had notice of it, at the
instance. of that H. Bishop Aurelius, I procured him to come to Carthage;
although we had formerly heard it by such, whose Credit was beyond all
exception.

Hesperius, one who had been Tribune, and lives close by us, has a Farm
called Zubedi, in the sk^rts of Fussala, where finding his house haunted with
evil Spirits, with much mischief also done to his Cattle and Servants; he
desired our Priests, in my absence, that one of them would go thither, and by
his prayers expel them. There went one, and offered on the place the Sacrifice
of Christ's Body, praying with most enflamed zeal that that annoiance might have
an end, the which through Gods Blessing instantly ceased. He had it seems some
of the Holy Earth brought from Jerusalem, where Christ was buried, and rose the
third day, given him by a friend: which he hung up in his Chamber, to secure
himself from danger. But his house being rid of that greivance, he bethought
him, what he should do with the Earth, which for the Reverence he bore it, he
was unwilling to keep in his Chamber any longer. It fortuned, that I and my
Colleague Maximus Bishop of Synica, were hard by: whom he entreated to come to
him, we went. When having told us the whole story, he Motion'd to have the
Earth buried somewhere, and an Oratory built there where Christians might
repair to Divine Service. We opposed it not: so it was effected.

In the same Town, a Country Lad that had the Palsy, hearing of this begged of
his Parents, that they would bring him speedily to that Holy place, whither
being come he prayed and forthwith went away on foot well from the place.

There is a village called Victoriana, scarce thirty miles situate from
Hippo-Regius, where is a Memorial of the Martyrs of Millain, Gervasius and
Protasius: thither one day was brought a young man, who in the midst of Summer
going to wash his horse in a current of a River, was set upon by the Devil.
And lying in this place either a dying or for dead, at Even the Lady of the
Place, as her custom was, came thither with her Maids and certain Nuns to
their Hymns and Prayers, and began to sing Vesp^rs. At the noise of which being
alarmed and roused, he with a hideous yelling took hold of the Altar, which as
if he had been fixed there, he held fast, either not daring, or not able to
stir thence, and desiring with a direful howling, that they would spare him,
confessed where and when, and how, he had seized upon the man. At last
declaring that he would go out of him, he reckoned up every part of him, which
he threatened at his departure to dismember him of, and while he was speaking
departed from him. But one of his Eyes falling down on his Cheek hung by a
small string that came from its innermost root, the Ball of it naturally black
turning white thereupon. Which those that were present beholding, for there
came in diverse raised by his clamours, who all betook them to their Prayers for
him, though glad that he was in his right wits; yet on the other side troubled
for his Eye, they concluded to send for a Surgeon. At which his Sisters
Husband, who had brought him thither, made answer: God, who at the Prayers of
his Saints* chased away the Devil, is able also to restore him his Eye. And
therewith put the Eye, that was out and hung loose, into its place, as well as
he could, and tied it up with a handkerchief, wishing him not to loose it for
seven days. Which done, he found it as well as ever. Others in like manner
were healed there, whom it is too long to mention.

I know a Virgin at Hippo that was dispossessed of a Devil presently, by
anointing her self with Oil, into which a Priest had dropped his Tears shed for
her in Prayer. I know a Bishop too, that prayed but once for a Youth, whom he
never saw, and the Devil left him.

An old man here in Hippo one Florentius, poor but pious, a Tailor by his
trade, had lost his Cloak, and not having wherewith to buy another, prayed with
a loud voice to the Twenty Martyrs, whose Monument is famous among us, to
reapparrell him. By chance some wild fellows being near overheard him; and at
his going away followed jeering him and laughing, as though he had begged fifty
half pence of the Martyrs, to buy him cloths. But he walking on quietly espied
a huge fish cast up on the shore panting, which with their leave and assistance
he caught, and acquainting Carchosus, a Cook and a good Christian, what he had
done, sold it him for his Kitchen, for a 150 pence, meaning to buy wool, for
his Wife to make him cloth, as fast as she could. The Cook, cutting up the
Fish, found a Gold Ring in the belly of it, which moved with pity and piety
together, he straight way delivered to the poor man, saying; Look how the
Twenty Martyrs have furnished you with clothes.

When Bishop Projectus conveyed the Relics of the Most Glorious Martyr Steven
to Aquae Tibilitanae, a vast multitude and confluence of People resorted to his
Sepulcher. Among the rest a blind Woman desired to be led up to the Bishop that
bare those Sacred Pledges: who gave her some of the Flowers he carried; she
took them, put them to her Eyes, and immediately had her sight: th^se that were
present astonished at it, the Woman triumphing went before, choosing her way,
needing no more a guide to lead her.

And Bishop Lucillus carrying the Relics of the said Martyr enshrined in the
Castle at Synica, near Hippo, the people going before and after, was by the
bearing that Venerable burden cured of a Fistula that had long troubled him,
expecting the help of a Surgeon his friend to come and lance it.

Eucharius a Priest of Spain, dwelling at Calama, being ill of the Stone, his
old disease, was by a Relic of the forenamed Martyr, brought thither by
Bishop Possidius, perfectly cured. And afterward falling into another
sickness, and being laid out for dead, so that they had already tied his Thumbs
together, was restored to life by means of the forementioned Martyr, from whose
Monument a Priests Coat being brought was cast over him as he lay.

There was one Martialis, a man of note, and pretty ancient, much averse from
Christianity, who yet had a Daughter a Christian, and a Son in Law Baptiz^d
that year. He sickening, they besought him often and earnestly both with
Prayers and Tears to become a Christian, he absolutely denied, thrusting them
from him, in a furious passion: His Son in Law resolves to go to S. Stevens
Monument, there to offer up his most ardent Prayers for him; that God would
change his heart, without any more ado to believe in Christ. This he did with
abundance of Tears, and Vollies of sighs, and a burning zeal of sincere
devotion: when at his going thence, taking some of the Flowers that came next
to hand off the Altar, at night he laid them under his Fathers head. To sleep
they went: and lo! before day break he cries out, to run straight for the
Bishop; who as it chanced, was then with me at Hippo: and when he understood
that he was abroad, he desired the Priests to come to him. They came, he
presently acquaints them, that he now believed: and to the wonder and joy of
all was forthwith Baptized. As long as he lived, he had this still in his
mouth: O Christ receive my Spirit: not knowing that these were the last words
of the B. Steven, when he was stoned by the Jews: which also were his last
words, who not long after died.

Two likewise that had the Gout were healed here: one a Citizen; the other a
stranger: the Citizen outright; but the Stranger by Revelation, what he should
use when he was ill; who doing accordingly was soon rid of his pain.

Audurus is the name of a Manor, where is a Church in which is a Relic of
the Martyr Steven. Where certain Oxen drawing a Cart, leaving the paths went
over a little Boy, that was playing in the Lane, and bruised him with the
wheel, who thereupon fetched a groan, and lay gasping his last. The Mother
snatching him up lays him at the same Monument, and he not only revived, but
recovered of all kind of hurt.

A certain Votress at a Neighboring Town called Caspiliana, being extreme ill
past all hope, her Coat was brought to the same Tomb; but before it came back
again, she dyed. Yet her Parents wrapping her Corpse up in it, her Spirit
returned, and she recovered.

At Hippo one Bassus a Syrian prayed at the same Martyrs Monument for a sick
Daughter of his, that was like to die, having taken her Garment to the place
with him; when on the sudden there came Servants from home to tell him, she was
dead. But while he was at his Prayers, his friends meeting with them forbad
them to acquaint him therewith, that he might not go mourning along the
Streets. So returning home to his house, which rang with the lamentations of
his Servants, he threw her Garment, which he had carried with him, upon her,
and she came to life again.

In the same Hippo likewise, the Son of one Irenaeus a Banker fell sick and
died. And as the Coorse was laid out, and provision made for the funeral one
of his friends, while some were wailing and lamenting, others administering
words of comfort, hinted unto them, that they should anoint the Corpse with the
Oil of the B. Martyr. Which was no sooner done but he was restored to life,

In like manner Eleusinus, one that had been Tribune, laid his Son, a little
Infant newly dead, upon the Martyrs Memorial, that is in his Manor in our
Suburbs, and, after his Prayers powered forth with abundance of Tears in the
place, took him up alive. What shall I do? My promise of completing this work
hastens me, so that I cannot name all those I know: and questionless most of my
familiars, when they read these, will take it ill, that I have omitted so many,
which they certainly know as well as I. Whose pardon at present I must crave,
and that they would consider, how laborious an enterprise it is, to perform
that, which the dispatch of this Employment undertaken permits me not here to
do. For should I only write down the Miraculous Cures, to let pass other things
which have been done within the Confines of Calama and Hippo by this Martyr, I
mean the Most Glorious Steven, I might compile many Volumes; yet not comprize
them all; but only those, whereof Testimonials are brought in, that so they may
be divulged to the people. For so we have ordered; being desirous that we
having seen even in these our days instances of a Divine and Supernatural
power frequently shown like those of old, they should not be buried in
oblivion, or kept from public view.

It is scarce two years since the Monument at Hippo-Regius was erected, when as
the Books delivered in to us concerning these prodigious effects, (yet many
other as we are most certain not being given in,) even to the time when I am
writing this, amount to some seventy. But at Calama, where the Memorial was
set up sooner, and the Books brought faster, they are incredibly more in number.

At Vzala too, a Colony adjoining to Vtica, we have been witnesses of sundry
things of note done by the same See (in sermon. de diversis 32. 33.) the relation
of another ^^ miracle, which the Father knew done in this place.
Martyr: whose Monument was built by Bishop Evodius long before ours. But there
is, or rather there was no custom as then to publish Testimonials; though happily
of late some such Usage have got footing. For, when we were there awhile since,
we desired Petronia a Noble Lady, that had been miraculously recovered of a
long and dangerous sickness, when all aid of the Physicians failed her, the
Bishop of the place likewise wishing the same, to give in a Declaration to be
read in the Congregation, who most willingly assented, and did so. In which one
thing was inserted, which I cannot here conceal, though hurried away to other
matters importing this present design.

She relates, how a certain Jew advised her to sow into a girdle of hair a Ring
that had a stone set in it found in the reins of an Ox, and to gird her self
with it under her clothes next her skin; furnished with this remedy she
addressed her self to the Shrine of the Holy Martyr. And in her Travaills from
Carthage, after having stayed at a Manor she had in those parts seated upon
the River Bagrada, as she rose up to go on her journey, she espied the Ring
lying at her feet, and wondering at it felt for the girdle of hair in which it
was bound, which when she found fast with all its knots, as it had been tied,
she guesed the Ring had broke, and so stipped out, but then finding it whole,
she interpeted it as a presage of her future recovery, intimated by so strange
a Portent and untying her girdle threw both it and the Ring into the River.

This they believe not, who do not believe that the Lord Jesus was born of his
Mother, her virginal enclosure remaining entire, and that he went in to his
Disciples the doors being shut. But let them enquire into this, and as they
find it true, let them believe those other. She is an Honorable Lady, nobly
descended, nobly matched, dwelling at Carthage: both the place and person so
illustrious cannot lie concealed from such as make enquiry. Nay the very Martyr
at whose entreaty she was restored, did believe in the Son of the Perpetual
Virgin, in him that entered in to his Disciples the doors being shut did he
believe: lastly, for which end all this is mentioned by us, in him who ascended
into heaven in the flesh wherein he rose, did he believe: and therefore were
such strange things effected by him, because for this Faith he laid down his
life.

So that even now adays Miracles are wrought: the same God working them by whom
and how he pleases, who did those we read of: but neither are they so generally
remarked, nor are they so riveted into the memory by often reading and
repeating them, as not at all to be forgot. For evenwhere that care is taken,
which we have have begun of late, to read the Testimonies of such as have found
benefit, unto the Assembly, yet they that are present hear it but once, and
they are not many, so that neither such as were by within a few days remember
what they heard, and scarce any one of them can be found, who will relate what
which himself heard to another, whom he knows was not there.

There is on Miracle wrought among us, not greater than those I have named, but
yet so notorious and famed, that I believe there is not one in Hippo but has
either See more particulars of this Miracle related in Sermon. de diverse. 31, 32,
33.
seen or heard thereof, not one that ever can forget it. There were seven
Brothers, and three Sisters, ten in all; Citizens of no mean rank in Caesarea
of Cappadocia, who upon the Curses of their Mother, at that time left desolate
by the late death of their Father, and highly resenting some distaste they had
given her, were seized by the Divine Vengeance with such a dreadful punishment
that they all fell into a horrible shaking and trembling of their joints; in
which dismal plight, not enduring to live under the eye of their Neighbors,
they turned Vagrants about the world, whithersoever each one listed, as far as
the Roman confines reached. Of these two, a Brother and Sister, Paul and
Palladia came to us, by this time known to most places through their sad and
sore calamity. Hither they came some fifteen days before Easter, resorting
daily to Church, and to the Memorial of the Glorious S. Steven, there offering
up their Prayers, that at length God would be appeased toward them, and restore
them to their former health. So that both here and where ever they came, they
were objects of wonder and compassion to the whole City, those who had seen
them in other places, and understood the reason of that trembling in them,
telling it to others still as occasion served. Well, Easter came, and a huge
throng of people being assembled in the Morning, as the Young man was at his
Prayers, holding with his hand the Bars of that Sacred place which enclosed the
Martyrs Relics, on a sudden down he falls and lay like one asleep, yet shook
not, as he used to do when he slept formerly; they that were present astonished
hereat, part of them surprised with fear, part with grief, some would have
lifted him up, others withstood them, alleging it was better to attend the
issue. When lo! he rose up, and without the least shaking, for he was
recovered, stood looking on the lookers on. What one of all the Spectators
could hereupon forbear giving praise to God? the whole Church rang again with
shouts of acclamation and Thanksgiving. Then they came running to me where I
was sitting ready to come forth: they flocked so fast one upon another, that
each last man told for news, that which his fellow had related before him.
While I was rejoicing, and giving thanks to God in my heart, in comes he
himself, with a many more, falling down at my feet, whom I took up and kissed.
So forth we go to the people, with whom the Church was thronged, resounding
with Peales of joy, none silent, but all unanimously crying out, God be
thanked, God be praised. I salute them and thereupon they shouted louder than
before with the same expressions. Silence being made, at last the Lessons
appointed were read out of H. Scripture. And I being to preach spoke very
briefly, yet sutably to the time and occasion of that extrordinary Joy: leaving
them rather to improve in their own thoughts, with how forcible an eloquence
God bespake them in so miraculous a work, than to hear it from me. The man
dined with me, and punctually related to me the whole story of his own, his
Mothers, and Brothers heavy affliction. Next day after Sermon I promised to
recite the day following a Summary of that Relation to the people. Which I
performed three days after Easter, causing both the Brother and Sister to stand
on the steps of the Quire, whilst the Sea this Narrative set down Sermon. de
diversis 31.
Narrative was reading; where I spoke to them from a place somewhat higher. All
the people gazed on them, the Man and the Maid: he without any irregular motion
standing still, she trembling every joint of her. Those, that looked not on
him, saw, in his sister, how great a blessing the Divine mercy had bestowed on
him: for they saw what to congratulate in him, what to pray for, for her.

Meanwhile, having read the Narration, I bad them go from the view of the
people, and began to examine more diligently the cause of such effect; when
behold! as I was debating it, more shoutings of new gratulation were heard from
the Monument of the Martyr. They that listened to me turning about began to
gather thither-ward: for the Maid, when she went down the steps, betook her
thither to pray to the Holy Martyr; and no sooner had touched the Bars, but
falling along, as though she had been asleep, rose up well. Then, as we were
enquiring what the matter was, that they made such joyous outcries, they
accompanying her into the Chancell, where we were, bring her cured from the
Martyrs Sepulcher.

But then arose such Eccho's of admiration from either Sex, seconded with
tears, as if it never would have ended. She was brought to the same place where
a little before she stood trembling; the multitude overjoyed, that she was (
like her Brother) recovered; whom even now they were sorry for, that she was so
dislike him. And they discerned their good will for her already granted, before
they could put up their prayers in her behalf. They set up their voices so
loud, yet without verbal expressions, to the honor of God, that we were
scarce able to endure the noise thereof. And what was there then in the hearts
of them that rejoiced thus excessively, save the Faith of Christ, for which
Saint Steven shed his blood? On this Chapter, the Centurists (Cent. 5. cap. 6.
coll. 699.) handling the History of Relics, comment thus. [Augustinus de
reliquiis Stephani scribit; superstitiosum and magnum concursum multitudinis ad
eas in Africam usque factum esse, dementatis populis quibusdam illusionibus,
quae pro miraculis habita sunt, libro de Civ. Dei. 22. cap. 8.] How truly this
is said, I leave to the judgment of the Reader of this Chapter.

To this chapter, urged by Mr. Fisher, Bishop White, (page 351.) amongst other
things, answers thus; Because these things were extraordinary, and the credit
of diverse of them depends upon Fame (which is many times uncertain, and S.
Augustine himself says, they are not commended unto us by such weighty
authority, as that without all doubt they must needs be credited) they cannot
be sufficient grounds or foundations of Catholic Doctrine or practice.] Now
that S. Austin says so, he quotes in the margent these words of his in the
beginning of the chapter [Non tanta ea commendat authoritas, ut sine
difficultate vel dubitatione credantur.] the sentence in S. Austin entire is
thus. [Nam plerunque ibi paucissimi sciunt, ignorantibus caeteris, maxim si
magna sit civitas; and quando alibi, aliisque narrantur, non tanta ea commendat
authoritas, ut sine difficultate vel dubitatione credantur, quamvis Christianis
fidelibus a fidelibus indicentur.] Here the Father doubts not of the certainty
of the Miracles; how could He, when as he instanceth in several, whereof
himself was an ey-witness? but complains; that Miracles certainly known by
some, yet when related to others, were hardly believed by them.

To this chapter, urged by Cardinal Bellarmine in his Apology, Bishop Andrews
( in Resp. cap. 12. p. 284.) answers thus. [Et illa quae legit ibi in capite
illo apud Augustinum miracula, videat, an concinne satis conciliare possit cum
Augustino ipso, qui (Epist. 137.) nusquam hic in Africa talia fieri scire se,
dixit clero suo and universae plebi Hipponensi: minus caute id, si tam
frequentia fiebant.] But, for answer to this, I refer the Reader to that
passage of the Epistle it self, which follows here, and to the note upon it.
--

Lastly, in answer to this chapter, Chamier ( in Panstrat. 2. Tom. 20. l. 4.
c.) has these words. -- De 22. libro de Civ. Dei. cap. 8. possum ex Vive
dicere; multum in eo lusisse Sciolorum lasciviam, aur potius superstitiosorum
audaciam; sed hoc potius; in eo toto, ne literam quidem esse de invocandis
sanctis. Nam quod legas sa pius, ad memoriam Martyrum, ad Martyrs, orasse,
significat, juxta Martyrum memoriam oratum fuisse Deum; non autem ipsos
Martyrs. Nam alioquin quis in Augustino hanc ferret barbariem, Orare ad
Martyrs? Thus he. Now first for Vives. Upon those word in the chapter [Aut ut
aliquanto homo diutius vivat] he has this note [In hoc capite non dubium, quin
multa sint addita, velut declarandi gratia, ab iis, qui omnia magnorum auctorum
scripta spurcis suis manibus contaminabant, quorum alia resecabo, alia more meo
contentus ero velut digito indicasse. But observe, that he speaks not this of
any matter added; but of some words added or altered velut declarandi gratia,
among which he mentions and corrects by a perfecter Co^^ ^h^se ^ollowing
[Quiesus] put by these Scioli sor [di^^ ius] -- [oratio] put for [orario] --
[quem a daemonio correptum videt] put after pro adolescente [velut declarandi
gratia. -- [dies quindecim and ecclesiam] put for [dies quindecim ecclesiam]
and, being interposed contrary to some perfecter Copies. After which and some
others noted by him; Vives says, fessus jam sum tam minuta annotando, quae non
dubito esse a Sciolo quopiam sic mutata, dum putat lucem afferre. But mark;
that he censures no further, than as one Copy corrects another; that none of
Vives his various readings prejudice, or alter any thing in any one Miracle
here: that these variae lectiones happen in other chapters, as well as this:
(see his complaint in his Preface to this work. -- Mira dictu res quanta in
codicibus varietas, ut unusquisque describentium putaret sibi licere, verba
arbitratu suo ponere, modo constaret sensus.) Lastly, that whatever Vives
blamed, by finding ancient copies differing, is corrected and left out in this
Copy to which his notes are affixed, and which I have here translated. Which
thing I suppose Chamier well perceived, and therefore says faintly, 'possum ex
Vive dicere' -- sed hoc potius. --

As for his second Note expounding that passage Orare ad Martyrs, as though it
were the same with ad Memoriam Martyrum; saying that St. Augustine could not
commit such a barbarism, as to say, Orare ad Martyrs in a proper sense.
First, it is certain; that both the Latin Translation of the scriptures, and S.
Austin himself elsewhere does use the like phrase, and that understood
properly; as [Orare ad Deum: orare ad Dominum] see 1. Sam. 12. 19. Ora ad
Dominum Deum tuum pro servis tuis -- and Psalm. 5 Quoniam ad te orabo Domine. On
which the Father: Dicit: Quoniam ad te orabo Domine id est, Quoniam tantus es
ad quem orabo. etc. And secondly the consequents here seem plainly to show that
this phrase is to be understood literally, as it is expressed. Because first,
else the words [quorum memoria apud nos est] immediately following ad viginti
Martyrs would seem useless. Secondly, It is said presently after, that
Florentius praying clare vo^e, audiverunt eum adolescentes qui forte aderant
irrisores, eumque discedentem exagitantes prosequebantur, quasi a Martyribus
quinquagenos folles, unde vestimentum emeret, petivisset. Therefore he did
petere a Martyribus, and not only, apud Martyrum memoriam: although he asked
only of them not quinquagenos folles in particular, but, ut vestiretur.) And
after this the Cook returning the Ring says (with reference doubtless to
Florentius his formerly derided prayers) [Ecce quomodo viginti Martyrs te
vestierunt!]

And see elsewhere this Father clearly mentioning prayer made to deceased
saints; In his Book De cura pro mortuis, 4 c. where he says thus concerning
praying for the dead to these Martyrs, near to whose Monuments or Memorialls
their Bodies are buried. -- Dum recolunt ubi sunt posita eorum quos diligunt
corpora, eisdem sanctis [Martyribus] illos tanquam Patronis susceptos apud
Dominum adjuvandos, orando commendant. Whilst they call to mind, where the
bodies of those who are dear unto them are laid, they with their prayers
commend them to the same Saints, as it where to Patrons undertaken [by them] to
be helped with the Lord. And, in his 33. Sermon de diversis where you may find
the like praying to S. Steven in the second Person, in a story related by him
at the Cure of the Trembling Youth and his Sister, mentioned before. The story
is this, Mulier quaedam amisit in gremio aegrotantem filium, etc. A certain
Woman lost her Son a sucking-infant (being a catechumen) sickning in her lap.
Whom seeing thus lost and irrecoverably perished, she began more like a
Christian, than a mother to bewail him. For she desired not the life of her
Son, save in the world to come; and lament^d that this was taken away from him,
and lost for ever. Yet full of confidence, she took the dead child, and ran to
the Memorial of the Blessed Martyr Steven, and began of him to demand her Son,
and to say; Holy Martyr, you see I have no comfort left. For I cannot say my
son is gone before, whom you know to be lost: for you see the cause why I
mourn. Restore my son; that I may have him at the appearance of him that
crowned you. Thus and in like expressions when she had prayed with tears, not
so much requesting, but (as I said) in a sort demanding him, her Son revived.
And because she said, You know wherefore I ask him; God was pleased to discover
her true intent. She straight brought him to the Presbyters, he was baptized,
sanctified, anointed; hands imposed on him, and all the Sacraments ended, he
was taken away again. -- Here the form of her prayer runs in the second person
Sancte Martyr -- Read Filium meum, etc.




S. Aug. de Civ. Dei Lib. 22. Cap. 9.
That all the Miracles done by the Martyrs in Christ's name bear witness to that
Faith, whereby the Martyrs believed in Christ.
NOw what do all these Miracles, but confirm this Faith, in which is preached,
that Christ rose again in the flesh, and therein ascended into heaven? For,
even the Martyrs themselves were Martyrs, that is, Witnesses of this faith; and
in giving testimony thereto endured a most cross and malicious world, which
they conquered, not by resisting, but by dying. Those died for this faith, who
now are able to obtain such things of the Lord, for whose sake they were put to
death. Their wonderful patience, suffering for this faith, went before, that
the divine power seen in these Miracles might follow after. For if the
Resurrection of the flesh to an eternal state either has not been already
fulfilled in Christ, or is not also to be fulfilled in us, as it has been
foretold by Christ, or as foretold also by the Prophets, who foretold of
Christ; how is it, that the Martyrs can do such strange things, who were slain
for that faith, which affirms such a Resurrection? For whether it be, that God
by himself (after that wonderful manner, whereby his Eternity acts in things
temporal) works these things; or whether by his Ministers he does them; Again,
in the things he does by his Ministers, whether he does some by the Spirits of
Martyrs also, as by them, when men yet resiant in a Whence we may collect, they
are by God acquainted with our wants, and prayers; at least so far as God makes
them instruments of relieving our necessities, or of performing our requests.
the body; or effect them all by Angels, whom he invisibly and incorporeally
commands; so that the things said to be done by the Martyrs, are caused by
their prayers and intercessions, not also by their operations; or whether some
things be wrought by one, some by other means; which yet are no way to be
comprehended by Mortals; still they all avow this faith, in which is asserted
the Resurrection of the flesh to all Eternity.

CAP. X.
How much fitter it is, that the Martyrs should be honored, who do obtain
diverse Miracles, that so the true God may be worshipped, than Devils, who do
some things, to the end themselves may be thought to be Gods.
BUt here perhaps they will say; their Gods likewise did some miracles. It is
well yet, that they begin to match their Gods with our dead men. Or will they
say that they have Gods too of their dead men, as Hercules, Romulus, and
several others, whom they conceive to be admitted into the number of Gods? But
we count not the Martyrs Gods; for that we acknowledge the Martyr's God, and
our's, to be one and the same. Yet are not the Miracles, reported to be done in
their Temples, at all comparable to those wrought by the Memorialls of our
Martyrs. Yet if any of these works seem like; as Pharaohs Magicians by Moses,
so are their Gods vanquished by our Martyrs. Indeed the Devils, out of the
height of pride and filthy arrogance, did them, to be thought Gods by them. But
the Martyrs do them (or rather God, they either praying or cooperating
thereto) for the propagating that faith, whereby we believe, not that they are
our Gods, but that they and we have one God. Lastly, they built Temples,
erected Altars, appointed Priests, and offered sacrifices to these their gods.
But we build no Temples to our Martyrs, as to Gods; but Monuments, as to dead
men; whose spirits live with God, Nor do we set up Altars there, whereon to
sacrifice to the Martyrs; but we offer sacrifice to the One God, both of the
Martyrs, and ours: at which sacrifice, as men of God, who in confessing him
overcame the world, they are nominated in their due place and order; ( [Non
tamen a sacerdote qui sacrificat invocantur.] To know what the Father means
here by [non invocantur Martyrs;] and so that it no way opposes the
recommending of our selves to their prayers; you may be pleased to consider two
or three other like passages of his -- Contra Faust. Manich. lib. 20. cap. 21.
-- and De Verbis Apostoli 5. Sermon. 17. and In Johaunem Tract. 84. -- Contra
Faustum thus Populus autem etc. But the Christian People resort with religious
solemnity to the Memorialls of the Martyrs, both to excite an imitation of them
and to be sharers in their Merits, and helped by their prayers: yet so, that we
sacrifice to none of the Martyrs, but to the God of the Martyrs; although we
erect Altars at the Monuments of the Martyrs. For which of the Priests serving
at the Altar in the place of the Holy Bodies, ever said at any time We offer
unto thee O Peter, Paul, Cyprian? But what is offered, is offered to God (who
crowned the Martyrs) at the M^morialls of those whom he crowned: that so, from
the intimation of the very places themselves, our devotion may rise higher, to
the enflaming our affection both to them, whom we may imitate; and toward him,
by whose assistance only we may so imitate them. We therefore worship the
Martyrs with that worship of love and communion, wherein are honored, even in
this life, holy men of God, whose hearts we perceive prepared unto the like
sufferings for the Evangelicall Truth. But those we worship so much the more
devoutly, by how much the more securely, after so many hazards now safely
passed over: as also we praise them with so much more confident Elogies, now
victors in a more blessed life, than yet conflicting still in this. But we
neither worship, nor teach men to worship any but God, with that worship termed
in Greek Latria, and which cannot be expressed by one word in Latin, being a
service peculiarly due unto the Deity. And seeing offering of sacrifice belongs
to this worship (whereby it becomes Idolatry in them that exhibit it to idols)
we offer no such thing, at no hand, nor enjoin it to be offered either to any
Martyr, or any holy Soul, or Angel; but whosoever falls into this error, is
reprehended by our sound doctrine, either that he may be amended, or that he
may be avoided. For, the Saints themselves whether Men, or Angels, would not
have that given unto them, which they know to be due, of right, to God alone.
-- And de Verbis Apostoli Sermon. 17. Perfectio tamen in hac vita non nulla est,
ad quam, etc. Yet some perfection there is also in this life, to which the Holy
Martyrs have attained. And therefore Ecclesiastical discipline as the
faithful know, shows, when in such places, the Martyrs are rehearsed at Gods
Altar, there are no prayers made for them; but for other dead, who are
commemorated, prayer is made. For it is an injury, to pray for a Martyr, unto
whose prayers we ought to be recommended; for he has resisted against sin even
unto blood, etc. Also Tract. 84. in Joann. 15. 13. -- Hoc Beati Martyrs, etc.
This [that is, laying down their life] the Blessed Martyrs with an enflamed
affection have done whose Memories if we celebrate not in vain, but repair to
the Lords Table unto that Feast, wherewith they were even saturated, it is
requisite, that what they did, so we likewise should prepare to do the like.
For therefore we do not commemorate them at the Holy Table in such manner, as
we do others that rest in peace, so as to pray for them; but that they rather
might pray for us, that we may follow their steps: inasmuch as they have
fulfilled that love then which Our Lord has said [greater could not be.] --
Ideo eos commemoramus ( says he) ut orent ipsi pro nobis.] Therefore the
Father conceived the Martyrs to pray for those, that thus commemorated them
rather, or more, than for others, who commemorated them not. Else such their
commemoration nothing availed, for obtaining the Martyrs prayers: whereas he
says here, commemoramus ut -- But then, that the Martyrs might pray for such
as commemorated them, more, than for others, they must have some knowledge of
such their commemoration. -- This shows therefore, 1. that the Father thought,
that the Martyrs knew of such commemorations. And again, 2. that such our
commemoration of the Martyrs, that they might pray for us, well consisted with
our not sacrificing, or offering to them; or religiously invocating them as
deities. And this needs not to seem strange in a Father whenas Charity grants,
that, Invocatio civilis is lawfully used to a creature. Chamier de cultu
Creaturarum 2. Tom. 20. l. 6. c. Quo minus rogentur, hoc est, invocentur
promiscue and civiliter, nihil obstat.


) yet are they not invocated by the Priest that sacrifices. For he sacrifices
to God. not them, although at their Monuments: because he is God's, not their,
Priest. And the sacrifice it self is the Body of Christ; which is not offered
to them, because they themselves also are it. Which of the two therefore should
we rather believe working Miracles? Those, who would have themselves reputed
for Gods, by them for whom they do those things? or those, who do all that is
done, that men may believe in God, which also Christ is? Those, who would have
their religious rites to be their crimes, or those who would not so much as
have their virtues and praises to be our service of them; but, what ever is
truly spoken in their praise, all tend to his glory, in whom they are praised?
For, in the Lord are their souls praised. Let us therefore credit them, both
speaking truth, and working wonders. And, of that Truth this is the main, that
Christ rose from the dead; and showed the immortality of the Resurrection, in
his own flesh first; of which he promised, either in the beginning of the new
world, or in the end of this, to make us partakers.

S. Aug. Epist. 137.
The Argument of the whole Epistle is this.

BOniface, a Priest of S. Austins Co-fraternity, complained of another young
man, of the same society, one of a suspected fame, that he had solicited him,
to commit uncleaness with him. Who by the Father questioned concerning it, by
recrimination charged Boniface with the same. When the matter could on no side
be proved, or confuted, by any evident argument; Upon S. Austins motion and
request, both of them engage to repair to the Monument of the Martyr Felix, at
Nola in Italy, over against Hippo in Affrik, that by some Miracle there, this
matter might come to be decided. The Father was very careful, that so
scandalous a business should be managed with great secrecy. But it
notwithstanding spreading abroad, he writes this exhortatory Epistle to the
Clergy and the rest of the people of Hippo; not to judge rashly nor yet for the
offenses of a few, either to desist from holiness or suspect evil of others:
showing that there never was any society of men so happy, but some wickedness
might get into it.

CVm enim ista me causa diu cruciasset etc.] This cause having long perplexed
me, so that I could not discover, which way one of the two might be convicted,
although I rather inclined to believe the Presbyter etc. -- I made choice of a
middle way; that both of them, by joint agreement, should bind themselves, that
they would take a journey to a holy place, where the more dreadful works of
God might more easily discover every one's conscience that was unsound, and
either by some fear, or punishment, force them to a confession. Indeed God is
every where, and he contained or included in no place who made all things; and
he is by true worshipers to be worshipped in spirit and in truth; that so,
hearing in secret, he may also in secret justify and crown them. But, as
touching those things which are visibly made known to men, who can search out
his counsel, why these Miracles are wrought in some places, not wrought in
others? For the holiness of the place is very well known to many where the Body
of the Blessed Felix of Nola was buried, wither I willed them to go, for that
whatever was miraculously mad^ manifest upon either of them there, might from
thence be more readily, and Nola in Italy being over against Hippo in Afric.
more faithfully transmitted in writing to us. For, at Millain, I my self knew
at the Memorial of the Saints, (where the very devils make strange and
terrible confessions) a certain Thief, who came thither purposely to deceive
one, by for swearing himself, that was compelled to acknowledge the theft, and
restore what he had taken away. And is not Africa full of the bodies of Holy
Martyrs? (a) And yet we know such things done no where hereabouts. For, as the
Apostle says, Non omnes etc. 1. Cor. 12. All Saints have not gifts of healing,
nor have all the discerning of Spirits, so neither would he, who divides his
own to every one, as he will, have these things done at all Memorials of the
Saints, Wherefore being unwilling, that this very great grief of my heart
should come to your knowledge, lest I should trouble you, by grieving you to
much, and to little purpose, God would perhaps therefore not conceal it from
you, that you, together with us, might give your selves to prayer; that so,
what himself knows in this matter, but we cannot know, he, of his goodness, may
be pleased to manifest unto us. etc.

Here Bishop Andrews, as I said, (Resp. ad Apol. Bellarm. c. 12.) would make
the matter of this Epistle someway to oppose and evacuate the eighth chapter of
the 22th. Book de Civ. Dei: because the Father here says, nusquam hic in
Africa, talia fieri, scire se; that he knew no such miracles done in Africa.
But the Father (without making him to contradict himself) may first either be
understood by [talia] not to exclude all miracles in general, and absolutely,
but only those of such a kind; that is, a miraculous deciding of matters of
controversy, and forcing the delinquent to confess his fault; as these
expressions of his seem to imply; Ubi terribiliora opera Dei non sanam cujusque
conscientiam facilius aperirent: i. e. 'where the more terrible works of God
'discovered every one's unsound conscience. And, novimus furem quendam, etc.
his story of a thief forced to confess his theft before such a Monument. And
that which follows after [talia] Non omnes Sancti, etc. All Saints have not
gifts of healings nor all the discerning of Spirits: so neither would he have
these things done at all Memorialls, who divides to every one according as he
will. These things, that is, both these things; both healing, and discerning of
Spirits.

Or Secondly if he speak here of all Miracles; and mean these things, in
general; yet may that which he says in Civ. Dei. 8. cap. be true
nevertheless: those frequent Miracles he knew to be done at the Martyrs
Memorialls in Afric (probably) happening after the writing of this Epistle.
For in that eighth chapter of the 22th. Book De Civ. Dei ( which books were
finished not long before his death) he says; Nondum est autem biennium, etc.
'It is not yet two years since this Memorial was set up at Hippo-Regius: and
of another Memorial he says; Quam Possidius illo advexit; Which Possidius
(Bishop of Calama, and one of S. Austins Colleagues, as he calls himself, in
the story which he writ of his Life) brought thither: therefore that of no long
standing. But to put all out of doubt, see what the Father says, concerning
this matter, in his Book De vera Relig. cap. 25. -- Sed accepimus majores
nostros, etc. But we have heard that our Forefathers followed visible Miracles,
for they could not do otherwise, in that degree of Faith, whereby men ascend as
high as from things temporal to eternal: by whom it is come to pass, that
these now are not necessary to their posterity. For seeing the Catholic Church
is founded, and diffused through all the World, those Miracles were not
suffered to last to our times, lest the mind should always look after things
visible, and mankind, by the frequency of them, should chill, by the Novelty
whereof it was at first enflamed. Nor yet are we to doubt, but that they are to
be believed, who preaching things whereunto few arrived, could notwithstanding
persuade the people to follow them, etc. Upon which words (that he might not be
misunderstood in them) the Father thus comments in his Retractations S. Aug.
Retract. lib. 1 cap. 13. Item quod dixi, etc. Again whereas I said that those
Miracles were not permitted to last to our times; it is true indeed; for they
that are now adays baptized do not so receive the Holy Ghost, when hands are
laid on them, as to speak in the Languages of all Nations: nor are the
impotent at this day cured at the shadow of the preachers of Christ, passing by
them; and whatever such like things were then done, which it is apparent,
afterward ceased. But what I said is not so to be understood, as that men
should believe there were now no miracles wrought in the name of Christ. For at
the same time, when I wrote that very Book, I my self knew a blind man in the
same City, that recovered his sight at the Bodies of the* Millain-Martyrs, and
some others; of which sort so many are, even in these times done, that we can
neither know them all, nor yet reckon up those we know. See what the Father
says to the same purpose Retract. 1. lib. 14. cap. Alio loco, cum miracula
commemorassem, etc. In another place [viz, of his Book De utilitate Credendi,
16. cap.] When I had recited the Miracles which the Lord Jesus did, when he was
here in the flesh, I added, You will say why are not these things done now? and
I answered there, because they would not move us, unless they were wonders: and
wonders they would not be, if they were usual. But this I said; because not so
great, nor all such, miracles are done now a days; not because none are done
also now a days.


Gervasius and Protasius: see S. Aug Confess. 9. lib. 7. cap.


S. Aug. De Cura pro Mortuis Cap. 16.
HEnce also is that Question solved; After what manner the Martyrs, by the
favors granted to such as pray, declare, that they intermeddle in humane
affairs, if the dead know not what the living do? For, we have heard it, not by
uncertain rumors, but undoubted witnesses, that, when Nola was besieged by the
Barbarians, the Blessed Confessor Felix, not only by certain instances of
particular favors, but even in the plain view of men, appeared to diverse
citizens and inhabitants, whom he especially loved. But these things were
divine manifestations, differing far from the usual course assigned to the
several sorts of creatures. For, because, when our Lord was pleased, water was
presently turned into wine, it follows not, that therefore we should not
distinguish, what virtue water in the proper order of Elements has, from what
in the rarity, or rather singularity, of that divine operation upon it. Nor,
because Lazarus rose again, therefore does every dead man rise again at
pleasure; or therefore are the lifeless roused up by the living, as one asleep
is by another that is waking. Therefore the bounds of humane things are of one
sort, the effects of the divine power of another: what is done naturally is one
thing, what miraculously another: although, both God is assistant to nature,
that she may be, and likewise nature not excluded to the being of Miracles. We
must not therefore imagine, that any of the dead promiscuously can intermix
themselves in the affairs of those alive, because the Martyrs are present at
the curing or helping some particular persons: but, we are rather to conceive
that, by the divine power it is, that the Martyrs do intermeddle in the affairs
of the living; because by their own proper nature the dead cannot do so.

Although this Question transcend the reach of my understanding; How the
Martyrs help those, who certainly are helped by them; whether they are
personally present at the same time, in so diverse, and so far distant, places;
either where their Memorials are, or wherever, besides at their Memorials, they
are known to be present: or whether (they being removed from all commerce with
men, into a place suitable to their merits, yet praying in general for the
needs of their suppliants, as we pray for the dead, whom we are no way present
to, nor know, either where they are, or what they do) Almighty God, who is
every where present, neither fastend to us, nor yet divided from us, hearing
the Martyrs prayers, by the ministry of Angels; dispersed from all places, does
dispense these comforts unto men, for whom he judges them needful in the
miseries of this life; and thereby out of his wonderful and unspeakable power
and goodness, sets forth the Merits of his Martyrs, where, when, and how,
himself pleases: but, especially, at their Memorials: for that he knows this
expedient for us, for the building and propagating of the faith of Christ, for
the confession of which the Martyrs suffered, etc, This is a thing much higher,
than to be reached by me, deeper and obscurer, than that I can fathom; and
therefore which of the two it be, or whether happily it be both of them, i. e.
that sometimes these things are done by the very presence of the Martyrs;
sometime again by Angels personating the Martyrs, I dare not determine, I had
rather inquire of such as know them; for there are some that know them, as some
that think they do, but do not; for they are the gifts of God, giving some to
some men, others to others, as the Apostle says. 1. Cor. 12. The manifestation
of the Spirit is given to every one, to profit withal: to one, says he, is
given by the Spirit, the word of wisdom, to another the word of knowledge,
according to the same Spirit; to another Faith in the same Spirit; to another
the gift of healings in one Spirit; to another working of Miracles; to another
Prophecy; to another discerning of Spirits; to another kinds of tongues; to
another the interpretation of tongues. And all these works one and the same
Spirit, dividing to every one his own, as he pleases. Of all these spiritual
gifts, which the Apostle reckons up, whosoever has the discerning of Spirits,
knows these things as they are to be known.

CHAP. XVII.
ANd such a one (it is probable) was John the Monk, whom Theodosius the Elder
being Emperor consulted about the event of the Civil war: for he had the gift
of Prophecy. For I doubt not, but that, as every particular man may have each
of those gifts particularly, so might some one have many. This John, when a
certain Woman, that was very devout, impatiently desired to see him, and (he
much relucting, because to women he permitted no such thing) much importuned
him by her husband for such a favor; Go, says he, tell your wife, she shall
see me at night, but in her sleep: as it came to pass. When he instructed her
in all things fitting to a Believer in a married condition. She, when she
awaked, told her husband, that she had seen such a man of God, as he well knew
him to be; and what she had heard from him. This a grave and Noble Person, most
worthy to be credited, and who had it from the parties themselves, told me. But
if I should ever have seen that Holy Monk, since, as report goes of him, he was
most patient in hearing questions, and most prudent in answering them; I would
have asked him what is pertinent to this Question: Whether he himself came to
that woman in her sleep, that is, his spirit in the shape of his body, as we
dream of our selves in the shape of our bodies; on, whether this vision befell
the woman in her sleep (he being busy about something else, or in his sleep
dreaming of something else) either by some Angel, or some other way; and
whether he did foreknow, that what he foretold, would come to pass, by the
Spirit of Prophecy revealing it to him. For, were he by her as she was in her
sleep, it must be (doubtless) by wonderful grace and privilege, not nature;
and by especial favor of God, not by any power of his own. But if she saw him
in her sleep, he doing something else, or being asleep, and taken up with other
visions; then, some such thing it was, as that we read of in the Acts of the
Apostles, Act. 9. where the Lord Jesus speaks to Ananias of Saul, and tells him,
that Saul saw Ananias coming to him; whereas Ananias himself knew nothing of
it. That man of God would inform me of every of these particulars: of whom I
would further enquire concerning the Martyrs; whether they present themselves,
to such as in their sleep, or any other way behold them, in what shape soever
they please: and especially at such times, when the Devils in the possessed do
confess that they are tormented by them, beseeching them to spare them: or,
whether by Gods appointment these things are done by the Angelical powers in
honor and commendation of the Saints for the benefit of men, they themselves
remaining in perfect rest, attending on other far better visions apart from us,
and praying for us. (For at Millain, at the Monument of the H. Martyrs
Protasius and Gervasius; the Devils did expressly and by name, amongst some
others that were already dead, whom they in like manner mentioned, confess also
Fishop Ambrose then living, and besought him, that he would spare them, he
being otherwise employed, and altogether ignorant when this was done.) Or
whether sometimes these things are done by the presence of the Martyrs,
othertimes of Angels; and whether these two can be distinguished by us, or by
what signs: and whether any man can discern and judge of these things, except
See more concerning this Holy man in Palladius his Historia Lausiaca. vita 43.
he that has that Gift from the Spirit of God, which divides things proper to
every one as he pleases. All these things, I suppose that Holy man John would
have discoursed to me according to my desire. etc.

[To these may be added the story which the Father relates in the 12. cap. of
the same book, to confirm that such apparitions may be made, and the real
effects, which God pleases, be produced upon men (whether by the Ministry of
Angels, or by some other unknown way) in the absence, and without the
knowledge, of the persons which are in such visions represented to them. So
that it is not necessary to affirm, the deceased Saints or Martyrs to be every
where or any where at all present or operative, where their images or
representations appear, and where cures are really wrought, or where secret or
future things are truly revealed or foretold, seemingly, by them. The Story he
there relates is this.]

Quidam Curma nomine etc. -- A certain man, by name Curma, a mean officer of
the Corporation of Tullia, near to Hippo, scarce a Duum-vir of the place, and a
plain rustic, falling fick and deprived of his senses, lay some days for dead:
only some little breath was in his nostrils, which with putting to ones hand
was hardly perceived, and, being an argument of one yet alive, suffered him not
to be buried. He moved not a joint, took no sustenance, discerned nothing by
his eyes, or any other sense, howsoever tortured. Yet mean while he saw many
things as we do in sleep which (after many days as it were awaking) he related.
And first as soon as he opened his eyes, let some body go (says he) to Curma
the Smiths house, and see what is there adoing. Whither when one went, he was
found dead at the same instant that this man was restored to his senses, and in
a manner revived from death. Then he told them who were with him, observing
him; that, the Smith was commanded to be presented, when he was released, and
that he heard there, whence he returned, that, not Curma the Officer, but Curma
the Smith, was commanded to be brought to those places of the dead. in these
visions, as it were in dreams, he was also amongst the dead, whom (according to
the difference of their merits) he saw to be differently treated. he also knew
some, [there] whom he had known alive. And happily I should have believed that
these had been really the Dead whom he saw, had not he seen, in those his (as I
may call them) dreams, some, who at this day are yet alive, to wit, certain
Clergymen of his own country: from one of whom (a Priest) he was directed to
go and be baptized by me at Hippo, which thing he said also seemed to him to
have been done. In that vision therefore he saw the Presbyter, Clergy, my self,
not yet dead, wherein he saw those also dead. Why therefore may not he be
thought to have seen them, as us; namely, both, absent, and ignorant [the
while]; and and so not themselves, but their, as also the place's, similitudes?
For he saw the place also where the Priest with the Clergy was, and Hippo,
where (as seemed) he was by me baptized. In which places he really was not,
when as he seemed to himself to be there. For he knew not what was done there
at that time; which doubtless he would have known, had he been there indeed.
Lastly after diverse things he saw, he related how he was brought into Paradise,
and that it was said to him, as he was released to return to his friends, Go,
be baptized, if you will enter into this place of the Blessed. Then, being
advertised that he should be baptized by me, he answered, that was already
done. To whom he that spoke with him replied, Go, be baptized indeed; for that
you saw was but in a vision. Afterward he recovered, went to Hippo: and Easter
now nigh, gave in his name among other Competentes, alike unknown to me, as
diverse others; nor did he regard to discover this vision, either to me, or to
any of our Clergy. He was baptized, and the holy days ended, he returned home.
And two years after or more, I came to know all this, First by a friend of his
and mine at my table, discoursing of some such things. Afterward I procured
that himself in person should relate this to me: his own townsmen, men of
credit attesting, both concerning his strange sickness, how he lay for dead
many days together, and concerning that other Curma, the Smith above mentioned;
as also concerning all those other things, he told to me, which they remembered
and averred they had then heard from him. Wherefore, as he saw his own
Baptism, and my self, and Hippo, and the Church, and Font, not in the things
themselves, but in certain Similitudes thereof; and some others then living,
the living themselves not knowing it. Why might not he see those dead also, the
dead, themselves not knowing it? Why may not we think these to be Angelical
operations by the dispensation of the providence of God using well both good
and evil spirits according to the inscrutable depth of his own judgments?
whether hereby, men's minds be instructed, or deluded; whether comforted or
terrified; as to every one either mercy is to be exhibited, or punishment
inflicted, by him, to whom Psalm. 101. 1.
(not without cause) the Church sings Mercy and judgment. Let every man, as he
pleases, interpret what I say.

A RELATION OF SUNDRY MIRACLES WROUGHT AT THE MONASTERY OF PORT-ROYALL, IN
PARIS. Ann. Dom. 1656.

Translated out of the French Copy Printed at PARIS. 1656.

Mat. 9. 21. For she said within her self; if I may but touch his Garment, I
shall be safe -- and Jesus said. Daughter, have a good heart thy faith has
made thee, safe. And the Woman became whole from that hour. 2 King. 31. 21. And
when the man touched the bones of Elisha, he revived, and stood upon his feet.
Act. 19. 12. And from Paul's body were brought napkins or handkerchefs upon the
sick, and the diseases departed from them, and the wicked Spirits went out.
Act. 5. 15. They brought forth the Sick into the streets that at the least the
shadow of Peter passing by might overshadow some of them, and they all might be
delivered from their infirmities. A Relation of sundry Miracles wrought at the
Monastery of Port-Royall in Paris. Anno Dom. 1656.
Translated out of the French.
AS, of all outward things there is nothing that so much awakens our faith, and
strengthens our hope, as Miracles; which render visible to us (as it were) the
imvisible presence of God; So all devout persons, that have heard of the
marveils, which Jesus Christ has of late done in the Church of Port-Royall by
a holy thorn of his Crown, have thereby received a sensible consolation, and
thought themselves obliged to bless his name for those extraordinary marks of
his gracious goodness. Whose blessed name and power that it may be further
glorified by many more, to whom perhaps as yet no exact relations of these late
wonderful acts of Gods Mercy has hitherto arrived, I have thought good to
give the Reader a particular account not of all of them, but some more
remarkable; as they have been attested b^ many witnesses, and more manifestly
provedby reason of the Opposition, which some religious Persons, not so well
affected toward the Votaries of that Monastery, made at first to the truth
thereof.

Monsieur de la Poterie, an Ecclesiastical Person of eminent quality and
piety, having enjoyed for some time, amongst the other relics of his
chapel, a sacred thorn of the Crown of our Savior; upon some importunity
sent it to the Carmelite Nuns, who had a holy curiosity to see it; and
afterward upon Friday March 24. 1646. sent it also to those of Port-Royall:
where the Religious women received it with very much devotion; and placed it in
their quire upon a Table dressed up in form of an Altar; and after they had
sung the Antheme of the Holy Crown, all went and kissed it. A young maid (a
Pensioner in the Monastery) by name Margaret Perier, who for the space of three
years and an half had had a fistula lachrimalis in her eye, came also in her
order to kiss it. And the Religious Woman her Mistress, being now more then
ever affrighted at the swelling and deformity of her ulcerous eye, was inwardly
moved to touch the sore with the Relic; believing that God was sufficiently
both able and merciful to heal her, and for the present she minded it no more:
But the little girl being retired to her chamber, after a quarter of an hour
perceived that her disease was cured; and havaing told it to her companions, it
was found indeed that nothing more appeared. There was no more tumor; her eye,
which the swelling (having lasted three years) had wasted, and made continually
to water, become as dry, as sound, as lively as the other; the spring of that
filthy matter, which every quarter of an hovr run down by the eye, the nose,
the mouth, and immediately before the miracle, had fallen upon her cheek (as
she declared in her deposition) was wholly dried up; the bone, which had been
rotten and putrified, was restored to its first condition; all the stench,
which proceeded from it, and was so insupportable, that by order of the
Physicians and Surgeons she was separated from Company, was changed into a
breath as sweet as an Infants; her smelling, entirely lost by this filthy
corruption falling through her nose; was in the same instant restored; And all
the other evil Symptoms which followed thereupon quite disappeared; insomuch
that even her complexion, before pale and fallow, became as clear and sprightly
as ever it had been.

What person of piety could have found fault, had this miracle caused such
applauses, acclamations, and transports of spiritual joy as S. Augustine
describes, reporting the De Civ. Dei. l. 22. c. 8.
cure of that young man, that having been cursed by his Mother suffered a
continual trembling in all his members? The Church was filled, says he, it
ecchoed with those shouts of Rejoicing, Glory to God, Praise to God. But the
discipline of that Monastery, which always observes a very strict silence, but
doubleth it in the holy time of Lent (for then they have not so much as common
conferences amongst themselves as at other times) was the cause, that the news
of this miraculous cure was so slowly dispersed among the Nuns themselves: some
knew it not till the next day, others not till three days, others not till
eight days, and there were amongst them, some, that heard not of it till
fifteen days, after.

But that which is most remarkable, is, that Mother Prioresse, to whom the
Relic had been addressed, gave no notice of this matter for a whole week to
that Clergyman, her Kinsman, that had sent it her. Indeed after eight days
she thought the respect she owed him obliged her to give him account of it by
letter: the praecise words where of I think fit rather to insert here, for that
Monsieur de la Poterie sending the same Relic a little after to the Religious
Vrselines, sent withal the Original of this letter, entreating them to read
it, before they honored that holy thorn; for that the miracle, which they
should find attested therein, would make them have it ingreater Veneration.

Cousin,

I could not hitherto give you thanks for the good opinion you had of us, in
favoring us, with the sight of your holy relic. It seems to have been sent
by an inspiration from God; who would work by it a wonderful effect, of which
I think my self obliged to inform you, although we purposed not to discover it
to any person. Then she gives him a brief relation of the miracle, which
Monsieur Dalence a famous Surgeon, came also to make to him the same day; and
she ends with these words. See Sr. a certain attestation of your relic,
wherewith it has pleased God to comfort us; and I take it for a praesage, that
he will heal our Souls, and sanctify them by the thorns of persecution
wherewith we are threatened.

By those so modest lines it may be conceived with what disposition this grace
was received at Port-Royall, and the Ecclesiastical person himself approves
this modesty, in his answer, returned, Ap. 2. the words whereof are these.

Reverend Mother and Cousin,

THe Reading of the letter, which you so affectionately writ to me, has given
me so great consolation, that joy drew tears from both my heart and eyes. I
cannot but commend the humble reservedness you have, not to publish the
miracle, because it is come to pass in your Monastery; to which many, by reason
of the malice of the times, have such an aversion; that they will not believe,
but that you have divulged it to procure a higher reputation to your house, or
for some other interests, which these men frame to themselves according to
their own humor and fancy. But for my part, I conceive my self obliged to make
it known, discreetly, upon occasion; lest I should do contrary to what the
Angel in Tobit teaches us: It is good to keep Tob. 12. 7.
close the secret of a King, but it is honorable to reveal the works of God.
And by so doing, it may be, that those who hear of so apparent a miracle in
your house, not without a particular opperation of divine providence, will
abate the aversion they bear to it, and take compassion of the persecution you
suffer without cause. I doubt not, but our Lord will sanctify your Souls by
these persecutions, and I beseech him from the bottom of my heart that he will
be pleased to strengthen you to support them.

So that Port-Royall has not been by any remonstrance or writing the first
publisher of this so extraordinary and astonishing a miracle. The first report
of it came not from the Religious women; who believed, that they ought to
admire this mighty work of God in private, and in silence, as they behaved
themselves fifteen years ago on a like occasion. But as God inspired into his
servants the desire of hiding from the eyes of men the graces they receive from
him; so does he often make them appear more gloriously by other means. As on
this occasion he would that this miracle should be known to all Paris, and
believed of all the Court, notwithstanding that the Religious women contributed
nothing to the publishing of it.

The Physicians and Surgeons being touched with so great a wonder held
themselves bound in conscience to tell it to all the world; that glory might be
given to him, who had let them see so adorable a touch of his Almighty hand
upon the wholly disfigured eye and face of that little girl. So did also
Monsieur Perier, her father, a Counselor of the Court of Aids at Clermont in
Auvergne; from whence he had been sent for (by a letter writ March 24. four
hours before the miracle happened) to come and assist at the application of a
cautery to the eye of his Daughter, which Monsieur Dalence was to make as soon
as he should be arrived. And he was so surprised to find her perfectly and
miraculously cured, when he saw her at Port-Royall, Ap. 5. that he thought
himself obliged in gratitude to God, to call together the Physicians and
Surgeons, who all gave their attestation to it in writing upon good friday.
Then did he join his voice with theirs, and imitated the zeal of Mar. 44, 45.
him in the Gospel, who published every where the favors he had received from
Jesus Christ, not withstanding that Jesus Christ himself forbad him.

In the mean while, not all the certainty of so wonderful a work, nor all the
aedification that it caused in the Church, could hinder some persons in the
Church it self from dissembling that they were scandalized at it. That which
the Heretics could not do without openly discovering their an imosity against
the Spouse of Christ, has been done by Catholics. For five months space have
they labored to deface the truth of this miracle out of the minds of the
people by the many false reports they have every where divulged.

First they said, it was a cheating and supposititious business, and that the
eldest Sister of the sick girl was showed instead of the other; which caused
both the Sisters to be showed together to Monsieur the Promoter, and many
others.

Afterward they gave out that her malady was returned, and that she was more
afflicted with it then ever: this caused Monsieur Dalence, who had seen her
both sick and well to come to Port-Royall accompanied with a Physician to a
Prince of the blood, to convince him of the falsenese of this report; as he was
by his own eyes.

Lastly they said, that the ulcer of the eye was indeed perfectly cured, but
that the malign humor which caused it, was fallen down upon the Nobler parts;
and had brought the Patient to the last gasp. Which report obliged Monsieur
Guillard the Surgeon, who had seen her both sick and healed, and had attested
the miracle under his hand, to come to see her in July 1656, where he found her
as sound and well as she was the very first day. And afterward Monsieur Helix
chief Surgeon to the King, that had seen her in April, returned August eighth,
and having found her cure as perfect and admirable as it seemed to him the time
before, declared under his hand; That he was bound to confess that God alone
had the power to produce an effect so sudden and extraordinary. Besides; this
miracle was witnessed by the solemn attestation of public persons such are the
Phisicians and Surgeons who had given it under their hands; and by the
juridicall depositions of twenty five, all unblamable witnesses; which
Monsiegnour the Bishop of Toul drew up at the request of Monsieur the Promoter;
in which he labored (as himself testified) with an extraordinary care; and
which he has now finished, and signed with his hand; an^ by his sentence would
have confirmed it long ago, had he continued to govern the Archbishopric of
Paris; seeing (as himself said) he had writ both to Rome and the Court, that
the truth of the miracle could by no means be doubted of. Monsieur de Hodencq
Doctor of Sorbone, Rector and Archpriest of St. Severins Church, and Vicar
general of Monsignour the Cardinal of Retz, Archbishop of Paris, having taken
for his Counsel five other Doctors of Sorbonne; and following the informations
made by Monsieur the Bishop of Toul, and the conclusions of Monsieur the
Promoter, declared by his sentence of Oct. twenty second, that a cure so
suddein, so perfect, of so great a malady, witnessed by so many, Physicians and
Surgeons, and happening so suddenly after the touching of a holy thorn of the
Crown of our Lord, could be no other then an extraordinary work of the
omnipotency of God. He ordained also that the Friday following a solemn Mass of
thanksgiving should be said in the Monastery of Port-Royall: (the which himself
in person celebrated) and that this Miracle should be published throughout
Paris; and the rest of the Dioecese, that all the people might glorify God for
it.

After this first miracle wrought at Port-Royall; this Sacred Relic was
returned to its ancient owner, Monsieur de la Poterie; who kept it in his
Chapel many days, and many persons upon it resorted thither to seek some
relief of their sicknesses and infirmityes. But it pleased God to work no
miracle thereby in his house (as neither all the while it had been in many
other places, and particularly amongst those Religious women, so much honored
for their piety, the Carmelites and Vrsulines, who by their reputation could
have added more splendor to such miracles; and have made them been received
with the applause of all the World. But he would not do any there, perhaps
because they having no enemies that persecuted and defamed them, had no need
(as some of themselves said) that he should work a miracle to testify that God
was amongst them, seeing there was none that made question of it). Whereupon
this Servant of God Monsieur de la Poterie seeing himself oppressed by the
great number of those that came to his house, and troubled his retirement and
rest, thought, that seeing God had wrought no miracle by that holy thorn, save
only at Port-Royall, that there it was, where he was pleased it should remain.
This only motive of faith and piety made him resolve to send it thither again.

The relic was no sooner returned to Port-Royall but God began to work by it
new miracles. This holy Ark of the Covenant brought prosperity and blessing
into that house, because God would have it so, as at another time 2 Samuel 6. 12.
the Ark of the Covenant brought them into the house of a pious Israelite. I
will recite here some of these miracles.

A Religious woman of quality of the Maison-Dien of Vernon, by name Sister
Margaret Carre de Mercay, Sister to Monsieur Mercay an attendant of the Queen
of England, and Neice to the Commander Mercay.
having for almost two years space been unable to walk but with very great
difficulty, either leaning upon another or holding by a staff, by reason of a
certain Palsy fallen upon her legs; for which she had in vain tried many
medicines, and had gone out of her Monastery to take the waters of Rouen by
advice of the Physicians and yet without effect; was at last sent to Paris with
another of her companions; where her faith carrying her to have recourse to God
rather then humane remedies, the unsuccesfulness whereof she had so long tried,
she caused her self to be carried to Port-Royall, there to reverence the holy
thorn and to communicate: which having done, she felt such a benummedness in
her legs, that she was afraid she should not be able to arise from her place;
but her faith and devotion prompting her to kiss the holy Relic once more,
instantly she perceived the desired success, Our lame woman is returned very
sound, she walked a league on foot as she came back. God has done her a
signal favor in working a miracle upon her. She hopes to acknowledge it by
her faithfulness to his service. Verno ^ July 22. 1656.
and found her self as able to walk, and go up and down, as she was before her
sickness: insomuch that a few days after, returning to her Monastery she
walked near a league on foot, without any inconvenience: as Madame de Lectier
her Prioresse writ shortly after to Monsieur Malet, at whose house the two
Religious women sojourned during their stay at Paris. And since that the same
Prioresse has sent her attestation together with those of the Physician and
Surgeon.

Madam Durand wife of Monsieur Durand and Attorney of the Court, (besides other
infirmitys^) having had for two years and ten months a continual vomiting,
casting up whatever sort of nourishment she took, caused herself to becarryed
to Port-Royall ^^ demand of God by the touch of the holy thorn, the cure of
this vomiting. And July the fifteenth having honored and kissed it, she
obtained this so perfectly, that finding a change in her self, which persuaded
her that she was cured, she presently took some sustenance in the very
Monastery; and though she could not retain what she had taken at home in the
morning, yet this she kept without pain; and she has done ever since without
either vomiting or swouning.

Diverse other persons, who were too sick to be carried to Port-Royall, or too
far distant, or too weak to undertake the journey, made use of such linnens as
had touched the holy Relic, and having applied these to their bodies for the
space of nine days, in which prayers were made in their behalf at
Port-Royall, have been c^red to the admiration of all men.

One of these persons is a little girl of thirteen years old, called Angelica
Daughter of Monsieur Portelot an Attorney of the Court; the diversity of whose
maladies were so strange and uncouth, that no remedies of Physic could do her
good, for the space of almost four years. She was six months together troubled
with a vomiting, afterward with a fever, (which never left her) with terrible
convulsions, and a dislocation of two vertebres of the backbone; which hindered
her from sitting, and forced her to ly continually all along, with her head
lower then her feet; for in all other postures she suffered extreem pains, and
cried grievously. So that once carrying her to our Ladies of virtues they were
forced to bear her said all along upon a small quilt in a basket. After all,
not finding any manner of comfort; the report of the miracles done at Port
Royal by the holy thorn persuaded her mother to procure to be said for her
the nine-dayes prayers, which gave the sick person a great confidence of being
cured. the last of the nine days, which was Wednesday July the fifth, her
mother brought her such linnens as had touched the holy thorn, and the sick
party putting them on her her, after half an hour, felt a great commotion all
her body over; the convulsion fits, which ordinarily seized her five or six
times a day, and thrice that very day with very great torment, wholly ceased:
her fever left her; and the vertebres returned to their place: she sat up,
which she could not do for the space of three years and a half before; she rose
up, walked about the Chamber; kneeled down to give thanks to God; and two days
after went to Port-Royall, being perfectly well, and so continuing ever since*
The report of which cure has drawn many persons of quality to her fathers
house, which have been spectators and witnesses of this wonder.

A Religious woman of the Monastery of the Vrsulines of Noyers in Burgundy,
called Sister Claudia Maria of S. Joseph, who for more then two years had been
hecticall and paralyticall, so that her feet were turned upwards, and her
knees, as she sat, trembled continually, was brought into the church the last
of the nine dayes-prayers which were said for her: there she heard Mass
sitting, and putting upon her legs the linen which had touched the holy thorn,
she entreated that the passion of our Lord might be read aloud; and when the
Sister that read it came to his crowning with thorns, and pronounced the words
hail King of the Jews, she lifted up her heart to God, praying him to give her
grace to worship him with another sort of Spirit then the Jews did; since she
acknowledged him her God, her King and her Father, from whom she expected the
assistance she stood in need of. Presently after she felt a secret divine
virtue spread it self all through her legs, which restored her feet to their
natural place, and so strengthened her knees that in the instant she rose up,
and walking alone to the grate she kneeled down to worship Jesus Christ, who
had granted her request. Her Fever also, her continual vomiting, and all other
her maladies suddenly vanished, the unexpectedness of so great a miracle caused
the Sisters to cry out for joy. She heard a whole Mass upon her knees; and the
Clergy and Magistrates coming to the Church upon the report of the miracle,
there was sung the Te Deum; and all the while, she, that for two years space
had been always carried to Church, stood upright; and ever since has found
her self in so good and perfect health, that the whole Monastery in which were
fifty five Religious women drew up an attestation signed by them all, and sent
it to that Ecclesiastical person, who had said Mass for them at Port-Royall
and sent them the linnens.

A Religious Vrsuline of Pontoyse, called Sister Mary of the Assumption, had
for eight months space been so extremely tormented with such a violent and
continual pain of her hea^; that she had no rest day nor night, no ease by any
remedies, though they had opened her head, to the skull; at length hearing of
the wonders done by God at Port-Royall, she sent certain linnens to touch the
holy thorn, and applied them Aug. the seventeenth the first day of the nine
days prayers for her. And from that day she perceived so notable a diminution
of her headache, that the last day, which was Aug. the twenty fifth. All the
community gave thanks to God for it with her, and she her self tuned the Te
Deum which was sung upon that occasion. And the Nuns sent to Mother Abbess of
Port-Royall an attestation of this miraculous cure, signed by all those in
Office within the Monastery; and together with it the testimony of two
Physicians and one Surgeon, who declared that the Relation given by the
religious women is according to truth; and that having applied remedies
according to their art without the desired success and comfort of the Patient,
they see and judge that her cure rather proceeded from heaven then their
medicines, and think it to be perfectly miraculous. These testimonialls bear
date, Sept. 14.

Madam D' Espinay, wife of Monsieur D' Espinay Clark of the Controll-generall
of the Finances relates, that of her three youngest children, which were three
daughters, the first living till five years and a half old, the second till
eighteen months, could never set one foot before another to go, and died in
this weakness: The third, being in the same condition at the age of seventeen
months, had moreover a great flux and vomiting which endangered her life:
therefore in the month of August One thousand six hundred fifty six she sent
to Cachan near Paris, where the child was at nurse, some linnens which had
touched the holy thorn of Port-Royall, and caused a Mass to be said for her in
the Church of the Monastery: as soon as her nurse had put these linnens upon
her, she fell asleep, and awaked without fever and flux; which news brought
her mother to see her, who was astonished to find, that her child was no^
only cured of her diseases, but that she began also to walk; and that a few
days after being holden only by a list she went as well as any child of that
age could do; and does still continue so to the great astonishment of all the
Neighborhood.

A Religious-woman of the Abbay of Thresor, of the order of Saint Bernard,
daughter to Monsieur Poterie Counselor of State, had been sick seven months
of a continual fever, with pains of her head and stomach; all the remedies of
physic not doing her any good, she writ in the beginning of September to
Monsieur Poterie, the Ecclesiastical person, her uncle, entreating him to send
her some thing which had touched the holy thorn, as also to procure the
prayers of nine-days to be said for her by the Religious-women of Port Royal;
and send her word, what day they began, and the hour when the Mass for her was
to be said, to the intent that the same might be done at the same time at
Tresor. Monsieur Poterie writ to her again, that they would begin Sept.
eleventh and that she should not put on the linnens he sent her, which had
touched the holy thorn, till the last day of the nine. The sick person
observing this order found no ease all the first eight days, but on the
contrary her fever notably increased, and she found her self so ill the
morning of the ninth day, that desiring to receive the communion, and
endeavoring to do it kneeling by her bedside, she was not able. After the
communion she applied the linnens to her head, and right side; and, as we see
in the Gospel, that some of those, whom our Lord would heal, were more
violently tormented before their perfect cure, so she felt her pains and fever
augmented; but falling asleep in the violence of her fit, she awaked after
seven hours perfectly recovered; she rose up, put on her cloths, walked, went
down into the Church all alone, where the sisters (which were then in the
quire) were so astonished at that sudden and wonderful cure, that to testify
their thankfulness to God, they took out of their sacristie another holy
thorn, which is kept in this Monastery, which the person that was cured
carried in a procession made by all Religious-women after high Mass: presently
after she went to speak with Monsieur the Abbot of Lauson, Canon of our Ladies
Church (who was at that time in the Abbey, where three of his sisters are
Religious-women) to whom she said, that she was perfectly cured, and entreated
him to tell at Paris, whither he was then returning, that she attributed her
recovery to the linnens which had touched the holy thorn at Port-Royall, and
to the prayers of those good Religious-women. Afterward she writ as much to
her uncle Monsieur de la Poterie, adding; that she had from the day following
observed their due fasting, which she had not done before since the first day
of that year; and, that in her prayer she felt her self moved to entreat him to
send a torch to Port-Royall to burn before the holy thorn, and to recommend
her to the prayers of the Religious women, that they might obtain for her the
health of her soull, as well as that of her body These are her very words. She
also sent the attestation of the Physician that had her in cure all the time of
her sickness; who acknowledges a cure so sudden and so perfect could not be
performed either by any motion of Nature, or help of his Medicines.

I will set down two other very remarkable ones, the first on the person of a
Religious-woman of one Lady at Troyes, as it is related in the letter following
of Madame her Abbess, dated October the fifteenth, One thousand six hundred
fifty six to the Reverend Father Sena^lt of the Oratory, Superior of the house
of St. Magloire.

Reverend Father I most humbly beg your holy benediction.

SEeing that they at Port-Royall desire to know the truth of the miracle, which
has been wrought in our Monastery in the behalf of one of our sisters, you
must know; that this sister from Christmas until the feast of the holy
Sacrament, had one of her eyes that watered continually, and gave her very much
pain, from that time it came to be a kind of an ulcer, which purged very much
matter, and smelt so ill, that they who dressed her, were much troubled to
endure the stench, as well as she the pain she felt. There was another of our
sisters, who had had a great desire to have some thing which had touched the
holy thorn, and so there was some thing begged for her of my sister du
Plessis; which being sent I imparted some of it to the sister that had the sore
eye, and all the come munity being assembled said the Antheme, which was sent
us, nine days together. In the three first days the pain absolutely ceased; the
three next her eye watered a little; and the last three it was strengthened,
and grew so well as if it had never been in that miserable condition Here is
the daughter of Monsieur Grassin the Councellor, who saw her, and was extremly
troubled for her, and is ready to attest the cure as well as the greatest part
of our community, who saw her in that great affliction. I should not have
failed to have made it sooner known to Port Royal, had it not been that I had
writ it to my si^ter Du Plessis, and that I had thought she would have
communicated it to them- Our Physician also is ready to avow, that he
acknowledges this cure to be miraculous. I am in Jesus Christ and his holy
Mother.

Your etc. Claudia de Jesus.


The other miracle is yet later, and mingled with stranger accidents, A
Religious-women of the Congregation of our Lady in the Monastery of Provins was
sick about three years of a dropsy, which swelled her belly, legs and feet so
prodigiously, that she could not ly down at all, but at first sat up in her
bed upon pillows, and afterward she sat always in a chair. This disease was
accompanied also with such strange shrinking of her sinnews, that her knees
were sometimes drawn up as high as her head; and moreover she was paralyticall
of her legs and feet, not having any motion in those members; although they
were so sensible that they could not be touched without great pain to her;
besides all these, she had a violent fever. Monseignour the Archbishop of Sens
saw her in this condition at his visitation of this Monastery. Monsieur Prevost
Physician to the house having used in vain all sorts of remedies, and consulted
the ablest Physicians of Paris, judged her disease absolutely incurable. This
was the condition of that Religious-woman as we received it from the mouth of
Father D' Arsy of the Oratory, Superior of that house; who often saw her,
being obliged to go in to confess and communicate her. And by what means it
pleased God to deliver her out of it may be perceived by the following letter;
which another Priest of the Oratory called Father du Merk Superior of that
house, and present at this so miraculous a cure, writ to Father D' Arsy. Oct.
twenty eight. 1656.

Reverend Father,
The wonders that God has wrought here by the holy thorn strengthen our hope.
-- Sister Antonietta made her nine-dayes-prayers according to your order,
rendering her respects to the holy thorn, and worshpping Christ crucified three
times a day, and applying the linen and the image which you sent her. I made
her receive the communion at the beginning of her nine days, and yesterday
again immediately after your departure. She has by the space of eight days
been extraordinary ill. This morning, as I said Mass, she suffered very great
and grievous torment, she applied to her head the image, the little linen, and
the prayer, and presently upon it her pains were doubled; upon this she had a
thought that God would heal her; and for joy going to lift up her mind to God,
she raised her self upon her feet, and walked all alone to the door of the
Infirmary, purposing to go and worship our Lord in the holy Sacrament in the
Church: but being at the door of her chamber, where she was all alone, she was
again set in her chair, not knowing by what means. This happened three times,
and every time was she carried back into her chair. She called to mind that she
had not obtained leave to go out of the Infirmary: wherefore she sent to call
Mother Superioresse and me. At my coming from the alter I went in, and found
the poor maid in her chair all overcome with joy, she told me what had happened
and that she hoped to go before the Holy Sacrament. We all together worshipped
Jesus Christ crucified, and said the prayer of the holy thorn, and read in
French the passion of our Lord according to S. John: in which time she felt
most grievous pains, which forced her to stretch her self all along upon the
ground: where we saw great agitations first in her stomach, next in her belly,
which is wholly abated, and no swelling to be seen then in her arms and legs;
all her shrunck sinews stretching themselves out at length. And as soon as the
passion was wholly read, her pains ceased. As we assayed to lift her up into
her chair, she told me she could easily raise her self from the Ground, where
she lay all along, which she did; and standing up, said that I had promised to
suffer her to go to the Church to worship our Lord. Thither she went, walking
with incredible speed; without any pain, upon her bare feet (You know that no
body durst touch them, and that she could not endure shoes or stockins) and
this in the sight, and to the amazment of more then twelve of the Sisters, the
rest being together before the Holy Sacrament. She continued on her knees more
then half an hour, with a devotion and fervor able to kindle the like in the
most obdurate. I made notice to be given to all the community, who were
astonished at so prodigious a miracle. And we all together begun a second
nine-dayes-prayer to beg of God a perfect accomplishment. We brought her back
walking on her feet into the infirmary where inste ad of her chair, we caused
her to ly down in bed; You know it is now more then three years, that she could
not ly down. I have been since dinner to confess her in bed, and she tells
me, the swelling in her legs begins to fall. I hope to morrow to give her
the communion at the grate of the quire with the rest, this she desired of me.
These are the wonders, which I could not deferr to communicate unto you, to the
end that you may give thanks to the Author thereof, together with us.

Provins. Oct. 28. 1656.

By a leter writ since we have notice, that the day following she did receive
the communion with the rest at the grate, and three days after she did put on
her shoes, which she could not endure before for the space of three years, and
went to the end of the Infirmary to pray before a crucifixe, where she kneeled
half an hour, and grows every day better and better.

We make no mention here of several other the like cures, which those that
have obtained them either for themselves or their children accounted to be
supernatural and divine: as of F Bernard Caignet Prior of St. Vincents of
Senlis of the order of Canons Regular of St. Austin; who came Sept. twenty
eighth to Port-Royall to say Moss and give thanks for his recovery. Of Mad. de
Mouchery dwelling near St. James's of the Hospital; of a Maid about twenty
four years old named Mary Elizabeth Renard, daughter of Mr. Renard of St.
Laurences parish: of a tailours boy called Claudius le Roy: of a little child
two years and nine months old by name Claudia Beche daughter of Mr. Nicolas
Beche in St. Anthonies street: and of many others, whose names are not
remembered, who come every day to Port-Royall to render thanks to God for the
favors that they have received.

It is sufficient to say, that, if God did not cause his assistance thereto be
either perceived or hoped for, there is no humane consideration that could draw
so many persons from the other end of the city to come to honor this holy
thorn in the Church of Port-Royall, and to make their prayers there every
Friday; for no man enticeth or inviteth them, by any means, nor does any one
seek or propose any other end but the glory of God, in this affair, which is
wholly of God. And thisiis it which has moved Monsieur de la Poterie freely to
give that which before he had only deposited: so many extraordinary cures
making him conceive that God would have him deprive himself of that treasure of
Blessings and graces, notwithstanding the devotion he had to reverence it in
his own Chapel amongst the many other holy Relics, and to give it as he
has done, to the Monastery of Port Royal: where Jesus Christ by the wonders
he daily works, makes it apparent, that there it is that he would have that
holy thorn of his Crown to be honored.

Ex R. P. Francisci Coventr. Paralipom. Philosoph. cap. 4. p. 68.
REferam ad huc unum miraculum, in patria nostra paucis abhinc annis, etc. I
will relate one miracle more done in my own Country, to the great wonder of
the neighboring inhabitants, but a few years ago, to wit about the year 1640.
The process of the business was told the King when at Oxford, which he
commanded to be further examined: And it was this. A certain Boy of twelve
years Old called John Trelille in the County of Cornwall, not far from the
lands end, as they were playing at football after the manner of that country,
snatching up the ball ran away with it, whereupon a girl in anger struck him
with a stick on the back bone; and so bruised or brake it, that for 16. years
after he was forced to go creeping on the ground. In this Condition arrived to
the 28th. year of his age, he dreamt, that if he did but wash in S. Maderns
well, or in the stream running from it, he should recover his former strength
and perfection. This is a place in Cornwall from the remains of ancient
devotion, frequented still by Protestants on the Thursdays in May, and
especially on the Thursday of Corpus Christi; near to which well is a Chapel
dedicated to S. Maderne, where is yet an Altar, and right against it a grassy
hillock (by the Country people every year made anew) which they call S. Maderns
bed. The Chappell-roof is quite decayed, but a kind of thorn of it self
shooting forth of the old walls, so extends its boughs, as that it (strangely)
covers the whole Chapel, and supplies as it were a roof to it. So, one
Thursday in May, assisted by one Periman his neighbor, nourishing great hopes
from his dream, thither he crept, and lying before the Altar and praying very
fervently, that (as it was related to him in his dream) he might regain his
health and the strength of his limbs, he washed his whole body in the stream
that flowed from the Well, and ran through the Chapel: after which, having
slept about an hour and an half on S. Maderns Bed, through the extremity of
pain he felt in his Nerves and arteries he began to cry out; and his companion
helping and lifting him up, he perceived his hamms and his joints somewhat
extended, and himself become stronger, insomuch as, partly with his feet,
partly with his hands, he went much more erected than before. And before next
Thursday he got two crutches, resting on which he could make a shift to walk
(which before he could not): and coming then to the Chapel, as formerly, after
having bathed himself, he slept again on the same bed; and at last awakened,
found himself much stronger and more upright; and so leaving one crutch in the
Chapel, he went home with the other. The third Thursday he returned to the
Chapel, and bathed as before, slept; and, when awake, rose up quite cured,
yea grew so strong, that he wrought day-labour amongst other hired servants,
and four years after, listed himself a Soldier in the Kings army, where he
behaved himself with great stoutness both of mind and body. At length in 1644.
he was slain at the siege of Lime in Dorset-shire.

What fiction can be here I see not: That he should have a dream to such a
purpose: that the event, according to things discovered in his dream, should
manifest the truth thereof: That on Thursdays, especially on
Corpus-Christi-Thursday (Thursday with Catholics being memorable for the Holy
Eucharist, as Friday is for the Passion) upon the suppliants prayers, his
desired health should be conferred: That the water sacred to this Saint, or
(more likely) blessed by him, when yet living, should have this healing virtue:
We read indeed in the Gospel of the water moved by the Angel, which upon it,
cured those that were brought and put therein: and from the same special
blessing of God doubtless, at S. Maderns intercession, for the singular
reverence he had to the mystery of the Body of Christ, this holy well received
that healing power. The whole procedure and order of the matter speaks it a
miracle; insomuch as that it is acknowledged for such by the
Protestant-inhabitants themselves: from whom I received this generally famed
Relation.

Out of a Treatise of Bishop Halls of the Invisible World 1. lib. 8. sect.
concerning the same Miracle.

THe trade that we have with good Spirits is not now discerned by the eye but
is like to themselves, spiritual: yet not so, but that even in bodily
occasions we have many times insensible helps from them, in such manner, as
that by the effects we can boldly say: here has been an Angel, though we see
him not. Of this kind was that (no less than miraculous) cure which at S.
Maderns in Cornwall was wrought upon a poor creeple, John Trelille; whereof
(besides the attestation of many hundreds of the neighbors) I took a strict
and personal examination in that last visitation, which I either did, or ever
shall hold. This man, that for 16. years together was feign to walk upon his
hands, by reason of the close contraction of the sinews of his legs, (upon
three monitions in his dream to wash in that Well) was suddenly so restored to
his limbs, that I saw him able to walk and get his own maintenance. I found,
here was neither art, not collusion; the thing done, the author invisible.

FINIS.

