A LETTER Written by Sir Richard Grenvile (under his own hand) To an Honorable
Person in the City OF LONDON, Concerning the Affairs of the WEST.

Published by Authority.

LONDON: Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons.
April 17. 1646.

A LETTER Written By Sir Richard Greenvile, under his own hand, to an Honorable
person in the City of London, Concerning the Affairs of the WEST.
Right Honorable,
FOrmer obligations have moved me to represent unto you my affectionate
service: I am now at Nantes in France, and about to depart hence toward Italy
for the war against the Turk (not much unlike the unhappy war of England.) My
Lord, I truly value you in the number of my best and honorable Friends, and
therefore have presumed to send you herewith a narrative truth concerning the
former proceedings of the affairs of the West of England, though not so
particular, as the evil managing thereof deserved: since which, an unhappy
Jest chanced at Peurin (a town nigh Pendennis castle in Cornwall) for Hopton
with his new forces (lately before) taking a strange affright at a party of the
Parliaments forces at Torrington in Devon, and flying into Cornwall with his men
dispersed several ways, like a wildegoose chase; the sad News thereof made the
Prince command the Earl of Branford and Lord Culpepper with all speed to meet
the Lord Hopton and Lord Capel at Wadebridge, nigh the heart of Cornwall, to
advise on affairs for the safety of the West (I think to shut the stable door
when the horse was gone) but Culpepper in his haste and way, finding some
Gentlemen merry and drinking in Peurin town, he would needs make one amongst
them, and so did, till night came, and then Bacchus prevailing, Culpeppers
Eloquence displeased Mr. Slingsby, by which grew a quarrel betwixt them two
only, and at bare fistycuffs they were a good space, till the company parted
them, and then Culpepper and Slingsby, in the Moonshine, got them into the
garden, and like two Cocks at the end of a Battle, not able to stand well,
offered and peck'd at one another, till the weight of Slingsbies head drew him
to the ground, which advantage Culpepper took hold of, and by it got Slingsbies
sword, and then like St. George, made more such triumphant flourishes over
Slingsby, then a German Fencer at the beginning of a Prize; but by good fortune,
the rest of the associates came in, and easily persuaded the Duellists to end
the quarrel by the cup again, which service continued till the next day, with
diverse and several bouts at fistycuffs: the next day (about ten of the clock)
they having red Herrings and mustard for Breakfast, Culpepper again gave
Slingsby distaste, whereon he threw a dish of mustard in Culpeppers face
(taking his Nose for a red Herring) which procured another grievous encounter,
in such sort, that the Market people (to part the fray) thronged the house
full, whereby that also was taken up, and the saucy Lord fain to get his
mustard-Face, Eyes, Beard, Band, and Coat washed; and about four of the next
evening, Culpepper rid on in his hasty journey to overtake the Lord of
Branford, who rid chafing and staying for him above twenty four hours in his
way. Such a Privie-Councellor will soon finish his Masters business one way,
preferring his own delights before the important business* that concerns the
safety of the Prince, etc. This story is indeed very true in every particular,
and so I leave it with you, and depart*

Your Lordships humble Servant, R: GRENVILE.
Nantes in France, 9. April, 1646. new style.
FINIS.

