A GREAT VICTORY Obtained by the ROYALISTS NEAR Huntington shire, against the
Parliaments Forces, and the manner of the Cavaliers engaging them; with the
particulars of the bloody Fight, and the number killed, wounded, and taken
prisoners.

ALSO, Their dismounting of the Lord Cenerals Troopers, their slashing and
cutting of them, and taking of diverse horses and arms, and the name of the
Commanders in chief of the Kings Forces.

LIKEWISE, Joyful News from the Royal Navy, the Desires of his Highness the
Prince of Wales, the Propositions of Prince Maurice, concerning the English
Ships, and a great Victory obtained near Carlisle.

London, Printed for R, VV. 1648.

A VICTORY Obtained By the Kings Forces near Huntington-shire; declaring the
manner of their falling upon the parliaments, and the particulars of the Fight.
Right Honored,
THE Kings Forces in these parts, (being but a small party) range the Countries
round, and are become masters of more then they are able to carry away, having
plundered diverse well affected in these parts, they are exceeding well mounted,
consisting of about twenty in number, one Captain Wharton commanding in
chief, a man of desperate fortunes, and the rest all Dammee Blades, who have
declared, That they are resolved to fight it out to the last man, rather then
to submit to the mercy either of parliament or army, or be taken by any
Independent Rebel (as they are pleased to call them.)

On Tuesday last, the said party marched toward the Confines of Cambridge
shire, where they discovered a party of horse, insomuch that Capt. Wharton
immediately advanced up to them, asked them what they were, and from whence they
came; they answered, they belonged to the Lord General Fairfax: then Wharton
replied, you are all my prisoners: a Gentleman at the head of the Parliaments
party, made answer, Not so long as we are able to hold a sword in one hand, and
a pistol in the other; whereupon capt. Wharton fired, his forces came up, and
both parties engaged, the encounter was very hot, and the ground disputed with
much gallantry, Wharton charged like a Lion, and at last gained the day, being
far more in number then the other, yet fought so long as they were able to make
opposition, insomuch that some of them are mortally wounded, the rest all
slasht and cut, their horse and arms taken from them, their pockets plundered;
which done, they bid them go to their General, and recruit. In this conflict
two were slain, and four of the Cavalry wounded. We hear that the said party
intends Westward, to join with Byron, if it be possible.

VVare 22. Sept. 1648.
Joyful News from the Royal Navy, and their present Design touching the Earl
of Warwick.
SIR,
THere is like to be no engagement between the prince and the Earl of Warwick,
the first declining an engagement, and not willing to fight; but much pressed
to weigh anchor, and resolve for some other foreign Country.

Here has lately happened some disputations between his Highness the Prince
of Wales, and the Royal party with him, in relation how to dispose of the
Navy, and the Grandees have had some consultation thereupon, in order thereunto
for disposing of the said Fleet, not thinking themselves or ships in so good a
posture, or useful a way where they are, because, they conceive, if they
should plunder the London Merchants, they should incur the displeasure of the
Metropolis, and for the future receive no succor or relief from thence, but
receive gratification by a power of opposition.

Besides, the Lord high Admiral at Sea may be upon the back of them before
they be aware, the wind serving now to carry them from the Downs.

This business took up some time in debate thereof and at last came to these
results.

Diverse of the Council, as Prince Maurice. and others, declared at the
Council table, That they conceived it most necessary and requisite, to weigh
anchor, and steer toward the kingdom of France, delivering several reasons,
wherein it tended most for the safety of the Navy, and the advancement of their
Sovereigns Cause, if the Treaty took not effect.

The Lord Willoughby, and others, moved for the North.

But Capt. Batten presses much for Ireland, and its conceived his Proposition
will be assented to; which indeed, is the place of greatest danger for England,
and the most eminent place to advance the Cause of the Royal party.

The Lord Inchiquin being master of the field with a very considerable power,
and (in all probability) will be ready to comply and join with the Prince; for
it is generally reported here, that the Navy is invited thither by some great
Ones, and that they have a design to join with them against England; Their
chiefest aim were first at the United Provinces, to levy forces, being promised
great matters; but finding such an unwillingnesse amongst the Netherlanders to
engage against England, they have changed their resolution, and within few days
will sail from Gorce.

Hague 19. Sept. 1648.
A great Victory obtained near Carlisle.
On Friday last they sallied out of the City with a considerable party of Horse
and Dragoons, marched some few miles up into the Country, fell to their old
trade of plundering, and had gathered great store of cattle in a heard
together; who even in the nicke of time as they were driving them away, a party
of the Genesis Lanberts Horse, came in to the Countries assistance, fell upon the
Scots and English Cavalry, rescued the cattle, and put diverse of the enemy to
the sword, killing above 30 upon the place, and took near upon as many
prisoners, with the loss of eleven men, 5 slain, and 6 wounded.

The rest of their Body retreated, and the night approached, which much
eclipsed the splendour of our Victory, and our horses being tired, and the ways
difficult, could not maintain the pursuit no further, so that they are now
marching up to the headquarters of Lieu. Genesis Crumwell, their Major General
being likewise marching toward the Borders of Scotland with 3000 horse, as
also col. Whites and col. Hackers going after him with all speed from the siege
of Pontefract.

The Lieul. Genesis is likewise marching toward the Borders, and has sent the
Bishopric horse commanded by Major Sanderson, and another of his own Regiments
by the way of Anwick, to dissipate the English Enemy about Barwick, commanded
by Sir Thomas Tildsley, and to fight them, or force them to a retreat; and we
hear that they have lately fallen upon some of their out-quarters five miles on
this side Chillingham, killed some, and took diverse prisoners, and have
alarmed the rest, who (we hear) are using all means possible to escape their
mercy, and desire to move Westward, but it is believed, col. Lamberts Forces
will interpose between them and Carlisle, and frustrate their design of joining
with the Lord Byron in Wales.

Monro is retreated into Scotland with all the Scots both Horse and Foot, the
Lord Lanerick is joined with him with the additionall Forces, consisting of
about 3000. who upon their march toward Edinburgh to the committee of Estates,
received intelligence, that the said committee were all forced from thence, the
castle surprised by old Genesis Leven, and that the Marq. of Argyle with a great
Army were entered the city; whereupon they changed their motion, and is now
marching toward the West of Scotland; but Lieut. Genesis David Lesley having
notice thereof advanced with a considerable party of horse, fell upon the Lord
Lanericks Briggade, and dispersed most of them.

Lieu. Genesis Crumwell is resolved to send summons to Scotland for surrender of
the English Garrisons to the obedience of the Parliament of England, and to
have a mutual correspondency between both Nations.

By an Express from Holland Sept. 22. it is advertized, that the Seamen and
Mariners in the revolted ships begin to mutiny, occasioned by the late
proposals of some of his Highnesses Council of War, to weigh anchor, and sail
for Ireland; this will cause a great breach in the Royal party.

The Prince having notice of the said Insurrection, declared very sad
expressions thereupon, and shook his head, saying, That he hoped the Treaty
would take good effect, and then he feared no revolt, desiring that both Navies
might join in mutual love and amity, as formerly.

FINIS.

