A DECLARATION In Vindication of the Honor of THE PARLIAMENT, And of the
COMMITTEE of the NAVY and CUSTOMS; against all Traducers: Concerning the
managing of the Navy and Customs, and many other weighty Affairs of State:
Faithfully Relating what strength of Shipping have been yearly employed for the
guarding of the Seas, and what moneys arising by the Revenue of the Customs,
Excise of Flesh and Salt, and other Receipts, have been applied to that Use.

The Rules by which they have been all managed; and a just Account how the
moneys have been disposed.

By GILES GRENE, a Member of the Honorable House of Commons.

LONDON, Printed for Laurence Blaiklock. 1647.

A DECLARATION In Vindication of the Honor of the PARLIAMENT, and of the
Committee of the Navy and Customs; against all Traducers. Concerning the
managing of the Navy and Customs, and many other weighty Affairs of State.
THere is no truth now more apparent, then that the tongues and pens of many
men; and the Press have in these latter times been so loose and disordered, as
that they have been applied too frequently to the scandalizing of proceedings
in Parliament, and the several Committees, and Members by them employed, in
the transacting of the weighty affairs of the Kingdom, during the times of
these late distempers: that so they might bring them into the disaffections of
the people. The truth of this is clearly proved by those several Pamphlets
which every day are engendered, and sent abroad into the world: and by the
cunning and artifice of several evil disposed persons, of different tempers,
they are made isntrumental for different ends and intentions. And this is
perceived by all wise men, so that it is hoped those Libells take no impression
with them, in regard of the persons scandalized: And amongst others finding the
Committee of the Navy and Customs, as they have had no small part of the care
and trouble of these weighty affairs, so not to have the least share in those
scandalls and reproaches: In discharge of the duty I owe unto the Parliament,
who when the King deserted them, were necessitated to undertake the Government
of the Navy Royal of this Kingdom, for the safety and good thereof, and
likewise of the Customs appointed for its maintenance and support, and also in
discharge of that particular duty I owe the Committee of the Navy and Customs,
and the Gentlemen attending those services, unto whose care and trust both
Houses of Parliament committed that great and weighry Charge. And to clear up
the Honor, Care, Prudence, and Fidelity of both Parliament and Committee,
against all Traducers, in the advantageous and faithful discharge of the trust
for the weal and safety of the People, and all the three Kingdoms; I thought
it not the least part of my duty, (being best acquainted with those affairs) to
make this following Declaration of the beginning, progress, and present State
of the same; relating to the Customs and Navy; and by what Rules they have
been transacted.

In the year 1641. shortly after the Parliament first sat, and before the
King deserted them, the House of Commons appointed some Gentlemen of that
Committee, and recommended to their charge the discovery of the abuses of the
then Farmors of the Customs, and the Examination of their Accounts from the
first year of his Majesty's Reign, unto that time: And notwithstanding the
work was conceived by many worthy Gentlemen not to be feazible, yet that
Cmmittee within few Months by their report did so satisfy the House of the
whole State of that affair, as it produced 176000. in fines to the use of the
state.

This done about the 25. of May 1641. the House of Commons commanded that
Committee to frame a Bill for the legal payment of Tonnage and Poundage, to
continue for a few weeks, until some difficulties and misunderstandings
between the King and Parliament were removed; and upon the same grounds
several other short Acts of Parliament were passed until July 1642.

But the burdens upon Merchandise, both foreign and domestic being unequally
laid by the old Book of Rates, occasioned several complaints and Petitions,
from Merchants, Cloathiers, Shopkeepers, and others, unto the Parliament, for
ease of those burdens; whereupon in the year 1641. the House ordered that
Committee to frame a new Book of Rates: This proved a work of that travel and
consequence in relation to the support of the trade of the Kingdom on the one
side, and the Revenue of the Kingdom for support of the Navy, the strength of
the Kingdom, on the other side, as it became full of labor and intricacy to
keep the Balance even; for the increase of the one, and support of the other,
of which the very bare discovery of those Rules which the wisdom of that
Committee found out to the due framing of that elaborate work, will
sufficiently satisfy the Reader at first view.

They first divided all Merchandise into Domestic and Foreign. Domestic into
Commodities totally to be prohibited, or to be transported. Transportations
into Manufactures of Wool, and Other Staple Commodities.


The Manufactures of Wool, in regard of their general influence throughout
most conditions of men, and hazard of the loss of that Trade in Foreign
parts so much of late undermined by Foreign manufactures, was much eased of
its former imposition.

The other Staple Commodities as Tyn, Lead, etc. not so subject to danger as
the others, were raised to some higher Rates, according as the same could well
bear.

The Foreign Commodities were divided into Necessaries. and Superfluities.


Necessaries, and of certain use, as victuals, and all materials for to
increase the Manufactures of the Kingdom were eased.

Superfluities which might be spared, and were incentives to Prodigality,
either in apparrall, or diet, food, or raiment, had their full load; saving
that in the very superfluities they found it necessary to make addifference: As,

Those of bulk, advantageous in the employment of Shipping and Mariners, in
that relation, were somewhat eased. Those of small Stowage had a full load laid
on them.
Yet in those likewise they made a difference: Easing all such as were
unmanufactured, Burthening the re^t.


But the Merchants of the Kingdom not only suffering under the unequal
impositions laid on their Commodities, but under the Arbitrary power, and undue
Fees of the Officers of the Customs, which oftentimes more oppressed them then
the payment of the impositions themselves.

It was not the least labor of that Committee, to dispose of the manner of
payment of the duty, and to give such directions therein as by those Rules they
delivered the Merchant, from all occasions of oppression, by the Officer, and
yet kept up the Officer in his due esteem.

In completing of this great work, the Committee proceeded by a further rule,
as well to attain to the knowledge of the value of all Commodities, as to
their usefulness, without which, they could not well agree on the duty: And to
that end did make use of the labors and judgments of many Merchants of
quality, of known integrity, and best experienced in Foreign Trade, and
Importers of the several Commodities, who having with much labor laid the
foundation of this great work; It was also the wisdom of the Committee in so
high a trust to take advice from the Retailors, and several Traders in the
respective Commodities.

And after diverse days disputes with them, having made their observations in
writing of the differences in opinion between the Importer and Buyer, did
refer the whole work together with their own observations, unto the Farmours
and Officers of the Customs, who according to their great experience and
wisdom, did contribute much unto the completing thereof: And upon return of
their opinions, the Committee finding yet further differences; did after diverse
days spent in conference with the three Parties, viz. the Importer, the Buyer,
and the Officer, and upon observations from them all, appoint a general
meeting of the Merchants, Retailors, and Officers, acquainted them with their
differences in opinion, which were reduced to very few, considering the variety
and greatness of the work: And after a deliberate debate with them jointly,
the Committee did complete that work; and so presented it to the House of
Commons, where it received a general approbation with very few amendments.

The Book of Rates thus formed, and upon Report made to the House of Commons
thereof, being approved and passed without a contradicting voice, Order was
given for the same to be printed and published; and an Act of Parliament to be
drawn for Tonnage and Poundage, relating to these Rates, which with great
deliberation of that Committee, and advice with the Kings Council, learned in
the Law, was drawn accordingly, reported and past both Houses, and sent to the
King then at York, for the Royal Assent, which his Majesty refusing, Order was
given to that Committee to consider of a way how to continue the payment of
Tonnage and Poundage by an Ordnance which they did accordingly, which upon
Report passed both Houses: Here arose the great difficulty of managing the
affairs of the Customs, which by Ordnance of Parliament was committed to the
charge of that Committee, wherein power was given them to remove and place all
Officers belonging to the Customs, to give Orders and Directions to the
Commissioners of the Customs as occasion should serve: To hear and decide all
differences happening between the Merchants and Officers in reference to the
Customs; and by their Orders to dispose of all moneys arising on the Customs,
for the use of the Navy.

An employment of great weight and as great trust, and which they discharged
with as much faithfulness, wisdom, and advantage to the State, the
distractions of the times, the disaffections of many Merchants, and the want of
a penalty to enjoin the payment, considered, as ever that affair was managed
sithence the Conquest; which does manifestly appear by their saving upward of
twelve thousand pound per Annum, in the very charge of the Commissioners; and
reduced unnecessary Officers, formerly employed in the managing of those
affairs, and yet increased that Revenue at least one third per Annum, in those
Ports which were still under the obedience of Parliament, besides the receipts
of those Out-Ports that were regained from the Enemy.

The distractions of the Kingdom increasing after the Kings deserting the
Parliament: It pleased both Houses by Ordinance in August 1642. to commit the
charge of the Navy, and setting forth the yearly Fleets to Sea for the defense
of the three Kingdoms, unto the care of that Committee of the Customs, and so
they became the Committee of the Navy and Customs: By which Ordinance they had
power to order the payments of moneys arising from the Customs to the
Treasurer of the Navy, who was a member of that Committee, for the carrying on
of that work: And the moneys being so settled in his hands, they were all to be
issued out by him, by the only Order of that Committee; which Trust I dare
confidently affirm he has discharged with as much clearness and freedom from
any corruption as ever Treasurer did. And to satisfy the world that this trust
was faithfully discharged by that Committee, I will here give a short account
of the several Fleets set to Sea, with their strength and charge.

In the year 1642 the Parliament doubting that Foreign Force would be invited
into this Kingdom, commanded that Committee that a strong Fleet should be set
to Sea, for that year, which consisted of twenty Sail of the Kings Ships, and
twenty three Merchants Ships with 5382. Mariners, the charge whereof as well
in the Summer as Winter Guard, with other matters incident to the keeping up of
the Navy, that year amounted to two hundred and one thousand, seven hundred
sixty one pounds. 201761 l. In the year 1643. the Parliament having more
particular information of preparation of Foreign Forces to infest this
Kingdom, there were set forth for the Summer Fleet 34 of the Kings Ships, and
34 Merchants Ships, with 7265 Mariners, and for the Winter Guard 21 Kings
Ships, and 24 Merchants Ships, with 4035 Mariners, the whole charge whereof
with other matters incident to the keeping up of the Navy, did amount unto
three hundred and thirty thousand three hundred sixty nine pounds. 330369 l. In
the year 1644. there were set forth for the Summer Fleet, 36 Kings Ships, and
20 Merchants Ships, with 5099 Mariners, and for the Winter Guard, 18 Kings
Ships, and 13 Merchants Ships, with 2677. Mariners: The total charge whereof
with other matters incident to the keeping up of the Navy, did amount unto two
hundred thirty eight thousand four hundred and seventy pounds. 238470 l. In
the year 1645. there were set forth for the Summer Fleet, 34 Kings Ships, and
20 Merchants ships, with 4483 Mariners, and for the Winter Guard, 27 Kings
Ships, and 14. Merchants Ships, with 2950 Mariners; the total charge whereof
with other matters incident to the keeping up of the Navy, amounted to two
hundred twenty five thosand, five hundred forty four pounds. 225544 l. In the
year 1646. there were set forth for the Summer Fleet, forty four Kings Ships,
and 29 Merchants Ships, with 5605 Mariners, and for the Winter Guard, 26 Kings
Ships, and 12 Merchants ships with 2880 Mariners; the total charge whereof
with other matters incident to the keeping up of the Navy, amounted to two
hundred ninety six thousand, fifty one pound. 296051 l. And this year, there
are set forth for the Summer Fleet 43 of the Kings Ships and Frigates, and 13
Merchants Ships; the charge whereof with the Frigots now building, furnishing
the Magazin, and paying the Ordinaries, and the other matters of the Navy, will
per estimate amount unto two hundred thirty three thousand four hundred and
fifteen pounds. 233415 l.

Besides, there have several years been set out several Ships, by private
Adventurers by way of reprizall, which have been allowed victuals by the State.

In all which Expeditions, these particular actions of that Committee are
remarkable.

1. That being furnished with this great power and trust, in setting forth of
Ships, providing of materials and payment of moneys, they took along with them
the concurrent advice and full consent of the Commissioners of the Navy,
Victulars of the Navy, Officers of the Ordnance, and all other Officers of the
Navy respectively, as fellow servants trusted with them, who by the order and
directions of that Committee, did with all cheerfulness and faithfulness,
for any thing that ever appeared unto that Committee, act and execute all
things for the greatest advantage of the State, in relation to the honor,
safety, and profit thereof.

2. That with their concurrent advice and help, the several Yards, and
Storehouses of the Navy Royal, were so plentifully and seasonably maintained
with Pitch, Tar, Hemp, Cordage, Planck, Timber, and all other materials for
shipping: And the Office of Ordnance so furnished with Ordnance, Powder, Shot,
and other Gunners Stoares, The victualling Office so carefully and
advantagiously managed, as that there was not one ship of all these several
Fleets, but at her setting to Sea was completely and Arithmetically furnished
with double Equipage, of Cordage, Sails, etc. with due proportion of Powder,
Match, Bullett, according to the Number and dimensions of her Ordnance: and
with Beef, Pork, Fish, Pease, Butter, Cheese, Bread, Beer, and all other
victuals, and all of the choysest and best, as there was never complaint made
to the Parliament or Committee of any defect of any of these, either for
quantity or quality.

3. That coming in of ships, (saving in the time of the late Commissioners of
the Customs, who for some reasons best known to themselves, did refuse upon
pressing occasions to furnish the Parliament or that Committee with money or
credit:) The Committee took that care for providing of moneys, (many times with
their credit) as the Mariners were so timely paid off, that the State was not
at the charge of one days dead pay, neither was ever complaint of Mariners
hard at the doors of the Parliament, since the time of these Commissioners.

4. That the whole body of the Navy was kept up, in that honor, strength, and
readiness for service, as no age can parallel, there being at this present an
increase of above thirty ships and Frigates more then they found belonging to
the Navy Royal, whereof some have been taken by reprizall, some bought for
money, and some built from the stocks, which are most active nimble Vessels,
all now in service.

5. That this great work was so advantagiously carried on, as notwithstanding
the State was sometime above three hundred thousand pounds in debt, an^
atpresent about two hundred and fifty thousand pound^ yet hitherto (saving in
the time before mentioned) there never wanted moneys to carry through all the
difficulties of that service.

Neither was the managing of the Customs and of the Navy, though two such
great works, the only employment of that Committee: But in the year 1643. the
Parliament having by reason of the great fleetes contracted great debts on the
Navy, were pleased to put an Excise on Flesh and Salt, the profits whereof they
appropriated to the use of the Navy, and committed the charge and care thereof
to that Committee, by whose wisdom and care, with the concurrence of the
Commissioners of Excise, only by changing the manner of the collection, the
yearly income was increased from about seven or eight thousand pound, unto near
sixty thousand pound per Ann. as by the Commissioners of Excize Accounts will
appear; All which moneys were disposed of by that Committee by the same Rule
of Customs. Besides, there are several Gentlemen of this Committee who being
with diverse honorable Lords, appointed a Committee for the Excize, have
transacted very great matters concerning the regulating of those Receipts, and
reconciling of differences happening in the same. There was a further charge
lay on that Committee, which was the managing of the ships, and goods taken by
reprizall, which begot not the least trouble to the Committee, in regard of the
many intricare cases, which fell out, scarce numerable, in so short a
Narrative, yet was that distracted work with the faithfulness, care, and
(...) of the Commissioners and Collectors appointed for reprizall goods,
carried on with all advantage as was possible for so unhappy a work to be
managed, which proved much the more troublesome and intricate, (though the
chiefest part of that trouble fell to the Collectors) by reason owners of
Merchants ships and all mariners had shares in all prizes and prize goods
taken; And this is here remarkable, that there is not an owner of shipping, nor
mariner in the Kingdom that can justly complain, but that he has received
his full payment of all advantages which have been made in this kind, saving in
some cases of late, only for want of a Judge of the Admiralty to adjudge the
same.

Beyond all this, It is observeable, that in the first year of these unhappy
distractions, six of the Committee of the Navy with three honorable Lords, did
discharge the office of the Lord high Admiral, and of the Judge of the
Admiralty: and with unexpressible trouble and care, without the help of the
Admiralty Court, the Judge having deserted it, did by the order of the
Parliament, wade through those intricare cases which fell out that first year.
Besides this, several worthy Gentlemen of that Committee, have for diverse
years since, together with diverse honorable Lords, for want of a Lord High
Admiral, by command of both Houses, carried on the whole frame of the affairs
of the Admiralty and Cinque Ports. There lay yet a further charge on diverse
Gentlemen of that Committee, in regard of those relations which that Committee
had unto all Sea affairs and to trade: It pleased the Parliament to join them
with diverse honorable Lords as a Committee of foreign affairs, who by reason
of the variety of complaints, which came from the several Ambassadors of
Spain, France, the States, and orhers, of the ships and goods of their Masters
subjects to be taken in reprizall, by ships employed by the Parliament, were
often encumbered with many intricate points of State; And it was no ordinary
service which those noble Lords and the rest of that Committee, labored under
to defend the just rights of the Parliament, upon those several Emergencies
which fell out, in special, between the Ambassadors of the States; And this
Committee, who after three Months debate, did maintain the Actions of the
Parliament as warrantable, by Treaties of State, and by Law of Nature, and
Nations; As by a Declaration sent unto the States from both Houses of
Parliament, most clearly appears* and this Committee held constant weekly
intelligence with the Parliaments Agents employed in France, Flanders, and
Holland, for the obtaining of Justice for those Merchants, who were agrieved by
the taking or seazure of their ships or goods, or otherwise.

There was another burden lay on that Committee, which was the managing of
that most Christian and honorable work for the Redemption of the poor
Captives from their slavery under the Turk, who with the help and unwearied
pains of diverse worthy Merchants of the City of London, did with all advantage
carry on that work, which will be memorable to Posterity: The care of the
money collected for those uses, and the employment of them being trusted by the
Parliament, with that Committee, and that trust with all faithfulness
discharged, so as had not that sad accident happened on the Ship Honor in the
loss of the first Cargason at Gilbraltar, (which much increased the trouble of
that Committee, and those Gentlemen) the work had well near been finished; yet
blessed be God, two hundred and fifty Captives are redeemed and brought home,
Ten thousand pounds sterling more in pieces of Eight sent away for Argier, and
another Cargason of the like value ready to be sent upon the first intelligence
from the Agent at Argier: And care is taken for the redemption of those in
Tunnis, Sally, Saphia, and all south Barbary. Besides all those public and
weighty employments of that Committee, uncessant were their labors in
particular businesses referred unto them by the House of Commons: As the
recovery in of the monyes due on the bonds delivered in by the Farmours taken
for Customs in the time of the late Act of Parliament: preparing Ordinances
for the advancement of the Trade of several Companys of Merchants trading into
foreign parts, with limited Rules and Restrictions; composing of differences
upon several occasions between Merchants and Officers of the Customs; and
examining, and stating that intricate affair of the Vintners, which subjected
them to just Fines; and many other businesses of great weight and intricacy,
and were with all cherfulness and faithfulness transacted to clear up
the Honor and Justice of the Parliament: and that without the use of any
Arbitrary power, but in all cases which they found proper to receive their
Trials in any Courts of Justice, were careful to referr such causes to their
proper Courts.

But the whole former Narrative may be true, yet the Honor of the Parliament,
or of the Committee of the Navy no way cleared, but rather stands the more
deeply charged: For it does appear by several passages in the Narrative, That
the Committee of the Navy have executed the power and trust of two great
Officers of State; as in the first year of these unnatural Distempers, being
1642, the Office of the Lord High Admiral: and from that very year to this
day the greatest part of the office and trust of the Lord Treasurert; These had
the power of disposing multitudes of offices, the one In the Navy, the other in
the Customs; besides great fees and other perquisites of profit and great
advantage; yet the power of the Committee rested not here, but the Narrative
setts forth diverse other employments of trust, whereby great advantages have
bin very probably made by that Committee or some private Gentlemen, as the
preferment of persons to Offices, and those unworthy or not qualified for such
Offices, and men of more merit, sufferings and abilities laid by, which does
lay a great blemish on the honor of the Parliament, to employ their own
Members in such great places of trust and advantage; And this is visible to all
men, that the Chaireman of that Committee, had five hundred pounds per annum,
allowed him, besides all his other great advantages, or otherwise neither he
nor some others of that Committee would ever have followed the affairs of that
Committee, with that zeal and pains early and late, that scarce a Tradesman
in the City, or husbandman in the Country took the like: so that he was
thereby brought to such weakness at three times, he was at the very gates of
death by sedentary diseases.

Unto all which it is necessary to give this further account that as to my own
particular, I do here in the presence of the Almighty God, the searcher of all
hearts, and the righteous Judge as well of all men's intentions, as of their
Actions, protest; That next that duty I owe unto God, who has called me to
this employment, and to the Parliament, who has entrusted me with the same,
and to my Country, for whose sake and preservation I was sent hither, all
irresistible motives to an Ingenious and conscionable Christian, to make me
account no labor too great, nor care too much, to be any way isntrumental in
so great and glorious a work as the Reformation in Church and State, being the
main end of the Endeavors of the Parliament; I say next the duty I owed to
those former relations, I was impatiently studious (with the help, wisdom,
and care of that Committee) to manage those great works with that advantage to
the Commonwealth, and with that clearenesse from all private ends, as that on
the one side the King, on the other side the people, might be in love with
Parliaments; the King that he might see the grear difference in the managing of
the affairs of State, between the Counsels of the Parliament, and his old
Councillors, of whom he was so fond, and by most of whom he was so grossly
deceived, and the State abused; on the other side, that the people might see
their happiness under the Government of a King directed by the Council of
Parliament, in receiving redress of their grievances, releise in their wants,
due and speedy justice with all cleerenesse, and without consumption of their
time, by long attendance, or of their estates by needless and forced expenses.
And as to the five hundred pound allowed me by the Parliament, toward the
defraying of my expenses, having my whole estate then under the power of the
Enemy for above three years; I acknowledge it a great mercy from God, and a
great favor in the Parliament, to provide so liberally for me: yer I do
profess that those moneys have not supplied my necessities, but before the
Quarters have come about, I have been forced to borrow money of my children or
servants, for to defray my ordinary disbursements; yet have I not bin profuse
either in apparel or diet, but have lived in a far less plenty then before I
came to attend the service of the Parliament.

And as to the disposing of those several Offices, either in the Navy or
Customs; I do make this Answer, that it is true, that many hundreds of
persons most of them destroyed in their Estates by these civil wars, had
their Petitions ly before that Committee for preferments unto office; and that
Committee did accordingly dispose of very many as they fell, wherein they used
all possible care that the persons they preferred should be qualified for the
employment, men that had suffered in their Estates, and recommended for their
integrities; And to my best remembrance they never preferred any but upon the
special recommendation and certificate of the Members of one or both Houses or
Parliament: All which offices were by that Committee conferred with so much
care and clearness, as what ever was the former practice of officers of State,
in disposing of them for money, a thing too apparent, and too great a blemish
to those times: yet I do with all confidence affirm, that neither my self,
nor any Gentleman of that Committee ever received one penny for any such
preferment; And that Committee in this point have been so exact and tender, in
regard of the Scandal that might arise to the Parliament, by sale of Offices,
as that they have from time to time taken strict Account of the Clerks
attending that Committee, what advantages they made by the disposing of such
Offices; And it appears by their Accounts duly kept, they have gotten between
them all for Orders, Warrants, and Grants for Offices, not full thitty five
pound, whereof near forty places have been Customers, Comptroulers, and
Searchers in the Custom house, all places of repute and profit,

And as to the profits which did arise the first year, for the Admiral tenths,
and were always by him carefully taken and converted to his private use. I do
confess there were Prizses taken that year which amounted unto twenty two
thousand pound or thereabouts, whereof two thousand two hundred pound accrued
to the tenths, but that neither out of the tenths, nor any other profits
whatsoever, I never received one farthing, but all the profits were faithfully
converted by that Committee to the use of the State.

As to the Office of the L. Treasurer in the disposing of moneys, the last
particular, and wherein satisfaction may more especially be expected, of what
advantages have been made by the moneys arising by those three springs, or
otherwise appropriate to the disposal of this Committee.

From the Customs has bin ordered unto Sir Henry Vane (whereof seventy
thousand pounds is borrowed) nine hundred twenty three thousand eight hundred
sixty four pounds two shilling and ten pence halfpenny. 923864 l. 2 s. 10 d.
^b. From the Excise of Flesh and Salt, one hundred forty five thousand four
hundred seventy one pounds seventeen shillings and seven pence. 145471 l. 17 s.
7 d. From Prize goods, twenty three thousand nine hundred forty three pounds
six shillings six pence halfe-penny. 23943 l. 6 s. 6 d. From other hands and
receipts being either moneys borrowed, which are since repaid, or otherwise for
special reasons appointed for the use of the Navy, ninety three thousand six
hundred pounds three shillings and nine pence. 93600 l. 3 s. 6 d. Amounting in
the whole, 1186879 l. 10 s. 9 d.

To which I say, That as in the case of Offices, so in this also, the Committee
have commanded their Clerks to give an account of what has been given them for
the Orders signed for moneys; and it appears, it has not been communibus
annis, fifty pounds per Annum unto each; yet in Orders, Letters, etc. twenty
Reames of Paper at least, have yearly been written, besides the Journals of the
Committee, which are with all faithfulness and care preserved for the use of
the Parliament.

And to satisfy the World of my own integrity, I do solemnly profess, as in
the presence of God, at whose Tribunal, I must give an account for all my
Actions before all Men and Angels; that for the appointing of all those moneys
disposed of by that Committee, I never received, nor any other to my knowledge
for my use, any Sum or Sums of money, not the value of a penny from any
person or persons whatsoever as a Fee, Bribe, Reward, or what other name you
may give it; but the same has in every part been faithfully conveyed from the
Treasury of the State to the hands of the subject without any advantage made
upon them, saving that there was about four years since, three pounds sent
unto me from a Captain at Sea for a Beaver hat, which money I gave freely away,
and was disposed to my best remembrance thirty shillings to the distressed
protestants which came from Ireland, the other moity to maimed Soldiers in the
Parliaments service:) Nor have I ever received any Sum or Sums for any other
affai^^s of Parliament whatsoever transacted by that Committee All provocations
tending there unto I have avoided, and declined, I abhor and from my soul
detest the very thought of such proceedings: It is so far below a Gentleman
and a Member of the high Court of Parliament. If any man can justly charge me
with any such matter, there is a Committee appointed by the House of Commons
for examination of such matters, where he may complain: and I will give him
fouresold reparations; Or further, if any man can make it evident, that he has
given any thing as a reward, gratuity, or such like to my wife, any child,
servant, or any other for my use, I will make him reparation to the full value.

And for any Gentleman, or other person, that has at any time by way of
civility brought or sent me any thing whatsoever, which yet among men is
lawful, and may have in it no dishonest intentions either in the giver or
receiver; I do hereby invite and desire him to let me know the value of the
same, and I will willingly satisfy him for it: And what I have here asserted
on my own behalf, I am confident I may with much freedom assert on the
behalf of those worthy Gentlemen of the Committee, who constantly attended
those Services.

And now I have done, and by this I hope have (...) all modest Christians, and
stopped the mouth (...) slander: whereby I trust I have discharged my first
^^gagement, in clearing up the honor of the Parliam^^^ and of the Committee of
the Navy and Customs, (...) their faithful transacting of all the affairs
(...) to their trust and charge: that they have been (...) not with any base or
private ends or advantages, (...) with public spirits to the honor of the
Parlia^^^^ good of the people, advantage and safety of the ^^^dom.

By GILES GRENE Esquire A Member of the Honorable House of Commons.
FINIS.

