THE GREAT MEMORIAL: OR, A List of the Names of those Pretended JUDGES who
Sat, and Sentenced our late Sovereign King CHARLES the First, in the Place
which they called the High Court of Justice, January 27. 1648. And also of
those Witnesses Sworn against the said KING; The Sentence read against him;
With the Catalogue of the Names of those that Subscribed and Sealed the Warrant
for his Execution; and the Manner of his Cruel Murder.
portrait of King Charles I with inset depiction of scaffold O horrible murder
But lo a Charg is drawn a day is set
The silent lamb is brought, the wolves are met;
And where is the Slaughter house Whitehall must be,
Lately his Palace, now his Calvarie
And now ye Senators is this the thing
So often declared is this your glorious King?
Religion vails her self, and mourns that she
Is forced to own such Horrid Villainy.


The NAMES of the said Pretended JVDGES, who gave Sentence against the Late
KING, January 27th. 1648.
JOhn Bradshaw, Sergeant at Law, Lord President. John Lisle William Say Oliver
Cromwell Henry Ireton
Esquires Sir Hardress Waller Knight. Thomas Waits Thomas Harrison Edward Whaley
Thomas Pride Isaac Ewer
Esquires. Thomas Lord Gray of Grooby. Sir John Danvers Knight. Sir Thomas
Maleverer Baronet. Sir John Bourcher Knight. William Heveingham Es; Isaac
Pennington Alderman of the City of London. John Downs Henry Martin John
Barkstead Matthew Tomlinson Gilbert Millington John Blakiston
Esqures Sir Will. Constable Baronet. John Hutchison Es; Sir Michael Livesey
Knight. Robert Tichburne Nicholas Love Owen Roe Robert Lilburne Adrian Scroop
Esquires. Richard Dean John Okey Simon Meyne John Hewson William Goffe
Cornelius Holland John Carew John Jones Miles Corbett Frances Allen. Peregrine
Pelham Thomas Chaloner John Moor John Aldred Henry Smith Humph. Edwards Gregory
Clement Thomas Wogan
Esquries Sir Gregory Norton Baronet. John Venn Thomas Scot Edmund Harvey
Esquries Thomas Andrews Alderman of London. William Cawley Anthony Stapdley
Thomas Horton Thomas Hammond Augustine Garland John Dixwell James Temple Peter
Temple Daniel Blagrave Edmund Ludlow
Esquires
The Names of those Witnesses Produced and Sworn in the said pretended Court,
to give Evidence against the KING.
WIlliam Cutbert of Patrington in Holderness Gent. John Bennet of Harwood in
Com. Ebot, William Brain of Wrexall in Com. Salop. Henry Hartford of Stratford
upon Avon in Warwick. Robert Lacie of the Town and County of Nottinghamshire.
Edward Roberts of Bishop Castle in Com Salop. Robert Loads of Cottam in
Nottingham, Tyler. Samuel Morgan of Wellington in Com. Salop. James Williams of
Rosse in Herefordshire. John Pinnegar of Hamer in the County of Derby. Samuel
Lawson of Nottingham, Maulster. Arthur Young Citizen and Barber Surgeon of
London. John Thomas of Kangellan in the County of Denbigh. Richard Bloomfeild
Citizen and Weaver of London. William Jones of Uske in the County of Monmouth.
David Evans of Abergenny in the County of Monmoth. Diogenes Edwards of Carston
in Com. Salop, Butcher. Giles Grice of Wellington in Shropshire. John Winston
of Damorham in Com. Wilts, Gent. George Seeley of London Cordwainer. John Moor
of the City of Cork in Ireland. Tho. Ives of Boyset in the County of
Northampton. Thomas Rawlins of Hanslop in the County of Bucks. Gent. Thomas
Read of Maidstone in the County of Kent. James Crosby of Dublin in Ireland
Barber. Samuel Burden of Lineham in Com. Wilts, Gent. Michael Pots of
Sharpeston in the County of Northumb. George Cornwall of Aston in the County of
Hereford. Henry Gouch of Gray's Inn, Gent. Rob. Williams of the Parish of St.
Martins in the County of Cornwall, Husbandman.
Counselors assistant to this Court, and to draw up the Charge against the
KING, were
Doctor Dorislaus. Mr. Ask. Mr. John Cook, Solicitor. Sergeant Dendy,
Sergeant at Arms. Mr. Broughton Mr. Phelpes Clerks to the Court. Colonel
Humfrey, Sword bearer.
Messengers, Door-keepers and Cryers, were these;
Mr. Walford. Mr. Radley. Mr. Pain. Mr. Powell Mr. Hull. Mr. King.
The SENTENCE against the said KING, January the 27th. 1648. which was read by
Mr. Broughton aforesaid, Clerk.
WHereas the Commons of England in Parliament, have appointed them an High
Court of Justice for the Trial of Charles Stuart King of England, before whom
he had been Three times Convented, and at the first time a Charge of High
Treason and other Crimes and Misdemeanors was read in the behalf of the
Kingdom of England, etc. as in the Charge which was read throughout.

To which Charge, he the said Charles Stuart was required to give his Answer,
but he refused so to do; and so expressed several passages at his Trial in
refusing to answer.

For all which Treasons and Crimes, this Court does adjudge, That the said
Charles Stuart, as a Tyrant, Traitor, Murderer, and Public enemy, shall be
put to death, by severing his head from his body.

This Sentence (says the President) now read and published is the Act,
Sentence, Judgment and Resolution of the whole Court. To which the Members of
the Court stood up and assented to what he said by holding up their hands.

The King offered to speak, but he was instantly commanded to be taken away,
and the Court broke up.

The true manner of proceeding to take off the Kings Head, according to the
Sentence given as aforesaid.
SIr Hardress Waller, Colonel Harrison, Comissary General Ireton, Colonel
Dean, and Colonel Okey, were appointed to consider of the Time and Place for
the Execution of the King, according to his Sentence, given by the (pretended)
High Court of Justice.

Painted Chamber, Monday January the 29th 1648.
UPon Report made from the Committee for Considering of the Time and Place of
the Executing of the Judgment against the King, that the said Committee have
Resolved, That the open street before Whitehal is a fit place: And the said
Committee conceive it fit, That the King be there executed the morrow, the King
having already notice thereof.

The Court approved thereof, and ordered a Warrant to be drawn to that purpose,
which Warrant was accordingly drawn and agreed to, and Ordered to be engrossed,
which was done, and signed and sealed accordingly, as follows.

At the High Court of Justice for the Trying and Judging of CHARLES STUART King
of England, Jan. 29. 1648.
WHereas Charles Stuart King of England, is and stands Convicted, Attainted
and Condemned of High Treason, and other Crimes, and Sentence on Saturday last
was pronounced against him by this Court, to be put to Death, by the severing
his head from his body, of which Sentence Execution yet remains to be done.
These are therefore to will and require you, to see the said Sentence Executed
in the open street before Whitehall upon the morrow, being the 30. day of this
instant Month of January, between the hours of Ten in the morning, and Five in
the afternoon of the same day, with full effect; and for so doing, This shall
be your sufficient Warrant: and these are to require all Officers and Soldiers
and other the good people of this Nation of England to be assistant unto you in
this service.

Given under our hands and Seals.
To Colonel Francis Hacker, Colonel Huncks, and Lieutenant Colonel Phray, and
to every of them.
Sealed and Subscribed by, John Bradshaw. Thomas Gray. Oliver Cromwell. Edward
Whaley. Mich. Livesey. John Okey. John Danvers. John Bourcher. Hen. Ireton.
Tho. Maleverer. Jo. Blackeston. Jo. Hatchison. William Gaffe. Tho Pride. Peter
Temple. Tho. Harrison. Joh. Hewson. Henry Smith. Per. Pelham. Richard Dean.
Rob. Tichburn. Hump. Edwards. Dan. Blagrave. Owen Roe. Will. Purefoye. Adrian
Scroop. James Templer. Aug. Garland. Edmond Ludlow. Hen. Martin. Vincent
Potter. William Constable. Rich. Ingoldsby. Will. Cawley. Joh. Barkstead. J.
Dixwell. Isaac Ewer. Val. Walton. Simon Meyne. Tho. Horton. Jo. Jones. Jo.
Moor. Hardress Waller. Gilbert Millington. G. Fleetwood. Jo. Alured. Rob.
Lilburn. Will. Say. Anthony Stapley. Gregory Norton. Tho. Chaloner. Tho. Wogan.
Jo. Venn. Greg. Clement. Jo. Downs. Tho. Wait. Tho. Scot. John Carew. Miles
Corbet.


Ordered, that the Scaffold on which the King is to be executed be covered with
black.

The Warrant for executing the King being accordingly delivered to those
parties to whom the same was directed, Execution was done upon him according to
the Tenor thereof about Two a clock in the afternoon, of the said 30. of
January 1648.

The Fatal day of the said Execution, being Tuesday, January the 30. 1648.
HIS Majesty continued, in Prayer all the morning, and receives the Sacrament.
Just at Ten a Clock before noon, he was conveyed on foot from St. James's
Palace to Whitehall, guarded by a Regiment of Foot Soldiers, part before, part
behind, with Colors flying, and Drums beating, his private guard of Partisans
about him, and Dr. Juxon Bishop of London, next to him on one side, and Colonel
Tomliason on the other; being come to Whitehall, he continued in his Cabinet
Chamber at his Devotions, refusing to dine, only about 12 a clock he eat a bit
of Bread, and drank a glass of Claret wine; from thence he was conveyed into
the Banqueting house, and the great window enlarged, out of which he ascends
the Scaffold, the rails being hung round, and the floor covered with black; His
Executioners disguised with Vizards, yet was his Majesty not affrighted: He
showed more care of the people living, then of himself dying: for looking round
about upon the people, whom the thick Guards of Soldiers kept a great distance
off, and seeing he could not be heard by them, omitting (probably) that he
purposed to have spoken to them, therefore turning to the Officers and Actors
by him, he delivered himself in a short (but excellent) Speech, which being
ended, he mockly vent to Prayers, and after some heavenly discourse between him
and the Bishop, having prepared himself, he lifted up his eyes to heaven,
mildly praying to himself, he stooped down to the block as to a Prayer deske,
and most humbly bowed his generous Neck to God, to be cut off by the Vizarded
Executioner, which was suddenly done a one blow. Thus fell King Charles, and
thus all Britain with him.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for Edward Thomas at the Adam and Eve in Little Britain. 1660.


