A Great Victory GOD Has Vouchsafed by the Lord General CROMWELS Forces
against the SCOTS.

CERTIFYED By several Letters from Scotland.

RELATING The entering of part of the English Army into Fife. 2000 of the Scots
slain.

With a List of the particulars of the great and glorious Success therein.

And the taking of Callender house by storm.

Together with A Letter from the Lord General to the Right Honorable WILLIAM
LENTHAL Speaker of the Parliament.

Imprimatur

Hen. Scobel Cleric. Parliamenti.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Ibbitson dwelling in Smithfield near Hosier Lane
end. 1651.

Deer Brother,
WE now lie close to the Enemy, who has so entrenched himself, that it does
not appear to us yet how to attempt him. We have by the blessing of the Lord
on Thursday last landed about 14 or 1500 men at the North-Ferry in Fife and
have drawn a line cross the Isthmos of the land, to which a way is made in 24
hours, to transport our Army (if it be fair). Our men took about 7 ships
laden with Salt and Coal upon the place, and near 20 piece of Cannon, the
Major General is gone thither with about 1600 Foot, and 1200 Horse, I have sent
to him about 1000 Horse and Foot more, so that with what he has there to
defend the works, I hops besides he will be able to take the field with 5000
Horse and Foot. Maj. Genesis Harison came up very seasonably with Ingoldsbys
Regiment, and three Companies more, and about 1200 Horse and Dragoons, which
truly we judge to be a seasonable providence (considering we must now divide)
he being very near Edinburgh, that day we took the said place. We shall
consider which way to dispose of the rest of his Forces, and I think it will
be fit, the Lord having led by his Providence to follow it close. We lost
Newarke for want of ships in Dunbarton-Firth, they taking it by the help of a
ship with her Canon, after we had held it three days, Gen, Dean^ having
Ordered two men of War to go from Leith about Scotland thither, our men had
good Quarter, whiles they were doing this, we took Callender house in the view
of their whole Army by storm, without the loss of above five men,


Honored Sir:
I Received yours of July 12. and communicated to my Lord what was not in yours
to him; Being returned to our old Quarters near Falkirke, on the fourteenth
day of July we battered, and then stormed Calander House, within two miles of
the Enemies whole Camp, which was at Torwood five miles from Sterling, we twice
offered them that kept it, mercy to surrender it, but they refused; they killed
us a Captain who was only a looker on, and likewise our Master Gunner; we
took it the same day we began to batter it by storm, and our Men put sixty in
the House to the Sword, some others dyed of Wounds, and about sixteen being
wounded had their lives; the House is very strong, with a Moate about it, and a
great Wood by it.

It has devoured many of our men, and God has now requited them, their great
Army never offered to send man to their releife; such stout men are the Scotch
Boasters.

The same day at night we sent a Party in Boats and Ships over the Fryth, from
Blackness to surprise North-ferry on Fife side; at the first we sent one
thousand four hundred Foot, and two hundred Horse, and one Troop of Dragoons,
it pleased the Lord to go along with them so as within two hours after their
landing they took the place called, North-ferry, which is a Peninsula, in
which was a Fort with five great Guns, and in a Bay near it four ships laden
with Coals, and Salt; in some other Forts near it we took as many Ordnance
as made up those five to be seventeen, which were planted by the Fyrth side to
gall our ships, this North-ferry is even against the strong Island of
Enisgarvy, we have sent over the sixteen, and seventeen days of July, five
hundred Foot more, and five Troops of Dragoons, if by the Lords mercy we can
make this place good, Enisgarvy must yield for want of fresh water, and then we
have a brave way to possess our whole Army into Fife if we see occasion. I
hope the Lord has now begun to work for us to purpose, the Lord give us
humble and believing hearts, and I fear not but the Lord will soon bring
down the hearts of our proud and cruel Enemies, and make a gracious return
to the earnest prayers of his people.

At Glascoe we found some good people fully owning us, and disowning their
Lords, and Ministers. The Ministers that are good, are as yet upon a Reserve,
to see what Game they can play with us after the Malignants be down; thus
far some owned us, as they were content to dispute no more about this
invasion; only they desire a little better to know us, as to our Religion. I
suppose if the Lord please to give our Enemies into our hands, we shall have
the best Party here not only to join with us, but to rejoice with us, who
find they have already had too much King. The North-ferry is ours, against
Queenes-ferry, near Blackness, and Enisgarvy is betwixt them. The Lords
dispensation against this people is exceeding severe, where our Army goes,
though, we do what we can to restrain straglers, yet very little is lost
either within doors, or without, that were not the people exceeding cruel to
us, our compassions of their miseries would not suffer our hearts to be any day
without pangs of sadness, who can see nothing but a present and perfect Famine
to follow us; in two or three days we make large Corn fields to become a
Heath, and the Enemy eats almost as fast as we.

O that our malignant Capon-eaters were but here, to see the price of the
Scotch lust after a King, and what desolations are like to be the fruit of his
entertainment. We hope the Lord in mercy will shorten these Wars to preserve
food for a Remnant; we are now in daily expectation of Gods gracious appearance
with us, to drive them out of their Holes, and to make them fight, or fly; help
us with prayers:

July 19. from the Camp near Falkirk. Your affectionate Cosen, W. G.


We lie within a mile and a half of the Enemy, and view one another every day,
but can neither come at them, nor come betwixt Sterling, and them, but I hope
now we have got a back door in Fife.

Truly Honorable:
YOu must not expect from me an account of passages in the Army, having been
wholly with that party that entered Fife, neither was I able by the last, having
scarce been master of a moments time to eat or sleep: Truly the Lord is now
breaking out of the Clouds in his brightness, and experimenting us, as of his
love and continued presence with us; so that his time and way of the Discovery
thereof is the best; how were we tugging these ten Months, and still reaped
nothing but disappointments? There are these three things very observable;
first, that the Lord should direct his poor servants to pitch upon a place of
such fitness for its end in every kind. Secondly, that Major Gen: Harison with
his forces should come up and that by the way of Edinburgh, whereas indeed we
expected that what forces had come from him should have come by the way of
Carlisle, and Hambleton, which had been nothing so well. Thirdly, that the Lord
should favor us with such a season of wind and weather for four days
together the wind serving a like to pass and repasse; our men had notice upon
Saturday, of Sir John Brownes being at Dumfermlin within three miles of them
that night with a considerable party of Horse and Foot, whereupon he was
resolved in case the forces of ours that were expected should come over in any
time, to march out to meet them, which accordingly by the Providence of God
fell out, for Col. Okeys Regiment of Horse, and part of Col. Ingoldsbies of
Foot were over early yesterday morning, and others following as fast as Boats
could carry them; Whereupon the Major Gen: with about six Regiments in all; of
Horse, Foot, and Dragoones marched out, and placed his Foot obscure on the side
of a hill, and advanced further toward the enemy with his horse, who also were
on their march toward him, with full resolution to engage; there was some
small charges with parties, but the Major Gen: retreated to his foot, using
that only as a means to draw them forward; and being come to his foot, each
in Battalia charged other, the hottest service was between the left wing of
ours, and the right wing of theirs, where Col. Okey commanded the Major
Generals Regiment of horse, and part of his own, where the service was very
hot at the swords point, and specially with Col: Okeyes men, who had the left
to the left, and were very hardly put to it, both in front and flanck, but were
seasonably relieved by Captain Bramstons Dragoones, who gave very good fire on
the enemy, and to good purpose, the business began about three in the
afternoon, and continued in its heat a quarter of an hour.

Our Word was Providence, theirs Scotland, it seems they were sensible that
Scotland lay at this bout much at the stake; Their Army is retreated over
Sterling, and ours on the advance, the Lord make you and us humble and thankful

The horse being beaten, their foot presently threw away their arms; I cannot
give you the particulars of the business as yet, being the last night
commanded away by the Major Gen: to my Lord, our men had the pursuit of them
for six miles, their number was about 5000 like to ours; they were their picked
men both horse and foot, there were about 2000 of them slain, and seven or
eight hundred taken,

Col: Scot, or Petty-Scot is slain, and Col: Buchanan (a man of great
eminency and estate amongst them) is taken prisoner, as also is Sir John Brown
their Commander in chief: Of their foot not 200. escaped, and those that are
prisoners the most of them are so desperately wounded they will hardly live; all
their foot Colors are taken, and many of their horse, the most of their foot
are High-landers, the rest of their Army are in a mighty confusion, and
retreated over Sterling; we lost only one Cornet, and I think not more, my
paper will hold no more, the Lord be praised for this:

I am, Sir, Your Honors G: DOWNING.


SIR,
AFter our waiting upon the Lord, and not knowing what course to take (for
indeed we know nothing but what God pleases to teach us) of his great mercy,
we were directed to send a party to get us a landing by our boats whilst we
marched toward Glascow. On Tuesday morning last Col. Overton with about 1400
Foot, and some Horse and Dragoones landed at the North-Ferry in Fife: We with
the Army lying near to the enemy (a small River parted us and them) and we
having consultations to attempt the Enemy within his Fortifications, but the
Lord was not pleased to give way to that Council, purposing a better way for
us. The Major General marched on Thursday night with 2 Regiments of Horse, and
2 Regiments of Foot, for better securing the place, and to attempt upon the
enemy as opportunity should serve: He getting over, and finding a considerable
body of the Enemy there, (who would probably have beaten our men from the
place, if he had not come) drew out and fought them) he being 2 Regiments of
Horse, and about 400 of Horse and Dragoons more, and 3 Regiments of Foot, and
about 4 or 5 Regiments of Horse: They came to a close charge, and in the end
totally routed the enemy, have taken about 40 or 50 Coullers, killed near 2000.
some say more, have taken Sir John Brown (their Maj. Genesis who cammanded in
chief) and other Colonels and considerable Officers, killed and taken, and
about 5 or 600 prisoners. The Enemy removed from their ground with their whole
Army, but whither we certainly know not. This is an unspeakable mercy, I trust
the Lord will follow it, until he has perfected peace and truth: We can truly
say, we were gone as far as we could in our Counsels and Actions; and we did
say one to another, we know not what to do. Wherefore it is sealed upon our
hearts, that this, as all the rest is from the Lords goodness and not from
man. I hope it becomes me to pray that we may walk humbly and
selfe-denyingly before the Lord, and beleevingly also. That you whom we serve,
as the Authority over us, may do the work committed to you with uprightness
and faithfulness, and thoroughly as the Lords: That you may not suffer any
thing to remain that offends the eyes of his jealousy that Commonwealths may
more and more be sought and justice done impartially. For the eyes of the Lord
run to and fro, and as he finds out his Enemies here to be avenged on them, so
will be not spare them for whom he does good, if by his loving kindness they
become not good. I shall humbly take the boldness to represent this Engagement
of David's in the 119 Psalm. the 134v. Deliver me from the oppression of man, so
will I keep thy precepts. I take leave and rest,

SIR, Your most humble Servant. O. CROMWELL
Lithgow 21 July 1651. The carriage of the Maj. Genesis as in all other things, so
in this is worthy of your taking notice of. as also Col. Okey, Col. Overton,
Col. Daniel, Col. West, Col. Lidcot, Col. Syler; and the rest of the Officers.



For the Right Honorable William Lenthall Speaker of the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England.

FINIS.
Imprimatur,

Hen: Scobell, Cleric: Parliamenti.


