OYLEYTPION, OR A Practical Demonstration OF County Judicatures. Wherein is
amply explained the Judicial and Ministerial Authority of SHERIFFS. Together
with the Original, Jurisdiction, and method of keeping all Country COURTS.

By WILL: GREENWOOD, (...).

Theophrastus. (...).
Qui nihil injuste agit, nulla opus habet lege.
LONDON, Printed by T. R. for John Place, at Furnivals Inn Gate, and William
Place at Grays-Inne Gate in Holborne, 1659.

To the Right Honorable, Thomas LORD Widdrington, Lord Chief Baron of his
Highness Court of the Public Exchequer.
My Lord,
I Am bold, by virtue of your Patronage, to expose this small Tract to the
public View and Censure of the World. It Is Refuge is the sanctuary of your
Name; the Result amounting to no more then a persuasive hope of Security from
the contagious emissions of that universal Basilisk, Detraction: and, by the
indulgence of your favor and acceptance, will triumph over self-martyring
envy. I presume not to present it to your judicious aspect, as that your Honor
should learn any thing by the act of one in the April of years and literature,
as I am; but hoping that if at any your recreatory hours, you shall grace it
with the view of your discerning eye, you may observe something in it that may
conduce to public utility. I might well fear my rudeness should offend your
Honorable survey; but that it is your nobleness rather to smile at the errors
committed by young heads, then censure them. However I humbly crave your
Lordships pardon for presenting things so unworthy your view, and to accept of
them as an incourager of my mean endeavors, who shall ever continue

Your Lordships most humbly devoted Servant, W. Greenwood.

TO THE CANDID AND Ingenuous Readers.
HOw worthy of observation is that ingenious Apothegme of Divine Plato, when he
said; (...). Non nobis solum nati sumus, sed ortus nostri partim sibi patria
vendicat, partim parents, partim amici. So the persuasive dictates of this
golden Theme suggested to me the utility a Treatise of this nature would
produce to the Country, which instigated my Pen to demonstrate as well the
Theorick as Practick part of those Courts generally incident to it; for the
more the country knows them, the better they will affect them, ignoti nulla
cupido. I cannot comprehend how any thing can be more useful to and for the
Country, and consequently more generally expetible and wished for, then the
theorick and practick knowledge of these Courts; for who is there in any County
of this Commonwealth, or within the several Precincts or Jurisdictions of any
of these, that is not or may not sue and be sued in them? So that here they may
read, and understand how their Actions do proceed, and what, and how far the
power and force of every precept and warrant does extend, and what the fees
are; and may, as with a touchstone, try and examine the actions and proceedings
of their Attorneys or Solicitors. I must acknowledge my early experience (that
I am but (...), Asinus ad Lyram in these discourses) in comparison to some of
the more grave and ancient practicers, is but as a drop of water to an
overflowing bucket: neither am I ignorant that much has been writ upon these
particular subjects, by men whose sage and industrious Labors, and strenuous
abilities, I dare not so much as emulate; yet, in a matter of so grand and
public importance, I hope I shall not be too severely blamed if I, according
to my cursory and imperfect manner (for never any at once vaulted into
perfection) adventure to follow their footsteps; for the subject is not new as
touching matter, but only in invention, order, style and method of handling it;
for I walk not upon mine own legs, but am stilted by what I have borrowed from
those Luminaries of Learning: I am indebted to all; yet not being beholding to
any of my Creditors without giving them a note under my hand, nor averring any
thing of my self, thereby to muzzle the mouth of contradiction; for I know the
too acute severity of some, will be furnished with latitude enough to charge my
pen with Lapses, and Imperfections. Therefore you must expect better and more
generous Wine of the old Vine-tree, according to that of Pliny, Vetustioribus
semper vitibus vinum melius, for I dare not promise you (Amphoram ne urceus
exeat) mountain, lest it produce the ridiculous issue in the Fable.

Objections may peradventure arise, That in this I have imitated the Amygdala
or Almond-tree, that with celerity buds and brings forth her fruit, or that I
have soared above my pitch, attempting an Eagles flight with the flagging wings
of a Wren in the high spring tide of an over weening opinion, pricked forward
by an insatiate desire of posthume glory, or conducted by the Ignis fatuus of
popular applause; but this I look upon as the carp of some Aristarchus, stepped
in to calumniate what he cannot better, neither do I expect but to be subject
to such a lash; for I confess it (according to that of Nicomachus) (...).
Difficile esse in hac vita degentem, omnes invidentium oculos latere, yet let
such Critics take this by the way, that (...), it is far easier not to like
then to do the like. But though they do uncivily prejudicate my endeavors with
a sinister conceit, or uncourteously censure my non-ability, impeaching me for
some things that do distaste their delicate palates, as my former appearances
have done, yet jacta nobis est alea, I intend by the divine favor happily to
proceed, though unhappily I have begun; (for in truth the subject would require
the studious pen of a sage Lawyer, yea the combination of learned heads to do
it to the life, yet neglected) for I ever esteemed the employment of those
talents, either naturally bestowed on man by the Deity, or acquired by study
and industry, ought more properly, yea, and of duty to be employed in the
service of our Country, than to be made use of in the satisfaction of our
private humors: therefore I do here (in acquittance of that general
obligation) endeavor to offer up this mite of my endeavors among the many
learned and elaborate works which the choice wits and studious pens of our age
have produced in all kinds, for the World at this time is oppressed with
nothing more then the press, every one striving to distill the dewy qu
intessence of his brain through the Limbeck of invention; so amongst the rest I
have not altogether sequesterd my self: for when I had employment, they were
my vacancies to rest, when I was infected with vice-nourishing idleness, they
were my employments.

I assume not upon me to write any Encomium's upon the Book, it belongs not to
me; but now it is abroad, must totally be submitted to your judgment and
censure. And I know it must be the worth of a book, and not the wyre-drawn
flourishes of an obsequious Epistle that causes your approbation, so that this
must stand or fall by the weight or levity you shall find in it.

Now as this Tract is chiefly intended for the commodity of the Country, and
as it is their sole object to place their invectives point-blanck against Law
and Lawyers, and if I vindicate them, I shall rather seem to detract from, then
add to, their fame, it having been the sole subject of many learned pens; yet I
hope it is no presumption, if I add one Laurel more to the learned's Crown: The
Laws constituted by learned men, antiquity owned and received as from the
command of the gods, accounting only those men fit to converse with the gods;
Thus Minos the Cretan is said to converse with Jupiter, and in his presence to
compile those Laws he after gave to the people; and Lycurgus the Lacaedemonian,
to have command from the Oracle at Delphos; and Numa to consult with the
Goddess Aegeria, that the Laws might be more cordially admitted and obeyed as
made by the gods themselves. Nay, in a kind, by a civil non obstante, excepting
them (so learned) from being obliged by Law, as other men of less magnitude
were; as appears in that carriage of Architas the Pythagorean his Citizens to
him, whom they would choose seven times their head Governor, though the Law
prohibited any other that office and honor above a year. Have a retro-spect to
the Journals of Antiquity, view the Diaries of time, and you shall find men
learned in the Laws, noble advantages to their Country, their Champions to
defend them, their Oracles to advise them, and their Orators to plead for them.

And now, as to the Laws themselves, which may be truly termed the Walls and
Palizadoes of Governments and Nations; yea, the strongest sinews of humane
society; for, take away the potency of Laws, and who is it that can say, This
is mine, or that he is within the Bulworks of incolumity? according to that
eloquent Aphorism of Demosthenes (...). Leges esse animam civitatis, ut etiam
corpus cum anima orbatum est, concidit: Ita and civitas sine legibus consistere
non potest: So the true end of all Laws is to ordain, and settle in order and
government amongst us, the jurisdiction whereof we are rather obliged to obey,
then dispute. Though Thales compared laws to spiders webs; But such are ever to
be spun in a corrupt state; ours are (...), speaking laws, that dare tax a
Delinquent be he never so potent; For the Law is grounded upon the rules and
axioms of reason, and therefore have an ingeminate denomination: the absence of
the one is the deformity of the other, being in a kind convertibilia, and
inseparable. That common Reason we have ingraffed in our natures, is a law,
directing what we are to do, prohibiting the contrary, according to that of
Cicero, Eadem ratio cum est in hominis mente confirmata et confecta lex est.
For Law is nothing but reason dilated and applied upon several occasions and
accidents: The comprehension of reason is of public enormities and
necessities, for which they be severally at several times constituted, being
infinite: so that the disease in our knowledge many times has the priority of
the remedy. And thus the reverence and duty we owe to laws, is nothing else
but obedience to reason, which is the begetter, correcter and preserver of the
very laws themselves. Those therefore who will not obey them, are more
propinque to the nature of bruits and salvages, then men endued withreason. It
is law and reason that do knit the true Gordian knot, that binds and cements us
to unity and peace amongst our selves, and dissipateth all such violent and
illegal courses, as otherwise unbridled liberty would insinuate, preserving
every man in his right, and preventing others, who if they thought their
actions might pass with impunity, would not measure their course by the rule
of Aequum and Justum, but by the square of their private commodity and
affections; and so being not circumscribed within reasonable Bounds or
Landmarks, their reason becomes invisible; whereas when they find that
Justice has a predominant power, they are deterred from proceeding in those
Acts, that otherwise their own wills and inclinations would give them leave to
effect. And these were the causes that prompted prudent Antiquity to institute
these Courts of Judicature in each County, and their several Precincts, and
likewise was the cause instigated me to compile this Miscellanie of Courts,
which in it self is methodical, facile and perspicuous, to benefit the meanest
capacity, yet satisfy the highest. I have now nothing more but to Apologize
with Isocrates, who with this rule prepares me to endure the supercilious
censures and various opinions of men. (...) And that I hope your candid
ingenuities (Juvenili mea aetate considerata) will promise me your connivance
at those Errors that shall occur, and that you will (mitissimo aspectu) smile
upon this Cradle brat, whose little desert, though it cannot expect the
perusal, yet its humility in prostrating it self before you, may merit your
acceptance, whereby he shall be encouraged to higher designs, whose highest
ambition is to be

Your friend to serve you, W. G.
From Furnivals Inn, April 20. 1659.
Ad amicum eruditissimum G. Greenwood in (...) suum (...).
DVm stupendam ingenii tui foecunditatem, lanuginosa conclusam atate, suspicio,
in mentem subit, imberbem Apollinem in te suum transfudisse genium, ut
testaretur tibi minus pili, quam eruditionis accrevisse. Minerva non multo
pridem, e Ioviali tuo cerebro prodiens, Affectus amoris titulo vulgo insignita,
inventionem ovantem plane ostendit; luxuriantis calami veneres dulcescentes
suas exhibent pulchritudines, nec formosa facetiarum rosa caret Aculeis,
lascivientes digitos stimulantibus. In desudato hoc (...) tuo limatum triumphat
judicium, antiquissimarum Curiarum leges, and methodos a prudentissimis sui
aevi inventas and excogitatas, ad immensum decus, elucubrasti: quae
tenebricosae vetustatis ruderibus jacebant occulta, in lucem dedisti: Magis
familiaria, sive indigesta, seu disseminata, politiori disposuisti ordine, and
in unum velut perfectionis corpus congessisti. In debitum hujus libri non
excurram elogium; quaelibet pagina suis turget laudibus, tuamque ultra Herculis
Columnas diffundit famam. Magni futuri nominis eximia sunt haec praeludia; nec
de expectatione, tantis suffulta speciminibus, dubitandum foelicissimam cerebri
tui ubertatem largiori rivo in publicas utilitates manaturam; ego interim,
impositis ori digitis, silebo, and mirabor,

Tui amantissimus J. P.

THE COUNTY COURT.
OF THE ORIGINAL OF Shires, Sheriffs, and the first institution of this COURT.
BEFORE we anatomise the practice of this Court, we thought it convenient to
deduce it from its Original or Prototype, Quia origo rerum attendenda^: And
first of the Shire.

Shire is a Saxon word scyra, and has its etymology from shiran, (id est)
partiri, to divide, as Mr. Lambert says in his explication of Saxon words,
Verb. Centur. And Mr. Cambden in his Britania reports, that Alfred (a Saxon)
King of England, was the first that divided this Common wealth into Shires,
those Shires into Ridings, and those Ridings into Weapentakes or Hundreds, etc.
Likewise as Sir Henry Spelman in his Glossarie says, Sunt qui Comitatum
distinct ones sub Berengariis and Othonibus, vel sub Carolo magno, apud exteros
accidisse opinautur; quod de plurimis forte verum fuerit, nounullae autem
antiquius deprehenduntur. Rem apud nos perspicuam facit Ingulphus, si sane
fides. Rex (Alfridus alias Aluredus and Aethelfridus, qui regnum iniit Anne
871) totius (inquit) Angliae pagos and provincias in Comitatus, primus omnium
commutavit, Comitatus in centurias and hundredas, and in decennas (id est)
tithingas divisit. Which strenous authorities, are sufficiently valid to prove
the original of Shires and their divisions.

The Republic being thus disunited or dissected into Shires, every Shire is
entirely governed by one Officer called a Sheriff, or Shire-reeve, Vicecomes,
compounded of these two Saxon words scyr viz. Satrapia, a Shire, and reave, viz.
Praefectus, a Governor of the Shire, Mr. Cambden thus describes his Office:
Singulis vero annis, nobilis aliquis ex incolis proficitur, quem Vicecomitem
quasi vicarium comitis and nostra lingua Sheriff, viz. Comitatus praepositum
vocamus: qui etiam comitatus, vel provinciae Quaestor recte dici potest. But in
Seldeni Jani fol. 53. and 54. you have two Governors of the Shire assigned;
where he says, Praefectus provinciarum qui antea vicedomini (ad Ingulphum
reversus est Aluredum) in duo officia divisit. 1. in Judices quos nunc
justiciarios vocamus, and in Vicecomites, qui ad huc idem nomen retinent.
Facessat ergo Polidoras urbinas, qui primos a Normanno petit Vicecomites, which
we now call Vicount a Vice-comite, which comes from our Conquerors the
Normans, as Sheriff from our Ancestors the Saxons. Also Sir Henry Spelman in
his Glossarie says, Quinem autem tunc essent magistratus quos Ingulphus hic
vocat Justiciarios and Vicecomites; non plane assequor. Reor, Aldermanni
provinciarum, and Grevii; Saxonice, Ealdormen and gerefas. De Grevii (says he)
tamen munere nec habeo definitum: discrepare enim videtur a Vicecomite, quod
hic tum adhuc comitis esset vicarius ille regis officialis, unde in
Anglo-Saxonum legibus: atque ipsius Aluredi; Cyninger gerethan, id est, Grevius
regis, vel (ut Latin sae^ius reditur) Praepositus regis appellatus est. And
that he is Governor of the County, the words of his Patent import as much,
viz. Commissimus tibi custodiam comitatus. So that he is an Officer of great
antiquity, trust, and authority, having (formerly from the King, as now) from
his Highness the Lord Protector, the custody, tuition, and command of the
whole County, Co. l. 4. 33. Mittons case.

The aforesaid Alfred at the division of the Kingdom into Shires or Counties,
instituted this Court called the County Court, and established Jurisdiction in
it; granting power and authority to the Sheriff to hear and determine such
matters as by just cause of appellation (either for Law or Equity) should be
brought unto him. This Court (as it is recorded by Mr. Seldom in his Treatise
of Tithes) was jointly exercised by the Bishop of the Diocese, and by the
Sheriff or Alderman of the sciregemot, or Hundred, or County Court, where the
one sat to give Gods fight, the other for puruldre right, that is, the one to
judge according to the Laws of the Kingdom, the other to direct according to
Divinity. And Sir Henry Spelman in his Glossary says, Comitatum simul
regebant, pariterque in foro considentes, judicia publica exercebant: hic
secundum jus humanum, ille vero divinum, LL. Canuti MS. ca. 44. Habeatur ter in
anno Burgesmotus (i. Civitatis conventus) and Schiresmotus (i. pagi, vel
comitatus conventus) bis nisi Saepius opus sit: and intersit Episcopus, and
Aldermannus, and doceat ibi Dei rectum and seculi: uterque scil. Pro suo
munere. Idem Ladgari, LL. ca. 5. sed pro Aldermannus, illic comes extat (ut
supra demonstravimus) and utrumque recte. Nam in comitatu simus considisse
reor, Comittem relpub. parts tueretur; Episcopum, qui Ecclesiae; and
Aldermannum, qui Legem diceret and exponeret. But at the Norman Conquest, this
kind of holding Ecclesiastical Pleas in the Hundred of County Court was taken
away, as may appear by this Mandate of William the Conqueror, recorded in
Seld. Jani. lib. 2. fol. 76. Willielmus Dei gratia Rex Anglorum, Comitibus
Vicecomitibus, and omnibus Francigenis, and Anglis qui in Episcopatu Remigii
terras habent salutem. Sciatis vos omnes and caeteri mei fideles, qui in Anglia
manent, quod Episcopales leges, quae non been, nec secundum sanctorum Canonum
praecepta, usque ad mea tempora in regno Anglorum fuerunt, communi consilio
Archiep. meorum, and caeterorum Episcoporum, and Abatum, and omnium principum,
Regni mei emendandas judicavi. Propterea mando, and regia authoritate
praecipio, ut nullus Episcopus vel Archidiaconus de legibus Episcopalibus
amplius in hundredo placita teneat, nec causam, quae ad regimen animarum
pertinet, ad judicium secularium hominum adducant, sed quicunque secundum
Episcopales leges, de quacunque causa, vel culpa interpellatus fuerit, ad
locum, quem ad hoc Episcopus elegerit and nominaverit, veniat, ibique de causa
sua respondeat and non secundum hundredum, sed secundum Canones and Episcopales
leges, rectum Deo and Episcopo suo faciat.

Lambert. arch.
All actions whatsoever were brought in this Court before the Sheriff, as it is
reported by Mr. Lambert in his Archeion in that particle of the Laws of Edgar
to our matter in hand, Viz. Let no man seek to the King in matter of variance,
unless he cannot find right at home: But if it be too heavy for him, then let
him seek to the King to have it lightened. The very like whereof in effect is
to be seen in the Laws of Canutus the Dane, sometimes King of this Realm;
out of which Laws may be collected four things.

First, That every man had means, and was authorized to sue and commence their
Actions in this Court, in their own Shire or County.

Secondly, That no man ought to sue out of the County, or to remove or draw his
plea from thence without good cause; both which things do plainly appear in
the letter of this Law.

Thirdly, That the King himself had a high Court of Justice, wherein it seems
that he sat in person; as these words do demonstrate, Let him not seek to the
King, etc.

And lastly, That the same Court of the Kings did judge not only according to
mere right and Law, but also after equity and good conscience. And after this
order, and in these two Courts, was all Justice administered. This Court
continuing (until the time of William the Conqueror, and ever since during the
times and reigns of the ancient Kings) and does yet continue (in manner) the
same form and substance that it then was (and will do in despite of those
Sycophants, that have had their Primum mobile from it, and now endeavor its
subversion; that Viperous brood of Birds, that have so much defiled their own
Nest, that the whole Country laughs at their folly) and that the pleas ought
no more to be taken from it now in our days (without cause) than they ought
then to have been; which may evidently be proved by those ancient Writs of
Pone, Recordare, Writ of false Judgment, and Accedeas ad curiam, which are yet
in use to this day, and to this only end to remove suits (upon cause) out of
this Court into superior Courts. But because this requires great search of
Records to make any further progression (whereunto I have no access) I must
leave it to such, whose abilities are more strenuous to travel in that so
intricate a path.

This Court no Court of Record.
This Court is no Court of Record, but only a Court Baron (though it had in
ancient times the cognition of great matters, as may appear by Hengham f. 8.
cap. 2. placita vero de furtis, melletis, hutesio plagis, verberibus,
transgressionibus ubi non agitur de pace domini Regis fracta, ad Vicecomites
pertinent audienda and determinanda. See Seldens Notes upon it, f 135, 136,
137, 138, 139, and 140. Likewise Sir Henry Spelmans Glossarie, fol. 18. and
438. LL. Edovar. Confess. cap. 12. Chimini vero minores de Civitate ad
Civitatem ducentes, and de burgis ad burgos, per quos mercata vehuntur, and
caetera negotia fiunt, sub lege Comitatus sunt, etc.
Glanvile, lib. 1. cap. 23. 4. by Bracton and Britton in diverse places, and by
Fleta, lib. 2. cap. 62. but it was abridged by the Statute of Magna Charta,
cap. 17. and much more by 1 E. 4. cap. unico.) therefore pleas holden in this
Court by Plaint, nor pleas holden by Writ of Justicies, are not taken as
matters of Record, for those pleas are holden by reason of the Court which the
Sheriff holds by reason of his Office.

Why instituted.
This Court (as Dalton reports in his Office of Sheriffs) was ordained for the
Sheriff to hold Pleas there for particular or private matters (under forty
shillings) between party and party.

The time when it is to be holden
It is now, as it was always, holden once every month, upon a day certain,
the month being computed according to twenty eight days in the month, and
not according to the Kallander, 9 H 3. c. 35. 2 E. 6. c 25.

Co. Inst. 4. cap. 55.
It holds no plea of debt or damages to the value of forty shillings or above,
because a Fine is due thereby to the Lord Protector, yet if the debt be forty
shillings or above, and the Plaintiff will acknowledge in his Declaration the
receipt of so much as to bring it within forty shillings, in this case the
plaint is good. But if the debt be above forty shillings, as five pounds, the
Plaintiff cannot divide this into five several actions to make this Court hold
plea of it, for in this case the Defendant may wage his Law.

And of Debt, Detinue, Trespass, and other actions personal above forty
shillings, the Sheriff may hold plea by force of a Writ of Justicies to him
directed, for that is in nature of a Commission to him, and is not returnable.
Neither does this Writ alter the nature of the Court, for therein the Sheriff
is not Judge, but the Freeholders or Suitors, yet all Judgments shall be
pronounced by the Sheriff.

Where to be kept. St. anno. 2 E. 6. cap. 25. Stat. 15 H. 7. cap. 24. 33 H. 8.
c. 26.
This Court may be kept at any place within the County at the pleasure of the
Sheriff, but not out of it. Yet the Sheriff of Northumberland (by the Statute)
is to keep his County Court in the Town or Castle of Alnewicke, and in no
other place. The Sheriff of Sussex (by the Statute) is to hold his County Court
one time at Chester, and the other time at the Borough of Jews, and so to be
kept alternis vicibus for ever: And also the Sheriff of the County of Chester
is to keep his County Court in the Shire Hall of the said County, Daltons
Office of Sheriffs, fol. 157. and 158.

To this Court all persons dwelling within the County, owe suit by reason of
their resiance.

No Fine.
No Fine can be imposed in this Court upon any offender, because it is no Court
of Record, Co. 8. 41. and 60. and 11. 43. Fitz. 73. d.

Amercement. What actions will not lie in this Court.
But a man may be amerced for a contempt, or a disturbance of the Court, in the
presence of the Court.

This Court will entertain no suits for Charters of Land, or for Inheritance,
or for Freehold of Land, or any titles of Land, or to make several plaints
upon one entire debt by Bond, or Trespass Vi and armis, or actions touching
life, nor actions to compel one to render an account.

The Office of the County Clarke.
THe Sheriff being elected, which is done yearly in the morrow after All
souls, in the Exchequer Chamber, by the Statutes, 9. E. 2. and 14 E. 3. cap.
7. And his Letters Patents do commonly bear date the sixth day of November, 1
2 E. 4. e. 1. unless it be in cases of necessity, that the Court is sorced to
adjourne it, Crook fol. 595. (before the next County day after his election,
and discharge of the old Sheriff) he ought to be very diligent in deputing and
constituting a County Clarke, such a one as is sufficient and able to keep the
Court, that no corrupt dealing be in it, as he will answer the contrary: and
that he be very skillful in entering the proceedings in it.

He ought to be endued with these qualities, according to the description of
Fleta, Provideat sibi Vice com' de Clerico circumspecto, and fideli, viro
provido, and discreto, and gratioso, humili, pudico, pacifico, and modesto, qui
in legibus consuetudinibusque provinciae; and officio Commit' Cleric' se
cognoscat, and jura in omnibus teneri affectei, quique sub-balivos in suis
erroribus and ambiguis sciat instruere and docere, etc. Which is thus
Paraphrased, That a County Clarke ought to be endued and qualified with
circumspection, fidelity, providence, humility, peace, and modesty; and must
know himself (or be expert) in the Laws and customs of the Country, and to
have ability to instruct or direct the Bailiffs or other Ministers in dubious
things wherein they may err. He must neither be attracted by price nor
lucratory corruption, nor any sinister affection to wander out of the way of
right. Qui nec (as Bracton advises) ad dextram nec ad sinistram, vel propter
prosperitatem terrenam, vel adversitatis metum a tramite justiciae declinet.

The Sheriff (and not the Protector) has power to delegate this Office to whom
he pleases, as it appears in Myttons case in the fourth Reports; where Queen
Elizabeth by Letters Patents did grant the Office of Clarkship of the County
Court of Somerset to Mytton, with all Fees, etc. for life. Arthur Hopton
Esquire, Sheriff of the same Shire interrupted him, because it was incident to
his Office. Mitton complained to the Lords of the Council, and was referred to
the two chief Justices, Wray and Anderson; and after many arguments concerning
the validity of that Grant, and conference had with all the other Justices, It
was resolved by all the Justices, Nullo contradicente aut reluctante, that the
said Letters Patents were void; and their reasons were, That the Office of
Sheriff was an ancient Office before the Conquest; and of great trust and
authority, for the King commits unto him Custodium Comitatus: And although
the King may determine the Office ad beneplacitum, yet he cannot determine this
in part, as for one Town or Hundred, nor abridge him in any incidents to his
Office; for the Office is entire, and ought to continue so without any
fraction, or diminution, (unless by Parliament) and the County Court, and the
entering of all Proceedings therein, are incident to the Sheriffs Office, etc.
And though it was granted when the Office of Sheriff was void, yet the new
Sheriff shall avoid it; as Scroges case, in the time of Vacation in the Office
of Chief Justice of the Common Bench, Queen Mary granted the Office of the
Exigenter of London, resolved, that the next chief Justice shall avoid it, for
it was incident to his Office Also in all Writs directed to the Sheriff
concerning the County Court, the King says, in comitatu tuo, and in return of
Exigents made by him, he says, ad comitatum meum tent. etc. and the style of
the Court proves it, and by the Statute of 33 H. 8. the Sheriff of Denbigh
shall keep his Shire Court at, etc. In a false Judgment it is said, in pleno
com. tuo recordari facias, etc. and in a Precept of Tolt, it is said summoneas,
etc. quod sit ad comitatum meum, and it should be very inconvenient that
another should have the custody of the Enteries, and Rolls of Court, which may
be imbezzelled, and the Sheriff responsible for them. And it was resolved that
the custody of all the Goales within every County appertains to the Sheriff by
right, and are annexed and incident by Law to the Sheriffs Office, vide an. 14
E. 3. cap. 10.

But note, that his late Highness, in the year 1653. granted the Office of
Clark-ship for the County of York to one Master R. H. though dissonant to
common Law, yet consentaneous to a gladiatorie power, like those in Livie, in
armis jus far, and omnia fortium virorum esse, that all Laws are engraven on
the hilt of a victorious Sword, to whose Mandamus both Statute and common Law
must submit.

He cannot execute the Office of a County Clark, and practice as an Attorney,
both at one time, it being prohibited by the Statute of 1 H. 5. 4. being a
cause of increasing Suits, and a hinderance in dispatch of Clyents causes.

He cannot act any thing without the assent of the Suitors; if he do an Action
of Trespass lies against the Sheriff.

He must be careful in deputing honest, able and sufficient men, as Bailiffs,
for the executing of the Precepts issuing out of the Court.

He ought to enter no Plaints (except in case of Replevins) out of Court, but
in full County (sedente curia) yet the case is otherwise at this day, and (as
it seems) good enough verifying the Diverbe, communis error facit jus.

He must make sufficient Precepts after the Plaints entered (but not before)
against the Defendants directed to his Bailiffs, to attach or warn the
Defendants to appear at the next County Court, and answer the Plaintiff.

The County Clark and Plaintiff upon complaint of the party grieved, may be
examined by one Justice of Peace concerning the taking or entering of Plaints in
the County Court, and book, against the Statute: If thereby the Justice find
any fault or offense committed, that shall stand for a sufficient conviction
and attainder without any further inquiry or examination. And the said Justice
must certify the examination, within a quarter of a year into the Exchequer by
the Statute of 11 H. 7. cap. 15.

If a Writ of discharge of the ancient Sheriff be delivered to the County
Clark, sitting in the County Court, the authority of the said Sheriff (although
absent) shall presently cease.

At the adjourning of every Court, he must appoint a day certain for the next
Court, to the intent the Country may know at what time they may resort thither
to hear the Lord Protectors Writs of Exigent and Proclamations read.

The Office of a Coroner in this Court.
A Coroner is one of the principal Officers of this Court, being chosen in it
(by a Writ de Coronatore elegendo, directed to the Sheriff) by the Freeholders
or Suitors in open and full Court, and is published there, and after the
Sheriff is to return and certify into the Chancery the election of every such
Coroner and their names; likewise the County Clark in Court must administer to
the Coroner his oath for the due execution of his Office.

The Coroner being thus elected and sworn, he is to sit there with the Sheriff
every County Court, to give Judgment upon Outlawries, which Judgment shall be
given and pronounced by him in the fifth County, and there the Sheriff is to
return the Outlawry with the Exigent: But by this Judgment no goods are
forfeited before the Outlawry appear upon Record: neither shall such an
Outlawry disable the party.

Exigents and Proclamations to be proclaimed five County days.
Exigents and Proclamations are to be proclaimed five County days one after
another, and once in the open Sessions, and once at the Parish Church door,
where he does or did lately dwell, that he appear, or else that he shall be
outlawed. And if Proclamation be made five County days, and at the fifth
County day the Defendant appear not, then the Coroner shall give Judgment that
he shall be out of the Protection of the Lord Protector, and out of the aid of
the Law. F. N. B. 163. But before I conclude let me give you in brief, why a
man is said to be outlawed, and a woman waived; viz. A man is said to F. N. B.
163. idem. 395.
be outlawed because he was sworn to the Law: and now for his contumacy he is
put from the Law, and said outlawed, as it were extra legem positus, but a
woman is not so, but she is waived, and not outlawed, because she was never
sworn to the Law.

Of Attorneys in this Court.
IT was once objected to me, that no Attorney could legally practice in this
Court, and that every man ought to prosecute his own cause himself: Epitomie of
the Statute of Westminster 2. cap. 10. That every man which owes Suit to the
County Court may make a general Attorney to prosecute and follow his Suits in
all Pleas: And likewise in the Statute of Merton. cap. 10. Quod quilibet liber
homo, qui sectam debet ad Com. etc. libere possit facere Atturn. suum ad sectas
illas pro eo faciendas, and an Attorney may do every thing in the name, and as
the act of him, who gave him the authority, as if he did it himself: he is
aliorum negotiorum gestor; for, qui per alium facit, per seipsum facere
videtar: likewise, these Statutes following do institute Attorneys in the
County Court, viz. 6 E. 1. cap. 8. 20 H. 3. cap. 10. etc. F. N. B. 156. I could
instance many more, but I hope these are sufficient to stop the black mouth of
a scurrilous Antagonist.

In their practice, they ought to be honest and just, according to their office
and oath, not exciting men to Suits, especially such as are foreign, and
illegal, nor for little offenses, and small debts, nor voluntarily (argenti
gratia) delay their Clyents, nor demand any sums of money for the prosecution of
the Action otherwise then is allowed by the Court.

Of Bailiffs.
A Bailiff is a Servant or Minister of the Law, and by consequence a Servant to
the party, at whose Suit he is to distraine the goods of any one. Therefore he
ought to be true, faithful and vigilant in levying of Distresses, he ought not
to be exoculated with common rural bribes; (as too many of them are) His
office is thus described by Fleta. Balivus esse debet in verbo verax, and in
opere diligens and fidelis, ac pro diserto appruatore cognitus, plegiatus and
clericus, qui de communioribus legibus pro tanto officio sufficienter se
cognoscat, Et qui sit ita justus; quod ob vindictam seu cupiditatem non querat
versus aliquos etc. He is to be contented with his wages and fees allowed him,
which are certain and known (and as I have described particularly) being
usually paid, and if he take more then he ought, or commit any error in the
Execution of his Office contrary to the tenure of his Precept, then is he to
forfeit forty shillings, and to be convicted thereof, by the examinations of
the Justices of Peace or any of them, 14 E. 3. cap. 9. And the Sheriff ought
not (by his oath) to have any Bailiff, but such as he will answer for, and such
as be true and sufficient men in the County, and make each Bailiff take an oath
for the true execution of his office; but such things are now not taken notice
of. And by the Statute of 27 Eliz. cap. no Bailiff, or other person ought to
take a Distress, nor to execute any Process until he be sworn, but now
common experience, and practice at this day, bears testimony to the contrary.
Alfred, once King of England hanged Judge Arnold, for saving a Bailiff from
death, who had robbed the people by Distress, and for extorting of Fees. If
the like Law were executed upon some of our grand Malefactors, it would make
the Remainder more honest.

What Actions may be brought in this Court.
Bract. l, 3. f. 98. Fleta l. 1. cap. 15.
HAving precipitated my self thus far, before I enter upon the Proceedings of
the Court; I will demonstrate the grounds and cause of Proceedings, and that
is, Actions, which is the form of a Suit, given by Law to recover a man's right:
or, actio nihil aliud est quam jus prosequendi in judicio quod sibi debetur
Therefore what Actions will hold in this Court, take as follows.

All Actions of debt, either upon an account made by the parties for wages
after a hire; sums of money owing or due from one man to another, whether by
writings or otherwise, it is grounded sometimes by writing, as an Obligation,
Bill, Covenant, or other especialty: sometimes without writing, as an
Arbitrament, Rent, money lent, Parol, Contracts, or the like.

All Actions of Detinue, Trover and Conversion, deceit upon a Warranty, a
Delivery, Nuisance, Case for scandalous words, case upon Assumpsits, and other
Actions of the case, as for a Dog killing Cattle, abusing a Distress,
spoiling my Goods, etc. Actions of Trespass, Assault and Battery, etc.

All these Actions would afford very much matter to treat of at large (but
least this Treatise should swell beyond its limits) I will refer you to the
reading Fitzherberts Natura brevium, which does learnedly treat of the nature
of all Actions, that lie in any Court of Judicature.

Within what time Actions must be brought.
31 Eliz. cap. 5.
ALL Actions of debt grounded upon any lending or contract, as Book-debt,
without especialty, and for Rents in arrear: all Actions of Trespass, quare
clausum fregit, Actions of Trespass, Trover, Detinue, and Replevin for taking
away Goods and Chattels, Actions of account, all Actions of the case (except
Actions for Slander) which shall be sued, must be commenced and brought within
six years after the cause of such Action or Suit accrued; if the Plaintiff be
then of full age, discovert, compos mentis, at Liberty, out of Prison and in
England; otherwise within such time after he becomes so, and not after.

All Actions of Trespass for Assault, Menace, Battery, wounding and
imprisonment, within four years after the cause of Action, and not after.

All Actions of the case for scandalous words, within two years next after the
words spoken, and not after.

Who may bring Actions, and who not.
IDiots, mad men, or such as have lucida intervalla, such as are deaf and
dumb, or any other man, woman or child (except persons disabled by Law) being
wronged, may bring the proper Action appointed for remedy in that case; and
all, or any of these wronging others may be sued. And if an Idiot sue or be
sued, he must do it in person.

An Infant must sue by Prochein amy, and being sued, must defend by Guardian.

A Feme covert cannot sue but with her Husband.

An outlawed person is disabled to sue any Action against any man in any Court
of Law or Equity (yet as Executor he may sue, because it is not in his own
right, but in trust for another) but any man may sue him, by Coo. Sup. Litt.
128. A man that is attainted in a Praemunire, may not sue in any Action, Idem.
129. And a man that is a convict recusant is disabled, so long as he so
continues.

No Barretor can maintain any Action in this Court, nor have Judgment, unless
it be required by all the Suitors. West. 1. cap. 3.

But note, all these disabilities remain during the continuation of the same
impediment.

Of Pledges in this Court.
PLedges are absolute, except it be for Forrainers, or such as live out of the
County, or out of the Jurisdiction of the Court, or such as are unmarried, that
have no goods distrainable, and it is if these be Plaintiffs: but if the
Defendant should nonsuit the Plaintiff, and have Judgment against the
Plaintiff and his Pledges. I never yet saw the form of the Judicial Precept,
that ever issued out to levy the costs upon the Pledges goods.

Of the Proceedings in the Court.
BEcause I would not have the Country, and young Practisers ignorant of the
Proceedings in the Court, which is the life of practice; I thought it necessary
to make an Abridgment of the terms of Law now used in the Proceedings. And
first of Appearance, because it is the first thing done after goods attached.

Appearance.
The first thing the Defendant in any Action or Suit is to do, is to appear, and
show himself in person, or by an Attorney in the Court, to answer the Action,
and defend the Suit.

Essoyn.
He may also appear by an Essoin which is an excusation coming from the French
word Exoine, it does delay the cause a Court day longer; (the common Essoin is
de male vener) and if he do not appear the next Court, then it passes by
default, Judgment entered, and Execution issues out against his Goods and
Chattels. But after the Defendant has once appeared in the Court by an
Attorney, there shall be no Essoin allowed.

Duc. tec.
But if he appear neither by an Attorney, nor by Essoin, then further Process
issues out against his Goods and Chattels, viz. The Precept of Duces tecum, and
attachment, and Distress upon attachment infinite, until he do appear.

Declaration.
After the Process executed, the next Court the Plaintiff is to appear and file
his Declaration, to show his cause of Action, or matter of complaint, in which
must be shown who complains, and against whom, for what matter, how, and in
what manner the Action grew between the parties, and at what time and place the
wrong was done; and in conclusion he must aver and profer to prove his Suit,
and show the damage he has sustained by the wrong done unto him. Special care
ought to be had that it be drawn in manner and form, yet by the Statute of 36
E. 3. Modo and forma.
cap. 15. A Declaration shall be good, if it have matter of substance, though
the terms he not apt; however to avoid doubts, and that the Attorneys may not
depend altogether upon uncertainties, let them be diligent in taking right and
full instructions from their Clyents, and inform themselves of every puntilio
which may be materially incident to the case, that so they may know what manner
of Action is most proper to be brought on the behalf of their Clyents.

Nota.
In some cases manner and form is chiefly to be looked at, but in other some not
altogether so material. As if an Action of debt be brought of the sale of a
Horse for five pounds (where the bargain was for two horses) the Defendant
pleads that he owes him nothing in manner and form: the Jury ought to find for
the Defendant, for that that the bargain was for two horses for five pounds,
fo manner and form there is material, and parcel of the Modo and forma.
charge; and so it is in every case, where the Action varies from the bargain
or special matter.

27 H. 8. fo. 29.
But if an Action of the case be brought by the Husband alone, upon an Assumpsit
to him by R. the Desendant says he did not assume in manner and form, and the
Plaintiff gives in evidence of an Assumpsit made to his wife, and his agreement
to it afterward, this is good, and manner and form is not material.

If an Action be brought before there is any cause of Action, the Declaration
is insufficient. But if a Trespass was done the fourth day of May, and the
Plaintiff declares the same to be done the fifth or the first day of May, when
no trespass was committed, yet if upon evidence it salleth out that the
Trespass was done before the action brought, it suffices. 19 H. 6. 47. 5 E. 4
5. 21 E. 4. 66. And Littleton says, That the Jury may find the Defendant
guilty at another day then the Plaintiff supposes, for the Law of England
respects more the effect and substance of the matter, then every nicity of
form and circumstance: Apices juris non sunt jura.

Note, that in actions of debt upon Emisset for Wares, for Money or other
things lent, upon an In simul computassent, actions of Trespass, Battery, or
upon the case, etc. you are not tied to lay the certain day; but you may lay
it any time after the cause of action accrued.

If an action upon the case be brought upon an Assumpsit, the Plaintiff must
declare upon the whole promise made, and not upon part of it, else the
Declaration is not good, Mich. 22. Car. b. r.

If there be words in a Declaration, which have no signification, the words
shall be adjudged to be void words, and shall not hurt the Declaration: but the
Declaration shall be taken as if those words were left out of the Declaration.
Hill. 23. Car. B. R. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.

A Declaration ought not to show a thing by implication it must be set forth
expressly.

If the Plaintiff do alter his Declaration after the Defendant has pleaded to
it; the Defendant may alter his Plea. For by the amendment of it, it may be so
altered in matter, that it may require a different answer from what was
sormerly pleaded, and in that case if he should not amend his Plea, he might be
triced sor want of a good Plea. Prac. reg. fo. 235.

Count.
A Declaration is sometimes called a Count, as Count in debt. Kitch. 281. Count
in Trespass, Brit. cap. 26. Count in an Action of Trespass upon the case for
a slander, Kitch. 251. But a Count is more properly used in Real than
Personal Actions. And a Declaration more applied to Personal than Real. F N.
B. 18. a. 60. D. N. 71. a. 191. c. 217. a. Nonsuit.


If after Process executed, the Plaintiff do not appear and file his
Declaration, and the Defendant does appear, upon such default the Plaintiff is
nonsuited, and the Defendant may have Judgment and Execution for his costs.

Empartance.
In every case where the Plaintiff may have costs against the Defendant, there,
if the Plaintiff be nonsuit, or a Verdict pass against him, the Desendant
shall have his costs, as in Trespass, Debt, Covenant by Specialty, or upon
Contract, Detinue, Accounts, Actions upon the case, or upon the Statute for
personal wrongs, 23 H. 8. cap. 15. Administrators nor Executors shall not pay
any costs neither upon Nonsuit or Verdict, because their Actions are brought
upon Debts or Contracts not made between them and the Defendants. But if they
bring Actions for things done to themselves, as for the taking away of goods
from them, etc. and they be Non suit or Verdict pass against them, in this
case they shall pay costs.

After the Plaintiff has appeared, and Declaration filed, upon the appearance
of the Defendant, Emparlance is to be entered: Emparlance is, when the
Defendant being to answer the Suit or Action of the Plaintiff, desires some
time of respite to advise himself the better what he shall answer, being
nothing else but a Continuance of a cause till a further day.

Continuance.
Now to demonstrate what the word Continuance signifies; it is, after a Suit is
begun and the Plaintiff has declared, he must continue his Suit from Court day
to Court day, or else the adverse party may take advantage of it, and this is
called a Continuance, being but only a proroguing of a Suit from time to time,
to keep it in being; And this is by the Act or order of the Court, and some
times by the agreement of the Attorneys of both parties.

Rule.
The Rule, or dies datus, is when further day is given to the Plaintiff, to put
in his Declaration, or to the Defendant to put in his answer: the time given is
usually fourteen days, or more or less, according to the order of the Court,
and the agreement of their Attorneys.

Answer.
The next Court after the filing of the Declaration, and Emparlance given, the
Defendant is to put in his answer, which he pleads and says in bar to avoid
the Action of the Plaintiff, either by consession and avoidage, or denying the
material parts thereof. It must be legal, full, and perfect, for a bad or
insufficient plea is in Law as no Plea.

Replication.
If Issue be not joined upon the answer, then the Plaintiff is to file his
Replication to the answer of the Defendant, which must affirm and pursue his
Declaration.

Rejoinder.
Then the Defendant must put in his Rejoinder to the Plaintiffs Replication,
which must pursue and confirm his answer; for every Rejoinder ought to have
these two properties specially; that is, it ought to be a sufficient answer to
the Replication, and also to follow and enforce the matter of the Bar.
Sur-rejoynder.


If the parties be not at issue by reason of some new matter disclosed in the
Defendants Rejoinder that requires answer; then may the Plaintiff Sur-rejoyn
to the said Rejoinder, if there be cause, but it salleth out very seldom. This
Sur-rejoynder is a second defense of the Plaintiffs Declaration, opposite to
the Defendants Rejoinder.

(...)rrer. C^. Inst. 1. fo. 7. b.
Demurrer comes of the Latin word Demorari, to abide, and therefore he who
demurreth in Law, is said, he that abides in Law, moratur, or demoratur in
Lege, when so ever the Counsel of the party is of opinion that the Declaration
or Plea of the adverse party is insufficient in Law, then he demurreth or
abides in Law, and refers the same to the Judgment of the Court. Now there
is no Demurrer in Law but when it is joined, and therefore when a Demurrer is
offered by the one party, as is aforesaid, the adverse party joyneth with him,
and thereupon the Demurrer is said to be joined, and then the case is by
Council of both sides argued. Nota.


Not informed.
When the Declaration, Answer, Replication, etc. are defective in respect of
some circumstance of time or place, etc. it may be remedied by consent of the
Court, or parties, or by a motion to the Steward.

Nil dicit.
Non sum informatus, is a formal answer of course made by an Attorney, whereby
he is deemed to leave his Clyent undefended, and Judgment passes for the
adverse party.

General issues.
It is a failing to put in answer to the Declaration of the Plaintiff (in any
Action) by the day assigned, which if a man do, Judgment shall pass against
him, because he says nothing to the contrary.

To an Action of Debt upon Specialty. Not his Deed, To an Action of Debt for
money lent, etc. He owes nothing by the Country. To a Bond for performance of
Covenants upon an Indenture or Arbitrament. Not his Deed, or not guilty. To an
Action of case upon an Assumpsit. He did not assume. To an Action of Trespass.
Not guilty. To an Action of Assault, and Battery and Slander. Not guilty. To a
Contract without Deed, the Plea is Payment, or an Obligation made for the debt,
etc.
Pleas specially to be pleaded. Obligation.
To an Obligation the Plea is Payment, etc. but to plead payment to an
Obligation without Acquittance is no Plea: For an Obligation, or other matter
in writing may not be discharged by any agreement by word, but by writing?
unumquodque dissolvitur, eo modo quo colligatur. But to plea d payment to an
Obligation with Condition, though no Acquittance by writing, it is good, for
the Condition is in nature of a Defeasance to the Obligation.

To an Action of debt; He owes nothing by the Country, or by the Law, or Paid.

Debt.
If the Action be brought against an Executor or Administrator, the ordinary
Plea is, that he never was Executor, or has fully Administered, etc. Against
Executors or Administrators. Nonage. Woman covert.


If the Suit be upon a Deed, or Contract without Deed; That he was within age
when he made the Deed or Contract.

If it be against a woman, That she was Covert: that is to say, had a Husband
when she made the Deed or Contract.

Arbitrament.
If upon an Arbitrament; That there was no Arbitrament legally made, or That he
has performed the Award.

Trespass Damage feasant
If upon an Action of Trespass Damage feasant; That the Beasts came in by the
default of the enclosure of the Plaintiff, or That he has little of Common
there, etc,

If upon an Action brought for Rent, That there is no rent in arrear, etc.

Rent.
To an Action of Detinue, That he does not detain the thing sued for: A release
or gift to him by the Plaintiff, or That he did tender the thing sued for
Detinue.
before Action brought, That the De-fendant did deliver it to him as Pledge for
ten shillings which he has not paid, etc.

Slander.
To an Action of the case for Slander: Not guilty, or Justify the words.

Warranty.
Cafe upon a Warranty: That he did not warrant.

Upon a Bond or Bill, plead; Conditions performed, Debt.
by Threats, Duresse, Imprisonment, etc.

Demise. Trespass.
Upon a Demise: Not demised.

To Trespass: Not guilty, an Arbitrament, Tender of amends before the Action
brought, etc.

Nota.
If diverse men do a Trespass, and one makes a good accord, this will discharge
and be a Bar to all the rest. Co. 9. 79.

If Freehold be pleaded, the Court in that case can proceed no further. Liberum
tenementum, or Freehold.


There are diverse Pleas to Actions of Trespass, some of one nature, and some of
another, as justification, etc. If the Defendant have matter of Justification
or excuse to plead, he must be sure to plead it specially, for if he plead the
general Issue, viz. Not guilty, it will be found against him; But now by the
late Act, made the 23 of October 1650. The Defendant may plead the general
Issue of Not guilty, or such like general Plea, and give the special matter
in Evidence.

Where the Defendant is not constrained to plead a special Plea, he may plead
the general Issue proper for the Action brought, and give the special matter
in Evidence. For every Plea must be so framed, that it may give a full answer
to the matter set forth in the Declaration, to wit, all such as are materially
to be answered unto.

If one be sued upon an Obligation, he cannot be compelled to plead before he
have Oyer of the Condition of the Obligation.

If an Action of Debt be brought for Rent, upon an Indenture of Demise for
years, the Defendant may plead payment without showing the Deeds, for the Lease
shall be intended to be in being at the time of the Action brought. Trin. 24.
Car. B. R.

If an Obligation of an hundred pounds be made, with Condition for payment of
fifty pounds at a day, and at the day the Obligor tenders the money, and the
Obligee refuses the same, yet upon an Action of debt upon the Obligation, if
the Defendant plead the tender and resusall, he must also plead that he is yet
ready to pay the money, and tender the same in Court; but if the Plaintiff will
not then recieve it, but take issue upon the tender, and the same be found
against him, he has lost the money for ever.

Nota. Et hoc paratus est verificare. Et de hoc ponit se super patriam. Et hoc
petit, quod inquiratur per patriam.
Every Plea must be offered to be proved true, by saying in the Plea; And this
he is ready to verify, and this is termed an Averment.

If tender of Issue come on the Defendants part, the form is, And of this he
puts himself upon the Country.

If on the part of the Plaintiff, it is, And this he prays may be inquired of
by the Country.

If Issue be taken upon these Pleas, and Jury thereupon warned to appear to try
them, the Jury appearing, the parties may have their challenges.

Challenge of Jurors.
CHallenge is said to be, where there is evident favor, 21 E. 4. f. 11. and
63. 20. Ass. 11. 2 H. 4. fo. 16. 4 E. 4. fo. 1. 2 H. 4. fo. 14. 13 H. 4. fo.
14. 22. B. 2. Car. 177. 8 E. 3. fo. 69. 3 H. 6. fo 24. 9 E. 4. fo. 49. Brit fo.
134. 11 H. 4. fo. 40. 33 H. 6. fo. 55. 18 H. 8. fo 2. 8 H. 6. fo. 60 Pasch 31.
Eliz. 21 E 4. 74. 11 H. 4. c. 9. 23 Ass. 11. Mirror. cap 3.
as Kindred, etc. the Juror of Alliance, Servant, Bears malice, or has some
Action against the Challenger. Juror a Gossip of the Plaintiff; Juror master to
the Plaintiff: the Juror eat at the Plaintiffs cost, or take money for his
charges. If the Juror was chosen Arbitrator for one party, but otherwise where
he was chosen indifferent for them. The Sheriff or Bailiff which make the
Pannell, is of the Plaintiffs kindred. Those who have been attaint of false
oath, or were seen on the Pillory, or against whom there was Judgment of life
or member. Those who pretend to have some right in the thing demanded. The
Juror outlawed, if the Record be shown. Juror attaint of Conspiracy. The
Sheriff being Plaintiff. It was allowed for a principal challenge, that the
Defendant was indebted to the Juror. If any one or more of the Jury be returned
at the denomination of the party Plaintiff or Defendant, the whole array shall
be quashed* If there be a Challenge for Cozinage, he that takes the Challenge
must show how the Juror is Cousin. If one within the age of one and twenty years
be returned, it is a good cause of Challenge.

Having now brought the Jury to the Bar, (and that they prove all honest men)
being sworn let them stand to the Bar and hear their Evidence.

Nota.
If a full Jury do not appear, as many as make default, may be amerced.

What witnesses are not sufficient to give in Evidence, and what are.
THe word Evidence is of a different signification, as signifying authentical
writings of Contract; but here it is taken for proof of a matter in question
and at issue, by testimony of witnesses before a Jury, and according to the
Evidence the Jury are to give their Verdict according to their oaths.

Co. Lit. fo. 6. Plow. 8. 12.
And to demonstrate who are insufficient and may be excepted against, are such,
as are infamous, as are persons attainted of Felony, or of a false Verdict, or
of Conspiracy, or of Perjury, or in a Praemunire, or of Forgery upon the
Statute of 5 El. c. 14. and not upon the Statute of 1 H. 5. 3. and such as have
had Judgment to lose their ears, or stand on the Pillory, or have been
stigmatized or branded; and infidells, men not of sound memory, or not of
discretion, or such as are interessed in the cause, and may have benefit by the
thing in question, these are not competent witnesses; and a wife cannot be
witness for or against her Husband. But all other persons, though they be
never so near in consanguinity, Tenants, Servants, Masters, Counselors or
Attorneys are allowed for competent witnesses, Co. Lit. fo. 6. Plow. 8. 12. And
these being required must come in to give Evidence, or they forfeit to the
party damnified so much as the Court shall award, and must give him costs and
damages, Statute of 5 Eliz. cap. 9. The Poet in two verses does declare what
things are required in a witness.

Conditio, sexus, aetas, discretio, fama,
Et fortuna, fides, in testibus, ista requires.
The manner of keeping the Court.
THe Sheriff at the first Court, which shall be after his Election and
discharge of the old Sheriff, must read his Patent and Writ of assistance, and
nominate his under Sheriff and County Clark, and 1 and 2 Phi. and Ma. cap. 12.
four Deputies (at the least) of the Replevins for the ease of the County.

Then enter the style of the Court after this manner.

Y. ss. The style of the Court. Proclamation.
The first County Court of I. B. Esquire Sheriff of the County aforesaid held at the
Castle of Y. on Monday the seventh day of July 1656.

Then command the Bailiff to make Proclamation three times. O yes, etc, and say,

All manner of persons that have any thing to do at the County Court holden
here this day, before I. B. Esquire Sheriff of the County of Y. come forth and give
your attendance.

Proclamation.
Command the Bailiff to make Proclamation again, O yes, etc. and say,

All manner of persons keep silence, and hear the Lord Protectors Writs of
Exigent and Proclamation read.

A Coroner is to be there then present to pronounce Judgment of Outlawry
against those that do not appear upon the Exigent and Proclamation at the fifth
County.

Proclamation.
Command the Bailiff the third time to make Proclamation, O yes, etc and say,

Essoynes and profers (before the Court three times) for this day. And then
say; If any man will be Essoyned, or enter any Plaints, let him come forth and
he shall be heard.

Plaint.
Then enter your Plaint in this manner.

A. B. against C. D. of a Plea of debt.

Then call the Plaintiff thus,

A. B. appear or thou losest thy Plaint, three times.

If he appear by an Attorney, then enter his Warrant of Attorney, viz. the two
first letters of his name, over the name of the Plaintiff, and then file his
Declaration. Declaration.


Then call the Defendant.

C. D. appear and answer A B. in an Action of debt, (or as the case is) or thou
forfeits thy goods distrained, and further Process will be awarded against
thee.

If he appear, then enter his appearance, and an Imparlance, to put in his
answer (to the Plaintiffs Declaration) the next Court.

Answer.
When the Defendant has put in his answer, If the Plaintiff join Issue, they
may proceed to trial the next Court day; except they proceed further by
Replication, Rejoinder, etc.

Venire facias.
If they be at Issue, send out a Venire facias to summon the Jury.

Then enter on the head of the Pannell, thus;

Jury betwixt A. B. Plaintiff, and C. D. Defendant, in a Plea of debt.

When they are brought to the Bar, command the Bailiff to make Proclamation,
etc. and say;

You good men that be impannelled to try the Issue between A. B. Plaintiff, and
C. D. Defendant, answer to your names, every man upon the first call, upon pain
and peril that shall fall thereon.

If twelve appear, then swear them one by one, in this manner.

The oath of the Jury.
You shall well and truly try this Issue, between party and party, according to
your Evidence, so help you God.

And as they are sworn, enter by every man's name Jur. viz. juratus est. he is
sworn.

Being all sworn bid them stand together to hear their Evidence.

Then swear the Witnesses.

The oath of the Witnesses.
The Evidence that you are to give to this Inquest, touching the matter in
variance, shall be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, so
help you God.

Then let the Jury depart from the Bar, to agree upon their Verdict.

At their return, command the Bailiff to call every one by their names, and
count them.

Then ask them if they be all agreed on their Verdict:

Jur. yea.

Who shall say for you?

Jur. The foreman.

Then call the Plaintiff A. B. appear or thou loses thy Plaint, three times.
Then ask the Jury if they will stand to their Verdict:

Jur. yea.

Whether do you find for the Plaintiff or for the Defendant?

Jur. for the Plaintiff.

What damages?

Jur. 2 d.

What costs of Suit?

Jur. 2 d.

Harken to your Verdict, this you say, you find for the Plaintiff, and assesse
damages 2 d. and costs of Suit 2 d. so say you all?

Jur. yea.

Then bid the Plaintiff pay the Jury.

Nota,
If the Verdict find matter incertainly, or ambiguously, it is insufficient, and
no Judgment ought to be given thereupon: as if an Executor plead plene
administravit, viz. fully Administered of all the goods and Chattels which were
of the Testator, and issue is joined thereupon, and the Jury find that the
Defendant has goods within his hands to be administered, but find not of what
value, this is uncertain, and therefore insufficient.

A Verdict that finds part of the issue, and finds nothing 17 E. 3. 47. 18
E. 3 48. 22 E. 3. 2. 18 E. 3. 56. 15 E. 3. Judge. 58, etc. Hill. 25. Eliz. Mic.
28 and 39 Eliz. inter Gommersall and Gomersall, etc. Adjournment.
for the residue, this is insufficient for the whole, because they have not
tried the whole Issue wherewith they were charged; But if the Jury give a
Verdict of the whole Issue, and of more, etc. That which is more is Surplusage,
and shall not stay Judgment: for utile per inutile non vitiatur, but necessary
incidents required by the Law the Jury may find.

The Court being ended, adjourn the Court to another day to be kept, commanding
the Bailiff to make Proclamation. O yes, etc. and say.

All manner of persons that have any more to do at this Court, let them come
forth and they shall be heard, otherwise they, and every one else, may depart
for this time, and keep their hour here on Monday the fourth day of August
next by nine a clock in the morning, etc.

Now the Court being done, and the Defendant condemned by Verdict, then
(Judgment being entered) a Fieri facias shall be awarded to make Levy of his
goods; and thereupon the Defendants goods shall be taken, praised and sold, to
satisfy the party Plaintiff, and if the Defendant has no goods, whereupon
Levy may be made, then the Plaintiff rests without remedy in this Court.

Of Distress.
COnsidering the many lacrymable wrongs the Country has sustained by those
Locusts, that litigious generation of men, a clamorous company, qui ex injuria
vivunt, Seminaries of discord, worse then any polars by the high way side,
monstra hominum, rabulas forenses, irreligious harpies, scraping, griping
catchpoles, Bailiffs, and corrupt practisers, and how much the ignorant people
are abused and deceived, yea, many times (as the sad experience of many will
inform us) ruined and utterly undone by them, they being the sole causes of
those ignominious aspersions cast upon the Court. The advantage that it would
produce to the Commonwealth is in-explainable, if the Statute of 1. of H. 5.
cap. 4. were observed, that is, that Sheriffs Bailiffs, one year, not to be in
that Office in three years after, because by their continual being in that
Office, they grow so crafty and cunning, that they are able to deceive the
Sheriff and ruin the whole Country; Therefore, that the Country may not be
altogether ignorant of their seeming authorized Actions: I will declare, what,
and when they may distrain, and what, and when they may not.

But first to declare what a Distress is.

Broo. 146. Finches. Ley 135. Coo. Sup. Litt. 97.
A Distress is either said to be real (that is) when Land is distrained upon a
grand cape, or petit cape, of which we have nothing to say here: or it is said
to be personal, where moveable things are distrained: and this is that we are
to speak unto. Therefore a Distress is where one does take and distrain the
Beasts, Cattle and other things of another man in some ground or place for
debt, rent, or other duty behind, or for some wrong or damage done.

The Sheriff nor his officers cannot break a man's house in the night time to
execute any Process, or to do any ministerial act: for the Law gives no
color to break a man's house by night.

None can be distrained that are out of the Jurisdiction of the Court. Marl.
cap. 2.

No Distress can be made in the night, but for Damage feasant.

The Bailiff may attach a man by his goods, citing him to appear, and answer
such a day, at such a man's Suit in such a Court, and for such a cause; Or he
may only give the Defendant warning (in the presence of two others) to appear
such a day, in such a Court, at such a man's Suit, it is sufficient; And if an
Attachment be made, it must be of such goods (of the Defendants own proper
goods) as are movables, viz. by mere Chattels personalls, which may be
forseited by Outlawry, and not immovables.

A Bailiff cannot sever horses joined to a Cart.

Sheep may not be distraind, if there be a sufficient Distress besides.

No man shall drive a Distress out of the County where it was taken.

A Distress may not be impounded in several places upon pain of five pounds
and trebble damages.

A man cannot work goods distrained, nor convert them to his own use.

The goods of any man may be taken in any place within the County, in another
man's house or ground, as well as his own.

If a Bailiff distrain or attach the horse of a master, where the Plaint is
against the servant, Trespass lies for the Master against the Bailiff, for the
Bailiff ought to take notice at his peril whose goods he distrains or
attaches, 13 H. 4. fo. 2. 14 H. 4. 24. 11 H. 4. 90. Dr. and St. 139.

After Distress or Attachment made, if the Bailiff does not return his Precept
the next Court: Trespass lies against the Bailiff for the Defendant, and an
Action of the case lies against him for the Plaintiff, for not returning of the
Precept. 10 E. 4. fo. 18. 3 H. 7. fo. 3.

By Choke. If one take Beasts in the name of a Distress, he ought to put them
in an open Pound, for that he who is distrained may give to them sustenance:
but if he distraine dead Chattels, he may put them where he will, but if they
spoil in his default, he must answer for them. 19 E. 4. fo. 2. b.

If goods distrained be put in an open Pound, and they die, it is the loss of
the Owner, but if they be put in another place, it is otherwise, 39 H. 8. Fitz.
Distress 6. He that distrains Beasts may put them in a close House, if he will
give them meat; for the putting of them into an open Pound, is but to the
intent, that the Owner may give them meat: 1 and 2. Phil. and Mar. cap. 12.
tit. Distress. That no Distress shall be taken out of the Hundred, unless to
the open Pound, nor above three miles.

Where a man distraineth Cattle for doing Damage-feasant, or for rent, or
service, and put them into the common Pound, or into another Pound, or place,
and he who has property in the Cattle, or other person, takes the Cattle
out of the said Pound, and drives them where he pleases, he who distrained
them may have a Writ de parco fracto, Fitz. Na. Br. 293. E.

A man may not distrain for any Rent or thing done for any Land, but upon the
same Land that is charged therewith; but in case where I come to distrain, and
the other seeing my purpose, chaseth the Beasts, or bears the thing out, to
the intent that I shall not take it for a Distress upon the ground, then I may
well pursue, and if I take it presently in the high way, or in another ground,
the taking is lawful as well as there, upon the same Land charged, to
whomsoever the properties of the goods be.

If one distrain my goods that are not distrainable by Law, I may have a
general Action of Trespass, or an Action of the case against him at my
choice, Co. 4. 94.

The Distress must be reasonable, somewhat proportionable to the thing, or
cause for which it was taken, and yet if the cause be so that a man cannot take
a Distress of less value, and the thing be after a sort entire, as in the
Distress of a Cart with its carryage, or with the Horse, or Oxen annexed to
them for twenty shillings, though there be much inequality, yet may it not be
unreasonable, Marl. 1. 4. 22 E. 4. 15. 20 E. 4. 3. 41 E. 3. 26. But such
Distresses as are either excessive for magnitude, as if one take four Sheep for
four pence, or four Oxen for two shillings, or the like; these are unlawful
Distresses, for which the Bailiff or Distrainer shall be punished, Excessus in
re qualibet in jure reprobatur. Yet if he take a Horse or Ox for two pence,
where no other Distress is to be had, it is not excessive; but if there were a
Sheep, or other goods somewhat proportionable to be taken, there it is
excessive and punishable, Co. 2. part. Inst. 107. 51 H. 3. Marl. 4. Co. 11. 44.
4. 8 H. 4. Fitz. Na. Br. 174. 45 Ed. 3. 26.

If one distrain my Kine great with Calf, and by driving they lose their Calves,
I may have an Action of the case, F. N. B. 86.

If goods be impounded in a close House, or secret place, so that the Defendant
cannot come to seed them, and the goods do perish for want of sustenance, the
Distrainer must pay for them. 33 H. 8. tit. Distress 66.

If the Distrainer give the Cattle meat in the Pound, he cannot compel the
Owner of the Cattle to pay for this, for the Distrainer is not compelled by
Law to give them sustenance: and if they do agree after the Distress upon a
sum, yet this is no excuse, but it is for their deliverance; but if they do
agree at the time of the Distress taken, that he should give them meat, and
that he should have twenty shillings (or a certain propounded sum) for the
same, this is a good bargain, 21 E. 4, fo. 53.

An Action of Trespass was brought upon the Statute, that none should be
distrained by his Cattle in the Plough, so long as any other reasonable
Distress may be had: and the Plaintiff declared the taking to be against the
Statute, and did not specially show that he had other Cattle to be distrained,
yet it was adjudged good for the Defendant to alleadg this, 4 E. 3. and 18 E. 2.

Stuff sent to a Tailor, Weaver, Fuller, Sheerman, Miller, etc. shall not be
distrained, for these Officers are necessary for the Commonwealth; and the
like Law is of and in a Common Inn.

A Distress must be of a thing whereof a valuable property is in some body,
and therefore Dogs, Bucks, Hares, Does, Cunnies, Bees, and the like, that are
ferae naturae, or apparel, Armor or Jewels cannot be distrained. Yet though it
be of a valuable property as a horse that a man rides upon cannot be
distrained, Fitzherb. in rescous, 11. quod nota.

If a man come into a common Inn, his Goods and Beasts shall not be distrained
there, because then it would be prejudicial to the Commonwealth.

Also Goods and Chattels brought into a Fair or Market to be sold, shall not be
distrained, per. cur. Mich. 7 H. 7 fo. 15. 10 H. 7. fo. 21.

Windows, Doors, Tables fixed on a post, a Furnace, Pales, Timber, Boards
fixed on the ground, Glass, etc. cannot be distrained nor sorfeited by
Outlawry: but if these are not used in a House, but standers by, then they may
be distrained, Mich. 21 H. 7. fo. 13. Pasc. 14. fo. 25. H. 8. fo. 25. Trin. 21.
H. 7. fo. 27.

If a Bailiff come to a house to distrain, the doors being fast shut and
barred, and with his hand through a crevice or hole did shove the bar, and open
the door, and did take out two Cows in the name of a Distress, and because he
did take a Distress in this manner, it was adjudged the Distress to be
wrongful, Fitzherb. abridg. fo. 296.

No goods shall be distrained but the proper goods of the party, and not
pledges, nor yet borrowed goods, 35. H. 6. fo. 25. per Moyle Justice. And it is
not of Chattels real, as a Lease for years, nor of apparel 7 H. 6. 9.

A Distress made by the servant of the Bailiff is good, 27. Ass. 6. 7.

If a man distrain Cattle, and they of their own accord come home again to the
owner, he who distrained them cannot take them again, by reason of the first
Distress, except he does freshly follow them, per Danby Justice, because of
the negligence of the distrainer, 9 E. 4. fo. 2.

If a man come to distrain for Damage-feasant, and see the Beasts in his
ground, and the Owner chaseth them out of purpose before the Distress taken,
the Owner of the ground cannot distrain them, and if he does the Owner of the
Cattle may rescue them, for the Beasts must be Damage-feasant at the time of
the Distress. 16 E. 4. 10. 2. 6. 2. Avowry, 182. lib. 9.

A horse cannot be distrained while the Owner thereof is riding upon him, or
leading of him, nor if he be tied at a Mill, and came thither with grist, nor a
horse tied at a man's door, the Owner being gone into the House on some
business, Pas. 39. Eliz. Co. B. adjudged.

If a Beast be unruly in the pound, and is like to leap over the pound, it
seems the distrainer cannot justify the tying him to the pound nor the
fettering of him. Broo. Trespass 250. 27 Ass. pl. 64.

None shall distrain wrongfully upon the penalties provided, upon the Statute
of Marlb. West. 1. 16. 3 E. 1.

None shall procure any to distrain another, to make him appear at the County
Court, or any other inferior Court, on purpose to vex him, and put him to
charge and trouble, on pain to make Fine to the Lord Protector, and to pay the
party grieved trebble damages, West. 1. 36. 13. E. 1.

An Axe that is in a man's hand cutting of wood, nor goods that are impounded,
and in the custody of the Law, cannot be distrained, being distrained already,
Damage-feasant.

If one distrain my Cattle, or Goods, without any cause or color, that is not
good and just: or if a man having distrained my goods, will not tell me,
requiring it, and offering to give satisfaction for what cause he distrained
them, or if having cause to distrain, he do distrain Beasts not distrainable,
as Beasts of the Plough, or Sheep, or if having distrained Beasts distrainable,
he afterward abuse them, as if being a Horse or an Ox he work it, or being
unruly he setter it, or lay it so as it be thereby hurt, or if he put the
Distress in an unknown place, that I cannot tell how to come to it, to feed
it: or if he take them out of the County, and put them into a Pound in another
County, or if he distrain them in a place not distrainable; In all these cases,
I may have an Action of Trespass against him, Co. 8. 147. Doct. and St. 112.
F. N. B. 47.

What goods may be taken upon an Execution.
EXecution is a Judicial Precept, issuing out after Judgment; properly called
a Fieri facias, and lies where a man has recovered in any Action lying in
this Court, either by default or Verdict, then he that has recovered may have
this Precept, commanding the Bailiff to levy the moneys (so recovered) of the
Goods and Chattells of the Defendant, and to bring it into the Court, that the
party Plaintiff may have it.

The Bailiff may (by virtue of this precept or warrant after Judgment)
distraine the Defendants goods, and detain the distress in his hands, in
safeguard till the Defendant has satisfied the Plaintiff of the condemnation,
22 Ass. 72. F. N. B. 165. and 4 H. 6. fol. 17. Action.

The Bailiff upon this precept is to do his utmost endeavor to levy the Money
upon the Goods and Chattels of the Defendant, and for that purpose to enquire
and search if he can find out any Goods and Chattels of his, whereof Execution
may be made; and it will be wisdom in the Plaintiff to make a diligent
search, to see if he can find out any thing to be taken hold of, and if he can
discover any, to direct the Bailiff to it, who ex officio is to take it, and to
sell it; and if he cannot sell it, he is to return it so, and thereupon a
Precept called a Venditioni exponas shall be sent to the Bailiff, to force him
to sell it, and pay the Plaintiff.

Goods taken in Execution, must be praised, and Execution made of them, 27.
Ass. 72.

Where erroneous Judgment is given, the Officer which does the Execution is
excused, 22. Ass. 64. Plowden 194. But the contray, if Judgment be given that
is void or voidable: for where Judgment and Execution is of a thing whereof
they have no Jurisdiction, there Trespass lies against the Officer, for
executing it* but if Judgment be there but erroneous; and so void, false
Judgment lies, and no Trespass against the Officers, Plowdens com. 394.

If after Judgment a man does sell his goods, to defraud me of my Execution,
and nevertheless takes the profits of them: if it be so found, I may have
Execution of the goods sold by fraud, 43 E. 3. fo. 2. 22. Ass. 72. 50 E. 3.

If the Bailiff has a Fieri facias against a man, and before Execution he
pays the money; in this case he cannot do Execution after: if he do, an Action
of Trespass lies against him. B. R. pach. 12 Car.

If the Sheriff open or break any House to do Execution at the Suit of a common
person, the Execution is good, but the party, whose House is broken, may have
an Action of Trespass against him for the breaking of the House, Co. 5. 93. 3.

If the Sheriff levy money upon an Execution, and gives it to the Plaintiff,
though he never make any return to the Court it is good enough, Co. 5. 90. 4.
67. 11. 40. 20 H. 6. 24. 4.

If a man has a Judgment in this Court against the Plaintiff, or the
Defendant, and the Execution is deferred in favor of him, the party grieved
may have a Writ de executione Judicii from above, to hasten it. F. N. B. 120.

This Writ de executione Judicii is directed to the Sheriff, in whose county
the execution ought to be done, and if he will not do Execution, the
Complainant shall have an Alias and a Plures, with this clause in the Writ of
Plures (or signify unto us the cause why, etc.) And if he do not Execution
upon this Writ, or return not some reasonable cause wherefore he delays the
Execution, the party shall have an Attachment against the Sheriff returnable
into the Upper Bench or Common Pleas, and must be directed to the Coroners
(returnable as abovesaid) to answer, etc.

Goods pawned shall not be taken upon Execution, for the debt of him who pawned
them, during the time they are pawned, 24 H. 8. Pledge. 28. and 4 E. 6.
Distress, 75.

By Fieri facias (or Levari faoias) the Bailiff cannot break the door or chest
to take goods in Execution, for if he do, Trespass lies against him for the
breaking only, and not for taking the goods in Execution, 18 E. 4. fo. 4. and
13 E. 4. fo. 9. by Choke, notwithstanding, 8 E. 2. tit. Executors, 152. to the
contrary.

If a man lets to farm by the year, Oxen, or Cattle, and after the Lessee
for years is condemned in an Action of debt, these Cattle and Oxen demised,
during the term cannot, nor shall not be taken in Execution for this debt, 22
E. 4. fo. 10.

A Bailiff cannot pull the latch to open the door, if it be shut, to make a
Distress, Co. 5. 91. 93. Dyer, 67. 224. But if the out door of the House be
open, the Sheriff may go into the House and take any thing these liable to
Execution, and being come in at the open door, it seems he may break open any
of the inner doors, 18 E. 4. 4. Co. 5. 90. Co. 4. 74.

Of the Replevin.
Cattle being distrained for Rent. Damage-feasant, etc. the Owner of the
Cattle must go to the County Clark (or some one of the Deputies appointed in
the County for the granting out Replevins) to have a Replevin directed to the
Bailiffs to Replevie them, and the party must be bound in an Obligation to the
Sheriff, to prosecute his Action against him or them that did take the Cattle,
and to make return of the same Cattle to the Distrainer, if he by
Justification or Avowry do recover. And if he pursue it not, or if it be found
or judged against him, then he that took the Distress, shall have again the
Distress, and that is called the return of the Beasts, and he shall have in
such case a Writ from above, de Returno habendo.

This Replevin may be returned out of the County into the Common Pleas by a
Writ of Recordare.

If the goods cannot be taken by the first Replevin, then issues forth an
Alias, then a Plures, then a Toties quoties, and if none of these will do, then
a Withernam.

The suing of a Withernam is after this manner.

If the Bailiff return at the next County, upon the Toties quoties, that he
cannot Replevie the Cattle, because they are esloyned, or that he cannot have
view of the Cattle, then the Sheriff ought to make inquiry if it be true
which is returned, and if it be so sound out, he shall make a Precept to the
Bailiff in the nature of a Withernam, to take as many Cattle of the other
party. And if the Bailiff upon the Withernam thus awarded, return that the
other party has not any thing, etc. he shall have an Alias and Plures, and so
ad infinitum, and has no other remedy in this Court.

Note, that Cattle taken in Withernam, ad valentiam, that is, to the value of
the Cattle that were first distrained, (and so detained, that the Sheriff
cannot execute the Replevin brought for them) is to be understood not of the
number of the Cattle first distrained, but according to their full worth and
value. For otherwise he that brings the Replevin and Withernam will he
deprived of his satisfaction he ought to have in case the Distress were not
lawfully taken.

But now to return again to the Replevin, if the thing distrained be put by the
Distrainer in a place where the Sheriff cannot come at them to make a Replevie,
he may take Posse comitatus, viz. the power of the County, and after demand of
the Chattels, he may beat down the door or place where they are, to take them,
and the Owner of the goods shall recover double for his loss what ever it be.

The Sheriff upon complaint made to him upon taking of Cattle may command his
Bailiff by word to make a Replevin of them, and it is as good as though he had
made his Precept to the Bailiff, Fitz. 6. 9.

He that has the Replevin must have either a general or special property in
the thing; as of goods pledged or the like, and it must be in him at the time
of the taking, or otherwise he cannot have or maintain the Replevin for them.

Diverse men's Cattle being taken, they may not join in one Replevin, but must
have several Replevins.

A Replevin ought to be certain in setting forth the number and kinds of the
Cattle distrained, otherwise it is not good; because if it be not certain, the
Sheriff cannot tell how to make deliverance of the Cattle, because he knows
not particularly what the Cattle are that were distrained, Trin. 23. Car. B. R.

If a man takes and impoundeth goods, a Replevin may be of more Cattle than
were impounded, for if a man distrain Cows or Ewes, etc. and they have in that
Pound Calves or Lambs the Plaintiff shall have a Replevin for them all, and by
Lit. it was adjudged, Mich. 8. E. 3. That if a man distraineth and impoundeth a
Sow great with pigs in the Pound, the Owner shall have a Replevin for the Sow
and the Pigs.

If Cattle be distrained, and a Replevin is sued, the Defendant does avow for
taking of them Damage-feasant or for Rents, Customs, and Services, and are at
issue, and after the Plaintiff is nonsuit, or otherwise barred, he shall lose
his costs and damages, by the stat. of 7 H. 6. cap. 5. but by the stat. 21 H.
8. it is clear, Pasch. 14. Mar. Dyer. 141.

If a man by his Deed grant a Rent with clause of Distress, and grant further
that he shall keep the goods distrained against Gages and Pledges until the
rent be paid, yet shall the Sheriff replevie the goods distrained; for it is
against the nature of such a Distress to be irrepleviable, and by such an
intention the current of Replevins should be overthrown, to the hindrance of
the Common wealth. 31 E. 3. Gage deliver. 5. Co. Inst. 1. fo. 145. b.

If in this case the taker of the Cattle justify the taking as in his
Freehold, then this Court can proceed no further therein, but the cause must be
removed by a Writ out of the Chancery called a Recordare facias loquelam,
directed to the Sheriff returnable the next term following, either into the
Court of upper Bench, or Common Pleas (to which the party pleases) but they
are more properly belonging to the Court of Common Pleas, and this Writ must be
openly read, and allowed in the same Court, to the end that notice may be given
thereof to the Plaintiff in the Replevin, that he may appear at the day of the
return thereof, and declare against the taker of his Cattle, otherwise the
taker will have a retur. habend. aver. and put him to sue forth the second
deliverance, which is a great disadvantage to the Plaintiff,

If a Replevin be sued out, and the Defendant does avow for taking of them
Damage-feasant, or for rents, customs, or services; and are at issue, and after
the Plaintiff is Nonsuit, or otherwise barred, he shall lose his costs and
damages, Stat. 7 H. 6. cap. 5. 21 H. 8. Pasc: 4. Maria, Dyer. 141.

Of the Process of this Court.
THe Process of this Court, are either original, issuing out before Judgment:
Or Judicial, issuing out after Judgment Original is a Distringas or County
Warrant, etc. Judicial Process is only a Fieri facias, or Execution, directed
to the Bailiff, to levy the debt or damages, and cost of Suit recovered, of the
goods of the Desendant or of the Plaintiff if he be nonsuited.

The Original Process, viz. Distringas, or County Warrant, is a Precept
issuing out for a debt under forty shillings. Its form is as follows.

Y. ss. I. B. Esquire Sheriff of the said County,
to all and singular my Bailiffs within the said County, and their Deputies
greeting.
Commanding you, and every of you, that you distrain R. B. by his goods and
chattels within the said County, so that he be and appear at the next County
Court to be holden at the Castle of Y. on monday the 10 of J. to answer unto S.
D. in an Action of debt And that you then and there certify your doings herein.

Sealed with the Seal of my Office the sixteenth day of June, in the year of
our Lord 1656. By the Sheriff.

If the Defendant do not appear the next Court after the Distringas executed;
then farther Process issues against him, viz. a Duces tecum to cause him to
appear. If not upon the first Duces tecum, he appear, you may have an Alias
Duces tecum, and a Plures Duces tecum ad infinitum until he appear, and no
other remedy here. The form is thus.

Duces tecum.
Y. ss. I. B. Esquire Sheriff, etc.
to all, etc. greeting.
I command you and every one of you jointly and severally, that you bring with
you, and have at the Castle of Y. at my next County Court, all those goods and
Chattels of R. B. which late by virtue of another Precept of mine to you first
directed, you distrained at the Suit of S. D. and that you farther distrain the
said R. B. by his other Goods and Chattels in the said County, so that he be at
the Castle of Y. at my next County Court to be holden on Monday the, etc to
answer to the said S. D. in a Plea of debt. And have you then and there this
Precept.

Given under the Seal of my office the twentieth day of July in the year, etc.
If you have your Distringas or Duces tecum special. Then the form is thus
Special.
Y. ss. I. B. Esquire Sheriff of the County aforesaid,
to all my Bailiffs and their Deputies in and through the County aforesaid;
more especially to R. S. and T. W. my Bailiffs in this behalf specially
deputed, greeting, etc.


then proceed as in the former.

Of the Writ of Justices.
3 H 6. 54. 7 E. 4. Br. Just. 3.
THis Writ issues out of the Chancery, directed to the Sheriff, giving him
power to hold Plea in this Court, in Actions for forty shillings or above: and
though it be directed to the Sheriff, yet are the Suitors Judges. It is called
a Justices, because it is a Commission (and no original) to the Sheriff to do
a man Justice and Right, and though it be quod Justices B. yet the Sheriff is
not Judge therein, but the Suitors, and a Writ of false Judgment lies upon
their erroneous Judgment, and it requires no return, unless the Action be
removed by a Writ of Recordare, and then the Writ must be returned, together
with the Record, The form of the Precept upon the Writ, is as follows.

Yo. ss. G. M. Esquire Sheriff of the said County
to all and singular my Bailiffs within the said County, and to their Deputies
greeting.
By virtue of a Writ of Justicies of Oliver Lord Protector, etc. to me
directed: I command you and every one of you jointly and severally, that you or
some of you do Justice to I. C. so that he be and appear at my next County
Court to be holden at the Castle of Y. on Monday, etc. to answer unto E. L. in
an Action of debt, and that you or some of you certify your doings herein.

Sealed with the Seal of my office the two and twentieth day of August in the
year of our Lord, 1657. By the Sheriff.

A Replevin.
IF any goods be taken wrongfully (as before I have more at large declared)
then the party grieved, may have a Replevin, which must be made after this
manner.

Yo. ss. G. M. Esquire Sheriff, etc.
to all and every my Bailiffs, etc. greeting.
Because G. A. has comed before me, and given sufficient security to prosecute
his Suit, and make return of his goods, if return thereof shall be adjudged.
Therefore by virtue of my Office, I command you, and every of you, that you or
some of you Replevie and deliver to the aforesaid G. A. two kine, which H. H.
has taken and unjustly detained against the said G. A. and his Pledges and
also that you summon, and take safe Pledges of the said H. H. so that he be and
appear at the Castle of Y. at the next County Court, there to be holden upon
Monday, etc. to answer the aforesaid G. A. in an Action for the taking, and
unjust detaining of his said goods: and that you or some of you then and there
make return of your doings, together with this Precept.

Given under the Seal of my Office, etc.
And if the Cattle be not delivered by virtue of the said Replevin, then the
Plaintiff may have an Alias Replevin, with these words vel causam mihi
signify. with which Replevin must be made after this manner.

Yo. ss.
Alias. Replevin.
G. M. Esquire etc.
to all and singular my Bailiffs, etc. greeting.
Because G. A. has comed before me and given sufficient security to prosecute
his Suit, and make return of his goods, if return thereof shall be adjudged;
Therefore by virtue of my Office, I command you, and every of you, as formerly
I have commanded you, that you or some of you Replevie, and deliver to the said
G. A. two Kine, (without delay you cause to be replevied, or the cause to me
you signify wherefore my Mandates to you therefore directed, execute you would
not, or might not) which H. H. has taken and unjustly detained, etc. as before
in the other Replevin.

And if the Cattle be not delivered upon this Replevin, nor show sufficient
cause why he did not: then the Party may have a Plures Replevin, vel causam
mihi signific. which must be made verbatim as the Alias Replevin was made; and
if return be made upon any of these Replevins, quod averia elongat. sunt ad
loca sibi ignot. ita quod averia ill' praef. G. A. non potuit deliberar. then
the Plaintiff may have a Withernam, which must be made in this manner. Yo. ss.
Withernam.
G. M. Esquire etc.
to all, etc. greeting.
Because G. A. has com'd before me, etc. (as in the former) I command you and
every of you, as diverse times I have commanded you, that you or some of you
replevie and deliver to the said G. A. two Kine, which H. H. has taken and
unjustly detained, and does unjustly detain as it is said, and that you upon
diverse of my Precepts for Replevie to be made to you directed, we have
certified, that the same two Kine elongated are to places unknown, so that view
of the same have you could not; therefore I charge, and also command, that you
take in Withernam Chattells to the value of the said two Kine, of the Chattels
of the said H. H. to be delivered to the said G. A. for the two Kine aforesaid
elongated, and also that you summon and take safe Pledges of the said H. H. so
that he be and appear, etc.

as before in the Replevin.

Yo. ss.
Alias capias in Withernam.
G. M. Esquire etc.
to all, etc. greeting.
Because you have at my County Court held at the Castle of Y. on Monday, etc.
the year, etc. to me returned: that by virtue of my Warrant to you many times
directed, you came to the Pound of H. H. to the place where the two Kine
aforesaid impounded and detained were by the said H. H. and these two Kine
going and elongated were before your coming out of the Pound aforesaid, to
places to you unknown, by the aforesaid H. H. for which the two Kine aforesaid
Replevie you could not; wherefore it is considered by the Court. willing to
meet with the malice of him the said H. H. that the Beasts of the said H. H. be
taken in Withernam to the value, etc. and these to the aforesaid G. A. be
delivered safely and surely to be kept, until to the same G. A. his Beasts
aforesaid according to Law, you can Replevy, and according to the tenure of my
Mandate aforesaid. Therefore you and every of you, jointly and severally I
command, that you take, or, etc. the Beasts of the aforesaid H. H. to the
value, etc. in Withernam, and these to the aforesaid G. A. to be delivered, you
cause, or, etc. safely and securely to be kept until, etc. and distrain you,
or, etc. the aforesaid H. H. so that he be at the Castle of Y. at the next
County Court to be held on, etc. to answer the aforesaid G A. in the Plea
aforesaid, and the answer of my Precept known, make you, etc. at the next Court,

Given under the Seal of my Office, such day and year, etc.
Nota.
Note that when a Replevin is granted, there must be a Bond taken of him to whom
it is granted, or of some other for him, with one or two sureties, to appear at
the next Court, and to prosecute his Suit with effect, or else it may be
prejudicial both to the Grantor of the Replevin, and to the Executioner
thereof, and the form of that Bond, and Condition thereof is this.

An Obligation upon a Replevin.
Know all men by these presents, that we G. A. of Skipton in Craven in the
County of Y. Gent. and I. B. of the same Town and County, Yeomen, are held and
firmly obliged to G. M. Esquire Sheriff of the County aforesaid in the sum of 100
l. of lawful money of England, to be paid to the said G. M. or his certain
Attorney, his Executors or Assigns, to which payment well and truly to be made,
we bind us, our heirs, Executors and Administrators, firmly by these presents,
with our Seals sealed,

Dated the tenth day of July, in the year of our Lord 1656.
The Condition.
The Condition of this Obligation is such, That if G. A. do appear at my next
County Court to be holden for the County of Y. at the Castle of Y. on Monday
the, etc. next, and do prosecute there with effect his Suit which he has
commenced against H. H. for the taking and unjust detaining of two kine of the
goods of him the said G. A. and to make return of the goods; if return of the
same shall be adjudged: That then this present Obligation shall be void and of
none effect, etc.

Or thus. The Condition, etc. that whereas G. A. has obtained from the above
named Sheriff, a Replevin for the delivering of two kine and other goods
distrained, and detained by H. H. and others, if therefore the said G. A. do
prosecute his Suit upon the said Replevin with effect, and do make return of
the goods, if return thereof shall be adjudged; and also to save and keep
harmless the said Sheriff, by reason of the said Replevin, to him granted, as
aforesaid, That then this present Obligation to be void, etc.

A Tolt.
TOlt, comes from the Latin word tollo, viz. to take away: It is a Precept by
which a cause depending in a Weapentake, or Hundred Court, or other inferior
Court Baron, may be from thence removed into this Court; The form is this.

Yo. ss. I. B. Esquire Sheriff of the County aforesaid,
to the Stewards, and also to the Bailiff of the Hundred of H: greeting;
Whereas I am informed that you are favorable, and not equal in a certain
Plaint depending before you in your Court, between W. A. Plaintiff, and R. M.
Defendant: therefore on the behalf of his Highness the Lord Protector, and by
virtue of my office, I command you and either of you, that you take the Plaint
so depending before you in your Court between the said parties, so that I may
have the same at my next County Court to be held at the Castle of Y. on Monday,
etc. next, in the same state and Condition, as it is now depending before you:
and that you give notice to the said parties of the same day, that they may be
there ready to prosecute the said Plaint, as to Justice and Right shall
appertain, and that in further prosecution of the said Plaint in your Court,
you altogether supersede, and no further proceed therein; and this, etc.

given under the Seal of my Office, the, etc.
The return.
Hundred of H. ss. At the Court Baron holden at W. within the Hundred of H.
aforesaid, upon Wednesday the last day of July, the year, etc. in the time of
I. B. Esquire Sheriff of the County aforesaid.

The Plaint.
W. A. Plaintiff, complains of R. M. Defendant in a Plea of debt, damages
twenty shillings.

By virtue of this Precept to us directed, to be recorded and taken, we have
caused the Plaint depending before us in our Court, betwixt the parties above
named, and in the same state and condition, as it is now depending; and to the
same parties we have prefixed and given notice, that they be at the County
Court within written, at the day and place within mentioned, to prosecute the
said Plaint, as to Justice and Right shall appertain, and as this Precept
exacts and requires; In testimony whereof we have hereunto set our Hands and
Seals, etc.

I. S. Steward. T. L. Bailiff.


Judicial Process.
Judicial Process issue out after Judgment, either by default, or Nihil dicit
against the Defendant; or Nonsuit against the Plaintiff: The form of Judicial
Process or a Fieri facias is this.

Y. ss. I. B. Esquire Sheriff, etc.
to all and singular my Bailiffs, etc. greeting.
I command you and every one of you jointly and severally, that of the Goods
and Chattels of T. B. you or some of you cause to be made as well a certain
debt of thirty shillings which H. S. in my County Court has recovered against
him; as also 13 s. and 10 d. which to the said H. S. in the same Court were
adjudged for his costs and charges about his Suit in this behalf expended, and
have you the money at the Castle of Y. at my next County Court there to be
holden upon Monday, etc. to render to the said H. S. of the debt and damages
aforesaid: whereof he is convict.

And this given under the Seal of my Office, etc.
Yo. ss. Fieri facias against an Executor.
I. B. Esquire Sheriff, etc. to all and singular my Bailiffs, etc. greeting. I
command you and every of you, jointly and severally, that you or some of you
levy of the goods and chattels which late were W. W. deceased, at the time of
his death, and now remaining in the hands of I. W. Executor of the Testament of
the said W. W. and not administered of, as well a certain debt of 40 l. which T.
L. in my County Court by virtue of a Writ of Justicies recovered against him:
as also 20 s. which to the said T. L. in the same Court was adjudged for his
costs and damages, which he sustained by reason of the detaining of the said
debt; If the said I. W. Executor of the Testament of the said W. W. have so
much goods or chattels De bonis propriis.
in his hand, which were the said W. W. at the time of his death sufficient to
satisfy the debt and damages aforesaid: If he have not so much goods or
chattels in his hands which were the said W. W. at the time of his death
sufficient to satisfy the said T. L. of the debt and damages aforesaid; That
then you or some of you levy of the proper goods and chattels of the said I. W.
the damages and costs aforesaid, so that I may have the said money at my next
County Court, to be holden at the Castle of Y. etc. to render to the said T. L.
the debt and damages aforesaid, whereof he is convict. And this Yo. ss. Fieri
facias upon a Nonsuit for costs.
given under the Seal of my Office, the, etc.

I. B. Esquire etc. to all and singular my Bailiffs, etc. greeting. I command you
and every of you, that of the goods and chattels of T. O. you levy 20 s. which
S. D. in the County Court (according to a Statute provided in that case) were
adjudged for his costs and damages, which he sustained in his own defense in a
certain Plea of debt, which the said S. D. against the said T O. of late
brought, because the said T. O. did not prosecute his Suit, but was thereupon
nonsuited and convicted: so that I may have the money at my next County Court
at the Castle of Y. holden on Monday, etc. next, to satisfy the aforesaid S.
D. of his costs and damages aforesaid; And this, etc. Given under the Seal of
my Office the, etc.

I. B. Esquire etc. to all, etc. greeting. I command Yo. ss. Fieri facias upon a
Verdict, for the Defendant.
you that of the goods and chattels of T. C. you levy 40 s. which to P. P. in
my County Court, were adjudged for his damages which he sustained in his own
defense, in a Plea of debt, by the said W. against him the said P. P. lately
brought, whereof the said P. P. was quieted, and by Verdict of his Country,
whereof the said T. C. was convict: and have you the money at my next County
Court, to be holden at the Castle of Y. on Monday, etc. to satisfy the said P.
P. of his damages aforesaid. And this, etc. given under the seal of my office,
etc.

Fieri facias after a Scire facicias against an Administrator upon a Verdict
had against the intestate.
I. B. Esquire etc. to all, etc. greeting. I command you and every of you jointly
and severally, that of the goods and chattels which late were of E. S. Esquire who
dyed intestate as it is said, and now in the hands of R. M. Gent. and A. his
wife Administratrix of the goods and chattels which were the said E. S. at the
time of his death remaining to be administered; you cause to be made as well a
certain debt of 4 l. which I. W. has recovered against the said E. S. in my
County Court as 30 s. which to him the said I. W. in my same Court were
adjudged for his costs and damages which he had (by occasion of detaining of
the same debt) by virtue of a Writ of Justices, so that I may have the said
money at my next County Court to be holden at the Castle of Y. etc. to render
the aforesaid I. W. of the debt and damages aforesaid, whereof the aforesaid E.
S. was convict, And whereupon it was considered in my same Court that the
aforesaid I. W. should have Execution against the aforesaid R. M. etc. of the
debt and damages aforesaid, of the goods and chattels aforesaid by his the said
R. M. his default. And this given under the seal of my office the, etc.

Venditioni exponas.
I. B. Esquire etc. to all and singular my Bailiffs, etc. greeting. I command you
and every one of you jointly and severally, especial to F. P. Bailiff of the
Liberty of S. and his Deputies, who has the goods taken upon an Execution
issuing out of this Court, that those twenty weather Sheep, of which, each, you
cause to be apprised at eight shillings, of the goods of I. C. Esquire which you
took and remain in your hands unsold for want of buyers, as you your
selfreturned to my Court, you expose to sale, and the money thereof, which in
the whole amounts to eight pounds, you have at my next County Court at the
Castle of Y. holden on Monday the tenth day of May next, to render to W. G.
which to him the said W. G. in my Court were adjudged for his damages which he
had by occasion of a certain Trespass to him committed by the aforesaid I. C,
brought, whereof he is convict. And this given under the Seal of my Office the
18 day of October in the year of our Lord 1657.

By the Sheriff.

Of a Scire Facias.
IF a Fieri facias do not issue out within a year and a day, after Judgment
entered; it cannot be had till there be a Scire facias first sued out to summon
the Defendant to show cause why Execution should not be done, and if now he
neglect to answer, or cannot be found to be summoned, then a second Judgment
shall be given, that that Execution be done of the first Judgment.

If Judgment be given against a Testator, albeit it be within a year after.
Judgment had; yet there must first issue out a Scire facias, against the
Executor or Administrator (before Execution) to show cause why it should not be
had.

Or if a man recover against a Feme-sole, and she become covert, viz. take a
Husband within the year and the day; then he that shall recover must have a
Scire facias against the Husband.

Scire facias, post diem and annum.
Y. ss.
I. B. Esquire Sheriff, etc. greeting. Whereas W. F. of late in the Court of the
aforesaid County, by Judgment in the said Court of the County aforesaid, held
at the Castle of X, on Monday the tenth day of February 1654. before the
Suitors of the said Court, recovered against G. L. as well a certain debt of
thirty two shillings, which the said W. F. in the same Court recovered against
him, as thirteen shillings and ten pence, which to the said W. F. in the same
Court were adjudged for his damages, which he sustained by the occasion of the
detaining of the debt, of which he is convicted, for as by the proceedings from
thence in the same Court residing, notwithstanding the manifest Execution of
the aforesaid Judgment remains to be done, as by insinuation, the aforesaid W.
F. has recovered. And because that I will that those things which were in the
said Court be rightly done, to demand due of the said Judgment; Therefore I
command you that by honest and lawful men of my Bayliwick, you give notice to
the aforesaid G. L. that he be at the Castle of Y. at my next County Court,
there to be holden upon Monday the third day of May next, to show if he have
any thing to say, or no, why the said W. F. ought not to have his Levy or
Execution against him, according to the force, form, and effect of the said
Recovery, if it seem expedient to him, and have you then and there the names of
them, by whom you give him notice, and have this Precept, etc. Given under the
Seal of my Office the fourth day of April; in the year of our Lord 1656.

Scire facias against an Executor, after Judgment against the Testator.
Y. ss.
I. B. Esquire Sheriff, etc. greeting. Whereas N. N. late in the County Court of the
said County held at the Castle of Y. on Monday, etc. before the then Sheriff of
the said County, by Judgment of the said Court, had recovered against H. N. as
well a debt of forty pounds, as two and twenty shillings and two pence costs,
for his damages which he sustained by reason of the detaining of the said debt;
whereof he is convict, as appears by the Proceedings remaining in the said
Court. And whereas the Execution of the Judgment yet remains to be done, and
the said H. N. since the giving of the Judgment aforesaid is dead, as by the
intimation of the said N. N. I am informed. And because I am willing that those
things, which are rightly done in the said Court, should be duly put in
Execution; I command you that by honest and lawful men of the said County, you
make it known to F. N. Executrix of the Testament of the said H. N. that she be
at the next County Court to be holden for the said County at the Castle of Y.
on Monday, etc. to show if she have any thing, or know what to say, why the
said N. N. ought not to have his Execution against her of the debt and damages
aforesaid, to be levied of the Goods and Chattels which were of the said H. N.
at the time of his death, and further to do and recieve, etc. Given under the
Seal of my Office, etc.

Scire facias after marriage.
Yo. ss.
I B. Esquire Sheriff, etc. greeting. Whereas A. B. late in my County Court held at
the Castle, etc. before the Suitors of the said Court had recovered against C.
D. as well a certain debt of forty pounds as forty shillings, which to the said
A. B. in the said Court were adjudged for the costs and damages, which she had
by occasion of the detaining of the debt whereof he is convicted, as by the
Proceedings thereof in the same Court before the said Suitors remaining
manifestly appears. Nevertheless Execution of the said Judgment remains
yet undone. And the said A. B. since the Judgment aforesaid given, has taken
to Husband T. R. as by the allegation of the said A. B. I am given to
understand, and because I will that those things which are rightly acted in my
said Court be duly put in Execution, I command you that by honest and lawful
men of your Bailiwick you give notice, and make known to the said C. D. that he
be at my next County Court holden at, etc. to show, that if he has or knows
any thing to say, or no, for himself, wherefore the said T. R. should not have
execution of the said judgment of the debt and damages aforesaid, according to
the form and effect of the recovery aforesaid, if to him it shall seem
expedient, and have you there the names of them by whom you give him notice,
and make known to him, and have this precept, etc. Given under the seal of my
Office the 4. day of June, in the year of our Lord 1658.

Venire facias Jurator.
Yo. ss.
I. B. Esquire, Sheriff of the County aforesaid, to the Bailiff of the hundred
of O or his Deputy greeting. I command you, and every of you, that you cause to
come before me, or my lawful Steward, by me appointed for the County Court to
be holden at the Castle of Y. on Monday the, etc All those several persons
mentioned in the panel hereunto annexed, to try such several issues between
party and party, as shall then and there be given them in charge. And hereof
you must not fail, as each of you will answer the contrary at your perils,
together with this precept. Given under the seal of my Office, etc.

Or thus.
Yo. ss.
I. B. Esquire, etc. These are to require you the said Bailiff, to cause to come
twelve good and lawful men of your Bailiwick, that they be and appear at the
next County Court holden at the castle of Y. on Monday, etc. by 9 of the clock
in the forenoon to try an issue joined between A. B. plaintiff, and C. D.
desendant concerning a plea of debt. (or as the case is) And this given under
the seal of my Office, etc. And if a full Jury do not appear, then as many as
make default, shall be amerced, and a December tales awarded to summon ten more as
follows, and the same day given to the first Jury.



December tales.
Yo. ss.
I. B. Esquire etc. These are to require you the said Bayliss, to cause to come ten
more good and lawful men of your Bayliwick, that they be here at the next
County Court holden at the Castle of Y. on Monday, etc. with others, which to
them shall be adjoined, to try a certain Issue joined between A. B. Plaintiff,
and C. D. Defendant of a Plea of Debt, etc.

And as many of these as make default shall be amerced, and then an Octo tales
shall be awarded, and if necessity require it afterward a Sex tales.

Subpoena, or a Warrant to summon Witnesses.
Y. ss.
I. B. Esquire Sheriff of the County aforesaid, to I. B. I. G. etc. greeting To you
and every of you I command, that (all excuses and delays being set apart) you
and every of you be and personally appear at the next County Court holden at
the Castle of Y. on Monday the 10. day of June next, to testify the truth
according to your knowledge in a certain Action there depending between A. B.
Plaintiff, and C. D. Defendant, on the part and behalf of the Plaintiff, in an
Action of debt. And hereof fail you not, under the forseiture of one hundred
pounds each of you. And this given under the Seal of my Office, the, etc.

A Liberate to deliver goods taken upon Original or mean Process.
County Court. ss.
I. B. Esquire Sheriff of the County aforesaid, To all and singular my Bailiffs
within the said County, and their Deputies, especially to A. B. greeting, For
as much as S. V. has appeared by his Attorney in this Court to answer W. N. of
an Action of debt. These are therefore to will and require you immediately upon
the sight hereof to deliver, or cause to be delivered unto the said S. V. Two
kine of the goods of him the said S. V. which you have distrained, and do keep
by virtue of my Warrant from this Court directed, at the Suit of the said W. N.
Fail you not hereof, as you will answer the contrary. Given under the Seal of
my Office, etc.

A Precept upon a Proclamation.
Y. ss.
I. B. Esquire Sheriff, etc. to the Bailiff of the Hundred of B. and to his Deputies
greeting. By virtue of a Proclamation upon Exigent to me directed, I command
you and every of you, that you or some of you make two several Proclamations.
The one to be made at the general quarter Sessions of the Peace to be holden
for the North Riding of the County of Y. And the other to be made at the Parish
Church door after divine service, where the several persons underwritten
live, and that they and every one of them yield their bodies to me the Sheriff
of the said County, where the Exigent lies, to answer the person at whose Suit
the Exigent is against them. And hereof fail not at your peril. Given under
the Seal of my Office, the two and twentieth day of August in the year of our
Lord 1658.

At the Election of the Coroner, he is to be sworn in Court, by the County
Clark, for the due Execution of his Office. In this manner.

You shall swear, that you well and truly shall serve his Highness the Lord
Protector, and the Commonwealth in the Office of a Coroner: and as one of his
Highness Coroners of the County of Y. and therein you shall truly and
diligently do, and accomplish all and every thing and things appertaining to
your Office, after the best of your cunning, wit, and power, both for the
profit and good of the Inhabitants within the said County, taking such Fees, as
you ought to take by the Laws and Statutes of this Commonwealth, and not
otherwise; so help you God.

The Oath of an Attorney in this Court.
YOu shall do no falsehood, nor consent to any to be done in the Court, and if
you know of any to be done, you shall give knowledge thereof to the Steward, or
county Clerk, that the same may be reformed; you shall delay no man for lucre,
or malice; you shall increase no fees, but shall be content with the old fees
accustomed; you shall suffer no foreign or illegal suits to hurt any man, nor
plead or cause to be pleaded any foreign plea, but such as shall stand with
the order of the law and your conscience; you shall seal all such process as
you shall sue out of this Court with the seal thereof; you shall not procure to
be sued any false suit, nor give aid nor consent to the same. And lastly, you
shall use your self in the office of an Attorney within this Court according
to your learning and discretion. So help you God.

A Warrant of Attorney.
To S. D. one of the Attorneys of the County Court for the County of Y. etc.
I A. B. do hereby desire you, and do give you full power, license, and
authority, to appear for me, and for, etc. in your said Court on Monday, etc.
in an action of debt, for, etc. at the suit of E. D. upon an obligation,
conditioned for the payment of, etc. in which said obligation I stand bound as
principal. And this shall be your sufficient warrant in that behalf. In
witness, etc.

Bond for appearance.
It has been formerly used to take a bond of the defendant for his appearance
in this Court: the form of the condition is thus.

THe condition, etc. That if the above bounden E T. do appear at the next
County Court to be holden at the Castle of Y. on monday the first day of
January next to answer H. B. in a plea of debt, and do also stand to such order
as the Court in that behalf shall set down and adjudge according to law. That
then this present obligation to be void etc.

A sale of Goods to the Plaintiff levied upon a Fieri facias, by the Sheriffs
Bailiffe.
KNow all men by these presents, That I, G. B. of Skipton in Craven, Bailiffe
of the Liberty or Weapentake of Slaincliffe in the County of Y. By virtue, of a
precept of Fieri facias from the Sheriff to me directed, have levied of the
goods and chattels of, etc. the sum of, etc. part of a debt due to, etc. levied
by virtue of the precept to his use. In full satisfaction of which said sum of,
etc I do by virtue of the precept or warrant to me directed as aforesaid,
assign, sell, and set over unto the said, etc. all the goods and chattels in
the apprisement hereto annexed, nominated at the rate of, etc. To have, etc.
the said goods and chattels, to him, his heirs, executors, and administrators,
as his or their own proper goods and chattels, as fully and absolutely as I the
said G. B. might, could or ought to do by force and virtue of the said precept
and apprisement, or otherwise howsoever. In witness whereof I have hereunto
set my hand and seal the sixteenth day of August in the year of our Lord, 1658.

A Deputation for a Bailiff of an hundred.
I. B. Esquire, Sheriff of the County of Y. to all Christian people to whom
these presents does or may concern, greeting. Know ye, that I the said Sheriff,
have deputed, constituted, and appointed R. D. of A. in etc. my lawful Bailiff
and Deputy within the Hundred of B. in the North Riding in the County of Y.
aforesaid, to have and execute the said Office of Bailiff within the said
Hundred, or elsewhere within the said County of Y. as occasion shall require it,
during my pleasure only and no longer: and to receive and take to my use all
Fees as well for Distress, Attachment and Perquisites of Courts, and other
profits due and accustomed whatsoever to the said Bayliwick belonging, or in
any wise appertaining. And whatsoever my said Bailiff shall lawfully execute
and do in his said Office, I do hereby warrant, ratify and confirm, as my own
act and deed. In witness whereof I have hereunto set the Seal of my Office the
seventeenth day of August, 1658.

The Fees.
The Fees to the County Clark.
l. s d. FOr every Distringas 00-00-08 Every special Distringas 00-01-08 Duces
tecum 00-00 08 A special Duces tecum 00-01-08 The Writ of Justicies 00-02-06
The Precept upon the Writ of Justicies 00-02-04 A special Precept upon the
Writ of Justic. 00-04-04 A Replevin 00-02-04 A special Replevin 00-05-04 The
Bond upon the Replevin 00-01-00 Subpoena, for Witnesses 00-00-08 Venire facias
00-02-00 Habeas corpora 00-02-00 Fieri facias 00-02-00 Capias in Withernam
00-05-04 Scire facias 00-02-00 Tolt 00-01-02 Precept upon an accedas ad curiam
00-02-04 Supersedeas 00-02-04 Procedendo 00-02-00 Warrant of Attorney upon
every Distringas 00-00-02 Warrant of Attorney upon a Iusticies 00-00-04 Entering
Essoynes for every name 00-00-04 Entering Imparlance 00-01-00 Copying the
Declaration 00-01-00 Allowing the answer 00-01-00 Copying the answer 00-01-00
Allowing the Replication 00-01-00 And for copying the Replication, and allowing
the Rejoinder, etc. and so of the rest 00-02-00 Entering a Rule 00-00-04 Entering
a Default by Nihil dicit 00-00-04 Entering a Nonsuit 00-00-04 Dividing a Plaint
for every name 00-00-04 Entering Judgment 00-02-00 Transcript upon a Plaint
00-01-08 Transcript upon a Writ of Iusticies 00-03-04 Allowing a Recordare
00-04-00 Allowing a Pone 00-04-10 Allowing a Writ of False Judgment 00-06-08.
Fees to the Attorney.
FOr drawing every Declaration 00-01-00 Drawing every answer 00-01-00 Drawing
the Replication 00-01-00 Drawing Rejoinder 00-01-00 Drawing Sur-rejoynder
00-01-00 For every Court day, wherein he proceeds in the Action, allowed as his
Fee 00-02-00 Fees to the Bailiff for executing of Process.
FOr executing a Distringas, of the Plaintiff 00-00-04 and of the Defendant 00
00-08 A Duces tecum of the Plaintiff 00 00-04 And of the Defendant 00-00-08 A
Iusticies, of the Plaintiff 00-01-00 and of the Defendant 00-02-00 A Replevin,
of the Plaintiff 00-02-00 A Venire facias 00-02-00 If tried for the Habeas
corpora 00-02-00 A Fieri facias 00-02-00 A Scire facias 00-02-00

The Order of the Judges of Assize, at York, the 24. day of July 1654.
concerning Essoins illegally returned into this Court.
WHereas of late Judgments have been surreptitiously obtained in this Court,
by reason of Essoins unduly brought into the Court, by Bailiffs or their
Deputies, and others, after attachment of goods for appearance, which pretended
Essoins, being afterward disavowed by the defendant, have occasioned sundry
complaints, and suits, when the defendants goods were taken in execution: for
preventing whereof, it is ordered upon advice and consultation had with the
Judges of Assize at Y this day, that henceforth no common Essoin shall be entered
and allowed by the Court to save a default, unless it be warranted in writing,
under the proper handwriting, or under the hand, seal, or mark of the
defendant, thereby specially authorizing the party being the Essoiner to cast
such Essoin for him, and in his name; for the truth of which subscription, or
sealing, the same Essoin is to be sworn in open Court, and no Essoin is to be
admitted, or received from henceforth being not affirmed, and sworn unto, and
so entered upon the back of the warrant of attachment, which is to remain upon
the file amongst the Rolls or proceedings of the Courr, and if any other person
(not being a Bailiff) shall be the Essoiner, he is to bring the like warrant
from the Defendant in writing as is aforesaid, and be sworn for the truth
thereof, which is to remain in Court as aforesaid: And no* jugdement shall be
given where there is no other appearance but an essoin: Unless the Essoin
shall appear to be warranted as aforesaid.

Nota.
To swear to warrant Essoyns in this Court is contrary to the Statute of
Marlbridge. cap. 19. which says, De essoniis autem provisum est, quod in Com.
etc. nullus habeat necesse jurare pro Essonio suo warrantizand.

Of the nature and Return of those Writs that do remove actions out of this
Court into superior Courts.
WRits removing suits out of this Court, may be without showing cause in the
writ, if the remove be by the Plaintiff, but not without showing good cause, if
it be by the Defendant. As that the suit is for Charters of land, or for
inheritance, or for freehold of Land, or any titles of Land, or actions
touching life, or actions to cause one, to render an account, or trespass vi
and armis, all which are not within the cognizance of the Court. Or that he
before whom the action depends, is a favourer of him that is on the other side,
or that the Defendant avoweth for damage feasant, and the Plaintiff does
justify for common of pasture, which is a plea touching Freehold, and
thrrefore the prosecution in this Court cease.

First of a Recordare facias loquelam.
Recordare facias loquelam.
A Recordare is a writ issuing out of the Chancery directed to the Sheriff,
commanding him to send a plaint that is before him in his County Court, without
writ of Iusticies into the Court of Upper Bench, or Common Pleas, to the end
that the cause may be there determined. And the Shiriff is hereupon to summon
the other party to be in that Court (into which the Plaint is to be sent) at a
day certain; And of all this he is to make a certificate under his own Seal,
and the Seals of four Suitors of the same Court.

The Return.
By virtue of this Writ to me directed, at my County of Y. held at the Castle of
Y. within written (such a day and year) to be Recorded, I caused the Plea, of
which within is made mention, which appears in a Schedule to this Writ annexed,
and that Record I have before the Justices within written, at the day and place
within contained, under my Seal and the Seals of W. H. E. R. etc. four good and
legal Knights of the same County, of them who at the Record present were, and
to the parties within written that day I have prefixed, that then they be there
in that Plea, as just it may be to prosecute, as within to me is commanded.

The residue of the Execution of this Writ appears in a certain Schedule to
this Writ annexed.

The Shcedule.
At my County Court held at the Castle of Y. in the County aforesaid, such day
and year, before I. R. M. L. I. S. and S. D. four Suitors of the said Court
amongst other matters is contained.

Y. ss. The Plea.
R. S. complains against B. W. of a Plea of debt, (or as the case requires)
I. B. Esquire Sheriff pledge. of prosec. I. S. I. D. In testimony of, etc.

Or thus.
By virtue of this Writ to be recorded, I have caused the Plea which is in my
County, without Writ of Oliver Lord Protector, etc. betwixt A. B. and C. D.
concerning the Beasts of him the said A. B. taken, and unjustly detained, as it
is said, and that Record I have before the Justices within written, at the day
and place within contained under my seal and the seals of E. B. S. D. R. B and
I. L. four legal Knights of my County, of those who at the Record present
were, as it appears in a certain Schedule to this Writ annexed, according to
the Exigency of this Writ.

At my County held, etc, as before.

By virtue of this Writ in form within written, I came to the Court within
written, and in that full Court to be recorded caused the plea within written,
and that Record as it appears in a Schedule to this Writ annexed, I have
before the Justices within written, at the day and place within contained, and
to the parties within written that day have prefixed, that then they be there,
in that Plea, as just it may be to proceed, as within to me is commanded.

The Schedule.
A. B. complains of C. D. in a Plea of taking of the Beasts of him the said A.
B. in testimony of which matter, E. B. S. D. I. W. and I. R. four legal men of
those who at the Record present were in full Court at the Castle of Y. in the
County aforesaid, the tenth day of Aug in the year, etc. to the same Record
their Seals severally have put the day and year abovesaid.

Nota.
Note, that though the Plea be discontinued in the County, yet the Plaintiff or
Defendant may remove the Plaint into the Common Pleas or Upper Bench by a
Recordare, etc. and it shall be good, and he shall declare upon the same. And
the Court shall hold Plea upon the fame Plaint; for if the Plaint be continued
in the County, and issue joined upon it, yet nothing shall be removed but only
the Plaint, and in the Common Pleas the Plaintiff may declare anew, etc.

Likewise if the Recordare bear date before the Plaint was entered in the
County, it is good enough, and the Record is well removed.

The nature of a Pone.
A Pone does nothing differ from a Recordare, but that a Pone is always to
remove such Suits as are before the Sheriff by Writ of Iusticies, and not by
Plaint only; but the Recordare is to remove the Suit that is by Plaint only
without Writ. F. N. B. 70. 11.

The Return.
By virtue of this Writ to me directed, I have put before the Justices, etc. of
the Common Bench at Westminster, the Plea which is in my County by Writ of his
Highness the Lord Protector of Iusticies, betwixt A. B. and C. D. of a Plea of
debt, as it is said, as it appears in a certain Schedule to this Writ
annexed, etc.

The Schedule.
At my County Court held at the Castle of Y. in the County aforesaid, upon
Monday the twelfth day of August, in the year of our Lord 1658. etc. A. B.
complains of C. D. of a Plea of debt, in testimony of which matter, R. L. S.
R. T. O. and S. D. four legal men of those who at the Record present were in
full Court their seals severally have put, the day and year abovesaid.

The Plea by Writ. Nota.
A. B. complains of C. D. of a plea of debt, 20 l.

That if a plea be removed by Pone at the suit of the Defendant, or Plaintiff,
and afterward they proceed in this Court in the plea, and give judgment and
award execution, etc. then the Defendant, or he against whom the judgment was
given, and execution awarded shall have an attachment against the Sheriff
directed to the Coroner, to answer as well his Highness the Lord Protector, for
the contempt, as the party his damages, etc.

Of the Writ of Prohibition.
THe Writ of Prohibition is of the same nature of a Recordare, and a Pone, but
not in use.

Of the Consultation, or Procedendo.
THese two Writs are both of one nature, though the Writ of Consultation be
obsolete, and the writ of Procedendo stepped up into its place; it lies where a
cause has been formerly removed by Pone or Recordare from this Court into the
Upper Bench, or Common Pleas, and for want of sufficient cause of removeall is
sent back again, Fitz. old Natura brevium 50.

The nature of a Writ of False Judgment.
A Writ of salfe Judgment lies where an erroneous Judgment is given in this
Court, (being no Court of Record) then the party grieved by the Judgment, may
have this Writ, and remove all process of the suit into the Common Bench, and
there it shall be examined, if it be found erroneous, the Judgment shall be
reversed, and the suitors of the Court who gave the Judgment amerced.

Nota.
Note, that a Writ of false Judgment lies not, but in a Court where there are
Suitors; for if there be no Suitors there, the Record cannot be certified by
them, F. N. B. 43. H.

By virtue of this Writ to me directed, to be Recorded, The Return.
I have caused the Plea (which is in my County) together with the proceedings
and the Judgment, betwixt the parties beneath, and to the same parties day
have prefixed, to be before the Justices within written, at the day and place
within contained, as the Writ exacts and requires, which plea with the
proceedings and judgment, appears in a certain Schedule to this Writ annexed.

The Schedule.
A Plaint by Writ in the County Court, holden at the Castle of Y. in the County
aforesaid, on Monday the 23. day of August, the year, etc. before the Suitors
of the same Court, in the time of I. B. Esquire, Sheriff of the County
aforesaid, according to the Customs and Privileges of the same Court (time
whereof the memory of man is not to the contrary) have been used and approved
in the same.

Writ of Justicies
At this Court came A. B. in his proper person, and brought here into Court a
Writ of his Highness the Lord Protector of Iusticies, which said Writ follows
in these words: O LIVER Lord Protector of, etc. To the Sheriff of Y. greeting.
A. B. has complained to us, that C. D. upon him the said A. B. at the Castle
of Y. has made an assault, and has beaten, wounded, and evil entreated him,
so that of his life it was despaired, and has done him other wrongs, to the
great damage and grievance of the said A. B. and therefore we command you, that
you hear the said plaint, and after cause them to be therefore brought to
justice for the same, that we hear no more complaint therein for want of
justice. Witness our selves at Westminster the 10. day of August in the year
of our Lord 1656. And thereupon found Pledges to prosecute the said plaint,
that is to say, Io. Do. and Ric. Roo. And thereupon the said A. B. put in his
place S. D his Attorney in the plaint aforesaid, and by his said Attorney
required process to be made to him upon the same: And it was commanded by the
said I. B. Esquire, Sheriff of the said County, to all and singular Warrant
upon the writ.
his Bailiffs jointly and severally, and their Deputies, that they or some of
them should do justice to the said C. D. so that he should be and appear at the
next County Court to be holden at the Castle of Y. on Monday the 20. day of
September, then next in the year aforesaid, to answer the said A. B. in the
plaint aforesaid. At which day came the said A. B. by his Attorney aforesaid,
and offered himself against the said C. D. in the plaint aforesaid; and then
and there came I. P. one of the Bailiffs in the County aforesaid, of the said
I. B. Sheriff of the said County, and returned the said precept so directed as
Essoin. De male vener.
aforesaid, served and executed on him: and the said C. D. did Essoin, because
he could not come until the next County Court, to be holden at the Castle
aforesaid, at which said next Court (viz.) on Monday the 10, day of October
then next following, in the year abovesaid, came the aforesaid A. B. by his
Attorney aforesaid, and offered himself against the said C. D. in the plaint
aforesaid, and the said C. D. then and there came in his proper person to
answer the aforesaid A. B. in the plaint aforesaid, and put in his place I. R.
his Attorney against the said A. B. in the plaint aforesaid, and by his said
Attorney desired of the said Court, that the said A. B. should declare against
him upon his said plaint: and thereupon the said A. B. by his Attorney
aforesaid declared against the said C. D. upon the plaint aforesaid in manner
and form following. Yo. ss. Declaration.


Emparlance.
A. B. By virtue of a writ of Iusticies by S. D. his Attorney complains of C. D.
of an action of trespass and assault, for that the said C. D. the 10. day of
October in the year, etc. at the Castle, etc. in and upon the aforesaid A. B.
did make an assault and affray, and him did beat, wound, and evil entreat so
that he did despair of his life, and other harms did do unto him, to the great
damage of the said A. B. wherefore the said A. B. says he is damnified to the
value of 20 l. and thereupon brings this action, etc. Whereupon at the same
Court, at the request of the Defendant, day was given to the said parties in
the plaint aforesaid, till the next county Court, to be holden before the
suitors aforesaid on Monday the 15. day of November then next following, saving
to the Defendant, etc. at which day at the said Court before the suitors
aforesaid, holden at the Castle of Y. aforesaid, came as well the said A. B. by
his Attorney aforesaid, as the said C. D. by his Attorney aforesaid, and then
and there the said I. B. Esquire, was removed from the office of Sheriff of the
County aforesaid, and R. L. Esquire was duly elected, and did enter into the
said office of Sheriff of the County of Y. aforesaid, whereupon at the same
Court, at the request of the parties, further day was given to the said parties
in the plaint aforesaid, until the next County Court, on Monday the 13. day of
December then next following, in the year abovesaid, to be holden before the
suitors aforesaid, saving to the parties, etc. at which day, at the said Court,
before the suitors aforesaid, holden Non sum informatus.
at the Castle aforesaid, came as well the said A. B. by his said Attorney, as
the said C. D. by his Attorney aforesaid, And the said C. D. by his Attoruey
aforesaid, came and defended the injury when, etc. And the said Attorney said
that he was not informed by his said Clyent of any answer for him the said C.
D. to the said A. B. in the plaint aforesaid to be given, whereby the said A.
B. did remain against the said C. D. thereupon without defense, for which the
said A. B. ought to recover against the said C. D. his damages by occasion of
the trespass, and assault, and wounding aforesaid; but because it was not
known Jury to inquire of damages.
to the Court what damages the said A. B. had sustained by reason of the
premises: therefore at the next County Court holden at the Castle of Y.
aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, before the Suitors aforesaid, upon Monday
the 10. day of January then next following in the year aforesaid, it was
required by the oaths of I. W. R. S. S. G. M. L. T. P. etc. twelve good and
lawful men of the County aforesaid, being present in the Court, and in the
full County sworn to inquire what damages the said A. B. sustained by occasion
of the trespass and assault and wounding say upon their oaths that the said A.
B. has sustained damages by occasion of the trespass and assault, and
wounding, to ten pounds, and for his costs and charges by him in that behalf
expended to two pence, therefore it was considered by the said Court, that the
said A. B. should recover against the said C. D. his damages and costs
aforesaid, by the Jurors aforesaid, in form aforesaid assessed; and also forty
shillings by the Court aforesaid, to the said A. B. by his assent, for increase
of costs to him adjudged, which said damages and costs do amount to twelve
pounds and two pence. And the said C. D. in mercy, etc. In testimony whereof,
etc.

The nature of an Accedeas ad curiam.
THis Writ issues out of the Chancery, directed to the Sheriff, commanding him
to go to such a Court of some Lord or Franchife, as Court Baron, or the like
(being no Court of Record) where a Plaint is sued, or a false judgment is
supposed to be given in some suit, which has been in the Court, and by this
the Sheriff is there to make Record of the same suit, in the presence of the
Suitors of the same Court, and four lawful men of the County, and of this he
is to make a Certificate into the Court above under his seal, and the seals of
four of the Suitors of the same Court, at the day appointed by the writ, F. N.
B. 71. Plowden 74. Finch. 444.

This Writ cannot be had without showing some special cause for the removing of
it: as that a Freehold is in question there, or some foreign plea is pleaded
not triable in that Court, or such like, F. N. B. 70. 119.

The County Clerk is to make a precept upon the Writ in this manner:

Yo ss. I. B. Esquire, Sheriff of the County of Y. Precept upon an Accedeas ad
curiam.
To the Steward and Bailiff of the Court of the Honor of P. greeting. I
command you by virtue of a Writ to me directed, that you take with you four
discreet and lawful Freeholders of the County aforesaid, and that you go to
the Court aforesaid, and in full Court there cause the Plaint to be recorded,
which is in the same Court without Writ, between R S. and G. M. of a certain
trespass upon the case brought by the said R. S. against the said G. M. as is
aforesaid, And that you certify the Record to me, so that I may have the same
before the Justices of the Common Bench at Westminster, from the day of the
holy Trinity in fifteen days under your seals, and the seals of four lawful men
of the said Court, of those that shall be present at the Record, and that you
prefix the same day to the parties, that then they be there ready to proceed in
the said plaint as shall be just, and have you the names of the said four men,
and this Precept; fail not hereof, etc. Given under the Seal of my Office this
second day of June, in the year of our Lord, 1656.

By the Sheriff.

The Return.
Honor of P. ss. The Court Baron of G. S. I. K. etc. holden at P. for the
honor of P. the 12. day of June in the year of our Lord 1656. before I. H. T.
H. I. G. and R. H. suicors of the said Court.

The Plaint.
R. S. complains against I. N. of a plea of Trespass upon the case, to the
damage of 30 s.

By virtue of this Writ to me directed at the Court aforesaid holden the day
and year abovesaid, in full Court there to be recorded, I have caused the
plaint, of which within is made mention, which plaint does appear above
written; and that Record I have returned, sealed with my seal, and the seals of
the aforenamed four lawful men, being in the said Court present at the said
Record; And to the parties within written, I have prefixed the day, in the Writ
specified, that then they be ready to proceed, as just it may be in the said
plaint, as within to me is commanded.

W. O. Steward.

I. H. T. H. I. G. R. H.

Suitors.
Record to be delivered in Court.
By virtue of this Writ to me directed in form within written, I came to the
Court within written, and in that full Court to be recorded I caused the plea
within written, and the Record as it appears in a Schedule to this Writ
annexed, I have before the Justices at the day and place within contained,
under my seal and the seals of T. R. A. B. C. D. and E. F. four legal men of my
Shire of those who at the Record present were, and to the parties, etc.

Or thus, if the Record be not returned.
By virtue of this Writ to me directed, and in my proper person, having taken
with me R. S. etc. good and lawful Knights of my County, I came to the Court
Baron of G. S. I. K. etc. holden at P. for the Honor of P. to Record the Plea
within written, at the day and place within contained, as within to me is
commanded; whereupon the Suitors of the Court aforesaid, at P. aforesaid, in
full Court, me the within written Sheriff the said Writ there to execute, or as
to the said plea in any manner to intermit, altogether denied; for which
execution of the Writ aforesaid make I could not, etc.

It is a good return for the Sheriff to say, that after the receipt of the
Writ, and before the return thereof, that no Court was holden, and that also he
required the Lord to hold his Court, and he would not, so as he could not
execute the same.

The Return of a Writ for the Election of a Coroner, after the death of another.
AT my County Court held such a day and year, in full County aforesaid, by
virtue of this Writ of the assent of the same County in the place of R. O.
within named who deceased is, I have chosen a Coroner, viz. I. M. who (as the
manner is) has taken his oath corporal, that he will do and keep those things
which to the office of a Coroner in the County aforesaid, belong to be done, as
within, etc.

The Return of the Writ of Exigent.
BY virtue of this writ to me directed at my County held at the Castle of Y. in
the County of Y. within written, on Monday, etc. the year, etc. within written,
I. C. and the rest of the Defendants within named (if there be above two in the
writ) first were exacted and appeared not, at my County of Y. there holden on
Monday, etc. the year aforesaid; the foresaid I. C. and the rest of the
Defendants within named the second time were exacted and appeared not, at my
County of Y. there holden on Monday etc. in the year aforesaid, the said I. C.
and the rest of the Defendants within named the third time were exacted and
appeared not, at my County of Y. there held on Monday, etc. in the year
aforesaid, the aforesaid I. C. and the rest of the Defendants within named, the
fourth time were exacted and appeared not. At my County of Y. there held on
Monday, etc. in the year aforesaid the aforesaid I. C. and the rest of the
Defendants within named, the fifth time were exacted, and appeared not. And
therefore I. C. and the rest of the Defendants within named by Judgment of I
W. and W. R. Gent. Coroners of the Commonwealth of the County aforesaid,
according to the Law and Custom of the Commonwealth of England outlawed are,
and every of them is outlawed.

I. B. Esquire, Sheriff.

Betwixt two Sheriffs.
By virtue of this writ to me directed, at my County held at Y. in the County of
Y. within written on Monday, etc. in the year, within written, the said I. R.
within named first exacted was and appeared not, this Writ so above indorsed to
be delivered was by I. B. Esquire, late Sheriff of the County within written,
my next Predecessor, in his going out from his office, as above upon the back
of this writ, And at my County, etc. as before.

Or thus:
This Writ so above indorsed, together with the Writ of Oliver Lord Protector,
of etc. of Supersedeas to it annexed to me delivered was by I. B. Esquire, late
Sheriff of the aforesaid County, my next Predecessor, etc.

Against a woman.
If it be against a woman, she cannot be said to be outlawed, (for the reasons I
showed before) but waved, so that the latter part of the return must be thus,
viz.

Therefore according to law and custom aforesaid, B. D. waved is.

Defect of the Coroner.
By virtue, etc. at my County, held on Monday, etc. the said year, etc. within
written the aforesaid I. C. the fifth time exacted was, and appeared not, and
for defect of N. B. and R, C Coroners of the County aforesaid further thereupon
to prosecute I could not.

Defect of the County.
By virtue, etc. and at my County, etc. and that there were not more Counties in
the County aforesaid held, from the day of the receipt of this writ, to the day
of the rerurn of the same, wherefore nothing done is at present.

Or thus:
And therefore in the Execution of this Writ further to be done nothing acted
is.

Supersedeas.
By virtue, etc. of my County aforesaid held on Monday, etc. in the year, etc.
within written, the aforesaid C. D. the fourth time exacted was and appeared,
and brought forth to me, the Writ of his Highness the Lord Protector of the
Commonwealth of, etc. of Supersedeas which to this Writ annexed is: wherefore
the execution of this Writ further to be done, I have superseded altogether.

Or thus:
As in the foresaid Writ of his Highness the Lord Protector of, etc. of
Supersedeas to me is commanded.

Or thus:
As to exact, take outlawed, or at all molest the within named I. R. by virtue
of this Writ, to the Justices, etc. within written, at the day and place within
contained I certify, that by virtue of a certain other Writ of his Highness,
etc. to me directed, to this annexed, I have superseded altogether, as by that
Writ to me is commanded.

Where one renders himself, and the rest appear not.
By virtue, etc. at my County of Y. there held, etc. the aforesaid I. H. and the
rest of the Defendants within named the fifth time exacted were, at which day
the aforesaid I. H. appeared, and rendered himself to the prison of his
Highness, etc. of the Castle of Y. whose body before the Justices within
written, at the day and place within contained ready I have, as within to me is
commanded, but the rest of the Defendants within named appeared not, therefore,
etc. as above.

Rendered himself.
And besides I. S. who has rendered himself to the prison of, etc. of the Castle
of Y. whose body before the Justices within written, at the day and place
within contained, ready I have, as this Writ exacteth and requires. And
besides I. C. who dead is, will not Dead.
appear, therefore by Judgment, etc. and the aforesaid T. C. waved is in
presence of T. C. and F. W. Coronors Waved.
of, etc. of the County aforesaid.

At the County, etc. 1. 2. 3. 4. exacted he was, and Languid.
has appeared and rendered himself to the prison of, etc. of the Castle of Y.
where so sick he is, that fore fear of death, him before the Justices within
written, at the day and place within contained, have I cannot.

The Return of the Writ of Proclamation.
BY virtue of this Writ to me directed at my County of Y. held at the castle of
Y. within written, on Monday, etc. the year, etc. within written, the first
time to be proclaimed I caused; And at my County of Y. held at the Castle of Y.
aforesaid in the said County of Y. on Monday, etc. the year, etc. within
written, the second time to be proclaimed I caused; as also at the general
Sessions of the peace held at Skipton for the West riding of the said County,
within written on Tuesday, viz. the 12. day of Sept. aforesaid, the year, etc.
within written publicly to be proclaimed I caused, that I. C. and all other
the Defendants within named, themselves to render to the within named Sheriffs
of London, so that the same Sheriffs have their bodies before the Justices
within written at the day and place within contained, as this Writ exacteth and
requires.

The manner of proceeding upon the Writs of Recordare, Pone, Writ of False
Judgment, etc. in the Common Pleas, after removal out of the County Court.
YOu must repair to the County Clerk or his Deputy, and demand a Return of the
Writ of Recordare or Pone.

If upon the return, the Defendant appear; then must you declare, and when your
Declaration is drawn, enter it upon a roll in one of the Prothonotaries
offices, and see that it be docqueted together with the number of the roll.

If the Writ be returnable in the beginning of a term, (especially in issuable
terms) the Desendant is to answer the same term, unless the Desendant has
Emparlance to plead until the following term.

Rules to answer must be entered in the Remembrance in the Prothonotaries
Office, entering in the Margent or over the head of the Rule, that if the
Defendant do not plead (within some few days) let Judgment be entered. And if
no plea be brought in within the time, then may you sign Judgment with the
Prothonotary in default of answer.

Nota.
If the Defendant appear not upon the return of the Writ, then may the Plaintiff
have a Procedendo to carry the cause back again into the County Court.

If the Plaintiffs Attorney declare not against the Desendant, upon his
appearance, within a reasonable time of the Term: then may the Defendants
Attorney enter a Rule in the Bill of Pleas against the Plaintiff to declare,
and if he declare not, then may he enter a Non prosec. and sign it with the
Prothonotary, and costs given for the unjust vexation.

If the Defendant plead general issue, then must the Attorney for the
Defendant set his hand to the Doquet book of the Plaintiffs Attorney, who draws
up the plea, and makes a Copy of the issue, and delivers it to the Defendants
Attorney, and then they usually give notice of trial.

If the Defendant plead specially he is to bring it to the Plaintiffs Attorney
under a Sergeants hand, and if the Plaintiff reply specially, it must likewise
be under the Sergeants hand: the like upon a Demurrer to a Declaration, and
Rejoinder in Demurrer.

Nisi prius.
If your trial be by Nisi prius, at the Assizes in the Country, and the Jury
appear not full upon the Panel, then may you require a December tales de
circumstantibus. viz. ten of the standers by to fill up the Jury, or more or
less, as is requisite, which Tales must be mentioned upon the return of the
Postea, and the Judgment upon it in the Issue Roll.

Having entered your Declaration with the Issue joined in the Prothonotaries
Office, then make out a Venire facias upon your Issue, and get signed with the
Prothonotary and seal it; then get it returned by the Sheriff of the County
where the action is laid; and upon the return of it sue forth an Habeas
corpora, and deliver the same to the Sheriff to summon the Jury, and get it
returned before the Assizes.

In suing forth your Nisi prius, ingrosse your Record, according to the copy of
the Issue made up, and the entry of it upon the Roll in the Prothonotaries
Office, and examine it; if it be upon an Issue joined the same Term, whose hand
must be to it, then carry the same to the Clerk of the Treasury to sign and
make up the Record.

If the Issue was entered of a Term past, then must you deliver the paper Book
of the Issue to the Clerk of the Treasury, to examine the same by the Roll, and
to make up the Record; which must be signed by him, then must it be sealed with
the Lord chief Justice of the Court, and then deliver it together with the Hab:
Corp: Iur. returned by the Sheriff to the Clark of the Ass: for that County
where it is to be tried, paying the Judges.

Then retain Council, and have your witnesses ready for the trial.

The trial being had, and verdict passing for your Client, the next Term you
are to call of the Clerk of the Assizes for a return of the Postea, and
thereupon the Prothonotor will assesse costs, and cause Judgment to be entered,
upon which you may have Execution by Capias ad satisfaciendum, Fieri facias, or
Elegit, etc. according as you desire, and as the nature of the action brought
does allow or require.

Nota. Cap. ad sasis.
Note that a Capias ad satisfac. is only against the body, who must be
imprisoned until satisfaction be made, and if, the Defendant cannot be found,
the Plaintiff cannot have another Execution, 20 E. 2. for he may chufe at the
first, whether he will have a Capias or an Elegit, but if he take the Capias he
shall not have the Elegit afterward, nec e converso, 15. H. 7. 15.

Fi. Fa.
The Writ of Fieri facias is only against the goods; as; Leases for years, or
moveable goods, as Corn, Household stuff. Cattle, Apparel, Money, Plate, etc.
and it ought to be sued out within the year after the Judgment, Co. 3. 13.
After a Fi. fa. a man may have an Elegit; but on the contrary, after the Elegit
he cannot have a Fi. fa. because the Elegit is of a higher nature then the
Fieri facias.

Elegit.
An Elegit is a Writ whereby the Plaintiff is to have Execution of the half of
all the Defendants lands and chattels, (except Oxen and beasts of the Plough)
till the debt and damages be wholly levied, and paid to him, and during the
term he is tenant by Elegit. Terms of the Law.

The Proceedings upon the Writ of False Judgment.
YOu must call of the County Clerk for a return of the Writ, together with the
whole Record of all the proceedings from the original and beginning of the
cause in the County Court.

The Writ being returned, you must assign Errors, and take Copies thereof, and
thereupon sue forth a Scire facias to the Plaintiff in the Action to hear
Errors. To which the Plaintiff may appear and plead the common plea, which is,
that The action nor proceedings in the County Court are in nothing erroneous.
Then must the Desendant endeavor to get a Rule, or day given for the arguing of
the same Errors.

But if the Defendant does delay, and does not call for a return of the writ,
nor proceed, then the Plaintiff may sue forth another Scire facias against the
Defendant, to show cause why he should not have Execution upon the Judgment
had in the County Court: And if at the Return of the second Scire Facias:
Errors be not assigned then Judgment is confirmed in that Court into which the
Writ is returnable.

If Errors be found and allowed to be sufficient and good, then is the said
Judgment to be reversed and made void: But if Errors be not found good, then is
the Judgment in the County Court affirmed, and further costs for delay of
Execution allowed to the Plaintiff who may presently sue forth Execution, out
of that Court into which the Writ was returned against the Defendant.

Nota.
Note, that if the Judgment be reversed and made void, yet notwithstanding it
takes not away the Plaintiffs cause of action, for he may commence a new action
against the Desendant for the same cause.

The same proceedings are upon an Accedeas ad Curiam. See the Record upon it.

The manner and form of drawing up Records upon a Writ of False Judgment, and
Accedeas ad Curiam.
Record upon a writ of false Judgment.
THe Sheriff is commanded that if A. B. shall secure the same Sheriff to
prosecute his plaint then in his full County, he cause to be recorded the
plaint which was in the same County by writ of his Highness the Lord
Protector, etc. between W. B. and the same A. B. in a certain Trespass upon
the case, to the same W. B. by the same A. B. done, etc. And whereupon the same
A. B. did complain, that False Judgment was done to him in the same County; and
that he should have here at this day; that is to say, Octab. pur. under his
Seal, and by four lawful Knights of the same County, who should be present at
the Record, and that he should have here the Summoners, the names of the four
Knights, this Writ, and another Writ.

And now here at this day came as well the same A. B. by Simon Dunn his
Attorney, as the said W. B. summoned, etc. by Phit. Prince his Attorney: And
the Sheriff (to wit) Geo. Mar. Esquire now returns, that the same A. B. had
found to the same Sheriff Pledges to prosecute his said Writ; to wit, John Do
and Ric Roo, And that he by virtue of that Writ to him directed, at his County
held at the Castle of York, in the County asoresaid, the 10. day of May in the
year of our Lord 1657. made the same plaint to be recorded, which was in the
same County between the same A. B. and W. B. and the Record of the same plaint
before the Justices here at this day, under his seal, and the seals of H. M.
and four lawful Knights of the same County has ready of those who were
present at the Record. And that he summoned the same W. B. that he should be
here at this day to hear the Record by R. S. and F. L. as by the same Writ to
him it was commanded, etc. which said Record follows in these words:

OLIVER Lord Protector, etc. To the Sheriff of York greeting, W. B. has
requested that A. B. of C. in your County husbandman, although the same W. B.
be our true and faithful subject, and as our true and faithful subject from
the time of his nativity hitherto has carried and behaved himself, and of
good name and same among many of our saithfull subjects was noted, called, and
reputed, notwithstanding the same A. B. not ignorant of the premises, the same
W. B. unjustly to vex: and him of his goods, name, fame, and opinion, whereof
from his nativity to deprive and conspurgate: And the same W. B. into
perturbation; vexation, and infamy amongst his neighbors, and many other
saithfull subjects and people of this Commonwealth to induce plain salse and
scandalous words of the same W. B. at C. in the presence of many faithful
subjects and people of this Commonwealth, said, published, and pronounced in
these English words following, to wit, W. B. (the same W. B. meaning) has
stolen my horse; By speaking, publishing, and pronouncing which same words, the
same W. B. not only in his good name and same is hurt, but also in his doings
and businesses with honest persons, with whom the same W. B. in buying,
selling, and lawful bargaining before used, is much prejudiced, and made
worse, to the no little damage and loss of the same W. B. etc.

And therefore we command you that you hear the said Plaint, and afterward
cause the same to be withdrawn, that we hear no more clamor thereof for
defect of Justice.

Witness, etc.

Pleas held at the Castle of York, in the County Court. ss.
County of York, upon Monday the second day of June in the year of our Lord
1657.
AT this Court W. B. complains of A. B. in a plea of Trespass upon the case,
W. B. by P. P. his Attorney complains of A. B. in a plea of Trespass upon
the case; for that, to wit, that whereas the same W. B. is a good, true, and
faithful subject of this Commonwealth of England, from the time of his
nativity hitherto has carried and behaved himself, and of good name, same,
credit and reputation, honestly with good and grave men, as well his neighbors
as other saithfull subjects of the said Commonwealth, was had, noted, called,
and reputed, without any falsehood, thest, perjury, selony, deceit, or stain of
any other fault, or hurtful crime unspotted and untouched by the whole time
aforesaid, carried and governed himself. Notwithstanding the said A. B. not
ignorant of the premises out of his mere and wicked malice preconceived,
endeavoring the name and same of the same W. B. to hurt, detract, make worse,
darken, and utterly to destroy: and also into perturbation, vexation and
insamy, to lead and induce, certain salse and scandalous words and lies of the
same W. B. the 8. day of April in the year of our Lord 1656. at, etc. and
within the liberty and jurisdiction of this Court, in the presence and hearing
of many faithful subjects of the said Commonwealth, said, repeated, and spread
abroad in these English words following; to wit, W. B. (meaning the same W. B.)
has stolen my horse out of my Close, which I will prove. By pretext of speaking
and spreading abroad of which said salse scandalous words, the same W. B. not
only in his good name and same is hurt, but also in performance of his
business with honest persons with whom the said W. B. in buying, selling, and
lawful bargaining is much hindered and damnified, and also some subjects and
people of this Commonwealth for that occasion will draw themselves from the
company of the same W. B. and to converse with him, or any ways to intermeddle
refused, and yet do refuse; whereupon, etc. damages to 39 l. And thereof he
brings suit, etc. And the said A. B. by S. D. his Attorney comes, etc. And
says, that the said W. B. his action aforesaid against him ought not to have,
because he says that he is not guilty of the speaking, and spreading abroad of
the words in the Declaration aforesaid specified, nor of any part of them in
manner and form as the said W. B. above against him complains. And this, etc.
Therefore according to the custom it is commanded to the Bailiff of the
Weapentake of Ouze and Dar, that, etc. that he cause to come before the Steward
of the same Court, at the next Court of the County aforesaid, such a day, 12.
etc. And that he then have there the same Precept together with the panel of
the names of the Jurors aforesaid the same day, etc. At which County Court held
at the Castle of Y. aforesaid, according to the custom before the Steward there
upon Monday the 2. day of April came as well the same W. B. by his Attorney
aforesaid, as the same A. B. by his Attorney aforesaid, etc. and the same
Bailiff of the Weapentake aforesaid, returned the precept to him, directed in
all things, served together with a Panel of the names of the Jurors. Annexed
to the precept, to wit, in the same panel are named L. M. N. R. etc. to make a
Jury between the parties aforesaid, in the plea aforesaid, who to speak the
truth of the premises, being elected, tried and sworn, say upon their oath,
that the said A. B. is guilty of the speaking and spreading abroad of the said
words in the said Declaration specified, and they assessed the damages of the
said W. B. by occasion of the speaking of the same words, besides his costs and
expenses by him about his suit in this behalf laid out to 4 l. 5 s. and for
those costs and expenses to 8 d. Therefore at the same Court, that the said W.
B. should recover against the said A. B. his said damages by the Jury
aforesaid, in form aforesaid assessed, and also 3 s. 8 d. for his costs and
expenses, which said damages in the whole do amount unto 5 l. 17 s. 4 d.

In witness whereof the seal of the Steward of the Court aforesaid is put,
Dated at the Castle of Y. the 12. day of March in the year of our Lord 1657.
Errors assigned.
And hereupon the same VV. B. prays that the same A. B. may show to the Court
here, and assign the defects, wherein false Judgment is made in the said
plaint, if any be done to him: whereupon the same A. B. says, that the same
Record is vicious, and much defective, to wit, in that it does not appear by
the Record, before whom the first Court was held, and in this, that the said
VV. B. by his Declaration did complain himself to be damnified and made worse,
to the value of 40 l. whereas by the law of the land, that Court cannot hold
plea of 40 s.

In this also that the same Court held the 12. of March, was held before the
Steward, whereas it ought to be held before the Suitors of the same Court, and
the Sheriff of the County for the time being, so that the same Judgment was
given Coram non Iudice. Also in this that by the same Record, it appears,
that the same VV. B. appeared by P. P. his Attorney, and the same A. B.
appeared by S. D. his Attorney; but in the Record is not mentioned any Warrant
of Attorney for the same VV. B. or for the same A. B. in the said plaint. And
to the same A. B. says, that diverse manner of ways in the County Court
aforesaid, false Judgment is made to him in the said plaint. And hereupon
prays, that the said Judgment for the said defects and others being in the
same Record as false and erroneous may be adnulled and altogether taken for
nothing. And the same A. B. to the said 5 l. 17 s. 4 d. which the said A. B. by
virtue of the same Judgment, for his damages, by occasion of the premises,
recovered against him, and unto all things, which he by occasion of the same
Judgment lost, may be restored, etc.

And the same W. B. says, that in the Record aforesaid, there is no error,
nor to the same A. B. in the same County Court held at the Castle of Y.
aforesaid, false Judgment is made in the same plaint: and prays, that the
Justices here proceed to the examination of the same Record, and to resorm and
correct the false Judgment, if any be found therein, proved, or can be made
appear. And because the Justices here will advise themselves of, and upon the
premises, before they further proceed therein, day is given, etc, in Oct. pur.
to hear thereof, what the Court hereof, and upon the premises shall consider,
because the Justices hear thereof not as yet, etc. At which day here came
as well the said A. B. as the said W. B. by their Attorneys aforesaid. And
because the Justices here further will advise themselves of, and upon the
premises aforesaid, before they proceed further therein, further day is given
etc. in Men's. Pas. to hear thereof, what the Court hereof, and upon the
premises aforesaid shall consider, for that the Justices hear thereof not as
yet, etc.

If any errors and defects be found in the proceedings, then will the Judgment
be reversed, and a Writ of Restitution awarded.
Upon a Replevin.
It was commanded the Sheriff, if A. B. and C. D. should secure the same Sheriff
of prosecuting their complaint then in his full County, he should make to be
recorded the plaint which was in the same Court, without Writ of his Highness
the L. Protector between E. F. and the same A. B. and C. D. of the cattle of
the same E. F. taken and unjustly detained, etc. And whereupon the same A. B.
and C. D. complained false Judgment to be made to them in the same Court, And
that he should have that Record here at this day. to wit, in Octab. Hill. under
his seal, and the seals of four lawful Knights, who should be present at the
Record. And that he summon by good summoners, the said E. F. that he should be
here at this day, to hear the Record, etc.

And now here at this day came as well the same A. B. and C. D. by S. D. their
Attorney, as the same E. F. by P. P. his Attorney: and the Sheriff, to wit, G.
M Esquire, now returns, That the same A. B. and C. D. had found to the same
Sheriff pledges to prosecute the said Writ, to wit, Jo. Do. and Rio. Roo. and
that he summoned the same E. F. to be here at this day, by I. R. and I. S.
honest, etc.

The Sheriff also returns, that he by virtue of the same Writ to him
directed, in his full County holden at the Castle of Y. in the County aforesaid
the 12. day of April last past, caused the said plaint to be recorded; and have
the Record here at this day, under his seal, and the seals of L. M. M. R.
honest and lawful Knights of the same County, of those who were present at
that Record, as by the said Writ it was commanded him; the tenor of which
Record follows in these words:

Yo. ss.
Be it remembered, that the 12. day of April in the year of our Lord. 1657.
before G. M. Esquire, Sheriff of the County aforesaid at the Castle of Y. in
the same County of Y. came the same E. F. by P. P. his Attorney, and complained
against A. B. and C. D. of a plea; wherefore they took the cattle of the same
E. F. and them unjustly detained against sureties and pledges, until, etc. And
found to the said E. F. pledges to prosecute his complaint aforesaid, and also
for the returning of the cattle, if the returning of them be adjudged by Law;
to wit, Jo. Do. and Ric. Roo. And then and there demanded due process in Law
against A. B. and C. D. thereof to be made, etc. Therefore according to the
custom in the County aforesaid, from the time whereof the memory of man is not
to the contrary used and approved on the behalf of his said Highness the Lord
Protector now, It was commanded to I, S. Bailiff of the Weapentake of W. and
one of the Ministers of the said Sheriff of the County aforesaid, that
according to that custom he put by sureties and safe pledges the same A. B.
and C. D. that they should be before me the said Sheriff, at the next Court of
the County aforesaid; to wit, at the aforesaid Castle of Y. the 12. day of
April in the year, etc. abovesaid then next following to be held, to answer the
said E. F. in the plea aforesaid: And the same day was given to the said E. F.
then, against the same A. B. and C. D. to prosecute the same plea. At which day
here, to wit, at my next Court then held at the said Castle of Y. came the said
E. F. by his Attorney aforesaid the same 12. day of April. And the same I. S.
Bailiff of the Weapentake aforesaid, returned the precept aforesaid to him, in
form aforesaid directed, in all things served and executed; to wit, that he by
virtue of the same precept attached the same A. B. and C. D. by pledges, to
wit, Jo. Den, and Ric. Fen. to be here at this day, to wit, the same 12. day of
April in form aforesaid, as by the said precept to him it was commanded.

And the same A. B. and C. D. in full Court there being called, came not, but
made default: whereupon the same E. F. by his Attorney aforesaid, prays
process further therein to be made upon the said complaint against the said A.
B. and C. D. and has it, etc.

Distress awarded.
Therefore according to the custom of the County Court aforesaid, it was
commanded to the same I. S. Bailiff of the Weapentake of W. and one of the
Ministers of the County Court aforesaid, that according to the custom of that
Court, he distrain the same A. B. and C. D. by all their goods and chattels in
his Bailiwick: So that, neither, etc. until etc. And that they should be before
me the said Sheriff at the next County Court to be held at the said Castle of
Y. to wit, the 10. day of May in the year abovesaid, then next following, to
answer the same E F. in the same plea. The same day is given to the same E. F.
here, etc. At which said next County Court aforesaid here, to wit, at the said
Castle of Y. the same 10. day of May in the year abovesaid then held, came as
well the said E. F. by P. P. his Attorney asoresaid, as the said A. B. and C.
D. by S. D. their Attorney. And the said A. B. and C. D. offered themselves
against the said E. F. in the same plea. And the same E. F. complained
thereupon, and declared against the said A. B. and C. D. of a plea, wherefore
the same A. B. and C. D. the 4. day of March in the year etc. at T. within the
Jurisdiction of this Court, in a certain place called the Hayes, took the
cattle, to wit, six calves of the same E. F. and them unjustly detained,
against sureties and pledges until, etc.

Whereupon he then said, that he was the worse, and had damage to the value of
39 s. 11 d. and thereupon brought his suit, etc.

And hereupon the same E. F. then and there put in his place the same P. P. his
Attorney, against the same E. B. and C. D. to gain or lose in the same plea:
(here must be likewise awarrant of Attorney for the Defendant:) And thereupon
the same A. B. and C. D. by S. D. their Attorney aforesaid, then in the same
Court demanded a Copy of the Declaration aforesaid; and license thereof to
imparl here, until the next County Court before the said Sheriff, to wit, the
15. day of May in the year abovesaid then next following, to be held at the
Castle of York, and then to answer, etc. And it is granted to them, etc. The
same day is given to the same E. F. here, etc. At which said next County Court,
before the said Sheriff of the County aforesaid here; to wit at the Castle of
Y. aforesaid the 15. day of May in the year abovesaid, came as well the said E.
F. as the said A. B. and C. D. by their said Attorneys. And it is said to the
said Attorney, of the said A. B. and C. D. by the Court here, that he answer
for the same, A. B. and C. C. his Clyents to the same E. F. in the said Plaint:
And the said Attorney, for his said Clyents says nothing in Bar, as in others,
by which the said E. F. his damages against the said A. B. and C. D. by
occasion of the taking and unjust detaining of his Cattle aforesaid, ought to
recover; but because it is unknown to the Court here what damages the said E.
F. sustained by occasion of the premises; It is commanded to the said I. S.
then Bailiff of the Wapentake of W. aforesaid, and one of the Ministers of the
County Court aforesaid, that he cause to come before the said Sheriff at the
next county Court of the County aforesaid, to wit, the 15th day of May, in the
year abovesaid, at the Castle of Y. aforesaid, then next following to be held,
twelve honest and lawful men of the neighborhood of S. to be suspected by
neither party, to enquire upon their Oath what damages the said E. F.
sustained, as well by the occasion of the taking, and unjust detaining of the
cattle aforesaid, as for his costs and charges by him about his suit in this
behalf laid out: and the same day was given to the said E. F. here, etc.

At which said next County Court the same 15. day of May in the year
abovesaid, before the same Sheriff of the County aforesaid held, came the said
E. F. by his Attorney aforesaid: And the same I. S. Bayliffe of the Wapentake
aforesaid sent not his precept thereof: Therefore, as before, it is commanded
to the said I. S. Bailiff, etc. that he cause to come here at the next County
Court, before the same Sheriff of the County aforesaid, to wit, the 12 day of
A. in the year abovesaid, at the castle of Y. aforesaid, to be held the 12th,
etc. to enquire, etc to inform aforesaid, etc.

At which day, to wit, the 12th day of April aforesaid before the same Sheriff
of the County aforesaid, came the same E. F. by his Attorney aforesaid. And the
said I. S. Bayliffe, etc. and one of the Ministers of the same Court, returned
before the same Sheriff, the said precept de venire fac. in all things served
and executed.

And thereupon the Jury being thereof impannelled and called, came, and to
enquire in form as aforesaid, sworn and charged, say, upon their oath, that
the said E. F. sustained damages by reason of the taking and unjust detaining
of the Cattle aforesaid, besides his costs and charges by him about his suit in
this behalf laid out 30 s. and for these costs and charges to 12 d. Therefore
it is considered by the Court here, that the said E. F. recover against the
said A. B. and C. D. his said damages by the Jury aforesaid, in form aforesaid
assessed, and also 26 s. to the same E. F. by the Court here for his said costs
and charges of his assent of increase adjudged; which said damages in the whole
amount unto 57 s And the same A. B. and C. D. in mercy, etc.

Whereupon it was commanded to the same I. S. Bailiff of the Wapentake of W.
aforesaid, that of the goods and Chattels of the same A. B. and C. D. in his
Bayliwick, he should levy the damages aforesaid: and that he have the money
before the said Sheriff at the next County Court at the castle of Y. to be
held, to wit, the tenth day of March, in the year abovesaid, to render to the
said E. F. for his damages aforesaid: Whereupon the same E. F. prays, that
the said A. B. and C. D. would assign and declare to the Court herein, what or
wherein false judgment is made to him in the said Plaint, if any thing can be
found proved, or made appear, etc.

Error assigned.
And hereupon the same A. B. and C. D. say, that the said Record is vicious, and
very much defective in this; to wit, that by the same Record it appears, that
the same cattle were taken the 15. day of January, in the year abovesaid; and
that the complaint thereupon was levied at the County Court of the Sheriff, the
19th day of December in the year abovesaid: so that the complaint was levied
before the taking of the cattle before made, etc. Also in this, that by the
Record it appears, that the County Court aforesaid was held before the said
Sheriff of the County aforesaid; whereas the same Court ought to be held
before the same Sheriff and suitors of the same Court, so that the same Plaint
was levied Coram non judice: And the process thereupon adjudged without any
warrant in Law: And so the same A. B. and C. D. say, that in the County
aforesaid false judgment was done to them in the said Plaint; And pray that
the said judgment for those errors and others, in the same record and
proceedings being may be revoked, adnulled, and altogether taken for nothing:
And that they unto all things which they by occasion of the judgment aforesaid
have lost, may be restored, etc.

A Record upon an Acced: ad Cnriam upon false judgment.
It was commanded the Sheriff, that if A. B. should secure the same Sheriff to
prosecute his complaint, that then taking with him four discreet and lawful
Knights of the County aforesaid in his proper person, he come to the Court of
the Honor of P. and in full Court cause to be recorded that Plaint which was
in the same Court of his Highness the Lord Protector, between C. D. and the
same A. B. in a certain Action upon the Case, to the same C. D. by the same A.
B. done as it is said: Whereupon the same A. B. complains false judgment to
be made to him in the said Court, and that he should have here the Record at
this day, to wit, Octab. Hill. under his seal, and by four lawful men of the
same County of those who shall be present at the Record; and that he summon by
good summoners the said C. D. that he should be here to hear that Record.

And that he have then here the names of the four Knights, and that Writ, etc.
And now here at this day, to wit, Octab. Hill. came as well the same A. B. by
S. D. his Attorney, as the same C. D. by P. P. his Attorney.

And the Sheriff, to wit, G. M. Esquire now returns that the same A. B. found to
the same Sheriff pledges to prosecute, Io. Do, Ric. Roo. And that the same C.
D. was summoned to be here at this day by Io: Den, and Ric. Fen and that he by
virtue of the same Writ to him directed took along with him I. S. W. P. I. H.
and W. VV. four discreet and lawful Knights of the County aforesaid, and in
his proper person came to the said Court held at P. in the County aforesaid the
15th day of October, in the year of our Lord, 1657. and in full Court made to
be recorded the said Plaint whereof in the same Writ mention is made; which
said Record here at this day, he has ready under his seal, and the seals of
the said four lawful men, who were present at the Record, as by the same Writ
to him it was commanded to answer to the said C. D. in the same plea: whereupon
the same A. B, at the same Court put in his place S. D, his Attorney in the
same plea. And the same C. D. at the same Court by his Attorney aforesaid,
complained against the same A. B. for that, to wit, that whereas the same C. D.
the last day of Dec. in the year aforesaid, at W. aforesaid, and within the
jurisdiction of the Court aforesaid, was possessed of one piece of woollen
cloth, containing eleven else, price 34 s. as of his proper goods and chattels.

And being so thereof possessed, the same piece of cloth out of his hands and
possession casually lost; which said piece of cloth afterward, to wit, the
12th day of February then next following, into the hands and possession of the
said Defendant by finding came: Notwithstanding the said Defendant knowing the
said piece of cloth to be the proper piece of cloth of the said Plaintiff,
and to him of right to belong and appertain; and minding and intending the same
Plaintiff of the same piece of cloth, craftily and subtly to deceive and
defraud the same piece of cloth, although thereof the third day of March, in
the year abovesaid, he was requested to the same, and has not delivered; but
the same piece of cloth afterward, to wit, the 18th day of March then next
following at VV. aforesaid, within the jurisdiction of this Court aforesaid,
unto his proper use he converted and disposed, to the damage of the said
Plaintiff of 39 s. And thereof he brings suit, etc. And the said Defendant at
the same Court prays License thereof to imparle until the next Court, and
has it, etc. The same day is given to the said Plaintiff then there, etc. At
which day the Court was held within the said Honor of P. the 26th day of May
then next following, came as well the said Plaintiff, as the said Defendant by
their Attorheys aforesaid: And the same Defendant prays further Imparlance
until the next Court within the said Honor to be held, and has it, etc. The
same day is given to the said Plaintiff then there, etc. At which said next
Court holden within the Honor aforesaid the 26th. day of May then next
following came as well the same Plaintiff, as the same Defendant, by their
Attorneys aforesaid: and hereupon the said Defendant prays further imparlance
thereunto, to speak until the next Court of the Honor aforesaid, to be held
and has it, etc. The same day is given to the said Plaintiff then there, etc.

At which said Court held within the said Honor the day of then next
following, came as well the said Plaintiff as the said Defendant by their
Attorneys aforesaid. And the same Defendant then defended the force and wrong
when, etc. And said that he was in nothing guilty of the premises above
imposed upon him, as the said Plaintiff by his said Declaration complained
against him; and of this he puts himself upon the Country, and the said
Plaintiff likewise: whereupon it was then commanded to the Bailiff of the
Honor aforesaid, that he cause to come to the Court of the Honor aforesaid to
be held by 12 free and lawful men of the Honor asoresaid, to try the issue
aforesaid above joined, Day was given to the parties abovesaid, then there etc.

At which said next Court held within the said Honor the day of then next
following, came as well the said Plaintiff as the said Defendant, by their
Attorneys aforesaid: and the said Bailiff returned the Panel with all the
Jurors; whereof 12 being called came, and were sworn, and said upon their oath
that the said C. D. was possessed of the said piece of cloth in the Declaration
aforesaid specified: and that the same piece of cloth by finding came to the
hands of the said A. B. and that the said Plaintiff requested the same A. B. to
deliver to the same Plaintiff the same piece of cloth: and that the said
Defendant did not deliver the same to the said Plaintiff.

And further, the said Jury said, that the said Defendandant does yet detain in
his hands, the same piece of Cloth, and if upon the whole matter, in form
aforesaid found the same Defendant to be guilty of the premises in the
Declaration aforesaid specified, or not, the Jury aforesaid are altogether
ignorant, and pray the advice of the Court in the premises: and if upon the
whole matter in form aforesaid found, it shall seem to the Court that the said
Desendant is guilty of the premises in the Declaration aforesaid specified,
then the said Jury say upon their oath, That the same Defendant is guilty of
the premises in the Declaration before said specified. And then the said Jury
do assesse damages, by occasion of the premises; besides costs and charges by
him about his suit in this behalf laid out, to 20 s. and for those costs and
charges to 12 d. and if upon the whole matter in form aforesaid found, it
seems to the Court here, that the said Defendant is not guilty of the
premises in the Declaration aforesaid specified, then the Jury aforesaid say
upon their oath, That the said Defendant is not guilty of the premises in the
Declaration aforesaid specified. And because the same Court will advise of, and
upon the premises before they give Judgment therein, day is given to the
parties aforesaid here, until the next Court to be held in the said Honor, to
hear thereof their Judgment, etc. At which said Court held in the said Honor
the day of then next following came as well the said Plaintiff as the said
Defendant by their Attorneys aforesaid. And because the same Court of giving
their Judgment therein are not advised, day is given to the parties aforesaid,
until the next Court to hear thereof their Judgment, etc. At which said Court
held in the said Honor the day of then next following, came as well the said
Plaintiff as the said Defendant by their Attorneys aforesaid, whereupon the
premises being seen and by the Court here fully understood, it seemed to the
Court here, that the same Defendant is guilty of the premises in the
Declaration aforesaid specified: Therefore it is confidered by the same Court,
That the same Plaintiff recover against the said Defendant the said 21 s. by
the Jury aforesaid, in form aforesaid assessed, and also 22 s. for his costs
and charges, by the Court here, by his consent of increase adjudged, which said
damages do in the whole amount unto 53 s. And the said A. B. in mercy, etc. And
hereupon the said C. D. prays, That the said A: B. may show to the Court
here, and assign the defects, wherein false judgment is made to him in the said
plaint, in the said Court if any be made. Whereupon the same Errors assigned.
A. B. says, that the said Record is vicious and much defective; and that
false judgment is done to him in the said plaint in this, that in the Record no
mention is made whole that Court of the Honor of P. is: and in this, that no
mention is made, who is Lord of the said Court, nor who are Suitors of the
same, and also in this, that the Jury have not found that the said A. B.
converted the same piece of Cloth to his proper use: and so the same A. B.
says, that diverse ways in the said Court false Judgment is done to him in the
said plaint.

And prays, that the said Judgment for those diverse errors, and others being
in the Record, as false and erroneous, may be revoked, and taken for nothing.
And that he, unto all which he by reason of the said false judgment lost, may
be restored. And that the Justices here proceed to the examination of the
premises. And because the Justices here, etc.

SOME SELECT PRESIDENTS OF DECLARATIONS AND PLEADINGS Incident and belonging to
this COURT.
Debt.
Executor against an Executor upon a Bill.
County Court ss.
E. F. Executor of the last Will and Testament of I. F. deceased, by virtue of a
Writ of Iusticies to the Sheriff of the County aforesaid directed, by I. S. his
Attorney complains of M. VV. Executor of the last Will and Testament of R. VV.
late of T. in the County Y. husbandman deceased, otherwise called R. VV. late
of T. of Y. Husbandman, deceased, of a Plea, that he render unto him 7 l. of,
etc. which he unjustly detains from him, etc. for that whereas the said R. VV.
in his life time, that is to say, the 20. day of, etc. year, etc. at the Castle
of Y. in the County of Y. and within the liberty and jurisdiction of this
Court, by his bill obligatory, sealed with his Seal, and here in Court
produced, bearing date the day and year abovesaid, acknowledged himself to be
indebted to the said I. F in his life time, the whole and just sum of 7 l. of,
etc. to be paid to the said I. F. his heirs, executors, administrators, or
assigns, upon the third day of May next ensning the date of the said Bill; and
for the payment thereof, the said R. VV. then and there bound himself, his
executors, administrators and assigns. Nevertheless the said R. VV. in his
life time, though often thereunto required the said 7 l. to the said 1. F.
whilst he was living, has not paid, neither has the said M VV. Executor of
the last Will and Testament of the said R. VV. after his death, paid the same
to the said E. F. Executor of the last Will and Testament of the said I. F. to
which said M. VV.'s hands, came all and singular the goods and chattels which
were the said R. VV.'s in his life time, sufficient to satisfy all the debts
which the said R, VV. at the time of his death owed to any person or persons
whatsoever, as also to satisfy the said E. F.'s debt; but the said R. W.
whilst he lived refused to pay the same to the said I. F. in his life time, and
the same M. W. likewise after the said R. W.'s death refused to pay the same to
the said E. F. after the death of the said I. F. and still refuses so to do,
and unjustly detains the same, by reason whereof the said E. F. says he is
damnified 10 l. and thereupon produces this suit etc.

And the said E. F. produces here in Court, the said letters testamentary, by
which it appears the said E. F. to be Executor of the last Will and Testament
of the said I. E. deceased, etc.

Upon a Bill to be paid at the day of marriage, and issue upon it.
Yo. ss.
T. N, and E. his wife, Administratrix of the goods and chattels which were of
I. B. deceased, complains by S. D. his Attorney of I. H. of C. in the said
County Gent of a Plea, that he render unto them 5 l. which he unjustly detains,
etc. for that whereas the said I. H. (such a day, year and place) by his
certain bill obligatory, with his seal sealed, and here in Court produced, the
date whereof is the same day and year; For and in consideration of one
Gold-ring, with a certain Stone called a Diamond, in the same Ring fixed of the
aforesaid T. B. in his life time received the day of the making of the
aforesaid bill, did acknowledge and grant, to and with the aforesaid T. B. in
his life time, that he the said I. H. his executors or assigns, would pay or
cause to be paid to the aforesaid T. B. his Executors or assigns, for the same
Ring (at such a day and time as he the said I. H. should be wedded or married:
or at any other time after his marriage, whenever he should be required by
the aforesaid T. B. his Executors or assigns, or by him that should bring the
said bill, the said sum of 5 l. to his or their use, the aforesaid time to be
paid: and the same T. N. and E. in fact say, that the aforesaid I. H. after the
making of the said bill, (to wit, such a day, year and place) within the Parish
Church of H. did take to wise one I. D. by which the action did accrue unto the
said T. R. in his life and to the said E. after the death of the said T. B.
whilst she was sole, and to the said T. N. and E. after espousals between them
celebrated: to require and have of the aforesaid I. H. the same 5 l. Yet the
aforesaid I. H. although often required the aforesaid 5 l. to the aforesaid T.
B. in his life time, or to the aforesaid E. whilst she was sole, to whom the
administration of all the goods and chattels which were of the aforesaid T. B.
the time of his death (such a day, year, and place) was committed, to the
aforesaid T. N. and E. after espousals between them celebrated, has not
rendered, but the same to render to them has denied: and the same to them the
said T. N. and E. as yet to render does deny and unjustly detain, whereupon
they say they are damnified, and have damage to the value of 10 l. and
thereupon they bring their action, etc. And they bring into Court here the
letters of administration, etc.

The Defendant pleads that he was within age at the time of the making of the
Bill.
Yo. ss.
AND the aforesaid I. F. by R. B. his Attorney, comes and defends the force and
injury when, etc. and says that the aforesaid N. and E. ought not to have
their action aforesaid against him, because he says that he at the time of the
making of the Bill aforesaid, was within the age of one and twenty years, and
this he is ready to aver, whereupon he demands Judgment, whether the aforesaid
T. N. and E. ought to have their action aforesaid against him, etc.

Replication.
Y. ss.
ANd the aforesaid T. N. and E. say, that they by any thing before alleged,
ought not to be debarred from having their action aforesaid against the said I.
H. because they say, that the aforesaid I. H. at the time of the making of the
bill aforesaid, was of the full age of one and twenty years, and not within
age, as the aforesaid I. H. has above alleged, and this they pray may be
inquired of by the Country; and the aforesaid I. H. in like manner: Therefore,
etc.

Upon retainder for suing of Horses, etc.
Yo. ss.
A. B. by S. D. his Attorney, complains of C. D. of a plea, etc. for that
whereas the aforesaid C. D. (such a day and year) at S. etc. retained the said
A. B. to set on upon the horse feet, of the aforesaid C. D. forty new
Horse-shooes, and to remove forty horse-shooes, and to mend one pair of
plough-Irons, and to make one fire-shovel, to take of the said C. D. for the
setting on of the aforesaid forty new Horse-shooes, and forty removes, 21 s.
and so of the other parcel to contract to be paid to the said A. B. when he
should be thereunto required, by virtue of which retainer, the said A. B. the
said forty new Horse-shooes, and forty removes upon the Horse-feet of him the
said C. D. did set on, etc. by which action accrewed, etc: Hill. 37. Eliz. Rot.
517.

Upon an account.
County Court ss.
E. B. complains of T. A. of a plea, that he should render unto him 12 l. of,
etc. which she owes, and unjustly detains from him, for that whereas the third
day of May, 1651. at, etc. the said E. B. and the said T. A. accounted together
for and concerning diverse sums of money, then and before that time due, and
owing, by the said T. A. unto the said E. B. and upon that account the said T.
A. then and there did acknowledge himself to be in arrear and owing unto the
said E. B. the sum of 12 l. to be paid unto the said E. B. when he the said T.
A. should be thereunto requested. Yet notwithstanding, etc.

Money lent by joint partners for a certain time, and to be paid to the
Survivor.
Yo. ss.
R. K. by, etc. complains of W. A. upon a Plea that he render unto him 20 s.
of lawful English money, which he owes unto him, and unjustly detaineth, etc.
For that whereas the last day of February 1651. at the Castle, etc. the said R.
K. and one R. W. now deceased, being joint partners of moneys and other
commodities, did lend unto the said W. A. 3 l. of lawful, etc. to be paid to
them or the Survivor of them on Easter Monday then next following; of which
said 3 l. the said W. A. paid to the said R. K. and R. W. in his life time the
sum of 40 s. and there then remained unpaid the sum of 20 s. since which, and
about the Nativity of Christ 1652. the said R. W. died, and the said R K him
survived, whereby action does acrew to the said R. K alone to have and demand of
the said W. A. the said 20 s. notwithstanding the said W. A. though often
thereunto requested the said 20 s. to the said R. K. hitherto has not rendered,
but the same to render hitherto has refused, and yet does refuse, whereupon
the said R. K. says, that he is worse, and has damage to the value of 39 s.
and 11 d. And thereupon produces this suit.

For Rent in arrear.
Yo. ss.
R. M. by, etc. complains of H. D. of a Plea, that he render unto him 30 s, of
etc. which he owes unto him, and unjustly detains from him. For that the same
R. M. the 10 day of Apr. etc. year, etc. at the Castle, etc. demised, granted,
and to farm let unto the said H. D. one Cottage or dwelling house, one garth,
and four acres of arable land, Meadow or Pasture, with the appurtenances be
they more or less, lying and being at W. in the County oforesaid, to have and
to hold the said Cottage or dwelling house, garth, and arable land, Meadow or
Pasture with the appurtenances, unto the said H. D. and his assigns, from the
Annunciation of the blessed Virgin Mary commonly called Lady day, then next
past, for and during the term of three years then last following, fully to be
complete, finished, and ended, yielding and paying therefore yearly rent for
the said premises to the said R. M. for the first year of the said 3 years,
the rent of 3 l. present money, and in hand to be paid to the said R. M. and 3
l. 10s. of, etc. yearly to be paid to the said R. M. for the other two years
residue of the said term, at the feast of S. Michael the Archangel, and the
Annunciation of the blessed Virgin Mary, by even and equal portions. By virtue
of which demise, the said H. D. entered into the said Cottage or dwelling house,
and was and still is possessed of the same: and because 35 s. for the half year
rent ended at the feast of S. Michael the Archangel, in the year etc. is in
arrear and unpaid unto the said R. M. therefore an action does accrue to the
said R. M. to have and demand of the said H. D. the said 35 s. nevertheless the
said H. D. although he has been often required the said 35 s. the same to the
said R. M. he has hitherto denied to restore and pay, and as yet does deny to
restore and pay, to the damage of the said R. M. of 39 s. And therefore he
brings this Suit, etc.

For Servants wages.
County Court. ss.
A W. by, etc complains of R. S. of a Plea, that he render unto him 24 s. of
etc. which he ows unto him, and unjustly deteynes from him For that whereas the
said J. D. that is to say, the day, year, etc. at the castle, etc. retained the
said A. W. to serve the said I. S. in the place of a Manservant, till the
Feast day of St. Martin the Bishop in Winter, then next to do and execute the
lawful occasions and commands of the said I. S. by the time aforesaid, paying
the efore the said A. W. 12 d. of, etc. which the said I. S. then and there
paid to the said A. W. and also 24 s. more of, etc. for his sallary, during the
said time, at the said Feast of St. Martin in the year, etc. aforesaid. And the
said A. W. in fact says, that he according to the said retainder, did serve
the said I. S. in the place of a manservant, and did, and executed the lawful
commands and occasions of the said I. S. by the time aforesaid, and that 24 s.
for his salary for his said service by the time aforesaid, due at the Feast of
St. Martin the Bishop, in Winter, in the year, etc. above mentioned, is yet
arrear and unpaid by the said I. S. to the said A. W. by which an action
accrews to the said A. W. to have and require of the said I. S. the said 24 s.
Nevertheless the said I. S. though often required, etc.

For not setting forth of Tithes.
Yo. ss.
R. H. Farmer of all and singular the tithes of hay growing within the Parish of
F. in the County of Y. by virtue of a Writ of justicies, by R. N. his Attorney)
complains of T. W. upon a Plea, that he render to him 6l. of, etc. which he
owes to him, and unjustly detains. For that whereas the said T. L. the day,
year, etc. at F. aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, etc. was possessed and
occupied of and in four acres of Meadow in F. aforesaid, and Parish aforesaid;
and being so possessed, he the said T. W. did then and there cut down the
grass growing in and upon the said four acres of Meadow, and two loads of hay
there, coming to the value of 40 s. then and there did take and carry away,
before he the said T. W. had set out, and severed the tithes, or tenth part
thereof from nine parts of the same, or agreed for the said tithes, or tenth
part thereof, which the said R. did against the form of the Statute in the 5th
year of E. 6. in such like case made and provided. VVhereupon action does
acrew to the said R. H. to have and demand of the said T. VV. the said 6l.
(that is to say) the treble value of the said hay so carried away. Yet
notwithstanding the said T. VV. though often requested, etc.

Upon an Award.
R. H. by virtue, etc. by E. B. his Attorney, does complain of H. S. of a Plea,
that he render unto him 10 l. of, etc. which he owes him, and unjustly
detaineth, etc. For that whereas the 25th day of A. in the year, etc. at the
Castle, etc. it was concluded and agreed betwixt the said H. S. on the one
party, and the said R. F. on the other party, that they and both of them should
stand and abide, the order, doom and Judgment of I. D. and M. L. of all and
every the suits, troubles, differences, debts, trespass, or whatsoever has
formerly been in any kind of dealing betwixt them two from the beginning of
the world to the day of the date of the said writing, being the said 25. day of
A. or else one or either party not standing thereto, to forfeit to the other
parties the sum of 10 l. of, etc. And for confirmation thereof, they did both
of them set to their hands and seals the day and year first above written, at
the Castle aforesaid, etc. as by the writing thereof (ready to be shown to this
Court) may appear. And whereas afterward, that is to say, the day, year, etc.
at the Castle, etc. the said I. D. and M. L. taking upon them the charge of the
premises, by their order in writing, bearing date the same day and year, last
above mentioned, and here in Court to be shown, did arbitrate; order, and
award, that the said R. F. should deliver to the said H. S. one parcel of
starch then into the hands of the said R. F. and the bag wherein the starch is
put affirmed to be the goods of the said H. S. upon the sight of the said
Order. And further, they did thereby order and award, that the said H. F.
should pay or cause to be paid to the said R. R. upon the sight of this order
the sum of 50 s. of, etc. And that all those suits, debts, trespasses, or
debates whatsoever from the beginning of the world until the said 25. day of
April, the year, etc. should utterly cease, and have an end; or else the party
not standing to the same, to forfeit as in the said Order is expressed, the sum
of 10 l. as by the said award sealed the said day, year, etc. by the said
Arbitrators, and here in Court ready to be shown, may appear. And the said R.
F. in fact says, that though he has performed all things in the said award,
on his part to be performed: Yet the said H. S. has not performed any thing in
the said award on his part to be performed: And namely for that the said H. S.
has not paid to the said R. F. upon the sight of the said Order, being the
day, year, etc. at the Castle, etc. the sum of 50 s. of, etc. whereby action
does accrue to the said R. F. to have, and demand of the said H. S. the said 10
l. The said H. S. notwithstanding, though often thereunto requested the said 50
s. to the said R. F. has not yet paid, but the same to pay, etc.

For Attorneys Fees.
Yo. ss.
R. A. Gentleman, etc. by T. S. his Attorney, does complain of W. P. of a Plea,
that he do render unto him 1 l. 17 s. 2 d. of, etc. which he does owe unto him,
and unjustly detains from him; For that whereas the said W. P. the day, year,
etc. at the Castle of Y. did retain him the said R. A, to be the Attorney of
him the said W. P. in the County Court holden at the Castle of Y. in the County
of Y. before the suitors of the same Court to prosecute as the Attorney of him
the said W. P. for him the said W. P. in a certain Action, in the name of him
the said W. P. against one T. C. of a Plea of Debt, from the said day and
year, etc. so long as should please both parties, taking for his fees and
pains in that behalf sustained every Court day, in which he the said R A.
should be the Attorney of him the said W P. in the said cause 2 s. of lawful,
etc. besides his other reasonable charges and expenses by him the said R A. in
and about the prosecution of the said action to be laid out. By virtue of which
said retainer the said R A. was the Attorney of him the said W. P. for eight
Court days then next following; and that he did lay out to the Clark and other
Offices of the said Court, in and about the prosecution of the said suit 1 l. 1
s. 2 d. of, etc. which together with the 16 s, for his fees for the said Court
days, does in all amount to 1 l. 17 s. 2 d. of, etc. By reason whereof an
action does accrue to the said R A. to have and recover of him the said W P.
the said 1 l. 17 s. 2 d. yet the said W P. although often requested the said,
etc. to the said R A. he has not rendered; but to render the same to him he
has altogether hitherto refused, and does yet refuse, to the great damage of
him the said R A. Whereupon he says, that he is damnified, and has damage to
the value of 35 s. And thereupon he brings this suit, etc.

Upon a Lease for Tithes.
Yo. ss.
W. T. by E B. his Attorney complains of R R. of a plea, that he render unto him
20 s. of, etc. which he owes unto him, and unjustly detaineth from him, etc.
For that whereas the said W. T. the 11th day of November, in the year, etc.
at, etc. being then Farmer of the Rectory of for one year then next following,
did let unto the said R R. all the Tithes of Corn being of, and on six acres
and three roods of arrable Land, being part of the Land of O P. in VVeatherby
aforesaid, and parcel of the said Rectory for 20 s. of, etc. to be paid to the
said VV T. in manner and form following (that is to say) 12 s, upon the Feast
of St. Mark the Evangelist then next following, and the other 8 s. upon the
Feast of St. Martin the Bishop in Winter then next following. Yet
notwithstanding the said R. R. though often thereunto requested the said 20 s.
to the said W T. has not yet rendered, but the same to render has
contradicted, and yet does contradict: Whereupon the said W. T. says that he
is worse, and has damage to the value of 30 s. And thereupon produces suit,
etc.

Upon a Bond where one is bound to two, and one dies before the commencement of
the Suit.
County Court. ss.
J. P. by virtue of a Writ of Justicies, etc. complains of M. M. of S. yeoman,
otherwise called M. M. of S. Yeoman, of a plea, that he render unto him 40 l.
of, etc. which he owes to him, and unjustly detaineth from him, etc. For that
whereas the said M. M. the second day of May, in the year, etc. at, etc. by
his certain writing obligatory, sealed with his seal, and here in Court
produced, the date whereof is the day and year abovesaid, did grant himself
to owe, and to be firmly bound unto the said I. P. and E. G. late of the City
of Y. deceased, in the sum of 40 l. to be paid to the said I. P. or E. G. or
either of them, when he should be thereunto requested; which said E. G.
afterward and before the commencement of this suit dyed, and the said I. P. him
survived and outlived, by which action does accrue to the said I. P. to have
and demand of the said M. M. the aforesaid sum of 40 l. Notwithstanding the
said M. M. though he has been often requested, the said 40 l. unto the said E
G. has not rendered, nor to the said I. P. since the death of the said E. G.
has not rendered, but to render, etc.

Another upon the same.
County Court. ss,
I. H. by virtue, etc. complains of VV. H. of L. otherwise called, etc. of a
plea, that he render unto him 20 l. which to him he owes, and unjustly
detaineth, etc. For that whereas the said VV: H: (such a day and year) at,
etc. by his writing obligatory, did acknowledge himself to be bound to the
said I. H. and one M. H. now dead, whom the said I. H. has survived in the
aforesaid 20 l. to be paid unto the said I. H. and M. H. or either of them,
when he should be thereunto requested; Yet the said VV. H. although often
requested the aforesaid 20 l. to the said I. H. and M. H. or either of them in
the lifetime of the said M. H. or to the said I. H. after the death of the
said M. H. whom, etc. has not rendered, but the same to them to render has
denied, and the same to the said I. H. yet to render does deny. Whereupon he
says that he is made worse, and has damages to the value of 30 l. And thereof
he brings his suit, etc. And brings here into the Court the writing
aforesaid, which testifies the said debt in manner aforesaid, the date whereof
is the day and year abovesaid.

Upon a Bond for an Executor against Sisters as Co-heires, one of them being
married.
York. ss.
T. P. Executor of the Testament of VV. P. by Writ, etc. complains against R. M.
late of L. Knight, and A. his wife, and L B. late of L. Spinster, daughters and
coheirs of C B. Gent. lately called C B. etc. of a plea, that they render unto
him 80 l. which from him they unjustly detain, etc. For that whereas the said C
B. Father of the aforesaid A. and L. whose heirs they are in his life time, the
10th day of June, etc. at, etc. by his writing obligatory did acknowledge
himself to be bound to the said W. P. in his life time in the aforesaid 80 l.
to be paid unto the said W. P. when he should be thereunto requested. And to
the same payment well and faithfully to be made, the aforesaid C. B. has bound
himself and his heirs by the same writing. Yet the said C. B. in his life
time, and the aforesaid A. and L. daughters and coheirs of the said C. B.
after the death of the said C. B. whilst they were sole, and the said R. and A.
and L. after the Marriage between them the said R. and A. celebrated, although
often requested the aforesaid 80 l. to the said W. P. in his life time, or to
the said T. P. after the death of the said VV. P. have not rendered, but the
same to them to render have denied, and the aforesaid R. and A. and L. the same
to the said T. P. yet to render does deny, and unjustly detain; whereupon he
says that he is made worse, and has damage to the value of 10 l. And thereof
he brings his suit, etc. And he brings, etc. (as in another upon a Bond for
an Executor, etc.)

Upon a Bond against an Administrator, for an Administrator during the minority
of the Executor of an Executor.
Y. ss.
W. T. and E. his Wife Administratrix of the goods and Chattels which were of E.
A. of H. late of, Executor of the Testament of E. A. of T. by Writ, etc.
complains against M. C. etc. Administratrix of the Goods and Chattels which
were of R. C. who dyed intestate, etc. lately called R. C. of T. in the County
of Yo. Gentleman of a plea, that she render unto them 40 pounds, which from
them she unjustly deteyneth, etc. For that whereas the said R. C. in his life
time, the fourth day of January, etc. 1649. at Y. by his certain writing
obligatory, did acknowledge himself to be bound to the said E. A. of T. in his
life time, in the aforesaid 40 pounds to be paid unto the said E. A. when he
should be thereunto requested. Yet the said R. C. in his life time, and the
aforesaid M. C. after the death of the said R. C. to whom the Administration of
all the Goods and Chattels which were of the said R. C. at the time of his
death at Y. aforesaid, after the death of the said R. C. was committed,
although often requested the aforesaid 40 pounds to the said E. A. of T. in his
life time, and to the said E. A. of H. in his life time, after the death of the
said E. A. of T. or to the said E. after the death of the said E. A. of H.
while she was sole, to whom the Administration of all the Goods and Chattels
which were of the said E. A. of H. at the time of his death during the minority
of the said E. A. the younger, Executor of the Testament of the said E. A. of
H. which said E. A. the younger is yet within the age (namely) of 14 years, and
no more, by the Keepers of the Liberty of England, etc. the tenth day of May,
1651. at Y. aforesaid after the death of the said E. A. of H. was committed, or
to the said VV. T. and E. after the marriage betwixt them celebrated have not
rendered, but the same to them to render have denied. And the said M. C. the
same to the said VV. T. and E. yet to render does deny and unjustly detayne.
Whereupon they say that they are made worse, and have damage to the value of
thirty pounds, and hereof they bring their suit, etc.

And they bring here into the Court as well the Writing aforesaid, which
testifies the debt in manner aforesaid, the date whereof is the aforesaid 14th
day of January, 1649. aforesaid, as the Letters testamentary of the said E. A.
of T. by which it does sufficeently appear to the Court here the said E. A. of
H. to have been Executor of the Testament of the said E. A. of T. And thereof
to have had Administration, etc. As also the Letters testamentary of the said
E. A. of H. By which it does sufficiently appear to the Court here, the said
E. A. the younger to be Executor of the Testament of the said E. A. of H. And
also the Letters of Administration of the said Keepers, which testifies the
committing of the Administration aforesaid to the said E. in form aforesaid,
etc.

For not delivering of a Pawn upon tender of the money borrowed.
Yo. ss.
A. S. by Writ, etc. complains against E. P. of a Plea whereas the said A. the
first day of May, etc. at etc. borrowed of the said E. P. 12 l. of, etc. and
then and there did pawn, and in the name of a pledge, gave and delivered to the
said E. P. diverse goods and chattels of the said A. S. to the value of 172 l.
of lawful, etc. for security to the aforesaid E. P. for the repayment of the
aforesaid 12 l. together with interest for deferring and giving day of payment
of the said 12 l. according to the rate of 6 l. in the hundred by sum until the
aforesaid, A. S. the aforesaid 12 l. to the aforesaid E. P. should repay. And
the aforesaid E. P. then and there (that is to say) the first day of May, the
year, etc. aforesaid at, etc. in consideration of the premises upon him did
assume, and to the said A. S. then and there faithfully promised, that he the
aforesaid E. P. the goods and chattels aforesaid to him by the aforesaid A. S.
formerly pawned and delivered to the said E. P. upon the payment of the
aforesaid 12 l. together with interest for the said 12 l. according to the rate
aforesaid to him to be made, he would well and faithfully redeliver and
restore, although the said A. S. afterward, that is to say, the 16. day of S.
the year, etc. and often after at, etc. the aforesaid 12 l. together with the
interest for the said 12 l. according to the rate of 6 l. in the hundred, by
the whole to the aforesaid E. P. fully to pay and satisfy offered.
Notwithstanding the aforesaid E. P. his promise and assumption aforesaid little
regarding, but shifting and fraudulently intending the said A. S. in that part
craftily and subtly to deceive and defraud the aforesaid; the aforesaid 12 l.
together with the interest for the same 12 l. according to the rate aforesaid
of the aforesaid A. S. to receive, and the goods and chattels aforesaid to the
A. S. to redeliver altogether has refused, and as yet does refuse, to the
great damage of the said A. S. etc.

Against a Carrier for loss of goods delivered to him.
Yo. ss.
G. B. Esquire, by virtue, etc. complains of P. M. upon an action of trespass
upon the Case, for that whereas the aforesaid P. M. (such a day and year) at,
etc. and long before, and always after, hitherto was, and yet is a Common
Carrier from the City of Y. in the County of the same City, unto the Town of S.
in the said County, and from the said Town of S. unto the said City of Y. And
the same P. M. the same day and year, and long before, and continually after
hitherto was used and accustomed, by himself and his servants upon the horses
of him the said P. M. to carry goods and chattels for any manner of persons for
a reasonable and a lawful stipend and sallary in that behalf therefore to be
paid; to be carried to and from, between the aforesaid Town of S. and City of
Y. according to an usual agreement and payment in that behalf to be made and
had: and whereas also accordding to the Law and Custom of this Commonwealth of
England, all such like common Carriers who do receive goods and chattels of any
manner of persons so to be carried, for a reasonable or lawful stipend or
sallary therefore to be given or paid, are bound to keep and carry the same
goods and chattels of such like persons so received, without spoiling,
withholding, or losing of them: so that for, or by the default of such Common
Carrier no damage should in any manner happen to such persons by carrying of
their Carriages: And whereas the aforesaid P. M. the aforesaid, (such a day and
year) at S aforesaid in the County aforesaid had taken upon him to carry one
Trunk fast locked with diverse moneys, goods, and chattels of him the said G. B.
to the value of 10 l. in the same Trunk then being sasely and carefully from
the aforesaid City of Y. to and unto the said Town of S. and for a certain and
usual stipend, sallary and rate, for carrying of the said Trunk, moneys,
goods, and chattels aforesaid, by the aforesaid G. afterward, to wit, such a
day and year aforesaid, at the City of Y. aforesaid, received of him the said
G. B. the Trunk aforesaid, with the moneys, goods, and chattels aforesaid in
the same chest then as aforesaid being locked in form aforesaid to be carried:
the aforesaid P. M. the Trunk aforesaid, with the moneys, goods, and chattels
aforesaid of him the said G B. afterward, to wit, (such a day year, and place)
did so negligently and improvidently keep and carry, that diverse moneys,
goods, and chattels of him the said G. B. in the said Trunk as aforesaid,
before that being locked (that is to say) 5 l. in money numbered, one pair of,
etc. to the value of, etc. by the negligent custom of him the said P. M. then
and there lost were taken, and that he the said G. B. those moneys, goods, and
chattels last mentioned from thence until the day, etc. to wit (such a day and
year) has not received nor had, although the said P. M. by him the said G. B.
afterward, to wit (such a day and year) has often been required to deliver to
him the said G B. the moneys, goods, and chattels aforesaid, so as aforesaid
lost. Whereupon the same G. B. says that he is damnified, etc.

For Coals, promising to pay so much as they should reasonably be worth.
I. I. by, etc. complains of R. R. of a Plea of Trespass upon the case, etc.
for that whereas the said R. R. the day, year, etc. at the Castle, etc. In
consideration that the said I. I. at the request of the said R. R. had
bargained and sold unto the said R. R. eleven wains loads of coals; he did
assume upon himself, and to the said I. I. then and there saithfully promise,
that he the said R. R. so much as the said eleven waines loads of coals should
be reasonably worth unto the said I. I. when he should be thereunto requested
would well and saithfully pay and content. And the said I. I. in fact says,
that the said eleven wains loads of coals was reasonably worth thirty three
shillings of, etc. Yet notwithstanding the said R. R. not regarding his
promise, and assumption aforesaid, but subtly and craftily intending to
defraud and deceive the said I. I. in the premises, although he has been
often requested the aforesaid thirty three shillings unto the said I. I. he
has not paid, but the same unto him to pay altogether hitherto he has
refused, and as yet does refuse, contrary to his promise and assumption
aforesaid; to the great damage of the said I. I. whefore he says, he is worse,
and has damage to the value of thirty nine shillings. And thereupon produces
suit, etc.

For a Horse sold, warranted to be sound.
Yo. ss.
W. M. by R. B his Attorney complains of R. K. of a plea of Trespass upon the
case. That whereas the said W. M. the day and year, etc. at the Castle, etc did
buy of the said R. K. one black Gelding for five pounds of, etc. he the said R.
K. then and there did warrant the said Gelding to be whole, sound and not
insected with any disease or infirmity: and the said W M. in fact says, that
the said Gelding was then so insected with the glaunders, and diverse other
diseases, and infirmities, as the said Gelding was nothing worth to the said W.
M. to the damage of the said W. M. of thirty nine shillings. And thereupon he
brings this action, etc.

For a Horse lent, promising to redeliver him, etc.
Yo. ss.
I. R. complains of I. A. of a Plea of Trespass upon the Case, etc. That
whereas the said I. A. the day, year, etc. at the Castle, etc. In consideration
that the said I. R. then and there at the instance and request of the said I.
A. had lent and delivered unto the said I. A. one Bay Nag of the price of six
pounds to be redelivered to the said I. R. when after that he should be
thereunto requested, the said I. A. assumed upon himself, and to the said I. R.
then and there faithfully promised, that he the said I. A. the said Bay Nag
unto the said I. R. when after he should be thereunto requested, would
faithfully restore and deliver, and also 12 d. of, etc. for every day wherein
the said I. A. should labor or ride the said Nag, to the said I. R. when after
that he should be thereunto requested, well and faithfully would pay and
content. And the said I. R. in fact says, that he the said I. A. forty days
did labor or ride the said Nag. Nevertheless the said I. A. his promise and
assumption aforesaid not regarding, but craftily and subtly intending to
defraud and deceive the said I. R, in the premises, although the day, year,
etc. abovesaid, as also at diverse days and times after that, and before the
Commencement of this suit, at the Castle, etc. he has often been requested to
deliver the said Nag to the said I. R. But the said Nag to restore or deliver
to the said I. R. he has not delivered, and the same to restore or deliver he
has altogether refused, and yet does refuse, no nor 40s. for the labor or
hire of the said Nag, the said forty days to the said I. R. has not paid, but
the same to pay he likewise has refused, and still does refuse, contrary to
his promise and assumption aforesaid, to the great damage of him the said I. R.
of, etc.

For adgysting of Beasts.
County Court, ss.
T. B. complains of I. S. upon a Plea of Trespass upon the Case; For that
whereas the day, year, etc. at the Castle, etc. In consideration that the said
T. B. at the special instance and request of I. D. in his life time would
depasture and feed two Oxen of the said I. D. in the ground of the said T. B.
in A. within the said County, etc. From the said day, year, etc, unto the end
of one month next following, he the said I. D. in his life time did assume upon
himself, and to the said T. B. then and the faithfully promised, that the said
I. D. as much as the said depasturing, and seeding should be reasonably worth
to the said T. B. when he the said I. D. should be thereunto requested well and
truly would content and pay. And the said T. B. in fact says, that he from the
said day, year, etc. unto the end of one month then next following did depasture
and feed the said two Oxen of the said I. D. in the said ground of the said T.
B. in A. aforesaid, and that the said depasturing and feeding was reasonably
worth 12 s. of, etc. Yet notwithstanding the said I. D. in his life time, and
the said I. S. after the death of the said I. D. the promises and assumptions
of the said I. D. not regarding, but endeavoring, and fraudulently intending,
the said T. B. in this behalf craftily and subtly to deceive and defraud: the
said 12 s. or any penny thereof, to the said T. B. as yet has not paid, nor
for the same any way contented, but the same to pay the said I. D. in his life
time, and the said I. S. after his death has refused, and as yet does refuse:
although the said I. D. in his life time, afterward, that is to say, the day,
year, etc. at the Castle; etc. was thereunto requested: whereupon the said T.
B. says, he is worse, and has damage to the value of 30 s. and thereupon
produces suit, etc.

For curing a Wound.
Y. ss.
A. S. complains of W. H. in, etc. For that whereas the said W. H. the day,
year, etc. at the Castle, etc. being then and there fore wounded in his throat
and back, with the stab of a knife: In consideration that the said A. S. at the
special instance and request of the said W. H. would to the best of his art and
skill of a Surgeon, endeavor to cure the wound of the said W. H. and take
pains and labor therein, he the said W. H. did assume upon himself, and to
the said A. S. then and there faithfully promised, that he the said W. H. so
much as the said endeavor, labor and pains of him the said A. S. to cure the
said wounds of the said W. H. and his charges and pains therein should be
reasonably worth, unto the said A. S. when he should be thereunto required,
would well and faithfully pay and content. And the said A. S. in Fact says,
that his endeavor, labor, and pains to cure the said wounds of the said W.
H. and his charges therein was reasonably worth 30 s. of, etc. Notwithstanding
the said W. H. not caring for his promise and assumption, but endeavoring and
fraudulenly intending him the said A. S. in this behalf, craftily and subtly
to deceive and defraud, etc.

For a Laborers hire.
Yo. ss.
M. R. complains of G. N. in an, etc. for that whereas the said G. N. the day,
year, etc. at, etc. In consideration that the said M. R. then and there at the
request of the said G. N. would cut down certain whins of the said G. N. then
growing and being in a Close called the O. lying in the Township of H. in the
County aforesaid, and make the same whins into whin-kids or faggots, the said
G. N. assumed upon himself, and to the said M. R. then and there faithfully
promised, that he the said G. N. as much as would please or content him the
said M. R. for his work and labor in cutting down and kidding the said whins
in the Close aforesaid, as long as the said M. R. should so work and labor
for the said G. N. when afterward that he should be thereunto requested would
well and faithfully pay and content. And the aforesaid M. R. does aver and say,
that accordingly he did cut down and kid whins for the said G. N. in the Close
aforesaid by the space of one whole day then next after, and that he well
deserved 12 d. of, etc. for his wages, for his day-work, and labor, and that
12 d. is a reasonable sum to please and content him for his said day-work and
labor, in cutting down and kidding of the said whins as aforesaid; yet
notwithstanding the aforesaid G. N. his promise and assumption aforesaid,
little minding or regarding, but craftily and subtly intending to deceive and
defraud the said M. R. in the premises, although, etc.

In consideration that the Plaintiff would deliver unto one E. L. certain
Mercery wares, if he did not pay for them, the Defendant would.
Yo. ss.
P. B. Esquire, by virtue of a Writ, etc. does complain of H. S. of an action,
etc. for that whereas the day, year, etc. at the Castle etc. In consideration
that the said P. B. (being then and yet a Mercer of the City of Y: would
deliver unto E L. for the use of the said E L. such parcels of Mercery wares,
as he the said E L. should take up and receive of the said P B. he the said H
S. did assume upon himself, and to the said P B. then and there did faithfully
promise, that if the said E L. should not pay and satisfy the said P B. for
the said wares at such rates and prizes, as the said E L. and the said P B.
should agree upon, that he the said H S. would well and truly pay and satisfy
unto the said P B. all such moneys as the said E L. and P B. should agree upon
for the rates and prizes of the said wares, betwixt the said day, year, etc.
and May day then next after: And the said P B. in fact says, that afterward,
that is to say, the day, etc. and year aforesaid, at the Castle, etc.
aforesaid, the said E L. did take up and receive of the said P B. Mercery
wares, hereafter following (that is to say) seven yards of black
Flaunders-searge, for 38 s. and five yards of Italiana, for 26 s. of lawful,
etc. both which rates and prizes were then and there agreed upon, between the
said E L. and the said P B. and did amount to the sum of three pounds and four
shillings of, etc, which said sum of, etc. or any penny thereof, the said E L.
has not yet paid, or satisfied to the said P B. Notwithstanding the said H. S.
his promise and assumption aforesaid not regarding, but endeavoring, etc.

Slander for calling the Plaintiff Thief, etc.
Yo. ss.
E. R. complains of G. S. of a plea, etc. Whereas the said E. R. is a good,
true, saithfull, and honest member of this Common wealth of England, and of a
good name, report, credit, conversation, condition, reputation and esteem, as
well amongst his neighbors (and faithful members of this Commonwealth) as
also other honest persons to whom the said E. R. has been known from the time
of his birth, and has been noted, esteemed, and reported, and without any
stain, blemish, or suspicion of theft, falsehood, deceit, fraud, or of any other
notorious crime, he has carried and behaved himself all his life time free,
untouched, and not in the least wise suspected. Nevertheless the aforesaid G.
S. not being ignorant of the Premises, but out of his mere malice, evilly
intending, not only the good name, report, opinion, credit, esteem and
reputation of the said E. R. to hurt, wound detract, and utterly to destroy,
but also to bring the said E. R. into trouble, vexation and infamy, the day,
year, and place, etc. in the County aforesaid, false, feigned, malicious, and
scandalous words, to the said E. R, and of the said E. R. in the presence and
hearing of many honest and credible men, openly and publicly, did speak and
publish in these words following; Thou (meaning the said E R. art a Thief) and
I (meaning the aforesaid G. S.) will prove thee (meaning the said E. R.) a
Thief, and a horse-stealing thief from thy cradle. By reason and means of which
false, feigned, scandalous, and malicious words declared and published as
aforesaid, the aforesaid E, R. is much hurt, wounded, and damnified in his good
name, report, credit and reputation aforesaid; in which before that time with
very many honest and faithful members of this Commonwealth he was reputed,
and also the said E. R. into great discredit, suspicion and infamy, with many
faithful and honest persons is thereby induced and brought, so that diverse
persons, who before that time did accompany, respect, and much esteem the
foresaid E. R. themselves from the company, and society of the said E. R. do
now withdraw, and absent themselves, and further with the aforesaid E. R. to
intermeddle, buy, sell, or commerce have altogether refused, and still do
refuse, to the great damage of the said E. R. of 30 s. And therefore he has
brought this suit, etc.

For slanderously calling the Plaintiff Bankerupt.
Yo. ss.
E. B. complains of E. M. in a Plea of Trespass upon the Case; For that,
whereas the said E. B. a good, true, faithful, and honest member of this
Commonwealth, and like a good, honest, and faithful member of the said
Commonwealth, now and from the time of his Nativity hitherto, without any spot
or suspicion of deceit, corruption, bankrupt, or fraud, or any one of them,
has carried, behaved, and governed himself, and of good name, fame, credit
and estimation, trust, and carriage, of great substance of riches, always
hitherto has been reported, and held, and honestly, justly, and faithfully in
all his intermissions and businesses with whomsoever had and made throughout
the whole time aforesaid, himself has carried and behaved. And whereas, he
the said E. B. the day, year, etc. and by the space of ten years last, and
continually afterward hitherto the art, mystery, or faculty of an Apothecary
of the said City of Y. exercised and used, his living and maintenance of
himself and his Family, by exercising amd using the art, mystery, or faculty
through the whole time aforesaid, well plentifully and sufficiently had gotten
and gained, and also diverse great sums of money, by lawfully buying and
selling, merchandising and bargaining, upon his credit of diverse wares, and
other things belonging to the art, mystery, or faculty of him the said E. B. to
the better maintenance of him and his Family, and to the great increase of his
riches, justly and honestly through the whole time aforesaid had obtained, and
all and singular sums for what things or merchandises whatsoever by him or of
any other persons throughout the said time, upon credit had bought or received,
or by any way due, he the said E. B. to any such person to him the said E. B.
so giving credit according to the contract and agreement betwixt them concorded
and made, without fraud or delay had paid by the parcel; of which said
premises, and also by reason of his honest carriage toward all persons, he
the said E. B. the chief credit and good opinion amongst all his neighbors,
and amongst very many honorable persons and other people of the said
Commonwealth to whom he was known, he deservedly had and gained to himself.
The said E. N. notwithstanding not ignorant of the premises, but the hap and
condition aforesaid, of the said E. B. maliciously devising, imagining, and
fraudulently intending the said state, name, fame, credit, trust and estimation
of the said E. B. to hurt, deprive, and to cause him, the said E. B. to fall
into want, discredit and poverty, and to be accepted and reputed of such an
evil carriage, and also for a Banckrupt, and a man of no credit amongst all
the faithful members of this Commonwealth, that they all from the company of
him the said E. B. as from the consort of a Banckrupt person, or man worthy of
no credit, might altogether withdraw themselves, and forbear with the said E.
B. to bargain, sell, or deal, they might altogether give over, afterward (to
wit) on the day, year, etc. aforesaid, at Y. aforesaid these false,
scandalous, and opprobrious English words following of him the said E. B. in
the presence and hearing of diverse faithful members of this Commonwealth then
and there present and hearing, falsely, maliciously, and scandalously with a
loud voice said, proclaimed, pronounced and published (to wit E. B. meaning the
said E. B. Plaintiff) is a Rogue and a Banckrupt, and I (meaning himself the
said E. N. now Desendant) will prove him one. By reason of the speaking and
proclaiming of which said false, scandalous, and opprobrious words, he the said
E. B. not only in his good name, fame, credit, trust, and estimation
aforesaid, is greatly hurt and scandalized, but also hereby does stand
deprived, and utterly spoiled, that his said neighbors and other faithful
members of this Commonwealth, with him the said E. B. to buy, merchandise,
bargain, or any way to meddle, or deal, do altogether distrust and refuse him
the said C. D. for a consumer, waster, and detayner of other men's riches and
estates, they repute and suppose him to be by the said E. N. not only in
exercising and maintaining of his art, mystery or faculty is very much
hindered, and his estate and substance is very much weakened and consumed, but
also has been constrained and compelled to lay out and spend diverse great sums
of money in clearing himself of the premises aforesaid laid upon him, for the
recovering of his good name, fame, credit, trust, and estimation aforesaid.
Whereupon the said E B. says, that he is made worse, and has damage to the
value of 200 l. And thereupon produces this suit, etc.

In consideration that the Plaintiff would marry E. R. the Defendant promised
to make him worth 200 l.
Yo. ss.
W. P. etc. complains of P. W. of a Plea, etc. That whereas the day, year, etc.
at the Castle, etc. there was a communication between the said W. P. and 14 E.
4. fol. 6. 15 E. 4. fo. 32. 17 E. 4. fo. 5.
the said P. W. of and concerning the said W. P. taking to Wise one E. R. the
daughter of one S. R. of, etc. County, etc. the said P. W. in consideration
that the said W P. at the special instance and request of the said P W.
according to the Laws and customs of England by the consent of the said S R.
would marry and take to wise the said E R. upon himself did assume, and to the
said W P. then and there did faithfully promise, that he the said P W. would
make him the said W. P. worth 200 l. of, etc. and better, immediately after the
solemnization of the marriage of the said W P. and the said E R. And the said W
P. indeed says, that in hopes of the performance of the promise and assumption
of the said P VV. and at the special instance and request of the said P. VV.
afterward (that is to say) the day, year, etc. at, etc. aforesaid, the said VV
P. according to the Laws and customs of England by the consent of S R. did
marry and take to wife the said E R. Nevertheless the said P W. little
regarding his promise and assumption aforesaid, but contriving and fraudulently
intending craftily and subtily to deceive and defraud the said W P. in this
behalf, has not made the said W P. worth 200 l. and better, albeit afterward
(that is to say) the day, year, etc. at, etc. aforesaid by the said W P. he
has been thereunto required, but has hitherto refused to do the same, and
still does refuse, to his damage of, etc.

For stopping up of another light, for depriving him of air, and the passage
of rain.
County Court. ss. Co. Report, q. part. Aldreds Case.
T. P. etc. complains of A B. etc. of a plea of Trespass upon the Case; for
that whereas the said T. P. for the space of seven years now last past, has
been, and yet is, seized of one ancient Message, with the Appurtenances in S.
aforesaid in his Demesne as of Fee; in which Message the said T P. and his
Family all the time aforesaid have dwelt, and yet do dwell; And also whereas
the said A B. for the space of three years now last past, has been and yet is
possessed of one other Message with the Appurtenances in S. aforesaid, lying
next and contiguous to the said Message of the said T P. on the West side of
the same Message of the said T P. And also whereas in the said West Side of
the said Message of the said T P. time out of mind there has been, and yet
are, two ancient Windows, parcel of the said Message of the said T P.
Through which windows not only light has used to shine into the said
Message to enlighten it, but also wholesome air has used to pass into the
said Message for the health of him the said T. P. and his Family abiding in
the same. And the said T P. of his said Message with the Appurtenances so as
aforesaid being seized: And the said A B. of his said Message with the
Appurtenances possessed, the same A. B. not ignorant of the premises, but
maliciously intending to stop up the said windows, and deprive the said T P.
and his Family of the light and wholesome air shining and passing through the
said windows into the said Message of him the said T. P. (such a day and
year) at S. aforesaid, did build and set up, and from that time hitherto has
continued a certain house upon a piece of ground called the backside, parcel
of the said Message of him the said A. B. so nigh unto the said Message of
the said T. P. and the said two widows, that not only the said two windows
are stopped up, and thereby the said T. P. and his Family deprived of the light
and wholesome air which were wont to shine and pass through the said windows
into the said Message of him the said T. P. but also the passage of the Rain
falling from the said Message of the said T. P. is hindered, and the Rain so
hindered in passing away, sinketh down to, and under the Foundations of the
said Message of the said T. P. whereby the foundations of the said Message
are weakened, and the Message likely to go to ruin, to the great damage of the
said T. P. of 20 l. And thereof he produces this Action, etc.

For teaching the Defendants child the Latin Tongue, etc.
Yo. ss.
P. G. by I. R. his Attorney complains of I A. of a Plea of Trespass upon the
Case, etc. For that whereas the said I. A. the first day of August, in the
year, etc. at, etc. in the County, etc. For and in consideration that the said
P. G. for and during the time of twelve months and twenty days then last
past, had taught and instructed I. A. the natural son of the said I. A. in
the rudiments and learning of the Latin Tongue, and from the said first day of
August, in the year aforesaid, at H. aforesaid, would teach and instruct the
said I. A. the son, so long as it should please both parties in the said
learning of the Latin Tongue aforesaid, did assume upon himself, and to the
said P G. then and there did faithfully promise that he the said I A. the
Father, so much as the said teaching, instructing, eruditing and learning of
the said I. A. the Son, for all the time aforesaid should be reasonably worth
to the said P G. when he the said I A. the Father should be thereunto
requested, well and faithfully would pay and content. And the said P G. in fact
says, that he relying on the promise and assumption aforesaid, of the said I
A. the Father, did teach, instruct, erudite and learn the said I A. the son
in the learning aforesaid, from the first day of August aforesaid, until the
last day of July, in the year of our Lord, 1651. And that the teaching,
instructing, eruditing and learning aforesaid of the said I A. the son,
during all the time aforesaid being 12 months and 20 days, was reasonably
worth twenty shillings of lawful English money. Notwithstanding the said I. A.
the Father, not regarding his promise and assumption aforesaid, but subtly
devising, and fraudulently intending him the said P G. etc.

For diet, and time given for the payment of the Debt.
County Court. ss.
N. D. by etc. complains of I D. of an action of Trespass upon the Case; For
that whereas the fifth day, etc. at, etc. the said I D. was indebted unto the
said N D. in the sum of 18 shillings of, etc. for meat and drink wherewith
the said N. D. then supplied him. And being so indebted, in consideration that
the said N D. then and there at the Castle of Y. in the County of Y. and within
the Liberty and Jurisdiction of this Court, at the special instance and request
of the said I D. did give time for the payment of the said 18 shillings, until
the next day after, he the said I D. did assume upon himself, and to the said
N D. then and there faithfully promised, that he the said I D. the said 18
shillings unto the said N D. the said next day after well and truly would
content and pay; and although the said N D. till the next day after, and
hitherto did forbear the payment of the said 18. shillings. Yet the said I. D.
his promise and assumption aforesaid not regarding, but endeavoring and
fraudulently intending the said N. D. etc.

Upon an Assumpsit to save one harmless upon an Obligation.
Yo. ss.
A. B. by virtue of a Writ of Justicies, etc. complains of C D. of an Action of
Trespass upon the Case, etc. For that, to wit, that whereas the aforesaid A.
B. the (day and year) at the Castle of Y. in the County aforesaid, and within
the jurisdiction of this Court, at the special instance and request of the
aforesaid C. D. by his writing obligatory, bearing date the same day and year,
was bound, together with the aforesaid C D. and for the sole debt of the said C
D. unto one E F. upon Condition thereupon indorsed, that if the aforesaid C D.
should pay unto the aforesaid E F. at a certain day in the same Condition
contained, 10 l. of lawful, etc. that then that writing should be void and of
none effect, otherwise to remain in his strength and virtue, the aforesaid C D.
afterward, that is to say, (in such a day and place) in consideration
aforesaid, assumed upon himself, and to the aforesaid A B. then and there
faithfully promised, that the said C D. at all times then afterward would
discharge the aforesaid A. B. against the aforesaid E F. from the aforesaid
writing obligatory. Yet nevertheless the aforesaid C D. his promise and
assumption aforesaid not regarding, has not hitherto discharged the aforesaid
A B. from the aforesaid writing obligatory, although he has been often
required by him the said A. B. to do it; whereupon the said A B. says, that he
is very much the worse, etc.

For keeping a Dog accustomed to bite Sheep.
Yo. ss.
A. B. by etc. complains of C. D. etc. for that, that is to say, whereas the
aforesaid C. D. did knowingly keep and retain a certain Dog accustomed to bite
Sheep at, etc. which said Dog twenty Wether Sheep, twenty Ewes and twenty Lambs
of him the said A B. to the price of 10 l. at, etc. aforesaid, found the 12.
day of May, in the year of our Lord 1657. did so grievously bite, that those
Sheep and Lambs by the biting of the Dog aforesaid, then and there died:
whereupon the said A B. says, that he is worse, and has damage, to the value
of twenty pounds. And thereupon he brings his Suit, etc.

Another.
County Court, ss.
A. B. by writ, etc. complains of C. D. of a Plea, etc. For that, that is to
say, whereas the aforesaid C. D. the 8. day of June in the year, etc. at, etc.
a certain dog accustomed to bite Sheep, he knowingly retained, which said Dog
the day and year aforesaid at, etc. aforesaid, the Sheeep, that is to say,
sixteen wether Sheep, and thirty Ewe-sheep, and eight Lambs of him the said A
B. did chase and bite, so that by the chasing and biting six of the said
Wether-sheep, 12 of the said Ewe-sheep, and four of the said Lambs of the price
of ten pounds died: and the residue, to wit, eighteen of the said Ewe-sheep
great with young, cast their Lambs abortive: And the residue of the said
Wether-sheep were much worsted: And other harms, etc.

Against an Innkeeper for a Horse lost.
County Court ss.
A. B. by virtue of a Writ, etc. complains of C. D. Innkeeper of a Common
Inn, called the sign of the White Heart in Skipton in Craven in the County of
York, and within the liberty and jurisdiction of this Court, of a Plea of
Trespass upon the Case: For that, that is to say, whereas according to the Law
and Custom of the Commonwealth of England, Innkeepers, who hold and keep
common Inns to lodge and Entertain men traveling by those parts, where such
like Inns are, and lodging in them, are bound to keep both by day and night,
their goods being within those Inns without any diminution or loss: So that by
default of those Innkeepers or their Servants, no damage shall happen or come
to their guests by any means. And whereas the aforesaid C. D. before the tenth
day of March in the year, etc. And the same tenth day, etc. held and kept the
common Inn aforesaid, called the sign of the White Heart in Skipton in Craven
aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, and within the liberty and jurisdiction
aforesaid. And him the said A B, in the same Inn as his Guest, then and there
entertained: and the same A B. then and there one Gelding of a white color, of
the price of ten pounds, he brought into the Inn aforesaid with him, which said
Gelding the aforesaid C. D. in his custody then and there received and had, yet
certain Malefactors unknown to him the said A B. afterward, to wit, the
aforesaid tenth day of March in the year aforesaid, E. F. aforesaid the Gelding
aforesaid, being under the custody of the aforesaid C. D. in the aforesaid Inn
then and there found, for want of good keeping of the said C. D. and his
servants, he took and led away, against the Law and Custom aforesaid.
Whereupon the same A B. says that he is worsted, and has damage to the value
of twenty pounds. And thereupon he brings his suit, etc.

Upon a Horse Race.
Y. ss.
G. G. by I. R. his Attorney does complain of D M of a plea of Trespass upon
the case, etc. That whereas (such a day and year) at, etc. conference was had
between the said G G. and D. M. concerning a Horse-race, to be run between a
gray Gelding of the said G. G. and a bay Gelding of the said D. M. from B.
aforesaid unto a house called Dexes in the aforesaid County, upon which
conference so had, in consideration that the said G. G. at the special
instance and request of the said D. M. did then and there pay and deposite into
the hands of one Margaret the wife of one I. W. two shillings six pence of
lawful English money. And in consideration also that the said G. G. did then
and there engage himself to give and deliver unto the said D. M. the said gray
Gelding of the said G. G. in case the said gray Gelding should not outrun the
said bay Gelding of the said D. M. from B. aforesaid unto the said house called
Dexes, and that the said G. G. should not there leave his Hatband, before the
said bay Gelding of the said D. M. should come to the said house called Dexes,
the said D. M. the said twentieth day of May in the year aforesaid, at B.
aforesaid, and within the jurisdiction aforesaid, did assume upon himself, and
to the said G. G. did then and there faithfully promise, rhat if the said
Gelding of the said G. G. did outrun the said bay Gelding of the said D. M.
from B. aforesaid unto the said house called Dexes, and that the said G. G.
should leave his hatband there before the said Gelding of the said D. M. should
come to the said house, that then the said D. M. the said bay Gelding to the
said G. G. to the use and behoof of the said G. G. would give and deliver when
he the said D. M. should be thereunto requested. And the said G G. in fact
says, that his said gray Gelding did then and there outrun the said bay
Gelding of the said D. M. from B. aforesaid to the said house called Dexes, and
that he the said G G. did leave his hatband there before the said Gelding of
the said D. M. did come to the said house called Dexes. And whereas also the
said 20. day of May in the year abovesaid at B. aforesaid, and within the
jurisdiction aforesaid, in consideration that the said G G. at the special
instance and request of the said D M. did then and there pay and deposite into
the hands of the said Margaret, wife of the said I. W. two shillings six pence
of lawful, etc. And in consideration also that the said G G. did then and there
engage himself to pay unto the said D M. 20 s. of like lawful money, in case
that the said gray Gelding of the said G. G. should not outrun the said bay
Gelding of the said D. M. from B. aforesaid, unto the said house called Dexes,
and that the said G G. should not there leave his hatband before the said bay
Gelding of the said D M. should come to the said house. The said D. M. the said
20. day of May in the year abovesaid, at B. aforesaid, within the jurisdiction
aforesaid, did assume upon himself, and to the said G G. did then and there
faithfully promise, that if the said Gelding of the said G G. should not
outrun the said bay Gelding of the said D. M. from B. aforesaid, to the said
house called Dexes, and that the said G G. should leave his hatband there
before the said Gelding of the said D. M. should come to the said house, that
then the said D. M. twenty shillings of, etc. to the said G G. when he the said
D M. should be thereunto requested, well and truly would content and pay. And
the said G G. as before in fact says, that his said gray Gelding did then and
there out run the said bay Gelding of the said D M. from B. aforesaid. unto the
said house called Dexes, and he the said G G did leave his hatband there before
the said Gelding of the said D M. did come to the house called Dexes. The said
D. M. etc. Notwithstanding his promise and assumption aforesaid not regarding,
but endeavoring and fraudulently intending the said G G. in this behalf
craftily and subtly to deceive and defraud, the said bay Gelding to the said
G G. has not yet delivered, nor the said twenty shillings to the said G G.
has not yet paid, nor for the same any way contented, although the said D M.
afterward, that is to say, the 21. day of May in the year aforesaid, at B.
aforesaid, and within the jurisdiction aforesaid, hereunto was requested,
whereupon he the said G G. says he is worse, and has damage to the value of
ten pounds: And thereupon produces suit, etc.

Another upon a Horse-race.
Yo. ss.
I. H. by virtue of a Writ, etc. complains of B. D. of a Plea, etc. For that
whereas the 20. day of May in the year, etc. at the Castle of Y etc. conference
being had by and between the said I. H. and the said B. D. of and concerning a
Horse-race to be run between a gray Mare of the said I. H. and a bay Gelding of
the said B D. three times about the Race as it was stooped out called A. Town
Race, being upon the Moor of A. aforesaid, upon which conference it was then
and there agreed between the said I. H. and B. D. that the said I. H. should
ride himself the said race upon the said gray Mare, and that the said B. D.
himself should ride the said race upon the said bay Gelding, and that the said
B. D. and I. H. should be weighed, and which of them should want of weight
should be charged with as much more weight as should make him equal in weight
with the other; and upon that agreement the said I. H. did then and there pay
unto the said B. D. twenty shillings of, etc. And in consideration the said B.
D. did then and there assume upon himself, and faithfully promise to the said
I. H. to pay unto him forty shillings of, etc. if the said gray Mare of the
said I H. should win the said Race, and likewise that the said B. D. should run
the said race with such weight as he should want of the weight of the said I.
H. and at the finishing of the said Race the said B. D. should be weighed, and
be one weight with the said I. H. And the said I. H. in fact says, that the
said I. H. and B. D. were then weighed, and that the said B. D. was found to be
false weight, then the said I. H. that is to say, a stone in weight and more,
and thereupon the said B. D. was charged with weight accordingly, and the said
B. D. did then and there run the the said Race; yet notwithstanding the said B
D. his promise and assumption not regarding, but endeavoring and fraudulently
intending the said I H. in this behalf craftily and subtly to defraud and
deceive, he the said B. D. the 20. day of May did not ride the said Race with
the said bay Gelding with weight equal to the weight of the said I. H.
according to the said promise, and after the Race was run and finished, the
said B. D. did refuse to be weighed with the said I. H. so that the said B. D.
the said I. H. herein did deceive. Whereupon he says he is worse, and has
damage to the value of five pounds, and thereupon produces suit, etc.

For keeping a Child, and finding it meat, drink, and apparel.
Yo. ss.
E. B. by Writ, etc. complains of R. E. of a plea of trespass upon the case,
etc. For that whereas (such a day and year) at, etc. In consideration that the
said E. B. at the specal instance and request of the said R. E. would maintain
and keep with competent meat, drink and clothes, and other necessaries one A.
E. child of the said R. E. begotten by him of the body of the said E. B. so as
the said child should not at any time after in default of the said E. B. be
chargeable to the said R. E. he the said R. E. the day and year abovesaid, at,
etc. did assume upon himself, and to the said E. B. then and there faithfully
promised, that he the said R. E 7 l. of lawful English money to the said E, B.
when he should be thereunto requested, well and truly would pay and content.
And the said E. B. in fact says, that she the said E. B. the said A. B. from
the said (day and year) hitherto* did maintain and keep with competent meat,
drink, and clothes, and other necessaries, so as the said child from thence
hither was not chargable to the said R. E. Yet notwithstanding the said R. E.
his promise and assumption, etc.

For breach of Articles.
County Court ss.
B. F. by Writ, etc. complains of T. F. of a plea of Trespass upon the case,
etc. For that whereas the first day of March, etc. 1650. at, etc. In
consideration that the said B. F. did assume upon himself, and promise to T.
F. thirteen pounds of, etc. which he has, and since before the commencement of
this suit paid to the said T. F. he the said T. F. did assume upon himself,
and to the said B. F. then and there faithfully promise, that he the said T. F.
would take to his Apprentice one W. F. son to the said B. F. to serve the said
T. F. in the Art or Trade of a Skinner, from the said first day of March unto
the full end and term of seven years, from thence next following, and during
that term. That the said T. F. should after the end of three quartes of a year
next after the said first day of March, instruct, inform, and train up the said
W. F. in the way of Chapmandry in buying and selling of wool at L. in the
County of Y. or such other places where the said T. F. then frequented, or
afterward should frequent during the said term, and that the said T. F. should
during the said term not cause or compel the said W. F. to do any servile work
about the said Trade of a Skinner, and that the said T. F. should during the
said term, find the said W. F. with Meat, Drink, and Clothes, Linen,
Woollen, Stockins, Shoes, and all other things necessary for an Apprentice to
have. And that the said Linen, Woollen, Stockins, Shoes, and all other things
necessary, should be from time to time provided and found for the said W. F. by
the said T. F. as good as he the said W. F. should have at the time of his
coming to the said T. F. and so to give him the like away at the end of the
said term of seven years. And that the said T. F. should seal and deliver unto
the said W. F. one Indenture in writing for the performance of the Covenants
aforesaid, and other usual Covenants touching Apprentices in that kind. Yet
notwithstanding the said T. F. his promise and assumption aforesaid not
regarding, but endeavoring and fraudulently intending the said B. F. in this
part craftily and subtly to deceive and defraud, he did not take the said W.
F. to be his Apprentice to serve him the said T. F. in the Art or Trade of a
Skinner, during the term abovesaid, but refused to take him to be an
Apprentice, according to the Covenants aforesaid, although the said W. F. was
ready and did offer to serve the said T. F. in the said Trade, according to the
said covenant, neither did he the said T. F. at any time after the said three
quarters of a year, instruct, inform, or train up the said W. F. in the mystery
or way of Chapmandry in buying and selling of Wool at L. aforesaid, other place
as the said T. F. frequented, according or in any to the Covenant aforesaid,
though often requested, neither did he the said T. F. seal and deliver an
Indenture in writing unto to the said W. F. for the performance of the
Covenants aforesaid, and other useful Covenants touching Apprentices in that
kind, although the last day of September in the year, etc. 1650. at the Castle
of Y. in the County of Y. and within the liberty and jurisdiction of this
Court, the said B. F. did tender unto the said T. F. an Indenture in writing to
that purpose, and requested the said T. F. to deliver the same to the said W.
F. whereupon the said B. F. says he is worse and has damage to the value of
twenty pounds. And thereupon produces suit, etc.

Upon a promise for the loan of a Mare, which was killed in riding.
County Court. ss.
P. by Writ, etc. complains against D. of a Plea, that whereas the aforesaid D.
(such a day, year, and place) in consideration that he the said P. at the
special instance and request of him the said D. would lend to him the said D.
acertain Mare of his the said P. for one G D. the son of him the said D. to
ride and journey upon the same Mare from the Town of L. in the County aforesaid
unto B. in the County of Lancaster, did assume upon himself, and to him the
said P. did then and there (to wit, such a day, year, and place aforesaid)
faithfully promise, that he the said G D. the aforesaid Mare in the journey
aforesaid, would in no manner overload, or in any ways oppress, but the same
Mare when he should be thereunto required to him the said P. would safely
deliver. And he the said P. in fact says, that he trusting to the aforesaid
promise and assumption of the aforesaid D. afterward, to wit, (the aforesaid
day, year, and place) did lend the aforesaid D. the Mare aforesaid, for the
said G. D. to ride and journey upon the same Mare as aforesaid, and that the
aforesaid G. D. the Mare aforesaid, in the journey aforesaid, did so far
provoke, over labor, and with such burdens over-load, that the Mare aforesaid
by the over-labour, riding, and over-loading aforesaid, dyed: And so the
aforesaid D. his promise and assumption aforesaid has not performed, to the
damage of him the said P. of 10 pounds. And thereupon he brings his suit, etc.

Upon a promise to save harmless a Surety against a Bond.
Yo. ss.
R. R. by virtue of a Writ, etc. complains of C. L. of an action of Trespass
upon the Case, etc. For that whereas the aforesaid C. L. (such a day and year)
at, etc. In consideration that the aforesaid R. R. then and there at the
special instance and request of the same C. L. would become bound and obliged
to one G. W. by his certain writing obligatory in due form of right to be
made, sealed, and as his Deed, delivered, in 24 l. of lawful, etc. yet under
the condition of 12 l. 12 s. of like, etc. to the same G. W. upon the first day
of May then next following, at or in the then dwelling house of the aforesaid
G. W. situate in, etc. by the aforesaid R. R. and C. L. or either of them to
be made, did assume upon himself, and to the said R. R. then and there (that
is to say) such a day and year abovesaid at L. aforesaid, to wit, in, etc.
aforesaid, did faithfully promise that he the said C L. the aforesaid 12 l. and
12 s. to the said G W. upon the aforesaid first day of May, in discharge of the
aforesaid writing obligatory would pay, and the said R R. from thence
afterward of, and concerning the writing obligatory aforesaid, would keep, and
save harmless and indempnified: And the said R R. in Fact says, that he
giving credit to the promise and assumption of the said C L. aforesaid,
afterward, to wit, the same last day of O. in the year, etc. abovesaid, at L.
etc. at the said instance and request of the same C L. together with the
aforesaid C L. for the own, mere, and proper debt of the said C L. became
bound and obliged to the said G. W. by their certain writing obligatory, in
due form of right made, sealed, and as their Deeds delivered, in the aforesaid
24 l. Yet under the condition of the payment of the aforesaid 12 l. and 12 s.
to the same G W. upon the aforesaid first day of May in manner and form
aforesaid to be made; yet the said C L. his promise, etc. not regarding, but
devising, etc. to defraud the aforesaid 12 l. and 12 s. to the said G. W. upon
the aforesaid first day of May, according to the form and effect of the
Condition aforesaid had not paid, or the same G W. for the same hitherto any
wise contented, nor the same R. R. of and concerning the writing obligatory
aforesaid has kept and saved harmless and indempnified, although this to do,
the same C L. afterward, to wit (such a day, year, and place) aforesaid, by
the said R R. was required; by which, and for that that the aforesaid 12 l. and
12 s. to the said G. VV, upon the aforesaid first day of May, according to the
form and effect of the Condition aforesaid were unpaid, the aforesaid G W.
afterward, to wit, (in such a term and year) in the Court of, etc. before,
etc. did implead him the said R R, of and upon the aforesaid writing obligatory
of the aforesaid 24 l. and that plea insomuch did prosecute that the same R R.
not only pounds of and upon the writing obligatory aforesaid to the said G W.
was forced and compelled to pay, but also diverse sums of money about the
defense of the suit aforesaid was forced to expend and lay out, whereupon he
says that he is damnified, etc.

Trover and Conversion.
York. ss.
J. B. by Writ, etc. complains of J. C. in an action of Trespass upon the Case.
For that whereas the said I B. the day, year, etc. at the Castle of, etc. was
possessed of one gray Mare, of the price of ten pounds, as of his own; and
being thereof so possessed, the said I B. the day, year, etc. aforesaid, the
said Mare out of his hands and possession was casually lost, which said Mare
afterward (that is to say) the day, year, etc. at the Castle, etc. came to the
hands and possession of the said I C. sufficiently knowing the said Mare to be
the Mare of the said I B. and to him of right to belong; and devising to
deceive the said I B. of the said Mare, though often thereto required, the said
Mare to the said I B. has not restored; but the said I C. afterward (that is
to say) the day, year, etc. the said Mare to his own use and profit converted
and disposed, to the great loss of the said I B. By reason whereof he says he
is damnified 20 l. And therefore commenceth this suit, etc.

Detinue.
Yo. ss.
T. V. by virtue of a Writ, etc. by E B. his Attorney complains of R M. upon a
plea, that he render unto him goods and chattels to the value of 20 l. of, etc.
which he unjustly detaineth from him, etc. For that whereas the said T V. the
day, year, etc. at the Castle, etc. did deliver to the said R. M. one Cow,
color black, of the value of 5 l. one gray Nag of the value of 10 l. and 14
yards of French green broad Cloth, of the value of 5 l. to be safely kept, and
to the said T V. where he the said R M. should be thereunto requested to be
delivered. Yet notwithstanding the said R M. although thereunto requested, the
goods and chattels aforesaid to the said T V. as yet has not redelivered, but
the same to redeliver hitherto has contradicted, and as yet does contradict,
and unjustly detains, whereupon the said T V. says he is worse, and has
damage to the value of 30 l. And thereupon produces suit, etc.

Trespass.
For breaking down the Plaintiffs Stall, being set up in the Market.
County Court. ss.
A. O. complains of VV. C. of a Plea of Trespass. That the aforesaid W. C. the
day, year, etc. at S. in the County aforesaid, and within the liberty and
jurisdiction of this Court, made an assault upon him the said A. O. and his
close and house, (that is to say) one stall there in the Market set up, broke
and entered, and his wares (that is to say) dressed leather, to the value of 5 l.
put upon his stall aforesaid, displaced, cut down, and spoiled, and other
enormious things to him did, to the great damage of the said A O. whereupon he
says, that he is the worse, and has damage to the value of ten pounds; And
thereupon he brings his suit, etc.

For breaking the Plaintiffs Close, etc.
Yo. ss.
I. A. complains of T. S. of a plea of Trespass, etc. For that the said T. S.
the day, year, etc. a Close of the said I. A. called C. at S. in the County,
etc. broke and entered, and the grass of the said I. A. then and there, being
of the value of ten shillings, with certain goods and chattels (that is to say)
with Kine, Oxen, Steers, Horses, Nags, Mares, Hogs, and Sheep, did depasture,
eat up, tread under foot, consume and spoil, continuing the said Trespass from
the said day, year, etc. aforesaid, during the time of one whole month then
next following, at diverse days and times, and other harms to him did to the
great loss of the said I. A. by reason whereof he says he is damnified 39 s.
And therefore commenceth this suit, etc.

For a Dog biting of a Mare so that she dyed.
Yo. ss.
H. S. complains of W. P. in an action of Trespass, for that whereas the said
W. P. the day, year, etc. at, etc. one Mare of the said H S. of the price of 10
l then and there being found did beat, wound and chase, and also with a Dog did
bite; so that by reason of the beating, chasing, wounding, bruising, and biting
of the said Mare, the said Mare then and there dyed: And other harms to him did
to the great damage of, etc.

For chasing of Hogs with Dogs, etc.
Yo. ss.
A. B. complains of C. D. of a plea of Trespass, wherefore he did chase two
hogs of him thesaid A. B. at M. sound with certain Dogs, insomuch by setting on
those Dogs, to bite the Hogs aforesaid: That by that chasing and biting of the
Dogs aforesaid, the aforesaid Hogs of the price of 40 s. dyed; And other
enormities, etc.

For pasturing sheep in a rotten pasture, by reason whereof they dyed.
Yo. ss.
A. B. complains of C D. of a plea of trespass. Wherefore the Close of him the
said A B. at L. did break, and his 260. sheep of the price of 40 l. there
lately found did take, and did chase them into a certain corrupt pasture within
the Village aforesaid, out of malice, detaining those sheep so long upon the
pasture aforesaid, that those sheep by corruptnesse of that pasture becoming
rotten and infected, dyed; and other enormities, etc.

For digging and plowing the Plaintiffs ground, and taking away his Corn.
Yo. ss.
T. S. complains of G G. in an action of trespass; For that whereas the said G
G. the day, year, etc. at, etc. the Close of the said T S. being one acre of
arable land lying in B. broke and entered, and the soil of the said close with
his plow did dig and rip up. And afterward, that is to say, the day, year,
etc. aforesaid at B. aforesaid, and within the Jurisdiction aforesaid, for that
the said G G. the aforesaid Close of the said T S. broke and entered, and his
corn, (that is to say) two wain loads of Oats, there lately cut down of the
value of 30 s. of his the said T. S. took and carried away. And other enormious
things to him did do, etc.

For taking away a post.
Yo. ss.
A. B. complains of C. D. of a Plea of Trespass, etc. wherefore he did break
the Close of the said A B. at F. and did take and carry away a certain new post
of him the said A B. there in the soil put and fastened to the value of 30 s.
and other enormities, etc.

For eating the grass, cutting the hedges, and assaulting the Plaintiff.
Yo. ss.
A. B. by, etc. complains against C. D. of a plea of Trespass, etc. For that
whereas the said C D. the 10. day of May, in the year, etc. at the Castle,
etc. in the County aforesaid, and within the liberty and jurisdiction of this
Court, the Close of the said A B. at S. broke and entered, and his grass to the
value of 30 s. there lately growing, with certain Cattle, did eat, tread down
and consume, and his other grass to the value of 6 s. there late growing, with
his feet in walking, did tread down and consume, and also upon the said A. B.
then and there made an assault, and him did beat, wound and evil entreat, so
that he despaired of life; and also his hedges there did cast down, and other
enormities, etc. to the great damage of the said A B. of 39 s. 11d. And
thereupon he produces this action, etc.

Trespass and Assault.
Yo. ss.
I. H. complains of I. S. in an action of Trespass and Assault, etc. For that
the said I. S. the day, year, etc. at the Castle, etc. made and assault and a
fray upon the said I. H. and did then and there beat, wound, and evil entreat
him, so that it was despaired of his life, and other harms to him did to the
great loss of the said I. H. By reason of which he says he is damnified 30 s.
And therefore he commenceth this suit.

Assault upon one at under-age.
Yo. ss.
W. E. by A. S. his Guardian, and next friend, by favor of this Court, is
admitted to prosecute for the said W. E. because he is within the age of 21
years, by virtue of a Writ of Iusticies by T W. his Attorney complains of T C.
in an action of Trespasst and Assault, etc. For that the said T C. the day,
year, etc. in and upon the said W. E. an Assault and Affray did make, etc. as
in the other.

Upon a Replevin.
County Court. ss,
A. B. complains of T. L. in a Plea wherefore he took the goods of the said A
B. and them did unjustly detain, contrary to sureties and sase pledges, etc.
For that whereas the aforesaid T L. the day, year, etc. at S. in a place there
called R. in the County, etc. took of the goods of the said A B. that is to
say, seven Kine of the price of 30 l. And the same did unjustly detain against
the sureties and safe pledges, etc. whereupon the said A B. says he is worse,
and has damage to the value of 39 s. And therefore he has brought this suit,
etc.

Pleadings.
He owes him nothing.
County Court ss.
ANd the said I A. comes and defends the force and injury when, etc. and says
that the said I G. ought not to have his said action against him, because he
says, that he the said I A. owes nothing to the said I. G. in manner and form
as the said I G. has declared against the said I A. and for that he puts
himself upon the Country, etc.

He made no such promise.
ANd the said H. B. comes and defends the sorce and wrong when, etc. and says
that he did not assume and promise to the aforesaid T R. in manner and form as
the aforesaid T R. against him complains: And of this he puts himself
upon the Country.

Replication.
Yo. ss.
ANd the said T R. says that he by any thing before alleged from his Action
aforesaid, ought not to be debarred; for that he says that the aforesaid H. B.
did assume upon himself, and promise in manner and form, as by the
Declaration aforesaid is alleged and set forth: And this he prays may be
enquired by the Country, and the said W. B. likewise, therefore, etc.

He made no such promise within six years.
York ss.
ANd the said W. B. comes and defends the injury when, etc. and says that the
said W. B. did not within the space of six years before the commencement of
this suit assume upon himself, or promise to pay to the said T B. the sum of
30 s. in manner and form, as the said T B. above against him the said W B.
does complain, and upon this he puts himself upon the Country, etc.

Never Executor.
Yo. ss.
ANd the aforesaid E. H. comes and defends the force and injury when, etc. and
says that the aforesaid T C. ought not to have his action against him, because
he says that he never was the Executor of the last Will and Testament of the
aforesaid R H. neither did administer of any of the goods or chattels which
were of the said R H. at the time of his death, as Executor of the last Will
and Testament of the aforesaid R H. after the death of the said R H. and this
the said E H. is ready to verify; whereupon he demands Judgment, whether
the said T. C. ought to have or maintain the said action against him, etc.

Fully Administered.
Yo. ss.
ANd the aforesaid M A. comes and defends the injury and wrong when, etc. and
says that the aforesaid A B. his action aforesaid ought not to have against
him, because he says he has fully administered of the goods and chattels of
the aforesaid T A. at the time of his death, and he no other goods nor chattels
has of the aforesaid T A. at the time of his death to be administered, nor had
at the time of the entry of this plaint of the said A B. nor at any time after;
and this he is ready to aver, wherefore he prays Judgment, whether the
aforesaid A B. his action aforesaid against him ought to have, etc.

Replication.
Yo. ss.
ANd the said A B. says, that he by any thing before alleged from his action
aforesaid, ought not to be debarred, because he says that the aforesaid M A.
the day of the commencement of this suit, (to wit) the day, year, etc. at the
Castle aforesaid: and within the jurisdiction aforesaid, had diverse goods and
chattels which were the aforesaid T A. at the time of his death, and afterward
in his hands to be administered to the value of the debt aforesaid, wherefore
the debt aforesaid to the said A B. ought to be satisfied; and this he requires
may be enquired of by the Country, etc. and the said M A. likewise, etc.

Not guilty.
ANd the said G. W. comes and defends the wrong and injury when, etc. and
says, that he is not guilty of the Trespass aforesaid, as the said J C. has
complained against him: and of this he puts himself upon the Country, etc.

Bar by within-age.
ANd the said H C. comes and defends the injury when, etc. and says, that the
said W B. his action aforesaid against him ought not to have; for he says that
he at the time of the aforesaid writing obligatory, was within the age of one
and twenty years; And this he is ready to verify, whereupon he demands
judgment, if the said W B. his action aforesaid against him ought to have, etc.

Payment upon a Bill, and a Release produced.
Y. ss.
ANd the said I. S. comes and defends the injury when, etc. and says that the
said I W. ought not to have his action aforesaid against him the said I. S. for
he says, that the said I W. after the making of the said Bill, and the
commencement of this suit (that is to say) the day, year, etc at the Castle,
etc. the said I W. did acknowledge and confess himself to be fully satisfied
and content of the said sum of 5 l in the said Bill mentioned, and thereupon
did acquit and release him the said I S. of and from all actions which the said
I W. might have against him the aforesaid I S. by reason of the making of the
aforesaid Bill, and this he is ready to verify, whereupon he prays
judgment, if the said I VV. ought to have his action aforesaid against him,
etc.

Free-hlod.
ANd the said H S. comes and defends the sorce and injury when, etc. and says
that the said W B. his action aforesaid against him ought not to have or
maintain, because he says that the Close aforesaid called T. at F. in the
Declaration above mentioned, in which the Trespass aforesaid is supposed to be
done, is, and at the time of the said trespass supposed to be done is, and was
the only sole free Tenement or Freehold of the said H S. By reason whereof
the said H S. did break, and enter into the said Close called T. and the corn
and grass there growing and being, with his feet did tread down and consume,
and other corn, grass and hay being in the said Close, with his horses,
mares, oxen and kine did eat, tread down, and consume, continuing the said
trespass as in the Declaration is above specified, as was lawful and well
pleased him so to do: and this he is ready to verify and prove; whereupon he
requires Judgment, if the said W R. his Action aforesaid against him ought to
have, etc.

No action to cause one to render an account, will lie in this Court.
Yo. ss.
ANd the said G F. in proper person comes and says, that the said C B. his said
Action against the said G F. in this Court ought not to have or maintain; for
that the said C. B. in an Action to render an account etc. wherefore the said G
F. demands Judgment, whether this Court will take cognizance of the said
Action, etc.

In arrest of Judgment.
Yo. ss.
AND the aforesaid R. M. says, that the verdict aforesaid given against him,
of the part of the said M S. ought not to stand or proceed, because he says
that the Declaration aforesaid, and the matter therein contained, is not
sufficient in Law to give and maintain the aforesaid Action against him, by
which he requires Judgment: And that the aforesaid Plaint and verdict to be
quashed and accounted nothing, and that the aforesaid Plaintiff may receive
nothing by his Plaint and Verdict aforesaid, etc.

Conditions performed.
Yo. ss.
AND the said W. G. comes and defends the force and wrong when, etc. and
desires to hear the said writing, and it is read to him, etc. he desires also
to hear the Condition of the said writing, and it is read to him in these
words, (that is to say) The Condition of this Obligation, etc. (recite the
Condition) which being read and heard, the said W. G. says, that the said C G.
his Action aforesaid against him ought not to have, because he says, that the
Articles in the Condition aforesaid abovementioned, were made at Y. aforesaid,
in, etc. day, year, etc. aforesaid, between the said C G. by the name of C G.
of A. in the said County, Gent. on the one party, and the said W G. by the name
of W G. of the same Town and County, Yeoman, on the other party, whose other
part signed with the Seal of the said C G. the said W G. does bring here in
Court, whose date is the same day and year, first, etc. (recite all the
Articles throughout) and the said W G. does say, that he has performed and
kept all and singular the Covenants, Grants, Articles, Clauses, Sentences and
Agreements whatsoever in the said Articles specified, on his part to be
observed, performed, fulfilled and kept, according to the form and effect of
those Articles: and this he is ready to maintain, whereupon he prays
Judgments, if the said C G. his action aforesaid against him ought to have,
etc.

Replication.
Yo. ss.
ANd the said C G. says, that he, by any thing before aledged, ought not to be
debarred from having his said action against the said W G. because protesting
that he the said W. G. has not performed or kept any covenants, grants,
articles, clauses, sentences, or agreements in the said articles specified, on
his part to be performed or kept, as the said W. G. above by pleading has
alleged; for plea the said C G. says, that the said W G. did not, etc.
(recite the breach) according to the form and effect of the same Articles: and
this he is ready to verify, whereupon he prays Judgment, and his debt
aforesaid, together with his damages, by occasion of detaining that debt, to
him to be adjudged, etc.

Rejoinder.
Yo. ss.
ANd the said W G. says, that he did (recite here that he did perform the
breach the Plaintiff assigned) according to the form and effect of thesaid
Articles: and of this he puts himself upon the Country, and the said C G.
likewise, etc.

Detain he does not.
ANd the said R. S. comes and defends the force and wrong when, etc. and says
he does not detain from the said R. L. the chattels aforesaid, nor any parcel
thereof, in manner as the said R. L. has above declared against him: and of
this he puts himself upon the Country, etc.

Bar by a general acquittance.
Yo. ss.
WHen, etc. his action ought not to have, etc. because he says, that after the
making of the Writing aforesaid (that is to say) the day, year, etc. the
Plaintiff by his certain bill of acquittance, which the said Defendant signed
with the seal of the said Plaintiff, here in Court produces, the date whereof
is the same day and year he acquitted and discharged him the said Defendant, by
name of, etc. of all actions, plaints, demands, debts, accounts, and debares
for plaint, and in his executed and assigned, from the beginning of the World
until the day of the date of the said Bill: and this, etc. if Judgment, etc.

Replication.
Yo. ss.
THe Plaintiff says that he ought not to be barred, etc. because he says, that
the aforesaid Bill of acquittance is not his deed: and this he prays, etc.

Justification of scandalous Words.
ANd, etc. when, etc. and says that the said G L. his action aforesaid against
him ought not to have, for that he says, that before the speaking of the
pretended scandalous words in the said declaration mentioned, (that is to say)
the day, year, etc. at etc the said G L. one Wether-sheep to the value of 10 s
of, etc. of the goods and chattels of the said H. A. in the said Declaration
mentioned, then and there being sound, feloniously did steal, take and carry
away, contrary to the public peace: By reason whereof the said P. G.
afterward (that is to say) the said day, year, etc. at, etc. the pretended
scandalous words in the said Declaration mentioned, did say, affirm and declare
to the said G. L. (that is to say) thou (meaning the said G. L.) art a Thief,
and stole H. A.'s Sheep: and this he is ready to verify, whereupon he
demands Judgment, if the said G L. his action aforesaid against him ought to
have, etc.

Tender of amends in Replevin.
County Court ss.
AND the said H. says, etc. the just taking of, etc. ought not to avow, because
he says, that after the aforesaid time of the taking of the Cattle aforesaid
in the aforesaid place, in which, etc. und before the day of the issuing forth
of the precept of Replevin, of him the said H. (that is to say) the day, year,
etc. aforesaid, at W. aforesaid, he the said H. offered 12 d. to pay the said
W. and I. to the use of the said W. for the damage of the said W. which he
sustained by occasion of the trespass aforesaid, which the cattle aforesaid, in
the aforesaid two acres of Land made, which said 12 d. were sufficient amends
for the trespass aforesaid, which the cattle aforesaid in the said two acres of
Land made; which said 12 d. the aforesaid W. and I. then and there wholly
refused to receive of the said H. and this, etc.

Part of the debt paid, The residue tendered before Suit, and refused.
Yo. ss.
ANd, etc. when, etc. and says, that the aforesaid I. G. ought not to have or
maintain his said action against him: because he says, that the said I. A. the
day, year, etc. before the beginning of this action, well and faithfully paid
to the said I. G. 20 s. part of the above mentioned debt, in the said
Declaration specified (that is to say) at B. aforesaid, and within the
jurisdiction of this Court: And as to the five shillings six pence the residue
of the debt, in the said Declaration specified, the said I. A. further says,
that he afterward, that is to say, the day, year, etc. abovesaid before the
commencement of this action, at B. aforesaid tendered to the said I. G. the said
five shillings six pence, which said five shillings six pence the said I. G.
then and there refused to accept of: and this the said I. A. is ready to prove,
and demands Judgment of the Court; if the said I. A. ought to have his said
action against him, etc.

Replication.
Yo. ss.
ANd the said I. G. as to the plea of the said I. A. as to the said 20 s. parcel
of the debt aforesaid, says, that he by any thing before alleged, ought not
to be barred from having his said action against 1 Pact. non sol.
him, for he says, that the said I. A. did not pay the said twenty shillings
to the said I. G. as the said I. A. above has alleged: and this he prays may
be inquired of by the Country, and the said I. A. likewise, etc.

2 Morat in lege.
And as the said plea of the said I. A, as to the said 5 s. 6 d. residue of the
said Debt, and the said I. G. says that the same plea of the said I. A. in
manner and aforesaid pleaded, and the matter therein contained is insufficient
in the Law, to bar the said I. G. from having his said action against the said
I. A. and that he to the plea aforesaid, in manner and form aforesaid pleaded,
needs not, nor is bound by the Law of the Land to answer: whereupon for want
of a sufficient plea in this behalf, the said I. G. prays Judgment, and the
said 5 s. 6 d. residue of his debt aforesaid together with his damages, by
reason of the detaining of that debt to him to be adjudged, etc.

Not his Deed.
ANd, etc. when, etc. And says, that he ought not to be charged with the said
debt, by virtue of the writing aforesaid; because he says, that the said
writing is not his Deed. And of this he puts himself upon the Country, And
the said A. likewise, etc.

By threats.
ANd, etc. when, etc. And says, that the said A. ought not to have his said
action against him, because he says, that the said A. at the time of the
making of the said writing, at N. aforesaid did impose upon the said B. such
and so great threats of his life, and may ming of his body to be inflicted on
him, unless he would make and seal unto the said A. the said writing; that he
the said B. did then and there make unto the said A. the said writing, for
fear of those threats. And this he is ready to aver, whereupon he prays
judgment, if the said A. ought to have his said action against him; etc.

Replication.
Yo. ss.
ANd the said A. says, he by any thing before alleged, ought not to be barred
from having his said action, because he says that the said B. at the time of
the making of the said writing aforesaid, was of his own power at large: And
did make to the said A. the said writing, of his mere and voluntary will, and
not for fear of threats, as the said B. has above alleged. And he prays,
that this may be inquired of by the Country. And the said B. likewise, etc.

By hardness of imprisonment.
Yo. ss.
ANd, etc. when, etc. And says, etc. because he says, that at the time of
making of the said writing he was imprisoned by the said A. and other of his
Covin, that is to say at N. aforesaid, and there in prison detained until the
same B. by force and hardness of that imprisonment, had then and there made to
the said A. the said writing. And this he is ready to aver, whereupon he
prays Judgment, etc.

Replication.
Yo. ss.
ANd the said A. says, that he, etc. because he says, that the said B. at the
time of making of the said writing, was of his own right at large, and out of
prison, and did of his mere and voluntary will make to the said A. the said
writing, and not by force and hardness of imprisonment, as the said B. above
has alleged. And this he prays may be inquired of by the Country; And the
said B. likewise, etc.

The Assault made by the Plaintiff, etc.
York. ss. Son. assault de mesn.
ANd, etc. when, etc. And as to the Trespass and Assault aforesaid above
supposed to be done, the said I. R. says, that the said R. W. his action
aforesaid against him ought not to have, because he says, that the aforesaid
R. VV. the day, year, etc. aforesaid upon him the said I. R. at the Castle,
etc. did make an Assault, and him would have beaten, wounded, and evil
entreated, by which the said I. R. himself against the aforesaid R. VV. did
then and there defend: And says, that if any evil to the said R. VV. then and
there happened, was of the proper assault of him the said R. VV. And in defense
of him the said I. R. And this he is ready to verify, whereupon he prays
Judgment, if the aforesaid R. VV. his action aforesaid, against him ought to
have, etc.

Replication.
Yo. ss.
ANd the foresaid R. VV says, that he by any thing before alleged, from having
his action aforesaid, ought not to be debarred, because he says, that the
foresaid I. R. the day, year, etc. abovesaid, at, etc. in his Declaration
aforesaid above specified, of his own proper injury, and without such cause by
the said R. VV. above alleged upon him the said R. VV. did make an assault,
and him did beat, wound, and evil entreat, so that of his life he did despair,
against the peace of the Lord Protector that now is, as the said R. VV. above
against him has complained: And this he prays may be inquired of by the
Country, And the said I. R. likewise, Therefore, etc.

The Defendant pleads, the Plaintiff within age, to bring his action: and
should have brought it by Guardian, and not by Attorney.
ANd, etc. when etc. And says, that the foresaid I. R. ought not to have his
action aforesaid against him, because he says, that the foresaid I. R. the day
and year in the Declaration specified (to wit) the day, year, etc. the day of
the issuing forth of the Writ of Justicies of him the said I. R. that is to
say, the day, year, etc. was within the age of one and twenty years, And that
the foresaid I. R. declared against him the said P. C. in the Plaint aforesaid
by his Attorney, whereas by the due form of Law, he ought to have declared by
his Guardian: And this he is ready to aver, whereupon he prays Judgment,
whether the aforesaid I. R. ought to have his action aforesaid against him, etc.

To a Trespass in Walking, Not guilty: and as to the residue of Trespass,
tender of amends.
Yo. ss.
ANd, etc. when, etc. and says, that as to the breaking of the close aforesaid,
as also to the treading down and consuming of the Corn, and grass aforesaid
with his seet, in walking in the same four acres of land aforesaid, of new
assigned, above supposed to be done, says, that he is in no wise thereof
guilty, etc. and of this he puts himself upon the Country, and the
Plaintiff likewise.. And as to the residue of the trespass aforesaid, in the
same four acres of Land, of new assigned above supposed to be done, the same A.
says, that the same B. his action aforesaid ought not to have, because he
says, that the residue of the trespass aforesaid in the same four acres of
Land, of new assigned, above supposed to be done, was done with the cattle
aforesaid, by negligence, and against the will of the same A. and that the same
A. afterward and before the day of commencing of this action of the same B. to
wit, the 16 day of May in the year, etc. at the same parish of R. in the said
County of Y. offered to the same B. 20 s. of lawful money of England, for and
in satisfaction for the residue of the trespass aforesaid, so as aforesaid
done; which said 20 s. were sufficient amends for the same residue of the
trespass aforesaid, in the same four acres of Land, with the appurtenances, of
new assigned, as beforesaid done* and that the same B. the said 20 s. as
aforesaid offered, to receive of the same A. then and there altogether refused,
and as yet does refuse, and this he is ready to verify; And etc.

Replication.
Yo. ss.
ANd the same B. as to the same plea of the said A. as to the said residue of
the trespass aforesaid in the same four acres of land, with the appurtenances,
of new assigned done, says, that he by any thing in the same plea before
alleged ought not to be barred from having his action aforesaid against him,
etc. because he protests that the aforesaid residue of the trespass
aforesaid, in the same four acres of land with the appurtenances, of new
assigned, was not done with the cattle aforesaid, by the negligence and against
the will of the same A. protesting also, that the said 20 s. in satisfaction
for the trespass aforesaid were not offered before the same day of commencing
the suit of the said B. as the same A. has above alleged for plea: the same
B. says, that the same 20 s. were offered by the same A. to the said B. for a
certain trespass by the same A. with his cattle aforesaid to the same B. in a
certain other Close of land, with the appurtenances called the S. of the same
B. in the Parish of R. aforesaid, in the County aforesaid done, without that
that the same A. offered to the same B. the said 20 s. for and in the
satisfaction of the foresaid residue of the trespass aforesaid, in the same 4
acres of land, of new assigned, done, as the same A. has above alleged: and
this he is ready to verify: whereupon for that the same A. the said residue of
the trespass aforesaid, in the same four acres of Land with the appurtenances
aforesaid, of new assigned, done, above acknowledges: the same B. prays
judgment, and his damages by occasion of the residue of the trespass aforesaid,
to him to be adjudged, etc.

Rejoinder.
Yo. ss.
ANd the same A. as before says, that he offered to the same B. the said 20 s.
for and in satisfaction of the said residue of the trespass aforesaid, in the
same four acres of Land, with the appurtenances of new assigned, done, as he
has above alleged: And of this he puts himself upon the Country, and the
same B. likewise. Therefore, etc.

Misnomer in Baptism pleaded in Abatement of the Writ of Justicies.
Yo. ss.
ANd the said A. by Simon Don his Attorney, comes and prays Judgment of the
Writ of Justicies aforesaid, because he says, that the name of Baptism of the
said Agnes, in the Writ aforesaid named is Anna, and not Agnes, as the said B.
has above declared, and this he is ready to verify, whereupon he prays
Judgment of the said Writ of Justicies, and that the said Writ of Justicies be
quashed, etc.

Plea in Abatement for that the Plaintiff has one name in the Writ, and
another in the Declaration.
Yo. ss.
ANd the said A. by I. R. his Attorney, comes and prays Judgment of the Writ of
Justicies aforesaid, because he says, that he is the same person against whom
the said B has brought his Writ aforesaid, by the name of B. D. otherwise E.
Yeoman, and that the said B. is named John otherwise Henry, and by the same
name of B. D. otherwise E. the day of obtaining of the Writ of Iusticies of the
said B. and always afterterwards hitherto he has been known and called, and
by the same name of B. D. otherwise against the said A. in his Declaration
aforesaid now has declared, without that, that the said B. is named or called
John otherwise Henry, or by the same name of B. D. otherwise E. has been at
any time known or called, and this he is ready to verify, whereupon he prays
Judgment of the writ of Iusticies aforesaid, etc.

The Defendant justifies, for horse-meat not satisfied, in answer to a
Declaration in Trover for the same horse.
Yo. ss.
ANd the said A. says, that he the same time in which the said horse in the
Declaration aforesaid specified, is supposed to come to his hands, and by two
years then next elapsed, and ever afterward, and yet is a common Innkeeper,
and holds a certain Inn called the George in the Parish and Town of Harwood
in he said County of Y. and that one C. D. the twelfth day of August in the
year aforesaid, at the Parish and Town of the said H. came to the Common Inn
of the said A. bringing with him the said horse into the said Inn, which said
horse the said C. D. the same twelfth day of August abovesaid until the twenty
fourth day of June in the year, etc. abovesaid in the Inn of the said A.
remained at meat, and that the said meat of the said A. eaten and consumed
within the same Inn by the same horse between the said 12. day of August in
the said year of, etc. and the said 24. day of June in the year aforesaid was
worth eight pounds ten shillings of lawful money of England. And that no
person within that time paid the said A. for the said meat, neither compounded
nor agreed with the said A. for the same, whereupon certain L M. NO and others
lawful and honest persons the neighbors of the said A. and inhabiting and
remaining within the said parish of H. in the County aforesaid, at the request
of the said A. afterward, to wit, the 24. day of June abovesaid, at the said
Town and Parish of H. reasonably appraised the said horse at six pounds ten
shillings, and no more; whereupon the said A. afterward, to wit, the said 24.
day of June in the year abovesaid, at the aforesaid Town and Parish of H.
retained that horse in his hands, toward the satisfaction of the said A. for
his meat aforesaid then and there did convert and dispose, as it was lawful
for him to do with it, without that, that the said horse came to the hands of
the said A. in the aforesaid County of L. or any other place without the said
Town and Parish of H. in the said County of Y. as the said C D. above against
him complains, and this he is ready to verify, whereupon he prays Judgment
if the Plaintiff his Action, etc.

The Defendant pleads leave and liberty granted to him by the Plaintiff, to
enter and feed his Cattle.
Yo. ss.
ANd the said A. as to the aforesaid Trespass, as to the breaking of the Close
aforesaid, and the eating, etc. with his cattle, etc. and the treading, etc.
with his feet, above supposed to be done, says, that the same B. before the
same time in which, etc. to wit, the 22. day of May in the year, etc. at
Skipton aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, and within the liberty and
jurisdiction of this Court, gave liberty to the said A. into the tenements
aforesaid, with the appurtenances (of new assigned) to enter, and put in his
Cattle aforesaid, the grass in the tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances
(of new assigned) then there growing to eat up: By virtue of which said
liberty, the same Defendant the same time in which, etc. into the tenements
aforesaid, with the appurtenances in which, etc. entered, and his Cattle
aforesaid, to eat the grass there put. And the same Cattle the same time in
which, etc. by virtue of the liberty aforesaid, the grass aforesaid, in the
tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, did eat, tread down, and consume:
which said breaking of the Close aforesaid, and eating, treading down, and
consuming of the grass aforesaid, with the Cattle aforesaid, in the tenements
aforesaid, with the appurtenances above newly assigned, and the treading and
consuming of the other grass aforesaid in the same tenements with the feet
walking, by virtue of the liberty aforesaid, and for the cause aforesaid, in
form as aforesaid done, is the same breaking of the Close, etc. And this, etc.

The Plaintiff replies, de injuria propria, and traverseth the liberty. And the
Desendant justifies he gave the liberty, and issue thereupon.

The Defendant justifies (in Replevin) the taking of the Cattle for Rent in
arrear.
Yo. ss.
ANd the said A B. by S D. his Attorney, comes and defends the force and
injury when, etc. and does well avouch the taking of the said Cattle, in the
said place in which, etc. And justly, etc. because he says, that the said
place in which, etc. is, and from the time of the said taking, and before was
four acres of Land in M. aforesaid, and says that long before the time of the
said taking, before supposed to be done, and at the same time the said A B. was
seized in his Demesne as of fee, of one Message, one Garden, and four acres of
Land, and one acre of Wood with the appurtenances in M. aforesaid, whereof the
said place in which, etc. is, And at the said time in which, etc. was parcel,
and so being thereof seized, that same Message, Garden, Land, and Wood, with
the appurtenances, long before the time of the taking aforesaid, that is to
say, at the Feast of the annunciation of our blessed Virgin Mary in the year,
etc. at M. aforesaid, demised unto the aforesaid C D. to have to him from the
same Feast, as long as it should please him the said A B. yielding therefore
yearly unto the said A B. as long as the said C D. should have and ocupy the
said Message, Garden, Land, and Wood 30 s. at the Feast of St. Michael the
Archangel, and the annunciation of our blessed Virgin Mary, by equal portions
yearly to be paid, by virtue of which demise, the said C. D. the said Message,
Garden, Land and Wood, with the appurtenances from the said Feast of the
Annunciation of, etc. until the Feast of the Annunciation of, etc. next before
the time of the taking aforesaid, had and occupied, and for that, that 30 s. of
the said Lease, by the said time unto him the said A. B. at the time of the
said computation, remained in arrear, and as yet remains unpaid, does well
avouch the taking of the said Cattle, in the said place in which, etc. and
justly, etc. And this he is ready to prove, whereupon he prays judgment, and
the return of the said Cattle to be adjudged unto him, etc.

The Defendant says, that the Goods were taken as a pawn or pledge for money
lent.
Yo. ss.
ANd the aforesaid A. B. by, etc. comes and defends the force and injury when,
etc. And as to the breaking the Close, etc. he is in nothing thereof guilty:
and as to the residue of the trespass aforesaid, supposed to be done, the same
A. B. says, the aforesaid C. D. ought not to have his action, etc. because he
says, that the same C D. long before the said time wherein, etc. was indebted
unto him the said A. B. in 22 s. for diverse sums of money by him the said C. D.
of the aforesaid A. B. formerly borrowed: And afterward and long before the
said time, the same C. D. by one E. his wife, delivered to the aforesaid A. B.
the aforesaid goods and chattels, as a pawn for the aforesaid 22 s. to be held
unto him the said A. B. in pledge until the said C. D. to the aforesaid A. B.
the same 22 s. had paid: And the same A. B. in fact says, that the aforesaid
C. D. has not as yet paid to him the said A. B. the aforesaid 22 s. which is
the same Trespass, and taking and carrying away the aforesaid goods and
chattels, whereof the aforesaid C. D. above now complains. And this, etc.
whereupon, etc.

Replication, that he took them Injuria sua propria without such a cause.
Yo. ss.
ANd the said C. D. says, that he, by any thing before alleged, ought not to
be debarred from having his action aforesaid, because he says, that the
aforesaid A. B. as of his proper injury, and without such a cause above by him
the said A. B. alleged the day and year aforesaid, the aforesaid goods and
chattels at R. in the said County of Y. found, he took, and carried away, as
the same C. D. by his Declaration aforesaid above supposes: And this he
prays may be inquired of by the Country: And the aforesaid A. B. in like
manner. Therefore, etc.

Concord in Assault and Battery.
Y. ss.
ANd the aforesaid A. B. in his proper person coms, and defends the sorce and
injury, when, etc. And says that as to the Trespass aforesaid above supposed
to be done, the same A. B. says, that the aforesaid C. D. ought not to have
his action aforesaid against him, because he says, that long after the
Trespass aforesaid was supposed to be made, to wit, the eighth day of July in
the year, etc. aforesaid, at S. aforesaid in the County aforesaid, and within
the liberty and jurisdiction of this Court, the same A. B. and C. D. by the
mediation of E. F. and G. H. their friends and acquaintance, in a friendly
manner coming between them, in such manner it was agreed together between
them, that is to say, that the aforesaid A. B. should pay to the aforesaid C.
D. in amends, and for satisfaction of that Trespass five shillings of lawful
money of England, which the said A. B. the said five shillings of, etc. to the
aforesaid C. D. then and there paid, according to the force, form, and effect
of the concord aforesaid: And this, etc. whereupon he prays Judgment, etc.

Replication, No such Concord or Agreement made.
Yo. ss.
ANd the aforesaid C. D. says, that he by any thing prealledged ought not to be
debarred from having his action aforesaid; because he says, that there was
never any such concord or agreement had between them the said C D. and A B. in
manner and form as the said A B. has above alleged by pleading. And this he
prays may be inquired of by the Country, and the aforesaid A B. in like
manner, etc.

The Defendant says, that as to the taking of the Ox, that he took it by the
name of an Heriot.
County Court. ss.
ANd the said C D. by etc. comes and defends the force and wrong when. etc.
And as to the taking of the said Ox, the said C D. does well avow the taking
of the said Ox in the said place, in which, etc. and justly, etc. because he
says, that long before the taking of the said Ox before supposed, one I G.
was seized of one Message with the appurtenances in W. aforesaid, in his
Demesne, as of see, and so seized held the same of the said C D. by fealty, and
the rent of 12 d. unto him the said C D. every year, at the feasts of the
Annunciation of the blessed Virgin Mary, etc. and of S. Michael the Archangel,
to be paid by equal portions, and also by Services, that every tenant of the
said Message, with the appurtenances thereof, seized in his Demesne as ofsee,
or in use, from the time of which contrary, etc. he ought and had accustomed to
render unto the said C D. and his heirs, the best animal living of the same
tenant of the said Message with the appurtenances so thereof dying seized in
his Demesne, as of see, or in use, by the name of Heriot, of which services the
said C D. was seized by the hands of the said I G. as by the hands of his true
tenant, that is to say, of the said Fealty, as ofsee, and right, and of the
said Rent in his Demesne as of see. And afterward the said I G. died of the
said Message with the appurtenances seized in his Demesne as ofsee. And
because the said Ox was the proper Ox of the said I G. at the time of his
Death, the said C D. that Ox as the best animal which was of the said I G. at
the time of his death, by the name of a Heriot he took, and justly, etc.

Justification in Trespass for want of reparation of the hedges by the
Plaintiff.
Yo. ss.
ANd the said A and B. by I R. their Attorney come and desend their force and
injury, where, etc. And as to the breaking of the Close aforesaid, and the
eating up, treading down, and consuming the grass aforesaid, the same A and B.
say, that the aforesaid D. ought not to have his action aforesaid against them,
because they say, that at the time of the Trespass aforesaid supposed to be
made, were, and are seized of a certain Close of Pasture near adjoining to the
said Close of the aforesaid D. in which the grass aforesaid, in S. aforesaid
in their Demesne as ofsee. Between which said Closes there is a certain hedge
separating each from other the aforesaid Closes: which said hedge the aforesaid
D. and all they whose estate the same D. has in the Close aforesaid, from time
out of mind were accustomed to make, repair, and sustain; and say, that that
hedge for want of reparation and sustaining of the same, was at the time of the
Trespass aforesaid supposed to be made broken down, and laid prostrate to the
ground, and that the Cattle of the said A. and B. in their Close aforesaid put
to depasture into the said Close of the aforesaid D. by the breach and decay of
the said hedge did enter against the will of them the said A. and B. and the
grass aforesaid did eat up, tread down, and consume, the same A. and B. their
Cattle aforesaid freshly pursuing into the said Close of the said D. by the
breach and decay aforesaid, did enter to drive back their Cattle into the said
Close of them the said A. and B. and into that Close speedily drove them, as it
was lawful for them to do, which is the same trespass, and breach of close,
and feeding, treading down, and consuming the grass aforesaid, whereof the
said D. above against them complains: And this they are ready to aver, etc.
whereupon, etc.

The Defendant upon a Replevin avoweth the taking of the Cattle, doing Damage
Feasant.
Yo. ss.
ANd the said A. by, etc. comes and defends the sorce and injury when, etc.
and does well avow the taking of the said Cowes, in the said place in which,
etc. and justly, etc. because he says, that he is seized, and at the time of
the said taking was seized in one Message, and 12 acres of Meadow, with the
Appurtenances in the said Town of S. whereof the place in which, etc. the said
Cowes were taken, as parcel in his Demesne as of Fee: And for that he at the
time of the said taking, found the said Cows doing damage in the said place in
which, etc. the said A. those Cowes in his ground and freehold, so doing
damage took, as to him it was lawful; And this he is ready to prove, whereupon
he prays judgment, and the return of the said Cattle, etc.

Misnomer in the Writ of Justicies.
Yo. ss.
ANd hereupon comes Alvered Pease by W O. his Attorney, and says, that he being
by virtue of the said Writ of Iusticies summoned by the name of Abraham Pease,
neither is nor can be understood the same person against whom the said E. W.
has brought his Writ by the name of Abraham Pease; For he says that he is
named and called Alvered Pease, and by the same name and surname from the time
of his nativity always known and called, without that, that he is named or
called Abraham Pease, or by the same name and surname was ever known or
called, as by the said Writ is supposed. And this the said Alvered is ready to
aver and prove; whereupon he demands Judgment of the said Writ, and that the
same may be quashed, etc.

Non cepit to a Replevin.
Yo. ss.
ANd the said B. by S. H. his Attorney, comes and defends the force and wrong
when, etc. And says that he did not take the Cattle aforesaid, as the said A.
above against him complains: And of this he puts himself upon the
Country. And the said A. likewise, etc.

Property.
Yo. ss.
ANd the said B. by S. H. his Attorney comes, etc. and says that the property
of the Cattle aforesaid, at the supposed time of their taking was in the said
B. and not in the said A. And this he is ready to prove, whereupon he prays
Judgment, etc.

Demurrer to a Declaration.
Yo. ss.
ANd the said B. by C. D. his Attorney, comes and desends the force and injury
when, etc. And says that the Declaration of the said P. and the matter therein
contained are not sufficient in Law for the said P. to maintain his action
aforesaid against him the said B. to be had: And that he to that Declaration in
manner and form aforesaid made has no need, nor by the Law of the Land is
bound to answer. And for causes of Demurrer in Law in this behalse, the said B.
according to the form of the Statute in this behalf provided does show to the
Court these causes following; That is to say, that the said Declaration does
contain double and insufficient matter, and wants form, and this he is ready
to aver; whence for default of a sufficient Declaration in this behalse, the
same B. prays Judgment, and that the said P. may be barred of having his
action against him, etc.

Joining in Demurrer.
York ss.
ANd the said P. says, for that he above declaring, has in his said
Declaration alleged sufficient matter in Law to maintain his said Action to
be had against the said B. which he is ready to aver, which matter the said B.
does not gainsay, nor thereunto at all answer, but wholly refuses to admit
that averment prays Judgment, and his debt aforesaid, together with damages
by reason of the detaining of the said debt to him to be adjudged, etc.

If it be in Trespass, then thus.
Prays Judgment, and his damages by reason of the said Trespass, or
Trespass and Assault, or Trespass, Assault, and Imprisonment (as the case is)
to him to be adjudged, etc.

If in an Action upon the Case.
Prays Judgment, and his damages by the occasion before specified to him to
be adjudged, etc.

OF THE JUDICIAL AND MINISTERIAL POWER OF SHERIFS.
TO treat of the Original or first Institution of Sheriffs in this
Commonwealth, is not here necessary, being already done in the tract of the
County Court, or first part of this our subject matter. Therefore we will
initiate with the office of Sheriff, in which office he has triplicem
custodiam, a threefold custody, viz.

1 Custos vitae Reipublicae, The Conservator of the life or peace of the
Commonwealth. 2 Custos vitae Iustitiae, The preserver of the life of Justice;
for no Suit does commence, and no Process is executed but by him. 3 Custos
vitae legis, The Guardian or Tutor of the life of the Law; for after tedious
and long spun suits, he is to make due execution, which is the very life and
spirit of the Law. Custos vitae Reipub. His judicial and ministerial authority.

Now as he is Custos vitae Reipub. or Principalis conservator pacis within the
County, he has a Judicial authority; in the other two a Ministeral.

1. And first to discover his Judicial power. And Judicial power. Fitz. N. B.
8. d. and 82. Term. del Ley, tit. visc.
as he is a preserver of the peace, he may (ex officio) upon request, command
and cause another to find sureties of the Peace, and may take the same
sureties by Recognizance; for all Obligations that he takes to that end, are as
Recognizances in Law.

44 E. 3. F. Bar. 202. 5 H. 7. 6.
And if he see one man assault another, or if an assault be made upon himself,
he may compel them to find sureties of the Peace, and may set them in the
Stocks until such time as they do find them. See 5 H. 7. 6.

3 H. 7. 1.
He may take (of the County where he is Sheriff) any number that he shall think
convenient (300 if necessity require it) to pursue, apprehend, arrest, and
imprison Traitors, Murderers, Robbers, Popish Recusants, and all Felons; To
suppress rebellions, St. 3 Iac. c. 4.
insurrections, or riotous Assemblies, or such as do break, or go about to
break or disturb his Highness peace: and every man (required) as well Dukes,
Earls, Barons, as all other his Highness Subjects within the Br. Fines 37.
same County ought to aid and assist him; and such as do refuse may be fined to
the Protector, and may attach all persons making such default to appear and
answer Offic. Coron. 3 E. 1.
before the Justices of Assize.

Suspected persons.
He may arrest all persons by him suspected, or of evil repute, that shall
walk by night or day, committing them to the Jail, to remain there until
they shall be delivered by the Justices of Assize. 5 E. 3. cap. 14. Cromp. 203.

Armed persons. 2 E. 3. c. 3. Cromp. 203.
He may arrest all such persons as go or ride offensively armed, and may commit
them to prison, there to remain during his Highness pleasure, unless they be
delivered by the Justices before whom they shall be convict, he may take their
armor to his Highness use, and prize it by the oaths of those that are
present. He may beat such as resist him, and may set them in the stocks, 2 E.
4 f. 6. 21 H. 7. 39. Br. Tresp. 218. and 296.


If a party after he is arrested, make resistance, or shall make an assault
upon the Officer, as the Sheriffs Bailiff, etc. the Bailiff may justify the
beating of such resister, and such as disturb him in the execution of his
precept, and may imprison them in the stocks. 2 E. 4. fo. 6. 21 H. 7. 39. See
Br. Trespass 18. and 296. And if the party arrested, and resisting be slain,
it is justifiable. Fitz. Coron. 261. Doctor and Student 133. 6. Cromp: 24 a. 30
b. Sed quaere.

By the 11 H. 4. 7 H. 4. fo. 4. Br. Offic. fo. 4. 9. 34. To enquire of waste,
or to execute a Writ of Redisseisin.
37. and 42. the Sheriff in a Writ to enquire of waste, and a Writ of
Redisseisin, he is both Judge, and an Officer of Record, and cannot delegate
his judicial power to any Bailiff of Franchise, but must enter the Liberty,
and execute it himself, otherwise it is error. And if upon the Writ of
Redisseisin, the Sheriff by Inquisition find the Disseisee to be disseised
again, he He may commit a disseisor to prison, etc. Co. 6. fo. 12.
may presently take such Disseisor and commit him to prison, there to remain
during his Highness pleasure. See Co. 6. fo. 12. And in the Writ to enquire of
wast, and in the writ of Redisseisin, whereby he is made Judge of the cause, he
must execute the same in proper person, Dalton office of Sher. fol. 18.
and not by his Under-sheriffe or other Deputy whatever.

See more of his absolute authority in the Sheriffs Turn (and also in the
County Court) and what things are inquirable there, and by him to be punished.

His Ministerial power.
Let us now descend to his Ministerial power or authority, which is dissected
into two parts, viz. as he is Custos vitae justitiae, and custos vitae legis.

2 Custos vitae justitiae. For no suit is commenced, Custos vita justitiae.
nor process executed but by him.

And first to demonstrate his initiation into this Ministerial part of his
office, viz.

Crom. 203.
The new Sheriff being elected and sworn, at or before the County next
succeeding his election, he is to deliver a Writ of discharge to the old
Sheriff, who thereupon is to set over all his prisoners that are then in the
Gaol, severally by their names, together with all his Writs, precisely by view
and Indenture made Co. 4. 72. A.
betwixt the two Sheriffs, wherein must be comprehended, and exptesly specified
all the Actions which the preceding Sheriff has against every Prisoner. And
till delivery of the Prisoners to the new Sheriff, they remain still in the
custody of the old, as you may see in that learned argument more at large in
Westbies Co. 3. 72. Westbies Case.
Case, Co. 3. 72. Neither is the new Sheriff obliged to receive the prisoners,
but at the Gaol only. And upon the return and delivery of the Writs contained
in the Indenture, if they were executed by the old Sheriff. The new Sheriff
must indorse them in this manner.

The indorsment of such writs as are turned over to the new Sheriff by the old
Sheriff.
I send you this Writ as it is indorsed, delivered to me by A. B. Esquire, late
Sheriff my next Predecessor, in his going forth from his Office.

E. F. Esquire. Sheriff.

Yet the old Sheriff (by the Statute of 12 E. 4. c. Stat. 12 E. 4. c. 1. and
17 E. 4. 6.
1. and 17 E. 4. 6.) till the Writ of Discharge be delivered to him, he may
execute his office.

The new Sheriff is to take notice who are in execution.
If the old Sheriff has in his custody diverse persons in execution, and dies,
afterward a new Sheriff is elected, it behooves the new Sheriff to take notice
at his Peril of all the Executions which are against any person that he finds
in the Gaol, and this is (necessitatis gratia) for necessities sake, for there
is none to make delivery of them, or to give him notice who are Co. 3. 72. b.
Westbies Case.
in execution, and who not. And it is no detriment to the Sheriff if he keep
them safe until he has perfect knowledge of all the Executions; for if he may
with impunity suffer such as are in execution to escape, great inconvenience
would thereupon ensue. Co. E. 3. 73. b. 1. Westbies case.

He is to preserve the Rights of his Highness with in He is to preserve the
Protectors right, etc.
his County, and to enquire what Lands are concealed from him, or withheld,
and to seize to his use the profit of such lands as come to him by Attainder or
Escheat, and likewise the goods of any Felon, Fugitive; 21 H. 7 7 a. Stamf.
Perk, 5. 6.
Outlaw, Egyptian, goods received, and goods confiscate, and wreck of the Sea.

He ought to certify to his Highness, or some of the Council, or the
Committee specially constituted for that purpose, if he know of the
withholding or concealment of any of the late Kings, or Delinquents lands
within his County.

He ought to be vigilant that the suits of his Highness be done in his
Highnesses Court, viz.

1 Suit real, or royal. 2 Suit service.
1 And to declare what suit Royal is, it is a suit Suit Royal, what?
due to the Sheriffs Turn, or Leet, which is so termed because of their
allegiance.

2 Suit-service is due also to the Sheriffs Turn Suit service, what?
or Leet, by reason of the Tenure of a man's Land.

He shall levy his Highness Debts by Distress either He must levy his
Highness debts, etc. 52 H. 3. c. 15. Fitz. 173. Br. Did. 35. 32. 40. and 72.
Stat. 51 H. 3. Issues.
in the high way, or common street, 52 H. 3. Cap 15. Fitz. 173. And if he can
find no goods elsewhere, he may distraine in the Church, Brook. Distress, 35.
And may sell such Distress after fifteen days. See Brook Distress 32. 40.
and 72. and Stat. 51 H. 3.

Dalt. office of Sher. fo. 25. (...).
He is accountable to his Highness for all manner of Issues and Profits of the
County; And by his Office (upon process out of the Exchequer) he is to gather
up, and to bring into the Exchequer such Issues and profits, etc. And likewise
such Issues lost and returned in respect of nonappearance of the Defendants,
or of Jurors, shall be forseited to his Highness, and shall be levied by the
Sheriff. See Dalton. fo. 25. b.

Amerciaments.
He is also accountable to his Highness for, and upon process, etc. and is to
gather up, and to bring into his Highnesses Exchequer, all Amerciaments and
Fines, which shall be set or assessed (as a penalty) upon the heads of
offenders, against his Highness in any of his Courts. Which is to be
understood of Amerciaments upon the Paintiffe or Demandant, or upon the Tenant
or Defendant in Actions real, or personal, (as if the Plaintiff and
Demandant be Non-suite, or if Judgment be given against the Tenant or
Defendant, or upon the Plaintiff, quia non est prosecutus, or pro false
clamore, etc. or upon the Mainpernors, because the principal appears not, etc.
In such case the Justices never assesse any amerciament but by the Stat. of
Magna Charta, Cap. 14. and Mag. char. 14. Westminster. 1. c. 18.
Westminster 1. Cap. 18. the Amerciament ought to be assessed per pares: And
the Court in such cases enters, Ideo in misericordia, general without taxing
or assessing any sum in certain. And then the Clark of the Warrants in the
Common Place makes Estreats of these Amerciaments, and delivers them to the
Clarke of the Assizes within every Circuit, to deliver unto the Coroners in
every County to assesse the Amerciaments. Dal. fo. 27. a.

His Highness shall have all Amerciaments, Fines, Recognisance, Fines,
Amerciaments, etc. 33 H. 8. cap. 39.
Issues, and all Forfeitures or Recognizances lost or forfeited, etc. before
any of his Judges or Justices in any of their Courts or Sessions; but these
must first be estreated into the Exchequer, and from thence Process must be
awarded to the Sheriff to levy the same to his Highness use; 33 H. 8. c. 39.

The Sheriff ought not to take or seize the goods of any man arrested,
imprisoned, or indicted for felony, He is to seize no goods of Felons, etc.
till they be lawfully forfeited.
or for suspicion thereof, before the same person be duly convicted or
attainted of the same felony, (viz. either by trial, confession, or Utlarie
and Judgment thereupon given) or that the same goods be otherwise lawfully
forfeited, upon pain to forfeit the double value of those goods so taken to
the party grieved.

By the Stat. 1 R. 3. c. 3. Yet lest the goods should 1 R. 3 cap. 3. But take
sureties he may, that the goods shall not be imbezelled, etc. Br. tit. forfeit
44. Plow. 68.
be disorderly wasted, or sold away, the Sheriff (before the attainder of the
Felon) may take sureties that the goods be not imbezelled, etc. And for want of
sureties, the Sheriff or other his Officers may seize them, and deliver them
to the Town, by them safely to be kept. Brook. tit. forfeit. 44. Plow. 68. But
yet the Felon must have reasonable maintenance for himself and his Family
until he be convict, and the remainder shall be to his Highness, etc.

If the Felon fly, the Sheriff is to seize all his goods He that flies for
felony forfeits his goods, chattels, and the profits of his Lands, etc. Coo. 5.
109. Plo. 262.
and chattels, as also the profits of his Lands to his Highness use. But yet
by Coo. 5. 109. Plo. 262. the goods, etc. of a Fugitive are not forfeited
until the flying for felony be lawfully found upon Record, either before the
Coroner upon an Indictment, Super visum corporis, in case of the death of a
man, or by verdict upon his acquittall (for although he be found not guilty
upon his trial, yet shall he forseit his goods for his flying; quia fatetur
facinus, qui judicium fugit, and the Law will admit no reproof against this
presumption:) And albeit the Jury which tryes him shall find him not guilty,
and further that he did not fly; yet the goods are forfeit Fitz. Forf. 92.
etc. Coron. 296. and 344.
by force of the finding of his flying before the Coroner. And the Sheriff
presently after such flying found before the Coroner is to seize the goods, and
the profits of the Lands of such offenders: See Fitz. Forf. 32. Yet he that
shall fly for felony shall not forfeit the goods or profits of his Lands which
he had at the time of the Felony or flying; but those only which he had at the
time of the Indictment or acquittall. Coo. 5. 109. Fitz. Coron. 296. and 344.

Felo de se.
The Sheriff is to seize to the use of his Highness the Goods and Chattels of
him that kills himself, but he shall not forfeit his Lands. Yet if an
Infant, a man Non compos mentis, or a Lunatic kills himself, he forfeits
nothing.

Vtlawes goods for felony. Co. 5. 110. b.
If a man be indicted for felony, and absents himself, so long as an Exigent is
awarded against him, they shall be accounted a flying in Law, for which he
shall sorseit all his goods, although he shall be acquitted afterward of the
Felony. And the Sheriff may presently ex officio seize them to his Highness
use. Co. 5. 110. b. Stamf. 184.

The Sheriff or his Under-sheriffe shall receive Must receive all Writs, and
execute them, etc. 2 E. 3. cap 5. Cromp. 203.
all manner of Writs at all times, and in any place within the Shire, without
taking of any thing, and shall make Warrants thereupon, 2 Ed. 3. cap. 5. Cromp.
203. and shall be by him or his Bailiffs executed.

He may command his Under-sheriffe, Bayliffe, or He may command his Bailiff to
execute them either by word or precept, etc.
other known Officer to execute them either by word or precept: But if his
mandate be to a man (that is no known Officer) to execute any Writ or Warrant,
he must either deliver the Writ it self, or a precept in writing in his own
name, and under the seal of his office, otherwise an Action of false
imprisonment will lie for the Arrest. Lamb. 91. 21 H. 7. 23. a. But Lamb. 91.
21 H. 7. 23. a.
if a precept be made to a Bailiff, and to a stranger or special Bayliffe,
(Conjunctim and divisim) and is executed by the stranger only, it is good,
Lamb. 91. and Daltons office of Sheriffs 44

If a writ issue out from the Judges, Justices, or the Court, he shall not
stand capitulating or disputing He must not dispute the authority of the
Judges, etc. that send Writs to him, but must execute them. Co. 6. 54. 9. 68.
and 10 70. Dr. and St. 150.
their authority, or validity of the Writ, but ought to execute it. Co. 6. 54.
9. 68. and 10. 70. Dr. and Student 150. For he is obliged both by oath and
office to execute all process of Law; and if a Capias be delivered to him
without an Original, he shall execute it, and is excusable in an action of
false imprisonment; For he being the Officer and Minister of the Court, it is
reasons adversary to punish him for executing the Mandates of the Court,
according to the Maxim, Co. 10. 70. Quicunque jussu judicis aliquid fecerit,
non videtur dolo malo fecisse, quia parere necesse est*; He that acts any thing
by the mandate of the Judge, seems that he acted not any thing fraudulently,
or amiss, because he must needs obey. But if the Court dilate it self beyond
its jurisdiction, in that case all the proceeds are Coram non judice, and there
an Action does lie against the Sheriff without any regard to the Precept or
Process; for when he has no jurisdiction, he is no Judge, and there is no
necessity to obey him, no more then a mere stranger, and to back it with the
authority of a rule or axiom; Extra terratorium jus dicente, non paretur
impune. He Co, 10. 57. a. and b.
that obeys in prescribing Laws beyond his jurisdiction, shall not escape
unpunished, Co. ibidem. fo. 57. a. and b.

A Bayliffe need not show his precept, when he A Bayliffe need not show his
precept when he executes it. But a special Bailiffe must show the warrant, etc.
Co. 9. 69. 21 H. 7. 23. and 37.
comes to execute it upon any man; Yet upon the arrest he ought to declare the
contents of it. But if a Bayliffe be specially deputed, or one that is not a
known Officer, he must show the warrant to the party, Co. 9. 69. 21 H. 7. 23.
and 37. Yet the special Bailiff is not obliged to show it without demand, 8 E.
4. 14. 14 H. 7 9. Co. ibidem.

If a Bayliffe by virtue of a Precept from the old An arrest by an old Sheriff
after his discharge tortious.
Sheriff, after his discharge, shall arrest a man, this arrest is tortious,
and an Action of false Imprisonment lies both against the Sheriff and the
Officer, Cromp. 205. b.

If process may be executed upon the Sabbath day. Coo. 9. 66.
Notwithstanding the ground or maxim of Law, that Dies dominicus non est
juridicus, and that no judicial Act ought to be done on that day; yet
ministerial Acts, as to arrest and execute Process are tolerated and
allowed; for an Officer ought to execute his office whenever he can find the
party, otherwise peradventure they shall never be executed, and God forbid that
things necessary should not be done on that day; for bonum est been facere Die
Sabathi; but this distinction and exception is taken away by a late Act made in
the long Parliament.

In all cases where the Process concerns his Highness, He may break open a
door to execute process concerning his Highness, but not in case of a common
person. Co. l. 5. 92. b. in Seymans Case
the Sheriff or other Officer (upon refusal after demand to open the door)
may break open the door of the house, or use other means to get in to do
execution: But in case of a common person, the Law does not permit the
Sheriff, etc. upon request made, and denial) to break into the house of the
Defendant to execute any Process at the suit of any subject, for the great
inconvenience that might ensue thereupon; because if men as well in the night,
as in the day should have their houses (which in revera are their Castles and
fortresses) broken open, upon pretense thereof, it would incur great mischief
and damage; for by color thereof upon any seigned suite, the house of any man
at any time might be broken open, when the Desendant might be arrested
elsewhere, and so men should not be in safety and repose in their own houses:
And although the Sheriff be an Officer Co. 11 82. a. Jews Bowls case.
of great authority and confidence; yet it appears by daily experience, that
his Highness Writs are served and executed many times by Bailifs, who are
generally persons of little or no value or credit, and therefore not to be
trusted with the breaking open and ransacking of houses upon every slight
occasion. See Co. 11. 82. a. Lewis Bowls Case.

He ought (In propria persona) four times a Proclamation to be made 4 times a
year. Stat. Winchester.
year to proclaim the Statute of Winchester within every Hundred of his
Bayliwick, and in all Faires and Markets by his Bailiffs. 7 R. 2. cap. 6. 13 E.
1. cap. 1. 28 E. 1. cap. 17.

Statute against unlawful games.
The Statute provided against unlawful games, is likewise to be proclaimed
four times in the year in every Market and Fair within the County. 33 H. 8.
cap. 9.

3 Custos vitae legis.
We will now handle the other Ministerial part of his office; and that, as he
is, Custos vitae legis, which extends to his doing Execution (after a tedious
and long spun suit) which is the very life and spirit of the Law. And this is
divided into several branches, or kinds of Executions, viz.

Statute Merchant. Statute Staple. Recognizance. Elegit. Capias ad
satisfaciendum. Fieri facias, etc. Levari facias.
22 Ass. 47.
Of the last four Executions, two are by the Common Law, viz. 1 Fieri Facias. 2
And Levari facias; And two by the Statute, viz. 1 Elegit. And 2 Capias ad
satisfaciendum. 22 Assize 47. And note, that Execution by the Statute does not
oust Execution by the Common Law, no more then the Execution by one Statute
ousts the Execution by another.

We are determined to insist upon all the seven in discovering their natures,
manner of executing them, etc.

And first of the Statute Merchant

Statute Merchant.
IT is defined by West. part 1. Symb. L. 2. Sect. 151. to be a Bond or
Obligation of Record acknowledged before one of the Clerks of the Statutes
Merchant, and Mayor, and chief Warden of the City of London, York, etc. or
before the Bailiffs of any Borough, or other sufficient men for that purpose
appointed, sealed with the seal of the Debtor or Recognizor, and of the
Protector, which consists of two parts, the greater is kept by the said Major
or chief Warden, etc. And the lesser part thereof by the said Clerks. The
form of which you may see in Fleta, lib. 2. cap. 64. etc. Fleta, l. 2. c. 64,
etc.


And if the Debt be not paid at the day, the proceeds upon it, to have the
fruits and effects thereof, is not like to the procceeding in other cases or
suits upon Obligations, etc. to reduce them to judgment, but as they are in
their own nature much like to the nature of a Judgment, so is the proceeding
and Execution thereupon, much like to the proceeding and execution upon a
Judgment: And therefore the Conusee may bring an Action of Debt upon a
Statute, or he may as soon as the same is forfeited, have a present execution of
it after this manner.

How to sue out an Execution upon a Statute Merchant.
He must bring his Statute to the Mayor and Clerk, or other Officer, before
whom it was acknowledged; And there if they find the Record of it, and the day
to be past for the payment of the money, they are to apprehend and imprison the
body of the Conusor, if he be a Lay person, and can be found within their
jurisdiction; and if he cannot be found there, they are to certify the Record
into the Chancery, which also if they refuse to do, they may be compelled unto
by a Certiorare: And if that Certificate Certiorare.
be faulty, or Execution be not done upon it, by reason of the death of the
Conusee, or otherwise, the Conusee or his Executor, or Administrator, may have
another Certificate: And thereupon he shall have a Writ of Capias out of the
Chancery directed Capias.
to the Sheriff of the County where the Conusor lives, to apprehend and
imprison him (if he be not a Clergy man) and this is to be returned into the
Common Pleas or Upper Bench. And when the Conusor is taken, he shall have time
for a Quarter of a year to make his agreement with the Conusee, and to sell his
lands or goods to satisfy the Conusee: And for that purpose, he may sell his
lands or goods, although he be in prison, and his sale is good and lawful: And
if in that time, he do not satisfy the Conusee, or if upon the Capias, the
Sheriff return a Non est inventus, then by a Writ (or by diverse Writs, if the
Lands or goods lie in diverse Counties) called an Extendi facias; then all his
Lands Extendi facias, what.
and goods shall be delivered (by the Sheriff) to the Creditors upon a
reasonable Extent, to hold until the debt be paid; And if the Jurors or
Appraisors upon the Extendi facias, overvalue the Lands or goods in favor to
the Debtor, the Conusee has no remedy, but by motion in that Court where the
Writ is returnable, at the Return day, or at least the same term wherein the
Writ is returnable, to desire that the Appraisors may take the Lands or goods
at the rate they have valued them, in the same manner as the Conusee is to have
them. But if the Conusee accept of the Lands and goods from the Sheriff, or
suffer the term to pass, wherein the Writ is returnable, he is too late, and
has no remedy at all. And if the Appraisors do under-value the Lands or goods
in savor to the Debtee, it seems the Conusor has no remedy at all, for he may
at any time pay all or the residue of the debt and damages unlevied, and have
his Lands again if he please. Yet nevertheless the body of the Debtor shall
remain in prison until the Debt be paid: And if there be Sureties, they shall
receive no damage, so long as the Debt may be fully levied of the goods of the
Debtor.

Note, that upon the Statute-Merchant or Staple, Note. All the fee-simple lands
of the Conusor at the time of the Stat. acknowledged, etc. shall be liable to
the said Statute. Stat. de Mercator. 13 E. 1. 27. c. 9. 23 H. 8. Co. 3. 12.
Copyhold Lands not liable. Nor Lease for term of life. But lease for term of
years, etc. shall be extended, etc. Goods demised, pawned, or pledged, may not
be taken. 22 E. 4. fol. 10. 34 H. 8. Br. Pledge. 28. Nor goods distrained for
Rent, etc. may not be taken. If the Conusor die in execution, the Conusee may
have Execution of his lands and goods. Co. 5. 86. and 87. Fitz. 246. b. Or if
the Conusor escape, his goods and Lands shall be extended. A Non est inventus
returned upon the 1. Certificate, a 2. not grantable, yet, etc. 28 E. 3. 91.
Execution 93.
all the Fee-simple lands, which the Conusor had at the time of the said
Statute acknowledged, or at any time after, shall be liable to the said Statute,
to whom soever they be afterward sold, by alienation, Feofment or otherwise.
Stat. de Mercator. 13 E. 1. 27. c. 9. and 23 H. 8. Co. 3. 12. But if the Debtor
die, the body of his heir shall not be taken, but his Lands in Fee that descend
to him by the Conusor, shall be taken (as aforesaid) if he be of full age, or
when he shall attain full age, until the said debt be levied, Stat. ibid.
Copyhold Lands are not liable, nor shall be extended. Nor lease for term of
life. But Lease for term of years, and all other goods and chattels of the
Conusor or Debtor are liable, and shall be extended, which the Conusor has in
his own possession, and to his use, at the time of the Execution sued or
awarded. But goods demised, pawned, or pledged, may not be taken in Execution,
for his debt, that demised or pledged them, during the time or term, that they
were demised or pledged, 22 E. 4. fo. 10. 34 H. 8. Br. Pledge. 28. also goods
distrained for rent, amerciament, damage feasant, etc. and are impounded, in
custodia legis, during the time that they are so, may not be taken in
Execution. See Br. Pledge. 28.

If the Conusor of a Statute-Merchant or Staple, etc be taken, and die in
Execution, yet the Conusee shall have execution of his lands and goods, Co. 5.
86, 87. Fitz. 246 b. or if the Conusor be taken in Execution, and escape, yet
his goods and lands shall be taken and extended upon by the said Statute; for
the escape and the action that the Plaintiff had against the Sheriff, for the
escape, is no satisfaction of the debt.

Certificate of a Statute-merchant was sued forth, and Execution sued in the
same County, the Sheriff returned Non est inventus, for which the Plaintiff sued
another Certificate to the Major, by reason of which the party was taken, and
it was holden that the second Certificate was not grantable, yet the party
taken would not be set at liberty, by, 28 E. 3. 91. Execution 93.

Where there are several Certificates in diverse Courts Several Certificates in
diverse Courts upon one Statute, Execution sued in the one shall not stay that
in the other 29 Ass. 29.
upon one Statute, Execution sued in the one shall not stay that in the other,
because they are intended several Statutes, but it seems he may sue to the
Major to certify if there be another Statute or not, and so be helped, 29.
Ass. 29. and because where a Certificate is sued in the Common Pleas, and the
same Plaintiff sues another in the Upper Bench, and the Justices were
certified, by the Major, that all was but one Statute, the parties caused the
Record to come out of the Common Pleas into the Upper Bench, and then a Capias
shall issue out against the Conusor, and yet one Conusor was taken before in
the Common Pleas, but it appeared 29 Ass. 41.
that he afterward escaped, 29 Ass. 41.

A Statute which was certified for the Testator, shall A Statute certified for
the Testator, shall be certified for the Executor, F N B. 132. F N B 244. The
Major, etc. has power to hold Pleas done in the Staple.
by a special Writ be certified for the Executor, F N B. 132. so where it is
not sufficiently certified before, so where the party keeps it in his hands, so
where the first Certificate is lost, and if the Major will not certify it, a
Certiorari shall be directed unto him, F N B. 244.

The Major of the Staple has power to hold plea of things done in the Staple,
and upon a Statute acknowledged before him execution may be sued, or in the
Chancery at the pleasure of the party, 9 H. 6. Jurisdiction 6.

Upon a Statute Merchant, a Capias issued out of the Non est inventus returned
upon a Cap. in the Common Pleas, Capias and extendi facias shall not issue out
there, without showing the Sta. to the Justices, etc. 37 H. 6. 6. and 7.
Statute must be showed at the day of the return, etc.
Chancery returnable in the Common Pleas, the Sheriff did return Non est
inventus; Now Capias and extendi facias shall not issue out of the Common Pleas
without showing the Statute to the Justices, although he had showed the same in
the Chancery before, and if the Sheriff has returned Cepi corpus, and has the
body here, if he do not show the Statute, the party shall be discharged,
although it be lost, but upon a Statute Staple he must show the same upon the
Capias awarded, but not afterward, because in the same place, 37 H. 6. 6 and 7.

It was holden, that if a Statute be certified, the Plantiff shall have
Execution without showing of it, but if he does not show it at the day of the
return, the other shall be at large, although he have Execution of the body of
one or of all the Defendants, 26H. 6. Execution 26 H. 6. Ex. 6.
6. See the Stat. of 5 H. 4: cap. 12.

Vavasor said, that he saw where the Recognisee A stranger may have Execution
where the recognisee is dead. Or a Satute be made to two, yet one may have
Execution, etc. 12 E. 4. 10. and 11. Execut. 14. Executors must sue out a Scire
facias before they can have Execution, etc. 17 E. 3. 31. 18 E. 3 10.
died, and a stranger came in his own name, and showed the Statute, and had
Execution, although the other came not in proper person, and upon a Statute
made to two, if one come with it, he shall have Execution in both their names,
and it is a common course, that every stranger who comes with the Statute,
shall have Execution upon it in the name of the Recognisee, 12 E. 4. 10. and
11. Execution 14.

And upon Non est inventus returned upon the Certificate where the Plaintiff
died, his Executors showed the Statute, and had Execution of it, 17 E. 3. 31.
But see 18 E. 3. 10. he shall not have it without a Scire facias, vide Eliz
Dyer, etc. Conusee of a Statute Merchant had it certified in the Chancery, and
thereupon had a Capias upon it and died, upon the showing of the Statute his
Executors had a Scire facias.

The opinion was, that if a man sue Execution Execution upon the Statute sued
into diverse Counties, upon Nihil returned in one County, he shall have
Execution of the whole in the other, etc. 16 E. 3. Exec. 49.
of a Statute Merchant in diverse Counties, and in each for the portion, viz. 20
l. in the one, and 20 l. in the other County, yet upon Nihil returned in one
County, he shall have Execution of the whole in the other, if he has Assets
there, 16 E. 3 Execution 49. and a man may well pray Execution of the body in
one County, and an Elegit of the land in the other County, 41 E. 3.
Execution 38.

Statute sued of parcel of the Lands in the name of all, shall never extend the
rest.
If a Statute Merchant be sued of parcel of the Lands of the Conusor, in the
name of all his Lands, he shall never extend on the rest of the lands, Mic. 22.
E. 3. f. 14.

Three bound to one in a Statute severally, Execution may be against one, or
all.
If three are bound to one in a Statute Merchant, and every one of them by
themselves, quemlibet eorum perse, I may sue Execution against one of them only
or against them all at my pleasure.

If an Infant bind himself in a Statute-Merchant, Infant bound in a Stat. may
avoid it during his Minor. etc. The like by dures imprisonm.
or Statute-Staple, he may avoid this during his Nonage by Audita Querela, and
also he may have his Audita Querela after his full age to avoid this Statute by
matter of fait; and the like law if the Statute be acknowledged by dures of
imprisonment.

Statute Staple.
WE now come to the laying open a Statute-Staple, which is duplicate, to use
the words of Mr. West, viz. either,

1. Properly so called, or Proper. Improper. Statute-Staple proper what.
2. Improperly.
1. A Statute-Staple properly so called, is an Obligation acknowledged before
the Major of the Staple, in the presence of one or two Constables of the same
Staple. And by virtue of such Statute-Staple, the Creditor or 27 E. 3. c. 9.
Recognisee may forthwith have execution of the body, lands and goods of the
Debtor or Recognisor: and this is founded upon the Statute of 27 E. 3. c. 9.

2. A Statute-Staple improper, is an obligation of Record Statute-Staple
improper what. Or. 27 H. 8. c. 6
founded upon the Stat. of 23 H. 8. c. 6. of the nature and validity of a
proper Statute-Staple, as touching the form and Execution thereof, and
acknowledged before one of the chief Justices, and in their absence before the
Major of the Staple at Westminster, and Recorder of London. (You have the forms
of all these Obligations or Statutes in West. part 1. Symb. L. 2. Sect. 152.
West. Symb. 1. L. 2. Sect. 152. 153. 154. 155.
153. 154. 155.) It is sealed with three seals, viz. with the seal of the
Conusor, with the seal of the Protector, and of one of the said Justices, or of
the Major and Recorder, 23 H. 8. c 6. And note that all Statutes Staple Note.
27 Eliz. cap. 4.
and Merchant shall be brought to the Clerk of the Recognisance within four
months, and enrolled within six months, otherwise such Statute shall be void
against Purchasors, etc. 27 Eliz. c. 4.

The manner of proceeding upon a Stat. Staple.
The manner of the proceeds upon it are the same with the Statute-Merchant,
saving that in a Statute-Staple, presently after the Certificate into the
Chancery, the Conusee shall have a Writ to take his body, and extend his Lands
and goods returnable in Chancery; and this writ is a Commission directed to the
Sheriff of the County where the Lands and goods lie, for the valuing of the
same, whereby all the lands, goods, and chattels of the Conusor shall be
apprised and valued at a reasonable rate by a Jury of men sworn, charged by the
Sheriff for that purpose; which Inquisition so taken is to be returned by the
Sheriff; and thereupon the lands, goods and chattels are to be taken into the
Sheriffs hands, and by him to be delivered to the Conusee (which the Sheriff
may do if he will without any Writ) to hold unto the Conusee, until he be
satisfied his debt and damages: And if the Sheriff refuse so to do, the Conusee
shall have a writ out of the Chancery called a Liberate, to compel him to
deliver to the Conusee the Liberate.
lands, goods, and chattels, so found by inquisition, and taken into his hands
upon the Extent, which the Sherif need not return, Fitz. Account 97. Execution
in toto. Broo. Stat. in toto. Stat. Acton Burnel de Market. 27 E. 3. 9. F N B.
130. 131. 132. Dyer 180 Coo. 4. 67. Plow. 61. 62. 82. Co. super Lit. 290. Coo.
5. 87. etc. See more of the proceeding in Statute-Merchant.

Note.
It was adjudged in B. R. Hill. 42. Eliz. that a debt recovered in the Kings
Court by Judgment, shall be paid before a Bond in nature of a Statute-Staple or
Merchant: because the Judgment is a matter of a more high and worthy nature
then private portable pocket Records: also Co. L. 6. 45. C. 2. in Higgons case.
it shall be preferred before a Recognisance acknowledged in any Court by
assent, which may also be privately done; and a Judgment so given in the Kings
Court, upon ordinary and judicial proceedings, which remain in the custody of a
sworn Officer, are Records which are preferred in Law before such Statutes; and
non refert, whether the Judgment or Recognisance or Statute be first; for be
the Judgment first or last, it shall be first satisfied, etc. And so it was
holden per totam Pemberton and Bartams case, Plow. 32. El. Rot. 235.
curiam in the Common Pleas in Pemberton and Bartams case. Plow. 32. El. Rot.
235. which see in the end of Sadlers Case in the 4. Reports, Dyer 80 53.

Recognisance, what it is.
WE now come to the third, which is Recognisance; and that is an Obligation or
Bond of Record, acknowledged in a Court of Record, testifying the Recognisor to
owe to the Recognisee a certain sum of money, and is acknowledged in some
Court of Record, or before some Judge or other Officer of such Court having
authority to take the same; as the Master of the Chancery, the Judges of either
Bench, of the Exchequer, Justices of Peace, etc. And those that be mere
Recognisances, are not sealed but enrolled, And yet some are sealed, with the
seal of the party: and may be with condition annexed, or may be single, and
then to have Indentures of defeasance.

The manner of proceeding upon a Recognisance.
If the money be not paid at the day, the Conusee proceeds upon it after this
manner: The Conusee his Executor or Administrator is to bring a Scire facias
against the Conusor; or if he be dead, against his heirs, when they be of full
age; or if the Lands the Conusor had at the time of the entering into the
Recognisance, be sold, against the Purchasors of those Lands, which the Conusor
had at any time after the Recognisance entered into, to warn them to come into
that Court, whence the Scire facias comes, and to show cause why Execution
should not be done upon the said Recognisance: And if the party or parties
cannot be found to be warned, or being warned do not appear at the time, or
appearing, show no cause why the debt should not be levied, then the Conusee
shall have Execution of a moyty of his Lands by Elegit; or if Elegit. Levari
facias. Fieri facias.
the Conusor be living, of all his goods by Levari or Fieri facias at his
Election, but he cannot have Execution of his body, unless he bring an action
of debt upon the Recognisance, or it be by course of the Court, as it is in the
Upper Bench upon a Bail, in which case a Capias does lie. Dyer 360. 315 West.
2. 18. Capias.
Broo, Execution, 129. Co. 3. 11. 15 H, 7. 16. Kitch. 117. And the proceeds
against Sureties in Statutes shall be Proceedings against the sureties.
as the proceeding against the principal; but in case where there are movables
of the principal to satisfy the debt, the Sureties (as it seems) shall not be
charged, Stat. de Mercatoribus.

Execution of all the goods and chattels, and a moyty of the Lands.
Execution by virtue or force of a Recognisance shall be of all the goods and
chattels of the Reconusor (except the Beasts of the Plough, and implements of
Husbandry) and of the moyty of his Lands: West. 103.

Execution of the Land which the Recognisor had at the time of the
Recognisance, etc.
The Recognisee by the first Writ shall not have Execution but of the Land which
the Reconusor had at the time of the Reconusance, and upon return that he had
no Land, then he shall have a Writ to try who had it at the time, etc. or
after, etc. 36 E. 3. Execution 47. 19 E. 3. 1.

Two sued in Execution, the money delivered to the Attorney of the one, and to
the other himself, good, etc.
Where two sued Execution, the money was delivered to one, and the Attorney of
the other, Mich. 14. E. 3. Execution 76. and the Desendant in Court did pay the
money to one, the other being absent; and it was good and the Recognizance was
withdrawn, Mich. 22. E. 3. 15, Execution 87.

The heir charged, etc.
The heir shall be charged in debt of the Lands which he had by descent; the day
of the Writ brought, and not the day of Judgment, Mich. 18. E. 2. Execution
241.

Execution upon Stat. and finds bail, and does not appear at the day, etc.
If a man be in Execution upon a Statue, and finds bail, and does not appear at
the day, but at another day, the bail brings him in, now it is in the Election
of the Plaintiff to take Execution of his body and Land, or to take the bail.
See 59. E. 3. Execution 43. Two sue Execution, and one dies before the extent,
yet the lands shall be extended, 11 R. 2. Brief. 938. Otherwise upon a Stat.
Merch.


If two sue Execution, and before the Extent one dies, the Sheriff shall
extend the Land, and shall deliver the same to the other, 11. R. 2. Brief 938.
But if two sue Execution of a Statute-Merchant, and the Reconusor is returned
dead, and then one of the Conusees does acknowledge the death of his Companion,
he shall not have Execution without suing a Writ out of Chancery, 25 E. 3. 38
Execution 92.

Where three are bound in a Statute jointly and severally, 3 Bound in a stat.
jointly and severally, he shall have exec. against one, or all, but not against
two, etc.
the Plaintiff shall have Execution against one, or all of them at his
election, and not against two, and so of an Obligation. But if he bring debt
against them all upon a joint Bond, the Execution shall be against all; but if
he bring it by several Praecipe's, he shall not have Execution but against
one, 34 E. 3. Execution 129. 14 H. 4. 19 Execution 29.

Note.
Note further, that a Recognisance though in the special signification, it does
but acknowledge a certain debt, and is executed upon all the goods, and halse
the Lands of the Recognisor: Yet by extention it is drawn also to the Bonds or
Obligations, commonly called Statute Merchant, and Statute Staple, as appears
by the Register of Original Writs, fol. 146. 151. and 152.

Elegit, what.
4 ELegit is a Judicial Writ by the Statute, and lies for him that has
recovered debt or damages against one not able in his goods to satisfy, and
directed to the Sheriff, commanding him that he make delivery of halse the
parties Lands or Tenements, and all his Goods and Chattels (Beasts for the Plow
excepted) Old N. B. fol. 152. Register of Original Writs, fol. 299. and 301.
and the Table of the Register judicial, which expresses diverse uses of this
Writ.

May take a moiety of the lands of the Conusor, and all his goods and chattels.
Westminster. 2. c. 18. Valuation of the goods and lands must be found by inquisition.
Co. 4. 74.
In Elegit by force of the Statute of Westminster 2. Cap. 18. the Sherif may
take in Execution the moietie of the Lands of the Conusor, and all his Goods
and Chattels (except as before) and may deliver them unto the Conusee upon a
reasonable price or extent until the debt be satisfied: But the valuation of
the goods and lands ought to be first found by the Inquisition of a Jury, Co.
4. 74. And the Sherif is to deliver him seisin of them, who is tenant by
Elegit, and shall do no waste.

Upon Elegit the Sheriff ought to return the extent, The sheriff must return
the Extent, and that he has delivered the lands, etc.
and also that he has delivered the Lands, etc. 12 Edward 3. Scire Facias 117.
and the extent shall be good for the sum due, notwithstanding that it be of
more. 44 Edward 3. 11. Execution 35.

Term of years delivered in execution upon Elegit good, and also rents.
A man sued an Elegit, and had a term of years delivered to him in Execution,
which the Desendant had in possession as a Chattell, and adjudged good. An
Annuity may be extended, and Rents, etc.

In every Elegit the Sheriff must return and set The sheriff must return the
moiety distinctly, unless they be Tenants in common, etc. Brownl. Rep. fol. 38.
out the moietie distinctly, unless they be Tenants in Common, and in that
case he must return the special matter. An Elegit issued out against one
Greisley, by the name of Greisley Esquire, who was at the time of suing out the
Writ made Knight and Baronet, and it was insufficient, and the Plaintiff
prosecuted a new Writ. Brownlows Rep. 38.

The sheriff cannot deliver a Lease at another value then what the Jury had
found it at.
A Lessee had a Lease to the value of 100 pounds, and after the Test of the
Elegit, and before the Sheriff had executed it, assigns his term to one, who
assigns it to the Plaintiff in the scire facias, and asterwards and before
the last assignment, the Sheriff executes the Elegit, and delivers the Lease
to the Plaintiff to be holden, etc. for satisfaction of the debt, which came
but to 43 pounds, 6 s. 8 d. and it was held by all the Judges, that the
Sheriff could not deliver the Lease at another value then what the Jury had
found it at; and the sale made by the Sheriff is as strong as if it had been
made in the open Goods cannot be sold by the owner after the Test of the Elegit.
Market, and that all the Goods and Chattels are bound after the Test of the
Elegit, and cannot be sold by the owner after the Test of the Writ. Brownlowes
Rep. 38. Comers versus Brandling.

An Execution valuable without satisfaction.
There are good diversities between an Execution not valuable, (as of the
Defendants body) and an Execution valuable, as of Lands, etc. As if two men are
bound jointly and severally in an Obligation, and the one is sued, condemned
and taken in execution, and afterward the other is also sued, condemned and
taken in execution, and then the first escapes, and the other brings his Audita
Querela; In that case he shall be barred to bring that Writ, until the
Plaintiff be satisfied: So likewise if the Desendant in debt dye in Execution,
yet the Plaintiff may have a new Execution by Elegit or Fieri facias: But if
the Plaintiff have once Execution of the Lands of the Defendant, and after the
Lands are evicted there before the Statute of 23 H: 8. Cap. 5. he shall not
have 23 H. 8. cap. 5.
any new Execution; for the Execution of the Lands was valuable, and accounted
in Law for a satisfaction, and (to avoid infiniteness) he shall have but one
valuable satisfaction, or one Execution, with satisfaction at the Common Law,
Co. 5. 86. b. 3. Blumfields case.

Note, where a Capias lies after an Elegit.
If upon an Elegit, there be no Execution but upon goods, because there is no
Land, and the goods appear insufficient, he may have a Capias; For note, it
is in effect but a Fieri Facias, though the word be Elegit: But if there be
Land extended, then it is otherwise; and yet, Quaere, if the debt be forty
pounds, and nothing extended, but a Lease for three years at five pounds a
year, or the like, for then to that which remains the Elegit fails. Hobert
Rep. fo. 58. Hobert. fol. 58.


Lands sold after Judgment shall be liable to satisfy it.
If a Judgment be obtained against a man, who thereupon sells his Land, in
whose hands soever the Land is, it shall be liable to satisfy that Judgment,
and to that end shall issue out a Scire Facias against the Terr-tenants.

If two Writs of Elegit be delivered to the Sheriff hoth at one time, the
Sheriff is to Two Writs of Elegit delivered to the Sheriff at one time how to
be executed.
exend the moiety of all the Lands, and shall give the moiety to the more
ancient debt; and then he ought to extend a moity of the other moiety, and
deliver it to the other, for he cannot deliver a moiety of all the lands to
one, and the other moiety to the other. See Attorneys Academy, 109.

Several Elegits may issue into several Counties.
Several Elegits may issue into several Counties where the Land lies.

If a man does pray to have an Elegit, to have No Capias nor Fieri fac. does
lie after an Elegit, and why.
the moiety of the Defendants Lands in Execution, and the Sheriff returned
that he had no Lands, whereupon he prayed a Capias to arrest the party, but the
Court would not grant it; but if the Conusee, etc. would tarry till Lands did
come to Mich. 30 E. 3. Cap. 24.
the Defendant, or goods, then, etc. But now he could not have a Capias, nor a
Fieri Facias. And the causes that the entery in the Roll is, that he has
chosen his Execution of the moiety of his Lands, the which he must stand to,
because it is an Execution in the superlative. Mich. 30 E. 3. 24.

Capias ad Satisfaciendum, what it is.
IT is a Writ (by the Statute) after Judgment, lying where a man recovereth,
in an Action personal, as Debt or Damages or Detinue, and he against whom the
Debt is recovered, and has no Lands or Tenements, nor sufficient goods,
whereof the debt may be levied: In this case, he that recovereth shall have
this Writ to the Sheriff, commanding him, that he take the body of him,
against whom the debt is recovered; and he shall be imprisoned until
satisfaction be made to the recoverer. And the Sheriff Prisoners must be kept
in salva and arcta custodia.
must keep him in salva et arcta custodia, unless he intend to pay the debt
himself; For if a Prisoner be taken upon an Execution, and shall afterward
let him go at liberty before the Debt be satisfied, etc. The Creditor may have
either an Action of Debt, or an Action upon the Case against the Sheriff, and
so Fitz. 93. a. c.
recover his debt. Fitz. 93. a. c.

A man shall not have a Capias ad satisfaciend. but Cap. ad satisf. where a
Cap. lies in the Orig.
where Capias lies in the Original, 11 H. 9. 18. vide Co 3. part. Sir William
Herbets Case, 8 H. 6. 9. 22 Ed. 4. 22.

Upon this Writ the Sheriff can take nothing Nothing but the body can be taken
by this Writ. Co. 5. 8.
but the body of the Defendant; for the Writ is to do no more but to take his
body, and to detain him in prison, till he has satisfied the debt. Co. 5. 8.

A man in the custody of the Sheriff, and a second Writ is delivered to him, he
shall be in his custody upon it, although not actually arrested.
When a man is in the custody of the Sheriff by process of Law, and afterward
another Writ is delivered to him, to arrest him who is in his custody,
presently he is in his custody by force of the second Writ by judgment of Law,
although he do not actually arrest him; for to what purpose shall he arrest
him, who is and was before in his custody? Et lex non praecipit inutilia, quia
inutilis labor stultus. And the words of the Capias ad satisfac. are not only
quod capiat, etc. but quod salvo custodiat, etc. Ita quod habcat corpus, etc.
So that although 7 H. 4. 30.
he cannot take him who he has in his keeping, yet he may safely keep him; and
therewith agreeeth 7 H. 4. 30.

If two men be bound jointly and severally in an Obligation, the one is sued,
condemned and taken Two bound in an Obligation jointly and severally, both may
be sued and taken in execution, etc.
in Execution, yet the other may not go scotfree, for he may be likewise sued
and taken in Execution, until the Plaintiff be satisfied of his entire debt.
Coo. 5. 86. But if the Creditor be satisfied by the first that was in
Execution, the other may plead this satisfaction, and be discharged, 29 H. 8.
tit Execut. b. 132.

A woman recovering damages in a Writ of Dower, No Cap. ad satisf. for damages
in a Writ of Dower.
she cannot have Execution of these damages recovered by a Capias ad
satisfaciendum, because the Capias was not in the Original. 11 H. 7. fol. 5. 2
H. 7. fol. 7.

If a man be condemned in an Action of Debt, and No return required upon a Cap.
ad satis.
the Sheriff has him in Execution, by a Capias ad satisfac. by arresting him,
although the Sheriff do not return the Writ, an Action* of false Imprisonment
is not to be brought against the Sheriff for not making return of the Writ,
for the writ of Capias ad satisfca. is not as other Capias, that is, So that
you have his body before, etc. For in every Capias ad satisfoc. the Judgment
is given before, and it is but to take Execution of the party, in which no
answer nor return avails, Pasch. 21 H. 7. fo. 13.

If one be in Execution by his body, and the party does release unto him all
actions, suits and debts, he shall not have an Elegit nor a Capias, because the
duty is extinct, 26 H. 6. Execution 7.

Capias pro Fine. Capias Vtlegatum. Capias ad Valentiam.
THere are other three Writs of Capias after Judgment, viz.

1 Capias pro Fine. Cap. pro Fine. Cap. Vilegatum. Cap ad valent.
2 Capias Vtlegatum. 3 Capias ad Valentiam.
1. The Capias pro Fine is, where one being fined Cap. pro Fine, what it is.
by Judgment unto the Protector, upon some offense committed against a
Statute, does not discharge it, according to the Judgment: by this is his body
taken, and imprisoned till he pay the Fine. F. N. B. 76. Coo. 11. 42. 8. 60.

If the Plaintiff sue an Elegit after the Defendant An Elegit sued after one
is taken for the Protectors fine, he shall go at large
is taken for the Protectors Fine, he shall go at large, for such Execution
does discharge the body, 7 H 6. 6. and 7. So if he sue by Fieri facias, 18 E.
3. Execution 54. Yet upon Nihil returned he may have a Capias, etc.

If the Defendant be taken upon a Capias pro Fine in One taken upon a Cap etc.
in trespass, etc.
Trespass, and the Plaintiff prays that he may remain in prison for his
Execution, the Plaintiff not satisfied shall have an Execution afterward: So
if one pray an Elegit of Lands, and nothing is returned but a Rent, he shall
have an Elegit of the same, 47 E. 3. 47 E. 3. Execution 41.
Execution 41. See F. N. B. 246. and Stat. 32 Hen. 8. Cap. 5.

2 Cap. Vtleg. is a writ of Exec. (after judgment of the Cap. Utlegat. what it
is.
Coroner of the county, into which the Exigent and Promation issued) which
lies against him that is outlawed, by the which the Sheriff upon the receipt
thereof apprehends the party outlawed, for not appearing upon the Exigent,
and keeps him in salva custodia (viz.) in safe custody.

Note.
If a Capias utlegatum issues to the Sheriff to take a party, and to enquire
what Lands and Tenements he had, and the Sheriff finds by Inquisition, that
he is seized of many Lands, and continues possession in them, and the Sheriff
do out me, I may have an Action of Trespass against him. Winch. fol. 78.

Cap. utleg. and inquiras de bonis and catallis, what it is.
Capias utlegatum and enquiras de bonis and catallis, is a Writ of the same
nature with the precedent, but that it gives a further power to the Sheriff,
over and besides the apprehension of his body to enquire also of his goods and
chattels. Minsh. fo. 111. b.

Cap. ad Valen. what it is.
Capias ad Valentiam, Is a Writ of Execution, and lies where the Tenant is
impleaded of certain lands, and he voucheth to warranty another, against whom
the summons Ad Warrantizandum has been awarded, and the Vouchee comes not in
at the day given: Then if the Demandant recover against the Tenant, he shall
have this Writ against the Vouchee, and shall recover so much in value of the
Vouchees Lands, if he have so much; And if he have not so much, then the Tenant
shall have Execution by this Writ of so much Lands and Tenements as descend to
him in Fee-simple; or if he purchase afterward, the Tenant shall have against
him a Re-summons; and if he can say nothing, he shall recover the value. Old
Natura Brevium. fol. 161, 162. Terms of the Law 45, 46.

Fieri Facias, what it is.
Westminster. 2. c. 18, 13 E. 1.
AFIERI FACIAS is a judicial Writ, and lies for him that has recovered in an
Action of Debt or Damage, directed to the Sheriff, commanding him to levy the
debt or damages of the Defendants goods, it must be brought within the year
and day. This Writ has beginning from West. 2. Cap. 18. Anno 13 E. 1. Old Not.
Br. fol. 150. See great diversity thereof in the Table of the Register
Judicial. Ver. Fieri Facias.

The Sheriff or Bayliffe ought to be very cautious The Sheriff must be
caut^ous in executing this Writ, etc.
in executing this Writ; For if the Goods or Lease which shall be taken, be
the Goods of a stranger, though they be found in the possession of the
Defendant; Yet if it be found upon Trial, that the Defendant has no property
in those Goods or Chattels, then the Sheriff or Bayliffe that executed that
Writ, shall be a trespasser to the right owner of the Goods, and shall recover
damage to the value of the Goods so taken, with costs of suite, although the
Officer has delivered them to the Plaintiff in Execution. Dalton office of
Sheriffs, fol. 60. Therefore the safest course for the Sheriff or Bayliffe is
not Dalt. office of Sheriffs, fol. 60.
to take any goods in Execution, unless they plainly appear to them to be the
proper goods of the Defenfendant; For the Officer is bound at his peril to
take knowledge whose Goods they be, Ibidem.

If the Sheriff for a debt of twenty pounds takes goods and sells them for 40
l. he may keep the surplusage till the Defendant demand it of him.
If a Fieri Facias be awarded for twenty pounds to the Sheriff upon which he
takes an entire Chattell, and sells it for forty pounds, and returns the Fieri
Farias with the twenty pounds in Court, he may detain the surplusage until
the Defendant comes to demand it of him; for he is not obliged to search out
the Defendant, but if a Fieri fac. be awarded for 40 s. by force of which the
Sheriff takes five Oxen, every one at the value of five pounds, and sels them
all, the Defendant may have an action of Trespass against the Sheriff, Noy
fol. 59. Woodby Noy's Reports, fol. 59. Sale upon a Fi. fa. shall stand, though
judgment be after reversd. Upon a Judgment against an Exec. or Administra. no
Cap. ad sat. lies, but a Fi. fa. etc. But if a Devast. be returned, then a Cap.
ad satis. or a Fi. fac. de bonis propriis, etc. After Scire fa. no Elegit lies,
until the tenant be warned, but a Fi. fa. does. Goods taken upon a Fi. fa. and
no buyers found, an Order to levy the money upon the goods and lands of the
Bailiff. 5 E. 3. Ex. 101. If no goods be found, the Sheriff may sell a Lease
for years, etc. 19 E. 3. Ex 148
against Coals, etc.

Sale by the Sheriff upon a Fieri fac: shall stand, albeit the judgment
afterward was reversed, and the Plaintiff in it restored to the value, Dyer
363. 24. Coo. 8. 76. b. Mat. Mannings case.

Upon a Judgment against an Executor or Administrator, the Plaintiff cannot
have a Capias ad satisfaciendum against the body, but a Fieri facias de bonis
Testatoris; and if the Sheriff return a Devastavit, then a Capias ad
satisfaciendum against the body, or a Fieri facias de bonis propriis. And if
there be two Executors and the Sheriff returns a Devastavit against one of
them, and he dies, the other shall not be charged for that Devastavit; for the
one shall not prejudice the other; but a gift by one of them is good against
the other.

A Scire facias after the year for damages recovered in waste, and a Nihil
returned, he shall not have an Elegit, until the tenants be warned, but he may
have a Fieri fac. without warning of them, 4 E. 3. 23. Execution 99. Old. N. B.
168.

The Sheriff returned upon a Fieri fac. mandavi ballivo, who said that he had
seized to the value, but he could not find buyers, and because the Court
cannot send to the Sheriff to have the money here, as they might upon his own
extent, therefore they awarded a Writ to the Sheriff to levy the money of the
lands and goods of the Bailiff, to the value of that which he had seized; the
same Law is upon a seizure of an ancient Sheriff, 5 E. 3. Execution 101.

Fieri fac. for damages recovered in waste upon a Lease for years, it was
returned that the Lessee had no goods but the remnant of the same Lease, and it
was holden, that by Sicut alias, that the Sheriff might sell the Lease, as well
as pots and pans in the Execution, for the Fieri facias is de terris and
catallis, of the Lands and Chattels, etc. 19 E. 3. Execution 148.

A Fieri fac. to the Sheriff to levy the expenses of the Knights of the
Parliament, the Sheriff may sell the Beasts of one of the Hundred for the
whole, or the beasts of any person he shall find within the precinct, 11 H. 4.
2. Avowry 52.

The Sheriff returned upon a Fieri fac, that he had A Scire facias issued out
against an old Sheriff (after a new one elected) for money levied by him, etc.
9 E 4. 50. Scire fac. 2.
levied the money, and that he had the same in Court, whereas he had not the
money at the day, and then a new Sheriff is chosen, and because it was upon
Record, that the old Sheriff had levied the money, a Scire facias issued forth
against him to pay it, and if he cannot, or will not otherwise discharge and
pay the money, the party shall have a Fieri fac. or an Elegit against the
Sheriff of his proper goods, etc. 9 E. 4. 50. Scire fac. 2.

Mich 10. Jac. Upon a motion at the bar it was Bond taken by the Sheriff, not
within the Stat. of 23 H. 6. c. 10.
resolved, that an obligation to the Sheriff upon a Fieri facias for the
payment of the money in Court, was not void by the Statute of 23 H. 6. cap 10.
For the first branch of that Statute is, that he shall let to bayl by Writ or
Bill, etc. which he could not do before, as appears, 19 H. 6. 43. The second
19 H. 6. 43.
shows the form of the bond, etc. The third contains a penalty, that if the
Sheriff take an Co. 10. 99. b. 3. in Beaufages case.
Obligation in any other form etc. than is there prescribed, that it shall be
void, so that upon consideration of all the branches together, and upon their
coherence and dependence one upon another, it plainly appears, that the said
Statute does extend only to Obligations of such as are within their guard and
custody and not otherwise.

Where the under Sheriff justified the breaking of three doors, etc. to do
execution, etc.
Trespass brought for breaking his house, and breaking three doors, and
breaking and carrying away three locks of those doors. The Defendant justifies
the entry into the house by virtue of a Fieri facias awarded against the
Plaintiff directed to the Sheriff of and he being under Sheriff, and the
other Defendants his Bailiffs, two of the Defendants entered into the house, and
the door being open, took the Crooks second part, fol. 555. 556.
goods, and the Plaintiff shut the doors upon the Bailiffs, and imprisoned them
for two hours, wherefore he brake open the doors, and the locks, to rescue his
Bailiffs, Quae est eadem transgressio: and it was thereupon demurred, and all
the Court held, that although a Sheriff cannot break open an house being to
take Execution by a Fieri fac: yet when the door is open, that he enters, and
be disturbed in his execution by the parties who are within the house, he may
break the house to rescue his Bailiffs, and to take execution: so it was
adjudged for the Defendants. And in regard this restraining of the Execution,
and detaining of the Bailiffs was confessed by the Demurrer, an Attachment for
the good behavior was awarded against the Plaintiff. Crookes second part,
fol: 555. and 556.

The Sheriff may sell a Lease for years, etc. without taking inquisition of
them
If the Sheriff take Leases for years, or other chattels real upon an Execution,
he may seize and sell them without taking Inquest by a Jury of them, and the
sale will be good, Co 5. 90. 4. 74. And no return is required upon a Fieri
facias, if Execution be done, which is grounded upon four strenous and solid
reasons, by Coo. in his 5. Report, in Hoes Co. 5. 90. 4. 74.
Case.

1. Because the levying of the debt is lawful and well Four Reasons why no
return is required upon a Fieri fac.
done, and the party Defendant, cannot resist the Sheriff to levy money.

2. The effect of the authority the Sheriff has, by force of the Fieri facias
is executed.

3. The great prejudice that the Defendant (whose goods are sold by the Writ,
and process of Law for the satisfaction of the debt) should have, if the
Sheriffs not returnig of the Writ should cause a new Execution to be sued forth
against him, and leave the Defendant to his action against the Sheriff.

4. if the sale of the goods by force of the Writ, shall be for not returning
the writ wrongfully, then the Sheriff will not find Buyers of the Defendants
goods, by force of any Writ of Execution, which would be very inconvenient, and
great delay of Executions, which are the fruit and life of every suit; and
where the words of the Writ of Fieri facias are, Ita quod habeas denarios, etc,
they are but words of command to the Sheriff to make return, which if he do
not, he shall be amerced, but the Execution shall stand in force.

Levari Facias what it is.
WE come to the seventh, which is a Levari facias, and it is only to be levied
upon the profits of the Lands and Tenements, and upon the goods of him that
has forfeited a Recognisance, etc. Register Orig. Register Origin fol. 298. b.
300. b. Plow. 441.
fol. 298. b. 300. b. but he cannot seize the Land and deliver that to the
party by this Writ, Plow. 441. and this ought to be sued within the year, after
the day of payment to be made, by the Recognisance or after the Judgment, for
after the year the Conusee or Plaintiff is now by the Statute of Westminster. 2. cap.
45. to have a Stat. Westminster. 2. cap. 45.
Scire facias, whereby the Sheriff is commanded, that he give knowledge to the
Defendant, that he appear at a day certain in the Chancery, there to show what
he can say, why he should not pay the debt or damages, and if he come not at
the day, or do come and can say nothing why Execution ought not to be done,
Fitz 266. c.
then the Sheriff shall be commanded to do execution, Fitz. 266. c.

And if the Sheriff upon this Writ return that he Part of the sum levied, a
Sicut alias Levari facias may issue out for the residue. Fitz. 265. h.
has levied part of the sum, viz. sixteen pounds part thereof which he has
delivered to the party, now upon this return, the party which ought to have the
money, may have a Sicut, alias, Levari facias directed to the Sheriff to levy
the Residue of the sum, Fitz. 265. h.

Of Habere facias seisinam, and Habere facias possessionem.
THere are other Writs of Execution, which are necessary to be treated of, viz.

1. Habere facias seisinam, and 2. Habere facias possessionem.
Co. 6. 51. F N B. 265. Westminster. 2. c. 18.
Which Executions are for recovery of Land in a real action; as Cap. ad sat.
fieri fac: and Elegit, are for Recovery of debt or damages in a personal
action, Co. 6. 51. F N B. 265. West. 2. cap. 18.

And first of the Habere facias seisinan, which is a judicial Habere facias
seisinam, what it is, and where it lies.
Writ, and lies where one has recovered certain lands in the Kings Court,
directed to the Sherif, commanding him, to put him in actual seisin of that
Land, which is done by delivering a bough of a tree, or by a clod of the same
land in the name of seisin, etc. and if the recovery be of a house, then the
Sherif may put him in seisin, by delivering unto him the ring of a door; or
otherwise he may open the door, saying to him, Enter into the house, and take
seisin thereof by virtue and force of the recovery. Perk. Sect. 206. 207. 208.
F N. B. 220.

2. It is a Writ judicial, and lies where one was evicted Habere facias
possessionem, what it is, and where it lies.
from his farm, and has recovered it by Ejectione firmae, or quare ejecit
infra terminum, it is directed to the Sheriff, to command him to put the
Plaintiff in actual possession, of the term again. The Sheriff in executing
both these two Writs may break the house and deliver seisin and possession
thereof to the Plaintiff. But he cannot justify the breaking a man's house, to
execute a Cap. ad satisfac. or Fieri fac. But where the Protector is a party,
there the Sheriff may justify the breaking of the house to execute his
Process, if they cannot be executed otherwise, yet he must first request the
opening of the door, and withal signify F N B. 220. and 221. Co. 5. 91. 1. 6.
51 Dyer 278.
the cause of his coming, F N B. 220. 221. Co. 5. 91. 6. 51. Dyer 278.

Some select Cases which have not been yet published in any Treatise of this
nature, etc. concerning Returns of Writs, where valid and good, and where
insufficient.
Return has a threefold acceptance and how.
THis word Return has a triple acceptance, First as it is applied to the case
of a Replevin, and here it is called Returno habendo. Secondly, it is applied
to the days of appearance in every term. And thirdly, it is applied to Sherifs
and Bailifs, and it is that which we are determined to handle. And it is a
Certificate made by the Sherif or Bailif to the Court from whence the Writ
issued. They ought to be very diligent in making true, certain, and perfect
returns, subscribing their names to them, for if they make a false return, the
party endamaged thereby may have an action of the case against him that made
such return. See Co. 5. 90. 11. 40. and 4. 67.

In Mich. term. 8. Jac. The words of a Return were Return of a Cepi corpus for
one, and a Non est inventus for others, by one that was not Sheriff. Bulstrods
Rep. first part fol. 70. Egerton against Morgan and others.
these, viz. By virtue of this Writ to me directed, I have taken the body of E.
M. whose body I have here ready in Court, at the day, etc. and as for the other
two, they are not to be found in my Bayliwick) And at the end of the return was
set down, -- The answer of S. H. etc. which S. H. at the time of the return,
was not then officer to the Court, nor to the King, and so disabled to make a
return, and therefore the return insufficient. The Writ was directed to the
Sheriff, and so ought the Return to have been by the Sherif, for none can make
a return of a Writ, but such a person, who at the time of the return remained
an Officer to the Court. If the old Sheriff be removed before the day of the
return, the new Sheriff is to make the return, and to this purpose is the book
of 22 E. 4. fol. 33. and 34. in the case of a Writ of Error, to reverse a false
Judgment given before the Major and Sheriffs in the Court at Coventry, and Co.
3. fol. 72. Westbyes Case, where it is Co. 3. 27. Westbyes case.
resolved, that after the election of a new Sheriff, and before delivery over
of the Prisoners to him, they do remain in the custody of the old Sheriff, and
after the delivery of them over to the new Sheriff, he at the day of the
return, ought to return Cepi corpus, but in this case the return by the new
Sheriff before any delivery over of the Prisoners to him by the old Sheriff, is
no return at all in Law. And the old Sheriff can now make no return, he being
no Officer at all to the Court, but the new Sheriff is the Officer to the
Court, and ought to make his answer unto the Kings Writ to him directed, and he
does not here return a Cepi corpus, but only an indorsment in this manner,
setting his hand also to the return, with this Postscript, viz. This Writ as it
is above subscribed, I the An indorsment of Writs, as was received by the new
Sheriff, from the old Sheriff.
now present Sheriff, have received from my Predecessor the old Sheriff going
out of his office, and this upon the matter is no return at all. Here the new
Sheriff has made a Return, but the same is not good, being but parcel of that
which he ought to have returned. For as to the other two; his return is, They
are not to be found within my Bayliwick: this Return is not good, for he ought
to have said, that those two, nor either of them were to be found. And it is
said that the old Sheriff put his hand to the Writ, he was at that time out of
his office, and so he was no Officer of the Court, and so it is in effect, as
if he had not put his hand at all to the return, and, and so the return being
as no return in Law, is merely void.

Upon an Elegit, the Sheriff returned that to be executed, and the extent of
the Church of S. Andrews, Surplusage no hurt to the return of a writ. Winch.
Repor. fol. 27.
alias S. Edes, and it was prayed, that the Sheriff might amend it, and make it
Andrews only, for that was the true name, and the Court said that the alias
dictus is surplusage, and will not hurt the return of the Writ, Winch. Rep.
fol. 27.

A Writ of Proclamation upon the Exigent was returned A Proclamation upon
Exigent returned by a Sheriff out of office, void. Rescous upon a Latitat, no
good return.
by the Sherif out of office at the time, upon which the Outlawry was adjudged
void, Stat. 6. H. 8. Dyer, 103.

To return Rescous upon a Latitat is no good return, for the Sheriff might have
had a Posse Comitatus as well for the serving the same Process as an Execution,
10 H. 7. 26. 33 H. 6. 1. 10 E. 4. 3. F N B. 102. Dyer 162.

Return by one Sheriff where there are two, no good return.
If a Writ be directed to a place where there are two Sheriffs, as London, York,
etc. and one of them does return the Writ, it is insufficient, for though one
(according to custom) does execute it, yet it must be returned in both their
names, 21 Ass. 20. Br. Officer 22.

If the Sheriff upon a Capias ad satisfaciendum returns Cepi corp. returned
upon a Cap. ad sat. and has not the body at the day, an escape, etc. Br. Ret.
107. In all Writs of execution (except an Elegit) no return is required. But an
Elegit must be returned. Co. 4. 67. 5. 90.
a Cepi corpus, and has not the body at the day, etc. he is chargeable for an
escape. Or if upon a Fieri facias, he returns a Fieri feci, and has not the
money at the day, etc. he is chargeable with the money. Br. Ret. 107. Yet in
all Writs of Execution (except an Elegit) as upon a Cap. ad satisfac. Habere
facias seisinam vel posessionem, Fieri fac. Liberate, etc. If the Execution be
duly done, although the Writ never be returned or filed, it much matters not,
if the Plaintiff have his demand, for then he has no cause of further proceeds
in it: But in case of an Elegit, because the Extent is to be made by an
Enquest, and not by the Sheriff alone, that ought to be returned, otherwise it
is invalid, Coo. 4. 67, and 5. 90. But where no Enquest is to be taken, but
only Land to be delivered, or seisin had, or goods to be sold, which are but
matters in fait, these are sufficient although the Writ be not returned, Co. 4
67. a.

To say that the party will not pay his fees, no reurn.
It is no good return for the Sheriff to say, that the party will not pay his
fee: ergo, he did not execute the Writ, 34 H. 6. Br. Ret. 10.

All Sheriffs and Bailiffs who have return of Writs The Sherif must set to his
returns both his name of baptism and surname. Plo. 63. a. Imperfect returns
corrigible.
ought to set both their names of Baptism and sir-names to their returns.
Plo. 63. a. so that the Court may know of whom they received such returns if
necessity require: And this is by force of the Stat. of 12E 2. Cap. 5. Yet by
the Stat. 18 Eliz. cap. 13. imperfect or insufficient returns of Sherifs are
corrigble.

For the Sheriff to fay that his Bayliffe will make no deliverance, no good
return.
Upon a Replevin, the Sheriff returns, I have commanded the Bailiff of the
Liberty of, etc who will make no deliverance, etc. these are no good returns,
for the Sheriff himself ought to have entered the Franchise, and to have made
deliverance of the Cattle, etc. Fitz. 68. f.

He shall not be charged for insufficient returns by Bailiffs of Liberties.
He shall be amerced for the default of his Undersheriff, County Clerk, or
Bailiff, 38 Ass. p. 13. Br. 77. 1 R. 3. c. 4. But by the Stat. of 27 H. 8. c.
24. Amerciaments for insufficient returns of Writs, made by Bailiffs of
Liberties shall be imposed upon such Baylifs, and not upon the Sherifs.

Every return must exactly answer the writ.
Every return ought to answer the Writ (ad punctum) and therefore where the
Writ was, That you make known to the heirs of the Lands and Tenements which
were of A, etc. And the Sherif returned, That he made known to B. Esquire,
son and heir of the said A, etc. which was not good, and assigned for
Error, etc. because Co. 3. 15.
he did not return him heir of any Lands or Tenements, as the writ required;
for his writ was not to summon the heir of the said A, but the heir of the
Lands and Tenements of the said A. Co. 3, 15.

Sometimes the omission of words make the return invalid. 19 H. 6. Fitz. ret.
14. 3 H. 7. 11. a. Br. ret. 88. 34 H. 6. 49. Br. ret. 1 4. Co. 8. 127, 128.
Usually the omission of words make the return invalid, as where the return
was, The residue of this Writ appears in a certain schedule, etc. For, the
residue of the Execution of this Writ; this is insufficient and vicious, 19 H.
6. Fitz. Ret. 14. For by 3 H. 7. 11. a. Brook Ret. 88. the return of the
Sherif ought to be certain to every intent, and he is obliged to take
knowledge of the Law in making his return: And therefore in a Scire facias to
L. B. Master of the Free Grammer-school of Skipton, etc. and to the Scholars of
the same, etc. he returned, That he made known to the Master, etc. And did not
say, that he made known to L. B. Master, etc. And likewise he omitted Scholars,
which return was insufficient and void. See Coo. 8. 127. 128.

Return of rescous invalid, because he did not show at what place it was done
B. ret. 97.
10. E. 4. 15. The Sherif upon a Capias returned, that he arrested the Defendant
at S. and would have carried him to the Goal, and that A. B. rescued him which
return was holden invalid, because he did not show at what place A B. made the
rescue, for it shall not be intended the place where the arrest was, ret. 97.

No good return where the Sherifs name is wanting, 9 E. 4 19. Br. 54. 11 H. 7.
10. a. b. Note that the word exacteth, amounts to as much as the within named.
By the opinion of Iennie, 3 E. 4. If a Writ be returned, thus The answer of the
Sheriff of C. and shows not the Sherifs name, it is no good return, 9 E. 4.
19. Br. 54 and by the 11 H. 7. 10. a. b. the name of the County ought to be
entered in the margent or over the head of the return.

In a Scire facias, the Sherif returns, I have made known to A. B. in manner
and form as this Writ exacteth and requires, and said not, To the within named
A. B. etc. and yet this was holden (per curiam) to be good: for note these
words, as this writ exacteth, etc. does amount to the within named, or the
within mentioned, or written: See 2 H. 4. 13. and 3 H. 4. 9. Br. 28. Fitz. 44.

The Sherif amerced 20 l. bebecause he did not take posse comitatus to execute
a Hab. sac. seisin, etc. 8 E, 3. 12. Hill. 19 E. 2. Execution 147.
Habere facias seisinam, Upon a grant and render, at the Plures the Sheriff did
return mandavi ballivo, who did nothing, because the parties to the Fine had
nothing, and the Writ of covenant was not sued in the Liberty, nor came to him
to be executed, upon which a non omittas was awarded, 8 E. 3. 12. upon the like
writ, the Sherif returned, that he could do nothing by reason of the resistance
of A B. and others, and he was amerced twenty marks, because he did not take
posse comitatus, and an alias awarded, and also a Writ to attach A. B. who was
taken, and pleaded not guilty, and prayed a Writ against the Sheriff to answer
his false return, Hill. 19 E. 2. Execution 147.

Waste was assigned in W. the return must not be, What return upon Waste good,
and what is not.
That he came unto W. but, that he came to the place wasted, 27 H. 8. Br 2.

Return of a precept for writ, not good.
The Sherif returned, That, by virtue of a Precept, etc. he took the body of A.
B. etc. and exception was taken because the return was not, by virtue of a
Writ, etc. yet it was holden to be a sufficient return, for the Sherif may take
one in Westminster Hall by the mandate of the Justices without any Writ.

No good return, Fitz. 19.
The Sherif returned, I have not found the party, etc. for, he is not to be
found; and the party thereupon outlawed, assigned this for Error, and not to be
amended, Fitz 19.

A return by the Sheriff in the 3. person, no good return. False imprison. lies
against the Sheriff for not returning a Capias in process, etc. But otherwise
in a Cap. ad sat. etc.
The Sheriff returned, that he has commanded the Bailiff of Slaincliff, in the
third person, for, I have commanded the Bailiff, etc. in the first person, and
was amerced for it, 21. Ass. 17.

Co. 5. 90.
If a Sherif do not return a Capias in Process, the arrest is tortious, and an
action of false imprisonment lies against him, by him that was arrested; and
likewise the Plaintiff shall have an action against him, Littleton, 18. E. 4. 9.
Br. Trespass 339. Br. false imprisonment, 5. 7. and 12. But if a Capias ad
satisfaciendum be not returned, it is sufficient, if the execution be duly
executed, and the Plaintiff satisfied, yet if he levy the money or debt, but
neither returns the Writ, nor pays the money to the Plaintiff, he is
chargeable to the Plaintiff in an action of account, etc. and to the Defendant
in an action of trespass, Co. 5. 90. And the Plaintiff may have his Execution
renewed against the Defendant and the Defendant is left to his action against
the Sherif.

Where one has a liberty to return writs, the Sheriff cannot enter, to make
Execut. of any process. In a Scire sac. etc. the Sherif must return the names
of the Su^moners, etc.
Where a man has liberty to return Writs, (as in the Honor of Pontefract in
Yorkshire, etc.) and to execute them, etc. if there the Sherif or his Officer,
shall enter the Liberty, and execute any process there, the Lord of the
Liberty, shall have an action of the case against him, Fitz. 95. b.

In a Scire facias to execute a Judgment or Fine, the Sherif must return the
names of the Summoners, 3 H. 7. 8. Br. Ret. 86.

Upon the return of a Jury, he is to return issues upon every person
impannelled, and returned by him, ibidem.

The Sherif may take Posse commit. upon a Replevin.
Upon a Replevin the Sherif returned, that the cattle were in such a strong
place, that he could not make deliverance, for which return he was amerced,
because he might have taken Posse comitatus, and so made deliverance, Br. 119.
or if he should return a resistance, the like, 13. E. 3. c. 39.

A Scire sacias against a husband and his wife, to say they are divorced; no
good return. A Fi. fa. against Execut. no good return, to say the goods were
sold, before the writ purchased. Nulla bona returned upon a Fieri fa. against
Executors. An enquiry of waste, and found that diverse goods were wasted, upon
which a scire sacias awarded, and upon 3 Nihil returned Execution awarded.
In a Scire facias against the Husband and Wife, the Sherif returns that they
are divorced, and therefore amercied; for Persons that are divorced may have
garnishment, quaere and vide, 1 H. 6. 2. Br. 63.

Upon a Fieri fac. against Executors, the Sheriff returns that they had sold
the goods of the party deceased, before the Writ purchased, etc. for which he
was amerced, for he should have taken other goods of the Executors, to the
value thereof, etc. 14 H. 4. 12. Br. 41.

Upon a Fieri fac. against Executors, the Sheriff returned nulla bona, etc. and
upon this return an entry was made in the Roll, because that testatum est, that
the Executors had sold diverse goods of the Testator, and converted the money to
their own use, a Writ was awarded to the Sherif, to enquire by the oaths of
good men of his Bailiwick what goods (which were the Testators the day of his
death) were wasted by the Executors, by force of which Writ, the Sherif had an
Inquisition, by which it was found, that diverse goods of the Testator, to the
value of the debt recovered, were wasted by the Executors; And this was
returned in Court, upon which the Plaintiff sued a Scire facias, against the
Defendant to show cause wherefore execution should not be awarded against the
defendant of his own proper goods, And upon two Nihils the Court awarded
Execution, Co. 5. 32.

Outlawry returned in London, where not good.
An Outlawry returned in London in these words; At the Hustings holden in Guild
Hall in the City of London (such a day) A. B. exacted was and appeared not this
is no good return: because there are two Hustings in London, the one of Common
Pleas, the other is of Pleas of Land, and therefore in such case, the return
must be, at the Hustings of the Common Pleas, etc. otherwise it is invalid, for
that the same may have double intendment.

An Exigent was returned, At my County held at The County omitted in the return
of an Exigent erroneous
the Castle of Y. the first time exacted was, etc. And because the County was
not set down, it was holden erroneous.

Upon Exigent returned, that the party has rendered himself, and not so, not
good.
If the Sheriff return that the party has rendered himself upon the Exigent,
and has not the body, he shall be amerced.

Cepi corp. upon a Capias ad satisfac. and not so, erroneous.
If the Sheriff return a Cepi Corpus upon a Capias ad satisfaciendum, and has
not the body, he shall not only be amerced, but the Plaintiff may have his
Action against the Sheriff for an escape, for so is he concluded by his return.
Br. ret. 107.

Process against the husband and wife, and the wife appears not at the day,
not good.
If upon process against the Husband and Wife, and the Sherif returns that he
has taken them, and the husband appears at the day, but not the wife, the
Sherif shall be amerced.

Upon an enquiry of damages, return of damages, no hurt to the sheriff, and
why? etc.
Upon a Writ to enquire of Damages, the Sherif returns that the Enquest or
Jury, gave or found no damages, the Sherif shall not be amerced for this
default of the Jury; for the Sherif is but amerced where he returns the Writ
falsely or insufficiently of himself, whereas here he returned it, as the Jury
had presented it, 44 E. 3. 3. Br. 20.

If the Sherif in a writ of Account or Debt, shall Upon account or debt, where
the sheriff returns no lands found, etc. and he had lands, etc. not good.
return upon one, that he is not found, nor has lands, etc. by which he may
be distrained, etc. whereupon a Capias is awarded against him, and he thereupon
taken, whereas he had sufficient lands, or goods and chattels, then the party
may have his action upon the Case against the Sherif (directed to the Coroners)
for such false return.

It is not good to return upon a Replevin, that To say upon a Repleyin that
there is no goods, etc. not good. The like in Detinue, etc. Or upon Hab. fac.
seisinam.
there is no such goods or chattels, 5 H. 7. 27. Or in a writ to deliver goods
upon a Detinue, it is insufficient to say, that there are no such goods. Or
upon a Habere fac. seisin. that there is no such lands. Ibid.

If the Sheriff return upon any person, I have If the sheriff return Cepi
corp. he shall be chargeable with the body at the day of the return.
taken the body of, etc. or he has rendered himself, etc. the Sheriff shall
be charged to have the bodies of the said persons at the days of the Returns,
or the Writs of Precepts, etc. 23 H. 6. Cap. 10. And so was the pristine Common
Law of this Nation.

Note.
Note that all process against any person, directed to the Sheriff, ought to
be duly and truly executed fifteen days before the return of the Writ, Br.
attach. Br. attach. 156.
15. 6. and returned into such Courts, out of which such process shall be
awarded

I shall not trouble you with many forms of Returns, being already amply
performed by Master Kitching in his Jurisdiction of Courts, only take these
few select ones which follow.

The return of a Non est inventus.
THe within named A. B. is not found in my Bayliwick.

R. S. Esquire sheriff.

The return of a Cepi corpus in the Common Pl.
By virtue of this Writ I have taken the body of the within named A. B. whose
body before the Justices within mentioned, at theday and place within
contained, I have ready as within it is commanded.

R. S. Esquire sheriff.

The return of a Cepi corpus in the upper Bench.
By virtue of this Writ I have taken the body of the within named, whose body
before his Highness at the day and place within contained I hay ready, etc.
as within it is commanded.

R. S. Esquire sherriff.

The return of a Cepi corp. and non est invent.
By virtue of this Writ I have taken the body of the within named A. B. whose
body before the Justices within mentioned, at the day and place within
mentioned, I have ready as within it is commanded. And I further certify the
same Justices that the other Defendants are not found in my Bayliwick.

R. S. Esquire Sheriff.

The return of a Cep. Corp. and languidus in prisona.
By virtue of this Writ I have taken the body of the within named A. B. whose
body remains so sick, weak and infirm in prison under my custody, that for
fear of the death of the same A. B. his body before the Justices within
mentioned, at the day and place within contained I cannot have, as by this Writ
it is commanded.

R. S. Esquire Sheriff.

The return of a mandavi Ballivo libertatis, where the Bailif makes no return
of the sheriffs warrant, or where he makes an insufficient return.
For the execution of this Writ to me directed to be done, I have commanded the
Baylif of the liberties of the hundred of B. in my County of Suff. who has
full execution of all Writs, Warrants, Mandats, and Precepts executable within
the said Liberty and return thereof; within which Liberty the execution of
this Writ wholly rests to be done; which Bailif (to wit) I. W. Knight (if
there be no return of the Sherifs warrant, or an insufficient return made,
then thus scil.) has given me no answer.

And also where he returns to the sheriff he has taken the body and the
like, in case the Bailiff returns a languidus in prisona, or as he shall
certify the sheriff by his return.
But if the Bailif of the Liberty return that he has taken the body of C. D.
then thus (scil.) answers me that he has taken the body of the within named
C. D. whose body before the Justices within mentioned, at the day and place
within contained he has ready, as by this writ it is commanded.

R. S. Esquire Sherif.

The return of a Scire fac. where a Scire fac. is returned.
By virtue of this Writ to me directed by T. G. and J. H. honest and lawful
men of my Bailiwick, I have given notice to the within named A. B. that he be
before the Justices within mentioned, at the day and place within contained to
show, etc. as within it is commanded.

R. S. Esquire Sherif.

The return of a Nihil to a sc. fa.
The within named A. B. has nothing in my Bailiwick by which I may give him
notice, neither is he found in the same.

R. S. Esquire Sheriff.

Return Scir. fa. for one, and Nihil for the other.
By virtue of this Writ to me directed by T. G. and I. H. honest and lawful
men of my Bayliwick I have given notice to the within named A. B. that he be
before the Justices within mentioned, at the day and place within contained, to
show, etc. As within it is commanded: And I further certify the same Justices
that the other Defendant has nothing in my Bayliwick by which I may give him
notice, neither is he found in the same.

R. S. Esquire Sherif.

The return of and Attachm^^t and Proclam. in Chancery.
The within named A. B. is not found in my Bayliwick; And in all places within
my Bayliwick; as well within Liberties as without, I have made public
proclamation that the above named A. B. personally appear before his Highness
in the high Court of Chancery at the day and place within contained, to answer
his Highness touching a contempt, and further to do and receive what the said
Court shall think fit in this behalf, as by this Writ I am commanded.

R. S. Esquire Sheriff.

A Nihil r. of a Ven. fac. upon an Indictment, presentment, or information. A
summons returned of the like.
The within named A. B. has nothing in my Bayliwick by which he may be attached.

R. S. Esquire Sheriff.

The within named A. B. is attached by pledges. John Do. and Rich. Roo.

R. S. Esquire Sheriff.

The return of a distrng. nup. vic. or Balliv.
The Manucaptorie of the within named A. B. John Do. and Rioh: Roo.


Issues -- 10 s. R. S. Esquire Sheriff.

The return of a Ven. fac. jur.
The execution of this Writ appears in a certain panel to this Writ annexed,

R. S. Esquire Sherif.

The pannell.
The names of the Jurors between A. B. Plaintiff, and C. D. Defendant, of a plea
of Trespass.

E. F. of G. Gent. H. I. of the same. K. L. of M. And so to the number of 24.
Every of the said Jurors is severally attached by pledges Io: Do. and Ric. Roo.


R. S. Esquire Sherif.

The return of a distringas or a Hab. cor. jur.
The execution of this writ appears in a certain panel to this writ annexed.

R. S. Esquire Sherif.

The names of the Jurors between A B. Plaintiff, and C D. Defendant of a plea of
Trespass.

E: F: of G Gent: H: I: of the same. K. L: of M: And so to the number mentioned
in the writ. Every of the said Jurors is severally attached by pledges John
Do. and Rich: Roo.


Issues of every of them 10 s. R. S. Esquire Sherif.

They of an Exigent where one brings a sup: one rendereth himself, the other
appears not.
At my County of N. held at L. in the said County of N. the 8th day of Ian: in
the year of our Lord, 1658. the within named A: B: C: D: and E: F: were the
first time called and did not appear. And at my County Court there held the
first day of Feb: in the same year 1658. they were the second time called, and
appeared not: And at my county Court there held the first day of March in the
foresaid year 1658. they were the third time called, and appeared not: And at
my county Court there held the 2d day of April, in the year of our Lord 1659.
they were the fourth time called and appeared not: And at my County Court there
held the first day of May in the year 1659. abovesaid, they were the fith time
called, and the above named A. B. brought me his Highness Writ of
Supersedeas, which I have to this writ annexed, therefore against him the said
A. B. I could no further proceed. And the above named C. D. rendered himself
into my custody, whose body before the Justices within mentioned at the day and
place within contained I have ready, as within it is commanded: And the above
named E F. did not appear; therefore by the judgment of J K. and L M. Gent.
Coroners of the County aforesaid, the aforesaid E E. is outlawed.

R. S. Esquire Sherif.

The return of a Proclamation.
At my County Court of N. held at L. in the County of N. the 1. day of Feb. in
the year of our Lord 1658 And at the general Sessions of the public peace
held at, G. the 20 day of Apr. in the aforesaid year the 2 day of April, in the
year of our Lord 1659. And at the most usual door of the Parish Church of c.
within written, on Sunday the 10 of April, 1659. abovesaid, I made public
proclamation, as within it is commanded.

R. S. Esquire Sherif.

The return of an Allocat.
There being four County Courts allowed, at which the within named A B. C D. and
E F. were four times called, and appeared now. Now at my County Court of N.
held at L. in the said County of N. the above named A B. C D. and E F. were the
first time called, and appeared not; therefore by the judgment of I: K: and L:
M: Gent. Coronors of the County, they are, and every of them is outlawed.

R. S. Esquire Sherif.

Return of a Tarde.
This Writ was so lately delivered me, that by reason of the shortness of time I
could not do due execution thereof according to the Exigence of the same.

R. S. Esquire Sherif.

The within named A. B. was taken by R. C. Knight The Return of a Hab. cor.
where the def. was taken by a former Sherif. The return of a pone.
and Baronet, late Sheriff of my County of N. and not by me now Sheriff of the
same County.

R. S. Esquire, Sherif.

By virtue of this writ to me directed, I have before the Justices within
mentioned at the day and place within contained the Plaint which is in my
County Court by his Highness Writ between the within named parties, under the
seals of A B. C D. E F. and G H. four lawful men of my said County present at
that Record, as appears in a certain Scedule to this Writ annexed; And have
given notice to the within named I. K. that he may be then there ready to
prosecute his plaint thereof against the within named T. W. And also I have
there the other Writ to this Writ and Scedule annexed.

I. G. Esquire, Sherif.

The Schedule.
S. ss. At my County Court held at I. in my said County the 11. day of in the
year of our Lord, 1657.

ss. I. K. complains against T. W. of a plea of Debt.

I. G. Esquire, Sheriff.

Return of a Sci. sa. for the releas of prisoners.
By virtue of this Writ by C D. and F G. honest and lawful men of my Bailiwick,
I have given notice to the within named L S. I. L. etc. that they be before his
Highness at the day and place within contained to show, etc. Why the within
named R R. should not be enlarged out of prison according to the act; etc. As
within it was commanded. I. G. Esquire, Sherif.

Return of Nihil to a Scir. fac. against the heir and ter-tenants.
The within named G. S. has nothing in my Bailiwick, whereby I can give him
notice, neither is he found in the same, neither are there any tenants or
tenant of any Lands or Tenements which were of the within named W. on the
within written day of the Judgment within given or at any times afterward in
my Bailiwick, unto whom I may give notice, as this writ does require.

I. G. Esquire, Sherif.
Pledges of process, The return of a summons in Dower.
Jo. Do, and Ric: Roo.

Sum of the within named A. B. Anth. Sharp, and Rich. Sharp.



And at the most usual Church-door of the Parish of D. where the within named
A. B. inhabiteth, upon the Lords day, (to wit) the 4. day of Iu. in the year
within written, immediately after divine service in the same Church ended, I
made public Proclamation according to the form of the Statute, etc.

R. S. Esquire Sherif.

By virtue of this Writ to me directed the 26. day of The return of a Cap. in
manus grand Cape in Dower.
A. in the year within written, I have taken into the hands of his Highness the
Lord Protector by the view of H. R. and T. R. honest and lawful men of my
Bailiwick, the third part of the Message, Lands and Tenements within
mentioned, with the appurtenances As within it is commanded.

The summoners of the within named A. B. Jo. Den. and Ric. Fen.


R. S. Esquire, Sherif.

Pledges of Process Jo. Do. and Rich, Roo. The return of a Summons, upon an
original against an heir.


The Summoners of the within named A. B. son an heir of A. B. I. W. and E. W.

R. S. Esquire, Sherif.

By virtue of this Writ I have caused to be delivered The return of Hab. fac.
possessionem, and cap. Where Judgment is signed with costs.
to the said A. B. his possession of his term within specified of the Message,
Lands, and Tenements within specified. And also have taken the body of the
within named C. D whose body before the Justices within written, at the day and
place within contained I have ready, as within it is commanded.

And where the Defendant is not found, then close thus: And I further certify
the Justices within specified, that the within named C. D. is not found in my
Bailiwick.

R. S. Esquire Sherif.

The return of a Liberate out of Chancery.
By virtue of this Writ, I have delivered to the within named I G. the Manors,
Messuages, Parks, Woods, and all and singular the Lands and Tenements, with the
appurtenances within mentioned, To hold to him and his assigns as his Freehold,
until he shall be fully satisfied of his debt within mentioned, with his
damages, charges, and expenses, reasonably sustained, as by this Writ it is
commanded, And I further hereby certify his Highness, that the within named R.
W. is not found in my Bailiwick.

R. S. Esquire Sherif.

By virtue of this Writ to me directed, in form within The return of an Acced.
ad cur.
written in full Court I recorded the Plaint within mentioned, And that Record
as it appears in a Scedule to this Writ annexed, I have before the Justices
within written at the day and place within contained, under my seal, and the
seals of R C. M C. T Y. and R E. four honest and lawful men of my Bailiwick of
those which were there present at that Record: And I have prefixed the same day
to the parties within written, that then they may be there ready to proceed in
the said plaint, as shall be just according to the exigence of this Writ.

R. S. Esquire, Sheriff.

The Scedule.
B. ss. At the Hundred Court of B. holden at C. the 12. day of A. in the year
of our Lord 1658. in the said Hundred before I. K. and L M. free Suitors of the
same Hundred.

B. ss. A B complains against C D. of a plea of taking, and unjust detaining
of his goods and chattels.

R. S. Esquire Sherif.

The return of a Re. sa. lo.
By virtue of this Writ to me directed in my full County Court of N. held at N.
in my said County the 12. day of A. in the year of our Lord 1648. I caused the
Plaint to be recorded between the parties within written, whereof within is
made mention: which plaint appears in a certain Scedule to this Writ annexed;
And I have that Record ready before the Justices within mentioned at the day
and place within contained under my seal, and the Seals of W H. L E. I B. and T
C. four lawful freeholders of the same County of those which were present at
that Record; and I have prefixed the same day to the parties within written,
that they be then there ready to proceed in the said plaint as shall be just
according to the exigence of this Writ. R. S. Esquire, Sheriff.

The Scedule.
N. ss. At my County Court of N. held at I. within the said County the 12. day
of A. in the year of our Lord 1658. before I G. H K. Freeholders of the same
County amongst other things it is thus contained.

N. ss. F I. does complain against F. S. of a plea of taking and unjustly
detaining of his cattle.

R. S. Esquire, Sheriff.

Return averia. elongat. and Cepi corpus for damages.
Before the coming of this Writ the within mentioned Mare was by the within
named G H. conveyed unto places unknown to me, so that I could not cause return
of the said Mare to be made to the within named I N. and H. as within it is
commanded, and I hereby further certify the within mentioned Justices, that by
virtue of this Writ I have taken the body of the within named G H. whose body
before the said Justices at the day and place within contained I have ready, as
within it is commanded.

R. S. Esquire, Sheriff.

The writ.
The execution of this Wtit appears in a certain Scedule hereunto annexed.

R. S. Esquire, Sheriff.

The Scedule.
By virtue of this writ to me directed, and to this Scedule annexed, I made a
certain Warrant to one W R. my Bailiff, to arrest and take I S. in the said
Writ named; My which Bailiff, by virtue of my aforesaid The return of a
rescous.
Warrant, the 11. day of February in the year of our Lord 1658. within written
at B. in my County arrested and took the body of the aforesaid I S. as by my
Warrant he was commanded, and him the said John so arrested, taken, and in my
custody as aforesaid, under the aforesaid arrest being, one G. S. of B.
aforesaid, together with the aforesaid John Spalding by force and arms, that
is to say, with staves, pitchforks, and knives upon him the said W. R. my
Bailiff, then and there did make an assault, and him did beat, wound, and
evilly handle, so that it was despaired of his life: And the aforesaid G. S.
him the said I. S. so as aforesaid under the foresaid arrest being out of my
custody, then and there took and rescued, and of his own right suffered him
to go at large. And the same I. S. so as aforesaid under arrest being, out of
my Custody, The custody of my said Bailiff.
then and there likewise rescued himself against the public peace: And
afterward the same John is not found in my Bayliwick.

R. S. Esquire Sheriff.

Return of Jurors.
If two sufficient hundredors do appear it is suffi-Stat. 27. Eliz. cap. 6.
He must return six Jurors where the Venue lies, if there be so many within
the Hundred, viz. within the place where the demand is made; yet by the Stat.
27 Eliz. cap. 6. upon the trial of an issue joined in any personal action, if
two sufficient hundreders do appear it is sufficient: He must return their
names, and a true addition of their dwelling places, or some other addition by
which the party may be known.

None are to be returned above the age of 17 years, etc. 21 E. 1. None shall be
impanel led out of their proper County, except, etc.
No persons are to be returned above the age of 7 years, nor persons of a
languishing sickness or disease at the time of their summons, no Alien Infant
under the age of fourteen, Clergy men or Ministers: Lamb. 382. Fitz. 165. d.
166. a. d.

None shall be impannelled upon a Jury for trial of any matter out of their
proper County, except such Jurors may spend in Lands and Tenements 5 l. per
annum, nor to try any matter within the County, except they have in Lands and
Tenements 40 s. per ann. of estate of Freehold within the County where the
Issue is to be levied. F. N. B. 166. d. F. N. B. 166. d.
But after. the Statute 27 Eliz. cap. 6. None to be returned but such as have 4
l. per ann.
None are to be returned for the trial of any Issue in the upper Bench, Common
Pleas, Exchequer, or before the Justices of Assize, but such as have estate of
Freehold in Lands, Tenement or Hereditaments of the clear yearly value of 4l.
at least, out of Ancient Demesne.

Though the current of the Venire facias be but to 24 Jurors must be returned,
otherwise error. Co. 5. 36. and 37.
return Duodecem bonos and legales homines, yet must he return twenty and
four; if he return but three and twenty, and 12 appear and give their verdict,
this is Error, Coo. 5. 36. and 37.

He is to summon and return the Grand Jury to the He must summon the grand
Iuries to the Assizes, and Iuries for the quarter sessions, etc.
Assizes, and the Juries for the Quarter Sessions of the peace, and is to array
his pannell six days (at the least) for the special Assizes, and before the
sessions of the Justices, so that view and copies of the pannels may be had if
they be required; which copies must be indented by the Sheriff, and delivered
to the Plaintifs, Defendants, or Tenants.

Upon an Indictment he ought to return none but None must be returned upon an
Indictment but, etc. probi and legales homines.
probi and legales homines; viz. such as are not attaint by Law, Decies tantum,
subornation of perjury, concealment, such as are not outlawed, abjured,
condemned in a Praemunire, or attaint of Treason, felony, etc. 11 H. 4. cap. 9.

Return of Issues.
He must return good Issues.
HE is to return good sufficient and reasonable Issues, and upon such persons
as have sufficient goods and lands according to the Stat. of Westminst. 2. cap.
39. and E. 3. cap. 5.

Of Escapes, and what damage does occur to the Sheriff by them.
The sheriff must elect an honest Jailer.
THe Sheriff ought to be very cautious in electing a vigilant and honest
Jailer, and such a one as is able to give sufficient security, for his
indemnity and true performance of his office, and to answer all escapes; for
of all the Officers that appertain to the Sherif, the Jailer ought to be most
circumspect, otherwise many escapes would happen. And first, to define what an
Escape is.

What an Escape is.
It is (here to be understood) where one that is arrested and imprisoned in the
common Gaol of the county, and comes to his liberty before that he is
delivered by the award of any Justices, or by order of Law. If For felony, it
is felony in him that suffers the Escape, etc.
the imprisonment of him that escaped were for felony, then that shall be
felony in him that did voluntarily (not otherwise) suffer the escape, and if
for treason, then it shall be treason in him; and if trespass then trespass,
etc.

If a prisoner escape, yet upon fresh suit, and taken, he shall be in
execution.
Although the prisoner which escapes be out of the view, yet if fresh suit be
made, and he be reprised in recenti insequtione, he shall be in execution,
otherwise, at the turning of a corner, or by an entry of an house, or by any
other such means the prisoner may be out of view. Co. 3. Rep. Rigweys Case.

If the Sheriff does assent, that one who is in execution, Co. 3. Boytons
Case. Idem sup. Lit. fo. 260. 13 E. 1. c. 11. 2 R. 2. c. 12. Plowd, 360. a.
and under their custody, shall go out of the Goal for a while, and then
return, although that he return in the time, yet this is an escape; for the
Sheriff ought to guard him in salva et arcta custodia, and the Statute of
Westminster. 2. c. 11. says, quod carceri mancipentur in ferris. So that the Sheriff
may keep such as are in Execution in yrons and fetters, till they have
satisfied their Creditors.

It is adjudged, if one be in Execution, no commandment The Protector cannot
command without writ, to free a man, etc.
although of the Protector himself without writ, is a sufficient warrant to
discharge the Jailer, and so by the same reason shall not discharge the Sheriff.

Where the Sheriff dies, and one in Execution, If the sheriff dye and one
breaks the jail, no escape, etc.
breaks the Jail, and goes at large, this is no escape; for when a Sheriff
dies, all the prisoners are in the custody of the Law, until the election of
a new Sheriff.

If a woman be Warden of the Fleet, and a prisoner If a woman jailer marry a
prisoner, adjudged an escape. Plow. com Plats case. It is no escape, if
prisoners be removed out of the County, that they may be removed to another
place within the same County; but not for their ease, for then it is an escape.
Mich. 3. Car. com. Banc.
in the Fleet marries her, this shall be judged an escape in the woman, and
the Law judges the prisoner to be at large. Plow. Comment. Plats case.

If the Sheriff remove his prisoners out of the County without being commanded,
it is an escape. But if he remove them from one place to another in his County
as he changes his Jail, it is no escape; but if he remove his prisoners for
their ease and delight in the same County, it is an escape. As the case was
cited by Harvey, Mich. 3. Char. Com. Banc. That the Sheriff went with his
prisoner to a Beare-baiting in the same County, and it was adjudged an escape.
And Hutton Justice said, that if a Sheriff permit his prisoners to go to work
for their benefit, it is an escape. And the question was, if in an Audita
Querela for a voluntary escape of one in Execution, there should be bail; And
the opinion of the Court was, That if it appears, that the cause upon which
the Audita Querela is grounded, is called a good proof by the Record, and that
he should not be bayled, unless good and special bayl.

If a prisoner of his own wrong escape and fly into The sheriff upon fresh
suit may take a prisoner in another coun. No felony in the Gaorler to kill a
prisoner that attempteth to escape, etc.
another County, the Sheriff or his Officers upon fresh suite may take him
again. See Daltons office of Sheriffs.

If a prisoner in the Jail attempteth to escape, and having broken his yrons,
strikes the Jailer (coming in the night to his prisoner) and the Jailer
slays him, it is no felony, 22 Ass. 35.

All that come into the Gaol, as prisoners, ought bar. plac. 253.
An Action of Debt was brought against a Jailer for an Escape, who said that the
Sheriff did not deliver him lawfully to him; And it was therefore ruled, 13
Edw. 3. Fitz. tit. Bar. plac. 253. That to be kept in salva and arcta
custodia. 13 E. 3. Fitz tit. he shall not take benefit, nor any notice whether
he was lawfully delivered to him in Execution, or not? But he being once in his
custody, he ought to keep him in arcta and salva custodia, subpoena salva for
the Jailer, and arcta for the party, the Plaintiff, the party by this being
coarcted to pay the debt.

Mich. 12 Jac. One taken upon a Capias by a wrong name, etc. a Testat issued
out against him by his right name, and was taken in Exec. and suffered him to
escape, and the sheriff was judged answerable for the escape.
Mich. 12 Jac. An action upon the Case was brought against the Sheriff of N.
for an escape upon Not guilty pleaded, all the special matter was found and
showed to the Court, which was this; That a Capias did issue to the Sheriff to
take one (John) which was by a wrong name, and the Sheriff returned a Non est
Inventus, and upon this a Testatum issued out to him, and therein named him by
his right name; Upon this the Sheriff took him, and had him in Execution, and
afterward suffered him to escape. The whole Court agreed, that the Sheriff is
answerable for this escape, notwithstanding the first Capias was by a wrong
name, for he was taken and suffered to escape; here, upon Not guilty pleaded,
the special matter was found, and showed that the first Capias was by a wrong
name; yet the Court was clear of opinion, that he being taken, and in Execution
by his right name, though the first Capias was erroneous, and not right, the
Sheriff shall be chargeable for this escape clearly, and so by the rule of the
Court judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

I think it very pertinent to our subject matter, (and it is well worth
observation) to transcribe Whitings Case against Sir George Reynell, Marshall
of the Kings Bench, in the second part of Crooks Crook 2 f. 657. and 658.
Whitings Case. A man's wife taken in Execution, and suffered to go at large
before the debt satisfied, adjudged an escape.
Reports, fol. 657. and 658. viz. Debt for 202 pounds, whereas he recovered
against Thomas Abingdon, and Mary his Wife, in trespass for damages, 202
pounds, and the said Mary was committed in Execution to the Defendant upon this
Judgment; That the Defendant, 24 November. 16 lac. suffered her to go at large
whither she would, his debt not being satisfied, per quod actio accrevit. The
Defendant pleaded, That she brake Prison and escaped, and freshly followed her
and took her again, 21 October. 17 Iac. in fresh suit, and had her in Execution,
and yet has her, etc. VVhereupon the Plaintiff demurred: And it was now angued,
that this plea was not good, because the escape is alleged 24 November. 16.
Jac. and the Action is brought Pasch. 17 Iac. And this reprisall is alleged a
year after the escape, and after the Action brought. For it was alleged,
although A reprisall by fresh suit before the action brought, excusable; but a
reprisal after the action brought, no excuse.
a reprisall by fresh suit (if it had been before the action brought) would
peradventure have excused him; yet being after the Action brought, so as the
Plaintiff at the time of the Action brought had good cause to have the Action,
the Reprisall after shall not excuse him: and compared it to waste brought for
Reparations, which is amended pendant the Writ, it shall not excuse him. So
here.

And in proof thereof were cited, Coo. 3. fol. 52. Coo. 3. fol. 52. Ridgleys
Case. 23 E 4. 8. 13 E. 3. tit. bar. 253.
Ridgeleyes case. 23 E. 4. 8. 13 Edw. 3. tit Bar. 253. But against this it was
argued, That this reprisall, being alleged to be by fresh suite, and before
the plea pleaded, is good for the time, and he shall take advantage thereof to
excuse the Escape: For it is upon the matter no escape, when she was re-taken
by fresh suit; for that is a continual pursuit, and the Law shall adjuge her
in prison always. And it is not like the case of Waste; For there nothing was
done after the Waste committed, before the Action; and the Reparation has not
any relation, nor is the continuance of any former Act: but this Reprisall has
relation, and makes it no escape, ab initio. As a Distress taken for Rent, and
rescued, and driven into another Manor, which is pursued and re-taken, the
party shall make his Avowry of the taking in the first place. So here. And it
would otherwise be a great mischiese, if an Escape should be against the wills
of Sheriffs, or keepers of Prisons, by breach of prison, or rescuing themselves
before they be brought to prison, or in their going thither; and the prisoners
be reprised within two or three days, That an Action should be brought in the
Interim against the Jailer, and that this Reprisall (when he has the prisoner
before the plea) should not be an excuse, especially to the Marshall, who has
multitude of prisoners, and every day is to bring them unto the Hall by Habeas
Corpus, or Rules of Court: If peradventure a Prisoner escapes, and an Action be
brought against the Marshall the same day, before he can have any time to
retake him; If he should not be excused by the re-taking, he would be charged
with a multitude of suits, and could not have any remedy to excuse him. And
therefore it was compared to the pleading of a Fine levied before the Writ of
Formedon, and Proclamations incurred, pendant the Writ, before the plea
pleaded, he well may take advantage thereof by pleading it, although when the
Writ was brought, it was not complete, nor could be pleaded, Vide 6 H. 7. 12. 6
H. 7. 12.


Secondly, it was moved, admitting this to be no plea, yet the Action lies not
here, because the Escape is of a Feme Covert, where her Baron is subject to the
Execution: So the Plaintiff has not lost his debt; for by intendment she
might not have paid it, if she had layne in prison; For she had nothing but
what was her Husbands, and the Execution remains yet against him.

Therefore Action of Debt lies not, because he is not totally deprived of his
Debt, but an Action upon the Case in respect of the damage.

Stat. 1 R. 2.
And therefore it was said, If one have Execution of a Statute of the Lands,
Goods, and Body, etc. and the prisoner escapes; Yet because the Lands remain
in Execution, debt lies not for the Escape, but an Action upon the Case: For at
the Common Law, an Action of Debt was not maintainable for an Escape; but it is
given by the Statute of 1 Richard 2. where the Debtor escapes. But here the
sole and principal Debtor did not escape; for the Baron is the Principal and
remained subject to the Execution. vide 33 H. 6. 47. N. Br. 93. Regist. fo. 98.
33 H. 6. 47 F. N. B 93. Regist. fo. 98. 4 H. 6. 6.
4 H. 6. 6.

Wherefore, etc. But the Court held, that it was not any plea, because the
Action is brought, and implies a voluntary permission, ire ad largum, which is
neither denied or traversed. And if the Sheriff voluntarily lets a prisoner at
large, he cannot re-take him. And so this Reprisall, as is alleged, being
after the Action brought, is to no purpose, nor is any plea. And for the Action
of Debt, they held, that it well enough lies, or an Action upon the Case at his
pleasure; Because the Feme was only committed to prison, and not the Baron:
And she is the sole Debtor, who is imprisoned, wherefore it was adjudged for
the Plaintiff.

Note.
But note, in as much as Escapes are so penal to Sheriffs, Bailiffs of
Liberties, and Gaolers, the reverend Judges of the Law have always made a
favorable construction as much as the Law will permit in favor of the
Sheriffs, Bailiffs of Liberties, and Gaolers, who are Officers and Ministers
Co. 3. 44.
of Justice. Co. 3. 44.

What bail is. Co. super Lit. lib. 1. c. 10. Sect. 79.
Of Bail what it is? And where the Sheriff may take Bail, and where not.
BAIL or Ballium is a safe keeping or protection, and thereupon we say, when a
man upon surety is delivered out of prison, traditur in ballium, he is
delivered into bail, viz. Into their safe keeping, or protection from prison
before that he has satisfied the Law, it has its original or derivation from
the French word Bailler, and that also comes from the Greek word (...), they
both signify to deliver into hand; For he that is bayled, is taken out of a
Prison, and delivered into the hands of his Friends, who are his Sureties for
his appearance at a certain day, to answer, and be justified by the Law.

Any person making a warrant, etc. without origi al process, upon examine. etc.
shall be committed without bail, etc. 43 Eliz. cap. 6.
Sheriffs, Under-sheriffs, or other persons, making any warrant for the summons,
arresting or attaching any person to appear in any Court, not having the
original Process or Writ to warrant it, upon examination, and proof thereof
before the Judges of Assize, or Judges of the Court, etc. such offender and
their procurers shall be committed to the Goal, there to remain without bail
until (they have paid (amongst them) 10 l. to the party grieved, and his costs
and damages, as also 20 l. to the Protector, 43 Eliz. c. 6.

Such persons as are in Execution upon any Statute or Recognisance, or upon
judgment given in the Such as are in execution, etc. not to be bailed.
Kings Court at the suit of any person, they shall not be bailed until they
have agreed with the Plaintiff, 1 R. 2. c. 12. 23 H. 6. c. 10. F. N. B. 9. and
121. a.

The like.
Persons condemned in any of the Kings Courts, and by virtue thereof committed
to prison, they shall not be bailed until they have agreed with the Plaintiff,
1 R. 2. c. 12. 2 H. 5. cap. 2. F. N. B. 121. a.

None to be bailed that are prohibited by the stat. Westminster. 1. cap, 15.
If the Sheriff do let to bail any persons prohibited (by the Stat. of Westminster.
1. cap. 15.) to be bailed, he shall be punished by the Justices of
Jail-delivery, according to the form of the same Statute; or the Justices may
fine them, as for an escape punishable at the Common Law. 25 E. 3. 39.

He cannot bail any suspect of felony as formerly.
The Sheriff might at the Common Law have bailed a suspect of felony (because he
is conservator of the peace) but now it seems the power is transferred to the
Justices of the Peace only. See the Stat. 1 R. 3. c. 3. and 3 H. 7. 3.

He cannot refuse to bail one bailable upon tender of sufficient sureties. The
like.
If a prisoner bailable tender sufficient sureties to the Sheriff, and he
refuses, he shall be amerced to the Protector and Informer 40 l. and shall
lose treble damages to the party grieved.

23 H. 6. cap. 10. Fitz. 251. b.
If a person be arrested by virtue of any Writ or precept in any Action
personal, upon tender of reasonable sureties to appear at the day and place,
as the said Writs, Bills or Preceps shall require, he shall be bailed. 23 H. 6.
cap. 10. Fitz. 251. b. And the person is not obliged to go to the Sherif, if he
offer sufficient bail to the Baylif.

Persons apprehended for any manner of Treason or Felony shall not be bailed,
Westminster 1. Cap. Traitors or Felons not bailable. In the upper Bench the bail not
chargeable till default assigned in the Principal, etc. Winch rep. so. 62.


It is the constant course of the Upper Bench, that the Bail is never
chargeable till there is default assigned in the principal upon the return of
a Capias ad satisfac. And if the principal render his body, though the
Plaintiff refuse to take it, yet that is a discharge of the bail. Winch Rep.
fo. 62.

It is not repugnant to our present subject to transcribe the new Rules
concerning special Bail, viz. 1.

The New Rules.
That if the Defendant appear upon the Summons, Attachment, or Distress, or by
Supersedeas quia improvide, or does truly render himself upon the Exigent, no
bail is requirable.

2 That in all causes of removeall, be it by Habeas Corpus, Privileges, or
Certiorari, special bail ought to be given.

3 That in causes where the Defendant comes in by Cepi corpus, be it Debt,
Detinue, Trespass for goods, Action upon the Case (except slander) if the debt
or damages amount to 20 l. special bail is to be given, except it be against
an Heir, Executor, or Administrator.

4 That in Covenant, because the damages are uncertain till Declaration, bail
at discretion.

5 That in Battery, Conspiracy, false imprisonment, no special bail of
course, without special motion and order.

6 That in slander no special bail, except in slander of title, wherein to be
left to the discretion of the Judges.

7 That in privilege, other then for sees and disbursments as an Attorney in
this Court, bail at discretion of the Court. In such case wherein a suite by a
common person, especial bail is not requisite.

8 That if bail be given upon reversall of an Outlawrie, or removal by Habeas
Corpus, the Original to be shown upon tendering of the Declaration, otherwise
the bail not liable, unless the party or his Attorney will voluntarily
appear, or take a Declaration without showing of it.

9 That in case of a removal out of an inferior Court, or reversall, the new
Original to agree in the nature of the Action, the sum in demand, and the
County, otherwise the bail not liable; but if the party will voluntarily
appear to such varying original, to be good as to the party, but if upon a
cause removed by Habeas Corpus, out of the Courts of Canterbury, Southampton,
Hull, Litchfield, or Poole, which are Counties where the Judges of Nisi prius
seldom come, if the Action be transitory, it must be laid in the County of
Kent, Southampton, York, Stafford or Dorcet, where the Town and County lies,
and the Recognizance to be taken accordingly.

10 That the Principal rendering himself at any time after bail put in, and
before or upon the day of appearnce of the scire fac. returned scire feci, or
of the second scire facias returned Nihil; or in case there shall be an Action
of Debt brought upon the Recognizance against the Bail, then if the Principal
shall render himself upon or before the process returned or served, no
further proceeding to be against the Bail.

Of the Election of Parliament men, how and when they are to be elected, etc.
Stat. 7 H. 4. 15.
THe manner of electing Knights of the Shire is as follows, viz. At the next
County Court after the delivery of the Writ, Proclamation is to be made in full
County, of the day and place of the Parliament, and that all there present, as
well Suitors summoned as others, shall attend to the election of the Knights,
and then in full County a free and indifferent election shall be made
notwithstanding any request or mandate to the contrary. And note that no
Election can be made by any Knight of the Shire, but Co. Inst. 4. fol. 48.
between the hours of 8 and 11. in the fore-noon: but if the election be begun
within the time, and cannot be determined within those hours, the election may
be made after. And if any election or voices be given before the Precept be
read and published, are void and not effectual.

23 H. 6. cap. 15. Cromp. 208.
Likewise he ought immediately after the receipt of the Writ of his Highness for
the summoning of the Parliament, to make his Precepts under the seal of his
Office, to every Major and Bailiff of Cities and Boroughs within his County,
commanding them thereby to choose Citizens and Burgesses to come to the
Parliament. And those Majors and Bailiffs must make a legal return of that
Precept to the Sheriff of their election, and their names that are elected: The
Sheriff setting his hand and seal of Office to one part of the Indentures,
delivering it to the Major, Citizens, or Burgesses to be kept; the Major,
Citizens, or Burgesses setting their hands and seals to the other part,
delivering it as their Deeds to the Sheriff to be certified and returned by him
with the writ of summons to the Clerk of the Crown, whose see is 4 s, for every
Indenture, 23 H. 6. cap 15. Crompton 208. P. Parl. 5.

Rot. Parliam. 5 H. 4. number. 38. Co. Inst. 4. fo. 49
Note that after the Precept of the Sheriff directed to the City or Borough, for
making of election, there ought Secundum legem and consuetudinem Parliamenti,
to be given a convenient time for the day of election; and sufficient warning
given to the Citizens or Burgesses that have voices, that they may be present:
otherwise the election is not good.

Co. Inst. fol. 48. Who may be electors.
At the election, if the party elected, or the Freeholders demand the poll, the
Sheriff cannot deny the scrutiny, for he cannot discern who be Freeholders by
the view: and though the party would wave the poll, yet the Sheriff must
proceed in the scrutiny. And by the Stat. of 8 H. 6. c. 7. and 10 H. 6. c. 2.
The election of Knights of the Shire shall be made by the more voices of the
people dwelling in the Counties having each of them lands or tenements of the
yearly value of 40 s. besides reprises; and the Sheriff has power to examine
upon oath the choosers how much they may expend by the year.

After such election, the names of the parties so elected 7 H. 4. cap. 15.
(be they present or absent) shall be written in an Indenture, under the seals
of all those that did choose them, which Indenture so sealed and taken to the
said writ, shall be the Sheriffs return thereof touching the Knights of the
Shires: and in such Writs (by the said Statute) this clause shall be hereafter
put, Et electionem tuam in pleno Comitatu tuo factam distinct and aperte sub
sigillo tuo and sigillis eorum, qui electioni illi interfuerunt, nos in
Cancellaria nostra ad diem and locum brevi contentum certifices indilate.

What persons are elegible, and who not.
Such persons as are eligible shall be resiant in the County for which they are
chosen, the day of the date of the Writ of summons, and likewise those that
chose them: Also Citizens and Burgesses shall be resiant in, and free of the
Cities and Boroughs for which they are chosen.

Co. Inst. 4. fo. 48
One under the age of one and twenty years is not elegible, neither can any
alien be elected of the Parliament until he be naturallized by Parliament,
after which he is eligible to this or any other place of judicature.

Ibid.
None of the Judges of the Upper Bench, or Common Pleas, or Barons of the
Exchequer that have judicial places can be chosen Knight, Citizen, or Burgess
of Parliament, because they are assistants in the House of Lords, As for the
present times I make a quaere of this.

Ibid.
A man attaint of Treason, felony, etc. is elegible: for touching the election
of two Knights, the words of the Writ are, Duos milites gladiis cinctos magis
idoneos, and discretos elegi fac. And for election of Citizens and Burgesses
the words of the Writ are, Duos etc. discretioribus and magis safficientibus,
which they cannot be said to be, when they are attainted of Treason or felony,
etc.

Any of the profession of the Common Law, and who are in practice of the same,
are elegible.

1656.
By the Humble Petition and advice, those are disabled to be elected, who have
advised, assisted, or abetted the Rebellion of Ireland, ad those who do or
shall prosesse the Popish Religion, and likewise all those who have aided,
abetted, advised or assisted in any war against the Parliament, since the first
day of January 1641. (unless he or they have since born arms for the
Parliament, or his Highness, or otherwise given signal testimony of their good
affection to the Commonwealth, and so continued) and such as have been
actually engaged in any plot, conspiracy or design against the person of his
Highness, or in any insurrection or rebellion in England or Wales since the 16.
day of December 1653. are disabled and made incapable to be elected.

Punishment of Sheriffs for their negligence in elections or returns.
The punishment of Sheriffs for their negligence in returning of Writs, or for
leaving out of their returns any City or Borough which ought to send Citizens
and Burgesses, vide 5 R: 2, Stat: 2. cap. 4. Also if one be duly elected Knight
or Burgess, and the Sheriff return another, the return must be reformed, and
amended by the Sheriff, and he that is duly elected must be inserted, for the
election in these cases is the radix or foundation, and not the return, Rot:
Parl: 5 H: 4. number: 38. Co: Just: 4. fol: 49.

Penalties on Counties, and places for not electing.
By the Stat: of 16 Car. Every County, City, Cinque port, and Borough that shall
not make election of their Knights and Citizens, Barons and Burgesses,
respectively, shall incur the penalties following, (that is to say) every
County the sum of one thousand pounds, and every City which is no County 200
l. and every Cinque port and Borough the sum of 100 l. Except the Freeholders
of any County and Inhabitants, or other persons having or claiming power to
make election of any Knights, Citizens, Barons or Burgesses, shall proceed to
making of elections of them, which elections shall afterward fall out to be
adjudged or declared void in Law by the Parliament, by reason of equality of
voices, or misdemeanor of any person whatsoever, then the said County, City,
etc. shall not incur the penalties aforesaid, so as an election de facto be
made. Note.
But who shall be Electors, and who shall be elected, and the time, place, and
manner of elections, and therein the duty of the Sheriff, you may read more
ample in the positive laws of 7 H. 4. cap. 15. 11 H. 4. cap. 1. 1 H. 5. cap.
1. 8 H. 6. cap. 7. 10 H. 6. cap. 2. 23 H. 6. cap. 15. 6. H. 6. c. 4. etc. which
need not here be particularly rehearsed.



Of the Office of Undersheriff.
What he is.
THe Under-Sheriffe (in effect) is but the Sheriffs Deputy, and acts whatsoever
is to be acted by the High Sheriff (except some particulars which are to be
done by the Sheriff himself, as you shall find in several places of this
Tract) and therefore according to the nature of a Deputation must be removeable
as Hobert fol. 13. Norton's case against Simms.
an Attorney is; and though the Sheriff should make him irrevocable, yet may he
revoke him, for there is neither Common Law nor Statute Law that makes him
immovable. He is but in the nature of a general Balliffe errant to the
Sheriff, and the whole County, as other Bailiffs are over a particular Hundred

He has power to execute all the ordinary offices of the Sheriff, that may be
transferred by the Law, etc.
The Sheriff constituting an Under-Sheriffe does implicitly give him power to
execute all the ordinary Offices of the Sheriff himself that may be
transferred by the Law, As serving of Process and Executions, etc. But he
cannot deal in a Writ of Redisseisin, because in that the Sheriff is Judge,
nor in the case of a Writ of Wast, where the Sheriff himself (in propria
persona) is commanded to go to the place wasted, etc.

The Sheriff must take good security of him, etc.
The Sheriff ought to be very cautious in taking good and sufficient security
of the Under-Sheriffe, to discharge, protect, and save him harmless of Escapes
upon arrests made by himself; for since that he transfers his authority unto
him, it is reason that he take security of him to perform all things justly,
and honestly to himself and others, not acting or intending any thing against
law. See more in the Articles betwixt the High-Sheriffe and Undersheriff
amongst the Presidents.

The Sheriffs Fees.
Upon an arrest.
By the Stat. of
TO the Sheriff 00 01 08 To the Bailff who makes the Arrest or Attachment 00 00
04 To the Jailer if the person be committed to prison 00 00 04 For the
Obligation for appearance if the prisoner be bailed 00 00 04 For making the
Warrant upon the Writ, for every name 00 00 04 For the Copy of a Panel 00 00
04 Extortion by Lamb. fol. 4. 15. Cromp. fo. 205. b.
For returning of a Panel (though it seems to be extortion by Lamb. fol. 4. 15.
and Cromp. fol. 205. b. they use to take 00 02 00 For the return of every Cepi
corpus 00 00 04 For the return of a Nihil, or Non est inventus 00 00 04 For
making Proclamation at the Church door upon an Extent, etc. 00 01 00 For the
Return of a Proclamation 00 01 00 For the return of every Venire facias, Tales,
Habeas corpora, and Distringas 00 02 04 For every name returned outlawed 00 00
04 For making a Precept upon a Writ to a special Bailiff for every name 00 02
00 For the arrest of every Desendant from the Plaintiff 00 01 00 For the Copy
of the warrant upon the writ 00 00 04 For the returning of a Mandavi ballivo.
00 00 04 For Writs of executions upon the Judgment upon bills sued in personal
actions, the debt or damage being under 40 s. 00 01 00 Upon Bills sued above 40
s. in actions personal for the return of every such bil 00 00 04 For every writ
of Execution 00 02 00 For executing of every writ of Elegit in personal actions
00 06 08 In all real or mixed actions sued by Original writ, for return of
every original writ 00 02 00 And for return of every other writ of Judicial
process depending upon the same before Judgment 00 02 00 And for every-Writ of
Execution after Judgment upon every original in action real or mixed 00 02 00
For executing every Habere fac: seisinam 00 06 08 For attachments upon Capias
or other process sued by Original or Judicial writ, if the return be Cepi
corpus 00 02 00 For a Reddidit se upon an Exigent of felony in appeal of
murder, or maim, or upon an indictment of selony or murder 00 02 00 Upon a
Reddidit se upon an Exigent of debt, trespass, detinue, and all other actions
personals 00 01 00 For the making of a Repleg. 00 01 00 and Withernam upon the
same 00 01 00 For return of every writ of appeal of murder, felony, or maim 00
01 00 And upon all Process growing upon the same, as Venire facias, Tales,
Habeas corpora, and Distringas 01 01 00 For every prisoner delivered by
acquittal, or by Proclamation for any manner of felony 00 01 00 For a Replevin.
00 02 00 For the return of a Recordare. 00 00 04 For the return of an Accedas
ad cur. 00 00 00 For the allowance of a Supersedeas after the return of the
Exigent. 00 02 00

The sheriff is to be compounded and agreed with for these.
For executing of a Writ to enquire of Waste, Also for executing a Writ to
enquire of damages, Likewise for executing a Statute, For executing of a writ
of Right, For serving of a Writ de partition facienda, For removing the
over-charge of Common of pasture, For enquiry upon an Elegit, For Writs of
forcible entry, or holding with force, whereupon the party amoved is to be
restored to his possession, For execution of a Judgment upon a Writ,


The Vnder-sheriffe of Middlesex uses to take these Fees following in the
Court of Common Pleas.
FOr a warrant for a Capias upon every name, 00 00 04 For the return of a
Venire facias, 00 02 00 For a warrant upon a Capias utleg. 00 00 04 For return
of a Habeas corpora juratorum, 00 04 00 For summoning the Jury for every name,
00 00 04 For return of a Proclamation, 00 01 00 For return of a Scire Facias,
00 02 00 For return of a Nihil overat and Fieri facias 00 01 00

For executing an Exigent, or Execution.
For executing an Exigent, or execution upon body, Lands, goods, and Chattels
twelvepence for every twenty shillings where the sum exceeds not one hundred
pounds: and six pence for every twenty shillings where the sum exceeds one
hundred pounds; that is to say, for every twenty shillings that he or they
shall levy or extend, and deliver in Execution, or take the body in execution.

Of Sheriffs Accounts, with a particular of some usual Charges or Fees paid by
them at the rendering of their Accounts.
THe Sheriff gives his Accounts into the Exchequer, and there is charged with
his casualties, which are all manner of Debts of Casualties, and Reliess,
Fines, Amerciaments upon the Sheriff, debts recovered, and such like as are
drawn down either from any Record of any of the Remembrancers of the Exchequer,
or from any other matter, ground, or seizure of the Court. And the Sheriff
musst answer to every sum charged upon him as he has cause; that is to say,
such a sum within such and such a Liberty, and shows whose they be.

He is charged with old seizures, which are Lands and Tenements seized before
by his Predecessors, upon the Process of the Court, and likewise with his own
feizures, which are Lands and Tenements, seized in his own time by Process of
the Court, and so adds to these such Felons goods as he has seized himself.

There the Sheriff has such allowances as are allowed him by act of
Parliament, together with the Justices of Peace wages of his Shire out of the
Fines and Forfeitures before the Justices of Peace thereof, if the streat will
bear them, laid out before the Sheriffs for the Justices wages, according to
the Statute, of the which allowance, and of the particular names of the
Justices, the foreign opposer does deliver a Roll into the Pipe for the Clerk
of the Pipes warrant to allow the sames wages to the Sheriff. After which
things done, viz, allowance of all payments, deductions, and annual charges,
then has he his Quietus est. The fees are as follow.

In the Term of S. Hillary, on the morrow of Purification, etc.
Imprimis, to his Attorney for his warrant of Attorney, etc. for his own sees,
and his man's sees and to another for entering the warrant 02 00 02 To the
Punie-Baron for ministering the oath, for the Apposel upon the summons of the
Pipe, his see for the Vicontels, and his man's see for the same 01 07 00 To the
Marshal, Criers, and Tipstaves there 01 06 08 The fees of the foreign Opposer
and his men are 04 00 00 For his writ of assistance from his Attorney 00 05 06
His Attorneys sees in the Pipe, and his man's fees 06 00 00 The sees of the
Deputy of the Pipe -- 01 03 04 To the Controlier of the Pipe, his man, and
other Officers of the Pipe 02 15 02 His Attorneys see in the Remembrancers
Office, and his man's fee 00 06 10 To the Master of the Wardrop for his see, for
a Talley, to have thereby an allowance given for it, and for joining of that
Talley in the Pipe 05 16 05 To the Master of the Pipe for his see -- 18 05 00
The foreign Opposers see for allowance of Justices wages to the Sheriff upon
the extracts of the peace, and for the casting up of the Debet upon the
Scedules of the Greenwax, and to his men for their see 02 18 04 To the Auditor
assigned for the Shire for declaring of the Account 12 00 00 To the Attorney of
the Pipe for giving allowance of the Justices wages, before allowed by the
foreign opposer in the Sheriffs account, and for the foot of the account, and
to his man 02 06 08 To the Baron for declaring of the account, and to his man
for his see 00 08 08 To the Attorney in the Remembrancers Office, for examining
of the account, and to one for the receiving of the account 00 05 00 For Copies
of the seizures which the Sheriff makes himself in his year, commonly at the
least 05 00 00 For copies of the new seizures, according to the number of them,
in some Counties but twenty shillings, but most commonly in Yorkshire to 02 00
00 For Petitions upon the account for each 00 04 00 For another writ of
assistance 00 05 06 For entering the view of the account, and in the alienation
Office for viewing of the account, and for a note of the charge there 00 09 08
For every Schedule of issues upon general pardons, and to the Clerk of the
extracts man 00 15 00 To a Baron for allowing of them, and to the Barons man 00
17 04 In the alienation Office for making of the Bond and Acquittance, with the
Scedules of seizures against such as have sold land held of the Commissioners
without license of alienation 10 06 00 For a Warrant for a day to finish the
account until Mich. Term 00 10 00 To the Attorney in the Pipe Office for
setting off from the Account six amerciaments, and to his man 01 10 00 For
discharging the amerciaments, and for a warrant to set off and discharge 01 12
06 For another Writ of assistance 00 05 06 If the Sheriff cannot go through with
his account in Trinity Term, then to the Marshall for liberty, and to his man
04 13 04 For ruling and making the Petitions, and to his man 09 00 00 To the
Master of the Pipe for his fee -- 00 13 04 To the Controller of the Pipe for
his fee, and to his man 02 12 00 The fee of the Attorney of the Pipe, and to
his man 06 02 06 For the Acquittances of two tallies in the receipt, and for
striking off those tallies 00 05 04 To two Auditors for casting up of the
Sheriffs account in Court, when he is to be cast out of the Court 00 10 00 To
the Baron then, and to his men -- 01 07 00 To the Marshal, Tipstaves, and
Criers then 00 16 08 To the Clerk of the Pipe for Recusants, and for allowing
and joining of the talley for Recusants Debts 01 16 00 To the Baron for
respects for Recusants Debts 01 10 00 To the Clerk of the Pipe for Recusants
for allowing of that Warrant, and to the Master of the Pipe for the same. 00 13
04 To the Bag-bearer 00 01 00 For the Quietus est to the Sheriffs Attorney of
the Pipe, and to his man 04 06 08 For the Quietus est for the Recusants -- Cum
multis aliis, etc. 01 00 00

But the Sheriff is at much more charge, which is laid out, and is disbursed
during his Sheriffwick, as experience will better inform him.

The Return of a Devastavit.
I R. S. Sheriff of the County within named, do certify the Justices within
mentioned, that the within named A. B. has before the coming of this Writ,
wasted, and to his own use converted diverse goods and Chattels, which were of
the within named F. G. at the time of his death, to the value of the debt and
damages within specified, and which came to the hands and possession of the
said A. B. Executor of the same F G. to be administered. So that the debt and
damages or any parcel thereof of the goods and chattels of the aforesaid
Testator F. G. I could not levy. And I further certify the aforesaid Justices,
that the within named A. B. has no goods or Chattels of his own in my
Bailywick, whereof I may levy the damages aforesaid.

R. S. Esquire Sherif.

The return of a Nulla bona and devastavit by Inquisition.
THe within named A. B. has no goods or Chattels which were of the within named
C. D. at the time of his death in her hands to be administered in my Bailywick,
whereof I may levy the debt and damages within mentioned, or any parcel
thereof, nor any of her own proper goods or Chattels in my Bailywick, whereof I
can levy the damages aforesaid or any part thereof: And I further certify the
Justices within specified, That by T. I. and E. R. honest and lawful men of my
Bailywick that I have made known to the said A B. that she be before the
aforesaid Justices at the day and place within contained, to show, etc. as
within it is commanded.

The residue of the execution of this Writ appears in a certain Inquisition
hereunto anexed.

R. S. Esquire, Sheriff.

N. ss.
AN Inquisition indented taken at A. N. in the County aforesaid, the two and
twentieth day of Ian: in the year of our Lord 1658. before me R. S. Sheriff of
the County aforesaid, By virtue of a Writ of his Highness the Lord Protector
to me directed, and to this Inquisition annexed by the Oath of G. H. (and so to
the number of twelve) honest and lawful men of my Bailywick, who say upon
their oaths, that A. B. in the aforesaid Writ named, wasted, and to her own use
converted diverse goods and chattels, which were of the within named C D. at the
time of his death to the value of the debt and damages in the same Writ
specified, and which came to the hands of the same A. B. to be administered. In
witness whereof as well I the said Sheriff as the aforesaid Jurors to this
present indented Inquisition have interchangeably set to our seals the same day
and year first above written.

R. S. Esquire, Sheriff.

BY virtue of this writ to me directed, I have levied The Return of a Fieri
facias.
of the goods and chattels of the within named A. B. the whole sum of 80 l.
which said moneys before his Highness at the day and place within mentioned I
have ready to render to the within named, C. D. for his debt and damages within
specified, as by this Writ it is commanded.

R. S. Esquire, Sheriff.

By virtue of this writ I have levied of the goods The return of a Fie sac.
where part of the debt is levied, and for the residue a nulla bona.
and chattels of the within named A. B. the value of eight pounds sixteen
shillings four pence, which said moneys before his Highness at the day and
place within mentioned, I have ready to render to the within named C. D. in
part of his debt and damages within specified: And I hereby further certify
his said Highness, that the said C. D. has no other or more goods or Chattels
in my Bailywick, whereof at present, I may levy the residue of the aforesaid
debt and damages, according to the exigence of this Writ.

R. S. Esquire Sherif.

Another return of a Fi. sa.
By virtue of this Writ to me directed I have taken of the Lands and Chattels of
the within named A. B. that is to say, one Message with the appurtenances in
C. in my County of N. now in the tenure of one G. D. which the aforesaid A. B.
at the time of my taking thereof, held to him and his assigns for a certain
term of years, yet to come of the demise, grant, or assignment of one R. B. to
the value of ten pounds, which said Lands and Chattels as yet remain in my
hands unsold for want of Buyers, by reason whereof those moneys before the
Justices within mentioned, at the day and place within contained, I cannot have
to render to the within named C. D. As within it is commanded.

R. S. Esquire, Sherif.

The return of a writ where the Sheriff dies after execution thereof, and so
returned prout indorsat. by the present Sheriff.
I hereby certify the Justices within mentioned that after the execution of
this Writ, and before the return of the same E. L. Knight, late Sheriff of the
County aforesaid, and that this Writ, so as above indorsed, and returned was
delivered to me R. S. Esquire now Sheriff of the County aforesaid by G. T.
Undersheriff of the aforesaid E. L. late Sheriff of the County aforesaid.

R. S. Esquire, Sherif.

The return of an Elegit, where Lands are in the Kings hands.
I hereby certify the Justices within written, That the Lands and Tenements
which were of the within named F. B. the same day and year within mentioned, in
which judgment of the debt and accounts within specified was rendered, are, and
yet be in the hands of our Sovereign Lord the King in his Court of Wards and
Liveries, by reason R. B. Gent. Tenant of the Lands and Tenements aforesaid
has not yet sued forth his Livery of the Lands aforesaid in the Court
aforesaid: Therefore to the execution of this Writ, I may not proceed, as
within it is commanded.

R. S. Esquire Sherif.

An Inquisition indented taken at W. in the County aforesaid the day of January
in the year of our Lord one thousand six hundred fifty eight, before me R. S.
Esquire, Sheriff of the County aforesaid by virtue of a Writ of his Highness
the Lord PROTECTOR to me directed, and to this Inquisition annexed by the oath
of M. P. and so to the number of twelve honest and lawful men of my Bayliwick,
who say upon their oaths, that H. S. in the said writ named, was seized in his
Demesne as of see the fourteenth day of June in the year of our Lord one
thousand six hundred fifty in the same writ mentioned, of one Capital Message
with the appurtenances, with five acres of Lands, six acres of Meadow, and
eight acres of Pasture, situate, and being in Br. in the County aforesaid, of
the clear yearly value in all issues above reprises forty shillings: And the
said Jurors further say upon their oaths, that the said H. S. has not any
other or more Lands or Tenements the said fourteenth day of June abovesaid, nor
at any time since, nor any goods or Chattels at the day of taking this
Inquisition in my Bailiwick to the knowledge of the said Jurors, the moiety of
all and singular which said Message, Lands, Tenements, and premises (that is
to say) the said Capital Message, and the said five acres of Land, and the
six acres of Meadow, I the said Sheriff the said day of taking this Inquisition
have caused to be delivered to T. C. in the said Writ also named, to hold to
him the said T. and his Assigns as his Freehold, according to the form of
the Statute in this case made and provided, until the debt and damages in the
same Writ mentioned shall thereof be fully levied. In witness, etc.

Otherwise, until the said T. C. in the said writ also named shall be fully
satisfied of his debt and damages in the same writ mentioned. In witness, etc.

R. S. Esquire, Sheriff.

The return of an Extent in the Exchequer, etc.
The within named A. B. is not found in my Bailywick. The residue of the
execution of this Writ appears in a certain indented Inquisition hereunto
annexed.

R. S Esquire, Sheriff.

N. ss.
An Inquisition indented taken at I. in the County aforesaid the one and
twentieth day of October in the year of our Lord 1658. before me R. S. Esquire
Sheriff of the same County of N. By virtue of a Writ of His Highness the Lord
Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the
Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging to me directed, and to this
indented Inquisition annexed: By the oath of H. S. and so to the number of
twelve at least, good and lawful men of my Bailywick, who say upon their Oath
that R. T. in the aforesaid writ named the twentieth day of A. in the year of
our Lord 1657. in the same Writ mentioned, on which day the said R. T. became
debtor to his Highness, Oliver, late Lord Protector in the aforesaid also
mentioned, was seized in his Demesne as of fee, of and in one Message with the
Appurtenances, five acres of Land, six acres of Meadow, and eight acres of
Pasture, situate, lying and being in F. in the County aforesaid, now in the
tenure and occupation of J. G. or his Assigns of the clear yearly value in all
Issues above reprises 10 l.

All which said Message, Lands and Tenements, with the Appurtenances, I the
said Sheriff, the same day of the taking this Inquisition have taken and
seized into the hands of his Highness, Richard, now Lord Protector, as by this
Writ it is commanded

And the same Jurors say upon their Oath, that the aforesaid R. T. at the day
of the taking this Inquisition is seized in reversion (when it shall happen
after the death of C. Widow) in his Demesne as of Fee, of one Message, with the
Appurt. six acres of Land, 5 acres of Meadow, and 12 acres of pasture situate,
lying and being in H. in the foresaid County of N. and now in the tenure and
occupation of the same C. widow: And that the aforesaid C. widow is now living,
so that at present the said Message, Lands and premises in H. aforesaid are
worth nothing: But after the death of the said C. widow will be of the clear
yearly value in all Issues above reprises 8 l.

The reversion of which said Message, Lands, and Premises, with the Appurt.
in H. aforesaid, when it happens, I the same Sheriff have also the same day of
taking this Inquisition, taken and seized into the hands of his Highness the
Lord Protector, according to the exigence of his Highness said Writ.

And moreover the said Jurors say upon their oaths that the above named R. T.
at the time of the taking this Inquisition, was and is possessed of all the
Goods and Chattels severally mentioned, comprised, apprised, and valued in a
certain schedule to this indented Inquisition annexed, as of his own proper
Goods and Chattels, and that the whole value of the same Goods and Chattels is
forty shillings.

Which goods and Chattels the same day of the taking this Inquisition, I the
aforesaid Sheriff have likewise seized into the hands of his said Highness
the Lord Protector.

And the same Jurors further say upon their Oath, that the same day of the
taking this Inquisition, R. J. of G. in the County of N. aforesaid Yeoman, was
indebted to the above named R. T. in the whole sum of twenty pounds for Rent.
And also that there is now in the hands of the same R. J. diverse Goods and
Chattels of the said R. T. (that is to say) one long Table, etc. which goods
and Chattels together are of the value of 40 s. All which said debt of twenty
pounds, and the Goods and Chattels of the said value of 40 s. l the Sheriff
aforesaid the same day of the taking of this Inquisition, have also seized into
the hands of his said Highness the Lord Protector, as in the hands of the
aforesaid R. I.

And the aforesaid Jurors moreover say upon their Oaths that the within named
R. T. has no other or more Lands or Tenements at the aforesaid day he became
debtor so as abovesaid, nor at any time since, nor has he any other or more
goods or chattels at the time of the taking this Inquisition in my Bayliwick to
the knowledge of the said Jurors. In witness, etc.

R. S. Esquire sheriff.

The return of a scir. sac. agaixst the heir and ter-tenants where notice is
given.
By virtue of this Writ to me directed by W. G. and E. D, honest and lawful men
of my Baliwick, I have given notice to R W. within named, Son and Heir of R.
W. within mentioned, deceased. And to W. R. and I. H. Gent. Tertenants of
diverse Lands and Tenements in my Bayliwick, of which the said R. W. the Fther
was in his life time seized in his Demesne as of Fee on the morrow of All
Souls within specified; That they be before the Justices within mentioned at
the day and place within contained to show, etc. as within it is commanded.

R. S. Esquire sheriff.

The return of a summons in Dower.
Pledges of prosecuting
Io: Do. and Ric. Roo.
Summoners of the within named H.W. R.M. and R. B.

And further by virtue of this Writ the 3d day of Ia: in the year within
written, I made public proclamation according to the form of the Stat. and
the exigence of this Writ.

R. S. Esquire Sheriff.

The Oath of the Sheriff.
YOu shall swear, that you shall well and truly serve his Highness the Lord
Protector in the Office of the Sheriff of the County of Yorkshire, and do the
Commonwealth profit in all things that belongs to you to do by way of your
office, as far forth as you can or may. You shall truly keep the Commonwealths
right, you shall not assent to decrease, or lessening, or to concealment of his
Highness rights, or of his Franchises. And whatsoever you have knowledge that
his Highness rights have been concealed or withdrawn, to be in Lands, Rents,
Franchises, or Suits, or any other things, you shall do your true power to make
them be restored to his Highness again. And if you may not do it, you shall
certify his Highness the Lord Protector, his Council, or some of them
thereof: You shall not respite his Highnesses debts for any gift or favor,
where you may raise them without great grievance to the debtors: You shall
truly and rightfully treat the people of your Sheriff-wick, and do right as
well to poor as to rich, in all that belongs to your office: You shall do no
wrong to any man for any gift, or other behest or promise of goods for favor
nor hate; You shall disturb no man's right; You shall truly acquit at the
Exchequer all those of whom you shall receive any thing of his Highnesses
debts. You shall take nothing whereby his Highness or the Commonwealth may
loose, or whereby the right may be let or disturbed, and his Highness or
the Commonwealth delayed. You shall truly return, and truly serve all his
Highnesses Writs, as far forth as shall be to your cunning. You shall not have
to be your Undersheriff any of the Sherifs of the last year past. You shall
take no Baylif into your service, but such as you will answer for; you shall
make Oath of your Baylifs to make such oath as you make your self in that which
appertains to their occupation; you shall receive no Writ by you nor any of
yours unsealed, or any sealed under the seal of any Justice, saving the
Justices of Assize, or Justice assigned in the same Shire where you are
Sheriff, or other Justices having power and authority to make any Writs unto
you by the Law of the Land, or of the Justices of Newgate; you shall make your
Bailiffs of true and sufficient men in the Country. Also you shall do all your
power and diligence to destroy and make to cease all manner of Heresies and
Errors, commonly called Lollaries, within your Bayliwick from time to time to
all your power, and assist and be helping to all the Ordinaries and
Commissaries. You shall be dwelling in your own proper person within your
Bayliwick for the time you shall be in the same Office, except you be otherwise
licenced by his Highness the Lord Protector. You shall not let your
Sherifwick, nor any Bayliwick thereof to any man. You shall truly set and
return reasonable and due issues of them that be within your Bailiwick after
their estate and behavior, and make your pannels your self of such persons as
be next, most sufficient, and not suspect nor procured, as it is by the
Statutes provided. And over this; in eschewing and restraint of Man-slaughters,
Robberies, and other manifold grievous offenses that be done daily, namely by
such as name themselves Soldiers, and by other Vagrants, the which increase in
number, and multiply, so that the people of this Commonwealth may not in
safety ride, nor go to do such things as they have to do, to their
intolerable hurt and hinderance. You shall truly and effectually with all
diligence possible to your power execute the Statutes, as the Statute of
Winchester, and for Vagabonds. All these things you shall truly observe and
keep, as God you help, etc.

An Indenture by a high Sheriff, deputing one to be his Undersheriff.
A covenant by the under sheriff honestly to execute the office, and to do
every thing which may lawfully be done by him without the presence of the high
Sherif, and there to discharge the Sher.
THIS INDENTVRE made, etc. between A. B. of R. in the County of York Esquire,
Sheriff of the said County of the one part; And C. D. of W. in the said
County, Gent. of the other part, witnesses; That the said A. B. of assured
hope, confidence, and trust that he has, that the said C. D. will honestly,
uprightly, and sufficiently discharge the office and duty of Under-sherif,
as well toward his Highness the Lord Protector, as all the people of this
Commonwealth of England, and therein discharge him the said Sheriff, and for
the consideration hereafter mentioned, has been pleased and contented to
assign, depute, ordain, constitute and make, and by these presents does
assign, depute, ordain, constitute and make the said C. D. his Under-sheriffe
of the said County of York, authorizing hereby the said C. D. according to the
Covenants and Agreements by these presents contained, to execute, persorme, and
do all that which to the duty and office of Under-sheriffe of the said County
of Y. shall appertain, or to the Sheriff of the said County, without the
personal presence of the said Sheriff may be executed and done, and also to
receive and take to his own use, all manner of duties and lawful free
commodities, profits and advantages to the same office belonging, or in any
wise lawfully appertaining, during such time as the said A. B. shall continue
Sheriff of the said County, in consideration whereof, the said C. D. for
himself, his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, does covenant, promise,
and grant, to and with the said A. B. his Executors, Administrators, and
Assigns, and every of them by these presents; That he the said C. D. shall and
will during such time as the said A. B. shall continue, remain, and be Sheriff
of the said County of Y. honestly, truly, and sufficiently execute and do the
office and duty of an Undersheriff in the said County of Y. And shall and will
well and sufficiently do and execute for and in the name of the said Sheriff,
all and every thing and things concerning the office of the said Sheriff of
the said County of Y. which without the personal presence of the said high
Sheriff may lawfully be done and executed, and thereof shall discharge the said
high Sheriff his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators.

And furthermore, the said C. D. for him, his Heirs, Executors, and
Administrators, and every of And that neither he nor his servant, etc. will
receive or do any thing by color of his office contrary to the Laws, Customs
or statutes of the Commonwealth in prejudice of the Sheriff, etc.
them does covenant, promise, and grant to, and with the said A. B. his Heirs,
Executors, and Administrators, and every of them by these presents, that
neither the said C. D. his Servant, Deputy, Assignee, Clark, or Bayliffe, by
him to be assigned, shall or will by color of his said Office, Deputation or
Assignment extort, levy, receive any manner of thing or things which by the
Laws, customs, or statutes of the Commonwealth are or shall be prohibited,
or not allowed, whereby the said Sheriff, his Heirs, Executors, or
Admistrators, or any of them may in any wise be either in their persons, goods,
or lands, lawfully defamed, impeached, charged, impaired, molested, or troubled.

And further the said C. D. for himself, his Heirs, Executors, and
Administrators, Covenant by the Vndersheriff, to appoint sufficient Deputies or
Attorneys in all Courts, accustomed to receive Writs, etc. to do every thing
concerning them, etc. to make sufficient Deputies in all parts of the County
according to the Laws and Statutes.
and every of them, does covenant, promise, and grant to and with the said A.
B. his Heirs, Excutors, and Administrators, and every of them by these
presents, That he the said C. D. shall and will assign and appoint sufficient
Deputies and Attorneys in all Courts accustomed, as well to receive writs,
warrants, precepts and commandments to the said Sheriff to be directed, and to
make process thereof, and to do all thing and things for the executing,
serving, and sufficient returning thereof; And also shall make and appoint a
sufficient number of Deputies in all parts of the said County of Y. according
to the Laws and Statutes of this Commonwealth.

That he is to give notice to the high Sheriff of all things to be done by him,
in his proper person, and thereto will be assistant, and will bear all charges
thereof, except man's meat and horse meat.
And he the said C. D. shall and will from time to time, give reasonable notice
and warning unto the said A. B. of all such things as shall be requisite and
necessary for the said A. B. Sheriff of the said County, or by reason of his
said office in his own person to do or execute, and therein at all times in
his own person, or by his sufficient Deputy, shall be ayding and assisting as
well for the doing and executing thereof, and the returning thereof: As also
shall bear and pay all such charges thereof, as to the Sheriff by reason of the
said office should appertain (except man's meat and horse meat.

And also the said C. D. for himself, his Heirs, Covenant to receive all
process wherewith the high Sheriff is chargeable, and to collect all fines,
issues, amerciaments, etc. and to pay the same at such times as the Sheriff is
chargeable to pay the same to his Highnesses use, and thereof to acquit and
discharge the Sheriff.
Executors, and Administrators, and every of them does covenant, promise, and
grant to and with the said A. B. his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, and
every of them by these presents, that the said C. D. his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators, or Assigns, shall and will well and truly from time to time
receive all such extracts and process whatsoever, wherewith the said A. B. as
Sheriff of the said County of Y. is or shall be chargeable to receive, and that
the said C. D. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assgnes, shall and
will well and truly collect, levy, and gather all Fines, Issues and
Amerciaments, Seisures, Fee-farms, Rents, Profits, Certainties, Pipe-silver,
Chequer-silver, and all manner of Debts, Duties and Demands whatsoever,
wherewith the said A. B. as Sheriff of the said County of Y. his Heirs,
Executors, and Administrators, their or any of their Goods, Chattels, or Lands,
may in any wise be charged, or chargeable, and the same to pay to his
Highnesses use at such times as the said A. B. is charged or chargeable to pay
the same, and thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof, to acquit and
discharge as well the said A. B. his Heirs, Executors, and Admnistrators, and
every of them, as also all and singular their and every of their Goods and
Chattels, Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments: And also
that he the said C. D. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or Assigns,
shall and will from time And that he will acquit, etc. discharge, or save
harmless the sherif, etc. his goods, etc. lands, from all Executions of
prisoners, etc. And from all forfeitures, fines, amerciaments, etc. by reason
of anymisfeasance, or non-feasance, etc. of him, his Deputy, Attorney, etc. And
that he will not intermeddle with the execution or returning of any Letters,
etc. from his Highness, or his Privy Council without the direction of the
Sheriff.
to time, acquit and discharge, or otherwise sufficiently save and keep
harmless the said A. B. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, and Assigns:
And also all his and their goods and chattels, Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments whatsoever, of and from all manner of Execution, or of Executions
of prisoners whatsoever which to the office of Sheriswick shall appertain,
forfeitures, fines, amerciaments, imprisonments, pains, penalties, or
impositions whatsoever, to be charged, levied, or imposed upon the said A: B.
Sheriff of the said County of Y. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or
Assigns, his or their, or either of their goods or chattels, Lands, Tenements,
or Hereditaments, by reason of any mis-feasance, or non-feasance, omissions,
default, delay, contempt, or cause whatsoever, of the said C. D. his Deputy or
Deputies, Attorney or Attorneys, Clark or Clarks, Bailiff or Bailiffs, or other
person whatsoever, not doing, or insufficient doing his or their duty
concerning the said office of Sheriff or Under-sheriffe. And that neither he
the said C. D. nor any his Assigns, Deputies, Clarks, or Attorneys, shall or
will intermeddle with the execution or returning of any Leters or commandments
from his Highness the Lord Protector, or any of his Highnesses Privy Council,
without the privity, notice and direction of the said A. B. then first had: And
the said C. D. for himself, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, and every of them does further covenant and grant, to and with the
said Covenant safely to keep the Prisoners committed to his custody, until
they are delivered to the Jail, there safely to be kept by the Jailer, till by
course of Law they shall, he delivered, etc. to execute prisoners attainted
according to their judgment.
A. B. his Heirs, Excutors, and Administrators by these presents, that he the
said C. D. shall receive into his custody all prisoners to be committed to his
charge, and them sasely and honestly shall keep, until they shall be brought
and delivered into the Goal or Prison of the said County, there to be safely
kept, by the Jailer or keeper of the same Jail or Prison, until by due course
of Law they shall be delivered. And of such prisoners as shall be convicted or
attainted, shall make, or cause to be made due Execution, according unto the
quality of the judgment against every of them to be pronounced.

AND that the same C. D. shall and will within six days next before the That
he will within six days before every Term deliver a Certificate in writing
of all Executions come to his hands with the name for whom it is to be
executed, and the name against whom, etc. and the sums to be levied, and what
is done therein.
beginning of every Term, which shall be during the time of the said
Sheriffe-wicke well and truly deliver and certify unto the said A. B. a true
Note or Certificate in writing under his hand of all such Writs of Execution
whatsoever, as before the Term shall be come to his hands, with the name and
surname of the party and parties for whom the said Execution is to be done;
and also the name and surname against, whom the same is to be executed, and
the sum, and sums of money thereby severally to be levied, and what is
done therein, upon every such WRIT or PROCESS.

Grant, that the undersheriff may in the name of the Sheriff assign over any
bond to be taken for appearance, etc. to any person, thereby to compel the
parties to appear, and to save harmless the Sherif, etc. And that the
undersheriff may commence any action upon such bonds, to enforce the parties
to appear, to save harmless the Sheriff, and that he will justify all suits
lawfully taken. And that it shall be lawful for him to retain the money
recovered to his own use, toward his own charges, for the not appearance of
the parties, so that he will stand to the order of the Sheriff for the
overplus.
In Consideration of all which premises, the said A. B. is contented and
pleased that the said C. D. shall or may in the name of the said A. B. assign
and set over any bond to be taken in the name of the said Sheriff, for
appearance or discharge of process to any person or persons, to the intent
thereby to compel the parties to appear, to save and keep harmless the said
Sheriff and Under-sheriffe of any Fine or Amerciament thereby: And also that
the said C. D. may commence or take his Action upon any such bond, for the
enforcing the said parties therein bound to bring forth the party or parties,
for whose appearance they were become bound, thereby to save himself harmless
of such Fine and Amerciaments, as shall be imposed or laid upon the said Sherif
for not bringing forth the said party or parties; All which suits being
lawfully taken for the causes aforesaid, the said A. B. does covenant and
promise to avow and justify, and that it shall be lawful to and for the said
C. D. his Executors and Administrators, and also for the said Assigns to
retain to their own use, their said sum or sums to be recovered by reason
of the said Bonds, toward their charges and losses by reason of the not
appearance of the said parties, so always that they and every of them, shall
stand to the Orders and Directions of the said A. B. his Executors or
Administrators for the overplus thereof (if any shall be) And the said C. D.
for himself, his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, Covenant to save
harmless the Sheriff from all costs and damages which may be recovered
against him upon any such suit.
and every of them, does covenant and promise, to and with the said A. B. his
Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, to acquit and discharge, or else to save
harmless the said A. B. etc. of and from all, and all manner of costs and
damages, which may in any wise be awarded, adjudged, decreed or recovered
against him or them by reason of any such suit.

Finally, The said C. D. for himself, his Heirs, Covenant by the
under-sheriffe to pay before such day, all sums due to his Highness, wherewith
the Sheriff is chargeable by reason of his office, etc. and thereupon within
three months next after procure a quietus est in full discharge of his said
office and account.
etc. and every of them does covenant, promise and grant, to and with the said
A. B. his Heirs, etc. and every of them by these presents, that he the said C.
D. his Executors, etc. shall and will on this side the Feast day of the
Purification of our blessed Virgin Mary, which shall be in the year, etc. well
and truly discharge and pay unto his Highness the Lord Protector, his Heirs,
or Successors, all such sum and sums of money, duties and demands, as shall
be due unto his Highness, his Heirs or Successors, wherewith the said A. B.
shall be charged or chargeable as Sheriff, or by reason of the said Office of
Sherifwick of the said County of Y. and thereupon within three months next
ensuing shall procure unto the said A. B. his Heirs, etc. a sufficient
discharge and quietus est, in full discharge of his said office and account.

Provided always, That if the said C. D. his Deputy Proviso, that if the
undersheriff or his Deputy, etc. shall do or leave undone any thing belonging
to the office, whereby to charge the Sheriff above the sum of, etc. that then
it shall be lawful for the Sheriff to grant the office to another.
or Deputies, Attorney, or Attorneys, Clark, or Clarks, Deputy, or Deputies, or
any of them, at any time during the said office, shall commit, do, or suffer to
be done, any manner of act, or acts, thing or things whatsoever, or shall omit
or leave undone any act, or acts, thing or things whatsoever, belonging to the
said office of Sheriff of the said County of York, or by color of the said
Office; by reason whereof, the said A. B. his Executors, Administrators, or
Assigns, or his or their Goods or Chattels, Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments, or any of them, may in any wise be charged, or chargeable, above
the sum of, etc. That then, and from thenceforth it shall be lawful to, and
for the said A. B. to grant, assign, and depute the Execution of the said
office of Under-sheriffe, for the residue of the said time then to come, to any
person or persons: And that then, and from thenceforth, it shall be lawful to
and for all such Assignee and Deputy, to have and take all the sees and
commndities, profits, and advantages, from thenceforth to the said office
belonging, or in any wise appertaining, This Indenture or any thing therein
contained, or any other matter or cause concerning the Assignement or
deputation of the said Under-sherifwicke in any wise notwithstanding.

And the said A. B. for him, his Heirs, etc. does covenant and grant to and
with the Covenant by the Sheriff to deliver cancelled to the under-sheriffe,
all the security given by him for the execution of his office, or for the
saving harmless of the Sheriff, within three months after he shall have
procured a quietus est.
said C. D. his Heirs, etc. by these presents; That he the said A. B. his
Heirs, etc. shall or will deliver, or cause to be delivered to the said C. D.
his Heirs, etc. to be cancelled, all such Bonds, and Obligations, wherein any
person or persons shall be, or stand bound, for, or in the behalf of the said
C. D. to the said A. B. for, or in respect of the Execution of the said Office
of the said Under-sherifwicke, or for the saving harmless of the said A. B.
concerning the said Office of High Sheriff, within three months next after
the said C. D. his Heirs, etc. shall procure or deliver to the said A. B. his
Heirs, etc. a Quietus est out of his Highness Court of Exchequer, for his
discharge of his said Office, and the Bond of the said C. D. to remain for the
saving harmless of the said A. B. his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, of
Amerciaments and other Impositions touching the said office.

And whereas by an Agreement made An agreement between the undersheriff, and
one E. F. by which the under-sheriffe does acknowledge that he is to pass the
whole account, etc. and to get a discharge for the same, and for that purpose
the Sheriff has security: Nevertheless for the better security, the Sheriff
does by these presents bind the said E. F. etc.
between the said C. D. and one E. F. Gentleman, whom the said A. B. has
appointed Under-sheriffe for the County of YORK, it is acknowledged and
affirmed by the said C. D. before the sealing of these Indentures, that the
said C. D. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, is to pass the whole
account of the said A. B. and to execute, levy, gather up, extend, bring in,
and pay all such seisures, extents, process, Chequer silver, duties and
demands, charges, sum, and sums of money whatsoever, howsoever, or
wheresoever, as the said A. B. his Heirs, Executors, or Administrators, shall
be in any Court or Courts, place or places, any way charged or chargeable unto,
or withal as Sheriff of the said County of Y. at and according to the place
and places, time and times, limited in these Indentures, for the said C. D. to
do and perform, and thereupon shall also acordingly within six months next
ensuing the time within limited, procure unto the said A. B. his Heirs or
Assigns, a sufficient discharge, and quietus est in full discharge of the said
office and account.

And the said A. B. has to that end also security of two thousand pounds from
the said C. D. and his sureties, for the performance of the like covenant
amongst other covenants in the Indenture specified, which are made between the
said A. B. and the said C. D. And yet notwithstanding the said A. B. for his
better security does by these presents bind and tie the said E. F. his
Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, to the doing and performing of the
same. Also the said A. B. is well pleased and contented, and Covenant by the
Sheriff, not to charge the said E. F. etc. if he may be relieved and saved
harmless by the undersheriff and his sureties.
for himself, his Executors, and Administrators, does covenant, promise, and
grant, to and with the said E. F. his Executors, Administrators, and every of
them, that if the said A. B. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, and
Assigns, shall or may be relieved, saved harmless, or indempnified for and
concerning the fore-recited covenants and agreements by the said C. D. his
Executors, and Assigns, and his sureties, that then he the said A. B. his
Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, shall or will not take any benefit or
advantage of the said covenants and agreements against the said E. F. his
Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, or any his sureties, or any of
them. In witness whereof, etc.

Or Thus.
THIS INDENTURE made, etc. in the year, etc. Between A. B. of R. in the County
of York, Esquire (now high Sheriff of the said County) of the one part, and C. D.
of, etc. in the said County, Gentleman, of the other part. Whereas his
Highness, RICHARD, Lord Protector of the Common wealth of England, Scotland,
Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging. By his
Highness Letters Patents under the Great Seal of ENGLAND, bearing date the
seventeenth day of this instant November, have made, nominated, constituted,
assigned, and appointed the said A. B to be High Sheriff of the said County of
YORK during his pleasure.

Now this Indenture witnesses, That the said A. B. for the good opinion which
he has conceived of the said C. D. and of the trust and confidence which he
reposeth in him, has deputed, assigned, constituted, and ordained, and by
these presents does depute, assign, constitute, and ordain him the said C. D.
to be his Undersheriff, of, for, and in the said County of York, during all
the time that he the said A. B. shall be and remain Sheriff of the said
County, by force of the Letters Patents aforesaid, and does hereby authorize
the said C D. to serve, exercise, and execute the said Office of Under-sheriffe
of the said County under him the said A. B. in his name during all the time
aforesaid. And the said A. B, as far as in him lies, does also by these
presents grant unto the said C. D. that it shall, and may be lawful to and for
the said C. D. by force hereof to appear, answer, and serve, and minister as
Under-sheriffe of the said County of York, for and in the name of the said A.
B. as well in all places of the said County of York, as in all and every the
Court and Courts within the Commonwealth of England, and before all and every
the Justices of Oyer and Terminer, Justices of Assize and Jail-delivery,
Justices of the Peace, Coroners, and Escheators, and other Officers and
Commissioners of this Commonwealth where the said A. B. by virtue of the said
Office of Sheriff-wicke for the said County of YORK, shall be bound, or ought
to appear, answer, serve, or be attendant, and to break open, answer, return
and execute for him the said A. B. in his name all Process, Writs, Precepts,
Warrants, Mandates, and Commandments to the Sheriff of the said County
directed, or hereafter to be directed out of any the Courts aforesaid, or from
any the Justices, Coroners, or Escheators aforesaid, and to do, perform, and
execute for him the said A. B. and in his name all and every thing and things,
which by him the said A. B. by virtue of his Office of Sheriff-wicke of the
said County of YORK, is to be performed, executed, and done, saving always,
and Covenant, that the under sheriff shall not open, return, serve, or
execute any Writs for Knights for the Parliament. Nor open, execute, or answer
any Letters of his Highness, or the Council, directed to the Sheriff without
his special warrant.
excepting the said C. D. shall not by virtue thereof be authorized to open,
return, send, or execute any Writ or Writs for electing any Knights of the
Shire, or Burgess of Parliament for the said County of YORK, or any Borough
within the said County, nor open, execute, or answer any the Letters of his
Highness the LORD PROTECTOR, or the Council, to be directed unto the said
Sheriff of the said County of YORK, without the special warrant, direction
or Commandment of him the said A. B. for that purpose.

And further the said A. B. does by these presents grant unto the said C. D.
for the executing of the said Office, all the Fees, Duties, and Profits to him
due, arising and growing, by the County Courts to be kept within the said
County of YORK, and all other fees, rewards, duties, allowances and profits
incident to the office of Sheriffe-wicke, or thereunto belonging, for which the
said A. B. is or shall be allowed by the Common Laws of this Nation, Covenant,
that the Vnder-sheriffe shall receive all dues and fees to his own use,
without rendering any account to the said Sheriff.
or customs of the said County, either for the opening, returning, or
executing of any Writ, Precept, or Process, Warrant or Commandment
whatsoever; or for other executing of the said office, and which have not been
accepted heretofore, the ordinary Fees of any other his Bailiffs or other
Officers, to have and enjoy the said duties, fees, rewards, allowances and
other profits to his own use without an account to be rendered to the said A.
B. his Executors, or Administrators for the same.

And the said C. D. for and in consideration of the benevolence aforesaid, and
for the free gift and grant of the said A. B. does for himself, his Heirs,
Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, and every of them, covenant, promise,
grant and agree, to and with the said A. B. his Heirs, Executors, and
Administrators, and Assigns, by these presents, Covenant to execute the office
without committing extortion, etc.
that he the said C. D. shall and will at all times from and after the day of
the date of these presents, duly, diligently, lawfully and carefully serve the
said A. B. as his Deputy and Under-sheriffe of, in, and for the said County of
YORK, without doing or committing any kind of extortion, or wilful
mis-behaving of himself in the said office, and shall and will duly and
respectively execute the said office of Sheriff-wicke, under the name of the
said A. B. in all points, so far forth as these presents, the LAWS of the
LAND, or other License or Commandment of the said A. B. shall warrant or give
liberty, and shall and will in the name of the said A. B. and as his Deputy in
the said office of Undersheriff of the said County of Y. be answerable,
attendant and minister in all Courts of his Highness the Lord Protector by and
before the said Justices of Assize, Justices of the Peace, and all
Commissioners, Escheators, Coroners, and other Officers of his Highness the
Lord Protector, before whom the said A. B. shall be bound or required to
Covenant to execute, answer, and return all process, writs, precepts and
Commandmentsdirected to the Sheriff, etc.
Minister, answer, or be attendant in respect of the said office of Sheriffwick
for the said County, and shall and will execute and make answer, true and
sufficient return of all such process, writs, precepts, and commandments
directed from his said Highness, or from every or any of the said Courts,
Justices, Commissioners, Escheators and other Officers aforesaid, as shall be
delivered to, or come to the hands of him the said C. D. his Deputy or
Deputies, Assignee or Assigns, or shall and will discharge and save harmless
the said Covenant, to save the Sheriff, etc. harmless, from all fines, issues
and amerciaments, etc. for not executing, not filing, neglecting,
mis-executing, etc. any writs, process, precepts, warrants, or commandments
etc. or other misdemeanors.
A. B. his heirs, Executors, and Administrators, and his and their and every
of their Lands, Tenements, Goods and Chattels, of and from all fines, issues
and amerciaments, and other penalties, forseitures, pains corporal and
pecuniary whatsoever, whereby or wherewithal the said A. B. his heirs,
executors, or administrators, or his, or their Lands, Tenements, Goods or
Chatels shall or may be charged or chargeable for his the said A. B. or the
said C. D. not executing, not filing neglecting, mis-executing evil returning,
not serving, mis-returning, or mis-filing any of the said Writs, Process,
Precepts, Warrants, or Commandments aforesaid, or for the absence evil
attendance, or not attendance of the said A. B. or of the said C. D. or his
Deputy as aforesaid, or other misdemeanors in the executing, not executing, or
misexecuting of the said office in any thing which the said C. D. might by
virtue of these presents by himself or his Deputies execute or perform other
then from such fines, issues, amerciaments, and other penalties as shall be
imposed or adjudged upon or against the said A. B. for or in respect of any
offense, sault, or negligence by the said A. B. at any time after the day of
the date of these presents committed, omitted, or done, or to be committed,
omitted, or done by himself in his own person, or by any other, except the
said C. D. by his the said A B. his commandment or appointment without the
consent of the said C. D And that the said C. D. shall himself or his
sufficient Deputy or Covenant to keep all the County Courts of the said County
at usual times and places, etc. And to appoint Attorneyes or Deputies of
Record in the Court of Record And constitute Deputies in every Hundred, etc.
Deputies duly and lawfully keep, or cause to be kept within the said County of
Y. all and singular County Courts of the said County, at such times and places
as heretofore has been accustomed: And that he the said C D shall and will make
and appoint one or more Attorney or Attorneys, Deputy or Deputies of Record in
the Courts of Record, now commonly called the Upper Bench, Common Bench, and
Exchequer, and in all other Courts and Offices wherein Attorneys are commonly
appointed; And so shall and will ordain, appoint and make one or more able
Deputy or Deputies for him the said A. B. in every hundred within the said
County of Y. according to the Laws and Statutes in these cases provided, so
that the said A. B. shall not hereafter be liable to any penalty or forfeiture,
for want of any such Attorney or Deputy, And shall and will, Covenant to make
ready, at his proper charges, the place where the Assizes, etc. shall be holden.
at his own proper costs and charges, appear, and make ready all such place and
places where the Assizes, Jail-delivery, or Sessions shall be from time to time
holden, meet and convenient, Courts, Bars, and all other things necessary and
convenient for the Justices of Assize, and other Justices to keep their Assizes
and Jail-delivery and Sessions in, and shall and will from time to time give
notice in convenient time to the And shall give notice to the Sherif in
convenient time, of the times and places where his personal attendance shall
be requisite.
said A. B. of every such time and times, place, and places, where the
personal attendance of the said A. B. shall be requisite and necessary, so as
the said A. B. may be personally present at such times and places, when and
where his personal appearance and attendance shall be necessary.

Covenant to collect and levy to the use of his Highness the goods of felons
and fugitives and of persons outlawed, and of persons attaint and convict of
treason murder or felony. And to collect and gather up all fines,
amerciaments, extracts, certainties fee-farms, pipe-silver, etc which he shall
have warrant or authority to seize, levy, or collect, etc.
And furthermore, that the said C. D. by and during the continuance of the said
office, shall and will well and truly collect, levy, gather, and seize to the
use of his Highness the Lord Protector all the goods and chattels of selons
and fugitives, and of all persons outlawed, and put in Exigent, and of all
persons attainted and convicted of treason, murder, or felony, which shall
happen within the said County of Y. during the time aforesaid, which shall be
due or forfeited to his Highness the Lord Protector by any ways or means
aforesaid, And shall and will from time to time well and truly collect and
gather up all Fines, Amerciaments, Extracts, Certainties, Fee-farms,
Pipe-silver, for License, Concord for Fines, Green wax and all other sum and
sums of money, which to the collection of the said A. B. by reason of the
Sherifwick of the said County shall appertain or belong, and which the said C.
D. shall have warrant or lawful Authority to seize, levy, or collect, or which
he shall have notice of, and may reasonably come by; and thereof, and of every
part thereof, and of all other the issues and revenues of the said County, and
of all sums of money due, or hereafter during the continuance of the said
Office of Sheriffwick of the said County, does or may appertain, shall and will
to his Highness the L. Protector in the Court of Exchequer aforesaid, yield
and give just account, and asso that he And shall at such days and terms as
the said A. B is, or shall be required to enter into account of the Court of
Exchequer, touching the said office, the which the said C. D. shall do in the
name of the said A. B. Sheriff, etc.
the said C. D. his Executors or Administrators at such days and terms as he
the said A. B. is or shall be required to enter into account of the Court of
Exchequer, for or touching the said Office, the said C. D. shall and will enter
into account in the said Court of Exchequer in the name of the said A. B. for
and concerning the said Sherifwick of the said County of Y. in and upon which
account the said C. D. his Executors and Administrators, shall and will truly
answer, all such debts, duties, and sums of moneys, as the said C. D. his
Deputies, Officers, or servants, or any of the Bailiffs, of any of the Hundreds
of the said County shall have received, or might have received, or wherewith
the said A B. as Sheriff of the said County shall be any ways charged or
chargeable with upon the same account; And the same account shall and will, at
his the said C D. his own costs and charges, prosecute with effect, until And
the same account shall at his own costs and charges prosecute with effect,
until it be finished, without demanding any allowances of the Sheriff.
the same account be fully finished and concluded, without demanding any
allowance or allowances of the said A. B. his executors or administrators for
the same: And also that the said C. D. his executors and administrators shall
and will pay into the Receipt o^ Exchequer all such sums of money as upon the
said account shall be found in arrearages within one year next after the feast
of S. Michael next ensuing the date hereof, and in the name of the said A. B.
obtain a lawful discharge, And shall pay into the Exchequers receipt all such
sums of money, as upon the said account shall be found in arrearages, within
one year next after the feast of S. Michael next, etc. and in the name of the
said A. B. shall obtain a Quietus est out of the said Court of Exchequer for
him the said A. B etc. within one year next after the said feast of S. Michael,
etc. paying all fees, duties and charges, rewards, etc. which shall be required
of the said A. B. without demanding any allowance.
and Quietus est out of the said Court of Exchequer for him the said A. B. and
the same shall and will deliver unto the said A. B. his heirs, executors, or
assigns, for a full discharge of him the said A. B: his heirs, executors,
admistrators and assigns, or, and concerning the said Sherifwick of the said
County of Y. within one year next after the said feast of S. Mich. and that the
said C. D. his heirs, executors, administrators and asgnes, or some, or one of
them, shall and will, at some or one of their own proper costs and charges,
disburse and pay for the said A. B. all, and all manner of sees, duties,
charges, sum and sums of money, rewards, gratuities, and demands whatsoever,
which shall be required, demanded, or demandable of the said A. B. as due or
accustomed to be paid or given by the Sheriff of the said County, for, or by
reason of the said account, without demanding any allowance or allowances
therefore of the said A. B. his heirs, executors, administrators, or assigns,
and the said C. D. does further for the consideration aforesaid, for himself,
his heirs, executors, administrators, and assigns, and for every of them
covenant, promise, grant, and agree to and with the said A. B. his heirs,
executors, administrators and assigns, by these presents, that the said C D.
his executors or administrators, Covenant, that the said C. D. shall truly
satisfy and pay all sums of money as he or any Deputy, etc. shall at any time
levy and receive by virtue of any writ, Process of Extent, Cap. ad sat. Fieri
sac. Elegit, etc. against any former Sheriff, or any other writs of Execution,
etc. whatsoever, according to the true tenure of any such writ, etc.
shall and will from time to time, and at all times hereafter, well, duly, and
truly satisfy and pay all and singular such sum and sums of money as he the
said C. D or any deputy Clark or Clarks, Bailiff or Bailiffs, substitute or
substitutes under him, shall at any time and times, and all times levy and
receive, by virtue or reason of any writ or writs, Process of Extent,
Liberate, Capias ad satisfaciendum, Fieri facias, Elegit, Distringas nuper
Vice-comes, against any former Sheriff, or any other writ, or writs of
execution or warrants whatsoever, according to the purport and true tenure of
any such writ or writs, warrant or warrants respectively, and in such manner as
by the same respectively shall be limited, required or appointed, and shall
from time to time sufficiently save harmless and defend the said A. B. his
heirs, executors and administrators, of for and from all and every such sum
and sums of money as aforesaid.

And further, he the said C. D. his heirs, executors, Covenant, that the said
C. D. shall at his proper costs and charges conduct and safe delivery make of
all such prisoners as are, or shall be in the custody of the Goal, to such
persons, and to such places as the said A. B. by writ, warrant, etc. or by
virtue of his said office, be commanded or bound to deliver the same.
administrators, or assigns shall and will at his and their own proper costs
and charges, conduct and safe delivery make of all such prisoners as are, or
hereafter shall be in the Custody of the Goal for the said County of Y. to such
person and persons, and to such place and places as the said A. B. shall by
writ, warrant, or other precept or commandment, or by virtue and in respect of
his said office, be commanded or bound to deliver the same.

And shall at his proper charges execute, or cause to be executed, all such
persons as shall be convicted and put in execution, according to their several
judgments, etc.
And further shall and will also, at his and their own proper costs and charges,
execute, or cause to be executed, all such persons as at any time during the
time aforesaid, shall be convicted, and put in execution, according to their
several judgments, if the same person or persons be not by any lawful
authority reprieved into the said Goal.

And the said C. D. does further for himself, his Covenant that the said C. D.
shall up on the discharge and giving up of the said office, to such as shall
succeed, deliver by Indentune to be made between the said A. B. his
successors, to the successor of the said A. B. all such prisoners as then shall
be in the custody of the said A. B. with the causes of their detainments, and
imprisonments, and all such iron impleme^ts as belong to the Common Goal of the
said County, etc. And also all writs, process, warrants, and other things
which shall be in his custody in respect of the said office.
heirs, executors, administrators and assigns, and every of them, covenant
grant, promise and agree, to and with the said A. B. his heirs, executors,
administratos and assigns by these presents, that he the said C. D. his
executors, and administrators, shall and will upon the discharge and giving up of
the said office, to such as shall succeed in the said office of Sheriff-wick,
of, and for the said County of Y. in due form of law deliver, or cause to be
delivered by Indenture to be made between the said A. B. and his successors, in
the said office to the said successor of the said A. B. in the said office, or
to his Deputy for the time being, all such prisoners as then shall be in the
custody of the said A. B. or of any of his Deputies or Ministers, with the
causes of their detainments and imprisonments, and all such iron implements and
things as shall be in the custody of the said C. D. belonging to the common
Goal of the said County, or to the officers of the same. And also all writs
process, warrants and other things, which then shall be in his hands and
custody, in respect of the office of Sheriswick, of, in, and for the said
County of Y.

And the said C. D. dorh further for himself, Covenant, that the said C. D.
shall and will from time to time discharge defend and save harmless the said
A. B. etc. and his goods, lands, etc. against his Highness, and all other, of,
and from all manner of pains, corporal and pecuniary, forfeitures, fines, etc.
hereafter lawfully to be commenced, prosecuted, imposed, etc. of, or against
the said A. B. etc. or his lands, etc. for, or by reason of any escape of any
prisoner, now under execution or arrest, or hereafter shall be; or for not
appearing of any person arrested at the daylimited, etc. or for, or by reason
of any false return, not return, or mis-return of any warrant, etc. of the
said C. D. etc. or for negligence in executing, or not in executing of the said
office, by reason of the not levying, answering, or not paying of any sums of
money, etc. or by reason of any writ or writs of assistance, for the levying of
any sums of money wherewith the said A. B. shall or may be charged, etc.
his heirs, executors, administrators, and assigns, covenant, promise, grant,
and agree to and with the said A. B. his heirs, executors, and administrators
by these presents, that he the said C. D. his heirs, executors, or
administrators, shall and will from time to time, and at all times hereafter,
discharge, defend, and save harmless as well the said A. B. his heirs,
Executors, and administrators, and his and their lands and tenements, goods and
chattels, as well against his Highness the Lord Protector, and all other
whatsoever, of, and from all manner or pains corporal and pecuniary,
forfeitures, fines amerciaments, debts, accounts, duties, and demands
whatsoever hereafter lawfully to be commenced, prosecuted, imposed, demanded or
demandable of or against the said A. B. his heirs, executors, or
administrators, or his or their lands, goods, tenements and chattels, for, or
by reason of any escape of any prisoner, or prisoners whatsoever, now under
execution, or under arrest, or hereafter to be had in execution or under
arrest, for any manner of debt, damage, trespass, account, or other duties, or
wrong; or for any treason, selony, or other offense whatsoever, or for any
other, or by reason of not appearance of any person arrested at the day
limited, for the appearance in any Court or Courts, or before any Judge or
Judges, or Justices whatsoever; or for, or by reason of any false return, not
return, or mis-return of any writ, warrant, or process, or for any other
misbehaviour, negligence, or larges of the said C. D. his Bailiffs, or Officers
in executing, or negligence in executing, or not in executing of the said
office of Sheriswick for the said County of Y. of, or for, or by reason of the
not levying, answering, or not paying of any sum or sums of money, which shall,
or may, or ought to be collected or received by virtue, or by reason of the
said office of the Sheriswick of the said A. B. or having relation thereunto;
or by reason of any writ or writs Grant, that the said C. D. shall have to his
own use the benefits of such Bonds and Covenants as shall be taken of any
persons, with condition for their appearance in any Court, or elsewhere, and
of all obligations to be taken of any Bailiffs, etc. and all other bonds and
coven. which are, or shall be made to the said A. B. (except, etc.) and shall
and may sue and prosecute the same in the name of the said A. B. at the cost
and charges of the said C. D. and the money recovered to have to his own use,
without any account thereof, etc. The said A. B. not acquitting any of the said
bonds, judgments, etc. without the consent of the said C D. unless the said A.
B. shall be enjoined thereto by order, or course of law or equity.
of assistance for the levying of any sums of money wherewith the said A. B.
shall or may be charged or chargeable, of, or for any matter, clause, or thing
having relation to the said office; and to the intent that the said C. D. may
the better perform the execution of the said office, the said A. B. is
contented and pleased, and does hereby grant unto the said C. D. that he the
said C. D. shall have to his own use the benefit of such Bonds and Covenants as
shall be taken of any person or persons, wherein the same person or persons
shall become bound unto the said A. B. as Sheriff of the said County of Y. with
condition for their, of any of their appearance in any Court, or elsewhere,
before any Commissioners of his Highness the Lord Protector: And of all
Obligations taken, or to be taken of any Bayliffes, or their sureties, and of
all other Bonds and Covenants, which are or shall be made to the said A. B. as
the Sherif of the said County of York (except the Covenants herein contained)
and the Bonds and Obligations taken, or to be taken for the performance of the
said Covenants, and every of them (except before excepted) and shall and may
sue and prosecute the same in the name of the said A. B. his Executors, and
Administrators, at the proper costs and charges of the said C. D. his
Executors. Administrators and Assigns, and the moneys thereof and thereby
recovered, to have, take and detain, to his and their own use and uses,
without any account thereof, to yield or make to the said A. B. his Heirs,
Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, all which said Bonds and Covenants
(except before excepted) he the said A. B. does for himself, his Heirs,
Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, covenant, promise, grant and agree to
and with the said C. D. his Executors and Administrators by these presents,
that neither he the said A. B. nor his Heirs, Executors, or Administrators, or
any of them, shall release, acquit, nor discharge the said Bonds or Covenants.
nor any action, plaint or suite thereupon to be brought or any judgment or
execution thereupon to be had, without the assent of the said C D. his
Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, unless he the said A. B. his Heirs,
Executors, or Administrators, shall be enjoined thereunto by order or course of
Law or equity.

And the said C. D. does for himself, his Heirs, Covenant, that the said C.
D. shall and will from time to time keep harmless the said A. B his, etc. of
and from all costs and charges and damages which may arise by reason of any
bill in equity, or of any Nonsuit or judgment obtained by any person, of, or
upon any of the said covenants, obligations, or bonds to be taken for
appearance as aforesaid, or by reason or means of removing any action or suit
in the name of the said A. B. upon the same Covenants, etc.
Executors, and Administrators, covenant, promise and grant, to and with the
said A. B. his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators by these presents, that he
the said C. D. his Executors and Administrators, shall and will from time to
time, and at all times hereafter, save, defend, and keep harmless the said A.
B. his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, and his and their lands,
tenements, goods, and chattels, of and from all costs, charges, and damages
which may arise and happen, by reason of any bill in equity, or of any Nonsuit
or judgment obtained by any person or persons of, or upon any of the said
Covenants, Obligations, or Bonds, to be taken for appearance as aforesaid, or
by reason or means of removing any action or suit in the name of the said A.
B. his Heirs, Executors, or Administrators, against any person or persons upon
the same Covenants, Obligations, or any of them.

And whereas it is agreed by and between the said parties to these presents,
that the said C. The said C. D. is bound to the said A. B. in the sum of 500
l. for the performance of the covenants, etc. aforesaid, on the part and
behalf of the said C. D. to be performed procuring five sufficient Sureties to
be bound in 100 l. a piece, with the like conditions.
D. shall become bound by obligation to the said A. B. in the penal sum of 500
l. conditioned for the true performance of the Covenants, articles, and
agreements in these presents contained, on the part and behalf of him the said
C. D. his heirs, executors, and administrators, to be performed, and shall
also procure five sufficient Sureties, before the thirtieth day of January next
ensuing the date hereof, to become bound unto the said A. B. in the several
penal sums of 100 l. a piece, with the like conditions as aforesaid.

Now the said A. B. is contented and pleased, A. B. grants to the said C. D.
that he the said A. B. shall within the space of one year next after the said
C. D. shall deliver, or cause to be delivered to the said A. B. the said
Quietus est, being discharged and saved harmless from all payments, penalties,
fines, etc. upon the reasonable request of the said C. D. shall deliver or
cause to be delivered up the said obligations so to be made by the Sureties of
the said C. D. etc.
and does by these presents, for himself, his heirs, executors, administrators
and assigns, covenant, promise, and grant, to and with the said C. D. his
heirs, executors, administrators, and assigns by these presents, that he the
said A B. his heirs, executors, or administrators, or some, or one of them,
shall and will within the space of one year next after the said C. D. his
heirs, executors, or administrators, shall deliver or cause to be delivered
unto the said A. B. his heirs, executors, administrators, or assigns, the said
Quietus est, before in these presents mentioned, the said A. B. his heirs,
executors, and administrators, being first sufficiently and reasonably
discharged, and saved harmless, of, and from all the payments, penalties,
fines, amerciaments, damages, dangers, and other demands before in these
presents mentioned upon the reasonable request of the said C. D. his heirs,
executors, or administrators, shall deliver or cause to be delivered up the
said Obligations, so to be made by the Sureties of the said C. D. as aforesaid,
to such Surety or Sureties respectively, and to their respective heirs,
executors, or administrators to be cancelled: In witness whereof, etc.

The form of the Condition.
THE CONDITION, etc. That whereas His Highness the Lord PROTECTOR, etc. by his
Letters Patents bearing date the, etc. in the year of our Lord, etc. did
apoint, nominate, and make the within named A. B. High Sheriff of the County
of York, which said A. B. afterward by his Indenture bearing date, etc. did
ordain, depute, constitute, and make the within bounden C. D. his Deputy and
Under Sheriff of the said County of Y. as by the same Indenture more plainly
at large does, and may appear; If the said C. D. his heirs, etc. and every of
them do at all times hereafter, and from time to time, for ever clearly acquit,
exonerate, and discharge, or otherwise sufficiently save and keep harmless the
said A. B. his heirs, executors, and administrators, and every of them, and
his and their goods, chattels, lands, tenements, possessions, and
hereditaments, and every of them, and of, and from all and every of the sum
and sums of money wherewith the said A. B shall be charged, by reason of the
said office of Sheriffwick, and shall fall out not to be answered upon the
accounts; and of and from all action and actions, plaint or plaints, or debt,
or debts that shall be commenced against the said A. B. his heirs, etc. by
reason of any escape, or escapes, committed of any prisoner or prisoners
arrested, and not committed to the common Goal of the said County, or
afterward by the act or negligence of the said C. D. or any the Bailiffe or
Bailiffes, or any his servants or Deputies, and of and from all actions, suits,
costs, losses, damages, hindrances, and demands whatsoever, which shall or may
at any time or times hereafter come, grow, or be to or against the said A. B
his, etc. on his or their goods, chattels, lands, tenements, possessions and
hereditaments, and every or any of them, for, or by reason of the premises, or
any of them, That then this present Obligation, etc.

Or thus:
THE CONDITION, etc. That whereas the above named A. B. Sheriff of the County
of Y. has assigned and deputed the above named C. D. his Undersheriff: If
therefore the said C. D. the above bound E. F. and H I. their heirs,
executors, and administrators, and every of them do at all time and times
hereafter, save and keep harmless and indempnified as well the said A. B. his
heirs, executors, administrators, and assigns, and every of them, as also the
lands, tenements, hereditaments, goods and chattels of the said A. B. of, for,
touching, and concerning the returns and executions of all such Process,
Writs, and Warrants of what nature soeverr they be, as are, or shall be
hereafter directed to the Sheriff of the said County of Y. and shall be
brought and delivered, or offered to be delivered to the said C. D. during the
time that the said A. B. shall be Sheriff of the said County; And of, and from
all issues, fines, and amerciaments which shall happen to be imposed or taxed
upon the said A. B. for and concerning the not executing, wrongful executing,
or detaining in his hands any Writs, Process, or Warrants, and of, for, and
concerning all escapes of all, and every person or persons that shall be
arrested or apprehended by virtue of any such Process, Writ, or Warrant,
during the time that the said A. B. shall continue Sheriff of the said County
of Y. And also if the said C. D. E. F. and H. I. their heirs, executors, and
administrators, and every of them shall save harmless and indempnified the
said A. B. and his heirs and assigns, and his and their lands, goods, and
chattels, of, for, or concerning all such account and accounts as the said A.
B. is or shall be charged withal as Sheriff of the said County of Y. to his
highness the Lord Protector, his heirs, or successors in any of his
Highnesses Courts, and of all sums of money, which shall be levied or received
by the said C. D. as under Sheriff of the said A. B. or any Bayliffe or other
person by the direction or assent of the said C. D. to the use of His Highness
the LORD PROTECTOR his Heirs or Successors, That then, etc.

But they are commonly made as all other Bonds are for the performance of
Covenants, in this manner.
THE CONDITION, etc. That if the above bounden C. D. do well and truly observe,
perform, fulfill, and keep, all and singular Covenants, Grants, Articles,
payments, promises and agreements, which on the part and behalf of the said C.
D. his heirs, executors, etc. or any of them, as are to be observed, performed,
sulfilled, or kept, contained, written, declared, or specified in one pair of
Indentures, bearing date, etc. made between the said C. D. of the one party,
and the within named A. B. of the other party, according to the tenure,
purport, true intent and meaning of the said Indentures, That then, etc.

An Indenture for the setting over of Prisoners, and Writs between two Sheriffs.
THIS INDENTURE made the tenth day of December in the year, etc. Between A. B.
Esquire late Sheriff of the, County of York, of the one part, and C. D.
Esquire, now Sheriff of the said County, on the other part, WITNESSES, That
the said A. B. by virtue of his Highnesses Writ of discharge of his late office
to him directed, has delivered and set over unto the said C. D. these Writs
following; That is to say, a Capias against L. M. returnable in 8 days of S.
Hillary at the suit of N. O. etc. Together with the bodies of E. F. in
execution at the suit of I. H. for a debt of an hundred pounds, and G. R. at
the suit of R. S. in execution for forty pounds, and W. P. in execution as well
at the suit of S. I. for a debt of ten pounds, as also at the suit of T. W. for
a debt of thirty pounds, etc. In witness whereof, etc.

An Indenture for the Knights of the Parliament.
THIS INDENTURE made in the full County of York, held at the Castle of York in
the said County on Monday the three and twentieth day of October in the year,
etc. Between A. B. Esquire, Sheriff of the said County of the one part, and C.
D. Esquire, E. F. Esquire, G. H. Esquire, etc. and many other persons to the
said County, and Electors of two Knights of the Parliament in the Writ to this
Indenture annexed specified, of the other part: who as the greater part of the
whole County aforesaid, then there being, sworn and examined, according to the
force, form, and effect of diverse Statutes thereupon set forth and provided,
chose R. S. and T. W. Knights within the said County Commorant, Knights able,
most fit, and discreet, giving and granting to the two aforesaid Knights, full
and sufficient power for themselves and the whole County aforesaid, to do, and
consent to those things which at the Parliament in the said Writ contained by
the Common-Counsell, etc. shall happen to be ordained, in businesses in the
said Writ specified. In testimony whereof the one part of the Indenture
remains with his Highness the Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of
England, Scotland and Ireland, and the dominions and territories thereunto
belonging, the parties abovesaid have put their seals, to the other part of the
same Indenture the Sheriff aforesaid has put his seal. Dated the day, year
and place abovesaid, etc.

An Indenture upon choosing of a Burgess to serve in Parliament.
THIS INDENTURE, etc. Between A. B. Esquire, High Sheriff of the County of Y.
of the one part, and C. D. and E. F. etc. Burgesses, and Borough men of the
Borough and Town of S. etc. of the other part, Witnesses, That the said
Burgesses and Borough men, according to the Proclamation made by the said
Sheriff for the election of Burgesses in every Borough or Town within the said
County, have the day of the date hereof at S. aforesaid, elected, named, and
appointed C. D. and E. F. Esquires, Burgesses of the said Town of S. and they
to give their attendance, advise and counsel at the high Court of Parliament to
be holden at Westminster the two and twentieth day of August next ensuing the
date of these presents. In witness whereof the said Burgesses and Borough-men
to these present Indentures have put their seals, and subscribed their names
the, etc.

A Condition for the executing of a Goalership.
THE CONDITION, etc. That if the within bounden C. D. his Executors and
Assigns, do well and truly execute and use the office of Goalership at the
Castle of York for the said County, and also do well, surely, and safely keep
all and every such person and persons, now being in the prison of the
Commonwealth of England in the said County of Y. or that hereafter shall be
committed to the said Goal, or to the said C. D. and further, that if the said
C. D. his Executors or Assigns, at his or their proper costs and charges, do
safely carry, bring, and re-carry all persons in the said Goal now being, or
that at any time hereafter shall be prisoners there, to any such place or
places as the said Sheriff, or his assigns shall appoint or name within the
said County of Y. and furthermore be truly diligent, and attending, aiding, and
assisting the said Sheriff, and his Under-Sheriffe, and Deputies, at all and
every time and times when any execution shall be done, within the said County,
to, and upon any person or persons, attainted, or to be attainted for treason,
selony, murder, or heresy, or otherwise, or for any other cause, unto the end
of the execution: And further, if the said C. D. his Executors and Assigns do
discharge and save harmless the said Sheriff his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, against His Highness and the Commonwealth of
England, and against all and every other person and persons, and from all
manner of escapes, damages, and losses, fines, issues, and amerciaments, which
by the negligence or otherwise of the said C. D. his Executors, or Assigns,
that the said Sheriff shall or may in any wise be charged or encumbered with,
or ought to be charged by the Law, by reason of the office of the Sheriffwick
of the said County from time to time, and do content and pay to the said
Sheriff; his Executors, or Assigns, all such sum and sums of money, as
the said Sheriff, his Heirs, Executors, or Assigns, ought to pay to his
Highness the Lord Protector, or to any other person or persons, or be due to
the said Sheriff, by reason of the said Office of Goalership, That then, etc.

Or Thus.
THe Condition, etc. That if the above bounden A. B. Jailer to the said
Sheriff of the County of York, do from time to time receive and take into his
ward and custody within the Jail at the Castle of York, in the County of
York aforesaid, all such person and persons, prisoner and prisoners, which
shall be committed or sent to the said Jail, or committed to the ward and
custody of the said Jailer, by the said Sheriff or his Deputy, or by any
Justice or Justices of Peace, or by any other having lawful authority to
commit persons or prisoners to the said Jail, and the said persons and
prisoners so committed as aforesaid, do well and truly, duly and sufficiently
by his own proper person, or by his sufficient Deputy or Deputies, so keep,
that the said Sheriff, his Heirs and Executors, and all the Lands, Tenements,
Goods and Chattels of the said Sheriff be saved harmless from all losses,
penalties, amerciaments and damages whatsoever, as well against his Highness
the Lord Protector, etc. As also against all other person and persons, of, for,
and concerning the custody and keeeping of the said Jail and Prisoners within
the said Castle of York, or elsewhere in the said County of York, and
likewise do discharge, save and keep harmless the said Sheriff, his Heirs
and Executors, and all those his Lands, Tenements, Goods and Chattels from time
to time, and at all times hereafter, of and from all and every escape and
Escapes, as well of convict persons, Reprieves and Felons, and of all other
persons now committed for any contempts, condemnations, trespasses, or
misdemeanors which may happen, or chance hereafter to be committed to the said
Jail, for any the causes aforesaid, during the time the said C. D. shall be
Sheriff of the County of York, and likewise that the said A. B. or any other
by his consent, privity, or appointment, in any wise let to bail or mainprize,
any prisoner or prisoners to him committed as aforesaid, not baylable by the
Laws of the Nation, without the special commandment or appointment of the
said Sheriff; And if the said A. B. or his sufficient Deputy, be ready to give
his attendance upon the said Sheriff and his Deputy at all times necessary and
convenient, and all and every lawful thing and things that he shall be
required to do by the said Sheriff or his Deputy touching or concerning the
etc. affairs and business wherewith the said Sheriff is, or shall be charged
or employed, in or about the keeping of the said Jail or Prison, that then,
etc.

Articles betwixt the High Sheriff, and a Bayliffe of a Wapentake, or Hundred.
ARticles of Agreement indented and made the tenth day of March, in the year,
etc. Between A. B. of R. in the County of Y. Esquire, High Sheriff of the said
County, of the one part, and C. D. of A. in the said County, Gentleman, of the
other part.

To be bailiff during the pleasure of the Sheriff.
Whereas the said A. B. by his deputation under the seal of his Office, has
constituted and appointed the said C. D. to be his Bailiff within the Wapentake
of Ewcrosse, to execute and enjoy the same Office only during the pleasure of
the said A. B. Now it is covenanted and agreed between the said parties, and
the said C. D. for himself, his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, for
the consideration aforesaid does covenant and grant unto, and with the said A.
B. his Heirs, Executors, and Admnistrators in manner following.

First, That the said C. D. shall and will during such time as he shall execute
the said Office, well and sufficiently perform and do whatsoever to the said
office belongs, as well within the said Wapentake as without; And shall with
speed and secrecy serve He must execute every precept and warrant with speed
and secrecy, making a true return by the space of four days before the
respective returns thereof, and keep harmless the Sheriff his, etc. of and
from all escapes, etc.
and execute, or cause to be served and executed all and every precept and
warrant to him directed by the said high Sheriff or Under-sheriffe. And shall
make a true return thereof to the said Undersheriff, or his Deputy by the
space of four days before the respective returns thereof: And shall likewise
from time to time save and keep harmless the said high Sheriff, his Heirs,
Executors, and Administrators, Lands, Tenements, Goods and Chattels, of and
from all Escapes, Amerciaments, Fines and sums of money, or other charges and
incumberances whatsoever, which shall or may be imposed or happen upon the said
high Sheriff, for or concerning the executing, or returning of them, or any of
them.

2 Item, That he the said C. D. his Executors, or Assigns, shall well and
truly He shall truly pay to the Vnder-sheriffe the Blanck-farme within the said
Wapentake within six days next after she Annunciation, and St. Michael, and
shall at his own charge levy and collect all sums of money of what nature
soever, within the said Wapentake, as are due to his Highness, or etc.
pay, or cause to be paid to the said Under-sheriffe or his Assigns at his
Office in the City of Y. or lese-where the Blanck-farme due to his Highness
within the Wapentake, within 6 days next after the Annunciation of our blessed
Virgin Mary, and Saint Michael the Archangel by equal portions, and shall
likewise at his own proper costs and charges faithfully and truly levy,
collect and gather all and every sum and sums of money of what nature soever
within the said Wapentake, as are, and shall from time to time grow due and
payable to his Highness, or which are and shall be within the charge of the
said Sheriff, and estreated, and given in charge to the collection of the said
C. D. or his Assigns, and shall within three weeks next after any Estreat and
warrant to him directed for the levying and collecting thereof pay, or cause
the same to be paid unto the said Sheriff or his Deputy at Y. or elsewhere,
or make his personal appearance there to give a just account, for what cause
he has not collected nor levied the same.

3. Item, That the said C. D. shall diligently enquire He shall enquire of the
goods and chattels of Felons, Fugitives, of persons outlawed and condemned,
waises, estrayes, etc. delivering them to the Sheriff within one month next
after the seizure.
of the Goods and Chattels of all Felons and Fugitives, and of all persons
outlawed and condemned, and of goods and chattels waived, estrayed, and
escheated within the same Wapentake. And the same shall lawfully inventory and
seize into his Highnesse's hands as Bailiff of the said Wapentake, and shall
likewise truly account for, and deliver, or cause to be delived unto the hands
of the said Sheriff or his Deputy the goods so seized and inventoried, within
one month next after such seizure and inventory made.

4. Item, That the said C. D. shall from time to He shall give lawful summons
to all Jurors and Freeholders as shall be appointed to appear at the Assizes,
Justices of the Peace, etc. attending personally himself at the Assizes,
Sessions, etc. to make his just returns, etc.
time give lawful summons and warning to all such persons, Jurors, and
Freeholders, as shall from time to time by warrant from the said High Sheriff
or Under-sheriffe, be appointed to appear before his Highness his Justices of
Assize or Gaole-delivery, Justices of the Peace, or before any other person or
persons, having any lawful authority to summon the same persons, and that he
himself shall personally attend at the same Assize and Gaole-delivery,
Sessions of the Peace, and at the County Court, to make his just returns, and
do all the services belonging to the Bayliffe of a Wapentake, if he be in
health, or able to perform the same, or otherwise by his sufficient Deputy to
be allowed under the High Sherifs seal of Office.

5. Item, That he the said C. D. shall before the twelfth day of January next
coming, He shall deliver before the twelfth of January next unto the hands of
the said Sheriff, etc. a paper book fair written, containing the names, etc.
of all Freeholders resiant in the Wapentake: And shall save and keep
harmless the Sheriff his, etc. from all issues and amerciaments, etc. for not
returning or misreturning of any Freeholder.
deliver, or cause to be delivered unto the hands of the said High Sherif, or
Under-sherif, one paper book fairly written, containing the names, sir-names
and additions, together with the dwelling places of all such Freeholders as
are now dwelling and resident within the said Wapentake of Ewcross, and shall
likewise save and keep harmless the said Sherif his lands and tenements,
goods and chattels of and from all issues and amerciaments which shall or may
be charged upon them, or any of them, for and by reason of returning, not
returning, or mis-returning of any Freeholder or Freeholders by the said C.
D. or his Deputies.

6. Item, That the said C. D. his Deputy or Deputies, He shall bring or cause
to be brought all persons by him arrested, etc. And upon all arrests of persons
baylable, take bond with 2 sureties for appearance, and shall deliver the bonds
to the under Sheriff six days before the days of appearance.
shall bring or cause to be brought to the Castle of Y. all such person and
persons, as shall by them or any of them be arrested by virtue of any Warrant,
or Warrants, upon any Capias utlegatum, or Capias ad satisfaciendum: And that
likewise upon all Arrests of persons baylable take sufficient bond with two
sureties, for their appearance at the return of the Writ, and the said Bonds
so taken shall deliver unto the Under-sherif or his Deputy, by the space of
six days before the respective days of their several appearances.

7. Item, That neither the said C. D. nor any of his Deputies make any sale of
any He shall not sell any goods by him taken, etc. nor shall keep them by the
space of four days, but shall deliver them to the under-sheriffe with the
appraisements.
goods by him or them, or either of them, seized or taken for any of his
Highnesses debts, or upon any execution between party and party. Nor shall
detain or keep in his or their hands any goods so taken by the space of four
days, but shall bring, send, or deliver the same unto the said Under-sherif,
his Deputy or Deputies with a true Copy of their appraisements, and the names
of the appraisers, in case the owners or some friends for them shall deny to
take them as they are apprized, or to pay the debts and sums, for which they
were so seized and taken, together with the reasonable charges expended
concerning the same.

He shall within 6 days after notice to him given by the Sheriff, come to his
office to make a perfect account for all fees for arrests, etc.8. Item, That
the said C. D. his Deputy and Deputies dues, profits, etc. during the time he
has continued baylif, etc. returning the overplus to him of the sums so
deposited by him.
and every of them shall and will from time to time within six days after
notice or command to him or them given by the said High Sheriff or his Deputy,
repair and come to his Office at Y. or elsewhere, and then and there make a
just and perfect account, for and concerning all Fees as well for Arrests and
Perquisites of Courts, as for all other dues and profits unaccounted
whatsoever, for and which he and they or any of them, shall have received and
taken, during such times as he the said C. D. shall continue Bayliffe of the
said Wapentake, which of right belongs unto his Highness, or the said now
Sheriff, or his Under-sheriffe. And the said high Sheriff or Under-sheriffe
upon his true account so be made by the said C. D. shall return unto him the
said C. D. all the overplus of the said sum so deposited by the said C. D. to
the said high Sheriff or his lawful Deputy, as shall remain in his the said
Sheriffs hands after the perfecting of the said account.

9. Item, That he the said C. D. shall after the several He shall after the
several general Assizes and Sessions of the peace be ready in his own person
to conduct the prisoners condemned to the place of Execution, and shall aid the
Sheriff to apprehend Traitors, etc.
general Assizes and Jail delivery, and Sessions of the Peace, be present and
ready in his own person, safely to carry and conduct the prisoners condemned
to the place of Execution, and not to depart thence without license from the
high Sheriff, or his Undersheriff; And shall likewise from time to time so
often as he shall be thereto required by the said Sheriff, Under-sheriffe, or
his Deputies, be ready to aid and assist them or any of them, for the
apprehending of any Traitor, Priest, or Felon, or for any other matter or thing
whatsoever, concerning his Highnesses service within the said County. In
witness whereof, etc.

The Bond for the performance of these Articles is ordinarily made as all other
bonds are for the performance of Covenants.

A Bond entered to a Sheriff for ones appearance in the Common Bench.
KNow all men by these presents, that we A. B. of S. in the County of Y. Gent.
C. D. of R. in the said County, Esquire, and E. F. of T. in the said County,
Yeoman, are holden and firmly bound to G. M. Esquire High Sheriff of the County of
Y. in 30 l. of good and lawful money of England, to be paid to the said G. M.
his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns; To the which payment well and truly
to be made, we bind us and every of us by himself, for the whole, and in the
whole, our Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, firmly by these presents.
Sealed with our seals, dated the twentieth day of June, in the year, etc.

The Condition.
THe Condition of, etc. That if the above bounden A. B. do appear before the
Justices of the Common Bench at Westminster in the morrow of the holy Trinity
to answer M. N Gent. in a plea of Debt. That then this present Obligation to be
void, etc.

In the Upper bench, thus.
THe Condition, etc. That if the above bounden A. B. do appear before his
Highness the Lord Protector of the Commonwealth, etc. at Westminster on
Saturday next after the morrow of St. Martin, to answer to M. N. of a plea of
Trespass: That then, etc.

Note that Upper Bench Writs are always returnable upon a day certain; as on
Monday, or Tuesday, or Thursday, etc. next after the morrow of St. Martin, etc.
and are always in trespass: But Common Bench Writs are in Debt, Trespass,
Account, Trespass upon the Case, etc. as the case requires, and are not
returnable on a day certain, but returnable on the morrow of the Holy Trinity,
or the morrow of St. Martin, etc.

An Indenture of Covenants to a Sheriff to save him harmless for returning a
Devastavit against an Executor.
THIS INDENTVRE made, etc. Between Sir A. B. Knight, High Sheriff of the
County of Y. and C. D. Gentleman, Under-sheriffe of the said high Sheriff of
the said County of Y. of the one part, and E. F. of, etc. of the other part.
Witnesses, That whereas the said E. F. has obtained and sued out of his
Highness Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, his Highnesses Writ of Fieri
facias to the said Sheriff directed, bearing Test the 29 day of June now last
past, and returnable in the said Court in 8 days of the holy Trinity last past,
thereby commanding the said high Sheriff to levy of the Goods and Chattels
which late were of P. R. of, etc. deceased, at the time of his death in the
hands of W. T. Executor of the Testament and last Will of the said P. R. the
Testator a certain debt of 200 l. which the said E. F. in the said Court has
recovered against the said W. T. the Executor, as by the said Writ now
delivered to the said Sheriff in form of Law to be executed, more at large
appears.

And whereas the said E. F. has informed the said high Sheriff and
Under-sheriffe, that diverse goods, chattels, and debts, which were the said P.
R. the Testator at the time of his death, to the value of his said debt of 200
l after the death of the said P. R. the Testator, came to the hands of the said
W. T. the Executor within the said County to be administered; and that the
Executor since the death of the said P. R. the Testator, came to the hands of
the said W. T. the Executor within the said County to be administered: and that
the Executor since the death of the said P. R. the Testator has wasted the
same, so that unless the said Sheriff shall upon the said Writ of Fieri
facias make his return, to this or the like effect, viz. That the said Goods
and Chattels which were the said P. R. the Testator at the time of his death to
the value of the said two hundred pounds, did after the death of the Testator
come to the hands of the said Executor within the said County of Y. to be
administered; and that the said Executor has wasted the same, so that the said
Sheriff cannot by virtue of the said Writ of Fieri facias do execution
thereupon of the goods and chattels as is thereby required; And so that also
the said E. F. cannot by course of Law have the benefit of his said recovery:
whereupon the said High Sheriff and his Undersheriff, being desirous to do
what to them or either of them, by virtue of their said Office appertains,
for the surtherance of Justice in that behalf, giving credit to the said
assertion and affirmation of the said E. F. the said High Sheriff at his
earnest request has upon the said Writ of Fieri facias in form of Law returned
to his Highnesses Justices of the said Court of Common Pleas, a Devastavit of
the Goods and The returning the Devastavit*
Chattels, which were the said Testators at the time of his death, and came to
the hands of the said Executor to be administered to the said value of the said
debt of two hundred pounds. Now therefore these presents do witness, that the
said E. F. and T. P. for the indemnity and saving harmless of the said
High-Sheriffe and Under-Sheriffe, and of their and either of their Clerks, of,
for, and concerning the making of the said return, in case the assertion and
information of the said E. F. be not true, do by these presents, Covenant and
grant jointly and severally for themselves and every of them, and for their and
every of their Executors and Administrators, to and with the said A. B. and C.
D. and either of them, their and either of their Executors and Administrators,
that they the said E. F. and T. P. or some of them shall and will at all times
hereafter, discharge, acquit, and save harmless the said A. A covenant to the
high Sheriff and the undersheriff to save them and their Clerks harmless,
touching the return of the Devastavit, and to pay all costs, etc. that they
shall be put unto.
B. and C. D. and either of them, their, and either of their Clerk or Clerks,
and the Heirs, Executors, and Administrators of them and every of them for,
and concerning all, and all manner of actions, suits, complaints, losses,
vexations and troubles whatsoever, which shall at any time hereafter be
commenced, attempted, brought, or prosecuted against them, or any of them by
the said P. R. the Executor, his Executors or Administrators, or by any other
person or persons, touching or concerning the said return, or by reason or
occasion thereof: And shall and will from time to time, bear and pay to to
them the said Sir A. B. and C. D. all such sum and sums of money, damages,
costs, and expenses, as against them, or either of them, or against their, or
either of their Executors, or Administrators shall be adjudged, decreed or
ordered, or which they or any of them shall from time to time by reason or
occasion aforesaid, be put unto, or shall necessarily lay out, or be enforced
to pay by reason They bind themselves in the penalty of 300 l. for the
performance of it.
of any such action, suit, complaint, molestation, vexation or trouble: And for
the true performance of all and singular which said premises, the said E. F.
and T. P. do by these presents bind themselves jointly and severally, and
their and either of their Heirs, Executors, and Administrators to the said Sir
A. B. and C. D. in the sum of 300 l. of good, etc. to be paid to them or
either of them, their, or either of their Executors or Administrators, if
default or breach of the Covenant aforesaid shall be made. In witness, etc.

A discharge to the Sheriff (for a Prisoner) from him to whom the prisoner is
indebted.
KNow all men by these presents, that I A. B. of C. in the County of York have
remised, released, acquitted and discharged, and by these presents do for me
my Heirs, Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, remise, release, and fully
and absolutely acquit and discharge E. F. high Sheriff of the said County of
Y. and G. H. his Undersheriff their Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, of
and from all, and all manner of Escapes, as well voluntary as negligent, and of
and from all actions, cause and causes of actions, for or concerning the
enlarging, or setting at liberty of the body of L. M. taken at my suite by
virtue of a Capias ad satisfac. to the said Sheriff directed, of ten pounds
debt, and forty shillings costs of suit, returnable in the Court of
Common Pleas in Easter Term last past, and I the said A. B. do hereby
discharge the said Sheriff from all actions, reckonings, duties and demands
whatsoever, concerning the executing of the said Capias ad satisfac. In witness
whereof, etc.

Or Thus;
KNow all men by these presents, that I A. B. of, etc. have remised, released,
and quit claimed, and by these presents do remise, release, and quit claim unto
C. D. Esquire now Sherif of the said County of Y. all and all manner of actions,
suits, troubles and incumberances whatsoever, which I might, may, or ought to
have against him for or concerning the discharging, or setting at liberty L. M.
of N. in the said County, Gent. being arrested and imprisoned upon a Capias ad
satisfaciendum out of the Court of Common Pleas at Westminster for an hundred
pounds debt, and twenty shillings costs, at my suit, returnable from the day of
Easter in one month last past. In witness whereof I have hereunto set, etc.

A Condition that the Sheriff executing a Writ, may detain, out of the goods
and lands extended so much money, etc.
THE CONDITION, etc. That whereas the within bound A. B. the day of the date
hereof, has delivered to the hands of the within named C. D. and E. F. the
Writ of execution, for levying and extending the goods, chattels, and moiety of
the lands, tenements, and hereditaments of one G. H. of, etc. to, and for the
use of the said A. B. whereby the same A. B. may be satisfied of the sum of
two hundred pounds mentioned in the said Writ, if in case the said C. D. and E.
F. or either of them, do lawfully execute, or cause to be lawfully executed,
the said Writ, according to the nature, meaning, and purport thereof, by the
impannelling of twelve lawful and indifferent men to be sworn of the contents
of the said Writ, if then the said A. B. his Executors and Administrators, do
quietly permit and suffer the said Sheriff or under Sheriff to have, take,
receive and detain, to his and their own proper use and behoof, out of such
moneys, goods, or chattels as shall be had, levied, or received by virtue of
the said Writ, or the execution thereof, so much in lawful money of England,
or other benefit as they or the said Sheriff or under Sheriff, or one of
them, shall think reasonable or sufficient, for their satisfaction, of and for
such travel, pains or charges, as they shall be at in and about the execution
of the said Writ, and extent thereupon to be had or made, otherwise within,
etc. next after the said writ shall be executed, and return made thereof
accordingly, do pay, or cause to be paid unto the said Sheriff, or under
Sheriff or their Deputy or Deputies so much lawful money of England, as they
shall for the causes aforesaid reasonably demand, That then, etc.

A Bargain and sale of Goods made by the Sheriff, by virtue of his office.
TO all faithful people, to whom this present writing shall come, Sir H. B.
Knight, Sheriff of the County of Y. greeting. Whereas by virtue of his
Highnesses Writ of Fieri facias to me directed, out of his Highnesses Court of
Common Pleas at Westminster for the levying of an hundred pounds debt, and
forty shillings damages, which Sir H. H. Knight, Lord Chief Justice of the
said Court of Common Pleas, has recovered in the said Court against E. F
Administrator of the Goods and Chattels which late were of I. R. late of R. in
the said County, Gent. deceased, at the time of his death to be levied upon the
Goods and Chattels which late were the said I. R.'s at the time of his death in
the hands of the said E. F. to be administered, if so much of them do remain in
the hands of the said E. F. to be administered: And if not, then the damages to
be levied, of the proper goods of the said E. F. as by the said Writ returnable
from the day of the holy Trinity in three weeks, more at large appears. I
have taken into my hands all and singular the goods and chattels mentioned in
an Inventory hereunto annexed, be the goods and chattels, which late were the
said I. R's. at the time of his death, and found in the hands of the said E. F.
unadministred.

Now know ye that I the said High Sherif by virtue of the said Writ, and of my
Office, and for and in consideration of the sum of two hundred pounds of good,
etc. to me the said High Sherif in hand paid, do hereby as much as in me lies,
by virtue of my said Office, fully and absolutely bargain, sell, and deliver to
the said E. F. his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, all and singular
the said Goods and Chattels, TO HAVE AND TO HOLD, and enjoy the same unto the
said E. F. his Executors and Administrators for ever. In witness whereof I
have hereunto set my seal of Office the tenth day of May, in the year of our
LORD, 1658.

THE JUDICIAL AND MINISTERIAL OFFICE OF CORONERS.
THIS Office of Coroner has its Etymology or Derivation a Corona, being an
Offficer of the CROWN from antiquity, and has principal cognizance of some
PLEAS called Placita Coronae.

Co. upon Mag. Chart. cap. 17. 4 Inst. cap. 59. sol. 271.
He was established by pristine Kings, ELFRED, etc. to be Principalis
conservator pacis, according to the Mirror of Justice, which says, Auxi
ordains fuer Coronours in Chescun County, et Viscounts a garder le peace, quant
les Countees soy demisterent del guard, et Bayliffes in lieu de centeners (that
is) Coroners in every County, and Sheriss were ordained and constituted to be
Conservators of the Peace, when the Earls dismissed themselves of the custody of
the Counties, and in place of Hundredors: but of his antiquity and
jurisdiction. Vide 2d Instit. Magna Charta, Cap. 17. Merton, Cap. 3.
Reddisseisin, and Westminster 1. Cap. 10. and 26. and Articl. super Chart. Cap.
3.

This office of Coroner is duplicate General and Special.


1. General.
TO the office of general Coroners appertains the receiving of the Appeals
of the whole County, of Fellonies committed within the year; to award the
Exigents of contempts, and to pronounce the Judgments of Out-lawries upon
County days (of which see more in the County Court) and likewise in what
pledge or Decenary they were, or of whom mainprised, and in whose ward. Mirror
cap. 1. Sect. 13.


2. Special.
Articuli super Chartas.
Special Coroners, are Coroners of Liberties, and of privileged places, as
Coroner of the Verge, viz. Coroner of the Protectors Household, etc. to
demonstrate the distinction of the Authority and Jurisdiction of general and
special Coroners by Wrote and Wiggs Case, in the fourth Reports, fol. 45. and
46. Where it was resolved, That at Common Law the Coroner of the KINGS House
had an exempt jurisdiction within the Verge, and the Coroner of the County
cannot intermeddle therein, as appears by the preamble of the Statute of
Articuli super Chartas; Because that before this time many Felonies done within
the Verge have been unpunished (and the reason and cause thereof was) because
the Coroners of the County are not suffered to interpose to enquire of Felonies
within the Verge, but the Coroner of the KINGS hostel, which is passant. By
which it appears, that the Coroner of the County could not intermeddle with the
death of a man within the Verge, but the Coroner of the Hostell only. And so
was it adjudged, Pasch. 24 Eliz. in the Kings Bench, where Swift was indicted
before the Coroner of the County of Middlesex, of a Murder done at Tuthil in
the said County of Middlesex, which Indictment was removed into the Kings
Bench, and there Swift pleaded, that Tuthil was at the time of the murder, and
yet is within the verge, etc. upon which the Attorney did demur in Law, and it
depended in advisement three Terms, and at length the plea was adjudged good,
and thereupon he was discharged of the Indictment; for as the Coroner of the
household cannot intermeddle within the County out of the verge, because his
Office extends not to it: so the Coroner of the County cannot intermeddle
within the verge; and it shall be contrary to reason, that their Offices and
jurisdictions being several and distinct, the one should intermeddle within the
jurisdiction of the other. But it was resolved, that the Justices of the Kings
Bench, Justices of Oyer and Terminer, Jail-delivery, and Justices of peace, may
enquire of, hear and determine all murders and felonies within the verge,
because their authority and jurisdiction are general through the whole County,
and always has been so used, and so was it adjudged without any scruple in
Holcrofts case.

What person ought to be Coroner, and how qualified.
OF ancient time this Office was of such estimation, that none could have it
but a Knight, if we look back to the Statute of Westminster. 1. cap. 10. and the
current of the Writ in the Register See Brit. cap. 3. fol. 3. Stamf. pl. coron.
48. c. Register 177.
fol. 177. b. is nisi sit miles, etc. and such a one qui melius sciat, and
possit officio illi intendere: for this was the policy of prudent antiquity,
that Officers did ever give a grace to the place, and not the place (only) to
grace the Officer: Therefore it was holden a principal cause to remove and
discharge a Coroner if he were not a Knight, and had not a hundred shillings
rent of Freehold. Yet in F N B. de Coronatore eligendo, it is not allowed a
valid and sufficient cause to remove him, (though he be not a Knight) at this
day, alleging; That those words were inserted into the Statute; to the intent
that a Coroner should have sufficient within the County to be responsible for
all that he does or ought to do by his said Office. Mr. Wilkinson in his office
of a Coroner also says, that this Statute requires such a Coroner as can,
will, and may attend to execute the said office: And therefore (says he) if
such a Coroner be elected, as cannot, will not, or may not attend the execution
of the said office, he is to be removed and discharged by Writ from the same
Office; and the cause of his not attendance, debility, or insufficiency must be
rehearsed in the writ: and if he be discharged of his office by a false
suggestion, F N B. de Coronatore elegendo and de electione viridariorum.
he may by a petition in Chancery pray a Commission to enquire of this false
suggestion, and if it be found and returned into the Chancery, then his
Highness may grant a Supersedeas to the Sheriff of the County, that he remove
not the said Coroner from his office; and if he be removed before the
Supersedeas come, then that he permit the Coroner removed to execute his office
as he did before his removal.

Co. Int. 2. fol. 174. and 175.
He must have two properties, viz. sufficient knowledge, ability, and diligence
in executing his office. Sir Edward Cook in his second part of his Institutes,
Westminster. 1. cap. 10. says, he should have five properties, viz.

1. He should be Probus homo. 2. Legalis homo. 3. Of sufficient understanding
and knowledge. 4. Of good ability, and power to execute his office according to
his knowledge. 5. Diligent in execution of his office.
And the Common Law does not only require expert men to be Coroners; but men of
sufficient ability and livelihood for three purposes, viz. 1. The Law presumes
that they will do their duty, and not offend the Law, for fear of punishment,
whereunto their Lands and goods be subject.

2. That they might execute their office without bribery.

3. That they be able to answer to the Protector all such fines and duties as
appertain to him, and to discharge the Country thereof, wherewith the County
being their Electors were chargeable. For the Coroners being elected by the
Country, if they be insufficient, and not able to answer such fines and other
duties in respect of their office, as they ought, the County as their superior
shall answer the same: As for example, the County of Kent made election by
force of the Kings writ of William Herlizon to be one of the Coroners for the
same County, who after was amerced for a false return forty shillings; In
Scaccar. inter praecept. term. Hill. 14. E. 3. ex part remem. regis 20 H. 9.
Whereupon process went out to the Sheriff to levy it, the Sheriff upon his
oath said that the said William Herlizon, non habet terras vel tenementa, bona
seu catalla in ballivo suo, nec habuit, unde dict. denarii levari possint: Now
says the Record, Et quia ipse Coronator electus fuit per Comitatum, etc. ita
quod in defectu ejusdem Coronatoris totus Comitatus ut elector and superior,
etc. tenetur regi respondere, praeceptum fuit nunc vicecomiti, quod de terris
and tenementis hominum totius Comitatus in balivo suo fieri fac. praedict. 40
s. And the like law was of the Sheriff, and other the said Officers, when they
were elegible.



Dyer 1. Eliz. fol. 165.
They remain Conservators of the peace, within the County where they are
Coroners, notwithstanding the Protectors death, for being elected by the
Freeholders of the County by Writ, and returned of Record in the Chancery, which
is a judicial act, remains, and so of the Verderor: It is otherwise of Judges
and Justices that hold their place by Writ, Commission, Letters patents, or
otherwise at will, whose authority is determined by the death of the King or
Protector, Daltons Justice of Peace.
for by the Commission, etc. he makes them Justiciarios suos, so that he being
once dead, they are no more his Justices. And it might be a reason wherefore
the Sheriff of ancient time was eligible, for that he had eustodiam Comitatus,
and principal Conservator of the Peace; and therefore his authority should not
cease by the death of the King or Protector, no more then that of the Coroner.

Of the number of Coroners in each County.
THe number of Coroners are not set down by the Law: In some Counties there
are sour, in some Counties six, in some sewer, and in some but one, 23 Ass. P.
7. 14 H. 4. 34. 39 H 6. 40. F N B. 163. Inst. 2. Westminster. 1. cap. 10. but in
twelve Shires in Wales, and in Cheshire there are but two, Vide Lamb. Just. 16.
b. Stamf. 48.

Of the power and Jurisdiction of Coroners.
THe Coroners power is duplicace, viz.

1. Judicial. 2. Ministerial.
Co. 2. Inst. Magn. chart. cap. 17.
1. The Judicial authority both of a general and special Coroner is in case
where a man comes to a violent death, by selony or mischance, and to take the
acknowledgement of selony, to take the enquest of selonies happening within his
Liberty, to give abjurations, and pronounce Judgment upon out-lawries, appeals
of death by bill, etc. solely to take an Indictment super visum corporis, and
to take and enter an appeal; but he can proceed no further, upon the Indictment
or appeal, but to deliver them over to the Justices, and to enquire of Treasure
trove, and wreck of the Sea, etc. But if you will enquire more amply what
anciently appertained unto him, read Bracton lib. 3. tract. 4. cap. 5. de
officio Coronatorum circa homicidium: and cap. 26. de officio Coronatoris in
Thesauris inventis and cap. 6. de officio Coronatorum in raptu Virginum: and
cap. 8. de officio Coronat. de pace and plagis. And Britton in his first
Chapter where he treats of it at large: and Fleta E. 1. cap. 18. But more amply
in Stamfords Pleas of the Crown, lib. 1. cap. 51.

It is amply expressed in F N B. fol. 186. That the Coroner shall carry the
Records of his own view, abjurations, outlawries, appeals, accusations of
Thefts done before him, and of all other things done in the County, that is
certain to the Coroners office: and also in the Court of Freemen which have
Franchises of infangtheft, etc. And in the presence of the Coroner shall all
appeals of Robbery and Larceny be framed.

Now as to the view of the body of a man, it is his office, that so soon as he
shall be certified thereof, to send to the Constable of the Hundred of the
place to summon sufficient and able men of the towns adjacent, that at a day
certain they be before him at such a place, all which done the body is to be
viewed, and if it be buried, it is to be taken up, and he is to record the
names of those who buried him; and if it has been decreased or endamaged by
ill keeping, or lain so long that it cannot be judged how it came by its
death, the same must also be recorded, that this negligence may be punished at
the coming of the Justices of Assize into the Circuit, for the Town where the
amerciament was shall be grievously amercied, upon sight of the Coroners rolls.

He ought to do his office in person, and to see the dead body when he makes
inquisition, otherwise the inquiry is invalid: for if he will inquire of any
dead person without view, this is without authority and void.

If the Coroner be remiss and negligent in coming to execute his office, after
he is sent unto, he shall be amerced.

Mirror cap. 1. sect. 13.
But to proceed, if the Coroner with the advice of the people present, be able
to judge of the death, then are they to present the manner of his killing,
whether he died of another felony, or of his own, or by mischance; and if of
blows, whether of a staff or a stone, or any other weapon; and he is to record
in his rolls the names of those who were summoned and appeared not, that the
same offenses of disobedience remain not unpunished, whereby the Coroner could
not at that time proceed for want of Jurors. Therefore we will inquire what
persons may be of the Enquest.

What persons are to be of the Coroners Inquest, and how to be qualified.
THe Inquisition before Coroners is to be of persons Croke 1. part, fo. 95. Sir
Will: Withipoles case.
within the four next adjacent Villages, to be made by the Bailif or Constables
of those Villages, as appears by the Stat. of 4 E. 1. de officio Coronatoris,
and Crompton fol. 113. In these Enquests lie no exceptions or challenges to the
persons of the Jurors; but he ought to make his pannels of the discretest, of
the ablest, and best of them. In case of death an Inquisition super vis. corp.
per sacr. prob. and legal. hom. where not good. Poph. rep. fol. 202. Harison
against Errington.


The names of the Jurors ought to be certified, for peradventure they be not
probi and legales homines, but Villains and Outlawes, 15 H. 4. 41. for note,
that an Indictment before Coroners was found, that the Earl of B. was felo de
se, was quashed, because it did not appear that it was per sacramentum proborum
and legalium hominum, Pophams rep. fol. 202. Harrison against Errington.

And likewise in Hillary termo 2. Car. B. R. Pophams rep. fol. 209. and 210. a
great multitude of Welshmen Poph. rep. fol. 209, 210.
were indicted for the death of a man by an Inquisition taken before the
Coroner in the County of Montgomery in Wales, and exceptions were taken to the
Inquisition: as first, that the Coroner cannot take any Inquisition, unless it
be super visum corporis, and to this was cited, Britton 6. R. 2. Coron. 107. 21
E. 4. 70. 2. R. 3. 2. This is also the reason, that if a man drown himself,
and cannot be found, the Coroner cannot inquire of the death of this man: but
for the King (or Protector) to have a forfeiture of his goods an Inquisition
ought to be taken before the Justices of the Peace. The second exception was,
that the Inquisition was, per sacramentum proborum and legalium hominum Com.
praedict. whereas Stat. 4. E. 1.
by the Statute of 4 E. 1. this enquest ought to be by men of the four next
Towns adjoining, and this ought to appear in the Indictment also. Hill. 10.
Jac. Rot. 3. Co. lib. Intr. fol. 354.
Co. Lib. Intr. 354. and in Pasc. 3. Car. This Indictment was quashed for these
exceptions.

The empannelling of the enquest, and the view of the body, and the giving of
the verdict, is commonly in the Street in an open place, and in corona populi;
Smiths Common wealth of England, cap. 24.
but this name rather comes, because the death of every Subject by violence is
accounted to touch the crown of the Prince, and to be a detriment unto it. The
Prince accounting that his strength, power, and crown does consist in the
force of his people, and the maintenance of them in security and tranquillity.

The method of keeping the Coroners Court.
Stamf. 52.
THe Coroners Court is a Court of Record, and holden after this manner.

When a Coroner comes to view a party that has hanged, killed, or drowned
himself, or that has come to his death by any other accident, he must make
out his warrant to impannel a Jury, to the Bailiffe in whose Liberty the party
lies dead, to appear before him at such a day, and place as he shall mominate
and appoint. The form of the Warrant is thus:

To the Bayliffe, and also to the Constable and Tithing-men of the Hundred of
R. in this behalf jointly and severally greeting.
BY virtue of mine office, these are in the name of Richard Lord Protector of
the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions and
Territories thereunto belonging, to will and require you, immediately upon the
receipt and sight hereof, to summon and warn twenty four able and sufficient
men to be and appear before me at Skipton the 21. day of November next ensuing
the date hereof, at the common Tolbooth of the said Town, then and there to do
execute such things as on his Highness behalf shall be given them in charge;
whereof fail you not, as you, and every of you will answer the contrary at
your perils. Dated under my hand and seal the 12. day of September, in the
year of our Lord, 1158.

By me W. G. one of the Coroners of his Highness the Lord Protector.

If it be in a City or Corporation, then the form of the warrant or precept is
thus:

City of York.
To the Sheriff of the City of York, and to the Sergeants at Mace, attending
the said Sheriffs.
THese are to will and require you, and in the name of his Highness the Lord
Protector of, etc. straightly to charge and command you, that you cause to come
before me one of the Coroners of the City of York, and County of the same City,
at the house of T. P. in Fosgate within the said City, between the hours of
One and Two of the Clock in the Afternoon of this present first day of May
twenty four good and lawful men of the said City, then and there to enquire
upon the view of the body of A. B. there lying dead, how, and in what manner he
came to his death, fail not herein at your peril, as you will answer the
contrary: Given under my hand and seal, the etc. 1658.

By me I. C. etc.

When you come to the place appointed, call the Baliffe, Constable, etc. to
make a return of their Warrant.

Then command one to make three Proclamations, calling the Jury after this
manner.

You good men that are returned to appear here this present time to enquire for
his Highness the Lord Protector, etc. answer to your names as you shall be
called, every man at the first call, upon pain and peril that shall fall
thereon.

And such of the Jury as fail to appear shall be fined 40 s.

The Jury appearing swear fourteen or fifteen of them, and give the foreman
his oath super visum corporis, thus:

The Oath of the fore man of the Jury.
You shall diligently enquire and true presentment make on the behalf of His
Highness the LORD PROTECTOR, etc. how, and in what manner A. B. here lying
dead, came to his death, and you shall deliver up to me (His Highnesses
Coroner) a true verdict thereof according to such evidence as shall be given up
to you, according to your knowledge: so help you God, etc.

Or thus:
You shall diligently enquire, and true presentment make of such things as
shall be given you in charge, according to your evidence: so help you God, etc.

Then swear the rest by four at once, thus:

The oath of the ^est of the Jury.
All such oath as L. M. the foreman of this Inquest for his part has taken,
you and every one of you shall well and truly observe and keep on your parts,
according to your evidence: so help you God, etc.

If the evidence be not ready, you may adjourn until another day and place, to
receive their evidence, binding the Jury by recognizance in twenty pounds
apiece for their appearance.

Then send out your warrant to the witnesses, commanding them to come to be
examined before you, and to deliver their knowledge touching the matter in
question, taking their examinations in writing under their hands.

If it be about the trial of a man's life, then must the witnesses be all bound
over in twenty pounds apiece at the least, personally to appear at the next
assizes then ensuing, to deliver their knowledge therein.

Their Recognizance must be made in this manner, viz. York. ss.
The two and twentieth day of May in the year, etc. A. B. of C. in the aforesaid
County, acknowledges himself to owe, and to be indebted, etc. under Condition,
etc.

That if the said A. B. do personally appear before the Justices of Assize,
and Jail-delivery, at the next Assizes to be holden at the Castle of Y. for the
said County, and then and there deliver and set forth his knowledge touching
the death of E. F. and do not depart thence without license of the said Court.
That then this present Recognizance to be void and of none effect, or else the
same to stand remain, and continue in force, strength, power, and virtue.

Taken and acknowledged the two and twentieth day of May in the year 1658.
aforesaid, before me R. W. Gent. one of the Coroners of the County aforesaid.
R.W.



Then command three Proclamations to be made, thus:

If any man can give evidence on the behalf of His Highness the Lord
Protector, etc. how, and in what manner A. B. here lying dead, came to his
death, draw near and you shall be heard.

Evidence appearing, give him or them this oath:

The oath of the evidence.
All such evidence as you shall give to this Enquest, concerning the death of A.
B. here lying dead, shall be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the
truth: so help you God, etc.

The Jury being all sworn, command them to stand together and hear their
charge, the which I shall give you in brief.

Gentlemen,
1. You that are sworn, you shall by your Oaths declare of the death of this
man, whether he died of felony, or by mischance; and if of felony, whether of
his own or of another, and if by mischance, whether by the act of God, or of
man; and if of samine, whether of poverty or common pestilence; and from whence
he came, and who he was: and if he dyed of another felony, who were
principals, and who accessaries, and if Hue and Cry were duly made or not; and
whether the men fled according to law or not, and who threatened him of his
life or members, and who were sureties for the Peace; or whether he dyed of
long imprisonment, or of pain, and by whom he was further from life and nearer
to his death; and so of all prevailing circumstances that can come by
presumptions.

2. And in case where he died by hurt, or fall, or other chance by the act of
God, so that he had no power to speak before his death; then you shall enquire
the names of the finders, and of his next neighbors, and who were his Parents,
and if he were killed there, or elsewhere, and if elsewhere, by whom, and how
he was thence brought, and the value and kind of the Deodand, and to whose
hands it came; for in case a man dies by a fall, in such case according to
Glanvile, it is ordained, whatsoever is cause of his death is Deodand; as it is
for whatsoever moves in the thing whereof he sell, What are Deodands, and what
are not
as Horse, Cart, Millstone; also Vessels are sometimes Deodands, but not in the
Sea; according to the maxim, Omnia quae movent ad mortem sunt Deodanda, but
the sums upon the Horses, the goods lying in Ships, Mills, Carts, and Houses
are not accounted for Deodands.

3. And in case of another felony, then you are to enquire, who were the
felons, in what Hundred, Pledge, Dosein, Ward, or Mainprize they were, and from
whence they came, and where they returned.

4. And if he was killed by false judgment, then you are to enquire who were
the Judges, who the Officers to form the Judgment, and who accessaries; and if
of false witnesses, who they were, and the Jurors.

5. And if he died of his own felony, then that you enquire the manner, and the
value of his goods, and the name of his parents, and the finders, and of the
neighbors, and the value of the waste.

Note that you are also to enquire of the Accessaries, and they are nine in
number, viz.

1. Those who command. 2. Those who conceal. 3. Those who allow and consent.
4. Those who see it. 5. Those who help. 6. Those who are Partners in the gain.
7. Those who knew thereof, and did not interrupt or hinder it by forbidding. 8.
Those who knowingly receive such Offenders. 9. Those who are in the force.
All which you are to enquire of. Also you must know, that if one man wilfully
kill another, or if a man kill or drown himself, the first does forfeit by
that fact both his lands and his goods, and the other forfeits but Goods and
Chattels, and no lands. And if any homicide happen to be wilful murder, which
offense cannot be too severely punished, and therefore by the Law, the offender
hereon ought to lose both life, lands, and goods. And if it be found
Manslaughter, if the Offender can read, then he may in favor of his life, by
His Highness the LORD PROTECTOR's mercy, have the benefit of his Clergy, and
so save his life, but he shall forfeit both his Lands and Goods. The Goods must
be found apprised and valued, of such offenders, and left in the Town or
Village where such offender dwells, by them safely to be kept, until the
Offender be acquitted or convicted by due course of Law; the interim the
Offender must be maintained with his goods, so as he may be kept alive to
answer his fact, and what shall remain when he is convicted, those to whom such
goods do belong by the Law must have them, and not before, and thereof
discharge the Town or Village which had the custody of such goods. And as for
the Offenders Free Land, if he have any, immediately after Conviction His
Highness must have annum, diem, and vastum therein, and after, the Lord of
whom it is holden, shall have it as an Escheat.

Thus having in brief declared these things incident to my office, and to you
to enquire of, I will conclude, therefore stand together, and hear your
Evidence.

2. His Ministerial power.
14 H. 7. 31. 4. H. 7. 3. Pl. Com.
WE now come to his Ministerial power, wherein he has authority as a Sheriff,
etc. that is, when there is just exception taken to the Sheriff, judicial
process shall be awarded to the Coroners for the execution of the Kings Writs,
in which cases he is locum tenens vice comitis, and in some special cases the
Kings original Writ shall be immediately directed unto him.

When the Sherif is Plaintiff in an action of waste, the Estrepement shall go to
the Coroners.
Estrepment judicial was awarded out of the Court to the Coroners of the
County of Westmerland, in the action of Waste, brought by the Earl of
Cumberland against the Countess Dowager, because the Earl was Sheriff of the
same Shire, by which Writ the Coroners were commanded to suffer no Waste to be
done in the Lands, etc. And it was then said, that the Coroner may provide
against He may take posse Comitatus.
waste, by taking posse Comitatus. Hobert fol. 85. Cumberlands case.

Of the Coroners Fees.
THe Statute of 1 H. 8. cap. 7. prohibiteth a Coroner for taking any thing for
doing his Office, upon pain for every default forty shillings, the like penalty
where he gives not his attendance when he is required to make inquisition upon
the death of any dead Corpse, etc.

Fitz. tit. Coron. fol. 221. and 371.
Fitz. tit. Coron. fo. 321. and 371. A Coroner has a fee appertains to his
office, viz. of every Visne one penny, when they appear before the Justices of
Assize, which see he receives not to do his Office, but as a right due to him,
though he execute no part of his office,

By the 3 H. 7. He is to have (upon an Indictment 5. H. 7.
found of murder) thirteen shillings four pence of the goods of the
Murderer, and if he has nothing, then of the amerciament of the Township for
the escape, etc. Mirror. cap. 1. Office of Coron. Fleta lib. 1. cap. 18.
Stamfords Pleas of the Crown, fol 48. 49. and 50.

Of Appeals.
APPEAL has its Origin or Etimology of the French word Appeller, signifying
to accuse or appeach, it is an accusation, or of Appeller, to call, because
appellans vocat reum in judicium, he calls the Defendant into judgment, Co.
super Lit. l. 2. c. 11. sect. 189. and l. 3. cap. 8. sect. 500.

Appeals are triplicate, viz.

1. Of wrong to his Ancestor, whose heir male he is, and that is only of death.

2. Of wrong to the Husband, and is by the Wise only of the death of her
Husband, to be prosecuted whilst she is a Widow, for if a woman who has title
of an Appeal of the death of her Husband takes another Husband; he and the
Wise shall not have an Appeal; for the woman ought to have it sole: for the
cause of an Appeal is, that she is indigent of her Husband; and the reason is,
because the wife wanting a Husband, is not so well able to live: and therefore
when she has another Husband the Appeal is determined: for cessante causa
cessat effectus, the cause ceasing, the effect cease, (Br. Appeal 109.) as
where a woman has a Quarentine, and she marries within the forty days, she
loses her Quarentine, 1 Mar. 1. Br. Appeal 109. Dower 101.

3. Of wrongs done to the Appellants themselves, as robbery, rape, and mayhem.

There shall none of the blood make Appeal, but the next Heir of the blood,
that should have the Heritage by Law after the death of him that was slain.

If a man be slain having no wife, his wi^e shall be admitted to make appeal
within a year and a day, if he begin the Appeal but two days before the
year be past, it is as good as if it had been at the beginning of the year.

If the wife begin not her Appeal, within a year and a day after the death of
her Husband, she shall never afterward be received to make an Appeal.

The Heir of a man killed shall have appeal as well of homicide of his
Ancestor, as of murder, 2 E. 6. Br. appeal 122.

If he that is attainted of Treason or selony be slain by one that has no
authority, in this case his eldest son can have no appeal; for he must bring
his appeal as heir; which being ex provisione hominis, he loses it by the
attainder of his Father, but his wife shall have an appeal, because she is to
have her appeal as wife, which she remains, notwithstanding the attainder,
because Maris and foeminae conjunctio est de jure naturae, and therefore is
indissoluble.

An appeal of Mayhme is in manner but a Trespass, for he shall recover but
damages, yet the Indictment shall say, quod felonice mahemavit.

The Coroner receives at the County appeals of robbery and appeals of death,
whether it be for the wife of him that is dead, or for his heir, which appeal
may be made at any County within a year and a day after the fact committed.
That is, within a year and a day after the stroke, and not the death, Stamf.
Co. 4. Report. Cases of Appeals and Indict.

If a man make Appeal at the County, it behooves him to be at the County in
proper person to make his Appeal, and he must find sureties at the same County
to pursue his Appeal, and he shall have a day to the next County to pursue his
Appeal, and if the Plaintiff sail at the County of his appearance in proper
person, the Appeal is abated.

If a man make an Appeal, and be non-suite in his Appeal, he shall never be
received to make his Appeal afterward.

Note.
Note, That an Appeal of Death may be commenced before the CORONER, and
Process awarded to the Exigent; but the Pleashall not be determined before
him. Br. Appeal 62. the end Corone 82.

Westminster 1. Cap. 10. The Sheriff shall have counter-rolls The Sheriff
shall have Counter-rolls of Appeals, etc.
with the Coroners, as well of their Appeals, as of Enquests of Attachments; and
of other things which to that Office appertains.

An Appeal of Murder by the wife of him that is slain.
A. B. the late Wife of C. B. in proper person instantly Appeals E. F. late of
S. in the County of YORK, Gent. in the custody of H. R. Sheriff of the County
aforesaid, and to the Bar brought in her own person, of the death of the
aforesaid C. B. late her Husband, of that, that where the same C. B. the tenth
day of May, in the year of our Lord, 1658. was in the peace of God and the
said Commonwealth, working and laboring in digging of Lime-stones in the Land
of T. W. Esquire called R. in a certain place there called a stone Delph, or pit,
at S. in the County aforesaid, where there came the aforesaid E. F. as a Felon
of the said Commonwealth, and by assault, and of malice forethought, upon the
aforesaid C. B. the said tenth day of May, in the year, etc. aforesaid, about
the seventh hour in the forenoon of the same day, by force and arms (that is
to say) with staves, knives, swords, etc. at S. aforesaid, in the place
aforesaid an assault made, and the same C. B. then and there feloniously and
wilfully slew, and murdered, and the same C. B. so slain incontinently, laid
in a coner of the said stone, delph or pit, and covered him with the
Lime-stones then and there lying in the said stone, delph, or pit, in the
Parish of S. in the County aforesaid against the public peace; and as soon as
the same Felon the felony and murder aforesaid had done, fled, and the
aforesaid A. B. then freshly pursued from Town to Town, as far as four
Towns next, and farther, until, etc. And if the aforesaid E. F. the felony
and murder aforesaid done, will deny, then the aforesaid A. B. is ready the
felony and murder aforesaid against them to prove, as the Court here, etc. and
she found pledges of Prosecution of this Appeal, to wit, J. D. and R. R, etc.

If the Appeal be by the heir of the person murdered, then thus.
A. B. next of blood, and Son and Heir of C. D. in proper person Appeals E F.
late of S. in the County of Y. Gent. and G. H. late of R. in the County
aforesaid, Esquire, in the custody of H. B. Sheriff of the County aforesaid,
and to the Bar brought in his own person, of the death of the aforesaid C.
D. lately his Father, of that, that where the same C. D. the day of, etc. in
the year, etc.

An Appeal of Mayheim.
A. B. in his proper person Appeals C. D. of S. in the County of York
Esquire; for that, that where A. B. was in the peace of the Commonwealth now
at, etc. the same C. D. came and made an assault upon him of forethought
malice, and armed in such a manner, cut off the right hand of the said A. B.
(or with such staff struck him upon the head, whereby he pierced the scull of
his head; or with a stone struck out his three foreteeth) whereby he maimed him
feloniously, and as soon, etc. and if, etc. the same A. B. this is ready
against him to prove as the Court, etc.

Of wounding, thus.
A. B. in his proper person, etc. of that, that where the said C. D, etc. the
said A. B. with such a weapon struck him, and wounded him in such a part of
his body, which wound contained so much in length, so much in breadth, and so
much in depth; and this wound he gave him feloniously, and as soon, etc. and
if, etc. the same A. B. this is ready against him to prove, as the Court, etc.

An inquisition in Manslaughter.
Middlesex. ss.
AN Inquisition indented, taken at the Parish of S. in the County of Middlesex,
the 25th day of March, in the year of our Lord, 1659. before T. E. Gent. one
of the Coroners of the County aaforsaid upon view of the body of W. F. then and
there lying dead, by the Oaths of I.W. R.W. H.P. I.A. I.B. L.S. ML. I.K. S.B.
W.H. R.G. N.D. good and lawful men of the Parish aforesaid, and of four other
Towns in the County aforesaid, the said Parish next adjoining, who being
sworn to enquire for the LORD PROTECTOR of the Commonwealth of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, etc. When and by what means the said W. F. came to his
death, say upon their Oaths, that the said E. L. late of the Parish of S.
aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, Labourer, the twentieth day of March, in
the year of our Lord, 1659. aforesaid, not having the fear of God before his
eyes, but being moved and seduced by the instigation of the Devil, with force
and arms, etc. at the Parish aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, in and upon
the said W. F. in the peace of God, and in the public peace then and there
being, feloniously did make an assault. And that the said E. L. the said W. F.
then and there to the ground did throw and cast down, and the said E. L. with
the left hand, and both the feet of him the said E. L. the aforesaid W. F. (so
as aforesaid upon the ground lying) in and upon the breast felloniously did
strike, beat and kick, giving to the said W. F. then and there with the said
left hand, and both the feet of the said E. L. in and upon the breast of the
said W. F. one mortal bruise of the length of six inches, and of the breadth
of four inches, of which said mortal bruise the said W. F. then and there
instantly languished, and lived languishing from the said nineteenth day of
March, until the said 20th day of March, on which said twentieth day of March,
in the year aforesaid, the said W. F. at the Parish aforesaid, in the County
aforesaid, of the mortal bruise aforesaid dyed: And so the Jurors aforesaid
upon their Oaths aforesaid, do say that the said E. L, the aforesaid W F.
felloniously did kill and slay in manner and form aforesaid against the
public peace. What Goods and Chattels the said E. L. had at the time of the
Felony aforesaid, in manner and form aforesaid by him done and committed, to
the said Jurors is altogether unknown.

In witness whereof, as well the Coroner aforesaid as the Jurors aforesaid to
this Inquisition have set their Seals the day and year first above written.

An Inquisition in Manslaughter, where one was starved, and perished for want
of sustenance.
Middlesex. ss.
AN INQVISITION indented, taken at Hamstead in the County of Middlesex, the 20th
day of December, in the year of our Lord God, 1658. before I. G. Gent. one of
the Coroners of his Highness the Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of
ENGLAND, etc. of the County aforesaid upon view of the body of W.T. there lying
dead and slain. By the Oath of R.H. W.P. T.E. M.W. I.M. N.D. A.P. P.B. R.B.
R.C. I.B. E.F. I.W. I.C. I.H. D.C. I.S. I.M. good and lawful men of Hampsteed
aforesaid, and of four other Villages in the County aforesaid, to Hampsteed
aforesaid next adjoining, who being charged and sworn to enquire how, when,
and after what manner the said W. T. came to his death, do say upon their
Oaths, that I. B of W. in the County aforesaid, Tailor, and S. his Wife, not
having God before their eyes, but being moved and seduced by the instigation of
the Devil, the 20th. day of November, in the year of our Lord God 1658.
aforesaid, with Force and Arms, etc. at W. aforesaid, in the County aforesaid,
in and upon the said W. T. then the Apprentice of him the said I. B. in the
peace of God, and in the public peace, then and there being, feloniously,
wilfully, and of their malice afore-thought did make an assault, and that she
the said S. then (that is to say) the said 20th day of November, in the year
aforesaid, and diverse other days and times, as well before as after, at W.
aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, feloniously, wilfully and of her malice
afore-thought, did withhold and withdraw from him the said W. T. and did not
allow and give unto him the said W. T. good and sufficient Food, sustenance,
raiment, lodging, physic and other necessaries, with the intent the said W.
T. for want thereof, should miserably languish, perish, and dye, of which said
withholding and withdrawing from him the said W. T. and not giving and
allowing unto him the said W. T. good and sufficient food, sustenance, raiment,
lodging, physic and other necessaries by her the said S. the said W. T. from
the said zoth day of November, in the year aforesaid, until the 15th day of
December then next ensuing in the year aforesaid, at W. aforesaid, in the
County aforesaid, miserably did languish, and languishing miserably lived; on
which said 15th day of December, in the year aforesaid, the said W. T. for
want of good sufficient food, sustenance, raiment, lodging, physic and other
necessaries at W. aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, miserably perished and
dyed, and that he the said J. B. together with the said S. his Wife at the time
of the Felony and Murder aforesaid, by the aforesaid S. in manner and sorme
aforesaid done and committed Feloniously and wilfully, and of his malice
afore-thought was present abetting, ayding, assisting, comforting and
maintaining the said S. the said W. T. in manner and form aforesaid to kill
and murder. And so the Jurors aforesaid do say upon their oath aforesaid, that
they the said I. B. and S. his Wife, the said W. T. in manner and form
aforesaid, seloniously, wilfully, and of their malice afore-thought did kill
and murder against the public peace, etc. And so the said W. T. came to his
death, and not otherwise, nor any other manner then is as abovesaid, what Goods
and Chattels, Lands or Tenements the said I. B. and S. his Wife at the time of
the Felony and Murder aforesaid, by them the said I. B. and S. his Wife in
manner and form aforesaid done and committed, or any other time afterward
(unto the taking of this Inquision) had, they the said Jury are altogether
ignorant of*

In witness whereof, as well the said Coroner as the said Jurors to this
Inquisition have set their Seals the day and year first above written.

Inquisition where one is slain by misfortune by a Cart laden with hay.
Middlesex. ss.
AN Inquisition indented, taken at, etc. Who say upon their Oaths, that the
aforesaid A. B. the tenth day of May, in the year, etc. abovesaid, at S.
aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, going with his Cart from S. aforesaid to L.
in the said County, by the way between S. and L. aforesaid, (that is to say at,
etc. aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, his said Cart loaded with Hay, fell
upon the body of the said A. B. and so bruised and brake his body, that of that
bruising and breaking, the aforesaid A. B. then and there instantly dyed. And
so the Jurors aforesaid upon their Oaths aforesaid say, that the aforesaid A.
B. in manner and form aforesaid, by mis-forture to his death came. And further
the Jurors aforesaid, upon their Oaths aforesaid say, that then and there four
horses with the Cart aforesaid, and their load of Hay, containing in weight by
estimation forty stone, moved to death the aforesaid A. B. and that the
aforesaid four horses are of the price of eight pounds and ten shillings, and
that the aforesaid Horses and Cart remain in the custody of C. D. of S.
aforesaid, to wit, the late Wife of the aforesaid A. B. and that the aforesaid
forty stone of Hay, is of the value of forty five shillings and eight pence,
and remain in the custody of E. F. of S. aforesaid, Gent. In testimony
whereof, as well the Coroners aforesaid as the Jurors, etc.

Another, where one by misfortune is slain by the fall off a Scaffold.
Middlesex. ss.
AN Inquisition indented, taken, etc. who say upon their Oaths, that the
aforesaid P. H. the 25th day of August, in the year, etc. abovesaid at St. K.
aforesaid, in the aforesaid County, did set up a certain Scaffold made of
Deals, and Fir-poles, to the House of I. B. situate and being at St.
Katherines aforesaid, there to tyle the said House. And E. W. having M. C. the
Daughter of W. C. an Infant in her arms, going in the common Highway by the
said House, and the said P. H. being at work alone, then and there on the said
Scaffold; And the said Scaffold being made with rotten Timber, one of the
Fir-poles bearing the said Scaffold did break, so that the said Scaffold did
fall on the head of the said M. C. and the scull of the head of the said M. C.
a little above the left ear of the said M. C. then and there did mortally
bruise and break, of the length of two inches, and of the breadth of one inch,
of which said mortal bruise and break the said M. C. instantly languished, and
lived languishing from the said 25th. day of August, in the year aforesaid,
until the seven and twentieth day of the same month of Aug, on which said
seven and twentieth day of August, in the year aforesaid, the said M. C. at
the Liberty aforesaid, in the County aforesaid of the said mortal bruise and
break dyed. And so the Jury aforesaid upon their Oaths aforesaid say, that the
said H. P. the said M. C. did slay and kill by misfortune, and against his will
in manner and form aforesaid. What Goods and Chattels the said H. P. had at
the time of the Manslaughter my mis-adventure, in manner and form aforesaid
by him committed and done against his will to the said Jurors is altogether
unknown.

In witness whereof, as well the Coroner aforesaid as the Jurors aforesaid to
this Inquisition have set their Seals the day and year first above written.

An Inquisition, where one drownes himself.
Felo dese.
AN IN QVISITION indented, taken, etc. Who say upon their Oaths, that the
aforesaid A. B. the second day of May, in the year, etc. aforesaid, about the
hour of eight in the Morning of the same day, not having GOD before his eyes,
but by instigation diabolical seduced and moved, of his malice forethought,
at M. aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, then and there alone being, in a
common River there himself willingly and feloniously drowned: And so the
Jurors aforesaid, upon their Oaths aforesaid say, that the aforesaid A. B. in
manner and form aforesaid, then and there willingly and feloniously, as a
Felon of himself, himself flew and murdered, against the peace, etc.

In witness whereof, as well the said Corouers, as the said Jurors, etc.

If one hang himself, then the Inquisition, thus.
Middlesex. ss.
AN IN QVISITION indented, (the hour, etc.) not having GOD before his eyes, but
by the instigation of the DEVIL feduced and moved at S. aforesaid, in a
certain Wood or Grove to the said S. adjoining, then and there alone being,
with one Hempen Rope of the value of one penny, which he then and there in his
hands had and held, and one end thence about his neck then and there put, and
one end thence about the bough of a certain Oak tree bound, and himself then
and there with the rope aforesaid wilfully and feloniously hanged and
strangled. And the Jurors aforesaid upon their Oaths aforesaid say, etc. No
forfeiture of Lands.


SHERIFFS TOURN AND Court Leet.
Of the Original of first Institution of them.
Lamb. E. 4. c. 4.
ALFRED, Governor of this Commonwealth in the year of man's redemption, 872.
was the first institutor of this Court which we now determine to treat of, then
called (...), that is to say, the Assembly of the Shire, Sheriffs Tourn, and
sometimes called the Sheriffs moot. It seems to have the appellation of
Sheriffs Tourn, of the French word (Tour, viz. Ambitus circuitus, vicissitudo)
and is by Britton styled Tour, cap. 61. sub fine capitis, as if we should say,
The Sheriffs course, or perambulation; For (as Britton notes in his 29th.
Britton cap. 29. and cap. 61.
Chapter) that which before the Sheriff is called the Sheriffs Turn, is
called in the Court of Franchises and Hundreds, The view of Frank-pledge:
Wherein enquiry is specially made of such as be not in any Dozin: with whom
Fleta accords: And by Fleta it appears Flet. E. 2. c. 62.
that this Tourn was the Sheriffs course to keep his Tourn in every Hundred, l.
2. cap. 52. Habet etiam rex eur' suam in turnis, vic' and vicibus Hundred',
etc. Br. 21. 23.
And in many Books it is denomination is the Kings Leet, and Sheriffs Leet.
Powel.


Suit real, what it is.
Two Courts were assigned to the Sheriff (by the said Alfred) by which two
Courts the whole County was governed, viz. the County or Shire Court, for one
man to have remedy against another, in any matter arising between them under
forty shillings. And the Sheriffs Tourn, unto which every man within the
County above the age of 12 years, and under 60. are compelled to come, that
they might not be ignorant of the things there published (or given in charge)
whereby they were to be governed; and this was called Suite real, by reason of
their Allegiance; Unto which they were sworn to be true and loyal to the King.
And it was learnedly spoken by a reverend Judge, Justice Flemming, in a Speech
of his concerning the necessity of Sheriffs Tourns, and Law-dayes, who said
that it was Schola insigniendi juvenes, a School to direct and instruct young
men in the ancient Laws of the Commonwealth, and to prepare them for greater
employment at more great Conventions, as the Assize, Gaole-delivery, or
Sessions of the Peace.

Leets how first granted.
Now, because the people did undergo great trouble and vexation in traveling to
the Sheriffs Tourn, Leets, or View of Frank-pledge were granted to Lords of
Manors within certain precincts, yet this Court, in whose Manor soever it is
kept, is accounted the Kings Court, because the authority thereof is originally
appurtenant to the Crown, and thence derived to inferior persons. And Dyer
likewise says, that this Court Kitch. fol. 6. Dyer, fo. 64. and 13.
was first derived from the Sheriffs Tourn.

This Court is a Court of Record in all things that appertain to the Turn, or
Leet, and Sheriff of the Turn, or Steward of the Leet, are therein Judges of
Record. For whosoever has the Leet, has the same Terms of Law. Co. L 4. 33.
and L 6. 12.
authority within the Precinct, as the Sheriff has within the Tourn.

Of the power and authority of the Judge of the COURT.
THe Steward, or Judge, has a double power and authority in the Court.

1. Election of Officers. 2. Correction or punition of offenders.
In that of punition, a double Act is to be respected.

1. Actus Curiae, the act of the Court. 2. Actus Patriae, the act of the
Country, or Jury.
The authority of these two Acts do encounter with two sorts of offenses or
misdemeanors, being furnished with a double weapon

1. Fine. 2. Amerciament.
The one sort of offenses are Extra curiam. The other sort are In curia.
1 Now, to oppose and subdue those extrinsicall offenses, viz. those that are
Extra curtam. The Jurors Extrinsical offenses.
that are sworn to present, have peculiar cognizance, and therefore authority
and power to present them, and to assess Amerciaments.

2 The second weapon to oppose intrinsicall offenses, viz. those that are in
curia, which offenses are Intrinsicall offenses.
either in omitting or neglecting a duty enjoined, which ought to be performed
by the Jurors, Constable, Bailiffs, etc. or in committing some contempt, and
disorder in the face of the Court, by any Officer or Suitor.

The Steward has cognizance, and may punish it by Fine, without enquiry by the
Country, As,

If a suitor being sworn of a Jury, shall refuse to Co. 8. 38. A Suitor
refusing to make presentment, or refuses to be sworn.
make a presentment there: or if he do depart without giving up his Verdict, or
if he refuse to be sworn, the Sheriff or Steward may impose a reasonable Fine
upon him.

He may impannell a second Jury to enquire of the defaults and concealments of
the first, and to fine them for their offense.

For default of resians he may compel a stranger coming within the View, to be
of the Inquest.

What may be enquired of in this Court.
THe Steward may enquire of several particular misdemeanors, comprised and
enumerated in the Statute of 18 E. 2. even from the highest Treason, to the
lowest Trespass, though not here punishable. Which so far as they may
concern the modern jurisdiction of our present times, such as are neither
absolute nor antiquate, you shall find in this ensuing Tract, viz. In the
charge of this Court.

What things are not to be enquired of in this Court.
He cannot enquire of the Statute of Laborers, or indict one feloniously
committing a Rape; yet such Indictments must be delivered to the Justices of
the Peace, according to the Statute of 1 Ed. 4. Bract. praesent. 16. Fitz.
Turn. 3. 4 Edward 4. 8 Edw. 4. 5.

He cannot commit any man to prison for his contempt, No commitment to prison,
etc. yet he may take a Recognizance for the peace. Co. Inst. 4. fol. 263. Magna
Charta. cap. 17.
neither can he take recognizance or bind a man to good behavior, as formerly
he might, and as the Sheriff in his Turn may do. Yet Co. Instit. 4. fol.
263. holds that he may take a Recognizance for the peace.

He cannot hold plea of any thing appertaining to the Crown, nor touching
Freehold or Lands, nor debt, trespass, or otherwise.

No Indictments of felony for death.
This Court cannot take Indictment of any Felons for the death of any man, or in
any other case wherein it has no cognizance; If it do it is Coram non judice,
and void, neither can it take a presentment of an offense done to a Parish or a
particular man.

28 E. 3. 95. 21 E. 4. 21. 3 H. 7. fo. 1. Br. Leet, 19. and 25.
Such things as are Trespasses by the Statute, or offenses against any Statute,
the Sheriffs Office does not extend to it here, except the Statute does give in
it an express authority to the Turn or Leet; for Nulla est generalis regula
sed admittit exceptionem.

Br. Leet. 26.
Nothing but Nusances, and Grievances, Offenses or Trespasses, as are popular
and common to many persons: And therefore Trespasses for breaking of Closes,
nor Assaults made to a sole and particular person, is here inquirable, except
there be bloodshed. Dyer 234. Fitz. tourn. 1. 4.


Styles prac. Reg.
It was the occasion of a very learned Contest or Argument, Pasch. 24 Car. B. R.
whether a Court Leet may enquire of private Assaults and Batteries, if there be
no bloodshed in the case? Bacon Justice, and Walker an Apprentice of the LAW
in the Inner TEMPLE, held that a Court Leet might enquire of them; But Justice
Roll held the contrary, because they are actionable at the COMMON LAW only, by
the party injured, and are not public offenses against the public.

Upon all Presentiments and Indictments taken before the Sheriff in his Tourn,
he has not power to attach, arrest, or put in prison, nor to levy, nor take
any Fines, or Amerciaments of any person so indicted or presented betore them,
by reason or color Delta. sol. 155.
of any Indictment or presentment taken before them in their Tournes, but the
Sheriff shall bring and deliver all such Indictments and Presentiments to the
Justices of Peace at the Sessions, that shall be holden for the said County; if
not, a forfeiture for every one not delivered 40 l.

What things are considerable in holding Tourns or Leets.
HAving demonstrated what things are to be enquired of here, and what are not.
Now, three things are considerable in the holding of Tourns or Leets, viz. 1.
Time. 2. Place. 3. Persons.


1. As to the time, it must be kept twice a year according to ALFRED,
quotannis celeberimus bis conventus agetur, one month after EASTER, Fitz.
Leet. 11.
and one month after MICHAELMAS, At the Tourn after EASTER, no Actions popular
Stat. 9 H. 3. c. 33.
are to be enquired after, etc. but only to take their suite, who are Suitors,
and to take the view, etc. And at the Turn after MICHAEELMAS, then to enquire
of such as are enquirable.

2. Now to the place where it is to be holden, and that must be within the
Precinct and Liberty, in loco debito and consueto, and if it be done
otherwise, what ever is acted in it is void, and coram non judice.

3. Thirdly, what persons are to appear in this Court? they are all the
Freeholders within the Precinct or Liberty are obliged to come, by the service
of their Fees: and all other people above the age of 12 years, and under 60.
only, Ecclesiastical and religious 52 H. 3. c. 2. and 10. Br. Leet 42. Fitz.
160. c. 161.
men, all Earls, Barons, Tenants in ancient demesne, and all women, are
excepted, because they are never sworn upon any Inquest.

Jury, What.
1 R. 3. cap. 4. Westminster. 2. 6 H. 4. fol. 1.
THere must be at the Court twelve (at the least) of the most discreet and
sufficient Freeholders, such as are of repute and estimation, and have Freehold
Lands within the same County of the value of twenty shillings at the least, who
ought to be impannelled and sworn (by the Sheriff) to enquire of and present
all things there inquireable and presentable: who ought to take all Indictments
by their oaths, and must deliver in their rolls and inquisitions indented and
sealed between the Sheriff (or Steward) and the Jurors.

2 H. 7. fol. 4.
And if there be not twelve to be sworn, the Sheriff or Steward may cause
strangers that come within the view to be of the Inquest.

How Amerciaments are forfeited, and what shall be causes to amerce, etc:
Coo. on Lit. lib. 2. c. 11. p. 194.
AMerciament in Latin is called misericordia, because it ought to be assessed
mercisully, and ought to be moderated by affeerement of his equals (otherwise a
Writ de moderata misericordia lies) or because the party offending puts
himself on the mercy of his Highness. And the difference betwixt a Fine and
an Amerciament is, That a Fine is assessed by the Court, Co. part. 8.
but Amerciament by the Country.

Of Amerciament.
BUT to demonstrate the cause of Amerciament, viz.

43 E. 3. 9. Avowry 80. vi. 11 H. 4. 89. 12 H. 7. 15.
The not appearing of a Leet is a good cause to amerce a Re^iant, and the Lord
who distrains for the amerciament needs not show for what he distraineth,
before the tenant has tendered something for amends, although the tenant does
not know the cause, 45 E. 3. 9. Avowry 80. vi. 11 H. 4. 89. 12 H. 7. 15.

11 H. 4. 88.
If a man be amercied for a thing done in a Town wherein he dwells, he may be
distrained for it in any place within the Hundred or Leet, 11 H. 4. 88.

A Suitor at a Leet may be amercied for not presentting things presentable,
being sworn with others, 11 E. 3. 9. Avowry 155. 10 H. 6. 7. Co. rep. 8.
Griesleys case.
and a general Avowry, but he may say, that there was nothing to be presented,
11 E. 3. 9. Avowry 155. 10 H. 6. 7. Coo. lib. Enteries. Det. 149. Coo. part. 8.
Griesleys case.

29 E. 3. 36. 41 E. 3. 26.
A Resiant was amercied for not clensing of a Ditch, and a pain levied upon
him, that he cleansed it after, and a distress taken for not doing of it, etc.
29 E. 3 36. 41 E. 3. 26.

Resiants and tenants may be amercied in the Leet for refusing to swear, 38 E.
3. 18. Conusance 23.

9 H. 6. 41. Custom.
The Lord of a Leet shall not prescribe to amerce the petty Jury for their false
verdict, the same being sound by the grand Jury, for it is no good custom; but
they may be amercied for concealing of any thing which is presentable there,
and this is by custom, M. 9. H. 6. 42. Custom.

An amerciament in a Leet may be well levied by an action of debt, 12 H. 2. Ley
43. 10 H. 6. 7.

Ass. 13 E. 3. Avowry 105.
One was amermercied for brewing Ale, and selling it contrary to the Assize
within the Hundred, and it was holden, that although he was resiant within
another Leet, yet the amerciament is good where it is made; so it is where one
sels Bread and Ale in a Market which is in another Leet, then where it was
brewed, etc. Ass. 13 E. 3. Avowry 105.

47 E. 3. 12.
If my Horse be in the keeping of another man, he may be distrained: if I be
amercied in the Leet for stopping the Highway, etc. 47 E. 3. 12. But if an
Inne-holder be amercied, the horse of a stranger cannot 10 H. 7. 21.
be distrained, 10 H. 7. fol. 21.

Note that in 8 R. 2. Avowry 194. If one be amercied in the Sheriffs tourn, the
Sheriff may distrain throughout the whole County; and in like manner if the
amerciament be in a Leet, throughout all the precincts of the Leet.

Stat. E. 1. 4.
The Statute of 1 E. 4. expressly appoints, that no fine or amerciament in the
Tourn or Leet shall be levied, unless it be certified at the next sessions of
the peace by Indenture enrolled there, and by process made from, the Justices
of Peace to the Sheriff or Steward.

How Presentiments in Leets shall be traversable.
Hill. 21. E. 3. Bar. 271.
NOte, Scard says, that if a thing be presented at the day in a Leet, this is
as Gospel, if it pass that day without being repealed: And therefore if a
false presentment be made, he shall have an action of false imprisonment the
same day against the prosecutors, but if he stay until another day it is
otherwise: and he who is amercied there for purpresture, or other Nuisance in
Avowry, for the amerciament he shall traverse in no point. Wilby, If it be
presented, that he has levied a Ditch over the Highway, if the presentment be
false, he shall have trespass against him who throws it down by force of such
presentment: And so of my house abated, by reason of such false imprisonment,
Hill. 21. E. 3. Bar. 271.

He who is amerced in a Leet, may traverse the resiancy, but he shall not say,
that the place where, etc. is within another view, 4 E. 3. 12. 10 E. 3. 5. 41
E. 3. 26. But if he has been sworn in my Leet, he shall not have the traverse,
4 E. 3. 31. 10 E. 3. 9.

The Method of keeping the Sheriffs Tourn, or Court Leet.
LEt the Sheriff (or Steward) make a Precept unto the Bayliffe, to summon the
Court by a reasonable time: to wit, fifteen or sixteen days before the Court
be kept (if it be less time it is sufficient in Law) the Precept must be made
according to this subsequent President.

A. B Esquire, Sheriff of the County of Y. To the Bayliffe of the Liberty (or
Weapentake) of S. greeting. I command you, that you diligently summon the
Court, with view of franke-pledge, to be held within the said Liberty the
sixteenth day of August next ensuing, about the hour of eight in the forenoon
of the same day, at the common Tollbooth of R. And this given under the seal
of my Office the twenty eighth day of July, in the year, etc.

By the Sheriff.

If it be a Court Leet held in a particular Hundred, or Manor of any Lord,
then the form of the Precept is thus.

A. B. Gent. Steward of I. N Esquire of his Hundred (or of his Manor) of O. to
the Bayliffe of the same Hundred (or Manor) greeting. Commanding thee that
thou summon this Court with the view of Frank-pledge of the said Hundred (or
Manor) to be held at the accustomed place of S. the 16. day of August next
ensuing, And this given under my seal the twenty eighth day of July in the
year, etc.

By me A. B. Steward.

After the Steward has placed himself in the Court, he must first enter the
title of the Court in the beginning of the Court-Roll, with the name of the
place where the Court is holden, in this manner:

The entry of the Court ss. The view of Frank-pledge with the Court of A. B.
Sheriff of the County of Y. there held on Tuesday the 16. day of August in the
year. etc.

By the Sheriff.

If In the Lords Court, then thus:

ss. The view of Frank-pledge with the Court of I. N. Esquire there held on
Tuesday the, etc.

By A. B. Steward.

Then cause the Bayliffe to make three Proclamations, repeating them after the
Steward in this manner.

Proclamation.
ALL manner of persons who were summoned to appear here this day, to serve His
Highness the Lord Protector, and the Sheriff, (or the Lord of the Manor) for
his Court now holden, draw near, and give your attendance, and every one answer
to his name, as he shall be called, upon pain and peril that may fall thereon.

After all are called, and those that are absent be marked to be amercied, then
the Steward shall cause the Bailiff again to make other three Proclamations,
viz. O yes, etc. causing the Bailiff to say:

Proclamation.
IF any man will be Essoyned, come into Court and you shall be heard, and all
such persons as were Essoyned the last Court let them come in now and warrant
their Essoyns, otherwise they will be amercied. And if any desire to be
essoyned by the Tythingman, or other neighbor, then for the first Court they
may be essoyned.

The Essoyn must be entered in this manner:

A. B. is essoyned by C. D. etc.

Inquiries.
Inquire if there be any tenant in the Manor that has any action or cause of
action, since the last Court day, let him put in his plaint sedente curia, viz.
the Court sitting, and it shall be entered.

Inquire if there be any Precepts, attachments, or distresses depending in the
Court rolls, call them openly in the Court, and know, if the Bayliffe have
executed them.

Also if there be any old Plaints depending in the Court Roll before this court
holden, cause the parties to be called, before the inquest be charged.

Then impannel the Inquest, comanding the foreman to lay his hand upon the
book, swearing him as follows.

The oath of the foreman of the Inquest.
You shall swear, that you shall diligently inquire, and true presentment make
of all such things as you shall be charged with, concerning his Highness the
Lord Protector, (or the Lords Court of the Manor) you shall well and truly
keep his Highnesses Counsel, your Fellows and your own: you shall not
conceal nor hide any thing for favor, fear, promise, or affection you bear
to any person or persons, or present any thing for hatred or malice you bear
to any man: but you shall present and tell the truth, according as things may
or shall come to your knowledge by information, or otherwise: making a true
presentment thereof without concealment: so help you God, etc.

After the foreman is particularly sworn, cause four (at once) of the
Inquest to lay their right hands together on the book, swearing them in this
manner.

The oath of the rest of the Inquest.
The same oath which A. B. your foreman on his behalf has made, you and every
of you shall well and truly keep on your behalfes: so help you God.

Swearing the rest accordingly.

After they are all sworn, cause the Bayliffe to number them as the Steward
does read them.

Then command the Bayliffe to make Proclamation, saying after the Steward.

Proclamation.
YOu good men that are impannelled to enquire for his Highness the Lord
Protector, and for the Lord of this Court or Law day, draw near and hear your
charge all the rest keeping silence whilst the charge is in reading, upon pain
and peril that shall fall thereon.

Before the charge gather the common fine, which the tenants do pay every Leet
or Law day, acording to the custom of the Manor.

The Exhortation before the Charge.
My Masters,
YOU of the Jury, the charge, which you by oath have promised to observe,
touches, and concerns diverse good Laws and Statutes instituted and made for
the preservation of the public Peace, and also for the private tranquillity of
every one of you, and your posterities, which matters the Sheriff (or the Lord
of this Franchise) considering and wishing your security, and desiring likewise
good orders to be observed and kept among you, that right and equity may be
administered to every of you, has therefore caused his Highness the Lord
Protectors Leete to be summoned and kept here this day: I will therefore, by
your favor, before I enter upon the principals of your charge, declare unto
you, by what authority you are brought hither, and wherein you are obliged to
observe.

The causes hereof are two.

1. The first is, for that his Highness, and royal predecessors, have given
and granted unto the Sheriff (or Lord of this Manor) authority and power to
keep a Leet, or Law day, twice in the year, at which Leet, or Law-day, all the
Headboroughs, Tithingmen, and Dezmers, and all other persons that are resident
or inhabiting within the Jurisdiction of this Leet, being above the age of
twelve years, and under the age of sixty, are bound by the Laws of the
Commonwealth to appear: to the intent that the Laws and Statutes may be there
published and declared, so that knowing the dangers of the not observing of
them, they may avoid diverse inconveniences, which otherwise would have much
prejudiced them: and further to inquire of the breakers of the same, and
present them, that such offenders may receive condign punishment.

The other cause or authority is, for that you being the Lords tenants, are
bound by reason of your tenure at the Lords Court Baron, when it shall happen
to be kept according to law, that is to say, at every three weeks end, (or
according as the custom is) and being here by these two authorities, you are
bound to serve in all such things, as you are legally and jointly charged
withal, as well concerning His Highness the Lord Protectors Leet, as the Lords
Court Baron.

Now, to the intent that you may have better cognizance of your oath; I think
it convenient (with your patience) to insist a little upon it.

What things are to be considered by a Jury in swearing.
IN swearing three things are principally to be considered.

1. That you swear, to seclude all favor and affection The first consideration.
to the parties, not fearing the rich, nor pitying the poor, not considering
the simplicity of any person, nor the smallness of the offense, but having an
affection to truth before your eyes, declare that which is truth to your
knowledge, and no further.

2. The second is, you must swear in righteousness, The second consideration.
viz. for the very zeal and desire you have in declaring the truth, for the
executing of justice, for the observing of Covenants, honest promises,
Statutes, Laws, and good Customs, and having a respect in doing and
performing these things, you do that which tends to the glory of God, the
honor of the Lord Protector, the preservation of the People and Commonwealth:
which kind of swearing is the mandate of the Almighty. Deuteronomy. c. 6.
Thou shall fear the Lord thy God and serve him, and shall swear by his Name.
That is, we must only serve and fear him, acknowledging his holy Name, which
is done by a legal swearing. It is also commanded in many places of the divine
Writ, but conditionally; (to wit) we must swear in truth, in Judgment and
righteousness, etc.

3. In swearing, and taking an Oath, you must The third consideration.
do it with Judgment, not rashly, nor unadvisedly, but soberly, and with
caution, considering what an oath is, which in brief I will declare to you.

What an oath is.
An Oath is, the recording or calling to witness the name of God; to confirm
the truth of that we say, and which is according to the testimony of St. Paul.
An oath for confirmation is among men an end Hebr. cap. 6. v. 16, 17.
of strife. For in ambiguous and obscure matters, where the knowledge of men is
brittle and fails, we betake ourselves to God, that he which is the only
Truth may give a Testimony unto the truth, and he that uses God for a
Witness, does also call for revenge of perjury at his hands, if he deceive and
speak not the truth: now, at the imposition of your hands upon the Book, you
swear truly to enquire, and make a true presentment of these things wherewith
you are charged, and not to let from declaring the truth, either for favor,
fear, affection, or envy of any person: consider, that in this Book is recorded
Gods eternal verity, whereby we have remission of errors and offenses, and an
enjoyment of eternal salvation. I am confident of your knowledge of the
plagues and threats (in the Gospel) to the obstinate, and perjured, bearers of
false and unjust testimony, condemners of innocent and guiltless persons, so
that it you voluntarily perjure your selves, you absolutely deny God, his
mercy, truth, and the merits of our Savior, betaking your selves, and adhering
to that Destroyer of mankind, the Devil, the author of all pejury and
persidiousnesse: and by forswearing and forsaking the truth, you forsake
Christ, the light and truth it self. And although that perjury does escape
sometimes unespied, and punished, and be kept secret between some of you and
others, yet your hearts will judge and repute one another false, and be
suspicious of each others actions. But God (that faithful one of Israel) will
not deny himself, neither will he suffer the profanation of his Name to go
unpunished; when at the last day the secrets of all men's hearts shall be
apparent, then the truth and your Consciences shall be your accusers, and
Christ the righteous Judge shall justly condemn you to eternal death and
damnation. Which sin of perjury the most High by his Prophet has threatened to
punish. Thus referring Malac. 3.
this to your serious considerations, and not to trouble you with prolixities,
Verbum sat. sapienti, a word's enough to the wife. I will proceed and declare
to you the Articles of your charge.

The Charge of the Court.
YOu must understand, That High treasons, petty treasons, and Felonies, which
are against His Highness the LORD PROTECTOR, are to be enquired of, and
presented in this Court; but not punishable here, the which offenses you must
set down in writing, indented and sealed, the one part to remain with the
Steward, the other with the Jury, and the same must be delivered to the
Justices of the next Assizes holden within the County.

The Charge of the Court Leet. Judgment. High Treason.
1. You shall first enquire of High treasons, as if there be any among you that
do compass, imagine, or intend the death of his highness the Lord Protector,
her highness, or their children, or of their consenters, or to levy war against
his Highness, or be adherent to his enemies. Death, and forfeiture of all
their goods, and chattels to his Highness, as well real as personal, moveable
and unmovable, corn growing, and all their debts due to them; sc. all such
goods and chattels, etc. as they had at the time of their attainder. 2. If any
counterfeit the great seal of England, or money of this Commonwealth, or do
clip, wash, or round the same. Death, and loss of goods; but of Lands during
life only, and no corruption of blood, nor forfeiture of Dower. Petty-Treason.
3. If a Servant kill his Master or Mistress; or if a woman kill her husband,
it is petty treason, and here inquirable. Death, the Escheat hereof appertains
to the Lord of the Fee, for such treasons touch not his Highness himself.
Felony.
4 If one kill another in his own defense, or by accident, it is here to be
enquired of as bloodshed, etc. Stamf. 15. a. Loss of goods in both, and
charter of pardon must be purchased for it. Stat, of Glove. cap. 9. Rape.
5 If any man ravish a Woman, whether Wife, Widow, or Maid, though she does
afterward assent, it is here enquirable as Trespass. And their ayders and
abettors are to be enquired of. Death, and the loss of Goods and Lands, the
benefit of Clergy is taken away, by the Stat. of 18 Eliz. cap. 6. The ayders
and abettors shall receive the like punishment as well as he that committed the
fact. Burglary.
6 Burglary are those, who in the time of peace, or in the night time with a
felonious intent to rob or kill, do break any houses, Churches, walls or
Gates, it is here inquirable. Stamf. so. 30. b. Death, and loss of lands
goods, and so shall their accessory. Petty Larceny.
7 Petty Larceny, is the selonious intent of taking of any thing under the
value of 12 pence, as, Capons, Pigs, Hens, and such like, or cloths off hedges,
and is here enquirable. The punishment is corporal, as whipping, and loss of
goods if they have any, for the law suffers no offense to escape unpunished.
Phisnomy defaced.
8 Putting out of eyes, cutting out of tongues, or disfiguring any member, to
the intent they should not see nor speak, is here inquirable, as bloodshed.
Judgment of death, and loss of lands and goods, 5 H. 7. Misprision of Treason.
9 Misprision of Treason, is, if any know of Treason, and concealeth it four
and twenty hours, you are to enquire of it. Loss of goods and chattels for
ever, of lands during life, and perpetual imprisonment, no bail being
admitted. Sorcerers and Conjurers, and Witches.
10 You are to enquire of Conjurers and Witches, and such as practice
Diabolical Arts, or any Enchantments, whereby any person shall be killed,
destroyed, or consumed, it is Felony in them, their abettors and concealers.
Death, grounded upon the Law of Moses, Exodus 21. 18. and Levit. 20. 27. and
loss both of lands and goods, 5 Eliz. Some of our Pulpit temporizers would
make Astrology (that sublime science) one of the number; but the Law is not
guilty of their ignorance. Sacrilege.
11 The taking away of Ornaments seloniously out of Churches or Chapels, is
here inquirable as Felons. Death, no benefit of Clergy, Frustra petit auxilium
Ecclesiae, qui peccat contra Ecclesiam. Taking of Doves, young Pigeons,
Goshawks, fish, Cignets, Swans, Peacocks, domestic Dear, and Robbery.
12 The felonious taking of Doves in Dovehouses, young pigeons, Goshawkes out of
their nests, taking of Fish out of ponds, stews, or trunks, (but in a common
River otherwise) or taking Cignets, Swans marked, Peacocks, or any domesticke
Dear, knowing it to be so, and setting upon one in the high way, though he
take but the value of a penny is Felony, and are here inquirable. Death, with
the loss of lands, goods, and chattels, and the like to their accessory.
Burning of houses or barnes.
13. If any one seloneously burn any dwelling house, or barns, or stacks, or
mowes of corn in the night-season, it is felony at the Common Law, and by you
to be inquired of. Death, and loss of goods and lands. Acessaries.
14. You are to enquire if any one procure or command another to commit the
felony, though he be not present when it is perpetrated, he is said to be an
accessory before the fact; or if any receive or aid a Felon, having knowledge
of the fact which he committed, he is an accessory after the fact, Stamf. 40.
The Judgment is the same as against the felon, according to the merit of the
fact. Escape voluntary.
15. If any be arrested for felony, or any other crime, and afterward the
party in whose custody he is, tollerates him to go at large, this is a
voluntary escape, and inquireable. It shall be adjudged against him that
suffered the escape, as if he were the offender, Stamf. fo. 33. Escape
negligent.
16. If one be arrested for felony, and escapes, contrary to the will of the
arrester, and is not followed with fresh pursuit, nor taken before the pursuer
loses sight of him: this is inquirable. Though he be afterward taken, yet is
it finable according to the quality of the offense. Rescue.
17. If any rescue and set at liberty any person apprehended, and arrested for
felony, it is felony in the Rescuer, and here inquirable, 1 H. 7. 9. The same
judgment is as in a voluntary escape. 18 These things mentioned in this first
part of the Charge, are here to be enqired of and presented, but not punishable
here, but are to be certified by the Steward to the Justices of the Peace, at
the Sessions next ensuing. But the matters contained in the subsequent part of
the Charge, are here in this Leete to be enquired of, presented and punished,
but not certified, as is the part preceding. And these are grounded upon the
Common and Statute Laws of this Commonwealth. Charge of the Leet. Judgment.
Constables Tything-men.
19 It behooves you to enquire, if the Constables and Tything-men have not been
remiss in executing their office upon Vagabonds, Rogues, and sturdy Beggars,
that have com'n within their Liberty and charge. For every such neglect or
default they ought to forfeit 20 s. You ought also to enquire of those that
sustain and feed them. The penalty is 10 s. for every time they give alms to
such. Stocks.
20 You shall enquire if there be in every Tithing a pair of good and sufficient
stocks according to the Stat. for the severe punishing of idle persons. If
there be not, the Tithing loses 5 l. Hue and Cry.
21 Whether Hue and Cry after Thieves and Robbers has been duly pursued, lies
next in your way, to enquire of, presenting them that made default. The penalty
or forfeiture of such default is 5 l. Common Nuisance.
22 All Purprestures are here enquirable, which are either in eligendo, or
destruendo, either in setting up, or casting down any thing which may tend to
a public annoyance, as in levying of Ditches or Hedges, or by making or
filling up of Ditches, or if walls, houses, or pales be made and erected, or
thrown down, or any ways or paths opened, or stopped to the damage of the
people; or if any waters be stopped or diverted out of their right course; or
if the common Rivers or watering places for Beasts be corrupted and annoyed
with Hemp, Hay, and such like; or if any encroachment be upon the Kings high
way, or any carrion or unwholesome thing be cast into the same. The party
offending for every time so doing forfeiteth 20 s. 33 H. 8. c. 17. Bridges
decayed.
23 Inquiry is to be made of the defect of Bridges or Causwayes decayed and
broken down, and who ought to repair them. The penalty is according to the
discretion of the Jury upon the view. Common Pounds.
24 Inquiry is also to be made, if Common Pounds be good and close to retain
such distress as shall be brought to them, until they be delivered thence by
order of Law, and to present such as ought to keep them in such order if they
be taken. This is also referred to the Iuries discretion. Surveyors of high
ways.
25 And forasmuch as high ways (especially in winter) are very troublesome to
travel in, it was enacted the 1. 2. Ph. M. c. 8. That the Constable and
Churchwardens of every Parish within this Common wealth should yearly upon
Tuesday or Wednesday in Easter week assemble a number of the Parishioners, and
elect two honest men of them to be Surveyors of the high ways for one year,
and that they shall have authority to direct the persons that shall be
appointed for the mending and repairing of them, according to their discretion,
faithfully executing their office. Every Surveyor neglecting his office, and
making default, forfeits 20 s. Every person for every plowland in tillage or
pasture within the parish, and every person there keeping a draught or plough,
shall send every day (that the ways are in mending) one Waine or Cart, with all
necessaries convenient to carry things, and also two able men with the same.
The penalty for every draught making default, is 20 s. Every other Householder,
Cottager, and Labourer, not being an hired servant by the year, shall by
themselves, or one sufficient Labourer, upon every of the said days work
there. The penalty for every one making default every day, 8 d. Ditches,
hedges, and high ways kept and scoured.
26 You shall enquire if any Heyes, Fences, Dikes or Hedges, next adjoining on
every side, to any high or common ways, be not from time to time ditched,
scoured, repaired, and kept, and all trees and bushes growing in the
highways, be cut down by the owners of the ground or soil, whereby the ways
are opened, and the people may have a more easy passage. Boundaries'.
Every person not so doing forfeiteth 20 s. 18 Eliz. 9. 27 You shall further
enquire, if any ancient bounds, or Landmarks be withdrawn and taken away, such
as distinguish or divide Hundreds, Parishes, Tythings, Commons. Common-meadows,
and Common fields, to avoid confusion, and consequently dissension. 18 Eliz. 2.
Fined according to the discretion of the Jury. Hedg-breakers.
28 You shall further enquire, if any common breakers of hedges or senses, by
which their neighbors ground is made subject to the incursions of Cattle,
which are the grounds of many actions of Trespass, to the disturbance of the
peace of the Comonwealth. Such offenders are to be stocked and whipped.
Pound-breach.
29 You shall also enquire of the breach of any common Pownd to take away
distress out of it, though the distress be without cause. Or if any shall
rescue, or take away by force any cattle, which is distrained for any rent,
amerciament or other cause, before it be in custodia legis, in the custody of
the Law, or impounded, it is presentable. Fineable according to the discretion
of the Jury. Or a Writ de pareo fracto, lies against him as Common Law. F. N.
B. 139. Bloodshed.
30 You shall also enquire, if any assaults be committed, whereby bloodshed
ensues to the disturbance of the people of this Common wealth, is here
inquireaable. 1 R. 3. fo. 1. The fine for the offense is accoding to the
discretion of the Jury, but commonly it is 3 s. 4 d. Rescous.
31 You shall further enquire if any Rescous were committed upon the Sheriff
or his Baylifs in disturbance of them, from the taking and detaining any person
arrested. An action lies against the offender at the Common Law. Common
Barretors.
32 You shall enquire if there be within the precincts of this Leet any Common
Barretors, such as are common incendiaries of strife, and discord amongst their
neighbors, and are ever fishing in troubled waters, they are of both fexes,
scoulds, brawlers, inventers, and dispersers of calumnies, and reports, whereby
discord and inquietude arises in the Country. Such persons must give sureties
for their good behavior, being disturbers of the peace. Alehouse-keepers.
33 You shall enquire if any Alehouse-keeper, etc. have permitted any
Inhabitant or Townsman (except laborers and handicrafts men, or persons
invited by Travelers) to continue tippling or drinking in any such house. The
pain or forfeiture of the Alehouse-keeper, for every such offense (to the use
of the poor of the Parish) 10 s. Forestaller.
34 You shall enquire if any buy, or cause to be bought any victual, or other
thing, coming toward any Fair or market to be sold in the same, or shall make
any bargain, contract, or promise, for the having or buying of the same, before
it shall be in the Market, etc. such shall be judged a Forestaller. He that is
convict thereof, is for the first time to be imprisoned for 2 months, and
loss of the value of the thing sold. The 2d time imprisoned by the space of
half a year, and shall loose the double value of the goods, etc. The 3d time
during his Highnesses pleasure, and judgment of the Pillory, forfeiting all
his goods and chattels. See Stat. 5 E. 6 cap. 14. Regrator.
35 You shall enquire if any regrate any corn, butter, cheese, or other dead
or quick victuals whatsoever, that shall come to any Fair or Market to be sold,
and does sell the same again in any Fair or Market, holden in the same place,
or within four miles thereof, shall be judged a Regrator. The judgment of a
Forestaller. Ingrosser.
36 You shall enquire if any do ingrosse and get into their hands, or promise
taking, (unless it be by demise, grant, or lease of Land) any Corn growing in
the Fields or otherwise, butter, cheese, or other dead Victual, to the intent
to sell again, shall be reputed an illegal Ingrosser. The same judgment of a
Forestaller and Regrator. Assize of bread.
37 You shall enquire if any Baker shall make and put to sale any bread which
is not of good and sufficient weight, and assize, according to the rate and
prices of come and grain in the Markets adjoining, or such as is not wholesome
nourishment for Man. And that he set his own signet upon every loaf of bread
that he vends, to the end that if it want weight, it may be known in whom the
fault lies. For the first, second, and third time he shall be amerced according
to the merits of the fault, and shall from time to time loose his bread so
found deficient in weight. But if he transgress the fourth time, then must he
in the open Fair or Maket stand upon the pillory. Brewers.
38 You shall likewise enquire if any Brewers or Tiplers do not keep and observe
the Assize of Ale and Beer, and that it be made healthful for man's body, not
setting the same to sale till it be tasted by the Officer (called the
Aletaster) on that behalf appointed, according to the Laws and Statutes of
this Commonwealth 5 H. 3. 58 Ed. 3. For the first, second, and third time he
shall be amerced. But for the fourth offense he shall go to the Tumbrel.
Victuallers.
39 You shall further enquire if any Victualler, together with Poulterers,
Cooks, Butchers, Bakers, or Brewers, have conspired or made oath not to sell
any Victuals but at certain prices; enquiring likewise of the like
conspiracies of Artificers and Laborers, to do but certain work in a day,
and that at certain hours. Every such person so doing, being thereof lawfully
convicted, shall forfeit for the first offense 10 l. within six days after
conviction, or 20 days imprisonment, having only bread and water for his
sustenance. For the 2d. offense 20 l. or else to stand on the pillory. And for
the 3d. offense 40 l. or the pillory, and to loose one of his ears, and ever
after to be taken as, an infamous person, and his oath not to be credited in
any matters of judgment. Inne-holders.
40 You shall enquire if any Inne-holders or Hostlers, sell their horse bread,
bay, oats, beans, peafe, provender, and all kind of victual, both for man
and beast, for reasonable profit, having respect to the prizes in the market.
For the first offense to be fined according to the quantity of the offense. The
2d. conviction, imprisonment for one month without bail, The 3d. to stand on
the pillory. And the 4th. after judgment of the pillory given, he shall be
fore-judged from keeping any Inn again. Butchers.
41 You shall enquire if any Butchers do sell any manner of corrupt victuals,
or any contagious flesh, that dyed of any Murrain or any other disease, or kill
or sell the flesh of any Bull unbaited, or do puff and blow up meat with
their breath, whereby it proves deceitful and unwholesome. Fineable. He shall
not kill any Calfe to sell, being under the age of five weeks. The forfeiture
for every Calfe so killed and sold, is 3 s. 4 d. Neither shall he use the crait
or mystery of a Tanner, during the time he is a Butcher. For everyday, 6 s. 8
d. False weights and measures.
42 You shall likewise enquire if any keep and use any false weights and
measures of bushels, gallons, else, yards, or false weights, balances, or
pounds; or if any use double weights, the greater to buy with, and the lesser
to sell with, to deceive the Nation. To suffer imprisonment until he has made
fine to the Lord Protector for his offense. And if any sell any Corn, Wine or
Ale but by a sealed measure. For the first offense, 6 s. 8 d. The second
offense 13 s. 4 d. The third offense 20 s. to be set on the pillory, and the
measure not sealed to be broken. Tanners.
43 You shall also enquire if any Tanner does use the mystery of a Shoemaker,
Currier, or Butcher. The pain is to loose all the hides or skins so wrought, or
the value thereof. Or if he forestall any hides coming to the Market, or buy
any hides in open Market, unless it be of a Beast killed for ones own private
provision. For every hide so bought he forfeits 6 s. 8 d. Or if he have offered
to sell any Leather before it be well dried, sorted, and marked, or has tanned
any sheeps skins, or if he put his Leather into any warm woozes. For every
offense 10 l. and to stand on the pillory three several Market days. Curriers.
44 You shall enquire if any Currier does exercise the mystery of a Tanner or
Shoemaker, during the time he shall exercise the trade of a Currier, or if he
shall curry any hide or skin (except it be perfectly tanned) being not thoroughly
dry, or shall burn or scald any hide or leather in the currying. To forfeit for
every hide or skin 6 s. 8 d. and the value of every hide or skin spoiled by his
workmanship. Shoomakers
45 You shall further enquire if any Shoemaker do cause any boots, shoos,
slippers, etc. to be made of any Leather, but such as is well and truly tanned,
curryed, and substantially sowed. The penalty for every pair of shoes, boots,
etc. made or sold otherwise, 3 s. 4 d. and the full value of the same.
Searchers and sealers of leather.
46 You shall enquire if any searcher and sealer of Leather do refuse with
convenient speed to seal any lawful Leather. The penalty for every such
offense is 40 s. Or if he receive any bribe, or exact any fee for the execution
of his office (except what is limited by the Statute.) For every such bribe or
see 20 l. Unlawful games.
47 You shall enquire if any keep or maintain any common house, Alley, or
place of bowling, Carding, Dicing, or any other game prohibited by any Statute,
or any other illegal game, hereafter to be sound out or invented. For every day
40 s. Every person that is found playing in the faid places or houses, shall be
by you enquired after. Forfeiteth for every time 6. s. 8. d. All Constables,
Tything-men, Bailiffs, etc. ought to search once every month for unlawful
games, as well within the Franchise, as without. In default thereof, they
forfeit for every months neglect 40. s. Shooters in handguns Croshowes, etc.
48. You shall also enquire, of such as shoot either in handguns or pistols,
Croshowes or stone bows; for all are prohibited to shoot in them, (except such
as can dispend 100. l. per annum) at any Herne, Duck, Mallard, Phesant,
Partridge, Pigion, Heathcock, Teal, or Wigeon. Upon pain of 10. l. for every
time he shoots. Or, (1. Jac.) he that shoots at any of the said fowls, or at
any Dear, or hare, and cannot dispend ten pounds per annum in land, nor is
worth two hundred pounds in personal estate. Forfeits for every shoot 20. s. to
the use of the poor of the parish, if he neither will nor can pay so much; then
3. months imprisonment, if he can dispend 10. l. a year or above then the
pain is 40. s. and finding sufficient-sureties that he shall not commit the
like offense again. Fry of fish.
49. You shall further enquire of such as destroy any fry of fish, in the
waters, streams or rivers, within the precincts of this Leete with any manner
of net, or any devise or engine, (angling excepted.) The penalty is for every
time 20. s. The fish taken, and the nets, etc. Phesant and Partridges.
50. You shall also inquire if any have destroyed any Phesants or Partridges,
with any nets or other devises in the night time. For every Phesant 20. s. and
every Partridge 10. s. to be paid within 20. days after conviction, or one
months imprisonment. Hawking or hunting with spaniels, etc.
51. Or if any do hawk or hunt with spanniels, where corn grows, except it be
in his own ground. The penalty is 40. s. to the party vexed. Tracing of hare.
52. You shall enquire if any do destroy or kill hares by traceing in the snow,
with a dog or otherwise. The penalty to the Lord of the Leet for every hare is
6. s. 8. d. Breaking of ponds.
53. You shall likewise enquire, if any do break any pond, pool, or other pits,
wherein the Lord of the Leet has fish, to the intent to destroy and steal them
away. He shall pay to the Lord treble damages, suffer imprisonment for 3.
months, and find sureties for his good behavior for seven years. Evesdropers.
54. You shall enquire of Evesdroppers, such as stand under walls or windows,
by night or day to hear news, and to carry it to others to make strife and
debate amongst their neighbors, these are evil members of the Commonwealth,
and here inquirable. Such offendes are punishable according to the discretion
of the Jury. Musters.
55. You are to enquire if any refuse to go to Muster, or absent himself
without any lawful impediment. The penalty is 40. s. and ten days
imprisonment. Horses infected
You shall enquire if any have put to pasture any stoned horses, gelding or
mare infected with the scab, or other infectious or contagious disease, into or
upon any Common or Common fields. The Penalty to the Lord of the Leet (for
every such horse so infected) is 10. s. Watch and Ward.
57. You likewise shall enquire if Constables have been dilligent in seeing the
peace kept and observed watch and ward, from the day of the Ascension until
Michaelmas day every night from the setting of the Sun, until its riseing, 13.
E. 1. c. 4. and if they have been remiss in any thing touching any part of
their oath it is presentable. For such neglect the Constables are fineable
according to the discretion of the Jury. [Enquire the like of all the rest of
the officers, according to the places they are in, as the Tythingman, Surveyors
of the high ways, Searchers and Sealers of Lether, etc.] Mortmaine.
58. You shall also enquire if any man has given any Lands in Mortmaine, viz to
any Corporations, or Fraternity, Religious houses, or Religious persons,
without license. Such gift or devise is void, and the Lord shall have it.
Treasure trove
59. You shall also enquire of treasure trove, viz. treasure found within the
precincts of this Leete, either within or above the ground, the hiders not
being known to any man. It appertains to the Lord of the Leete. Waifes,
Estrayes, etc.
60. You shall likewise enquire of all Estrayes and waifes; as if there be any
Horses, Mares, or other cattle, or Swans, that have come within the
Jurisdiction, and remained there a year and a day, and not claimed, these are
Estrayes. The Lord may have them by prescription. And Waifes are cattle stolen,
and waved out of the possession of him that stole them, as a thief being
pursued with hue and cry to save himself does delinquish them, they are called
by the Civillians, bona derelicta) These Waifes appertein to his Highness,
unless the Lord have them by grant in his Charter.

Conclusion.
But not to charge your patience with prolixities; if there shall be any other
matter come to your knowledge, omitted in the charge, and fitting to be
presented, you shall enquire and present it with the rest.

Then after the charge is concluded, the Steward shall command the Crier to
make proclamation, and after Proclamation made three times, the Steward shall
say;

Proclamation.
If any can inform the Steward or this Inquest, of any Treason, petty treason,
Felony, petty Larceny, purpresture, breaking of pondes, or of Rescouse, or of
any other thing acted against the peace, or of any misdemeanor of any officer
or other person here, or of any waife or stray, Treasure found, Mortmaine or of
any other thing here to be enquired of, come into Court and you shall be heard.

If any come in, and appear, let him be sworn thus;

The Oath.
The Evidence that you shall give to this Inquest, shall be the truth, the whole
truth, and nothing but the truth; So help you God, etc.

Then let the Steward say to the Jury.

Go together, and enquire of the matters of your charge, and when you are
agreed I shall be ready to take your presenments.

Then adjourn the Court by Proclamation, until after dinner, in this manner.

All manner of persons that have any more to do at this Court, may for the
present time depart, and appear here again at one of the clock in the afternoon.

After your return from dinner, call the Court by proclamation, and after O yes
three times, say,

All manner of persons that were adjourned over until one of the Clock, or have
any thing more to do at this Court, let them come into Court and give their
attendance, or as they will answer the contrary at their peril.

Then take the presentiments of the Jury if they be there ready with them;
otherwise, give them a day to bring them in, adjourning the Court till then. At
that day call the Court. And then call the Jury, every man by his name, and if
they all appear; take their presentiments, and ask them if they be all agreed;
if they say Yes. Then ask them if they be content that their presentiments shall
be altered in form, if they grant it, then take them, read them, and amend the
form if need require; see that they be brought under their hands and seals for
the Stewards warrant.

Then discharging the Court with Proclamation, command the Crier to say, O yes,
three times, and say,

Adjournment.
All manner of persons that have appeared and have any thing more to do at this
Court Leete holden here this day; Let them come forth and they shall be heard,
otherwise they may depart and are discharged of their attendance, and are to
keep their day again upon a new Summons.

I shall not need to trouble you with presidents of presentiments, (seeing that
they are so copiously performed by Mr. Kitching in his Jurisdiction of Courts,
and Wilkinson in his office of Sheriffs) only with three or four for methods
sake.

A Presentment of Petty Treason.
FIrst, the Jury aforesaid say and present upon their oath, That A. B. etc. at
Skipton, within the Jurisdiction of this Court, as a Felon of his Highness the
Lord Protector, etc. did make and coin twenty silver pieces of money called
shillings, and forty silver pieces of money called half crowns falsely and
felloniously (having not first gotten his Highnesses Letters Patents) against
the peace of his said Highness, and his Dignity, and against the form of the
Statute in this case provided and published.

A Presentment of Felony for burning a house.
ALso they present, That one A. B. of etc. gent. such a day, etc. at C. within
the Juridiction of this Court, by force and Arms, etc. wilfully and
feloniously (of malice by him pretended) did burn the house of one E. F.
against his Highnesses peace, and the peace of the Commonweall; therefore the
Bailiff is commanded to seize all his lands and tenements, goods and chattells,
that he may answer for them to the Lord of this Manor.

A Presentment of a Felon.
ALso they present, That A. B. of etc. Yeoman' such a day, etc. at S. within
the Jurisdiction of this Court by force and arms, etc. and against the public
peace, the Close of C D. at S. aforesaid broke and entered into, and one silk
coat, called Tabby, of an Ash color, of the goods and chattels of the said C.
D. then and there found, feloniously took and carried away. Therefore it is
commanded the Bailiff, etc.

A Presentment of an Accessory.
ALso they present, that A. B. of S. aforesaid gent. such a day, etc. at S.
aforesaid within the Jurisdiction of this Court, did council, provoked,
procured, encouraged, and abetted one C. D. etc. one Cow of black color, etc.
of the chattel price, etc. of one, etc. then and there found, feloniously to
steal, take and drive away, and the said C. D. by virtue of the council,
provocation, procurement, encouragment and abetment, the aforesaid, etc. the
said black Cow such a day, etc. year, etc. felloniously stole, took, and drove
away, etc.

The Oath of the Steward.
YOu shall swear that you well and truly shall serve the Lord of this Manor of
S. in the office of Steward, and truly to see all plaints, actions, process
and matters in the Courts to be holden before the Lord of this Manor, and by
you or your sufficient deputy, according to the custom and Libertyes of the
said Manor, to be entered and recorded as they ought to be, after the best of
your cuning, skill, and power, taking for the same your due fees, and the
perquisites, issues, profits, and amerciaments of the same Courts; you shall
justly and truly write, and yearly extract, for the levying and gathering
thereof; and you shall truly and diligently do and accomplish all other things
appertaining to your said office after the best of your knowledge, as near as
Gods grace shall direct you. So help you God, etc.

The Oath of the Bailiff.
YOu shall swear, that you shall well and truly serve his Highness the Lord
Protector, etc. And the Lord of this Leete in the office of Bailiff for this
year ensuing, and shall well and truly collect all rents, Revenues and other
annual profits, as shall be chargeable, and issuing out to you. And of that you
shall make and give a lawful account at the end of the same year, and in every
other thing appertaining to your office, well and truly to discharge in your
year ensuing. So help you God, etc.

The Oath of the Constable.
YOu shall swear, that you well and truly shall serve his Highness the Lord
Protector, etc. in the office of Constable-ship, and as Constable of this Town
of S. for and during the space of one whole year now next ensuing; you shall
endeavor your self to the utmost of your power, to see the Public Peace kept
and Watch and Ward observed and kept in this Town, as has been accustomed, and
as it ought to be: likewise you shall endeavor your self to learn and
understand the contents of the Statute of Winchester, and diverse other Laws
and Statutes of this Nation made for the punishment of rogues, vagabonds, and
sturdy beggars, haunting and resorting within the precinct of your office, and
punish the offenders accordingly. Also you shall punish all such persons, as do
or shall play, at any unlawful games, according to the Statute in that case
made and provided. You shall also have regard for the maintenance of Artilery
within your said office, and that you shall do and accomplish to the utmost of
your power, So help you God, etc.

The Tithengman or petty Counstables Oath is after the same manner mutatis
mutandis; only the Tithingman is sworn to attend on the Constable (if he be
required) when he shall execute his Office.

Of the Affeerer, and his Oath.
But, first let us inquire what he is, and from whence his name is derived.
Minsh. says, that Affeerer comes of the old French word Affeur'er, which is,
to tax or fine, and in Latin they are called Affidati, as it were men put in
trust and appointed to this Office, which do affirm upon their Oaths, what
penalty they think in their conscience, the offenders have deserved; so that
they may mulct such as have committed any fault, which is arbitrably
punishable, and for which no express penalty is prescribed by statute. The
Oath is as follows.

You and either of you shall swear, that you will truly and indifferently tax,
assesse and affeer all such Amerciaments as are presented at this Court;
wherein you shall spare no man for love, favor, affection or corruption, nor
raise nor inhance upon any man (of malice) more grievous amercements, then
shall be thought reasonable, according to the quality of the offense, and the
faults committed, and not otherwise. So help you God, etc.

The Oath of the Ale-taster.
YOu shall well and truly swear that you shall well and truly serve his
Highness the Lord Protector, etc. and the Lord of this Leete in the office. of
Aletaster, or Assizor of this Liberty or Hundred for this year to come; you
shall duly and truly see from time to time, that the bread brought to be sold
be duly weighed, and that the same to continue such weight, according to the
prices of wheat, as by the Statute in that behalf is provided: likewise you
shall have diligent care, during the time of your being in office, to all the
Brewers and Tiplers within your office, that they and every of them, do make
good and wholesome Ale and Beer for man's body, and that the same be not sold
before it be assayed by you, and then to be sold agreeable to the prices
limited and appointed by the Justices of Peace; and all faults committed or
done by the Bakers, Brewers or Tiplers, or by any of them, you shall make
known, and present the same at this Court, whereby due and condign punishment
may be inflicted upon them for their offenses accordingly, and in every other
thing, you shall well and truly behave your self in the said office for this
year to come, So help you God, etc.

Of the Hayward, Beadel, or Greve, and his Oath.
HAyward, has its derivation from the French word Hay, i. e. sepes, a hedge,
and Guard, i. e. custodia, a keeper of the hedges. With us it signifies, one
that keeps the Common heard of the Town: and yet one part of his office is to
look that they break not the hedges of enclosed grounds. He is called by the
Latins Bedellus. i. e. oppidi vel civitatis servus.

You shall swear, that you shall well and truly serve his Highness the Lord
Protector, etc. and the Lord of this Leete in the office of Hayward, Beadel, or
Greve for this ensuing year, and you shall duly and truly execute all
Attachments, and other process to you directed from the Lord or Steward of this
Court, and you shall present all pound breaches which shall be made within your
office; and also all Chattels, Strayes and Waifes, and in every other thing,
well and truly hold you in the same office. So help you God, etc.

It is usual with Lords to grant their office of Bayliwick, taking good
securities in this manner.

A grant of a Bayliwick.
TO all, to whom this present writing shall come. A. B. of C. in the County of
Y. sends greeting. Know ye that I the said A. B. in the fidelity,
circumspection and due diligence of my beloved servant E. F. to me and my
posterity hereafter to be done and performed, very much relying and confiding;
Have made, ordained, and by this my present writing constituted the said E. F.
of Town, Manor, or Lordship of S. in the said County of Y. Collector and
Receiver of all and singular my Rents, Revennues, Fines, Amerciaments, and
Estreates of Court Leets, or viewes of Frank-pledge there: And of all other
profits by reason of the said Court Leet, or view of Frank-pledge, any way
arising, emergent or coming: to have, hold, exercise and occupy the said
office to the said E. F. by himself so long as he shall well behave himself
toward me, and shall a true and just account of his Receipts make unto me, and
the same shall well and truly pay and satisfy. Taking of me for his yearly
wages 5l. at the Feasts, etc. by equal portions, by mine own hands after his
account and full payment at every half year, and the gifts, rewards, and
emoluments to the same office due and accustomed. In testimony whereof, etc.

Curia Dominicalis: OR, COURT BARON.
Of the first Original, and Institution of Manors and of this Court.
IF we labor to investigate the Antiquity of Court Baron we shall find them
as Ancient as Manors themselves; therefore we will inquire what a Manor is,
together with the first institution of Manors.

What a Manor is?
The word Manor, Manerium est nomen collectivum and generale, it comprehends
Houses, Lands, Gardens, trees, etc. and has its Etimologie (as some derive it)
a Manendo, and then it takes its name either from the Manor House which the
Lord makes his dwelling L. Dyer.
place, or else a manendo, quia Dominus ac tenentes in Manerii sui circuitu
cobabitant ac manent: others compute its denomination from the Latin, Manerium
quasi Manurium, because it is labored with handy work by the Lord himself, or
which the Tenants are obliged to manure, or else from the Lands remaining in
the Tenants hands, which are likewise tilled and manured: others would have its
appellation from the French word, Manoir, i. e. Mansions; because the Lord
remains there and has his house which is called the principal house of the
Manor, or from the French word Mesner, which signifies to govern or guide,
because the Lord of a Manor has the guiding and directing of all his Tenants
within the limits of his Jurisdiction, and this is holden (by some) to be the
most probable Etimologie, and most consentaneous to the nature of a Manor: for
a Manor (hisce diebus) signifies the Jurisdiction and Royalty incorporate,
rather then the Land or Site:

How Manors were created.
When the pristine Kings of this Commonwealth (who had all the lands of England
in Demesne) did conferr great quantities of land upon some great Personages
with liberty to parcel the land out to other inferior Tenants, reserving such
duties and services as they thought convenient: Such lands were called Manors;
a Manor consisting of two parts, viz.

1. Demesne, 2. Services,
F. N. B. 3. and 8
And neither of them can make a Manor without the other: for a Message or
Lands cannot be called demesnes without Tenants belonging to them, to pay Rent
and do services: so on the other part, though a man have Tenants to pay him
Rents, and do him service, and no Message or lands whereupon to keep his
Court. and to receive his Rents and services, this cannot be called a Manor,
but only a Signtory ingrosse, F. N. B. 3. and 8. Likewise a Manor must be by
prescription, and the services by continuance time out of mind, and therefore
a Manor cannot be created at this day by the Protectors Patent, it Leonards
Reports first part 33. Marsh against Smith.
being an hereditament consisting of many real things and incorporated
together, before time of memory; then a multo fortiori, a subject cannot creat
one; yet may he in some sort enlarge a Manor by adding some services unto it,
9. Ass. pl. 24, and Br. tit. tenure, 26.

A Customary Manor, what it is, and what may be a good Manor to maintain
Coppy-holders.
NOw though a Manor by his proper nature ought to consist of

Demesnes and Services,
Yet in some cases, that may be a Manor, and maintain Coppyholders, and a
Court Baron; by usuage and custom, which otherwise by Common law is no Manor,
nor can be so called, etc. As if diverse do hold lands by Copy of the Manor
of Dale, and so have done time out of mind, and the like time there has been
no Freeholders to the said Manor, although this be no Manor in his proper
nature, yet by usuage and custom it is a good Manor to maintain Coppyhoders,
Carthrops Readings 12.

Customary Manor, what.
And in Coo. 11. 17. and 18. Sr. Henry Nevils case, it is clearly resolved by
the whole Court, that there may be a Customary Manor, and held by Copy, and
that such a Customary Lord may hold Courts, Co. 11. 17. and 18. Sr. Henry
Nevils case.
and grant Coppies, and that such a Customary Manor may pass by Surrender and
Admittance, and that Fines shall be paid upon admittance, as well upon
alienation, as upon descent, and there may be also a Customary Lord, Mesne, and
a Customary Tenant, as in case where the Mesnalty is a Tenancy at will, at the
common law of a Manor, and also if such a Customary Manor be forfeited, the
Lord shall have the customs and services as appertaining unto the same, and it
is there said that the Manor of Aylesham in the County of Norff. is held by
Copy.

By what names a Manor may pass.
17. E 3. fo. 8. Bolstrod. first part. fo. 54. Mich. 8. Jac.
A Manor may pass by several names; as it may be known by the name of Priory or
Chantery as appears by the book of 17. E. 3. fo. 8. where a feofment was made
of a Manor by the name of Knights fee, and this is there held to be good, this
having usually carried the name of Knights fee, and the same may well pass by
this name, either by Fine or by Feofment; and in another place a Manor was
cognitum and vocatum by the name of seven yard land as well as by the name of
Manor, and passed.

How Court Barons were first Instituted.
Lamb fo. 128. and 146. Cambden Brit. 1216. Britton. fo. 274 Mirror. cap. 1.
Sect. 3.
At the Creation of Manors, the King delegated Courts to the Lords, where they
might redress misdemeanors within their precincts, and to punish offenses
committed by their Tenants, and to decide and debate controversies arifing
within their Juridiction, and these Courts were termed Courts Barons, as it
appears amongst the Laws of Edward the Confessor, where it is said Barons
vero qui suam habent curiam de suis hominibus, etc. taking its name of the
Baron who was Lord of the Manor, (or according to Coo. com. Lit. fo. 58. a.
for that properly in the eye of the Law it has relation to the Freeholders,
who are Judges of the Court) because in ancient time such persons were called
Barons, and came to the Parliament and sat in the Upper House; but when time
had wrought such an alteration; that Manors fell into the hands of inferior
men, and such as were far unworthy of so sublime a calling: then it grow to a
Custom, that none but such as the King would, should come to the Parliament;
such as the King, for their extraordinary wisdom or quality thought good to
call by Writ, which Writ ran hac vice tantum: yet though Lords of Manors lost
their names of Barons, and were deprived of that dignity, which was inherent to
their names, yet their Courts retain still the name of Court Barons, because
they were originally erected for such personages as were Barons, neither has
time been so injurious as to irradicate the whole memory of their pristine
dignity, in their denomination, there are yet stamps left of their nobility,
for they are still entitled by the name of Lords.

Court Baron cannot be separated from a Manor.
12 Eliz. Dyer 288.
THis Court Baron is the chief Prop and Pillar of a Manor, which no sooner
fails, but the Manor is destroyed, and therefore it cannot be separated from
the Manor, for it is a wealth to a Manor (the like of a Court of Pypowder to
a Fair, of which more in its proper place) and by granting the principal
which is the Manor, the Court which is incident to it, passes without being
named, 12 Eliz. Dyer 288. if a Manor be granted cum pertinentiis the Court
passes,, for it is an incident inseparable to the Manor, and one cannot grant
his Court, but he may grant the profits of it, Brownlows Rep. 175. Yet though
Brownlows rep. 175.
a Court Baron is incident to a Manor, it must be understood of a Manor in
facto, in reality and truth, but not to be a Manor only in intendment, and a
mere nominall Manor, Bolstrod, first part, fol. 54. Bolstrod, 1. part fol. 54.
Mich. 8. Jac.

Bolstrod, 1. part, fol. 57.
And as a Manor at this day cannot be derived out of the CROWN, therefore ex
consequente, neither the Court Baron which is incident to such a Manor, but a
Court Leet is not incident to a Manor, but he which has a Manor may also
have a Court Leet to be by him held within his Manor, but this ought to be by
a special grant from the King, and not otherwise, and then he may punish
offenders, the which he cannot do in his Court Baron, he cannot be ousted of
his Court Baron unless he be ousted of his Manor; for if he have a Manor, he
ought to have such a Court Baron, for this, (as I have said) is as an incident,
and follows the Manor as a necessary consequent and adjunct unto the Manor,
and therefore if he have the one (viz.) the Manor, he shall also have the
other, (viz.) the Court Baron.

What parts a Court Baron does consist of.
THis Court Baron appertaining to a Manor consists of four special parts,
viz.

1. The Lord. 2. The Steward. 3. The Tenant. 4. The Bayliffe.
It is defined to be an assembly of these parts together within the same
Manor; and it is likewise duplicate, viz.

1. The first is for the taking care, counsel, and inquiry of causes concerning
the same Manor: as for the trial of titles of the land, and the taking and
pasing of estates, Surrenders, admittances, and grants, and to see justice duly
executed, and the Acts and Ordinances there done to be recorded in the Rolls of
the same Court, which Rolls are the evidences of all Ordinances, duties, and
customs, and conveyances between the Lord and the tenants of the same Manor,
and are to be entered by the Steward, or an Officer indifferent between the Lord
and his Tenants, and the same Rolls to remain with the Lord, thereby to know
his Tenants, his Rents, his Fines, his Customs and his service. And the
particular grant of every Copyhold, to be copied out of the Rolls, and the
copies thereof to be delivered to every particular tenant, neither can they
make any other title to their said tenements, but by their said Copy: And this
is called the Copiholders Court, and herein the Steward is judge.

2. The other is for the trial of actions under the sum of forty shillings, of
the nature of the County Court, (of which we have copiously treated in the
first part of this work, and therefore here not necessary) And herein the
Freeholders are Judges. But to return to the Copyholders Court.

And herein, the Lord, the Steward, the Freeholders, the Copyholders, and the
Bailiffs of every Manor, have an intermixed and joint office, and authority, in
some cases, and to some purposes: and to other purposes their office is
distinct, and every of them does occupy several places, persons, and parts.

Five things necessarily appertaning to a Manor.
THere are five things necessarily appurtenant to a Manor, and Court Baron,
viz.

1. The Lord is chief to command and appoint. 2. The Steward to direct and
record. 3. The Freeholders to affere and judge. 4. The Copyholders to inform
and present. 5. The Bailiff to attend, and execute, etc.
And all these united make a perfect execution of Justice, and judgment in
Court-Barons, and without all these a Court Baron cannot be held in his proper
nature, in respect of all causes appertaining to the perfect jurisdiction of a
Court Baron. But to make a more particular demonstration of their distinct
authorities and offices.

1. And first of the Lord, as he is chief in place, Of the Lord.
so in authority, and he officiateth three several places, viz. the one of a
Chancellor, in cases of equity, the other of Justice in matter of right, and
the third of himself, in cases proper and particular to himself.

2. The Steward does act the part of several persons, Of the Steward.
viz. Judge and Orderer in cases of Copyhold; and also a Minister and Register
to Record and enter things into the Court-rolls, and in both these to be
indifferent between the Lord and his tenants.

3. The Freeholders do likewise execute two parts, The Freeholders.
that is to affeere, and judge amerciaments, and also to return and certify
judgments.

4. The Copyholders hold two distinct places, viz. The Copyholders.
to inform offenses committed against the Lord within the Manor, and to
present such things, as shall be given in charge by the Steward.

5. The Bayliffe officiates two parts, viz. to execute The Bailiff.
the process, and mandates of the Court, and also to return into the Court the
execution of the same process, and quod sit ita justus, quod ob vindictam vel
cupiditatem non quaerat versus tenentes Domini, vel aliquos sibi subditos,
occasiones injustas, per quas destrui debeant seu graviter amerciari. Fleata
lib. 2. cap. 73.


The difference betwixt Court Leet and Court Baron.
Mag. Char. c. 35. 31 E. 3 cap. 15.
HAving traveled thus far in this pen-beaten way, we will now inquire the
difference between Court Leet and Court Baron; and here these Courts differ
from Court-Leets in diverse respects: and first in this, that Court-Barons by
the Law may be kept once every three weeks, or (as some think) as often as it
shall please the Lord of the Manor, though for the better ease both of Lords
and tenants, they are kept but very seldom; but a Court Leet by the Statute of
Magna Charta cap. 35. 31 E. 3. cap. 15. is to be kept but twice every year, one
time within the Month after Easter, and another time within a Month after
Michaelmas.

2. Secondly, in this, that Court-Barons may be kept in any place within the
Manor, but a Court Leet by the said Statute of Magna Charta is to be kept in
certo loco ac determinato within the precinct.

3. Thirdly, in this, that originally Court-Barons belonged unto inferior Lords
of Manors, but Court-Leets belonged unto the King only.

4. Fourthly, in this, that Court-Barons are inseperably incident to every
Manor, so that every Lord of a Manor may keep a Court Baron, but few have
Leets; for inferior Lords of Manors cannot keep Court Leets without special
prescription, or some special patent from the King.

5. Fifthly, in this, that in Court-Barons the Suitors are Judges; but in
Court-Leets the Steward is Judge.

6. Sixthly, in this, that in Court-Barons the Jury consists oftentimes of
less then twelve, in Court-Leets never, because none are impannelled upon the
Jury but Freeholders in Court-Barons of the same Manor; but in Court-Leets
strangers are oftentimes impannelled.

7. Seventhly, in this, that Court-Barons cannot subsist without two Suitors ad
minimum, but Court-Leets can well subsist without any Suitors.

8. Eighthly in this, that Court-Barons enquire of no offenses committed
against the Protector, but Court-Leets enquire of all offenses under
High Treason committed against the State and dignity of the Protector.

9. In many other respects they differ, as that a Writ of error lies upon a
Judgment given in a Court Leet, but not in a Court Baron.

10. So in a Court Leet a capias lies, but in a Court Baron, instead of a
capias is used an Attachment by goods.

11. So in a Court Baron an action of Debt lies for the Lord himself, becanse
the Suitors are Judges, but in a Court Leet the Lord cannot maintain any action
sor himself, because the Steward is judge.

Of the time when, and place where this Court is to be kept.
THE usual and accustomed time is to keep it once every three weeks, and
although no Court has Coo. l. 4. 26. and 6. 27. Owens Reports fol. 35. Mic.
13. and 14 Eliz. Leonards Rep. 133. Marsh against Smith.
time out of mind been holden within the Manor, yet it is not thereby extinct
and lost, for it is incident to a Manor of Common right, Coo. l. 4. 26. and 6.
27. a. And to the place where it is to be kept, it may be kept and holden in
any place within the Manor, as the County Court in any place within the
County, and Hundred-Court in any place within the Hundred: for as to every
Manor a Court is requisite and incident to it; so is it transitory throughout
the whole Manor, and every part of the Demesnes of the Manor is capable of a
Court to be holden there. But if it be Co. 4 fol. 24. Murrell and Smith, and
fo. 27. Cliftons case.
holden out of the Manor it is void, unless a Lord being seized of two or
three Manors, and has usually time out of mind holden at one of his Manors,
Courts for all his said Manors, there by custom such Courts are sufficient in
Law, though they be not holden within the several Manors.

The manner and Method of keeping the Court.
The Style of the Court.
THE Court Baron of A. B. Esquire, of his Court Baron aforesaid, held the 18.
day of October in the year of our Lord 1658. before C. D. Steward there.

After you have entered the Style of the Court, command the Bayliffe to make
Proclamation, O yes, etc. and say:

Proclamation.
All manner of Persons that have been summoned to appear here this day, or have
any thing to do at this Court, draw near and give your attendance.

Or if any will be Essoyned, or enter any plaints, let them come forth and they
shall be heard. Which Essoyn is thus entered, viz.

A. B. is Essoyned for suit of Court, by C. D.

Essoyn.
And Plaints are entered in this manner:

Plaint.
A. B. complains against C. D. of a plea of Trespass, debt, or as the case
requires.

And the proceeds upon plaints are the very same as in the County Court.

Call the Freeholders, and those that make default, let them be amerced in this
manner, viz.

Amerciament.
A. B. Esquire, and C. D. Yeoman, are Freeholders of this Court, and have made
default, therefore each of them is amerced, as may appear upon their heads.

Then enter over their heads thus: Amerced two pence.

Then command the Bayliffe to call the Jurors.

Jurrors.
I. D. Jur. C. D. Jur. B. A. Jur. R. R. H. I. D. C. S. T. K. L. F. E. V. W. M.
N. R. P.

Then call the Foreman to the Book, and swear him after this manner.

The Foremans oath.
You shall swear that you as Foreman of this Homage, with the rest of your
fellows shall duly inquire, and true presentment make of all such articles and
things as shall be given you in charge, and therein you shall spare no man, for
love, favor, or affection, nor present any man for malice, hatred, or envy,
but according as things here presentable, shall or may come to your knowledge,
by information or otherwise: So shall you make there true presentment without
concealment, So help you God, etc.

The Foreman being sworn, call the rest by their names, and swear them by
sour at a time, in this manner:

The oath of the rest.
The same oath that I. D. your Foreman has taken before you on his part, you
and every one of you shall observe and keep of your parts. So help you God,
etc.

After the Inquest thus impannelled and sworn, make another O yes, and say:

Proclamation.
You good men that are impannelled, draw near, and you, and all other keep
silence during the Charge.

An Exhortation to the Jury.
MY MASTERS:
YOU that be sworn, before I give you your Charge, I think it necessary to
declare, by what authority you are commanded hither, and for what cause.
Chiefly you are appointed to be and appear here, being that you are the Lords
Tenants, and are obliged by reason thereof to appear at the Lords Court Baron
when it snall be holden, according to the Law and Custom of this Manor, that
is to say, at every three weeks end, being warned, and being (by the same
authority) there to end and determine injuries, trespasses, debts, and other
actions, where the debt or damage is under forty shillings. And also that
nothing be acted within the Manor, which shall be a detriment to the
Inheritance of the Lord of this Manor, which ought to be enquired and
presented for the Lord: And that you be the more diligent and careful in
enquiring and presenting the same, I have ministered a corporal oath unto you,
which is an Invocation, or taking to witness the name of God, to confirm the
truth of that you shall say and present, minding neither fraud nor deceit, but
only the truth, not partial, but seeking the glory of the Almighty, the
commodity of your neighbors, and the whole Common wealth. Thus much of
exhortation in brief, and now to your Charge.

The Charge.
1. FIrst, you shall enquire of the Suitors which owe any Suit to this Court,
whether they be heirs or no, and present their names that make default, for
they which be absent ought to be present here as well as you, except they have
some lawful impediment to the contrary, for they hold their lands as well to do
their suit, as to pay their rent; so that if they do not thei^r suit they shall
be amerced, or the Lord may have good remedy for the same: Also, you shall
understand, that every common Suitor is bound by The tenants are obliged to
appear at every three weeks end at the Lords Court Baron.
the Laws to appear at the Lords Court Baron every three weeks:
notwithstanding the Lord for your ease (which he esteems more than his own
profit) suffers it to be kept but seldom, as appears; for which cause
every of the Tenants ought to be more willing to come unto his Court at such
times as are appointed for the holding of it; for if they voluntarily absent
themselves, then they render evil for good, for when they did their Fealty they
were sworn to be true tenants unto their Lord, and to pay and do all manner
of suits, customs, and services due for their Tenements, at their day
assigned, and therefore let every man remember his oath, and duty, and do his
suits and services according to the same, otherwise he shall fall into the
danger aforesaid.

2. Next you shall enquire whether there be any tenants What tenants are dead
since the last Court.
dead since the last Court-day or before, whose death as yet is not presented,
and you shall present the same: also what lands and tenements he holds of the
Lord of this Manor at the time of his death, What lands he held, and by what
service.
and by what services, to wit, whether it were by Knights-service, Soccage
tenure, or Copyhold, and what advantage the Lord shall have by his death, as
Relief, Escheat, Fine, Heriot, etc. and who is his Who is his next heir.
next heir, and what age he is of, and in whose custody, and present it. You
shall understand there be diverse manner of Tenures but most men do hold by
Knights service, or Soccage Tenure.

Knights service what it is.
Knights service is when the Tenant holds of the Lord by Escuage, that is to
say, by the service of the Shield; also to hold by Castle-guard, to wit, to
keep a Castle or Tower, or other place of his Lords upon reasonable notice,
when the Lord hears that enemies come into England, that is Knights service.

Homage, fealty, and Escuage, Knights service
Also he that holds by Homage fealty, and Escuage, holds by Knights service.
Also he which holds of his Lord to blow a Horn to warn the men of that
Courtrey when Enemies do invade England, holds by Knights service, and
Knights service ought always to Knights service is done by a man in propria
persona.
be done by a man in his proper person, which formerly drew unto it Ward, and
Marriage, and at this day relief: for when such a Tenant died seized, and his
heir male within age and unmarried, the Lord and the Land holden of him, and
also the marriage of him until he were of full age, viz. the age of 21 years.
But if such a tenant died seized, his heir female being of fourteen years or
more, then the Lord should neither have had the Wardship of the Land, nor of
her body, for the Law intends that a woman of that age may have a Husband
able to do Knights service: and if she were within fourteen years of age and
unmarried, then the Lord had the Wardship of her Land, and also of her body,
until she attained the age of sixteen years; and this at this day is extinct,
of which see more in the Act of Parliament for the taking In Scobels acts in
Wards, etc. See the Act of Parliament for the taking away of the Court of Wards.
away of the Court of Wards. And some such Tenants do hold by half a Knights
service, and some by half a Fee, and some by more and some by less, and if
such a Tenant dies, which holds by one Knights fee, and his heir being of
full age, then the Lord shall have Homage and Fealty, and also five pounds for
a Relief (of this fee the said Act) of him that holds by half a Knights
fee, two pounds ten shillings, and he that holds by more shall pay more, etc.
you shall therefore present whether any such Tenant died seized of any such
Lands and Tenements so holden, yea or no.

3. Also, you shall enquire whether any Tenant If Tenant by Knights service
made any Feofme^t to his heir. Alenation by collusion and holding by Knights
service. Feofment to his use, the land holden in Knights service.
which held by Knights service, made any Feofment to his Heir, and after died,
his Heir being within age.

4. And whether any such Tenant made any Alienation of any such Land so holden
to any person by collusion, to defeat the Lord of his profits, and present that.

5. Also you shall enquire, whether any such Tenant which held by Knights
service, did make any Feofment by Deed to his use, or any Recognizance, by fine
to his use, or suffer any Recovery against him to his use, and after died, and
no will by him declared, and present it: for in those cases also the Lord shall
have Relief, of his Heir, being of full age, and other duties, as well as if
his Tenant had died seized.

6. Also you shall enquire whether the Heir of such Entry for Conditions
broken.
Tenant entered into any such Lands so holden, for any condition broken, being
made by any of his Ancestors, and present it.

7. Also you shall enquire if any Tenant which held Disseizin of the Tenant,
and death before any re-entry.
by Knights service was disseized of Lands so holden, that is to say, put out
of them by one who had no right or title to them, and after died before any
re-entry, or any legal recovery had, and present it.

8. Soccage-tenure is, where the Tenant holds of What Soccage tenure is.
the Lord by Fealty and certain rent for all manner of services, or by Homage
and Fealty for all manner of services, or to pay a sum of money for Escuage,
or to pay a certain sum of money for Castleguard: All such Tenures are
Tenures in soccage: and all other Tenures which are not Tenures by Knights
service, are Tenures in soccage: and where such tenants die seized of any Lands
so holden, the Lord of whom the Land is so holden, after the death of his
Tenant can have no more profit but only his Fealty and Relief, that is to say,
as much money and service as one years rent does Relief is as much money as
one years rent.
amount unto. As if the Tenant held by Fealty, and ten shillings for a Relief,
over and besides the ten shillings, which he shall pay for his Rent, and in
such case after the death of the tenant, such relief is due to the Lords
maintenance, so that the heir be of the age of fourteen years, and he ought
to tarry for his relief until the day of payment of the Rent, but he ought to
have his relief maintenant, and for that he may distrain immediately after the
death of his Tenants.

9. Also if a Copyholder die sole seized of any Lands Copyholder.
or Tenements so holden, his heir being of the age of fourteen years, then
he shall pay a fine unto the Lord and do Fealty, and be admitted Tenant; but if
the heir be within the age of fourteen years, then some Guardian shall be
admitted to occupy his Copyhold, and to pay and do his service due for the
same, viz. If Lands descend from the Father, then the Mother, or some of her
next kindred shall have the occupation of the same Lands, until the Heir be
at age, and they shall a little fine for the Guardianship, and the Heir at his
entry shall pay the whole fine, you shall enquire thereof and present the same.

10. Also you shall enquire whether any Tenant If tenant by Socage made any
feofment to his use.
which held by Soccage Tenure did make any Feofment in fee to his use, and died
seized of the use, his Heir being within age, and no will by him declared of
the use, and present it, for that the Lord shall have his Relief, as well as
if he had died seized of the same Lands.

11. Also you shall inquire whether any Freeholder Whether any Freeholder has
aliened any of his freehold Lands.
has aliened or sold away his Free hold Lands or Tenements, or any parcel of
them, and present it; for he which has purchased the Land, before he enter,
ought to come and give notice unto the Lord, that he has purchased the same,
and so the Lord shall know his Tenant, and the service which the former paid
unto the Lord, shall be apportioned according unto the value of the Lands.

12. Also you shall enquire, whether any that held Herriot service, Herriot
custom.
by Herriot service, or Herriot custom died seized of any Lands or Tenements
so holden, and present it, for their service shall be apportioned: also the
Lord shall have of every of their several parts diverse Herriots at their
several deaths. Also if one man have two several parcels of Lands holden by
Herriot-service, and by two several titles, and dies seized of the same, the
Lord shall have after his death two Herriots.

13. Also you shall enquire if any Copyholder died seized Whether any Copyholder
died seized of any such Lands.
of any Lands so holden, and present it, also whether any Copyholder has made
any Lease of his Copyhold, or otherwise aliened or sold the same, and present
it, for it is a forfeiture of his Copyhold; for if a Copyholder will alien or
sell away his Copyhold, he ought to come into the Court and surrender the same,
into the hands of the Lord, to the use of him who shall have the Estate, or
else out of the Court he ought to How a Copyholder ought to surrender his
Copyhold.
surrender it unto the Bayliffe, or to some of the Tenants of the Lord-ship to
the use of him who shall have the estate, and they to whom the surrender is
made, ought to present the same at the next Court, and then pay his fine for
the same, and take it to his use in the Court, and do his endeavor to be
admitted, and if he be not at the same Court, then the Lord shall have the
mean profits of the same Lands, all the rentservices and repairations being
deducted, until he be amerced of his fine, according to his duty.

14. Also you shall enquire if any Copyholder Whether any Copyholder has made
any surrender.
has made any Surrender of his Copyhold, or any part thereof since the last
Court-day, or before, and present it, and into whose hands it was made, and in
whose presence, or to whose use: for at every surrender the Lord ought to have
a fine, and the party into whose hands the surrender is made, ought to come to
the next Court, and present the same, and to yield up his right into the Lords
hands to the use of the alienee, according to the trust reposed in him, or
otherwise he forfeiteth his Copyhold, except he have a treasonable excuse: for
that he does as much as in him lies to defeat the Lord of his Fine, and also to
defeat the other party; to whose use the surrenderd was made.

15. Also you shall enquire if any Tenant of the Mortmain.
Lordship have given any lands into Mortmain, and present it.

What Mortmain is.
Mortmain is, if a man give or sell any lands to any House of Religion, or to
any other which be corporate by the Knights grant: also if one make a Foefment
upon trust to the use of a Religious House, or to the use of a Fraternity
corporate, that is Mortmain.

Also if one exchange Lands with a body corporate, this is Mortmain.

Also if a Religious person, or other body corporate, does hold of any man by
Knights service, and he release unto him, this is Mortmain, and then the Lord
may enter, and shall hold the same by force: you shall therefore present them
that have given any Lands or tenements in Mortmain.

16. Also you shall enquire, whether any tenant for term of life or years, or
any Copiholder of this Lord-ship Waste.
has committed any waste, or suffered any waste to be committed upon their
Lands or Tonements.

What waste is, and how the same is committed.
Waste is, when any tenant for term of life, years, or any Copyholder,
pulls down any house, or cutteth down any timber trees, or suffers the
house willingly to fall, being on their Copyhold Tenements, or if any of the
Tenants plow up any Meadow ground, or if they suffer any wall or pale which
were covered to be uncovered, by reason whereof the same wall or pale falls
into decay, or if any of them dig coals, chalk, or sand, or make any Mines in
their grounds, this is waste. Also if they cut down a tree to the value of
three shillings four pence, this is admitted waste: but if a man cut down
timber to repair the old houses that stand upon parcel of the same ground, and
therewith does repair them, then it is no waste: but if he with the timber
build a new house, then the cutting down of such timber is waste: Or if he cut
down any timber to sell, to repair such houses which are fallen into decay,
such is waste. But if waste be done with a tempest, no tenant shall be punished
for such waste: but if waste be done by any danger, the tenant shall be
punished for such waste. Also it is no waste to sell in a reasonable time such
trees as have been selled within twenty years before: But if Tenants cut down
such trees to burn upon their Tenements, where they have wood sufficient, this
is waste. Also a Copyholder may not cut down wood to sell, but he may to burn
upon his tenement, or to make reparations as aforesaid.

17. Also you shall enquire whether any tenant in Whether any tenant in
possession or reversion died seized without any heir.
possession or reversion died seized of any Land or Tenements holden of this
Lordship, having no heir at the time of his death, yea or no, and present it,
for then the Lord shall have the Land holden of him by Escheat. You shall
understand that none shall have Lands in Fee-simple, as heirs unto any man,
unless he be heir of the whole blood: for if a man have issue two sons by
diverse women, and dies seized of the same Land, and the eldest enters and
dies without issue, the youngest shall not have the Land as heir unto his
brother, because he is of the half blood, but another heir of the fathers
side shall inherit the same Land, and if he have no heir on the Fathers side,
then the next hiere on the Mothers side shall not have the Land, but the Lord
of whom the Land is holden shall have it by Escheat; and so when Land
descends on the Mothers side, the heir on the Mothers side shall inherit, and
not the heirs of the Fathers side. Also you shall understand, that filius in
adulterio conceptus, viz. a Bastard can never be heir unto any man, nor have
heir unto himself: Therefore if any Bastard, or any A Bastard may not inherit.
other Tenant have died seized without heirs, you shall present.

18. Also you shall inquire if any Tenant was seized Whether any tenant died,
being put out of his land by one that had no right to
of any Lands or Tenements, and was put out of his Land by one who had not a
right title, and afterward died without any heir, the Lord shall have his
Escheat as well as if his Tenant had died seized.

19. Also you shall enquire, whether any Tenant of Petty Treason, felony, or
murder committed of any Tenant, for which he was hanged, or had judgment to be
hanged.
this Lordship has committed any Petty treason, felonies, or murders, for the
which he was hanged, or for the which he had Judgment to be hanged, though
afterward he paid his Charge, and was delivered to the Ordinary, and present
it. And whether any Tenant has committed any Petty treason, felony, or
murder, for the which he has abjured the Land, for which he was outlawed, or
by death, and present it: For in all those cases the Lord of whom the Lands are
holden, shall have them by Escheat, and also the evidences concerning the same.

20. Also you shall enquire if there be any Rents, Whether there be any rents
lost, or services withdrawn.
Customs, or Services withdrawn from the Lord-ship, which of right ought to
be done, and present it, and what Rents, Customs, and Services they are, and
by whom they are withdrawn, and where the Land lies, that the Lord may have
the remedy for the arrearages thereof.

Whether the Tenants do uphold and repair their tenements.
Also you shall enquire whether the Copyholders, or Fermers of this Lordship do
uphold and repair their Tenements yea, or no, and present them. You shall
understand that every Tenant is obliged to three things viz.

1. That he be a true tenant to his Lord. 2. That he sufficiently repair his
tenements. 3. That he pay and do all suits, Customs, and Services at his days
assigned: for he took upon him to do so when he did Fealty, and if he do not
pay his Suits, Customs, and Services the Lord shall have good remedy and
recover the same with his damages: and if he be a Copyholder, and do the
contrary, he forfeits his Copyhold.
21. Also you shall enquire if any tenant of this Whether any tenant has
withdrawn his services.
Lordship, which is obliged by reason of his tenure to do suit unto the Lord,
will do the same, yea or no, and present it: and whether any have used to
withdrawn their suit from the Lords Mill, in not grinding their corn there,
and present it.

22 You shall also enquire whether any Waif or Stray Waife and stray.
is, or was within the Lordship, and whether the Lord be answered of the same;
if not, present by whom they are conveyed away: Also you shall enquire if any
Heriot be conveyed away, and by whom, and present it.

23. You shall also enquire whether person have Rescous.
made Rescous against the Lord, or any other Officer, and present it.

What it is.
Rescous is, when the Lord distraineth in the land holden of him for his Rent,
or services in arrear, or if the Lord come upon the lands and would distrain,
and the Tenant or some other will not suffer him, this is Rescous. Likewise if
the Lord distrain for service behind, or for damage-Feasant, and in driving
cattle to pownd, the Beasts enter into the house of the owner, if he that
distraineth pray deliverance, and the possessor will not deliver them, this is
a Rescous, therefore if Rescous have been made, you shall present it.

24. Also you shall enquire whether any person Breach of pownd.
has broken the Lords pownd, that is, to have taken away a Distress put in,
and present it. You shall understand, that if the Lord do distrain any Tenant
for Rent or Service in arrear, he may impownd the same Distress in a Common
pownd if he will, or in his own ground, or in his neighbors if he will, by
the license of his neighbor, and all those places in which the Lord does
impound any Cattle, are called the Lords pownd, but not so when another does
impound any Distress in his own pownd, or in his neighbors: It behooves him
to give notice to the other party; for that if the Distress be quick he may
give it meat; and then if the Beast die for want of sustenance, he that was
distrained shall be at the loss, and then he that distrained before may
distrain again for the same rent or duty.

Whether any Tenant has let any Farm fall to decay, viz. not maintained for
husbandry, as before.
25. You shall also enquire, if any Tenant within the precincts of this Manor,
has suffered any Farm or House to fall to decay, which at any time since the
first year of the Reign of Henry 7. has been let with twenty acres of land,
and present it: For if they suffer their houses to fall to decay, the Lord may
take and distrain for half of the issues and profits of the same, and keep to
his own use, until such time as the houses shall be sufficiently builded and
repaired, viz. maintained again for husbandry.

26 Also you shall inquire if any inhabitants or If any have overcharged the
common, or high ways, or put Cattle in them before the days agreed upon.
Commoners have overcharged the Common or High ways, or your Common fields,
by putting in more Cattle then they ought to do, and whether any of them have
put their Cattle in any the Commons aforesaid, before the days agreed upon,
and present it; for the Lord (as it seems) may distrain the surplusage damage
feasant, or else you may make among your selves orders and laws for your own
profit, that none shall do upon certain penalties, etc. and by such Laws the
Inhabitants and Commoners shall be bound, etc.

27 You shall also enquire if any persons have made If any persons have made
pits in the high ways, breaking of hedges, etc. Stopping of ways, waters, etc.
any pits in the high ways, and whether any person do commonly break hedges,
and suffer any Hogs to go unyoaked or unringed, to the annoyance of their
neighbors.

28 You shall also enquire whether any persons have drained or stopped any
ways, waters, ditches, paths, or turned any of them into a wrong course, and
present it.

29 Also if any have incroached any Land of the Lords, viz. Land, Meadow,
Pasture, Wood, Heath, Whether any have encroached.
Moor, or any other vacant land without license of the Lord, by setting of his
hedge, pale, or otherwise, and present the same.

Note that all the vacant and waste land within the Manor, belongs to the
Lord of the Manor.

30 You shall also enquire, whether any person has Whether any have removed
any marks.
plowed up, or removed away any Mere marks, baulks, or limits between one piece
of Land and another, and present it.

31 Also you shall enquire if any have stalked with a bush or beast to kill
Dear which is in the Lords Close Whether any have stalked with bush or beast.
or Park, and present it.

32 You shall also enquire if any person has, concealeth, Whether any have or
do keep away any Evidences.
or keeps away any Evidences, Charters; or Court Rolls, Customary terres, or
any other evidence which concerns the Lordship, or any parcel thereof, and
present it.

33 Also you shall enquire if any person have fished, Whether any have fished,
fowled, etc. Whether any have taken any Feasants, etc.
fowled, hawked or hunted in this Lordship, or Lords Warren, and present it.

34 You shall enquire also if any person have taken any Feasant, Partridges
with net, snare, or other Engine upon the Freehold of the Lord of this Manor,
and present it.

35 Also you shall enquire if any have taken away Swans, or swans eggs.
any Swans, Signets, or eggs of the Lords Swans out of their nests, and present
it.

36 You shall likewise enquire if any lands of the Concealed land.
Lord be concealed or kept back, or occupied by any without the license of the
Lord: Also what land it is, and how much land has been so occupied, and of
what value by the year the same is. and present it.

37 Also you shall enquire if any Trespass be done Trespass in the corn,
grass, etc.
in any of the Lords liberty, viz. in his Corn, Grass, Meadows, Pasture,
Woods, Hedges, Waters, or Pounds; or if any take Hawks, or air of Hawks, or
such like trespass, and present them.

38 You also shall enquire if any Land be enclosed, For enclosing in several
grounds without the L. license, etc.
and the same kept in severalty, which ought to lie open, without license of
the Lord and other Freeholders, you shall present it; for no Tenant of the
Lordship shall loose the Common in the same.

39 Also if any Copyholder let his Copyhold Land for longer time then a year
and a day, without license, A Copyholder may not let longer then a year and a
day.
except it be by Custom that he may let for longer time, and if he do, it is
forfeiture, and present the same.

40 You shall also enquire whether any Tenant for Granting greater estates.
years or life, have granted any greater or larger estate then they had in
their Lands or Tenements, and present it, for that is a forfeiture of their
estate.

41. Likewise you shall enquire if the Bailiff, Headborough, Whether the,
Baylifs, etc. do execute their office. Whether the defaults and plaints be
amended.
Constable, and Hayward, and all other Officers have well and truly executed
their offices, and present it.

42. You shall likewise enquire whether all the defaults and plaints that were
prosecuted at the last Court be sufficiently amended, and whether all the
orders and Laws heretofore made be observed and kept, and present it.

43. To conclude, you shall enquire of all other Conclusion.
things by me omitted, which you know to appertain to your charge; and by the
Oaths that you have taken, you shall truly and diligently enquire of all the
premises, and plainly without concealing of any fault, and make a return of
your presentment, subscribed with your hands, and sealed with your seals, by
three a clock in the afternoon.

Then command the Bayliffe to make proclamation, O yes, and adjourn the Court
till after dinner, in this manner.

Adjournment.
All manner of persons that have any more to do at this Court, may for this time
depart, and keep their hour here at two of the clock in the afternoon.

After your return from Dinner, if any surrenders or admittances be to be made,
or Actions to be tried, let them be done: Otherwise call the Jury for their
presentiments, if they be ready, and swear two affeerers to affer them as before
at the Leet. Then discharge the Court, the Bayliffe making an O yes, thus.

The discharge of the Court.
All manner of persons that have any more to do at this Court holden here this
day, let them come forth and they shall be heard, otherwise they and every one
else may for this time depart, and keep their day here upon a new warning. And
so God save the Lord Protector, and the Lord of this Manor.

Some select cases out of the new Reports, and others, concerning the Lord,
Copyholder, and Copyholds, Surrenders, Forfeitures, etc.
First, of the Lord.
He that is a Lord to grant and allow a Copyhold, must be such a one as by
Littletons definition, is seized of a Manor, so that he must be in possession
at the time of the grant; for though he have good right and title, yet if he be
not in possession of the Manor, it will not serve. And on the other side, if
he be in possession of the Manor, though he have neither right nor title
thereunto, yet in many cases the grant and allowance of such a Copy is good, as
he is Dominus de facto sed non de jure. Calthrop 48.

A Copyhold granted by a Disseisor, may be avoided by the Disseisee.
A Copyhold granted by a Disseisor, or any other who has the Manor of which it
is parcel by wrong, shall be avoided by the Disseisee, or any other who has
right to the Manor by his entry or recovery of the Manor. Pophams Rep. fo.
71. Yet it was agreed, that admittance upon surrenders of Copyholders in fee,
to the use of another; or if an heir in case of a dissent of a Copyhold were
good, being made by a Disseisor of a But admittance upon surrenders, etc. good.
Owen. Rep. fol. 115. Trin. 1 Iet. rot. 853.
Manor, or any other who has it by Tort, because these are acts of necessity,
and for the benefit of a stranger, viz. of him who is to have the Land by the
surrender, or of the heir: And also Grants made by Copy by the Feoffee, upon
Condition of a Manor, before the Condition broken, are good, because he was
lawfully Dominus protempore. ibid.

None can pass it larger estate then he has.
If a Lord grant a Copy in Fee, having but an estate for life in the Copyhold,
no larger estate shall pass then he himself has, Quia nemo potest plus juris
in altenum transfer, quam ipse habet. Co. of Copy-holds. fol. 96.

If the Lord of a Manor takes a Wife, and after Copyhold estates not to be
avoided for dower.
makes Copyhold estates, according to the Custom, and dies, though the Feme
has this Manor assigned unto her for her Dower, yet cannot she avoid the
Copyhold estates, because the Copyholders are in by a title paramount, the
title of the Feme, viz. by Custom. Co. of Copyholds, 45.

Secondly, of the Copyholder.
HE is Tenant by copy of Court-roll, being admitted of Lands or Tenements
within a Manor, that time out of mind by use and custom of the said Manor
have been demiseable and demised to such as will take the same in Fee, in
Fee-taile, for life, years, or at will, according to the custom of the said
Manor by Copy of Court roll of the same Manor. West. part 1. Sym. lib. 2.
sect. 646.

What person is sufficient to be a Copyholder. Eliz. Dyer. 301.
And that person is sufficient to be a Copyholder who is of himself able, or by
another to do the service of a Copyholder; as an Infant may be a Copyholder for
his Guardian, and prochein amy may do the service; But a Lunatic, or Idiot
cannot be a Copyholder, because they cannot do the service themselves, nor
depute any other: and the Lord shall retain the Copyhold of an Idiot. Carthrop
fo. 52. Nor a man cannot be a Copyholder unto a Manor whereof he himself is
Lord, although he be but Dominus pro termino annorum, or in jure Vxoris. ibidem.

What interest a Copyholder has in his estate.
Let us enquire what interest Copyholders have in their estates, and that will
appear to be very strenuous; for although Customary Tenants are termed in Law
Tenants at will, yet are they not simply so, nor merely Tenants at will, for
every Copyholder is but only Tenant at will, secundum consuetudinem Manerii,
which custom warrants his possession, and therefore it is a more certain
estate then an estate at will, for the Copyholder may justify against his
Lord, so cannot a Tenant at will, whose estate is determined at the will and
pleasure of his Lessor: And although his estate is but by custom, and by no
conveyance the state is raised, it is as material, so as it be an estate: and
this estate being supported by custom is known in Law an estate, and so
attainted in Law; and the same Law has notably distinguished Copyhold
Tenancies by custom, and Tenancies at will by the Common Law; for a Copyholder
shall do fealty, shall have aid of his Lord in an Action of Trespass, shall
have and maintain an Action of Trespass against his Lord, his Wife shall be
endowed, the Husband shall be Tenant by the Courtesy without new admittance:
And it was adjudged in the Common Pleas, 8 Eliz. 8 Eliz.
That if a Copyholder surrender to the use of another for years, the Lessee
dies, his Executors shall have the residue of the term without any
admittance. Mic. 14 and 15 Eliz. A Copyholder made a Lease for years by
Indenture warranted by the custom, it was adjudged that the Lessee should
maintain Ejectione firmae, although it was objected, that if it were so, then
if the Leonards rep. first part. fo. 8. Mich. 25. and 26 Eliz.
Plaintiff does recover he shall have Habere facias possessionem, and then
Copyholds should be ordered by the Laws of the Land, 10 Eliz. Lord and
Copyholder for life, the Lord grants a Rentcharge out of the Manor, whereof
the Copyhold is parcel, the Copyholder surrenders to the use of A. who is
admitted accordingly, he shall not hold it charged; but if the Copyholder
dies, so that his estate is determined, and the Lord grants to a stranger de
Novo, to hold the said lands by Copy, this new Tenant shall hold the Land
charged. Leonards rep. first part. fo. 8. Mich. 25. and 26 Eliz.

Copyholder and Tenant at will.
Tenant by Copy of Court Roll, has an Inheritance by the custom; but when he
does that which is contrary to the Custom, he shall be then in no better
condition then a bare Tenant at will, Bolstrod. 1 part. fo 51. so that
performing the duties and services according to Bolstrod. first part. fo. 51.
the Custom, does so establish and fix the estate, that the same by the
Custom of the Manor is descendable, and his heirs shall inherit the same;
and therefore his estate is not merely (as I have said before) ad voluntatem
Domini, but ad voluntatem Domini secundum consuetudinem Manerii, so that the
custom of the Manor is the soul and life, and also the chief basis upon
which stands the whole fabric of Copyhold estates; for without custom, or if
they break their custom, they are subject to the Lords will. And by custom a
Copyholder is as well inheritable to have his land according to the Custom as
he who has a Freehold at the Common Law, for consuetudo est altera lex,
custom and usage time out of mind, etc. may create and consolidate
Inheritances, Consuetudo vincit legem, 7 E. 4. Danby chief Justice said, that
a Copyholder is 7 E. 4.
as well inheritable to have his Land according to the Custom, as he who has
Freehold at the Common Law. Co. 4. 21.

Tenant may have an action of Trespass against the Lord. Husband to a woman
Copyholder shall not be tenant by the Courtesy without special custom. The
heir of a Copyholder not bound to come to any Court during his nonage.
If Tenant by custom paying his services be ejected by his Lord, he may have an
action of Trespass. 21 E. 4. 80. Co. 4. 22.

If a woman Copyholder in Fee have a Husband, who has Issue, and the Wife
dies, the Husband shall not be Tenant by the Courtesy without special
custom. Co 4. 22.

If a Copyholder dye, his heir within age, the heir is not obliged to come to
any Court during his nonage to pray admittance, or to tender his Fine. Also if
the death of the Ancestor be not presented, nor Proclamation, he is not at any
detriment, although he be of full age. Leonards rep. first part. fol. 128.
Pasch. 30 Eliz. B. R.

Whether or no a Copyholder may lop trees.
Brownloes Rep. first part fol. 231. Swain and Becket, a question was, that
whereas there is a Manor wherein are Copyholders for life, who used to lop
Trees, growing upon the Copyholds, for their necessary fire, and repair of
their customary Tenements; the Lord of the Manor makes a Lease of the Manor
for years, excepting the Trees: The Lessee of the Manor grants a Copy for
life, the Copyholder loppeth his trees growing in his Copyhold, whether or no
he might do it by Law was the doubt of the Jury. And it was held by all the
Court. Hill. 6 Jac. that the Copyholder might lop the Trees, because he is in
by the custom which is above the Lords estate after he is admitted, and that
the Copyhold depends not upon the Lords interest: And that the trees excepted,
and the soil remained parcel of the Manor because the Lease was but for
years: but if the Lease had been for life, it had been otherwise, because it
had been severed from the Manor.

Copyholder for life cannot claim custom to cut down and sell trees.
But note, that in Justice Crooks Rep. first part. fol. 160. That a Copyholder
for life may cut down and sell Timber trees, and dispose of them at his
pleasure, is a void and unreasonable custom, and not allowable by Law; for it
is a destruction of the Inheritance, and against the nature of a Copyholder for
life. For a Copyholder has but a particular estate in the Land, and so he has
in the Trees: And it is unreasonable, that he should cut down, sell, and
destroy the Inheritance, and it would be to the great prejudice of those who
succeeded, for they should not have to maintain the house and the plough. And
it is against the nature of the estate of a Copyholder, that he should do Acts
in destruction of his estate; therefore customs which maintain them are
allowable, but not e converso. Vide 24 E. 3. Bar. 77. 21 H. 7. 40. 11 H. 7.
14. 9 H. 4. Wast. 59.

No tenant by the Courtesy nor Dower shall be of Copyhold lands. Leonard rep. 1
part. 126.
If a Copyholder of inheritance grant his Copyhold to one and his heirs, this
shall descend, and no Tenant by the Courtesy, nor yet Dower shall be thereof,
without a special custom for the same. Bolstrod. second part, fo. 275. Mich.
12 Jac.

If I give all my Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments in D. my Copyholds do not
pass, Leonard Rep. first part, 126.

An estate tail cannot be of Copyhold lands without use. Crook. 1 part. fo.
31. and 32. Poph. fol. 38.
An estate tail cannot be of Copyhold Lands, unless it be in case where it
has been used, for the Statute De donis conditionalibus shall not enure to
such customary Lands, but to Lands which are at Common Law, and therefore an
estate tail cannot be of these customary Lands, but in case where it has
been used time out of mind. Popham. fol. 34. And it was holden afterward,
that an estate tail is wrought out of Copyhold Land by the equity of the
Statute De donis conditionalibus, for otherwise it cannot be that there can be
any estate tail of Copyhold land, for by usage it cannot be maintained,
because that no estate tail was known in Law before this Statute, but all were
Fee-simple, and after this Statute it cannot be by usage, because this is
within the time of limitation, after which an usage cannot make a prescription,
as appears, 22 and 23 Eliz. in Dyer. And by 8 Eliz. a custom cannot be made
after Westminst. 2d. And what estates are of Copyhold land, appears expressly
by Littleton in his Chap. of Tenant by Copyhold, etc. And in Brook, tit. Tenant
by Copyhold, etc. 15 H. 8. In both which it appears that a Plaint lies in
Copyhold land in the nature of a Formedon in the Discender at the Common Law,
and this could not be before the Statute De donis conditionalibus for such
land, because that before that Statute there was not any Formedon in the
Discender at Common Law, and therefore the Statute helps them for their remedy
for intayled Land, which is but customary by equity. And if the Action shall be
given by equity for thy land, why shall not the Statute by the same equity
work to make an estate in tail also of this nature of the land? Poph. ibidem.
And Copyholds are now become by usage by such estates, that Law allows them to
be good against the Lords themselves, they performing their customs and
services, and therefore are guided by the guides and rules of the Common Law,
Dyer Trin. 12 Eliz. And to say, that estates of Copyhold land are not warranted
but by custom, and every custom lies in usage; and without usage a custom
cannot be, is true, but in the usage of the greater, the lesser is always
employed, Omne majus in se continet minus: As by usage three lives have been
granted by Copy of Court Roll, but never within memory two or one alone, yet
the grant of one or two lives only is warrantable by this custom; for the use
of the greater number of lives warrants the lesser number, but not e converso

If the Copyholder by his letter of Attorney appoint A Copyholder may assign
one to essoyn for him, but not to do his service.
the son of his Farmer his Attorney, to do the services for him due for his
Copyhold: Such a person so constituted and appointed may Essoyne for the
Copyholder, but not do the services for him, for none can do the same, but the
Tenant himself. Leonard, first part. fo. 139.

Copyhold land is not extendable upon a Statute-Staple, Copyhold not extendible
by Stat. Stap. but it is upon the Stat. of Bankrupts, not liable to any charge
of the Lord, etc.
but upon the Statute of Bankrupts it is extendable, Brownlows first part, 34.
As long as a Copyhold of Inheritance is in the Tenants hands, it is not liable
to any estate or charge of the Lord, as Dower, Courtesy, Elegit, Statute, etc.
But when it is in the Lords hands it is liable. Co. 4. 22. But a custom in
this case may make it chargeable. Calthr. 88, 89. 92, 93.

We will now declare something of Surrenders.

Of Surrenders, what are good, and what not.
Upon a surrender action lies not against the Lord for refusing admittance.
LOrd and Tenant, Copyholder by Surrender, or by nomination by force of a
Custom precedent, desires his Lord at his Court to admit him to the Copyhold
estate, and offers him his Fine, the Lord refuses, he cannot take the profits
before admittance, here is damnum and injuria, whether for refuall he may have
an action of the Case or not? And it was resolved, Pasch. 13 Jac. P. R. That an
Action of the Case lies not against the Lord for his refusal to admit him,
without a special custom, or prescription for the same, Omnis innovatio plus
novitate perturbat quam utilitate prodest; for if upon every such refusal an
Action shall be brought, this will introduce many inconveniences. C. 4. 22. in
Brownes case. But note that in all cases of Ministerial offices, if they
refuse to In ministerial offices action lies against him that will not do his
office, but not so in cases of trust.
do their offices, Actions upon the case shall well lie against them, as
against the Clarke of the Inrollments, if he refuses to inroll a Deed, an
Action upon the case lies against him for this, but it shall not be so in
cases of trusts, Bolstrod. second part, fol. 337, 338. Foords case. Hill. 12
Jac.

If a Surrender be to the Lord generally, without saying A surrender to the
Lord good. A surrender to the use of another, etc. In a surrender it matters
not if the party to whom it is be precisely expressed, etc.
to whose use, it is good enough. Kitch. 81.

If the Copyholder surrender to the use of another, and the Lord grant it to
the Cestuy que use, not naming the surrender; this is good enough by Calthr. fo
99.

In a surrender it matters not, if the party to whom it is, be precisely
expressed, if by any circumstance he may be known: And therefore to surrender
to the Major of York, next of his kin, or next of his blood, his Brother,
Sister, or his son, may be good, and it may be made certain by averment. So
if it be to a man's Wife without warning of her, or the High Sheriff of
Yorkshire; But a surrender to the use of ones Cousin or Friend, is void for
incertainty, so it is if it be to the use of A. B. or C. Coo. 4. 29. of
Copyhold 96.

If a surrender be made to the Lord in general, without Surrender to the Lord,
etc.
expressing to what use, it shall be taken to the Lords use Kitch. 81.

If a Copyhold be surrendered to the use of A. B. and Surrender to A. B. until
be marry C. D. etc. Surrender to the use of a stranger, etc.
his heirs, till he marry C. D. and then to the use of them two in special
tail; this is valid, and shall enure accordingly, Calth. fo. 22.

If a Copyholder surrender to the use of a Stranger, in consideration that the
stranger shall marry his daughter before such a day; In this case if the
marriage succeeds not, the stranger shall take nothing by the surrender. But if
the consideration be, that the stranger shall pay such a sum of money, at
such a day, although the money be not paid, yet the surrender is valid. Calth.
fo. 37.

If the Copyholder surrender his land to the use of A. Surrender to A. B's use,
if he pay 20 l. at a day, etc. Surrender to the Lord to the use of I. S. paying
100 l. etc.
B. so that A. B. pay 20 l. at such a day if he please; this is an absolute,
not a conditional surrender. Calth. fol. 39.

If a Copyholder surrender his Coyphold of Inheritance into the hands of the
Lord, to the use of I. S. paying one hundred pounds to his Executors within
such a time after his death, he to whose use this surrender is made, takes by
force of this presently. Bolstr. 2d. part. fo. 275. Mich. Jac. 12.

If a Copyholder surrender to the use of one for life, Surrender to the use of
one for life, etc.
who is admitted and dies, he in the Reversion may enter without a new
admittance. Leonard. first part. Rep. 144.

Copyhold may be extinguished without an actual surrender.
If a Copyholder bargain and sell his Copyhold to the Lord of the Manor, which
has the Manor in lease for years, the Copyhold estate is thereby
extinguished: And if a Copyholder come into Court, and says that he is weary
of his Copyhold, and requests the Lord to take it, this is a surrender; for
between the Lord and the Tenant, a conveyance shall not need to be according to
the custom, for the Copyholder has no other use of the Custom, but only to
convey the Land to another. Vide Co. 4. in his Copyhold cases, that a Release
by him who has right to a Copyhold, to one who is admitted Copyholder,
extinguisheth the right of the Copyhold by Deed: And if a Copyholder release to
the Lord, that extinguisheth the Copyhold, although it be contrary to the
nature of a Huttons Rep. fo. 65. Blemerhassets case.
release to give a possession. Huttons Rep. fo. 65. Blemerhassets case.

Leonard. first part. 133.
If the Copyholder surrender to the use of his right heirs, the Land shall
remain in the Lord until the death of the Copyholder, for then his heir is
known, etc. See Dyer. 99. Leonards first part. rep. 133.

Leonard. first part. 124.
If a man seized of Copyhold land in the right of his Wife, or Tenant in tail
of a Copyhold does surrender to the use of another in Fee, the same does not
make any discontinuauce, but that the issue in tail, and the Wife may
respectively enter, Leonards first Rep. fo. 124.

Poph. fol. 39.
An Insant who surrenders his Copyhold land within age, may enter at his full
age, without being put to any suit for it. Poph. Rep. fol. 39.

It was resolved by all the Barons of the Exchequer, Pasch. 4. Iac. That if a
Copyholder surrender to the use of a younger son, and dies, that this younger
son cannot bring an Action till admittance; but if the Copyhold be descended
to the heir, he may have an Action before admittance. See Co. 4. fol. 22.
Copyhold cases, it was likewise said, That all Copyholders of the KINGS Manors
may now have admittance into their Copyhold estates well enough, and the order
for the stay of their admittances, which was made heretofore is now dissolved
and quashed. Lanes Rep. fol. 20. Lanes Rep. 20.


A surrenderer of a Copyhold cannot surrender before admittance.
A Copyholder surrendered out of Court according to the Custom of the Manor,
which at the next Court was presented, and entry thereof made by the Steward,
viz. Compertum est homagium, etc. but no admittance; and afterward Cestuy que
use surrenders before admittance, and the first Copyholder surrenders to the
Plaintiff; and in this case there was two questions.

First, whether he may surrender before admittance?

Poph. fo. 128. No surrender by an Attorney without deed, but an admittance may
be.
The second was, who shall have the land? whether the Copyholder or the Lord?
and it was held that he could not surrender before admittance, and the entry of
the surrender does not make admittance, for this being the sole act of the
Steward shall not bind the Lord; and it is not like to the usual form of an
admittance, viz. Dat domino de Fine fecit fidelitatem and admissus est inde
tenens, and it was agreed to, and said that in Hare and Bricklegs Case, the
admittance of a Copyholder was compared to the induction to a Benefice which
gives the possession, Poph. fol. 128.

A Copyhold cannot be surrendered to another by an Attorney without Deed, but
one may be admitted to a Copyhold estate by Attorney without a Deed. For there
is a difference betwixt the passing of an estate and the receiving of an estate
passed. Prac. Regist. tit. Surrender 2. Apr. 1650. B. R.

What shall be said a reasonable Fine for a Copyholder to pay upon his
admittance.
Hill. 5 Car. Rot. 125. Dow and others against Golding in trespass upon a
Demurrer, and the question was, whether the Lord of a Manor may assesse two
years and a half value of land according to racked Rent for a Fine upon grant
of a Copyhold, and for non-payment entry for forfeiture? And all the Court
conceived, that one year and a half of Rent improved is high enough; and the
Desendant assessing two years and a half, it is unreasonable, and therefore
Crook, first part. fo. 142.
the Plaintiff might well refuse the payment thereof, and consequently the
entry of the Defendant for a forfeiture not justifiable. Crook 1 part. fol. 142.

What shall make a Forfeiture of Copyhold estates, and what not.
We now descend to Forfeitures of Copyhold estates, both what shall be, and
what shall not be forfeited.

First, In a Forfeiture of a Copyhold estate, by making of a Lease of his
Copyhold land contrary to the custom, there ought to be very direct and
certain proof made, of a certain Lease, with a certain beginning and ending
of it, and likewise of any other thing supposed to be acted and done by a
Copyholder, and contrary to the custom of the Manor, thereby to make a
forfeiture of his Copyhold estate, it must also appear certain to the Court;
for if a stranger shall come and make oath to this purpose, it shall not be of
any force or effect to prove a forfeiture, especially if the Copyholder still
continue in possession, and so dies seized of his Copyhold estate, and never
came in question till after his death. And 28 H. 8. Dyer. fo. 24. pl. 151.
Plow. fo 273. b. in Say and Fullers case, and 14 H. 8. fo. 14. b. and Coo. 6.
35. Bolstrod. first part. so. 50.
if such a presentment shall be allowed in the Lords Court upon an oath made by
a stranger, as to make a Copyhold estate, every Copyholder might be in danger
to lose his Copyhold estate. Or if a Copyholder did promise to make a Lease,
and it is not proved in facto, that he did make the same, this is no forfeiture
of his Copyhold estate. Or if a Copyholder do make a lease of his Copyhold
land, and so a forfeiture being contrary to the custom of the Manor, if after
this he continues still in possession, and the Lord of the Manor dies, and
afterward his Widow, or he who has the Manor, does receive Rent from the
Copyholder, he shall never, after acceptance of Rent, take any benefit or
advantage of the forfeiture. Bolstrod. first part. fo. 50.

If a Lessee for life build a house upon his land, and A forfeiture to build
and pull down again. No good custom to pull down houses, or cut down trees,
etc.
afterward pulls it down again, this is a forfeiture of the Copyhold, ibid
fol. 50.

If a custom be that a Copyholder may pull down houses, such a custom is not
good, if the custom be for a Copyholder to cut down trees, in this for the
warranting of such a custom, the difference will be this, if he be a Copyholder
of inheritance, then such a custom to cut down trees for such a Copyholder
will be a good custom; but otherwise it is if he be a Copyholder Bolstrod.
first part. fo. 51. and 52.
for life, there such custom is not good. Ibid. fol. 51. If a Copyholder erect
a house, and pull it down again, it is a clear forfeiture of his Copyhold
estate. Ibidem 52.

A Copyholder by the common law, without special custom, cannot make a Lease
for one year, but it is a forfeiture.
By the Law of the Land every Copyholder may make a Lease for a year without
forfeiture: Yet admit it be a forfeiture, if the Lord take a surrender, and
enters not for the forfeiture, but makes a Lease for years, his Lessee shall
not enter for the forfeiture, for the Lessee cannot when the Lord allows
thereof. Yet to the Lease for one year it was answered, That he must have a
special custom, or else it is not good, unless it be for a trial of a
Title, which has been allowed, because it is for reducing a Rite, and for the
Lords benefit. And to the second it was said, that admitting it is a
forfieture, yet the Lords acceptance of the surrender, not knowing of the
forfeiture, is no dispensation therewith, and consequently that the Lords
Lessee has a good estate and right in him, for which his entry is lawful,
this was approved good by the Court, and the first part overruled. Crook
Crook. first rep. fo. 169.
Rep. fo. 169.

A COPYHOLDER made a Lease for one A lease for one year by a Copyholder, etc.
a forfeiture.
year, Et sic de anno in annum, during the life of the Copyholder (excepting
one day at the end of every year for the Copyholder to enter, and this only
for to avoid a forfeiture) but it was clearly resolved, Mic. 8. Jac. B. R. rot
602. that this is Bolstrod rep. first part. f. 215.
a forefeiture of his Copyhold estate; for if a Lease be made de anno in annum
this must of necessity be a Lease for twenty and two years, and so is Potkins
case in 14. H. 8. fo 14. As to the reservation of one day, at the end of every
year to make his lease but for one year, and so to be warrantable by the
custom, it Lutterels case, Mich. 8 Jac. B. R. rot. 602.
will nothing avail him, though he had excepted a month at the end of every
year it would have been to no purpose, for by this invention he has a purpose
to cheat and deceive his Lord, but he is deceived himself Bolstrod. 1. part,
fo. 215. Iutterels case Mic 8. Jac. B. R. rot. 602.

Hetleyes rep. fo. 122.
If a Copyholder make a Lease for years, to comence at Michaelmas; it is a
forfeiture presently, Hetleys rep. fo. 122.

A Copyholder may enclose where it has been formerly enclosed; and may digg
Ma^l, but it must be laid upon the some land. Winches rep. fo. 8 The heir may
take the profits before admittance, and make a lease, etc. Poph. rep. fo. 39
A Copyholder may hedge and enclose, but not where it was never enclosed before,
and he may dig for marl without any danger of forfeiture, but he ought to lay
the said marl upon the same Copyhold land, and not upon other Land, Easter, 19.
Jac. Winch. rep. fo. 8. But if land be dug to make a banck, and if more be
dug then is necessary it is wast, and if it be not cast down for the land
might be made barren, 41. E. 3. Wast. 82.

The heir before admittance may enter and take the profits, and make a Lease
according to the custom, or bring an action of treaspase against him who
disturbes him? But if the Lord require his Fine or his services, and the heir
refuse to do them, this may be a forfeiture of his Copyhold; But until lawful
seisin made by the Lord (because it belongs to him) the heir may intermeddle
with the possession, though he be not admited by the Lord where it is an Estate
of inhetance by the custom, Pophams rep. fo. 39.

To refuse to pay a Fine certain, is a forfeiture. Or refuse to appear at his
Lords Court.
It is a forfeiture of a Copyhold, for the Copyholder to refuse to pay his Fine,
if it be a Fine certain; but if he refuse to pay a Fine uncertain, after it is
set, quaere whether it be a forfeiture or not, for that Fine may be
unreasonable, See before forfit. Or if he refuse to appear at his Lords Court,
and to do his service there Prac. Regist. tit. fo. forfit. Trin. 24. Car. R. B.
yet if the Copyholders dwell in a Town far distant from the Manor, a general
warning within the Manor is not sufficient, but there ought to be to the
person notice of the day when the Court shall be holden, etc. For his not
coming in such case Some excusive reasons why he may not appear at the Lords
Court.
cannot be called a voluntary refusal: so if a man be of that debility in body,
as he cannot travel without danger, so if he have a great office, etc. these
are good and strenuous causes of excuse: It was likewise holden, that if a
Copyholder makes default at the Court, and be there amerced, although that the
amerciament be not estreated, or levied, yet A general warning of the Court
within the parish is sufficient. Leonards first part fo. 133. Hetleys rep. fo.
7.
it is a dispensation of the forfeiture. But note that a general warning within
the parish is sufficient, for if the tenant himself be not resident upon his
Copyhold but elsewhere, his Farmer may send notice to him of the Court,
Leonards rep. first part fo. 133. And note further by Hetly in his rep. fo. 7.
Pasc. 3 Car. C. B. that if a Copyholder be summoned to the Court, by Common
Proclamation, or express notice, and he does not appear, it is no forfeiture,
because it is but a failer of service, and no denial, and for the neglect he
may be punished and fined.

One seized in the right of his wife, surrenders it, and dies, no
discontinuance to the wife. Co. rep. 4. 23
If a man seized of Copyhold land in the right of his wife, surrendreth the same
to the use of another, and the Husband dies, it is no discontinuance to the
Wife; but that the Wife may enter, and shall not be put to a Cui in vita, nor
the heir to sue a Cui in vita. Coo. 4. 23. And if a Copyholder for Life
surrendreth to the use of another in Fee, it is no forfeiture, for it passes
by surrender to the Lord, and not by Livery, and Copyhold Estates shall not
have such qualities as Estates at Common Law have without special custom.
Ibidem.

Of the Office and Duty of the Steward.
Co. super lit. fo. 61. a. b.
STeward, in the Latin is called Seneschallas, and is derived from the French
word Sein a house or place, and Schale, an Officer or Governor, some say that
Sen is an ancient word for Justice, so as Seneschal, should signify
officiarius justiciae. As to the word Steward, it seems to be compounded of
Stew and Ward, and is a word of many applications: yet always signifies an
Officer of chief account within the place of his sway. In this place it
signifies an officer of Justice, viz. a keeper of Courts, etc. therefore for
the prevention of many inconveniences, it would be no disadvantage to Lords to
elect and constitute such as are exercised in the studies of the Provincial
Laws of this Commonwealth, and the customs of Manors. Fleta lib. 2. cap. 26.
describes the office Fleta. lib. 2. cap. 26.
of a Steward, and councelleth Lords of Manors and Liberties to provide (or
elect) their Stewards in these words; Provideat sibi Dominus de seneschallo
circumspecto, and fideli, viro provido, and discreto and gratioso; humili,
pudico, pacifico and modesto qui in legibus consuetudinibusque provinciae and
officio seneschalliae se cognoscat, and jura Domini sui in omnibus teneri
affectet, etc. cujus officium est curias tenere Maneriorum and de
substractationibus consuetudinum, servitiorum, reddituum, sectarum ad curiam,
mercata, molendina domini, and advisus Franci-plegiorum aliarumque libertatum
Domino pertinentium inquirat, etc. By which description it is observed that he
ought to have a double qualification, viz.

1. In Moralibus. 2. In Judicialibus.
1. In moralibus, he must be qualified with these properties, viz.
Circumspection, fidelity, providence, discretion, etc. which may be reduced to
two general heads, to wit, (verity and Industry.)

2. In Judicialibus, and therein he must be attended by the property of
Knowledge, as to be expert in the laws of the Country, and the customs of
the Manor, and have ability to instruct and direct the Bailiffs, and other
ministers in dubious things.

How he may be retained.
Let us now descend to demonstrate his retainer into office, etc.

Co. rep. 4. 30. Dyer. 8. Eliz. 248.
A Lord of a Manor may by parol retain one to be Steward of his Manor, and to
hold the Courts thereof, as well as a Bailiff may be, and that by word, and
this retainer shall be as effectual in all points before discharge, as the most
effectual institution by Patent; yet most commonly they have patents for their
offices. Co. 4. 30. and therewith accorderh 8 Eliz Dyer 248. Likewise it was
adjudged in the common pleas in the Lady Julian Holcrofts case, that whereas
one was generally retained by the Lord of a Manor by parol to be Steward of a
Manor, and to keep his Courts, that such Steward may take surrender of
customary tenants out of the Court or make voluntary admittances or any other
act incident to the office of a Steward, for till such Steward be discharged,
he is Steward of the Manor, as well by the retainer by word, as if he had a
grant thereof by Patent Leon. fo. 309. Leonards first part fo. 309.


Co. 4. of Copy-holds, fo. 143.
He represents the person of the Lord in many things, for in the absence of the
Lord he sits in Court as Judge to punish offenses, to determine
controversies, redress injuries, etc. he acts some things in the Lords name
and not in his own name; for if the Steward admit any Copyholder, or by special
Authority or particular custom, license a Copyholder to Alien, this admittance
and license shall be made in the Lords name, and the entery in the Roll shall
be Quod dominus per senescallum admisis, and licentiavit, etc. Co. of Copyholds
fo. 143.

Carthrop. sc. 47.
He must take care to Record and Enrol all the Conveyances of estates; for it
has behn holden by some, That if the Lord in open Court grant a Copyhold
estate, and no entry is made thereof in the Court Rolls that the grant is
inavlid, and that no collateral will make it valid. Carthrop. fo. 47. But if
the tenant have no Copy, or lose his Copy, the roll of the Court is a good
evidence, And if the wills be lost, it is thought clearly it may be supplied by
proof, ibidem.

2 H. 4. 24.
At every Court he is to swear some of the Tenants (which is called the Homage)
these he charge with the Articles before mentioned, and upon them they do
present; and upon this presentment, the Steward is to proceed as upon the
presentment in a Leet, save only that (as it is said) the Lord cannot bring an
action of debt, but is only to distraine for the amerciament in this Court, 2
H. 4. 24. For by the Common Leonards first part fo. 299.
Law he has no authority to assesse amerciaments or Fines in a Court Baron,
but the suitors, for they are the Judges and not the Steward. Leonards rep.
first part 299.

How he may forfeit his office.
If the Steward take a bribe, or use partiallity in any case depending before
him, (of which crime many are too culpable) or if by his Patent he be obliged
to keep Court at certain times of the year, and fails thereof, the Lord
receiving prejudice thereby, (not otherwise) or if he be by his Patent obliged
to keep Court upon demand or request to be made by the Lord, Co. 4. rep. of
Copyholds, fo. 146.etc.
and upon request and demand by the Lord he refuses; these and the like cases
will make him subject to a forfeiture, Co. of Copyholds, fo. 146. etc.

Of the Fees of the Court Baron.
AS for the Fees of this Court they much differ, and are by Law what they have
been by custom; time out of mind. For some take the same Fees as are taken in
the County court. And other Courts take the Fees which follow.

The Stewards Fees.
FOr entering every Essoyne 00-00-02 Entering every action 00-00-02 Every Order
entered 00-00-04 Entering a Declaration, if it be large then more 00 00-04
Every Process 00 00 04 Entering every plea or answer 00-00 04 Every
Continuance 00-00-02 Every wager of Law and entry 00 00-02 Warrants for
witnesses and summoning Juries 00-00-04 Every Non-suite and detraxit 00 00-04
Entering the Judgment 00 00-04 Satisfaction acknowledged 00-00 02 For removing
and certifying a cause 00-06-08 The Bailiffs Fees.
FOr every Summons and entrance 00-00-08 For executing every Process 00-00-04
For every shilling upon Judgment 00-00-01 For summoning the Jury 00-01-00 For
summoning of Witnesses upon a Warrant 00 00-04 For every Oath 00 00-02 If there
be Attorneyes, then their Fees are,
FOr every cause if it be heard 00-01-00 For drawing the Declaration 00-00-06
For every Court the cause depends after he is retained 00-00-06

See more in the Fees of the County Court.

The Oath of the Bailiff of a Manor.
YOu shall swear that you shall well and truly serve his Highness the Lord
Protector and the Lord of this Monnor for the year to come, in the Office of
Bailiff of the same Manor; and you shall duly and truly gather, all such
rents, revenues, or other yearly profits as shall be extracted out unto you,
and therefore you shall make and yield up a true account at the end of the said
year, and in every thing you shall well and honesty behave your self in the
said office, during the time aforesaid. So help you God, etc.

The Bailiff must be sworn before the Court end.

Mr. Kitchen in his Jurisdiction of Courts, etc.
The form and method of Presentiments (which are to be drawn by the Steward) I
shall not trouble you with, being copiously performed by Mr. Wilkinson in his
office of Sheriffs, fo. 218, 219, 220, etc. only take these subsequent for
methods sake.

The finding of the death of a Tenant, and of a Surrender made to the use of
his Will, with an admission of the Tenant according to the Will.
THe Homage do further present, that A. B. the elder Copyhold tenant of this
Manor, dyed after the last Court, and that he the said A. B. before his death,
that is to say, the tenth day of May in the year, etc, did surrender into the
hands of the Lord of this Manor, by the hands of C. D. Copyhold Tenant of the
said Manor, all and singular his Copyhold lands, Tenements and Hereditaments
holden of this Manor, to the behoof and use of his Testament and last Will.
And now at this Court came E. F. the eldest son of the said A. B. and does
bring here into the Court the Testament and last Will of the said A. B. bearing
date, etc. before G. H. Deputy Commissary of I. A. in and through the whole
Arch Deaconry of W. approved; the tenor of which said Will as to the Copyhold
lands, does follow in these words, that is to say, Item, I give unto E. my Son,
etc. as by the said Testament and last Will of the said A. B. more at large
appears. And he does crave of the grace of the Lord to be admitted to all and
singular the aforesaid premises, that is to say to two pieces of land Copyhold,
lying in the field called R. containing by estimation eight acres, one piece of
land, lying next the land called D. on the South part, and the lands, etc.
which said two pieces of land, the aforesaid A B. lately had and took up to him
and his heirs of the Surrender of S. T: and M. his wife, at the general Court
with the Leete here holden on Thursday the 18th. day of August in the year,
etc. more at large appears, to which said E. seisin is delivered to him
thereof, to him and his heirs, under the Condition and in manner and form as
in the said last Will is specified by the Rod, at the will of the Lord, by the
service and rent of 2. s. by the year, and suite of Court, saving the right,
etc. and he does give the Lord for a Fine, etc. and does therefore Fealty, etc.

The finding of the death of a Tenant.
ITem, they say upon their Oaths, that A. B. after the last Court, dyed seized
of and in two Roods of land lying in a Pightel called R. holden of this Manor
by Fealty, and the yearly rent of 4d. by the year; and that E. F. is the Son
and next heir of the said A. B. and of full age, who now does therefore to the
Lord Fealty.

Pains found and set upon Tenants for want of suite of Court.
Item, they say upon their Oaths, that I. W. S. and I. I. etc. Copyhold
Tenants of this Manor do owe suite to this Court, and now at this day have
made default, and therefore every one of them in mercy, six pence.

The like.
ANd that A. B. and C. D. are Tenants of the Lord of the Manor by demise, and
do owe suite to this Court now at this day, and have made default thereof,
therefore either of them are in mercy, as over their heads 3. d.

The like.
ANd that E F. G. H. and I. K. are Free Tenants of this Manor and owe suit of
Court, and now at this day have made default thereof, therefore each of them
are in mercy, as over their heads 6. d.

The presentment of a Surrender made out of Court into tenants hands with the
admission of the tenant accordingly.
ANd that L. M. the younger, out of the Court, after the last Court did
surrender into the hands of the Lord of this Manor, by the hands of N. O.
Copyholder tenant of this Manor, in the presence of L. M. and P. R. likewise
Copyhold tenants of this Manor, all their Copyhold lands: and tenements holden
of this Manor with the appurtenances, to the behoof and use of S. T. the elder
and his heirs and assigns: And now came the aforesaid S. T. the elder, and
craveth of the grace of the Lord, to be admitted tenant to all and singular the
premises; that is to say, to one parcel of pasture containing half an acre, be
it more or less, with the apurtenances, late parcel of one Customary tenement,
and eleven acres of land called C. tenement in C. aforesaid, which the said L.
M. did lately take up to him and his heirs, after the surrender thereof made
by one S. T. at the Court general with the Leet here holden, on Monday next
after, etc. more plainly appears: And he is admitted Tenant thereunto, and
seisin is thereof delivered to him, to hold to him, his heirs, and assigns by
the Rod, at the will of the Lord according to the custom of Manor, etc. by
the services and customs, etc. and the rent of six pence by three years,
saving the right, etc. And does give to the Lord a Fine, etc. and has done to
him therefore Fealty, etc.

The finding a Surrender made into Tenants hands, to the use of a man's will.
ANd that A. B. Copyhold Tenant of this Manor, out of Court, after the last
Court; that is to say, the 24th: day of May last past, before the Title of this
Court, did surrender into the hands of the Lord of this Manor, by the hand of
C. D. Copyhold Tenant of the same Manor in the presence of I. A. and S. A.
likewise Copyhold Tenants of the said Manor, all his Copyhold lands and
tenements holden of this Manor, to the behoof and use of his Testament and
last Will.

The finding of the death of a Tenant, and of the lands, and that the youngest
son is next heir, according to the custom, etc. with his admission.
ANd that W. D. Copyhold tenant of this Manor dyed after the last Court;
solely seized of and in onetenement enclosed, called L. containing by
estimation five acres lying in F. which the said W. late took up to him and his
heirs, of the Surrender of I. S. as at a Court here holden on Monday, in the
morning of St. John the Baptist in the year, etc. appears. And of and in five
acres of Copyhold land with the appertenances, holden of the same Manor called
B. which etc. And that W. D. his younger son is next heir of the said W.
according to the custom of this Manor; who now does come, and craveth of the
grace of the Lord to be admitted to the premises with the appurrenances,
according to the custom of the Manor aforesaid, and he is admitted thereto
Tenant, to whom seisin is thereof delivered, by the Rod at the will of the
Lord, according to the custom of the same Manor, by the services and customs
and rents for five acres, etc. at 4. s. by the year, and for the other said
five acres of land at the rent of 5. s. by the year, etc. saving the Right,
etc. And he does give the Lord for a Fine, etc. And does Fealty to the Lord,
etc.

The finding of a Sale made of Freehold lands, with a distress to the Bailiff
to distrian for want of taking it up.
ALso they say upon their oaths, that I. A. after the last Court did sell to
R. A. one tenement called T. with the Apurtenances, containing by estimation
two acres, holden free of this Manor in Free Soccage by Fealty, and the yearly
rent of 3d. by the year, and suit of Court, which said R. A. does not come,
etc. Therefore it is commanded to the Bailiff that he distrain the aforesaid R.
A. against the next Court to do Fealty, etc.

The acknowledgment in the Court of a Legacy paid.
ANd that I. B. in full Court, did acknowledge himself to be satisfied and
fully paid by N. B. his Brother of his Legacy of ten pounds to the said I. B.
by the Testament and last Will of his Father bequeathed, according to the form
and effect, and the true intent of the said Testament and last Will of his
father.

A presentment of a Surrender made out of Court with the admission of the
tenant.
THE Quest of Office do present upon their oaths, that I. S. Copyhold Tenant
of this Manor out of Court, that is to say, the tenth day of May in the year,
etc. did surrender into the hands of the Lord of this Manor by the hands of S.
N. Copyhold Tenants of this Manor, in the presence of I. G. and G. F. likewise
Copyhold. Tenants of the said Manor all his Copyhold lands and tenements with
the appurtenances holden of this Manor to the behoof and use of R. K. and of
his heirs and assigns for ever, who now came here into Court and craveth of
the Grace of Lord to be admitted to all and singular the aforesaid premises
with the appurtenances; that is to say, to one Message decayed, with certain
lands in C. containing by estimation four acres, be it more or less with the
appurtenances, parcel of one Cottage and three acres of Land of the Tenement of
H. with the appurtenances, in the same of Skipton, in the Tenement of Maidens
late W. K. which the same I. S. lately took up to him, his heirs, and assigns
at a Court, for the Manor aforsaid holden, after the surrender thereof made by
I C. as at a Court, for the Manor aforesaid holden on Thursday the 17th. day
of May in the year, etc, more plainly appears: And he is admitted thereto
Tenant, to whom seisin is thereof delivered, to hold to him, his heirs and
assigns by the Rod at the will of the Lord, according to the custom of the
Manor aforesaid, by the services, etc. and Rent of 2 s, by the year, saving
the Right, etc. And he does give to the Lord for a Fine, etc, and does do to
the Lord Fealty, etc.

A Presentment made in Court of an agreement made between a son and his mother
touching her Dower, and the mothers release of her Dower.
AND afterward in this Court came the said N. B: and E. B. widow, relict of
the said R B. and do give here intelligence to the Court, that they are agreed
between themselves of and for the Dower of the said E B. in the premises,
according to the custom of the Manor aforesaid, whereupon the said E B.
present here in Court does remise and release into the hands of the Lord
aforesaid, all her Dower and title of Dower, and demand, which to her does
belong according to the custom of the Manor of and in all and singular the
Copyhold land and tenements holden of this Manor, which late were the said R
B. sometimes her husband, to the behoof and use of N B. (in his full and
peaceable possession thereof now being) and of his heirs and assigns for
ever; so, that is to say, that the said E B. from henceforth may not require,
claim and challenge any Dower, of, in, or to the premises, or any parcel
thereof, according to the custom of the said Manor, but thereof, and of and
from all action and demand of such Dower concerning the premises, shall be for
ever barred and excluded by this inrolment. And for this remise and release,
the said N B. does give to the said E B. 210 l. of lawful money of England: And
he gave to the Lord for a Fine, etc. for the release aforesaid, etc.

A pain set for an incroachment.
The Quest of Office do say upon their Oath, that T G. has incroached with his
ditch upon the Common of H. G. toward the milking yard of his Message;
therefore he is in mercy as it is over his head.

A pain set for the amending of the same, etc.
And it is commanded him to reform the said incroachment on this side the Feast
of St. Michael; the Archangel next coming; upon pain as over his head.

Also they say that S. A. has forfeited his pain of The finding of a pain
forfeited.
5 s. upon him imposed at the last Court, for that he after the last Court, and
after notice to him to the contrary given by the Bailiff of this Manor, has
suffered his swine to go out and pasture upon the Common pasture of H. against
command thereof to him to the contrary given.

A presentment for an offense done, and a charge to the Jury to enquire, and
further day given for giving their verdict.
WHereas W. S. and G. B. Lords of the Manor of R. have lately cut down one Oak
lately growing at the West end of a certain Pightel called B. Pightel of the
Demesne of this Manor, in the Copyhold tenure of F. W. and at this Court it
was given in charge to be enquired of by the homage, and they to give their
verdict of and upon the premises. The same homage do desire day for giving in
their verdict until the next Court, for that they are not yet thereof advised,
etc. And they have, etc.

I. A. Copyhold Tenant of this Manor does desire to be admitted to a Fine for
respite of Suite of Court to be done, and he is admitted for 4. d.

A Fine desired for respite of suite to be done.
WHereas at the last Court it was given in charge to the homage to enquire and
give their verdict of and concerning the cutting down of one oak lately before
then growing at the West end of a certain pightel called B. pightel of the
Demesnes of this Manor in the Copyhold tenure of F. W. by W. S. and G. B.
Lords of the Manor of R. late before that time cut down, and at the said Court
day was further given until this Court; the Jurors of this Inquisition do now
say upon their oaths that as well by the testimony of R. A, one of the Tenants
of this Manor to this specialy sworn, as of the certain knowledge The verdict
of homage touching their former charge.
of some of the homage now sworn, that the aforesaid F. W. and all those whose
estate the said F. has in the aforesaid Copyhold pightel from time to time by
the space of sixty years now last past, have quietly and without contradiction
cut, taken, carried away, and enjoyed all the wood from time to time by the
space of sixty years, growing on the part of the way, and at the West end of
the said pightel; and that the hedges of the said pightel aforesaid by all the
said space were placed and did adjoyn to the said Oak, and that the greater
part of the thickness of the Oak did reach it self toward the said way; and
further they say, that there never was any ditch where the Oak aforesaid did
grow; And they further say of the testimony of the said R. A. that the said R.
A. in times past, having in his occupation the pightel aforesaid from time to
time by diverse years did gather and had the Acrons of the Oak aforesaid
without any contradiction. To the Court came I. W. and R. his Wife, and present
here in Court in their proper person, and the said R. by the Steward of the
said Court, being solely and secretly A Surrender and remise of lands made in
Court before the Steward, and the examination of the wife.
examined and consenting, did surrender into the hands of the Lord of the same
Manor, and did remise, release, and altogether for them their heirs, and
assigns, quit claim to the behoof and use of S. N. and his heirs, all their
right, title, state, use, interest and demand whatsoever, which they ever had,
now have, or hereafter may have, or they or either of them may have, according
to the custom of the same Manor of, in, or to seven Acres of land with one
Message, parcel of the tenement called S. and of, in, and to two acres of
Copyhold land of the Tenement of W. etc. which said premises the said S.
lately had and took up, and now holds to him and his heirs, after Surrender
thereof made by I. W. as at the Court there holden on Wednesday the 21. day of
March in the year etc. more at large appears to the behoof and use of the
aforesaid S. N and of his heirs, so, that is to say, that neither the aforesaid
I. W. and R. nor either of them, nor their heirs, nor the heirs of either of
them, from henceforth may require, claim, or challenge any estate, Right,
title, Dower, and demand thereof to be had, from henceforth shall be altogether
barred and excluded, and either of them is barred and excluded by this present
surrender, release, and quit claim; and for this surrender, remise and release,
the said S. does give a Fine to the Lord, etc.

A Surrender of Copyhold in Court, with the admission of the tenant accordingly.
TO this Court came A B. gent. Copyhold Tenant of this Manor and present here
in Court did surrender into the hands of the Lord of the same Manor two acres
and a half of land lying in two pieces in C. be it more or less, whereof the
first piece does lie between, etc. and the other piece is accounted for half an
acre, and lies, etc. which said two acres and a half the said A. B. late in
the Court did take up to him, his heirs and assigns, after surrender made
thereof by I W. as at the Court here holden on Friday the sixteenth day of May
in the year, etc. more plainly appears, to the behoof and use of I. W. and
R. his wife, and the heirs of the said I. W. which said I W. and R. present
here in Court, do desire of the grace of the Lord, to be admitted to the
aforesaid two acres and half of land; according to the form and effect of the
Surrender aforesaid; and they are thereunto admitted tenants, to whom seisin
thereof is delivered to hold to the said I. W and R. and to the heirs of the
said I W. of the Lord of the Manor aforesaid, by the Rod, of the will of the
Lord, according to the custom of the Monnor aforesaid, by the services, etc.
and the rent of 2 s by the year, saving the Right, etc. and he does give to the
Lord a Fine; and the said I W. has done Featly to the Lord, etc.

A surrender, and Lease made in Court, with the examination of the Wife.
AND afterward at this Court came the aforesaid I. S. and M. his Wife, and
present here in Court, and the said M. being solely and secretly examined by
the Steward of the same Court, and consenting, did surrender, remise, and
release into the hands of the Lord of the Manor aforesaid, all their right,
state, title, possession, Dower, and demand of them the said I. S. and M. of,
in, and to all and singular the premises aforesaid, with the appurtenances to
the behoose and use of the said R. K. and his heirs and assigns for ever (in
his full and peaceable possession of the premises now being) so, that is to
say, that neither the said I. S. and M. or either of them, from henceforth
shall require, claim, or challenge any right, title, Dower, or demand, of, in,
or to the premises, or any part or parcel thereof; but of, and from all
action, right, title, Dower, or demand thereof to be had for ever, hereafter
shall be barred and excluded by this inrollment. And the said I. S. for the
said remise and release, does give to the Lord a fine, etc.

A Surrender of Lands made in Mortgage, upon condition for the payment of
money, with the admission of the Mortgagee by her Attorney, and the Fealty
respited.
AND immidiatly after the same Court, the aforesaid N. B. present here in
Court, did surrender into the hands of the Lord aforesaid, by the hands of his
Steward of the same Manor, one piece of Land containing (by estimation) two
acres of arable Land, lying between the Lands of the Manor of R. late of N. B.
of the West part, and the lands, etc. together with the ways and paths to the
same belonging and used, which said piece of Land, R. B. the Father of the said
F. whose heir he is, late had to him, his heirs and assigns amongst other
things, after the Surrender thereof made by W. B. and E. his Wife, as at a
general Court with a Leet there holden on Thursday next after, etc. in the
year, etc. appears to the behoof and use of F. D. one of the daughters of
N. D. Gent. and of the heirs and assigns of the said F. under this form and
condition, that if the said N. B. his heirs, executors, or administrators, or
any of them shall pay or cause to be paid to the said F. D. her heirs,
executors, administrators, or assigns, at the mansion house of the said R. B.
in H. in the County of York Gent. the sum of twenty pounds of good, etc. in,
or upon the twenty eighth day of October next following, after the title of
this Court, that then the said surrender shall be void and of none effect or
virtue; and that then also it shall be lawful for the said N. B. his heirs
and assigns to re-enter into the said piece of Land, and the same as in his
former estate to have again, repossesse, and re-enjoy; the said surrender, or
any thing to the contrary notwithstanding; and upon this the said F. by C. W.
her Attorney, in this behalf is admitted thereto tenant, and Seisin is
delivered to the said F. her heirs and assigns under the condition aforesaid,
and in manner and form aforesaid, by the Rod at the Will of the Lord,
according to the custom of the Manor aforesaid, by the services, etc. saving
the right, etc. And he does give the Lord for a fine, etc. and Fealty is
respited until, etc.

A Surrender of Lands made presently in Court.
A Surrender made by one to his mother of lands for her life, the reversion to
the Son again and his heirs.
ANd afterward sitting in the same Court, the aforesaid F. W. present in Court,
did surrender into the hands of the Lord of the same Manor, in the aforesaid
Close, containing by estimation five acres called L. to the behoof and use of
C. W. his Brother, and to the heirs and assigns of the said C. to which said
C. seisin thereof is delivered, to hold to him his heirs and assigns by the
Rod, at the will of the Lord according to the Custom of the same Manor, by
the services, etc. saving the right, etc. And he does give to the Lord for a
fine, etc. And does therefore Fealty to the Lord; and the same F. W. present
here in Court does surrender into the hands of the Lord, by the hands of the
Steward of the same Manor, the aforesaid seven acres of Land in one Close, now
in two parts divided with hedge and dike, to the behoof and use of I. VV.
Widow, his Mother, and of her assigns in form aforesaid, for term of the
natural life of her the said I. VV. to whom seizin thereof is delivered to the
said I. VV. and her assigns in form aforesaid, the reversion thereof to the
said F. VV. and of his heirs and assigns by the rod, etc. at the will of the
Lord, etc. according to the custom of the Manor aforesaid, saving right, etc.
And he does give to the Lord for a fine, etc. And does therefore fealty to the
Lord, etc.

A Release of Land made in Court.
AT this Court came S. B. and present in Court, did surrender, remise, and
release, into the hands of the Lord according to the Custom of this Manor,
all his right, title, state, possession, interest, and demand of, and in all
those parcels of the land, parcel of the Orchard of the said N. called the old,
or further Orchard, next adjoining to the Pightel or Close of Pasture of him
the said S. called the Bean-close, as it is now divided from the said Pightel
or Close, with the door-stakes put upon the Front of the Dike of the said old
Orchard to the behoof and use of N. B. his Brother (in full and peaceable
possession thereof now being) and to his heirs and assigns for ever; so, that
is to say, that neither the said S. nor his heirs from henceforth may
challenge, crave, or demand, any right, title, state, claim, or demand of or
in the said piece of land. But from all action, right, title, state, use,
interest, and demand thereof to be had, from henceforth shall be utterly barred
and excluded, and every of them shall be for ever barred and excluded by this
present inrollment. And the said N. for the said remise and release does give
to the Lord a fine, etc.

A Lease made by the Lord of parcel of his Lands.
AT this Court the Lord here in full Court did demise to farm to I. A. one
Garden containing half a Rod, lying, etc. and half an acre of land in F. of
the Demesnes of the Manor, to hold to him, his Executors and assigns for the
term of five years next following after the title of this Court, paying
therefore yearly for every year during the said term one penny at the Feast,
etc. And he does give to the Lord for a fine, etc. And does therefore Fealty to
the Lord, etc.

The Admission of the younger Son to Lands according to the custom.
AT this Court came F. W. the younger Son, and next heir of I. W. deceased; and
did crave of the grace of the Lord to be admitted tenant to one parcel of land,
containing in length twenty perches, and in breadth three foot, late parcel of
one piece of Copyhold land called B. containing by estimation three acres of
land, of which said parcel of late there is made a dike, which said parcel of
land I. W. the Grandfather of the said F. W. lately had to him, his heirs and
assigns of the surrender of L. A. as at a Court for the Manor aforesaid
holden the 24. day of May in the year, etc. appears, as to his right and
inheritance, for that the said I. VV. died thereof seized, and the same parcel
of land by and after the death of the said I. VV. according to the custom of
the Manor aforesaid, did descend to the said F. VV. the Father of the said F.
VV. and from the said F. VV. the right of the said parcel did descend to the
said F. VV. the younger; and he is thereunto admitted tenant to whom seisin is
thereof delivered to hold to him, his heirs and assigns, by the rod, at the
will of the Lord, according to the custom of the Manor aforesaid by rent of
two pence, etc. and the services, etc. saving right etc. And he does give to
the Lord for a fine, etc. And does therefore fealty to the Lord, etc.

A License by a Lord of a Manor to a Copyholder to pull down houses standing
on Copyhold lands.
TO all and singular Survayors, Bailiffs, and other Officers whatsoever within
my Manor of Skipton, in the County of Y. I, E L. of B. send greeting: Whereas
I am informed, that H. G. has lately purchased of T. C. certain old houses
within my said Manor being Copihold, and that the said T. C. has surrendered
the same houses, to the use of the said H. G. and his Heirs, according to the
custom of the said Manor: Now my will and pleasure is, and I do by these
presents give and grant unto the said H. G. his heirs and assigns, full
license and absolute liberty, power and authority to pull down, and to take
and carry away the said houses, and every of them, or any part of them to and
for the use of the said H G. and his heirs and assigns from time to time as
to him or them or any of them shall seem meet; Any custom or usage whatsoever
within the said Manor (if any such be, or heretofore has been had or used)
to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding: And I will and command you
and every of you, that the said H. G. and his assigns may quietly have and
enjoy the full and whole benefit of my said grant and license without any
denial, let, or impediment of you or any of you. In witness whereof, etc.

A Letter of Attorney to surrender a Copyhold.
BE it known unto all men by these presents, that I A. B. one of the customary
or Copyhold tenants of the Manor of H. in the County of M. have made,
ordained, constituted, and appointed; and by these presents, do make, ordain,
constitute, and appoint, my trusty and well beloved friends C. D. and F. F. two
customary or Copyhold Tenants of the Manor aforesaid, my lawful Attorneys and
Attorney jointly and severally for me, and in my name jointly and severally by
lawful ways and means, to surrender into the hands of the Lord or Lords, Lady
or Ladies, Farmers, owners, or proprietors of the said Manor of H. aforesaid,
all that customary or Copyhold Message or Tenement, with the appurtenances
situate, lying, and being in H. aforesaid, parcel of the customary lands of
the said Manor: And all my estate, right, title, interest, claim, possession,
and demand, of, in, to, and out of every part and parcel thereof, to the use
and behoof of T. VV. his heirs and assigns for ever; and I the said A. B. do
hereby give and grant unto them the said C. D. and E. F. jointly and severally,
and to either of them full power and authority to do, execute, and perform any
other lawful act and acts whatsoever, needful or necessary to be done in,
for, or about the better effecting of the premises, as fully and amply to all
intents and purposes as I my self might do in person or otherwise, and
whatsoever my said Attorneyes, or either of them, shall jointly or severally do
in the premises, according to the true intent and meaning of these presents; I
do hereby allow of, ratify, and confirm. In witness, etc.

The Grant of a Stewardship.
TO all to whom these presents shall come A. B. Knight, sends greeting Know
ye, that I the said A. B. for diverse good causes and considerations me
thereunto moving, have, for me, my heirs and assigns, given and granted, and
by these presents do give and grant unto John Preston of B. Gent. the Office of
chief Steward, and the place and execution of the Stewardship of my Manor of
Skipton in Craven in the County of York. And the holding and keeping of all
Courts, Court-Leets, viewes of Frank-pledge, and of all other Courts of what
kind soever the same be, to the said Manor belonging or in any wise
appertaining: To have, hold, execute, and enjoy the aforesaid Office of chief
Steward, and the place and execution of chief Stewardship, and the holding and
keeping of all manner of Courts usually held and kept within the same; together
with all manner of fees, wages, rewards, profits, advantages, and emoluments,
to the said office of chief Steward or Stewardship of the said Manor or
Lordship belonging or appertaining, or at any time heretofore accustomed and
used to be paid, rendered to, or received, by the chief Steward or Stewards
there for the time being, for, or by reason of the said office of chief
Steward or Stewards there for the time being, from henceforth, for and during
the natural life of him the said John Preston, In witness, etc.

THE COURT OF Pypowders.
The definition of it, what it is, and why it was instituted, together with its
jurisdiction.
THis word Pypowder, has its definition from the The definition of Pypowder.
French words pied, i. pes, and puldreux, i. pulverulentus, or as Skene de
verb. significat. Pede pulverosus, dusty feet, a Vagabond, Pedder, or Scotch
Merchant, who has no certain dwelling place, and by whom Fares are usually
kept, to whom justice should be summarily ministered within three flowings and
ebbings of the Sea; or as some define it to be curia parvi ponderis, and this
is to be pedis-pulverizati, and so the Lord chief Justice Anderson did use to
define it, for the speed and celerity there used, in the present dispatch of
business.

8 H. 7. fol. 4. b.
This Court of Pypowders is a Court of Record, instituted and set up for the
speedy and sudden dispatch of matters and differences arising in a Fare or
Market, and for the speedy doing of Justice, and this in case of necessity, for
the sole benefit of Tradesmen and Merchants, and for the present determination
of all doubts and questions there then arising, and that only upon sales and
contracts had in the Fare and Market, during the time thereof, but not for
matters acted and done before, or at any time after the Fare or Market held;
but for matters happening and arising in pleno Mercato, or in plenaferia, 8 H.
7. fol. 4. b.

This Court is of two kinds, viz.

1. Either by prescription, and this is an absolute jurisdiction. 2. To be in a
Fare and Market, and to this a Court of Pypowders is incident.
And here two things are requisite, viz.

1. This Court to be for matters arising in the Fare or Market. 2. The matters
to be determined there, within, St. 17. E. 4. c. 2. and 1. R. 3. c. 6.
and during the continuance of the Fare and Market; and this appears to be so
by the Statutes of 17 E. 4. cap. 2. and 1 R. 3. cap. 6. and this is in a Court
of Pypowders annexed unto a Fare or Market: But in a Court of Pypowders which
one has by Prescription, there they may hear Bolstrod. 2. part. fol. 21. Cro.
1. part, fol. 33.
and determine matters done before, Bolstrod 2. part. fol. 21. Goodson against
Duffill, Cro, first part, fol. 33.
Prescription.
For in case of a Prescription such a Court may well be without a Fare, from
time to time, and from day to day, 13 E. 4. fol. 8. b. it was so adjudged in
point 13 E. 4. fo. 8. b.
of a Writ of Error, where the error assigned to reverse a judgment given in
curia pedis pulverizali, there alleged to be held, secundum consuetudinem
ejusdem civitatis, the Error insisted upon was, because he showed not, that the
matter upon which the action was brought was in pleno Mercato, or in plena
feria, it is there expressly adjudged, that this was no Error, because the same
was laid to be held secundum consuetudinem civitatis; so that such a Court may
be held without a Fare or Market, and that the King may well grant such a Court
to be held from day to day, and such a Court may well be held by Custom
without any Fare or Market, and its proper denomination is from the speedy
dispatch of business there; so that the jurisdiction of this Court held by
prescription, may be extended unto all contracts and bonds, to actions of
trespass, and actions upon the Case, and to this purpose was the case,
between Chambers Plaintiff against Pert Defendant, Hill. 33. Eliz. Rot. 124.
where Hill. 33 Eliz. Rot. 124.
an action of trespass for an assault and battery was brought in a Court of
Pypowders, for an assault done long before, and well maintainable as it was
held.

But this Court held by prescription does much differ from the ordinary Court
of Pypowders, and that by many circumstances: This Court may be thus used and
held, viz.

1. Either by way of Grant. 2. By way of confirmation. Pypowders by way of
grant and confirmation.

12 H. 7. fo. 16. b. 13 H. 7. fo. 19. 13 E. 3. fo. 8. b. Old book of Ent. 168.
Fit. debt, en Gailor, pl. 1. fol. 18. Fit. account in Execution pl. 3.
And being thus held, it differs from the ordinary Court of Pypowders, which is
incident to every Fare, as appears by 12 H. 7. fol. 16. b. and 13 H 7. fol.
19. And the same Court is thus incident to a Fare, and that of common right, as
it appears, 13 E. 4. fol. 8. b. Old book of Entr. fol. 168. Fit. debt en
Gailor. placito, 1 f. 18. Fit. account in Execution placito 3. If one will
declare upon a matter in this Court in Fare, there in such a case of necessity
he ought to set forth in pleading, that the same was done in pleno ferio, or in
plena Mercata, otherwise not good. But it is not so in case where a man has,
and holds this Court by prescription, in which Court they may hear and
determine actions upon the case for words, but not so in an ordinary Court held
during the time of the Fare: And by 6 E. 4. fol. 3. b. If a man in his Fare
has 6 E. 4. fol. 3. b. The Steward is Judge.
this Court, here the Steward is Judge and no other, for there are no Suitors;
and for a Judgment given in this Court a Writ of Faux judgment lies not, but a
Writ of Error, and with this agrees 7 E. 4 fol. 23. 7 E. 4. fol. 23.
And where one claims to hold this Court by prescription, and also by Charter;
if the Charter be not contrary to the prescription, this shall be good by way
of confirmation.

As a Court Baron is incident to a Manor, so a This Court is incident to a
Fare or Market, and by a grant of them it passes, 19 H. 8. Brooks case, fol.
2. pl. 7. and Brook tit. incidents, pl. 34. 2, 3 Phil. and Mar. Dyer. fol. 133.
pl. 80. Co. 10. fol. 73.
Court of Pypowders is incident to a Fare, and by the Grant of the Fare this
does pass, and with this accords, 19 H. 8. Brooks case, fol. 2. placito, 7.
and Brook, tit. incidents placito 34. and not to be fevered from them, neither
by grant nor by reservation, 2 and 3 Phil. and Mar. Dyer fol. 133 pla. 80. the
Plaintiff in a Court of Pypowder does count of a contract made in the last
Fare before, where no plaint was then begun, nor any judgment of Amerciament of
the Defendant then given, and this was held a good Error in both by all the
Justices of both Benches, Mich. 42. and 43 Eliz. B. R. Co. 10 fo. 73. in the
case of the Marshalsea, where Hall braught a Writ of Error against Jones, to
reverse a Judgment given against him in the Court of Pypowders of the Market in
the City of Gloucester, for that that Hall had published slanderous words of
him, (viz.) Mr. Jones and his Clerk have by color of his office, extorted and
gotten 300 l. per annum by unlawful means, for many years together, above
their ordinary fees, for proving of Testaments and granting of Administrations,
the which judgment was reversed for two Errors, viz. 1. Because words did not
concern any matter touching the Market, and therefore the Court had no
jurisdiction of it; but if one slander any with Trades, and Merchandizeth in
the Market, in any thing which concerns his Trade, there an action for this
well lies.

2. It appears in the Count, that the words were spoken before the Market, and
not during the time of the Market: for as this Court has no jurisdiction, but
in matters concerning the Market, so the same Court has no jurisdiction, for
matters concerning the Market, unless they were acted and done during the time
of the Market. Bracton, lib. 5. fo. 335. a. De brevi de recto. 1. Bracton, lib.
5. fol. 335. De brevi de recto 1.
de diversitate, and divisione summonitionis, It is there said, per quindecim
dies, ante diem quo comparere debeat summonitio, ought to be, Et talis
summonitio, dici debeat legitima. Si minus spatium contineat, possit
illigitimam judicari; nisi ob causam legitimam, minus tempus statuatur, ut
propter personas, qui celerem habere debeant justitiam, sicut sunt Mercatores,
quibus exhibetur justitia, Pepoudrous, by the Statute of 17 E. 4. capite 17 E.
4. cap. 2.
2.



No plea shall be holden in this Court, unless the Plaintiff or his Attorney
do swear that the contract was made during the time of the Fair. Stat. 1. R.
3. cap. 6.
And in this Court no Steward, or other Minister, shall hold plea upon any
action, at the suit of any person unless the Plaintiff or his Attorney, in
presence of the Defendant, do swear that the contract in the Declaration, etc.
was had and made, during the time of the Fare, and within the jurisdiction of
the Fare (but this oath so taken) shall not conclude the Defendant for pleading
in abatement of the action, and to the jurisdiction of the Court, this by the
Statute of 1 R. 3. cap. 6. is made perpetual in this principal case here, the
Defendant in the Court at Rochester, was condemned in an action of debt for 300
l. upon a Bond and Contract formerly made, and entered into, and for this cause
the judgment was erroneous.

Note.
Note that in this Court the Steward is Judge, because there are no Suitors
there, neither can the Steward delegate a Deputy, 6 E. 4. fol. 3. 7 E. 4. fol.
23.

A TABLE OF THE PRINCIPAL MATTERS contained in the BOOK.
A
A Merciament, in the County Court, 6 How they are forfeited in Court Leet, and
what shall be causes to amerce, etc. 313 Of Amerciament, 314 Attorneys, in the
County Court, 10 how qualified, 11
Actions, within what time they must be brought, 12 Who may bring Actions, and
who not, 13 Appearance, what it is, 14 Answer, what, 17 Accounts of the
Sheriff, with a particular of some usual charges or fees paid by him at the
rendering of them up 224, 225 Appeals, 295 The Sheriff shall have Counter-rolls
of Appeals etc. 297 Accessaries, who, 326 Alehouse keepers, 332 Assize of
bread, 333
B
Bailiffs, in the County Court, 11 how qualified ibid.
Burglary, what, 324 Bond, taken by the Sheriff upon a Fieri facias for the
payment of money in Court, not within the Stat. of 9 E. 4. 50. 185 Burning of
houses or Barns, 326 Bail, what it is, 212 Any person making a warrant, etc.
without original process, upon examination, etc. shall be committed without
bail, 214 Such as are in Execution, etc. not to be bailed, ibid. None to be
bailed that are prohibited by the Statute of West. 1. cap. 15. he cannot bail
any suspect of felony as formerly, ibid. The Sheriff cannot refuse to bail one
bailable, upon tender of sufficient sureties, ibid. Traitors or Felons not
bailable, 215 In the Upper Bench the bail not chargeable, till default
assigned in the principal, etc. ibid. The new rules concerning special bail,
ibid. and 216 Bridges decays, 328 Boundaries, 330 Bloodshed, 331 Barretors,
ibid. Brewers, 333 Butchers, 334 Breaking of Pownds, 338 Beadel, why so called,
347 Bastard may not inherit, 351
C
COunty Court, when instituted, 3 Now the Sheriffs Court, ibid. By whom first
exercised, ibid. What action may be brought in it, 4, 5, 6, 12 The time when it
is to be holden, 5 Where it is to be kept, 6 What actions will not lie in it,
ibid. Proceedings in it, 14 The manner of keeping the Court, 23, 24, 25
Process of the Court Original, 37 Judicial, 43
County Clerk, how to be qualified, 7 He cannot practice as an Attorney, 8 Can
act nothing without the Suitors, 9 His care in deputing Bailiffs, 9 How he must
enter plaints, ibid. How he is punishable, ibid. Count, what it is, 16
Continuance, what, 17 Challenge of Jurors, What are good causes, 21 Capias ad
satisfac: where it lies, 71, 174 Cap. lies not after an Elegit, and Why, 179
Note where it lies after an Elegit, 178 What it is, 179 One taken upon it must
be kept in salva and arcta custodia, ibid. This Writ lies where a Capias lies
in the original, ibid. Nothing but the body can be taken by this Writ, 180 A
man in the custody of the Sheriff, and a second writ is delivered to him, he
shall be in his custody upon it, although not actually arrested, ibid. Two
bound in an obligation, jointly and severally, both may be sued and taken in
Execution, ibid. This Writ lies not for damages in a Writ of Dower, ibid. No
return is required upon it, ibid. Capias pro Fine, what it is, 181 An Elegit
sued after one is taken for the Protectors fine, he shall go at large, ibid. No
one taken upon it in trespass, etc. ibid. Capias ut legatum, what it is and
where it lies, 181, 182 Capias ut legate. and inquiras de bonis and catallis,
What it is, 182 Capias ad valentiam, what it is, and Where it lies, ibid.
Coroners office, how derived, 279 When first established, ibid. His office is
duplicate, viz. general, and special, 280, and 281 What person ought to be a
Coroner, and how qualified, 281, 282, 283 Of the number of Coroners in each
County, 284 Of the power and jurisdiction of Coroners, ibid. What persons are
to be of the Coroners Inquest, and how qualified, 286, 287 The Method of
keeping the Coroners Court, 287, 288, 289, 290, 291, 292, 293 His Ministerial
power, 294 His Fees ibid. Custom, to pull down houses and cut down trees,
not good, 368 Constables, 327 Crossebows, 337 Copiholder may not let longer
then a year and a day, 355 Copihold granted by a disseisor may be avoided by
the disseisee, 357 But admittance upon surrenders, good, ibid. None can pass a
larger estate then he has, ibid. Copiholder, What person is sufficient to be a
Copiholder, 358 What interest he has in his estate, ibid. 359 Husband to a
woman Copiholder, shall not be tenant by the Courtesy without special custom,
360 The heir of a Copyholder not bound to come to any Court during his
nonage, ibid. Whether a Copyholder may lop trees, ibid. Copyholders for life
cannot claim custom to cut down and sell trees, 361 No tenant by the Courtesy
or Dower shall be of Copyhold lands 361 An estate tail cannot be of Copyhold
lands without use ibid. Copyholder may assign one to essoin for him, but not
to do his service 362 Copyhold not extendable by Statute-Staple, but it is
upon the Statute of Bankrupts not liable to any charge of the Lord 363 Common
Nuisance 327 Common Pownds 328 Common Barretors 331 Curriers 336 Court Baron 349
How Court-Barons were first instituted 352 What parts a Court Baron does
consist of 338 Court Baron cannot be separated from a Manor 337 The difference
between Court Leet and Court Baron 340 341 Of the time When, and the place
Where the Court is to be kept 342 The manner of keeping the Court ibid. and 343
344 The charge of the Court 345
D
DUces tecum, What 14 Declaration, What it is 14 15 Modo and forma 15 Demurrer,
what 18 Distress, what good, and What not 26 27 28 29 30 31 Ditches, hedges and
Highways kept and scoured 330 Discontinuance, one seized in the right of his
wife, surrenders it and dies, no discontinuance to the wife 370
E
ESsoin, what it is 14 Execution in the County Court, and What goods may be
taken upon it, and what not 32 33 34 Where the under Sheriff justified the
breaking of three doors to do execution 185 Elegit, Where it lies 71 174 What
it is 176 The Sheriff may take a moiety of the Lands of the Conusor, and all
his goods and chattels, and the valuation of the goods and lands must be found
by inquisition ibid. He must return the extent, and that he has delivered the
Lands 177 Term of years delivered in execution upon Elegit good, and also rents
ibid. The Sheriff must return the moiety distinctly, unless they be tenants
in common ibid. He cannot deliver a Lease at another value then What the Jury
had found it at ibid. Goods cannot be sold by the owner after the Test of the
Elegit ib. An execution valuable Without satisfaction, ibid. Where a Cap. lies
after an Elegit 178 Lands sold after judgment shall be liable to satisfy it,
ibid. Two Writs of Elegit delivered to the Sheriff at one time, how to be
executed, ibid. Several Elegits may issue into Counties, ibid. No Cap. ad sat.
nor fieri fac, does lie after an Elegit, and why 179 An Elegit sued after one
is taken for the Protetectors fine, he shall go at large, 181 Escapes, 208 What
an Escape is, ibid. For felony, it is felony in him that suffers the escape,
ibid. If a prisoner escape, yet upon fresh suit, and taken, he shall be in
execution, ibid. One in execution cannot go out of the Goal, though with the
assent of the Sheriff, ibid. The Protector cannot command without Writ, to
free a man, etc. ibid. If the Sheriff die and one breaks the Goal, no
escape, 209 If a woman-Goaler marry a Prisoner, adjudged an escape, ibid. It is
no escape if Prisoners be removed out of the County, that they may be removed
to another place within the same County, but not for their ease, for then it is
an escape, ibid. The Sheriff upon fresh suit may take a prisoner in another
County, ibid. No felony in the Jailer to kill a prisoner that attempteth to
escape, ibid. All that come into the Goal ought to be kept close and safe,
ibid. One taken upon a Cap. by a wrong name, etc. a Testat. issued out against
him by his right name, and was taken in Execution, and suffered him to escape,
and the Sheriff was judged answerable for the escape, 210 A man's wife taken in
execution, and suffered to go at large before the debt satisfied, adjudged an
escape, ibid. A reprisall by fresh suit before the action brougt, excusable,
but a reprisall after the action brought, no excuse, 211 212 213 Exigents and
Proclamations to be proclaimed five County days, 10 Extendi facias, what, 168
Election of Parliament men, how and when they are to be elected, 216 Who may be
electors, 217 Time when they are to be elected, ibid. What persons are
elegible, and what not, 218 Punishment of Sheriffs for their negligence in
elections or returns, 219 Penalties on Counties and places for not electing,
ibid. Escape voluntary, what, 326 Escape negligent, what, ibid. Evesdroppers,
338 Estrayes, 340
F
FEes, to the County Clerk, 54 To the Attorney in the County Court, 55 To the
Bayliffe for executing Process out of the County Court, 55 56 Fees of the
Sheriff, 221 222 223 What fees the Under Sheriff of Middlesex uses to take
223 Fees paid by the Sheriff in rendering his accounts into the Exchequer 225
226 227 Fees of the Coroner 294 Fees of the Court Baron 373 374 Fieri facias,
where it lies 71 174 What it is 183 The Sheriff must be cautious in executing
this Writ, etc. ibid. If he, for a debt of twenty pounds takes goods and sells
them for forty pounds, he may keep the surplusage till the Defendant demand it
of him ibid. Sale upon a Fi. fa. shall stand, though judgment be after reversed
184 Upon a judgment against an Executor or Administrator no Cap. ad sat. lies,
but a Fi. fa. etc. but if a Devast. be returned, then a Cap. ad sat. or a Fi.
fa. de benis propriis, etc. ibid. After Scire fac. no Elegit lies, until the
tenant be warned, but a Fi. fa. does ibid. Goods taken upon a Fi. fa. and no
buyers found, an order to levy the goods and lands of the Bayliffe ibid. If no
goods be found, the Sheriff may sell a Lease for years, etc. ibid. A Scire
facias issued out against an old Sheriff (after a new one elected) for money
levied by him etc. 185 Bond taken by the Sheriff, not within the Stat. ibid.
Where the Vnder-Sheriffe justified the breaking of three doors to do
execution, etc. ibid. The Sheriff may sell a Lease for years without taking
inquisition of them 186 Four reasons Why no return is required upon a Fi. fa.
ibid. Felony, he that flies for it forfeits his goods, chattels, and the
profits of his lands 162 Vtlawes goods for felony 163 Felony, What 324
Fore-staller 332 Fry of fish 337 Fine, What shall be said reasonable for a
Copyholder to pay upon his admittance Forfeitures, What shall make a
forfeiture of Copyhold estates, and What not 367 Forfeiture, to build and pull
down again 368 A Copyholder by the Common Law cannot make a Lease for one
year, but it is a forfeiture ibid. A Lease for one year by a Copyholder, etc.
a forfeiture ibid. A Copyholder may enclose where it has been formerly
enclosed, etc. and not forfeiture, 369 The heir may take the profits before
admittance, and make a Lease, etc. ibid. To refuse to pay a fine certain, a
forfeiture, or refuse to appear at his Lords Court, ibid. and 370
G
General issues, what 18 Jailer, the Sheriff must be cautions in electing of
him 208
H
HAbere facias seisinam, what it is, and where it lies 188 Habere fac.
possessionem, what it is, and where it lies ibid. High treason, what 323 Hue
and cry 327 Hedge-breakers 330 Hand guns 337 Hawking and hunting with
Spaniels, 338 Hares tracing ibid. Horses infected 339 Hayward, why so called
347 Herriot service and herriot custom 348
I
ISsues general, what 18 Jurors, and what are good causes of challenge 21
Ingrosser 333 Inne-holders 334
K
KNights-service, what it is 346 Homage, Escuage, and fealty is Knights-service
ibid. Knights-service is done by a man in propria persona ibid.
L
LEvari facias 174 What it is 187 Part of the sum levied, a Sicut alias Levari
fac. may issue out for the residue 187 Leet, what it is, and the first
institution of it 307 The power and authority of the Judge of the Court 309
What may be enquired of in this Court 310 What things are not to be inquired of
in this Court 310 What things are considerable in holding Tourns and Leets 312
Jury, what 113 The method of keeping Court Leet 316 Exhortation before the
charge 319 What things are to be considered by a Jury in swearing 320 321 The
charge of the Court 322 Lord of the Manor, how qualified 357
M
MOdo and forma 14 15 Mayor of a Staple, has power to hold pleas done there
170 Misprision of treason, what 325 Measures and weights false 335 Musters 338
Mortmain 339 Manor, what it is 349 Of the first original and institution of
it ibid. The definition of the word ibid. and 350 How Manors were first
created 250 Of what parts a Manor does consist ibid. Customary Manor, what it
is, and what may be a good Manor to maintain Copyholders 351 By what names a
Manor may pass 350 Five necessarily appertaining to a Manor 339 Mortmain,
what it is 350
N
Nonsuit, how 16 Not informed, what 18 Nihil dicit, what ibid. Nuisance 327
O
OFfice of County Clarke 6 7 Office, of Coroner in the County Court 9 10 Office
and duty of the Steward in a Court Baron 371 Order of the Judges of Assize at
York, concerning Essoins, illegally returned into the County Court 56 57
P
PLedges in the County Court 13 Proceedings in the County Court 14 Upon the
Writs of Recordare, Pone, Writ of false Judgment, etc. in the Common Pleas
after removal out of the County Court 69 70 71 72 Pleas specially to be
pleaded 19 20 Parliament men, how and when they are to be elected 216 Who may
be Electors 217 Time when they are to be elected ibid. What persons are
eligible, and who not 218 Punishment of Sheriffs for their negligence in
elections or returns 219 Penalties on Counties, and places for not electing
ibid. Presentiments in Leets, how traversable 315 Petty Treason, what 323 Petty
Larceny, what 324 Physnomy defaced ibid. Pownd-breach 331 Pheasants and
Partridges 338 Pond breaking ibid. 353 Pypowders, the Court, the definition of
it, what it is, together with its Jurisdiction 393 and 394 By way of Grant and
confirmation 395 The Steward is Judge ibid. This Court is incident to a Fair
or Market, and by a grant of them it passes 396 No plea shall be holden in it
unless the Plaintiff or his Attorney do swear that the Contract was made,
during the time of the Fare 397
R
RUle, what 17 Replication what ibid. Rejoinder, what ibid. Replevin, with the
Proceeds upon it, 34 35 36 37 Recognizance, what it is 174 The manner of
proceeding upon it ibid. Proceeds against the Sureties 175 Execution upon it of
all the goods and chattels, and a moiety of the Land ibid. Execution of the
Land, which the Reconusor had at the time of the Reconusance ibid. Two sued in
Execution, the money delivered to the Attorney of the one, and to the other
himself good ibid. The beir charged ibid. Execution upon the Statute, and
finds bail, and does not appear at the day ibid. Two sue execution, and one
dies before the extent, yet the lands shall be extended, but otherwise upon a
Stat. Merchant ibid. Three bound in a Statute jointly and severally, he shall
have execution against one or all, but not against two 176 Rape, what 324
Relief, is as much money as one years rent 347 Rescous, what it is 353
Returns of writs, and first what return is 189 Return of a Cepi corpus for one,
and a Non est inventus for others, by one that was not Sheriff ibid. Four
reasons why no return is required upon a Fieri fac. 186 Surplusage no hurt to
the return of a writ 190 A Proclamation upon Exigent returned by a Sheriff out
of office, void 191 Rescous upon a Latitat, no good return, ibid. Cepi corp.
returned upon a Cap. ad sat. and has not the body at the day, an escape, etc.
ibid. In all writs of execution (except an Elegit) no return is required, but
an Elegit must be returned ibid. To say that the party will not pay his fees,
no return ibid. The Sheriff must set to his returns his name of Baptism and
surname 192 Imperfect returns corrigible ibid. To say that the Bailiff will
make no deliverance, no good return ibid. He shall not be charged for
insufficient returns by Bailiffs of Liberties ibid. Every return must exactly
answer the writ ibid. The omission of words makes the return invalid ibid.
Return of Rescous invalid, etc. 193 No good return where the Sheriffs name is
wanting ibid. Note that the word exacteth amounts to as much as the within
named ibid. The Sheriff amerced twenty pounds because he did not take posse
com. to execute a Hab. fac. seisin. ibid. What return upon waste good, and
what not ibid. Return of a Precept for Writ, not good ibid. A bad return 194 A
return by the Sheriff in the third person, no good return ibid. False
imprisonment lies against the Sheriff for not returning a Cap. in process,
etc. but otherwise in a Cap. ad sat. ibid. Where one has liberty to return
writs, the Sheriff cannot enter to make execution of any process, ibid. In a
Scire fac. the Sheriff must return the names of the summoners, etc. ibid. The
Sheriff may take pos. com. upon a Replev. ibid. A Scire fac. against a Husband
and his wife, to say they are divorced, no good return 195 A Fi. fac. against
Executors, no good return to say the goods were sold before the writ purchased
ibid. Nulla bona returned upon a Fi. fa. against Executors, an enquiry of
waste, and found that diverse goods were wasted, upon which a Sci. fa. awarded
and upon two nihil's returned execution awarded ibid. Outlawry returned in Land
where not good ibid. The County omitted in the return of an Exigent erroneous
196 Upon an Exigent returned, that the party has rendered himself, and not so,
not good ibid. Cepi corpus upon a Capias ad satisfaciendum, and not so,
erroneous ibid. Process against the husband and wife, and the wife appears
not at the day, not good ibid. Upon an enquiry of damages, return of damages no
hurt to the Sheriff, and why ibid. Upon account or debt, where the Sheriff
returned no lands found, and he had lands, etc. not good ibid. To say upon a
Replevin, that there is no goods, etc. not good, the like in detinue, etc. or
upon a Hab. fac. seisin. ibid. If the Sheriff return Cepi corpus, he shall be
chargeable with the body, at the day of the return 197 Return of Jurors 206 If
two sufficient Hundreders do appear, it is sufficient ibid. None are to be
returned above the age of seventy years ibid. None shall be impannelled out of
their proper County, except, etc. ibid. None to be returned but such as have 40
l. per annum 207 Twenty and four Jurors must be returned otherwise error ibid.
He must summon the grand Iuries to the Assizes, and Iuries for the quarter
Sessions, etc. ibid. None must be returned upon an Indictment but, etc. probi
and legales homines ibid. Return of issues 207 The Sheriff must return good
issues ibid. Rescue, what 326 Rescous 331 Regrator 332
S
SHire, what it is 1 By whom instituted ibid. Sheriff, why so called 2
Instituted Governor of his Shire ibid. He only has power to delegate the
office of County Clerk 7 Custos vitae Reipub. Custos vitae Justitiae, Custos
vitae Legis 157 His Judicial power 158 To enquire of wast, and execute a writ
of Redisseisin 159 He may commit a disseisor to prison ibid. His Ministerial
power ibid. The new Sheriff is to take notice who are in execution 160 He is to
preserve the Protectors right, etc. 160 He must levy his Highness debts, etc.
161 He is to gather up amerciaments and fines, etc. ibid. and 162 He is to
seize no goods of Felons, till they be lawfully forfeited 162 But take Sureties
he may, that the goods shall not be imbezelled ibid. He must receive all Writs
and execute them 163 He may command his Bayliffe to execute tem either by word
or precept ibid. He must not dispute the authority of the Judges that send
writs to him, but must execute them 164 His Bayliffe need not show his writ
when he executes it, but a special Bailiff must show his warrant ibid. An
arrest by an old Sheriff after his discharge tortious 165 He cannot execute
process on the Sabbath day ibid. He may break open a door to execute process
concerning his highness, but not in case of a common person ibid. He must
proclaim the Statute of Winchester four times a year 166 And also the Statute
against unlawful games, ibid. Steward of Court Baron, how he ought to be
qualified 371 How he may be retained 372 How he may forfeit his office 373
Sur-rejoinder, what 17 Suit-royall, what it is 161 Suit-service, what ibid.
Statute-Merchant, what it is ibid. How to sue out execution upon it ibid. All
the Fee-simple Lands of the Conusor, at the time of the Statute acknowledged,
shall be liable to the said Statute 169 Copyhold lands are not liable, nor
Lease for life, but Lease for term of years shall be extended, etc. Goods
pawned or pledged may not be taken, nor goods distrained for rent, etc. ibid.
If the Conusor die in execution, the Conusee may have execution of his Lands
and goods, or if the Conusor escape, his goods and Lands shall be extended
ibid. Non est invent returned upon the first Certificate, a second not
grantable ibid. Several Certificates in diverse Courts upon one Stat. Execution
sued in the one shall not stay that in the other 170 A Stat. certified for the
Testator, shall be certified for the Executor ibid. Non est inventus returned
upon a Cap. in the Common Pleas, Cap. and Extendi facias shall not issue out
there without showing the Statute to the Justices, etc. ibid. Statute must be
showed at the day of the return ibid. A stranger may have Execution where the
Recognusee is dead, or if a Stat. be made to two, yet one may have Execution,
etc. 171 Executors must sue out a Scire fac. before they can have Execution
ibid. Execution upon the Statute sued into diverse Counties upon Nihil returned
in one County, he shall have execution of the whole in the other ibid. Stat.
sued of parcel of the Lands in the name of all, shall never extend the rest
ibid. Three bound to one in a Statute severally, Execution may be against one
or all ibid. Infant bound in a Statute may avoid it during his minority, etc.
the like by Dures imprisonment 172 Statute-Staple, what it is ibid. The manner
of proceeding upon it ibid. and 173 Scire facias issued out against the old
Sheriff (after a new one elected) for money levied by him, etc. 185 Sorcerers,
Conjurers, and Witches 325 Sacrilege ibid. Stocks 327 Surveyors of highways
329 Shoomakers 336 Searchers, and sealers of Leather ibid. Soccage tenure, what
it is 347 Surrenders, what are good, and what not 363 Upon a Surrender, action
lies not against the Lord for refusing admittance ibid. A surrender to the
Lord, good 364 A Surrender to the use of another, etc. ibid. In a Surrender it
matters not if the party to whom it is be precisely expressed ibid. Surrender
to the Lord, etc. ibid. Surrender to A. B. until he marry C. D. etc ibid.
Surrender to the use of a stranger ibid. Surrender to A. B.'s use, if he pay 20
l. at a day ibid. Surrender to the Lord to the use of S. paying 100 l. etc.
ibid. Surrender to the use of one for life 365 Copyhold may be extinguished,
without an actual Surrender ibid. A Surrender of a Copyhold, cannot surrender
before admittance 366 No surrender by an Attorney without Deed, but an
admittance may be ibid.
T
TYthing men 327 Tanners 335 Tracing of hares 338 Treasure trove 339 Tenants by
Copy of Court-Roll, are obliged to appear at every three weeks end at the Lords
Court Baron 345 Tenant at will and Copyholder 359 Tenant may have an action of
Trespass against the Lord 360 No tenant by the Courtesy or Dower shall be of
Copyhold lands 361
V
VErdict ambiguous and uncertain, no judgment ought to be given upon it 25 Part
of the issue found, and nothing for the residue, insufficient ibid.
Undersheriff, what he is 210 He has power to execute all the ordinary offices
of the Sheriff, that may be transferred by the Law, etc. ibid. The Sheriff must
take good security of him, etc. ibid. Victuallers 334 Unlawful gains 336
W
WItnesses, who are suficient to give evidence, and who are not 22 Withernam,
what, with the proceedings upon it 35 Weights and Measures false 335 Watch and
ward 339 Waifes 340 353 Wast, what it is, and how it is committed 350
A TABLE OF ALL THE PRESIDENTS Contained in this BOOK.
A
ARticles betwixt the high Sheriff, and a Bailiff of a Weapentake or Hundred
266 Appeal of Murder by the wife of him that is slain 297 Appeal by the heir
of the person murdered 298 Appeal of Mayhme 299 Appeal of wounds ibid.
Admission of the younger son to lands, according to the custom 389
B
BArgain and sale of Goods made by the Sheriff, by virtue of his Office 277
Bond upon a Replevin, vide Obligation. Bond for the appearance in the County
Court, vide Obligation Bond, to the Sheriff for ones appearance in the
Common-Bench; and another in the Vpper-Bench, vide Obligation.
C
CAse, for not delivering of a pawn upon tender of the money borrowed 102
Against a Carrier for loss of goods delivered to him 103 For Coals, promising
to pay so much as they should reasonably be worth 104 For a horse sold,
warranted to be sound 105 For a horse lent promising to deliver him ibid. For
adgysting of beasts 106 For curing a wound 107 For laborious hire 108 In
consideration that the Plaintiff would deliver unto one E. L. certain mercery
wares, if he did not pay for them the Defendant would 109 Slander for calling
the Plaintiff Thief, etc. 110 Same for calling the Plaintiff Bankrupt 111 In
consideration that the Plaintiff would marry E. R. the Defendant promised to
make him worth 200 l. 113 For stopping up of another light 114 For teaching
the Defendants child the Latin tongue 115 For Diet, and time given for
payment of the debt 116 Upon an Assumpsit to save one harmless upon an
Obligation 117 For keeping a dog accustomed to bite sheep 118 Another ibid.
Against an Innkeeper for a horse lost ibid. Upon a horse-race 119 Another upon
a horse-race 122 For keeping a child, and finding it meat, drink, and apparel
123 For breach of Articles ibid. Upon a promise for the loan of a Mare, which
was killed in riding 125 Upon a promise to save harmless a Surety against a
Bond 126 Detinue 128 Condition, the form of it for the performance of the
Indentures between the High Sheriff and Undersheriff 258 Another 259 and 260
Condition for executong of a Goalership 263 Another 265 Condition, that the
Sheriff executing a writ, may detain out of the goods and lands extended so
much money, etc. 276
D
DIstringas, or County warrant 37 Duces tecum 38 December tales 50 Deputation for
a Bayliffe of a Hundred 53 Discharge to the Sheriff (for a Prisoner) from him
to whom the Prisoner is indebted 275 Another ibid. Declarations in debt 88
Executor against an Executor ibid. Upon a Bill to be paid at the day of
Marriage, and issue upon it 89 90 91 Upon retainder for sheoing of horses 91
Upon an Account 92 Money lent by joint partners for a certain time, and to be
paid to the survivor ibid. For rent in arrear 93 For servants wages 94 For not
setting forth of Tithes ibid. Upon an award 95 For Attorneys Fees 96 Upon a
Lease for Tithes 97 Upon a Bond, where one is bound to two, and one dies before
the commencement of the Suite 98 Another upon the same ibid. Upon a Bond for an
Executor against Sisters as Co heirs, one of them being married 99 Upon a Bond
against an Administrator during the minority of the Executor of an Executor 100
F
FIeri facias against an Executor 44 Upon a non suit for costs ibid. Upon a
Verdict for the Defendant 45 After a Scire facias against an Administrator,
upon a Verdict had against the intestate ibid. Fine (in Court Baron) desired
for respite of suit to be done 382
G
GRant of a Bayliwick 348 Grant of a Stewardship 341
I
INdorsement of such writs as are turned over to the new Sheriff by the old
Sheriff 160 Indenture by a High Sheriff, deputing one to be his Undersheriff
237 Another 246 Indenture, for the setting over of Prisoners and Writs between
two Sheriffs 261 Indenture for the Knights of the Parliament 262 Indenture upon
choosing a Burgess to serve in Parliament 263 Indenture of Covenants to a
Sheriff to save him harmless for returning of a Devastavit against an Executor
272 Inquisition in manslaughter 299 Inquisition in manslaughter, where one was
starved, and perished for want of sustenance 301 Inquisition where one is slain
by misfortune by a Cart laden with hay 303 Inquisition where one by misfortune
is slain by the fall of a scaffold 304 Inquisition where one drowns himself
305 Inquisition, where one hangs himself ibid.
L
LIberate, To deliver goods taken upon original or mean process 50 Lease and
Surrender made in Court with the examination of the Wife 385 Lease made by the
Lord of parcel of his Lands, 388 License by a Lord of a Manner to a Copyholder
to pull down houses standing upon Copyhold lands 390 Letter of Attorney to
surrender a Copyhold ibid.
O
OAth of the Jury in the County Court, and of the witnesses 24 Oath of the
Coroner 51 Oath of an Attorney in the County Court 52 Oath of the Sheriff 235
Oath of the Foreman of a Coroners Inquest 289 Oath of witnesses before the
Coroner 291 Oath of the Foreman of the Inquest in a Court Leet 318 Oath of a
Steward in a Leet 344 Oath of the Bayliffe in a Leet ibid. Oath of a Constable
in a Leet 345 Oath of the Affeerer in a Leet 346 Oath of the Aletaster, etc.
ibid. Oath of the Hayward, Beadle, or Greve 347 Oath of the Foreman of the
Inquest in a Court Baron 343 Oath of the Bayliffe of a Manor 374 Obligation
upon a Replevin 41 42 Obligation, for an appearance in the County Court 52 53
Obligation entered to a Sheriff for ones appearance in the Common Bench 271
Another in the Vpper-Bench ibid. Order of the Judges of Assize at York,
concerning essoins illegally returned into the County Court 56
P
PLeas, He owes nothing 133 He made no such promise, and Replication ibid. He
made no such promise within six years ibid. Never Executor 134 Fully
administered, and Replication ibid. Not guilty 135 Bar, by which in age ibid.
Payment upon a Bill, and a Release produced ibid. Freehold 136 No action to
cause one to render an account, will lie in this Court ibid. In arrest of
Judgment ibid. Conditions performed, and Replication 137 138 Rejoinder ibid.
Detain he does not ibid. Bar by a general acquittance, and replication ibid.
Justification of scandalous words 139 Tender of amends in Replevin ibid. Part
of the debt paid, the residue tendered before suit, and refused, and
Replication 140 141 Not his Deed 141 By threats, and Replication ibid. and 142
By hardness of imprisonment, and Replication ibid. The assault made by the
Plaintiff, and Replication 143 The Defendant pleads the Plaintiff within age
to bring his Action; and should have brought it by Guardian, and not by
Attorney 144 To a trespass in walking not guilty, and as to the residue of the
trespass, tender of amends, and Replication, and Rejoinder 144 145 Misnomer in
Baptism pleaded in abatement of the writ of Justicies 146 Plea in abatement,
for that the Plaintiff has one name in the writ, and another in the
Declaration ibid. The Defendant justifies, for horse meat not satisfied, in
answer to a Declaration in trover for the same horse 147 The Defendant plead
leaves and liberty granted to him by the Plaintiff, to enter and feed his
cattle 148 The Defendant justifies (in replevin) the taking of the cattle for
rent in arrear 149 The Defendant says that the goods were taken as a pawn or
pledge for money lent 150 Replication that he took them injuria sua propria,
without such a cause 151 Concord in assault and battery ibid. Replication, No
such concord or agreement made 152 The Defendant says, that as to the taking
of the Ox, that he took it by the name of an Herriot ibid. Justification in
trespass for want of reparation of the hedges by the Plaintiff 153 The
Defendant justifies (upon a Replevin) the taking of the Cattle, doing
damage-feasant 154 Misnomer in the writ of Justicies ibid. Non cepit to a
Replevin 155 Poverty ibid. Demurrer ibid. Joining in Demurrer 156 Presentment
(in a Leet) of petty Treason 342 Presentment of felony for burning a house 343
Presentment of a Felon ibid. Presentment of an Accessory ibid. Presentiments in
Court Baron 375 The finding of the death of a Tenant, and of a Surrender made
to the use of his will, with an admission of the Tenant according to the will
ibid. The finding of the death of a Tenant 376 Pains found, and set upon
tenants for want of suit of Court ibid. and 377 The presentment of a Surrender
made out of Court into tenants hands, with the admission of the tenant
accordingly 377 The finding of a Surrender made into tenants hands, to the use
of a man's will 378 The finding of the death of a tenant, and of the lands, and
that the youngest son is next heir, according to the custom, etc. with his
admission ibid. The finding of a sale made of Freehold lands, with a distress
to the Bayliffe to distrain for want of taking it up 379 The acknowledgement in
the Court of a Legacy paid ibid. A presentment of a Surrender made out of Court
with the admission of the tenant 380 A presentment made in Court of an
agreement made between the Son and his mother touching her Dower, and the
mothers release of her Dower 381 A pain set for an incroachment ibid. A pain
set for the amending of the same ibid. A presentment for an offense done, and a
charge to the Jury to enquire, and further day given for giving their Verdict
382
R
REplevin 39 132 alias Repl. 40 Plures Repl. ibid. Return of a Tolt 43 Return
of a Recordare fac. Lo. 58 59 of a Pone 59 60 of a writ of False judgment 61 62
63 of an Accedeas ad curiam 65 66 of a Writ for the Election of a Coroner after
the death of another 66 of an Exigent 66 67 68 of a Proclamation 69 of a Non
est inventus 197 of a Cepi corpus in the Common Pleas ibid. of a Cepi corpus in
the Vpper-Bench ibid. of a Cepi corpus and Non est inventus ibid. of a Cepi
corpus and Languidus in prisona 198 of a Mandavi Ballivo libertatatis, where
the Bailiff makes no return of the Sheriffs warrant, or where he makes an
insufficient return 198 and also where he returns to the Sheriff, he has
taken the body, and the like, in case the Bayliffe returns a Languidus in
prisona, or as he shall certified the Sheriff by his return ibid. of a Scire
facias, where a Scire facias is returned ibid. of a Nihil to a Scire facias
ibid. of Scire facias for one, and Nihil for the other 199 of an Attachment and
Proclamation in Chancery ibid.
A Nihil returned of a Venire facias upon an Indictment, presentment, or
information, and summons returned of the like ibid. The Return of a Distringas
nuper vic. or Balliv. ibid. of a Venire facias jur. 200 of a Distringas, or
Hab. corp. Jur. ibid. of an Exigent where one brings a Supersed. one
rendereth himself, the other appears not ibid. of a Proclamation 201 of an
Allocat. ibid. of a Tarde ibid. of a Hab. corp. where the Defendant was taken
by a former Sheriff 202 of a Pone ibid. of a Scire fac. for the release of
Prisoners ibid. of Nihil to a Scire fac. against the heir and ter-tenants ibid.
of a Summons in Dower ibid. of a Cap. in manus in Dower 203 of a Summons upon
an original against an heir ibid. of a Habere facias possessionem and Cap.
where judgment is signed with costs ibid. of a Liberate out of Chancery 204 of
an Acced. ad cur. ibid. of a Re. fa. lo. ibid. averia elongat, and Cepi corp.
for damages 205 of a Rescous ibid. of a Devastavit 228 of a Nulla bona and
Devastavit by inquisition ibid. of a Fieri fac. 229 of a Fieri fac. where part
of the debt is levied, and for the residue a Nulla bona 230 another of a Fi.
fa. ibid. of a writ where the Sheriff dies after execution thereof, and so
returned prout indorsat. by the present Sheriff ibid. of an Elegit where lands
are in the Kings hands 231 of an Extent in the Exchequer 232 of a Scire fac.
against the heir and ter-tenants where notice is given 234 of a summons in
Dower 235
Records upon a writ of False judgment and Accedeas ad curiam 73 74 75 76 77
78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 Recognizance of a Coroner to bind witness to
appear at the next assizes 290 Release of Lands made in a Court Baron 388
S
SCire facias, post diem and annum 47 against an Executor, after Judgment
against the Testator ibid. after marriage 48
Subpoena, or a Warrant to summon witnesses 50 Sale of Goods to the Plaintiff
levied upon a Fieri facias by the Sheriffs Baliffe 53 Sale of Goods made by
the Sheriff by virtue of his Office 277 Surrender, and remise of Lands made in
Court before the Steward, and the examination of the Wife 383 Surrender of
Copyhold in Court, with the admission of the tenant accordingly 384 Surrender
and Lease made in Court with the examination of the wife 385 Surrender of Lands
made in Mortgage, upon condition for the payment of money, with the admission
of the Mortgagee by her Attorney, and the Fealty respited ibid. Surrender of
Lands made presently in Court 387
T
TOit 42 Trover and Conversion 127 Trespass, for breaking down the Plaintiffs
stall, being set up in the Market 129 For breaking the Plaintiffs close ibid.
For a Dog biting a Mare, so that she dyed 130 For chasing of hogs with dogs
ibid. For pasturing sheep in a rotten pasture, by reason whereof they died
ibid. For digging and plowing the Plaintiffs ground, and taking away his corn
131 For taking away a post ibid. For eating the grass, cutting the hedges, and
assaulting the Plaintiff ibid. Trespass and assault 132 Assault upon one at
under age ibid.
V
VEnditioni exponas 45 46 Venire facias Jurator. 49
W
WArrant upon a Writ of Justicies 39 Warrant upon a Proclamation 51 Warrant of
Attorney for an appearance in the County Court 52 Warrant upon Accedeas ad
Curiam 64 Warrant of a Coroner for the impannelling of a Jury 288 Warrant to
summon a Leet 316 Withernam 40 Alias capias in Withernam 41
FINIS.
Courteous Reader,
These Books following are Printed for John Place, and are to be sold at his
Shop at Furnivals- inn Gate in Holborn.

Books in Folio.
1. THe History of the World, by Sir Walter Raleigh, Knight. 2. Observations on
Caesar's Commentaries, by Sir Clement Edmunds, Knight. 3. Sheppards Epitomy of
the Law. 4. The Reports of the learned Judge Popham, sometime Lord chiese
Justice of England. 5. The Reports of the Learned Judge Owen, chief Justice of
the Common Pleas 6. Londinopolis, or a History of the Cities of London and
Westminster, by James Howell. 7. The History of Swedes, Goths, and Vandals, by
Olaus Magnus Bishop of Vpsall. 8. The Reports of the learned Sarjeant
Bridgeman. 9. Cowells Interpreter of hard words in the Law, etc. 10. Maxims of
Reason, or the Reason of the Common Law, by Edward Wingate Esquire, late one of
the Benchers of Grays-Inne. 11. The History of Edward the Fourth, of the Wars
between the Houses of York and Lancaster, by W. H. Esquire. 12. The Minister of
State, wherein is showed the true use of Policy, by Monsieur de Siton,
Secretary to Cardinal Richlew, Englished by Sir Henry Herbert Knight.
Books in Quarto.
1. The Complete Clerk, or Scriveners Guide, containing the Draughts of all
manner of Presidents, of Assurances, and Instruments now in use, as they were
penned by the most eminent Lawyers. 2. Commentaries on the Original Writs, in
Natura brevium. 3. An exact Abridgment of the Common Law, with the Cases
thereof, drawn out of the old and new Books of the Law: both by William Hughes
of Grays-Inne, Esquire. 4. An exact Abridgment of the Acts and Ordinances of
Parl. beginning at the fourth year of King Charles, to the year 1656. 5.
Declarations and Pleadings, etc. in the Upper-Bench. by Will. Small of
Furnivals Inn, late one of the Clerks in the Upper-Bench. 6. Declarations,
Counts and Pleadings in the Common Pleas, by Ric. Brownlow Esquire late
Prothonotary: The second part. 7. Regni argumenta Consilii, or a collection of
Authentic Arguments in Parliament, humbly presented to the view and use of
this present Session. 8. The floating Island, by Dr. Strowd, acted at Oxford.
9. The Tragedy of the fair I ene the Greek, by Gilbert Sumhoe Esquire
Books in Octavo.
1. The Jurisdiction of Courts, by John Kitchen of Barnards Inn. 2. Books of
Entries of all manner of Judgments in the Upper-Bench and Common Pleas. 3. The
Grounds and Maxims of the Law, by Michael Haulk of the Middle Temple. 4. A
perfect Guide for a studious young Lawyer, by Thomas Fidell of Furnivals Inn
Gent 5. The Arraignment of the Anabaptists, in a Dispute at Abergavenny in
Monmouthshire, by John Cragge M. A. 6. A Cabinet of Jewels, wherein Gods Mercy,
Man's misery, etc. is set forth in S Sermons, with an Appendix of the nature of
Tithes, and expedience of Marriage, by a lawful Minister, by John Cragge, M. A.
1. The Abridgment of the Lord Dyers Reports, by Sir Tho. Ireland. 2
Observations on the Office of a Lord Chancellor, by the Lord Elsemore, late
Lord Chancellor. 3. The Laymans Lawyer, or the second part of the Practick part
of the Law, by Tho. Foster, Gent.
1. The Laws of Corporations, Fraternities, and Guilds, by W. Sheppard Sarjeant
at Law. 2. Transactions of the High Court of Chancery, by W. Tochel. 3. Brooks
Cases in English, by I. Marsh of Grayes Inn Barrester. 4. Poems by Matthew
Stevenson. 5. Perkins of the Laws of England. 6. An exact Abridgment of Doctor
and Student. 7. Invisible World, and the Mystery of Godliness. 8. Imposition
of Hands: both by Joseph Hall Bishop of Norwich. 9. Clarastella, by R. Heath,
Esquire. 10. Doctor Prestons Saints Infirmities. 11. A Catechism, containing
the Principles of Christian Religion, written by Moses Wall. 12 The whole
Survey of a Justice of Peace his Office, by W. S. Sarjeant at Law.
FINIS.

