Die Mercurij 26. April. 1643.
IT is this day Ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, that Sir Peter
Wentworth do from this House give thanks unto Mr. Greenhill for the great
pains he took in the Sermon he preached this day, at the entreaty of this
House, before the Commons at St. Margarets, in the City of Westminster,
(being a day of public humiliation) and that he desire him to Print his
Sermon. And it is Ordered that no man presume to print his Sermon, but whom the
said Master Greenhill shall authorize under his hand writing.

H. Elsyng. Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I appoint Benjamin Allen to print my Sermon.

W. GREENHILL.

Axine pros ten Pizan.

The Axe at the Root, A SERMON Preached before the Honorable House of COMMONS,
at their public Fast, April 26. 1643.

By William Greenhill.

MATTHEW. 3. 10. Now also the Axe is laid unto the root of the trees, th erefore
every tree which brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down, and cast into
the fire.

LONDON, Printed by R. O. and G. D. for Benjamin Allen, and are to be sold in
Pope's Head Alley, 1643.

TO THE Honorable House of COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
WHen the World was shaken by Adams sin, God secured it by the Promiseof his
Son* Genesis 5. When Canaan was distressed by the Midianites, he sent Gideon to
save Israel, Judge. 6. Now England is distracted, and her foundations out of
course, He has raised up you, the Worthies of our Israel, to repair her
breaches, and settle her foundations; we acknowledge the infinite mercy of God
to raise you up at such a time, and for such designs. It Is great hard work to
save Kingdoms: but Honorable, whoever would not save a Kingdom, is no more
worthy to live in it, then the Man seeks the destruction thereof. Wicked men
will venture all to get or ruin Kingdoms, and shall not good men venture as
far to save Kingdoms? Had men public spirits they would do it. Heathens
have so minded the public, as that they have forgot themselves. Publius
Decius the Roman Army Valex^maxim, l. 5. c. 553.
being brought low, rusht into the midst of the enemies, demanded safety for his
Country, Death for himself; and so occasioned an unexpected Victory. Luc.
Alvanius his Wife and Children, being ^ Dein, lib. 1. c. 11.
in the VVagon, escaping for their lives in a common Calamity; commands them
down, and takes up the Vestall Virgins, who had the care of their holy things:
he was proprior publicae Religioni quam privatae charitati, the Publiquenesse
of his spirit carried him above private interests. Where spirits are right set;
self is much forgotten. Ji's domesticknes of spirit, selvishnesse, which is
the great let to Armies, Religions, and Kingdoms good. Esther was right when
she said, if I perish I perish, she would venture for the public, and for
her God. The Quicunque occupati sunt negotijs reipublicae debent hoc ipsum
facere propter Deum Rabbi Gamel. in Paul. Fagio Capit. patrum.
Rabbis give a good lesson for Men in publiqne employment, They must do their
work propter Deum Then neither difficulty of work, disappoinment in event,
nor ingratitude in People, will disturb the spirits of men. Then nothing will
be done against the Kingdom of Christ, evidence of truth, or liberty of
Conscience; If men be public and act for God they are Eshbaals, Ruling
lights; if private and selvish, they will be Ishbosheths men of shame. The Axe
is at the root of our Tree, we hope your spirits are all unselvished, that
none are now unpublique; Publiquenesse of dangers calls for publiquenesse of
spirits; Eminency of danger for speediness of help. When Jerusalem was
brought low, Asaph cried to God for speedy prevention, Psalm. 79. 8. England,
Ireland are brought low, the Asaphs cry to God, and cry to you also for speedy
prevention. There be ill spirits abroad which tear us, which cast us into the
Fire and water to destroy us, as the Man's Son in the Mar. 9. 22.
Gospel, and we say, Masters if you can do any thing have compassion on the
Kingdom, and help it, help us; keep back nothing may save a Kingdom, help
by ways ordinary, and by ways extraordinary. You are Es. 36. siqua est
miserecordia and humanitas extremae nostrae miseriae s^ccurrere ne graveris
Calvin.
Rulers and our ruin is under your hand; Vote our Resurrection nomine
contradicente, effect it quamvis mill repugnent, and this shall be your
Impresse, Hoc Regnum est vere vestrum. Yea other Kingdoms shall contribute to
your praise, and the Kingdom of Kingdoms be your reward. Bestirre you they are
active, who would undo us. Think on the * Rabbis Rabbi Shimeon in Paulo Fgio
Capit. patrum.
words a little altered Dies brevis, opus multum merces magna, Pater familias
urget operarij ne sint pigri. This Epistle and Sermon had both lay on in the
dark, if your authority which commands Persons, Pulpits, Presses, had not
brought them forth; accept the fruits of your own power, and blessed be the
Lord for what you have done since you heard what is now presented unto you. The
Lord enable you to perfect all your intentions and undertakings, which are for
the public good.

The Lord unite you, Watch ever you, fill you with his Spirit, Prosper you, All
yours, and accomplish yet greater things by You, So Prays*

Your most Unworthy Servant, and meanest in the work of Christ. WILLIAM
GREENHILL.

A SERMON PREACHED Before the Honorable House of COMMONS. at their public
FAST. April 26. 1643.
MATTHEW. 3. 10. Now also the Axe is laid unto the root of the trees, therefore
every tree which brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down, and cast into
the fire.


THese words are part of a penitential Sermon, John Baptist, the greatest
Prophet borne of a woman, yet the humblest that had to do with Christ, Mat. 3.
11. Preaching repentance to the people v. 2. multitudes flocked to hear him
upon that subject, amongst others the Pharisees and Sadduces, which were none
of the best, came to hear; and these he exhorts also to bring forth fruit meet
for repentance: many arguments he used to press on that duty, and this Text is
Argumentum ^^gens, a strong argument unto it: Beside the Arguments, of the
Kingdom of God being at hand, v. 2. and that there is wrath to come, v. 7. he
says, Now also is the Axe laid to the root of the Tree* if the Kingdom will
not draw you, nor the fear of wrath after this life drive you (...) the present
Axe that is laid to the root of the (...) draw and drive you to repentance.

In the words you have a description of divine severitie* And first in the
preparation to it, The axe is laid to the root of the tree. Secondly, in the
execution of it, Every tree that brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down,
and cast into the fire.

First, I shall open to you the words, and then draw forth such truths, and
Observations, as the words do naturally prompt unto you, without any straining,
or fetching of blood.

By Axe we understand not Christ* as Gregory, nor the Gospel, as some would
have it; but any Judgment that God uses to cut down a sinful people by. The
Roman forces, under Vespatian and Titus, were Gods Axe, to cut down the Nation
of the Jews, by the war they made upon them by the famine attended that
war, and the dispertion followed it, they were utterly cut down I will a
little show you the resemblances between them and an Axe: Because Gods
judgments are called Axes.

Resemb. 1.
First, an Axe is a sharp and terrible thing, so are Gods Judgments, Psalm.
45. 5* Thine arrows are sharp in the heart of the Kings enemies. Gods Arrows
are not only his truths, but also his judgments* and they are sharp at
distance, but especially upon the entrance when they come into the hearts of
Christ's* enemies they wound, and that dreadfully, Ier. 5^. 20* (...) called
Gods battle Axe, and that you know (...) a terrible Instrument; God by Babylon
did break, and terrify Kingdoms, he dealt sharply, and roundly with them, and
his Judgments executed by Babylon were very dreadful, Psalm. 119. 120. My
flesh trembles for fear of thee; and I am afraid of thy Judgments. David
that was not afraid of the Bear, of the Lion, nor of G^liah, yet was afraid
of Gods Judgments If the giving of the Law made Moses and the people quake,
Heb. 12. 20, 21. surely Gods Judgments which are lexanimata, the execution of
the Law, will make Kingdoms to tremble. At the entrance of the law Mount S^na
did smoke, and when God shall avenge the breach of the Law, Mount Sion will
burn, Lament. 4. 11.

When Ananias and Saphira were smitten, great fear fell upon all the Church,
and all others that heard of it, insomuch that none of them durst join
themselves with them. Acts 5. 11. 13. So you see Gods Judgments are sharp and
dreadful.

Secondly, an Axe as its terrible so its strong and weighty, and Gods Judgments
have strength and weight in them, Psalm. 90. 11. Who knows the power of thine
anger? there is power and strength in the wrath of God, let him use the least
creature to execute his judgments, and there is strength enough in that
creature to ruin any: the rain is a weak thing, but if God will use rain as
a Judgment, it is strong enough to drown a world* Job. 37. 6. It is called the
great rain of his strength. God can put that strength into a cloud, into a few
drops of rain, that they shall conquer any opposite power; the worms eat up
Herod, Act. 12. A humor in the feet tumbles open Adrian the fourth choked with
a fly at Anagnia Simps. History of the church. Cent. 12* Iovianus the Emperor
stifled with smoke or eating of a mushrum Grimston, lives of Emperors.
down Asa, 2 Chronicles. 16. a disease in the bowels consumes Ieh^ram, 2 Chronicles. 21.
And Stories tell us small things have overthrown men of great renown, a grape
stone* a fly, some petty thing: God can arm the weakest creature with that
strength, that no man is able to stand against it, not the Princes of the
earth, Psalm. 76. 1^. He cuts off the spirit of Princes, He deals with
Princes as men deal with a Vine, an Axe is too strong for a cluster of Grapes,
or a sprig of a Vine, it easily cuts them off: so God by a Judgment easily
cuts off the spirit of Princes, they are not able to stand against the least
Judgment of God, when he puts strength into rain, worms, or any other
creature, they fall.

Esa. 10. 15. Shall the axe boast it self against him that heweth therewith?
God by His Judgments hewes Nations and Kingdoms. He hewed Israel by foreign
Nations, when Israel was under the Judges, the Philistimes, and others were
Gods Axe to hew them. After they had chosen them a King the Lord also hewed
them, 2 King. 10. 32. He cut Israel short in all their coasts; the Hebrew word
is to curtaile* to cut off the ends: Hazael was sent, and smote them in all
their coasts; he took their coast Towns, cut off the supplies and succors,
came from thence and much molested them, Psalm. 75. 10. The horns of the wicked
will I cut off; the Lord will deal with them as men do with Trees first loppe
off one bow, then another, then a third, and leave only the trunk: so for
wicked men God will loppe off their pride, their strength, their glory, and
leave them destitute.

Psalm. 110. 5. In the day of thy wrath thou shall smite through Kings; God
shall not only smite, but he shall smite through Kings: an Axe cuts, and cuts
through; and Gods judgments cut through the greatest and throws them down,
Ezekiel. 14. 21. Gods Judgments are sore ones, the Sword, Famine, Plague, noisome
Beast, they are His sore Judgments to hew down People and Kingdoms; hence it
is that God is called a consuming fire, not that He is so in his own nature,
for he is nothing but love and delight: but when He sends out his sore
Judgments, then GOD is fire, and will be everlasting burning to the wicked.

The next thing to open in the words is, what is meant by the Tree, and the
Root of it. By Tree, we are to understand the Jewish state principally, they
were called Gods pleasant plant, Isa. 5. 7. God had dug, dung'd, watered,
and shined upon, and done much for them; they were a great and goodly Tree: but
now the Lord lays the Axe to the Root of this Tree; and if God cut down this
Tree, his pleasant Tree, then no State, no Family, might ever after look to
find Mercy, that was in the condition of this Tree, Every tree that brings
not forth fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire.

For the Root of the Tree, some make Man the Tree, the life of Man the Root of
it; the Axe to be the sentence of Death, and Death it self the cutting down of
the Tree. Others make the Root of the Tree to be whatever they built most upon,
and confided in: they built upon their Temple, Greatness, Strength, Chariots
Horses and such things. But I shall commend to you these 4. things, wherein the
Root of the Tree did mainly consist.

The First was that Covenant which they had with Zach. 11. 10. and 14 v. there
is the staff of beauty, and bands; says God, I took my staff, Beauty, and
cut it asunder, that I might break my Covenant with all the people; and when
God had broken that, it was not long before He brake that other staff of
Bands, viz. the brotherhood between Israel and Judah, the ten Tribes were
dispersed before: but they had some communion with Judah at Jerusalem: but God
would break the staff of Bands, he would disperse them at Jerusalem, and so
there should be no communion between Judah and Israel for the future. The
Covenant being dissolved they were wounded at the Root, and were no longer Gods
people.

Secondly, by Root is meant the true Religion, and A Kingdom then lives and
prospers when Religion and the Pure worship of God are maintained; this the
Ethnicus Marcius apud ^^vium l. 44. dixit favere pieta*i fideique Deos, p^r
quae populus Romanus ad tantum fastigium pervenit. a Omnia prospera eventunt
colentibus Deum, ad versa spernentibus. Lucius. l. 5.

Numa Pompilius secundus Roman^r^ rex, ferum p^pulum religionis institutione
and utilibus legibus domuit, suumque regnum ita formavit, ut pendente ejus
regno nemo illi bellum moverit. Plin de viris illust. c. 2.

Religio and timor Dei solus est, qui custodit hominum inter se soci^tatem.
Lactant. lib* de Ira c. 12.


Heathens themselves did know, that Religion and worship of their Gods was the
only way to make a Kingdom flourish. Tullie in his Book (de natura de^rum)
attributes the felicity, Empire and Triumph of the Romans (Religioni.) They
saw all things to be ruled by the Gods, and as we, says he, excelled all
Nations p^etate and Religione, so we excelled them all in plenty; and when the
Macrob. in Saturn. l. 3. c. 9.
Romans went out to War, they first took care to call the Gods out of that
City and Tow^ which they went against, and promised them better entertainment
at Rome, then at any other place, intimating to us, that while they kept their
Gods they could not be overcome: and they conceited Rome invincible, while they
had their Palladium: but to leave them, and to look to Gods word. Sanchius in
Locum.
Hosea 13. 1. When Ephraim spoke, trembling, he exalted himself in Israel.
When Jeroboam set up Calves, at Dan and Bethel, and willed the people to
worship there, pretending it was too far to go to Jerusalem, these were
shorter journeyes, and the worship as warrantable, they spoke trembling. What
shall we leave our God, shall we give way to Idolatry and worship we know not
what? When they spoke trembling they exalted themselves; but when he offended
in Baal then he died; when Jeroboam prevailed by his poslicie and power and
brought them to it then they dyed* as the worship of God preserved or
corrupted, so Kingdoms flourish or wither, 1 Chronicles, 22. 13. 1 Kings 11. 11. 2 Chronicles 17. 3.

Thirdly, the root of a Kingdom consists in Civil Power, when that is upheld
in a Kingdom, it flourishes, but when that is wounded or destroyed, the
Kingdom is blasted and withers at the root. Genesis 49. 10. the Promise was that
the Scepter should not depart from Judah till Shiloh come; till Christ's coming
the Civil Power should not be removed. There is a Questionl among great ones,
how this can be made good? But I will not dispute that, only take it thus: unto
the day of Augustus Caesar the power remained, in the State of the Jews; he
then with the Senate took the power from them, placed it in Herod Ascalonita,
and set him up, and then the Scepter departed from Judah. Willet. Mercerus A
Lapide.
The Sanedrim were most, if not all of the Tribe of Judah, and had the supreme
Authority, they called Herod to Question for his contumacie, and had almost
taken away his life, which Herod taking to heart, rooted out the Sanedrim,
reigned absolutely over the Jews, and did what he listed against them, and
only feared to displease the Romans; here was the Axe at the root, their
Civil Power was taken away.

Fourthly, the Root was the Godly party among the Elishah and Elisah were the
Chariots and Horsemen of Israel, they were the Militia of that Kingdom; Psalm.
75. 3. says David, I bear up the Pillars of the earth: he maintained
Religion, their Laws, and the faithful, these were the Pillars of the Earth,
and his eye was upon the faithful, Psalm. 101. 6. they should dwell with him,
he knew they were strong props of the Kingdom. That place is observable, Esa.
6. 13. As an Oak whose substance is in it, when it casts the leaves, so the
holy Seed shall be the substance thereof. When the wind, rain and thunder blow
off the leaves, break off the branches, yet the life and substance remains; so
here the holy seed shall be the substance of it. Let Nebuchadnezzar come, blow
and break off the leaves and branches of this Vine, throw them into the furnace
of Babylon, and make Israel as a dead saplesse thing* yet the holy seed shall be
the substance thereof; and when they return again, it shall spread in the
Kingdom, and be a great Tree, and the top reach to heaven, and over all the
borders of the Land, the holy seed being the substance and root would grow and
multiply; when godly Ministers* Magistrates and People be struck in a Kingdom,
then the Axe is laid to the Root of the Tree. Now they were persecuted and
thrust from their place; Herod put by the Nulli Asamon* ^orum posteritati
sacerdo^ium committere voluit Herodes. Joseph. Antiq. Judaic. l. 20. c. 8.
Asamonaeans, and suffered none of them to enjoy the Priesthood. Annas was set
up, and (...)
Caiphas who according to his name, vomited out malice against Christ; and
before their full cutting down, the voice was heard, Ite pellam, go to Pella,
the godly were removed, and then they were destroyed.

Question. Was not the Axe laid to the root of the Tree before this time? was
it not at the Root, when the ten Tribes were cut off? Why then is it said, Now
is the Axe laid to the root of the Tree?

The Answer is, it is true the Lord did lay the Axe to the root of it before
this time, and that heavily, in the dispersing of the ten Tribes; therefore its
said Now also: but he did not so lay the Axe unto the root of the tree, as that
it was wholly destroyed; often times they were hewed with the Judgments of
God, yet always there was semen, a seed left: and when they came out of
Babylon there was a glorious Church, and God delighted in them: but now the Axe
was so laid to the Root, that they Post pe^catum in Christum commissum
radi^it^s est, percussus status ille per universalem captivitat^m. Gorran in
Mat.
were utterly cut down, and made no People. Now the Lord did unconvenant them,
unchurch them, unpower them unsaint them; now the Lord cast them off; they had
no Root left, no god for their God, but were made a reproach and curse among
all Nations.

Secondly, Now the Axe is laid, because the Lord has another People to graft
in; before he took no care of the Gentiles, but left them to perish in their
way; now he would take this wild Olive, and graft it into the Root: therefore
says Christ John 9. 39. I am come for Judgment, to cut off the Jews by the
Root, and to graft in the Gentiles, that I may try them, and see whether they
will bear better fruit then the Jews have done, Acts opening of the words.
Now I come to give you those Observations which do naturally flow from the
word.

Obser. 1.
And first observe, that God bears long with a sinful people: Now is the axe
laid to the root of the tree, I have borne a long time, been patient, but now I
come with the axe, and do lay it to the root of the tree. God is a patient God
toward his people, and toward the world, a God that bears with sin and sinners
beyond our expectation: three years God bore with the Fig Tree, Luk 13. 7. I
came these three years and have found no fruit: Forty years God bare with
them in the Wilderness, Heb 3. 9. a hundred years God bare with a sinner,
Esa. 65. 20. an hundred and twenty years with the old world, Genesis 6. 3. and
after Noah was shut into the Arc, God bare seven days, to see if they would
repent and turn, as some collect from Genesis 7. 4. God goes further then this,
he bare three hundred and ninety years with the idolatrous passages of Israel,
Ezekiel. 4. 5. three hundred and ninety days taken for years, that God had borne
with them. Four hundred years did God bear with the Amorites, Genesis 15 16.
God has borne with Antichrist above this 1200. years: God bare with the
Gentiles before Christ came, more then 2000. years, Acts 17 30. God is (...),
a God of patience, Romans 15. 5. long-suffering, Exodus 34. 6. he does bear, and
forbear with sinners, and Kingdoms, and a world full of wickedness and
vanity, Esa. 42. 14. says God there, I held my peace, yea I held my peace a
long time, and was silent and refrained: God held his peace, said nothing to
Kingdoms, nothing to Families, nothing to particular persons; he held his hand
also, did not strike a long time: God is patient, and withholds so long, as
(patientia Dei turbat pios) the Saints are troubled at Gods patience, it makes
them to cry, How long, how long how long shall the wicked triumph, utter and
speak hard things! it is thrice repeated, Psalm. 94. 3. 4. the Saints are
troubled that God does not come and destroy the wicked: and not only the
Saints on earth, but the Saints in heaven, Rev. 6. 10. they cry, How long, how
long wilt not thou avenge our blood! We have been slain by Cains, by Pharaohs,
by Nimrods, by Herod, How long, how long Lord will thou not avenge our blood.
Not only the Saints, but the sins of wicked men, they cry for vengeance; the
sins of Sodom cried for vengeance against Sodom: Not only sin, but the whole
Creation, heaven and earth groans, Romans 8. The Land mournes for oaths, and
other iniquities, Jer. 23. 10. Satan, the accuser of the brethren, cries; Gods
Justice cries all his Attributes cry, to destroy sinners, to destroy the whole
world; yet God seems deaf, and will not hear; yet Use.
he is patient, and holds his hands: What should the patience of God produce?
The Apostle tells us Romans 2 4. Know thou not that the long-suffering and
goodness of God should lead (the word is drive) thee to repentance? the
patience of God should constrain us to repentance. What* shall God hold the
Candle of our lives in his hand, and we sin against him? there is much in Gods
patience to constrain us to repent, its patience bears with all our sins;
if Gods patience were at an end sin would be heavy; it is patience that
lengthens out our lives, Lam. 3. 22. it is divine patience that keeps us out of
hell; it is that keeps open the door of common and choice mercies; the door
of grace and salvation had been shut long since, if Gods patience had ceased, 2
Pet. 3. 9, 15. God is willing we should all come to repentance, let us reach to
it this day, and make his long-suffering salvation to us. Often we have grieved
his Spirit by sinning and abuse of his patience, once let us rejoice it by
repentance, the improvement of patience.

Obser. 2.
Again, observe that great severity goes along with the greatest mercy. The
Gospel is the greatest mercy that ever came into the world, and there is the
greatest severity with the Gospel, that ever came with any mercy into the
world; now is the axe laid, when the Gospel is coming. Func^ius observes that
John began his Ministry in the fifteenth year of Tiberius, Augustus died the
twentieth of August, Tiberius succeeded him, whose reign is reckoned from that
of August, and not from January; on the first of September, which was the feast
of Trumpets, and on which day was the promulgation of the year of Jubilee, then
was the voice of the Crier first heard: At this time, which was very festival,
John preached and said, Now the axe is laid to the root of the tree, at the
year of Jubilee, and coming of the Gospel it is done. Here was the acceptable
year, and the day of Esa. 61. 2.
vengeance together; the acceptable year of Christ's coming* and the day of
vengeance, the axe is laid to the root of the tree. To give more light and
strength to this point, be pleased to take into your thoughts these passages in
the Gospel, Mark 16. 16. Go (says Christ) preach the Gospel, he that believes
shall be saved, he that believes not shall be damned: upon non-believing
presently is damnation entailed. John 3. 18. he that believes not is condemned
already. Matthew. 10. 14. Shake off the dust of your feet against that City and
Town that does not receive you: Shake off the dust of your feet against them,
that shall be a testimony against them: It shall be more easy for Sodom and
Gomorrah in that day, then for that Town, that City, that, People, that
Christian, that refuses the means of grace, and the Gospel of Christ. Is not
here the greatest severity with the greatest mercy in the world? And the reason
is, because the Gospel is the height of Gods mercy; the Angels they had
simplicem misericordiam, bare and naked mercy; but men have divitias
miserioordiae, the riches of mercy: in the Gospel, as there is plenitudo
gratiae, so plenitudo irae, plenty of mercy, and plenty of wrath too: If there
were a sword on Moses thigh, there is an axe in Christ's hand; if there be fire
in the Law, there is fire and brimstone in the Gospel. In the Law God kept
Assizes once a year; in the Gospel he keeps Sessions every month: If he died
without mercy that despised Moses Law, he must die with all severity that
despises Christ; Luke 19. 27. Bring those mine enemies, that will not that I
should reign over them, and stay them before me: Rev. 8. 13. dreadfuller woes
are pronounced under the Gospel then under the Law, Woe, Woe, Woe, to the
inhabitants of the earth: so Mat. 18. 7. Woe to the woe ld: there was never a
general Woe pronounced upon the world before this time; but now, Woe unto the
world: and the plagues since the coming of Christ have been greater upon the
world then before as the Trumpets and Vials in the Revelation do manifest. Till
Christ was come, and the blessings of the Gospel were tendered to the Jews,
they never had a perfect bill; but after he was come, and the grace of the
Gospel refused, then the bill of Divorce was perfected, ^ These. 2. 16. they
cast out of Gods family, and his wrath came upon them to the utmost, (...), to
the utmost, even to perfection: God would bear no more, but cut them off
presently, and with as much severity as ever we read of any.

Use.
We should learn hence, to take heed how we slight and refuse the Gospel of
Christ: in it there is the choice love of God, the precious blood of the Son
of God; in it is the Spirit of grace and glory, the exceeding great and
precious promises, all spiritual excellencies and eternal life: if you refuse
these, you provoke God to lay the axe unto the root of the tree; you provoke
Christ to say, Bring him and them hither, and slay them before me, that would
not have me to reign over them. The Gadarenes preferred their Swine, the
Capernaites their Loaves, the Jews Barabbas, before Christ; but it cost them
all dear when the axe came. Let not a Gadarenish, a Capernaiticall, a Jewish
spirit be found amongst us; let us say, Pereant porci, pereant panes, pereat
Barabbas, and regnet Christus, let all go, so Christ may reign. The Jews
stuck so to Moses and Mosaicall things, so to the Temple and the Rites of it,
so to superstitions and the traditions of their Fathers, that they would not
receive Christ and the truths of the time present, and therefore God dealt so
severely with them, as to cut them down by the Romish axe. There be truths of
Christ reserved for some times and when those truths are discovered, we should
examine them, and labor to be established in present truths, 2 Pet. 1. 12. as
the Apostle speaks Are there not truths now on foot, concerning Christ's Kingly
Office, and his government in the Church? has he not powered out his Spirit
upon men eminently, and brought light out of darkness? Shall we reject truth
and light, it is feared we stick too much to Mosaicalls, Prelaticalls, and
Trditionalls: Let us prove all things, and hold fast that is good; let us
receive the truth with the love of it* lest we be given up to strong delusions,
2 These. 2 10. 11. and strange judgments, Acts 2. 13. 17. 28. when the Spirit
was given, choice truths presented and they not received, there is mention of
turning the Sun into darkness, and the Moon into blood; which notes some
dreadful judgments* that should darken and imbitter their best comforts: The
like may we fear, if we refuse any truths of Christ.

Thirdly, observe that God does premonish before he Now the Axe is laid to the
root of the Tree, John tells them, there was an Axe laid, the news of the Axes
coming was heard before the noise of its cutting. The Lord tells Delinquents
before he strikes them, Yet forty days, and Nineveh shall be destroyed. Men
are close, Cometae vel pestem provin^i alium vel Regni muta^i^nem portendere
pro vero asseverabo Gul. Malmsbur. de Gestis reg. dngl. l. 2 c. 9. de Edwardo*
Martyr.
their designs are underneath, they often storm, surprise, and plunder Towns
without giving the least notice but when God intends judgments, he sends his
Heralds to warn Kingdoms and Nations. Has not God given warning to all
Nations? has he not within these hundred years, given us 100. warnings? have
not the Heavens seemed on fire? have not there bin four or five blazing Stars?
Herlicius Stargardensis held that the influence of the Comet 1618. upon the
christian world would last to between 20 and 30* years, which is already
verified at last is blazed over England and expired, intimating that England
should take warning by it. Besides these, have we not had Earthquakes? great
frosts, deep snowes, unseasonable weather, and is it not fresh in your memory
how God had a quarrel with your Steeples* and Churches for the corruptions and
Innovations in them, when diverse of the^ were smitten, broken and burnt by
thunder and lightning: not only by prodigies, has God warned us, but by his
Prophets also Ezekiel. 33. 3. they have bin telling you of a stroke that would
come, Elishahs sword has bin drawn, and brandished before us, and because we
would not take warning by that, Iehnes and Hazaels swords are in the midst of
us; Its undeniable the cocks have crowed and told us of this storm of blood
above this thirty years, all exceptions are taken away, none can quarrel with
God, he has warned us, he is just and will overcome in Judgment, he hewed
Jerusalem by his Prophets, before he cut it down by his Axes, Ier. 1. 10 The
Prophet did root up by his Prophecy and after that Nebuchad* cuts down by the
sword. Further God has warned us by his judgments on others. Germany these
20. years has bin a Beacon to us, Scotland was lately a Land of darkness,
and Ireland is still a Land of wrath, and must England be secure. Awake, awake,
O England, there be Armies within thy bowels, Parliament City, Kingdom, are
all in danger. God has long threatened and is now upon execution. Use of the
point, Amos 4. 12. Thus will I do unto thee, and because I will do this,
prepare to meet thy God: Its dreadful to hear God is in a way of Judgment,
especially when we are not in a way of repentance: If I whet my glittering
Sword, and my hand takes hold of Judgment, I will render vengeance to mine
enemies, and will make mine Arrows drunk with blood, and my Sword shall
devour flesh, etc. Deuteronomy. 32. 41, 42. When God whets his Sword, and shoots his
arrows, he will make them eat flesh, and drink blood, yea be filled with
blood, and grow fat with fatnes, Esa. 34. 6. Now God has given a Commission to
the Sword to eat English flesh, and drink English blood; and I fear the
Sword having bin starved a long time, will now eat to purpose, it comes
hungry, and is like to eat much flesh, it comes dry, and is like to drink
much blood* before it be put up again: Let us therefore meet God in this way
with sighs and tears, let us take warning in time, praemoniti pr^muni^i, men
that are forewarned should be forearmed. In these times men are armed to go to
battle with men, but are you armed to meet God? have you on the girdle of
verity? the Breastplate of righteousness? are you shod with the preparation
of the Gospel of peace? is the helmet of salvation on your heads? is the
shield of Faith on your hearts, and the sword of the spirit in your mouths? If
you be thus armed you may meet God marching in flames of fire, and that without
prejudice. The Lord of Hosts is come, if we be not prepared we cannot stand
in the evil day, read Ezekiel. 22. 14 but the soul that takes warning shall
deliver it self, Ezekiel. 33. 5. Let us all then, lay it to heart, that the sword
is drawn, has drank the blood of our friends, and may drink ours, The Axe is
laid to the root of the tree, and threatens the downfall of Church and State,
if we do take warning and meet God the right way, we may deliver our own
souls, the souls of those that belong unto us, and probably the whole Land.

Fourthly, God begins with lesser judgments, and afterward Now the Axe is laid
to the root of the Tree. First there was Culter pota^orius, the pruning hook,
and when that would do no good, then comes the Axe, Gods Judgments are
graduall not superlative at the first upon Kingdoms and families Sodom was
first plundered by the four Kings, after that rescued by Abraham, and set in
Statu quo, Genesis 14, 15, 16. This Judgment doing little good, they were smitten
with blindness Genesis 19. and when that did no good then came fire, and Brimstone,
and consumed them from before the face of the Lord. The Romans had their
Fasces, and their Securis, first their Fasces came, and then their Securis: God
has his Fisces, his Rods before his Securis, his Axe, if lesser judgments
will prevail, the Axe shall never come, Hos. 5. 12. 14. there is mention of a
moath, rottenness, and a Lion, first the Moath a lesser fretting judgment,
then comes rottenesse* a soarer judgment, the word for rottenesse signifies a
Worm also that eats into Trees, and causes rottenesse. God would send such
judgments as should eat into the heart of the Jewish State, and after that he
would be as a Lion, tear in pieces and devour Rac^ab (...) putred^ and te^ed^.
them.

This shows that God is not willing to cast off, and destroy a people that
have bin his, Hos. 11. 6, 7, 8. How shall I give thee up Ephraim? how shall I
deliver thee Israel? how shall I make thee as Admah? how shall I set thee as
Zeboim? etc. The Sword was to abide upon their Cities. their goodly branches
were to be lopped off, they followed their own Counsels, went backward from
God, they were called to by Prophets and Judgments, to exalt God, but would
not, yet says God, how shall I give thee up, etc. There was a contention
between mercy and justice, the one pleaded as much for them as the other
against them. Judgment is opus alienum, Gods strange work, mercy comes out
sweetly, but judgment constrainedly (as a sting from a Be:) the Woman
constrained the unjust Judge to do her Justice, so wicked men constrain God
to destroy them. If the Sodomites would have amended upon the first or second
Judgment, Salvian.
God would have stayed the Plague; but ipsi extorserunt ut perirent, they
constrained God to destroy them. Shall God be unwilling to destroy us, and
shall we destroy our selves? Let not such a perverse spirit be in us. God is
loath to cast men into hell, and yet they desire God to damn them* and swear
themselves many miles into hell. O horrible wickedness! many a man is ready to
make away himself, when God steps in, and prevents the mischief. God is
willinger to keep many out of Hell then they are themselves.

Fifthly, God has Sovereign Authority over all Kingdoms, Now is the Axe laid
unto the Root of the Tree, this axe was the Roman State, this Tree was the
Jewish State. God has the Authority of all in his hand, he sets one Kingdom
against another. Babylon must ruin Sion: Titus and Vespatian, are stirred up by
God to cut down and destroy the Jewish Nation: God has Sovereignty over all
Kingdoms, Psalm. 103. 19. and can imply them to execute his judgments.
Senacherib was his axe, Esa 10. 15. to cut down Nations. God makes one
Kingdom an Axe to hew down another, he makes one part of a State to hew
down another part of the same. The Jewish Commonwealth was now under the
Roman Empire; it is so in England at this day, has not God mingled a perverse
Spirit amongst us, Esa. 9. 21. Ephraim against Manasseth, Manasseth against
Ephraim, and both against Judah; They sought each others destruction as we do
at this day; a perverse Spirit was mingled among them* and among us. Kingdoms
depend upon God, Dan. 4. 32. 2 Chap. 21. and where there is the greatest
dependancy, there is the greatest Sovereignty. Now Kingdoms depend upon God,
quoad omnia, for their beings, upholdings and blessings, and therefore he has,
jus utendi, he may do with his own what he list, he can and may dash one
Family, one Town, one Country, and one Kingdom against another, and that
without control. Who shall say to him, what do thou?

Use.
What should this beget in us, but to fear this God that has Sovereign
authori y over all flesh, over all Kingdoms; let us fear this God, Ier. 10. 7.
Who would not fear thee O King of Nations? for to thee does it appertain:
Shall God be the King of Nations, the King of all Kings and not be feared? to
the does it appertain, not to men to be feared but to thee does it appertain:
The great God must be feared. Ye that are petty Kings on the Earth, you that
are Gods on the Earth, you must know that this God has Sovereign Authority
over Nations, Persons, lives* consciences, he is the everlasting King or King
of eternity, Ier. 10. 10. He can, will, and must, dispose of you ere long
eternally in heaven or hell, Job 36. 8, 9, 10. When Families and Kingdoms are
in fetters under the afflicting hand of God, then He shows them the
excessivenesse of their sins, and commands them to return from iniquity. Did
not God command them before? yes, but then they slighted God, being at ease and
in prosperity, His commands were not regarded, but when God cast into
streights, fetters and afflicts Families or Kingdoms, their ears are opened,
they harken to Discipline? What they formerly contemned, is now precious, and
they see Authority and Majesty in the command of Vexat^o dat intelle* ^um.
God, Mic. 6. 9. The King of Nations is wroth with this Kingdom, He has it in
fetters, let us hearken to His commands, and tremble at his Sovereignty. Psalm.
99. 1. The Lord Reigns let the Earth tremble; let all the Potentates and
Inhabitants of it tremble and quake before him: It Is for our advantage to do
it. Hab. 3. 16. when the Caldeans were to come up and besiege Jerusalem, the
Prophet apprehending it beforehand, quivered and quaked, and why was it? that
he might rest in the day of trouble: that soul which trembles when judgment
is in the Cloud* when the Axe is at the root of the tree, shall have rest in
the day of trouble: Isa. 66 2. To him will I look that is of a contrite
Spirit, and trembles at my word: God will look to him, that the flood shall
not drown him, nor the Axe cut him down. Lot is saved when the fire consumed
Soddom; God was to him a Sanctuary, he feared God and God was his defense, Esa.
8* 13, 14. When we have frames of Spirit suitable to the Authority and Majesty
of the great God, that is Lord of Kingdoms, that raises and ruins them at his
pleasure, then we sanctify God in our hearts, and he will be a Sanctuaary unto
us, and such a Sanctuary is needful for these times.

Sixthly observe, That after warning, and waiting, God Isa. 42. 14, 15. I have
been silent a long time, and held my peace, and refrained, and said nothing,
but now I will cry like a Woman in Travel, I will destroy, and devour at once
says GOD, I will stay no longer, I will lay wast Mountains, and hills, I will
dry no Rivers and ^ooles: Great and small should now feel the stroke of Gods
hand; where Gods long suffering ends, there his fury begins, and he will deal
severely with Kingdoms, and with particular Persons.

This severity appears in three particulars: First, in that it is an Axe, is
used. Secondly, it is the Root it is laid too. Thirdly, in the impartialnesse,
the root of every Tree. First, it is an Axe not Culter putatorius, a pruning
Falx a Bill or Hook, to chop off some Arms or Bows, but securis, an Axe,
some sharp, strong, hewing, destroying Judgment. Secondly, It Is

Quest.
What makes God to lay the Axe to the Root of a Tree or Kingdom?

Answ.
There are 4 things make the Gardener, and so God, to lay the Axe to the Root
of a Tree. First, Deadness. Secondly, Rottenness. Thirdly* Barrenness,
Fourthly, Evil fruitfulness.

First, Deadness: When the Tree is dying or dead, Hosea 1. When Ephraim sinned
in Baal then he died. Ephraims death being pronounced, Gods Axe was presently
prepared, v. 3. Therefore they shall be as the morning Cloud, etc. God would
scatter them as Clouds, Chafe, Smoke, and dry them up as dew. Sardis one of
the 7 Churches in Asia, had a name to live but was dead, Rev. 3. 1. What says
the Lord to Sardis? Remember what thou have received and heard hold fast,
repent, watch, else I will come on thee as a thief in the night, v. 3. that
is, suddenly and cut thee down: and you know that God did lay wast that and
the other Churches not long after; when Churches or Kingdoms are dying or
dead, the Axe is not far from the Root of them.

Has not our Kingdom bin languishing and dying many Hi sunt ultimi singultus
moribundae libertatis.
years together; you know what was said at a Commencement some years since,
our Church and State liberties lay a dying: some reviving through the means,
blessed be the Lord we have had, but our fainting and fears are not over,
England is in a consuming dying condition, Genesis 12 All flesh has corrupted
their way, and the end of all is come before me* I have looked upon all flesh,
and find that great and small have corrupted their way, and therefore the end
of all is come before me, I am resolved to send a Flood to drown the World and
its corruptions together. It was not some particular corruption among them, but
an universal one. There was corruption in faith and life, in their Religion,
Worship, and manners, and when a State is generally corrupt in those, the
Heavens grow black, and either a flood or fire comes, a flood to the old world,
a fire to Sodom. Trees natural or political being rotten, call for the Axe,
and God hastens it to the Luk 7. I came and found no fruit, cut it down why
cumbreth it the ground: a barren Tree cumbers the ground. Some observe, that if
the Alapide.
Fig Tree bear not fruit in three years, it will never bear fruit, and
therefore it is said, this 3. years I come seeking fruit and find none, cut it
down. A Barren Tree must be cut down. God waited long on them when under the
Judges, under the Kings, when under the High Priests after their captivity, in
Moses days, in the Prophets, in Christ's, and still they were barren, therefore
down they must. Fourthly, Fruitfulness* but its an ill fruitfulness, Hos.
10. 1. Israelis an empty vine, he brings forth fruit to himself; Empty and
yet fruitful, it seems to be a contradiction* but God accounts that no fruit,
is fruit to our selves. Barrenness and baseness is all one with God, when our
fruit is not for God and the public, it is selvish, and tends to ruin. Such
fruit Isreal's Tree was full of, and if a barren tree cumber the ground, what
does a tree laden with cursed fruit.

Quest.
Its demanded, What fruit was it, which brought the Axe to the Root of the tree?

Answ.
1. It was profanation of the Sabbath, Ierem. 17. 24, 25. 27. If they made
conscience of Gods Sabbath, he would take care of their City: If they would
hollow that day with pious duties, he would honor them with choice Princes;
but if they would defile his day, he would fire their City* and that with
unquenchable fire. This made Nehemiah so zealous for the Sabbath, after the
return from Babylon, Neh. 13. 17, 10. he contended with the Nobles, and said,
What evillthing is this that ye do, and profane the Sabbath day? did not your
Fathers thus, and did not our God bring all his evils upon us, and upon this
City? yet ye bring more wrath upon Israel, by profaning the Sabbath day. He
knew that sin had formerly laid them wast, and would therefore stand for the
Sabbath, that the Lord of Sabbaths might stand for and by them. England is not
innocent in this thing. The Book of Sports (a Monster that Heathen and
Idolatrous Kingdoms never produced) that opened a wide door to profane the
Lords day, has kindled a fire in our Land, which is not like to be extinct
till that Book be burnt by public Authority.

2. Idolatry, that is a Kingdom destroying sin. Jeroboams two Calves eat up
the 10. Tribes, and Manasses Idols devoured Juda, Hos. 13 1. When Ephraim
sinned in Baall then he died. Idolatry is the death of a Land, it divides
between God and Kingdoms, it breaks the Covenant, and causes God to give a
Bill of Divorce, and that is not all, it calls forth Gods fury upon a Land,
Ezekiel. 36. 18. 19. and that is a destructive thing.

3 Neglect of justice, when sin abounds, execution of justice saves
Kingdoms, and want of it hastens their ruin. Ierem. 5. 1. ^un^e ye too and
froe says God, through the streets of Jerusalem, and see now and know, and
seek in the broad places thereof, if you can find a man, if there be any that
executes judgment, that seeks the truth, and I will pardon it. Doubtless
there was some godly man in Jerusalem, but there was none of a public Spirit,
that did execute Judgment in the broad places, neither King, Counselors,
Priests or Prophets did execute Judgment* and therefore he could not pardon;
when none appear to cut down sin, God will appear to cut down sinners. Isa.
5. 7. ^ looked for judgment: ludah was his pleasant plant, he had hedged,
dig'd, dung'd, watered, shined upon them, and looked for Judgment, but there
was none, therefore God would break down the hedge, and lay them wast. If God
could have found 10 righteous persons in Soddom, he would have spared it. You
may take the word righteous not only for godly men, but for men executing
Judgment* there were none such: Lot could have no Justice from them, and that
enforced God to execute Justice on them.

4. Blood, oppression, uncleanness, hatred of truth and such like, which I put
together because I cannot enlarge upon all particulars, Hosea. 4. 2. 3. By
swearing, lying, killing* stealing, and committing adultery, they break out,
and blood touches blood; Therefore shall the Land mourn, God will destroy
because of these sins, Ezekiel. 36. 18. When the Britains called in the Saxons
to help them against the Scots and Picts, God who has power over Kingdoms
and people made them his Axe, to how and destroy the Britains, for they soon
joined with their adversaries and picked quarrels against the Britains, and God
so stirred up their Spirit against the Britains, that they spoiled them in
many places, drove them into corners of the Land, made them flee into foreign
parts* and destroyed the Country with fire and Sword. The S^e Speed l. 7. c. 1.
of the downfall of Britain.
sins then observable, were such as were not among the Gentiles, hatred of the
truth; and the patrons of it drunkenness, contention, cruelty, uncleanness
countenancing of lies, and the forgers of them, respect to lewdness more then
goodness, the better things wrought most discontent; all vice was in the
Clergy and people: Princes were Tyrannical Murderers, Adulterers,
Soddomiticall: and the last of the Cadwalader said, Vae nob^s p^ccatorib^s ob
immania scelera nostra. Eitz^erb.
British Kings flying into France said woe to us for our great iniquities, we
had time to repent but did it not, therefore justly now the wrath of Godrootes
us out. When the Vide Speed Fox in the lives of Edgar and Etheldred.
Danes conquered England the Land was guilty of blood and uncleanesse, it was
in Ejus vitae curs^s saevus in principio, miser in medio, turpis in exitu
asse^itur. Guliel. Malms. l. 2. de gest* Reg Anglor. c. 10. And he relates in
that Chapter what Dunstan told him* Quia inquit p^r mortem fratris tui
aspirasti, ad regnum, non delebitur peccatum ignominiosae matris tuae, and
peccatum virorum qui interfuerunt consilto illius nequim, nisi multo sa nguine
miserorum provinctal^um, and venient super gentem Anglorum mala qualia non
passa est ex quo Anglia fuit usque ad tempu^ illud.
^theldreds time, whose ways were cruel, miserable and shameful; his ears
were open to to accusers to calumniations, and no man's life was in security.

When Roderick King of Spain deflowred the Daughter of Count Julian, who in
revenge stirred up the Moors, showed them the way to get Spain, which they
conquered and possessed above 600. years At the Conquest by the Normans the
sins were profaneness ignorance, uncleanness, neglect of Justice and
Religion, the people were a prey to the Nobles, which made Edw: the Confessor
say before his death, that England should be given into the hands of Divills
and wicked Spirits. You see what sins made the great changes in this Kingdom,
sins not unlike the Amorites, which from Levit. 18. Deuteronomy. 2 and 12. are
conceived to be Idolatry, oppression and filthiness, Peccata exitialia humanae
societati maxim solet punire Deus Alopid. in Genesis
which are destructive of Religion, Justice and holiness of life, the only
bands of humane Societies; and when these sins of theirs were full* God cuts
them off, for when sins become destructive to Societies, they whet Gods Axe
and hasten it to the root, and now you have heard what are the sins bring the
Axe thither. It follows that I show you the third thing sets out the severitie
of God and that is, Thirdly, the impartialnesse of God in the work, Every Tree
that brings not forth good fruit is hewn down and cast into the fire; let it
be an Olive Tree, or a Bramble, a Fig tree or a Vine no exception excuse,
evasion, pretense, or privilege or plea is admitted, but the axe is laid to
the root of every one, it referres to that in Deuteronomy. 20. 20. The trees thou
know be not for meat thou shall destroy, such trees must not be spared
though great and goodly: In particulars you may see this truth more clearly:
Look at Kings, they are tall Cedars, Dan. 4. 14. Hew down the Tree:
Nebuchadnezzar himself must down, Herod, Pharaoh, Belshazzer were cut off by
the root. Gods axe neither fears nor spares the proudest, Psalm. 76. 12. Not
Prophets, Balaam is slain by the Sword, Number. 31. 8. Not Priests, 1 Kin. 18.
Not Nobles, Zimri and Cozbi are run through, Number. 25. Not Apostles, Judas
falls headlong* and bursts in pieces, Act. 1. 18. Not Statists and great
Counselors, Ahitophel is smitten, a Sam. 17. Not Tribes, Judge. 21. 3. A Tribe
was lacking in Israel, afterward ten were wanting. Not Cities, Sodom,
Jerusalem, Babylon, are laid wast. Not a World, 1 Pet. 3. 20. That is drowned;
no privilege will advantage. Abraham's seed, Children of the Kingdom, are cast
out, Mark. 8. 12. No place secures; Ioab is taken at the horns of the Altar,
Angels in heaven are thrown down, 2 Pet. 2. 4. the Figtree in the Garden is not
spared, Luke 13. 6 That of Coniah is most observable, Ierem. 22. 24. Though
Coniah be as the signet on my right hand, yet would I pluck him thence: though
he be much esteemed and very dear, as Signets on Princes hands are, yet it
shall not privilege him; you may think his nearness and my affection to him
may preserve him in his place, but be not deceived, as I live says the Lord I
will pluck him thence. Thus you see the severity of God in his impartiallnesse
toward every tree. Now I come to make application of the point.

Use 1.
I might here first show you that all Kingdoms have their Periods, and learned
writers tell us, that there are no Kingdoms so great, so glorious, so
powerful, that extend their duration above 500. or 600. years at most, but
are either ruinated and fall to ashes, or else suffer some great change. The
Jewish State from Egypt to the Temple, was 480. years, from Saul their first
King, to Zedektah the last of Judah, were 480. years, and then they were led
into Captivity, and after their return within 500. years, they were cut off
by Vespasian and Titus, the Axe in my Text, and are not a Tree to this day. And
the ten Tribes after their division 260 years were carried away: the Assyrian,
Persian, Grecian* and Roman Monarchies had their Periods, and were cut down by
one Judgment or another; the Britains after 500 years Helui^us. Sl^idan Speed.
were quit of the Romans tyranny in England, and Athens from the time of its
Monarchy, to the time of its Democracy had 490. years. The Lacedaemonians
flourished 491. years. The Saxons had to do here 469. years The Danes 242. And
then there was an end of them, and it is known to all of you, how long we have
been since the conquest, but I do not desire to prophecy, and foretell things
to come, all seasons are in the hand of God, but its thought we are upon the
Tropicks, if we be not ruined altogether, certainly there will be some great
alteration in the Kingdom.

Heb. 11. 7.
a Kingdom of darkness. where will be waiting and gnashing of teeth for ever.
When Noah heard of a flood to drown the world, he prepared an Arc presently
to preserve himself and his family: when you hear the Axe is laid to the root
of Kingdoms and they be terribly shaken, see you provide an eternal Kingdom,
for the safety of your souls, and those are yours. Christ has a Kingdom to
bestow that is not to be hewn or shaken by the power of men or devils get
Christ and that Kingdom is yours. They have interest in Christ, are of the
Blood royal, and Co-heires with him. Christ is the root of Iesse, Romans 15.
12. desire the Father to draw you and to ingraft you into that root that being
rooted in him as it is, Col. 2. 7. you may be out of all danger, for Romans 8.
1. There is no Condemnation to them that are in Christ: (...), not one
condemnation, neither the Divill nor the World, nor their own hearts, nor God
himself* shall, or can justy condemn you with one condemnation. And if there
be no condemnation, there is no Axe, John 8. 51.
He that believes in me, an^ keeps my sayings, says Christ, shall never see
death, if then you be not in Christ, if you be Christians in name, and not in
truth, Christians in the forehead and not in the heart, if you have the
sprinkling of water in the face, and not that of blood in the conscience, you
are dead men, 1 John 5. 12. He that has the Son has life, and he that has
not the Son, has no life in him: If it be so, you are dead Trees and must be
cut down, and cast into the fire, and there will be no remedy, look narrowly
therefore to your interest in Christ, and right to the Kingdom of Heaven seeing
the Kingdoms of the earth are sopping and cutting down by the Axe of God. And
to help you a little in this maine point: which way do the branches of your
trees tend? is it upwards or downwards? the branches are desideria and
affectus: are your desires and affections to promotion pleasure, profit,
content in the creature and upon things below? then will you fall downward into
the lake of fire, when the Axe does his office, for the tree ever falls that
way, the boughs and branches most incline: but if your desires and affections
are after and upon the things above, Christ and his Kingdom, the riches
pleasures, honors and excellencies thereof you shall not be cut down only be
transplanted, the Lord will take you out of his kitching Garden, and plant you
in Paradise, by the Rivers of pleasure at his right hand for evermore.

Thirdly, as this day requires, let us all humble our Levit 16. 29. 3^. and
Chapt. 23. 29. if they be not afflicted, we and the Kingdom may be cut off
together. The soul most affected with the time, and most afflicted for the
sins of them, will do the Kingdom most service. There is sin and misery
enough in the Land to break and humble us. Besides our deadness, rottenness,
barrenness, are we not sinfully fruitful? Have we no* such sins and sinners
among us as bring destruction unto Kingdoms? Has not the Lords day been
constantly profaned? Has not Idolatry and Superstition bin entertaind,
countenanced and practiced? Has not Justice bin neglected? has not blood,
oppression, drunkenness, swearing, Blasphemy, uncleanness, contention (...) 2
5. (...)
and scoffing at holiness overspread the Land? England is become like Israel a
Rebellious House, the Hebr. is, a House of bitterness, or an imbittering
House; sin is such gall, such worme-wood, that it imbitters Gods (...)
Spirit against a Kingdom, Hosea 12. 14. Ephraim provoked him to anger most
bitterly, the word is, with bitterness: they thrust Religion, Justice and God
Himself out of place, they set up Idols, forsook God, and oppressed the
people, which things were very bitter. It was a bitter provocation when they
gave Christ hanging on the Cross gall and vinegar to drink. A land does worse
when it sins against God in such sins as have bin mentioned; they give him
pure gall to drink, Lamentation, 1. 18. The Original runs thus, the LORD is
righteous, for I have imbittered his mouth. The sins of a Kingdom and
Families, imbitter the mouth of God; and the Lord pronounces wrath, curses, and
judgment against that Kingdom, that imbittereth his heart, his mouth, and
hand; he will come, deal severely with that Kingdom, and cut it down by the
Quonia ^ ^d (...) ^dmem ^o ^^it^vit de^^ (...).
roots: Hos. 13. 16. Samaria shall become desolate, for she^ has rebelled
against her God, she has dealt bitterly with her God; and what then? they
shall fall by the sword, their Infants shall be dash't in pieces, and their
Women with Child shall be rip't up: This was bitter to have their Children
dash't in pieces, their Young Men to fall by the Sword, their Women to be
slaughtered and rip't up like Beasts, their Country and Land to be laid
desolate; but it was not so bitter as man's dealing is with God, it is a greater
evil for u^ to sin, it crosses the will of the blessed God it darkens his
glory strikes at his life and being* it murdered his Son, vexes his Spirit,
defaces his work, and presses him as a Cart i pressed with sheaves, and this
is worse then any or all the Judgments of God upon us They are to purge us, to
heal us, and to prevent the greatest punishments in Hell, and this is not so
bitter, but when we deal so with God, as to darken his glory, to slight his
love, to crucify his Son, to grieve his Spirit, to undervalue the glorious
excellencies in the Gospel, this imbittereth the heart of God, and should
imbitter and afflict ours.

There is a bitternesin sin as well as for sins: men may be humbled but not be
humble; at the sense of Judgments most are humbled, there is the bitterness
for sin: but at the sight of the great wrong to God, men are humble, there is
the bitterness in sin. Let us then consider seriously of our sins, and
thoroughly view the enmity that is in them to God, to Christ, and to his Holy
Spirit; let us go down to the root of all, even original corruption, and
charge the enmity which is in that sin to God, and in all those have sprung
thence deeply upon our hearts, that feeling the wrong they have done to God,
and the real bitterness is in them, we may be truly and thoroughly humble. If
the bitterness in sin will not do it, let thoughts of Judgment and
bitterness for sin help on and perfect the work. Consider, is there not an
Axe in the Land and an Axe at work? is not God hewing and lopping of us? are
not hundreds and thousands cut off? Are not Towns, Counties and the
Kingdomewounded? does not Ireland lie bleeding to death? Is it not drawing its
last breath? Shall a Tribe be lost in our Israel and we not be sensible of it?
Shall the Christian world be shaking, and cutting down as it is at this time?
and shall we not lay it to heart? Are we Christians? where is the Spirit of
Christ? He wept over Jerusalem before the Axe came, we weep not over Ireland or
England now the Axe is come. If we will be slight and formal in our
humiliations, we provoke God to be real and severe in our destructions, Job
36. 18. Because there is wrath, beware lest he take thee away with his stroke,
his hand is lifted up and where his strokes fall they are deadly; let us
therefore humble our selves under his mighty hand that we may not be cut down.

When the Axe is at the root, the danger is great, and Repentance necessary, if
tears flow not the chips must fly, the tree must down. (...). Chrysostom: in
locum.
Chrysostom says, the Text is compulsorie, John constraines them to
repentance, can you endure to see your wives and children cut down? your
habitations laid wast? your Temple and worship destroyed? your City to be
burnt? most of your selves to be slain or enslaved? the Axe is at the root, if
you repent not these things you must see and feel. Repentance now may prevent
all. Smite upon your breasts and say woe is me its my sin has provoked God to
anger, and brought the axe to the root of the tree that has endangered all,
and now through the help of God I will do what lies in me to save all. If
we were humble, and broken with the bitterness of sin, and weight of
judgments, we should find mercy, 2 Chronicles. 12. 56, 7. There was a great Army
came up against Jerusalem, Shemiah tells them, they had forsaken God, and
therefore he had left them to the spoil of their enemies: upon this the King
Princes and people humble themselves and acknowledge the righteousness of God
in his Judgments upon them and what followed, presently upon their humiliation
comes deliverance* God saw and sent, he saw them humble, and sent them mercy
and in Judah things went well, v. 12. If we would have things go well in the
Parliament, well in the Army, well in the Kingdom then must we humble our
selves and suitably to our sins 2 Chronicles. 7. 14. If there be through humiliation
God will hear, help, and heal our Land, if we be truly humble Gods Axe shall
not cut us down, but his hand shall lift us up in due time, 1 Pet. 5. 6.

Fourthly, as there must be humiliation, so there must be Reformation: let us
lay the Axe to the root of our sins this day, if God lay it to the root of
Kingdoms, its time for us to lay it to the root of our sins, Prove. 28. 13. it is
said* he that confesses his sin, and forsakes it shall have mercy. It Is
without question we have often times in public confessed our sins, but if
heaven should now demand of us whether we have forsaken them? I fear there
would be a general silence. Its a vain thing to expect mercy and live in
sin: if we do not forsake them they will stop the sluices of mercy, and hasten
in destruction upon you, us, all. Humiliation without Reformation is a mocking
of God, and provokes much. Has sin brought us low, let the Axe of
Reformation bring sin low this day, lay it to the root of sin and cut that
down. Psalm. 110. 5. It Is said of Christ, In the day of thy wrath thou shall
smite through Kings. Is not this the day of your wrath with your sin? are you
not angry with them? do you not hate them? if it be so, show your selves
Christians, that you have the Spirit of Christ in you. Smite through Kings, I
mean your kingly lusts; There be kingly reigning sins in men, lusts that do
command and imbondage their Spirits to base things, coveteousnesse, pride,
uncleanness, selvishnesse, inconstancy, unfaithfulness, unbelief, carnal
reasonings, creature fears, and such like, which are predominant in the breasts
of men, and endanger their eternal condition, these we must mortify else we
die for it, and that eternally Rom 8. 13. Let this therefore be one of our great
works to mortify our sins, and to destroy them utterly. Many deal too
kindly with their sins, they do by them as you do by Malignants in prison,
they have their friends come to them, they have their wine, their feasts and
what they will, only they are a little restrained of their liberty, so some
restrain them of their lusts and that is all the Martyrdom and Mortification
they have, their fantasies give them frequent visits, and feast them with
delightful meditations, and so in sparing of their lusts they ruin
themselves. When Ioab went out against Absalom, what said David, Deal gently
with the young man for my sake, and beware that none touch him, 2 Samuel 18. 5.
12. He would have Absalom spared though it tended to the ruin of the Kingdom.
And thus is it when we come out against men's Absoloms, their lust, they would
have us deal gently with them, not touch them; especially not wound them,
their lust they would have spared, though a Kingdom by them should be ruined.
But you know how Ioab dealt with Absalom, v. 14. he thrust him thrice through
the heart while he was alive in the midst of the Oak, he made sure work and
prevented future commotions in the Kingdom. You are caught in an Ordinance
this day of Prayer and Fasting, it is our aim and desire to strike through the
heart of your lusts by the darts of divine truth, that for the future there may
be no commotions in your souls. O suffer us to do it and help on the work,
for it lies most in your hands. You know what lusts are strong and living in
you, set upon them* spare them not. It was an Argument of wickedness in Saul
that he spared Agag, of righteousness in Samuel in that he hewed him to
pieces; if you spare your lusts, your great and fat ones, it will be an
Argument of your wickedness, but if you hew them in pieces and make a general
slaughter of them, it will be an Argument of your righteousness, and may produce
the good and safety of the whole Kingdom. I beseech you therefore in the name
of Christ, spare not one Achan, one lust, that one may be the ruin of all, one
sinner destroys much good, Eccles. 9. 18. and any sin may hinder much mercy,
Ier 18. 10. Now the Axe is laid to the root of every Tree, we must therefore
lay it to the root of every sin sins of constitution, sins of cust ome,
sins against heaven and earth, God and man, the least, the greatest, let them
all feel the sharpness and strength of the Axe. He that spares any sin,
does what lies in him to ruin Parliament, Army, City, Kingdom, King and
all, Ion. 3. 8. 10. When every one turned from his evil way, so that there was
no way of wickedness left unturned from, then God turned away his fierce anger
and spared their City; if we turn every man from his evil ways, and all
those ways, we may certainly and suddenly expect Gods turning from his fierce
wrath, and his walking in ways of peace and mercy with us. Peace is a
desirable thing, yet not that peace will whet the Axe sharper, and make it cut
deeper; such peace we desire as will keep the God of peace with us; we take the
wrong course for peace if we go on in our sins, Es. 57. 21. Ps. 68. 21. He
that cries for peace with his lips, and destroys it with his life, he
maintains the Wars, divides betweenethe King and Parliament, and widens the
breaches of the Kingdom. If we will fast and go on in sinful ways, we may
have a dubious and dangerous peace with men, but it is impossible we should have
any with God. I shall shut up this point with that of Samuel to the people, 1 Samuel 12. 24, 25. Only fear the Lord and serve him in truth with all your
heart, for he has don great things for you, but if you shall still do
wickedly, ye shall be consumed, both ye and your King: progress in
wickedness produces not peace. The true product of it is destruction to
people, Parliament, King and Kingdom. If we would therefore have all safe,
peace be in our Borders, and the God of peace be propitious to us, let us
depart from all iniquity.

Hitherto I have spoken to all, give me leave now Honorable and worthy
Senators, to commend some things to your considerations. My first and humble
request is, that the Axe of your power may not ly still, but that Justice may
be done. God is a God of Justice, he makes it known to all the world he lays
his Axe to the root of the Tree, show your selves a Parliament of Justice, let
the world know it, lay the Axe to the root of Delinquencie. Neglect of Justice,
as you heard before, indangers a Kingdom, Judah was laid wast because there
was no Judgment executed* Es. 5. 67. Suffer not a Kingdom to perish upon that
ground. It brings your Authority into contempt, and renders you despicable in
the eyes of many: whereas if justice were done, Authority would be more
dreadful and your persons more Honorable, 1 Kings 3. 28. when Judgment was
given between the two Harlots, its said, all Israel heard and feared; that act
struck fear into a whole Kingdom. We do not read what became of the Harlot
which took away the Child from the true mother, but it is conceived, and very
probably, that she died for it, according to the Plagiarian Law, of which you
may read, Exodus 21. 16. Deuteronomy. 24. 7. It a man did steal an Israelite, or the
Son of an Israelite, any soul, and the party were found in his hand, he was
surely to be put to death; whence we may conclude, the Harlot suffered* the
whole Kingdom feared, and Solomon was honored for that act of Justice; it is
execution of justice makes Authority to be regarded, and a Kingdom to fear:
when your justice fell upon that great Cedar above a year and half ago did
not England tremble? did not it make many fear and fly? Justice secures a
Kingdom, but neglect of it makes Courts contemptible and Kingdoms hazardable.

Again, the neglect of Justice enboldens men to go on in wicked practices,
Eccles. 8 11. because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily,
therefore the hearts of the Sons of men is fully set in them to do evil,
they are void of all fear says one Absque rim re ^llo (...) homin^m vulg.
Translation, Cor homin^m a^da^t^ ^l^num T^g^rin.
filled with boldness says another; and the Ont le coeur rempli pour mal-sa^^e.
French is filled to do evil. Impunity fills the sails of wicked men, and drives
them against Parliaments, Kingdoms, and Heaven it self. When great
Delinquents go unpunished, Ex impunitate s^^le^ator^m derogatur fides divine
providentie Plut. de Sera numinis vindi^^a.
divine providence is brought to the Bar and questioned, men upon it become
Atheistical, heady, outrageous, dissolute. Who knows it not says Quis
ignorant muximam illecebram esse peccandi impunitatis spe^. Cic. orat pro milone
effraenatus furor alitur impunitate diutur^a id^ pro Sextio.
Tullie, that impunity is the greatest encouragement to impiety. The Heathen
with his dark Lantern could see the truth of this, and shall we Christians
that have the light of life, John 8. 12. not see it? Remota justitia quid sunt
regnanisi magna latrocinia. Lib. 4 de civit. aet. cap. 4.
Augustine long since saw it, and said, take away Justice, and what are
Kingdoms but Dens of thieves and places for plunder? we find and feel the
realty of this truth at this day, and are like to lie under guilt till Justice
be done.

Lastly, want of justice, increases the number of Delinquents, Judge. 17. 6.
there was no Justice, and now they were all delinquents, every man did what he
list. The words are, there was no King in Israel, and yet they were all Kings
in Israel. They had not then had any King in a Drus. ad loca difficiliora
Iudicum.
stricke sense. Judges were their Governors, and because they did rule and
execute Justice, they are styled Kings, and now they had no Judge no King, and
yet they were all Judges, all Kings their lusts were their Laws, and Vbi
pl^res regnant ibi nemo imperat.
every man did what was right in his own eyes. Nature is corrupt, nothing
sweeter to it then liberty, and where Justice is suspended, there is a Deterio
res omnes sumus licentia Terent
Commission to be wicked, but where is most Justice, there are fewest
Malefactors and least mischief: The ^lunt in his voyage to the Levant.
Turks are severe and speedy in their Justice which prevents increase of
Delinquents and danger. Those Nations are remiss in Justice: besides the
sadding of those are innocent, they abound in Delinquents and dangers, its our
case at this present; Englands dangers are many, because Englands Delinquens
are not a few, and its not like to be better with us till the justice of a
Parliament be so feared, that no Delinquent may expect safety in any part of
our Kingdom. Let Justice therefore, O you heads of Israel run down as waters,
and righteousness as a mighty stream: we have mighty sins and mighty
sinners which make mighty dangers, and if there be not, (...) Sicut torrens
fortis.
tor^ens iustitia, a stream of Justice, yea a mighty stream, that may
Iuditium contra vos ^bet, ut vos obr^at Calv.
run down and run over the Sons of B^^^al, will not be taken away, our
guilt and spot will not be purged, nor our Land secured. You are the Supreme
Court of Justice, let the Sun be dark and the Sea dry before your streams
do cease flowing. In Moses days men wondered at the dryness of the Red Sea.
In Christ's days they wondered at the darkning of the Sun, but let none wonder
for want of Justice. Open your Sluices, and let the floods of Justice carry down
the floods of Iniquity. ^n^alls of france (...) by Al^^ide in ^^meres.
Jews one of the Kings of France having spared upon entreaty a man deserved
death, and reading that in the 106. Psa me 3. Blessed are they that keep
Judgment, and he that does righteousness at all times, this doing
righteousness at all times, so wrought upon him, that presently he reversed
what he had granted, and said, He that has power to punish sin and does it
not, becomes a Patron of it, and is as guilty before God* as if himself had
committed it; and that its Piety not Cruelty to execute Justice. If the spirit
of this Prince were in all the Princes and Magistrates of the Christian world,
what a sudden change should we see. The Lenity many propound and plead for,
proves cruelty to particulars, to whole Estates: It made Eos Magistratus qui
male^^c^s panis non co^rcen^, non tantum, non feren ^^s ^e^ (...) ^bru^ndos,
esse, ne ex paenae neglect^ salus reipublicae la^^firet Plut* in vita Caton.
Cato say that those powers did not punish Delinquents* were not only to be
rejected, but to be stoned, least their indulgence might damnifie the State. He
saw neglect of Justice did prejudice Kingdoms, and we see, the want of it
hinders much, if not all our good I speak not this from mine own head, but I
will give you the warrant of a Prophet for it Ierem. 6. 29. The founder melts
in vain, for the wicked are not plucked away: Ministers are Founders* they are
to melt, make men fit for a spiritual estate; you are Founders are melting and
making men fit for a Politic condition, but both you and we melt in vain,
and the reason is given, the wicked are not plucked away, while they stand, the
labor is in vain: and what can an Army do, if Justice march not with them?
Achan will sooner overthrow Israel then take At: but when Justice was executed
and he stoned, At was easy to take, God was then with Israel and filled them
with spirit to do exploits. Its thought by men of wisdom that if your power
had acted more and penlesse, we had bin in a safer condition, and God more
propitious. Justice pacifies wrath, when neglect thereof provokes it. Some fear
execution of Justice will kindle a fire, and make stirs in Kingdoms: but
Fiat justu^a, and ruat mun^as, Gods way will never destroy Gods work; let
Justice be done, and God will look to the world, and Kingdoms of it. Further
see how cross men's thoughts are to divine, Ph^^chas executes justice upon
great ones, and what followed? a Commotion? no, Gods wrath was turned away, and
a Covenant of peace made, Numb. 25. 8. 11, 12. Seeing he has executed justice
and honored me, says God, behold I give unto him my Covenant of peace, and
will honor him. In public calamities the Non pinguior ma^tari vi^^ima Deo
p^test quam ^omo s^^lera^us* Sen^^.
Sacrifice of a wicked man is a Peace Offering, and may prevent great wrath.

If Powers will wink at wickedness, they may remedy, the time may quickly
come, they shall smart for judgments they cannot prevent. It Is injustice and
want of justice that disturbs Kingdoms and Cities: does not that treacherous
plot of Bristoll justify what is said? Does it not cry alowd for justice? and
shall it be forgotten? Let the waters of justice flow and they will refresh. It
was the River in Eden that made Paradise so sweet and flourishing, and streams
of Justice may make us a Paradise once again* being almost a Wilderness. When
Ioab, Sh^mei and Adon^jah were cut down by Solomon's axe, then was the Kingdom
established* 1 Kings 2. 46. If Justice be at a stand, and cannot take hold of
living Delinquents, to keep the Axe from rust, let Justice be exeuted upon
livelesse Delinquents. Are there no Altars? no high places? no Crucifixes? no
Crosses in the open streets that are bowed unto and Idolized? lay your Axe to
their roots and hew them down. In Ezekiel. God threatens the destruction of
their Cities, because they spared their Altars, Idols, Images, and own works,
chap. 6. 6. Let us secure our Cities and save God that labor, down with all is
suspicious, scandalous, and superstitious. Thus have I done my first motion.

(...) 2.
The second is, that the Axe of God being laid to the root of our Kingdom,
you would have a special care of the root, while that is safe there is hope.
Job. 14 7.

1. Do your utmost to keep God with us, yet he, is in the midst of us, Ier.
14. we are his people, he is Ier. ^4. 9.
our God, yet we have no Bill of Divorce, and L^^^mm^ is not written over our
Gates* do what lies in you to keep off such a mischief. If God should depart
and disanull his Covenant with us, most dreadful things would betide us, Hos.
9. 12. Woe to them when I depart from them, all evils presently step, crowd in
upon a people left of God, then public enterprises prosper not, ^ Chron. 24.
20. 24. then Counsel fails, 1 Samuel 28. 15. Then protection ends. Esa 50. 5.
Then peace* loving kindness and mercy go, Ierem. 16. 5. And such Judgments
are as taking the Sun out of the firmament, and the Soul out of the Body.
Popery is the thing produces such effects, Ezekiel. 8.
it is like (...) Chambers full of abominations, and has that malignity in it
as to drive God from his people. You have bin pressed to the Mr. Newcomb. Sermon.
on the 5. of November. 1642.
extirpation of it* had thoughts to effect it: Let them not die in you but come
to perfection, and engage us yet in a more firm Covenant to the Lord, that we
may for ever be the Lords, and the Lord ours, according to what you heard out
of Dr. (...).
Ier. 50. 5.

2. Look to the Civil power, let not that be rested out of your hands, your
Magna Charta, the Position of Right, your Parliament ^riviledge^, what have bin
taken from you recover, what have layen dormant and tend to public good
revive* what obtrusions and bonds have bin put upon you ad^^be^e securim and
imputate* You are a free Parliament, preserve your freedom, our Laws and
Liberties are in your hands, let them not suffer: The being and livelihood of
the Kingdom depends much thereon. Loges terra and Statuta ^egn^, are the
Sinews and Bon^s of the body politic, wound them and the Kingdom bleeds,
loose them and the life of it is gone. Arbitrary Government is a dangerous
thing; a Comet that threatens destruction to the Country, it is over: you tell
us Declaration Aug. 3. 1642.
That acts of will and Tyranny are the ingredients into it, that neither
Parliament nor Kingdom can ^e safe with it: Let your convictions cause
prevention, improve your power; let not Eng: become a house of bondage a 2d.
Egypt.

3. Let Religion and truth be precious in your eyes, they are of Tanti momenti
Religio and sides and jus sacrerum in omnt humana republica ut ab illa una pot
ssim^m p^ndeat pax and tranquillitas cujusque regni Spalatens: de republ.
Eccles. l. 6. c. 5.
such consequence, as that without them is little peace or safety to Kingdoms
That state preserves truth, will the God of truth preserve. When Jeroboam gave
way to plausible inventions, he laid the foundation for his own and the
Kingdoms ruin, 1 King 14. The Church of Philadelphia had a special care of
Gods word, Rev. 3. 10. and found the fruit of it, because thou have kept the
word of my patience, not only in their hearts, in their practice, but also
because Beza Annotat. in 1 Job. 518. (...)* is to keep from dangers.
they had kept it from being taken away, from corruption therefore God would
keep them from the hour of temptation* Gods word is in danger often by
Haeresies, Schisms, Persecutions, if we will engage our selves for it, GOD
will engage himself for us, but if we desert the truth, both God and truth
will be against us. Chytraeus Chron. Sax n.
The Danish Prelates stood not for pure Religion, but chiefly for that was their
own, and therefore were cast out by Prince and people in the year, 1537 God
priseth his truth at a high rate, he will destroy Nations for the safety of his
people. Es. 43. 3. and he will destroy heaven and earth for the safety of his
truth, Mat. 5. 18. that he Magnfies above all his name, Psalm. 148. 2. This
whole Creation, this visible name of GOD is little to his eternal Truths. Let
truth therefore be gracious with you, and contend with all your might for the
faith Iud. 3.
that it be not pulled from us. The only wise God bids you by the wisest of men,
to buy the Truth and not to ^ell it, Proverbs 23. 23. it is worth all men's
labors, liberties and lives, it cannot be over bought; loose Religion and
Truth, and we have lost all that is considerable; where these go, the Blessing
goes, Ier. 31. 23. The Lord bless thee O habitation of Justice, and Mountain
of Holiness. Where the Laws are executed, and pure Religion is maintained*
there is a habitation of Justice, a Mountain of Holiness, and the blessing of
God upon them both. If you love blessings and would avoid curses, keep Religion
in it is own luster, and rather let Men and Kingdoms, then Truth fall to the
Earth; yet the way to make earthly Kingdoms happy, is to uphold the Kingdom of
heaven.

Fourthly, The godly in the Kingdom, Magistrates, Ministers, and people, let
them be preserved, they are the root of a Kingdom: it was Joseph preserved
Egypt, and the Kingdom of the Egyptians: when the Israelites were driven out
of Egypt, the Egyptians were quickly destroyed, and their Kingdom ruined: for
Paul's sake all the souls in the Ship were kept alive, Act. 27. Moses kept Gods
hand in Heaven that he did not destroy his people on earth, Exodus 32. 10. A
godly man is of great worth, Elijah did more good by his fasting, and Prayer,
by opposing Ahab, and destroying Baals Priests, then the Chariots and Horsemen
of Israel. The godly are the Forts and Magazines of a Kingdom: It was Lot
upheld Sodom, when he was gone, the brimstone came and the City was turned
into ashes, the place is very remarkable Genesis 19. 22. Have thee, escaped to
Zoar, I cannot do any thing till thou come thither; what the righteousness
of one Lot to preponderate the Iniquities of all Sodom, where were thousands? O
wonder! O the weight of one Saint! away Lot, escape to Soar, I cannot do any
thing till thou come thither: but were not their sins great and many? be it
so yet I cannot do any thing till thou come thither: but were not their sins
full? Yes, they were, yet I cannot do any thing till thou come to Zoar. I but
Lord art thou not come down to execute Judgment without mercy: Its truth yet
I cannot do it till hou come to Zoar; my hands are tied, fire and brimstone
will not come down from Heaven while Lot's in Sodom. Thou art the man that
hinders all, Be gone, have to Zoar, but Lot lingers and will not make have,
then I must linger also says God, if he stick my Judgments must stick, till
he be gone I cannot do any thing. Here Is the worth and excellency of a
righteous man, he keeps off Judgments, even brimstone Judgments from a City
and a Kingdom.

Great things will God do for a good man's sake, 2 King. 2^. 6. I will defend
this City for mine own sake, and for my servant David's sake, God joins David
with himself, and puts great honor upon him, its* ^swell for his sake as for
Gods, that Jerusalem is defended. The Saints are dear to God, he does much for
them, and for their sakes and shall they not be dear to you: there is a choice
Prophecy in 1 Zach. 12. 5. the Governors of Judah shall say in their hearts,
the Inhabitants of Jerusalem my strength in the Lord of Hosts their God, they
were newly come out of Babylon, their enemies that opposed them in the work of
the Temple, and Reformation were many, the number of the godly was few, yet
their eyes were upon them. The Governors of Iuaah said in their heart, the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, my strength in the Lord of Hosts their God, every
Governor looked at all the godly in Jerusalem, and account of them as his
strength in particular, and they looked not at the godly in themselves as poor
few, weak and despicable but they looked at them in the Lord of Hosts, their
God. They saw that those persons had interest in the Lord of Hosts, that he was
their strength and defense: Whereupon they owned them, closed with them, and
countenanced them, knowing that these men and their God would be assured
strength and sufficient defense unto them. You that are the Governors of our
Judah, cast your eyes upon the godly, and say in your hearts, these are our
strength in the Lord of Hosts their God, these have bin faithful unto us, and
we will be shields unto them, for so the word Ruler signifies, Hos. 4. 18.
(...).
Victor Vicensis tells of one that had a vision, of a Tree that reached up to
Heaven, and spread its branches far, so that all delighted in the greatness
and beauty of it, but suddenly there came a wild beast and rubbed at the root of
it, and overthrew the same. This Tree was the Church which spread through all
Africa, Hunnerick; an A^ria^ Prince was the wild Beast, who banished and
martyred the Orthodox amongst them, and laid all waste; where the Godly are
driven out there Judgments are drawn in, if men's Axes cut down the trees are
green: Gods Axes must and will cut down the Trees are dry.

Chron. 14. 3. 5. When Asa took away Altars, high places, brake the Images,
cut down the Groves then had the Kingdom quiet before him, its such trash as
Altars, Images, Ceremonies and inventions of men, which do disquiet Kingdoms,
Churches, Consciences. Men's thoughts are, that removal of them will breed
disturbance, its their standing not their taking away does it. When we go in
Gods way, breaking and banishing out of Gods worship the needless, scandalous,
and accursed things, God overules spirits which are opposite, and a Kingdom is
at rest.. Asa took the Images and high places out of all the Cities of Judah,
and yet the Kingdom was quiet; the more exact in the things of God, the better
success. God would not have the names of Idols and superstitious things left
amongst us, Hos. 2. 16, 17, 18. Thou shall call me no more Baali, Baalim must
be no more in their minds or memories, It was a good Baali my Lord.
name, but because abused to Idolatry, God would not endure it. A great name is
no great matter in man's judgment, it was much in Gods, and he would have a
perfect Reformation, not tolerate the least evil* and thereupon he makes a
Covenant with all creatures for them, and promises to break the bow, sword,
battle out of the earth, and to make them lie down safely. You see a through
reformation is the readiest way to greatest security. The Vide Ca^tw. Answ. to
Rhem. Testam. on 1 Timothy 6. 20.
Papists hope by names and terms of theirs to work in their faith amongst us*
they call our words novita^es vocum, and keep the old terms, Penance, Priest,
Mass, Altar, Sacrifice, etc. These words* say they will bring us to the faith
of our first Apostles, I beseech you therefore to dash their hopes, take away
these names and days, they so confide in Neast-eggs, yea cockatrice eggs, they
are and may Rudera veteris superstitioni erunt rudementa novae.
breed Serpents, tread them under your feet, show your selves children of that
Father who hates superstitious names, times, things, and loves a perfect work,
Esa. 1. 25. I will turn my hand upon thee and purely purge away thy dross,
and take way all thy sin. God will not endure dross and sin in the
Shekells of the Sanctuary, those things dim the glory and imbase the
substance, they must out; and because there be many adversities and great
opposition to works of Reformation therefore says God in the verse. before, I
will ease me of mine adversaries, do they hinder so needful so good, so
great and so glorious a work* ah I will ease my self of such adversaries; and
if men will not do the work my hand shall do it and do it, thoroughly. It Is
man's wisdom to do that aforehand which God will do by his judgments. In this
3 of Math 12. Christ is presented with his Fan in his hand, and resolution to
purge it to purpose. The Jews would not part with their Mosaicall Worship,
they stuck to the Ceremonies and Rites of the Temple, but because they would
not purge out the corruptions crept in, nor part with the shadow for the
substance now come* therefore Christ fanned them by a terrible judgment
destroyed, them, their Temple, and all the Formalities of it, setting up pure
and Spiritual Worship, which had they admitted, their destruction might have
bin prevented. Luke 13. 33. 34.

What corruptions are got into the worship of God, is not unknown to you, the
Worthies of our Israel, turn your hand upon us and purely purge out all the
dross is there. If things be not evident to you, make an exact scrutinie, and
whatever you find without Christ's superscription, is adulterate, he will not
own nor bless it. Ius divinum, is his stamp, and what has that Christ will
own. O suffer nothing to be in his House, which has not a divine impression
upon it, which is not after Christ, Col. 2 8. and for the future let nothing be
brought in which is after men and not after Christ; let no worldly rudiments
approach his presence, when Nadab and Abihu, brought strange fire into the
worship of God, fire went out from the Lord and made them a Sacrifice; there
was nothing against their fire, but this was it, they had no Warrant for it,
God commanded it not, Levit. 10. 1, 2. Let some fiery law go forth from you
that may scorch all such as shall hereafter dare to join their posts with
Gods, and mingle their chafe with his Wheat, and let not any laws be of
force, that may countenance such evils, uphold suspected things, or prejudice
the liberty of tender consciences, yea ways of worship which may prove snares
to you, or your Posterity; put the Axe of your power unto them, and hew them
down.

There is another thing yet, and very desirable, you have been faithful to the
Kingdom hitherto, go on still to be faithful: you are Ambassadors of the
greatest King, the great things of heaven and earth are committed to your care;
the glory of Jehovah, the Gospel of Christ, the welfare of Churches, the good
of Kingdoms; and in some respect of the whole Christian world is in your
hands. Olives and Figgetrees will not let go their fatness and sweetness, do
not you let go your faithfulness: put forth your selves, and do what you can
for the glory of God, the Gospel, the Churches, the Kingdom, the world.

All these wait and expect much at your hands, Prove. 13. 17. A wicked
messenger falls into mischief, but a faithful Ambassador is health.
Messengers of a State have power to do great things, if men will be biased
with fear, promises and selvish respects, importunities of friends, and the
like, they shall fall into mischief: God has said it, and well it shall not be
with them, but a faithful The word Messenger is Malach, which the Septuagins
read Melech, a King, and so turn it, Rex audax incidet malum, but a faithful
Embass: shall free him.
Ambassador he is health, health to his own conseience, he is health to a
Kingdom, health to the Churches, health to all. God calls to you to help Him
against the mighty; the Churches call to you to help them against corruptions,
Innovations, impositions; this Kingdom, Ireland cries to you for help against
distractions, oppressions, blood, ruin: now show your selves Helpers and
Healers. In Prove. 25. 12. it is said A faithful messenger refreshes the soul
of them that send him: It Is not the head, but the soul, the heart is refreshed
by such a man; the Hebrew is, He causes the soul of his Lord to return: and
we may truly say to your comfort and honor, that the soul Religion and the
Kingdom has, you have caused it under God to return. We were dying, Religion
and Kingdom were dying, and you have given us a little reviving the Lord
reward you fully for it: go on and show your faithfulness, bring it to
perfection, Esa. 11* 5. faithfulness is the golden girdle of Christ.

Some Expositors understand by righteousness and faithfulness, righteous and
faithful men, which are as near and dear to Christ as his girdle; a great
and glorious ornament unto him. There is much difference between those are for
Christ, and those are newters or against him: in the 17. Rev. when the Kings of
the earth shall give their power to the Beast, and make war with the Lamb,
the victory is the Lambs, and they that are with him are called, chosen and
faithful. Let not a neutralizing or oppressing spirit be found amongst you:
show your selves All now to be with and for the Lamb, His cause, His Churches,
His People and you shall have that honor as to be styled called chosen
faithful. It Is good being with the Lamb when the Axe is at the root, and
having honor from Christ when contempt is pouring down upon the heads of
others. Faithful men have the blessings, when others have blows and curses,
Prove. 28. 20. A faithful man abounds with blessings, his blessings are without
number; he shall have the blessings of the present people; the blessings of
Generations to come, the blessings of heaven, the great God will power forth
his blessings upon such, and say to them as to faithful Abraham, Genesis 12. 2. I
will bless you and make your names great, and you shall be a blessing, and
those that bless you shall be blessed: the great God will power forth great
blessings upon you, and men's curses shall never come near you; If emergents of
time should prove such as that you should not accomplish what you intend, yet
you shall not go without a blessing, Psalm 84. 5. Blessed is the man in whose
heart are the ways of God.

There is another observation for all, in which I will be brief, it is this,
That the way to save a dying Kingdom from ruin, is by bringing forth good
fruit: Now the Axe is laid to the root of the Tree, every Tree that brings
not forth good fruit is hewn down and cast into the fire. There is fruit unto
Death, Romans 7. 5. this the Kingdom abounds withal, and has brought us under
a sentence of death. There is fruit unto Holiness, Romans 6. 22. and fruit unto
God, Romans 7. 2. these last are the fruits we must bear; If our fruit be unto
holiness, it is fruit unto God, and will reprive us from death. But to bear
such fruit more then nature is requisite, Semen naturae non consurg^^ in
fructum Gratiae, It is not natural abillities be they never so great and
excellent, it is not Moral principles and virtues which will suffice: If a
(...)
man have not aliquid ampl^^^, all is nothing, his fruit is sour, Romans 8. 7.
the wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God. If you would bring forth fruit
to save your souls and a Kingdom also, you must get into Christ, John 15. 4.
Labor to be rooted in him. Col. 2. 7. who is the root of Iesse, Romans 15. 12.
you must have divine faculties, 1 John 5. 20. divine habits, Ephesians. 2. 8. divine
motions and operations, Phil. 2. 13. and after all this you must act by a
divine rule, and for a divine end and then your fruit is good, even such as
will keep the Tree from cutting down. There is great difference in trees and
fruits, there is a Vine of Sod^me as well as of Sibmah, De^t. 32. 32. Esa 16 8.
both are Vines, have their leaves and clusters: but in the one is a blessing,
on the other is a curse.

Cain and Abel go forth to Sacrifice, the one is accepted, the other despised,
the Pharisee goes to Prayer with the Publican, the one is justified, the other
condemned: The Egyptians went the same way with the Israelites, but they were
drowned where the Israelites were saved, look narrowly to your selves
therefore what trees you are, what fruit you bear. There will be distructum
judicium, and the ways seem right in a man's own eyes may prove death. Prove.
14. 12. Let not flatteries and vain pretenses undo you: what if you have been
baptized? So was Romans 12. 11. Es. 60. 17. 54 11, 12 Romans 8. 21.
Simon Magus. What if you keep fasts? So did the* Jews, and yet not fast unto
God. If you hear the Word gladly* and reform in many things so did Herod: if
you pray, Matthew. 7. 21. Its not every one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven; there is more then all these to be looked after,
you must be in Christ, not have a name to be in him, but see to it in truth,
that you be in him: The great work is to make out that you are in Christ, most
presume and are undone Aliter judicium D^i ali^r^ judicium hominis.
by it. Gods judgment and man's differ much, and you will find it when you come
to die, his thoughts are not ours. Many that think themselves figtrees will be
found brambles, and the fruit of many trees will be found naught, which has
now an excellency upon it* if you walk after the flesh and not after the
spirit, you are not in Christ, and that man is not in Christ, is Arbor
^amnab^lis a Tree for the fire.

I should now exhort all to be fruitful, time permits it not. I will only
turn my speech a little unto you, O Noble Senators, seeing bearing of good
fruit is a special means to save a Kingdom, labor to abound in every good
word and work, to bear much fruit, and fruit answerable to your
opportunities. God has planted you in this Parliament to bear some choice
fruit. If any should ask what do you here? Let your answer be, We are zealous
for the Lord of Hosts. When Esther was advanced she would not loose her
opportunities. She will in to the King, although contrary to a Law, she will
have the liberty of her people and Hamans head off, and venture Her life to
accomplish it. If I perish, I perish, chap. 4. 16. Iosia, Hezek^ah, took their
opportunities and make a thorough reformation in Judah: you know what great
things Elijah did i^spiciente and reluctante rege, 1 Kings 18. Nehemiah and
Ezra, for all the enemies scoffing cunning complyances to build with them,
taking up Arms to subdue them, they took their times, improved their
opportunities and brought forth fruit answerable to the expectation of heaven
and earth, they built up the Temple and walls of Jerusalem. It was Ahabs sin,
he lost his opportunity, in letting Benhadaa go a man that God had appointed
unto death and it cost him his life for it, 1 Kin 22. 31. Men are snared in an
evil time because they know not their time, Eccl. (...).
9. 13. You may be timeservers and observers without sin. The richest
opportunities that ever men had are in your hands, observe them and serve the
Lord in them. It Is good fruit for a Parliament to set up a faithful
conscientious Ministry all the Kingdom over, to have a care of all Schools of
learning, that no corrupt opinions or practices be there: it is good fruit to
abrogate ill Laws* to see to execution of those are good, to call for an
exacter Translation of Holy Scripture, to help Ireland, to inquire after and
countenance the Government of Christ and al those particulars you have bin
pressed unto by those you have called to preach before you on these days. Es. 60.
17. 54. 11, 12.
Have you not found the materials of our Jerusalem rubbish, iron, and brass,
now give us gold for brass, silver for iron, and precious stones for rubbish.
Now lay the Foundations thereof with Saphires* make the windows of Agates, the
Gates of Carbuncles, and all the Borders of pleasant stones; then shall you set
the prisoners of hope at liberty. These things are foretold, in their time are
to be fulfilled, and we desire your hands may help on so great and glorious a
work. The whole Romans 12. 11.
Creation groans to be delivered from the bondage of corruption, and we groan
to be delivered from such bondage: If you shall deliver us and set us in such a
condition, you shall be as Gods unto us you shall be our Ioshuahs, though not
our ^esusses, Saviors of our liberties, lives. Kingdom, Religion, All only
not of our Souls.

Lastly, let not the frut of Prayer be wanting in any: it is choice fruit, and
of great efficacy. The Ninivites Jon. 3.
cried mightily and obtained mercy. The foundation of the Jews deliverance was
laid in Morde^aies, Esthers, Est 4. 16.
and the peoples Prayers. Asaes prayers overthrew the greatest Army we read of*
2 Chronicles. 14. 9. 11. The prevalencie of Prayer is yet unknown* When the Master
bid the Gardner cut down the Tree* Luke 13. 7. The Gardner being tender of it,
interceeds, and interceeding gets the Axe removed. We are dressers of the
Garden, and shall cry to God to spare it, and give him no rest: You likewise
are principal dressers, and we hope will not fail to inter^eed for this Land
and People; the want of your prayers may retard it not ruin the business,
Exodus 32 10. Others prayers may do something* they may do much: but when Moses
prayers come they do all, Let me alone (says God) that my wrath may wax hot
against them and I will make of thee a great Nation. Behold a wonder, the great
God petitioning sinful man! and that which is yet more, man denying Gods
petition. Moses would not let God alone he would not be hired or byafled by God
himself to loose the people* he would not compound or comply with God
himself. If God would not blot out the peoples sins, he requests God to blot
him Verse. 32.
out of his Book. Moses knew he had brought them out of Egypt, engaged them in
a War with A^a^^^k, exposed them to many difficulties and dangers, and
therefore he is tender of the people and could not leave them, or any part of
them, (when he had a great opportunity to do it) unto the wrath of a provoked
King and God. verse. 12, 13.
He puts God in mind of his Name and Oath, What will the Egyptians say, and
did not thou swear to Abraham Is^a^k and Israel when thou tookest them and
their Seed to be thy people and promisedst them to be their God and Sovereign,
that thou would multiply them and will thou now destroy them; Lord do it
not, provide for thy Name, thine Oath, thy people; and what was the issue? The
Lord repented of the evil intended and spared the people. You that are the
Mosesses that sit at the Stern, and know all passages, hasten to the Lord,
pour out your hearts before him your sighs tears, prayers may remove the Axe
and secure the Kingdom, press him with Moses his Arguments and you may have
his Answer, and make us all happy by your prayers and endeavors.

FINIS.

