A GREAT VICTORY OBTAINED BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE Lord General Fairfax NEAR The
Island of Mersey, against the Forces of the Lord Goring, both by Land and Sea,
With a List of the number that were slain and taken prisoners, the Seamen
totally routed, 22 Pieces of Ordnance taken, with all their Arms, Powder,
Match, and Bullet.

Also another Fight at Wivener, within two miles of Coulchester, 16. slain, 40
taken prisoners, and the surprising of Lieut. Col. Gardner, and a Party of
Walloons, by capt. Fisher, with his Suffolk Horse.

(...) Examination before the General, and their Co^^ ^ouching their marching
up to the Walls of (...) and joining with a Party to plunder the City.

June 23 L^^^^^, Printed for R. W. Anno Dom. 1648.

C R

Another FIGHT NEAR Coulchester, betwixt the ships which came in to his
Excellency the Lord General, and the ships belonging to the Lord Goring.
SIR,
ON Monday last being the 19. of this instant, Captain Peacock and two more of
the Harwich ships, which came in to the assistance of his Excellency the Lord
General, engaged with the two ships that the Forces in Colchester had to lay
open the River, and secure their passage in and out, and had a very desperate
fight, discharging several broad sides, and were often upon boarding, but
still repulsed by each other, with exceeding gallantry and resolution, the
Docks being very well manned with half pikes and other necessaries for War.

This conflict continued for the space of half an hour, the victory being very
doubtful on which side it would be given, till at the last a party of our
Dragoons were sent from Mersey Fort, who joined with the Sea men, and fought
resolutely; but at the last the victory were given to our party, for by the
assistance of the Landforces, the Seamen boarded the Enemies two ships with
the loss of 7. men, three slam and two wounded, killed a Boston, and 7 or 8
Mariners, took about 60. prisoners, 22. pieces of ordnance, 70. Sea muskets,
100 half pikes, two Tun of Match, 9. Barrels of powders, great store of
Bullets, and plenty of provisions, both for cheese, Biskets, Butter, salt
Beef, etc.

The Enemy hearing that their ships were engaged, they hastened to send supplies
for their relief, which they did. but before they could get to them, both the
ships were seized on, the men secured, and the prize brought ashore; but
because this party should not lose their labor, a party of the Lord Generals
engaged them at Wivenall, a Village they hitherto possessed, fought with them,
killed 16. and took 40. prisoners, with the loss of 7 men.

One of the Frigots which were taken carried 12. piece of ordnance, the other
ten; the one is sent away, the other stays here.

We have had several skirmishes with the Enemy, within these two or three
days, they are a very resolute and obstinate party, but we have diverse of them
prisoners, and amongst the rest, a party of Walloons, who were going to the
Enemy, extraordinary well mounted and as well armed with Blunderbasse Pistols,
each of which would carry seven Bullets: this party was intercepted by the
Suffolk horse commanded by cap. Fisher, who after a short dispute, took most of
them prisoners, and seized on their Horse and Arms.

Lieut. col. Gardner, once Vice-governour of Far^ington house, with about 30.
more, were also set upon by a party of our Horse, and secured, and were brought
prisoners to the General.

And upon their examination before his Excellency, they confessed, that their
intent was to go through Colchester into Suffolk, so into Norfolk, and back
through Cambridgeshire, by which time they should have a gallant Army, and then
they would up to the very walls of London, where their own party would join
with them in plundering that Rebellious city; and then how shall the Royalist,
Independent, or Presbyterian be distinguished? and must all be involved in
ruin.

The great Work upon the top of the Hill is finished, it holds 1000. men, the
great Canons are planted, and upon Monday last they began to play, 8 Piece;
were discharged six several times together.

The General has received a Letter from Sir William Masham, and the rest of
the Committee under restraint in Colchester, intimating, That they made it
their request to his Excellency, to enter into a Treaty for peace, and in the
same Paper a line or two signed, Norwich, Capel, Lucas, That they thought fit
to give the Committee leave to sign that paper, and that they intended by it a
general peace. No answer as yet returned, and believed the Committee was
forced to sign this paper.

The party in the town are fortifying, and endeavor provisions from Tendering
Hundred, which cannot be considerable, nor yet prevented, unless the Suffolk
forces were come up, for whom col. Whaley is gone; they are imposing a fine
upon the town, forcing all between 16. and 60. to bear arms, and are preparing
horse-mils, and hand-mils to grind their corn.

The Lord General begun a work yesterday at the North gate, and the Soldiers
maintain it with much gallantry and resolution.

The Trumyeter with a message for a treaty is not yet returned, nor must not,
till the Morter-piece and Grenades come up, and then accept of what the
General offers, else Thunderbolts and Grenades will be their doom.

They have twice marched out with foot and long Boats to regain Mersey Island,
but returned with loss, for our Forces fell upon them, and beat them back into
the town.

The soldiery begins to despair, but the Earl of Norwich feeds their fancies
with vain delusions, telling them, That the General had sent a Trumpeter to
them, offering to draw off, bid them chew their bullets all the Roundheads in
London were plundered, only their friends had left some for them, as deserving
it. And he further intimated, that Maj. Genesis Langdale with 10000. men were
within 15. miles, and would fall on the Generals Rear very suddenly.

On Monday the Bells in the 16. Parishes rung till night, for joy of the
blowing up the Parliament house, for so it were suggested to the soldiery.
They keep no Matches ligted, unless upon duty.

The General has set forth a Proclamation against the straggling Soldiers of
his Army, which follows in these words.

WHereas I am informed that many Soldiers of the Army do ordinarily absent
themselves from their quarters and cullers, and straggle about the country,
whereby much opportunity and liberty is taken to plunder and abuse the country,
and commit many outrages, the guards and other services are neglected, and some
are taken prisoners by the Enemy; for prevention whereof for the future, since
the pretense of seeking for victuals, under which this liberty has been taken,
is now provided against, by an orderly course of supplying the Army with
provisions: I do hereby order and require, That henceforth no Soldier or
Officee do presume to straggle a mile from the Leaguer, or stir away from their
Colors and duty, under pain of being severely proceeded against recording to
the Articles of War in that behalf; And all officers are hereby required twice
at least in every 24. hours, to call over the List of the soldiers in their
respective Troops and Companies, and to take special notice of such as shall
at any time be found absent without order or leave, that they may be duly
proceeded against, and punished as aforesaid.

Given under my hand and seal, June 16. 1648. T. FAIRFAX.

Since the proclaiming of this Order, the Soldiery keeps together, which does
prove far more disadvantagious to the enemy, then formerly, by reason our
Guards are more strong and secure, and able to oppose the enemy upon any
attempt whatsoever, which they have since found, and smarted for; as appears
by their late attempt this morning upon two of our Guards, near the North gate,
who upon their sallying forth, our Sentinels discovered them, and gave fire,
which gave an allarm to the Guards, who immediately were in a readiness to
receive them, and upon the Enemies advance they fired at each other, but did
not dispute the business long, for upon the approach of a party of Horse, the
Enemy retreated, our men pursued, and in the pursuit took 15. prisoners, killed
6. with the loss of one Corporal, and a private Soldier.

From the Headquarters near Colchester June 21. 8. at night, 1648. Imprimatur

G. M.



FINIS.

