GREAT NEWS FROM THE North of England; BEING A DETECTION OF A LATE Plot. (or
Conspiracy:) Against the Present Government.
LICENSED, And Entered according to Order.

HIS Most Sacred Majesty, King William, ever since His Accession to the
Imperial Crown of these Realms (rightly considering, that Mercy is one of the
most splendidst Gems, that truly adorns a Crown) has extended his Clemency even
to the greatest of Offenders; Amongst a number of other Instances, particularly
to the Officers and Soldiers of the Lord Dunbarton's Regiment, after every
Soul of them had forfeited their Lives, by their Notorious Defect or rather
Rebellion, near the Isle of Ely; And his Majesty's so often recommending to the
Last Parliament, and his taking Care to have presented to the Present, a Bill
of Indemnity, that, if possible, He would oblige the most Obdurate of his
Subjects, to Acts of Loyalty and Obedience; yet, notwithstanding all this
Princely Condescension, its too too plain and evident, that there are many
Roman Catholics, and other Jacobites, so notoriously disaffected to our
present happy Constitution, that they are not to be allowed, or drawn by the
Chords of Mercy and Clemency; which is plainly demonstrated from their late
detected secret Cabals, and Treasonable Conspiracies in the North of England,
to disturb the Government in His Majesty's Absence; but let them have a care,
least it should befall them, what the Lord Chief Justice Scroggs told Coleman,
ne Catalus qui them relinquendus; for Orders are already gone down to have
several taken into Custody.

Likewise, their almost daily Paper Plots, or Treasonable Pamphlets, which by
their Factors they secretly disperse, to endeavor, if possible, to poison the
Minds of many of His Majesty's well-meaning Liege People; for the prevention,
an some Measure, of the said design of theirs, I reccommend the Reader to the
following Admonitions.

How much Europe in general, and this Kingdom in particular, has suffered by
the Bloody Zeal of Furious and Cruel Papists, is known to every man of common
Understanding amongst Us; Therefore it behooves Us, of this Nation, to consider
our Danger and former Sufferings, and grow so Wise, as not to run the same
Hazard again, as we were lately like to be brought into, in the Days of James
the II; or trust they will prove more kind, than they have been heretofore; We
may assure our Selves, if Experience has not taught us to use all means to
avoid their Cruelty, it has now taught them, how more effectually to work our
Destruction. All the Repentance that ever I heard they have shown, is, only
that they did not more thoroughly Root out their Adversaries, when they had the
Power in their own Hands; and that is all we must look for, if ever God, for
our Sins, should suffer Abdicated King James to prevail again. For, whatever
fair or specious Pretenses may be alleged against our present happy
Constitution and Settlement, by the Jacobites, and other more Slyer Enemies.
King James's General Liberty of Conscience was but the Gilded Bait to delude
us; 'Twas really our Religion, our Estates, Liberties, Lives and Fortunes,
which that Prince, and his Popish Crew thirsted after; For if ever they should
prevail, the Liberty they promise us, would end in Slavery, the Wealth in
Beggary, and the Happiness in Confusion. The Horror of Queen MARY's Days, the
several Bloody Plots and Conspiracics in Queen Elizabeth's, and King James the
First, the Massacre in France, and the Rebellion and Horrid Massacre in
Ireland, 1641. are not yet blotted out of our Minds; and the late and Inhumane
bloody Practices of King James, and his bloody French and Irish Crew, since his
Landing There, we have daily Instances of almost before our Eyes; neither have
we forgot the lamentable Miseries and Destructions of our late Civil Wars,
which were chiefly fomented and stirred up by them.

If therefore the Preservation of our Holy Reformed Religion, our Estates,
Lives and Fortunes, the Benefit of our Posterity, the true Peace of the
Kingdom, the preventing of Popery, Athesm, and Confusion, and the common Rules
of Justice, be any Motives to work upon Us, I hope, it will be the Endeavors,
and constant Care of all true Englishmen, to keep out Tyranny and Popery, and
heartily maintain the Religion and Government, which is now established amongst
Us.

LONDON: Printed for W. Sturt, in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1690.


