A Great VICTORY Obtained by COLLONELL SCROOPE

Against the Duke of BUCKINGHAM, at Saint Needs in Huntingtonshire. On Monday
July the 10th. 1648.

Where was slain Col. Dolbier, Quartermaster General. 3 Officers more. 8
Troopers.


Taken Prisoners: Earl of Holland, 30 Officers and Gentlemen, 120 Troopers.


The Duke of Buckhingham fled with 200 Horse.

Taken besides.

200 Horse, 150 Fire Arms, 100 Great Saddles. Powder some pounds. Silver, and
gold and store of other good plunder. The Earl of Hollands blew Ribbon and his
George.
LONDON, Printed for the general satisfaction of moderate men. MDCXLVIII.

THE Duke of BUCKINGHAMS speech to the Magistrates of St. NEEDS.
Gentlemen,
WE come not hither to carry any thing from you, but have given strict order,
that neither Officers nor Soldiers take what is yours away. Nor are our
intentions to make a new war, but to rescue the Kingdom from the Arbitrary
power of the Committees of the several Counties that labor to continue a
bloody war, to destroy you. Our resolution for peace is, by a well-setled
Government under our Royal King Charles, and do bless God that he has made
us instruments to serve the King the Parliament, and Kingdom, in the way of
peace.

A LETTER of the Gallant Victory obtained at S. Needs by Lieutenant Colonel
Scroop, against the Duke of Buckingham, the Earl of Holland, the Lord of
Peterborough, and between 4 and 500 horse.
Honored Sir,
WE have again given the Duke of Buckingham, the Earl of Holland, and the rest,
a notable brush.

Since we gave them the former defeat at Kingstone, they marched toward St.
Albands, and so by Dunstable, and Breckhilts.

It is supposed that they had a design, to have gone toward Lincolnshire, but
the news of Coll. Rossiters good success (as is supposed) hindered them.

They feared to draw nearer to Northamton, least the Lord Gray should way lay
them from the Counties of Leicester, Nottingham, and Derby, as nimbly as his
Lordship assisted Col. Rossiter.

Sir Michael Livesey took care to stop all places, to hinder their marching
back into Kent.

And Lieutenant Coll. Scroop, was sent with seven Troops of Horse to pursue
them toward the Eastern association, lest they should attempt Lynne, or some
other dangerous place, that if they did stop, he might fall upon them.

The Lords with the Cavaliers were in number, then, between 4 and 500 all
horse, but, as they went, left diverse tired by the way.

Their custom was, that when they came into fresh quarters, they would declare
to those Towns where they came, and make speeches to court the Magistrates and
Inhabitants (at which the Earl of Holland had a better faculty then at the
sword).

I have sent you herewith the substance of one of the speeches made to the
Inhabitants of the Town, by the Duke of Buckingham, The Earl of Holland, and
the Earl of Peterborough did the like.

But by that time they came hither, the Earl of Holland was so weary, and
shaken in his joints, that he had a better will to his bed than his horse,
especially not knowing the end of his distracted journey.

And yet for all their speeches and Declarations, their manner was, upon
removing of quarters (till when all was pretty fair) to leave their Carriages
and meanest Soldiers to follow, and they both plundered horses, and pillaged
houses, and did much harm, whereby they lost the affections of the Country very
much, so that they were ready to give any reasonable assistance to our men that
pursued them.

And the Earl of Hollands Innes were pretty well known, whereby they were the
better trased.

On the Lords day (at night) they took up their quarters in this place, but
with a great deal of fear.

A council of war was called that night, by the Lords and Officers, at which
they had some debates which way to march the next morning.

Quartermaster General Dolbier (who was an old Officer of the late Lord
General the Earl of Essex,) had joined with them, and was esteemed an eminent
Officer among them, to whose advice they much adhered.

And he engaged to make good this Town of S. Needs, against any party that
should pursue them, and that he would engage his life, which he would loose
rather then see them surprised there that night.

Dolbier watched (and drunk Sack stiffely) that night, and all was quiet.

But a little before Sunrising, this morning then came an alarm to this Town,
which made the Cavaliers cry, all to Horse, Horse, The Lords, and chief
Officers being most of them then in bed.

The Duke of Buckingham was not long before he was up, dressed, and mounted, and
so others. But the Earl of Holland took more Deliberation to dress him.

About Sunrising Lieut. Col. Scroop came up to the Towns end, where he found
some opposition, but both he and the rest of the Officers and Soldiers were
very resolved.

Dolbier made some opposition, but in the charge was slain with some twelve
more, and then they all began to retreat, and fled some one way, some another,
the Duke went with nigh 200 toward Huntington, whether Lieutenant Coll.
Scroop, is pursuing them. We have taken here almost 200 Horse, and nigh 150
prisoners, amongst whom the Earl of Holland, who was got out of his bed, but
had not quite dressed him, to whom quarter was given, that he may turn round
once again.

A List of the Particulars of the great victory obtained by Coll. Scroope
against the Duke of Buckingham at St. Needs in Huntington shire, on Monday July
10. 1648.
Slain. Coll. Dolbier, Quartermaster General. 3 Officers more. 8 Troopers.

Taken Prisoners. Earl of Holland. 30 Officers and Gent. 120 Troopers. The
Duke of Buckingham fled with 200 Horse.

Taken besides. 200 Horse. 150 fire Arms 100 great Saddles. Powder some
pounds. Silver and gold and store of other good plunder. The Earl of Hollands
blew Ribbon and his George.

FINIS.
woodcut of a man


