AN EXPOSITION CONTINUED UPON the sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth,
eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth CHAPTERS of the Prophet EZEKIEL, WITH USEFUL
OBSERVATIONS THEREUPON.

Delivered in several LECTURES in London, By WILLIAM GREENHILL.

PROVE. 4.7, 8. Wisdom is the principal thing, therefore get Wisdom: and with
all thy getting, get understanding.

Exalt her, and she shall promote thee: she shall bring thee to honor when
thou do embrace her.

LONDON; Printed by M.S. for Hanna Allen, at the Crown in Popes-head-Alley.
1649.

TO ALL LOVERS OF DIVINE TRUTHS; Especially the Undertakers for the Expositorie
Lectures in the City of LONDON.
THe infinite and only wise GOD, has annexed to the Ministry, Conversion,
Acts 26 18. Regeneration, 1 Cor. 4.15. the addition of sinners to the Church,
and to himself, Act. 2.41.47. Chap. 11.24. faith, Romans 10.14. 1 Cor. 3.5. the
perfecting of the Saints and edification of the body of Christ, Ephesians. 4.12.
Collation of the Spirit, Gal. 3.2. Act. 10.44. yea salvation, Act. 11.14. 1
Cor. 1.21. 1 Timothy 4.16. Now notwithstanding the Ministry be the great Medium
and Appointment of God to effect and accomplish such needful and glorious
things: yet some there be that thrust hard at it, and endeavor to throw it
down. But were it removed, and the pernicious desires of men fulfild herein, a
sadder judgment could not befall the Nation. Solomon the firstborn of
Wisdom says; Where there is no Vision, the people perish, Prove. 29.18. Where
the Word of God is not expounded, preached, and applied to the several
conditions of the people, there they perish. Feriabitur populus, says
Montanus, they will be idle, keep holy day, cease from doing the work of the
Lord, and do the works of the flesh and darkness. Piscator reads it, nudatur
populus, the people is made naked; They are like men without clothing, without
armor, exposed to wind and weather, to spiritual storms and temptations,
having nothing to defend themselves. The Vulgar is, dissipabitur populus, lay
aside preaching and expounding the Scriptures, the people will be scattred, run
into errors, wander up and down as sheep without a Shepherd. Pagnine has it,
rebellis erit, the people will be rebellious, they will not be kept in order,
obedience, and subjection to authority; for where means of knowledge are
wanting, there must be ignorance, and ignorance is the mother of rebellion.

When Queen Elizabeth, whose memory is precious, was instigated by some
ill-affected to the Ministry, to abridge the number of Preachers, E.G.
Archbishop of Canterbury was much troubled at it, and wrote her a learned and
serious Letter about it, out of which having the Manuscript by me, I have
thought fit to transcribe and commend unto you what follows.

I cannot marvel enough, how this strange opinion should once enter into your
mind, that it should be good for the Church to have few Preachers? Alas
Madame, is the Scripture more plain in any one thing, then that the Gospel of
Christ should be plentifully produced? and that plenty of Laborers should be
sent into the Lords harvest, which being great and large, stands in need of
not a few but many workmen. There were appointed to the building of Solomon's
material Temple an hundred and fifteen thousand artificers and laborers,
besides three hundred and thirty Overseers, and shall we think that a few
Preachers may suffice to build and edify the spiritual Temple of Christ,
which is the Church. Christ when he sends forth his Apostles, says unto
them; Ite praedicate Euangelium omni creaturae. But all Gods creatures cannot
be instructed in the Gospel, unless all possible means be used to have a
multitude of Preachers and Teachers to preach unto them. Habitet sermo Christi
in vobis opulenter, says Paul, Col. 3. And to Timothy, Praedica sermonem,
insta tempestive, intempestive, argue, increpa, exhortare, which thing cannot
be done without often and much preaching. To this agrees the practice of
Christ's Apostles; Qui constituebant per singulas Ecclesias presbyteros, Act.
14. Paul likewise to Titus writes; Hujus rei gratia reliqui te in Creta, ut
quae desunt pergas corrigere and constituas oppidatim presbyteros: and
afterward describes how the Presbytery should be qualified, not such as we
are compelled to admit, by mere necessity, unless we should leave a great
number of Churches utterly desolate, but such indeed as were able to exhort Per
sanam doctrinam and contradicentes convincere. And in this place I beseech your
Majesty, to note one thing necessary to be noted, which is this. If the Holy
Ghost prescribe expressly that Preachers should be placed oppidatim, how can it
well be thought that two or three Preachers may suffice for a Shire. Public
and continual preaching of Gods Word is the ordinary means and instrument of
the salvation of mankind. St Paul calls it The ministry of reconciliation of
man unto God. By the preaching of Gods Word, the glory of God is enlarged,
faith nourished, and charity increased, by it ignorance is instructed, the
negligent exhorted and incited, the stubborn rebuked, the weak comforted, and
to all those that sin of malicious wickedness, the wrath of God is threatened.
By preaching also, due obedience to Christian Princes and Magistrates is
planted in the hearts of Subjects: For obedience proceeds of conscience,
conscience is grounded upon the Word of God, and the Word of God works this
effect by preaching, so as generally where preaching is neglected, obedience
fails. No Prince ever had more lively experience hereof then your Majesty
has had in your time, and may have daily. If your Majesty come to the City
of London never so often, what great gratulation, what joy, what concourse of
people is there to be seen, yea what acclamations and prayers to God for your
long life, and other manifest significations of inward and unfeined love joined
with most humble and hearty obedience, are there to be heard? Whereof comes
this Madame, but of the continual preaching of Gods Word in the City, whereby
that people has been plenteously instructed in their duty toward God, and
toward your Majesty. On the contrary, what bred the Rebellion in the North?
Was it not Papistrie, and the ignorance of Gods holy Word through want of
preaching? And in the time of that Rebellion, were not all men of all estates
that made profession of the Gospel, most ready to offer their lives for your
defense? in so much that one poor Parish in Yorkshire, which by continual
preaching had been better instructed then the rest, Halifax, I mean was ready
to bring three or four thousand able men into the field, to serve you against
the said rebels. How can your Majesty have a more lively trial and
experience of the contrary effects of much preaching, and little or no
preaching, the one working most unnatural disobedience and rebellion, the
other most faithful obedience.

By this part of the Letter, you see, how firm the Archbishop was for
preaching, and that he has fully confirmed that sense of the words; Where
there is no vision or preaching the people will rebel, and if he would not
yield to the abridging of preachers, why should any desire the abolishing of
them? and so make way for the people to be idle, naked, scattred, rebellious,
yea for their perishing. It was one of the saddest times that ever Israel had,
when Israel was without a teaching Priest, 2 Chronicles. 15.3. then they had no
peace within nor without, but great vexations were upon all the inhabitants of
the Countries, even all the ten Tribes. This being without a Teaching Priest
was such an affliction, as that the Lord promised his people afterward, that
what affliction soever befell them, this should not, Isa. 30.20. Though the
Lord give you the bread of adversity, and water of affliction, yet shall not
thy Teachers be removed into a corner any more: but thine eyes shall see thy
Teachers. This is a gracious promise for the continuance of the Ministry.
They had the law, and should have Teachers to instruct them therein. We have
the Gospel, and Teachers to instruct us therein. The Church and Ministry may
be hid, Rev. 12.6. but not extinct. Christ is a King, the government is upon
his shoulder, he has a Kingdom, and it knows no end, Isa. 9.6, 7. Luke 1.32,
33. his Throne is for ever, Heb. 1.8. He therefore has promised to be with his
Church, and the Ministry thereof unto the end of the world, Mat. 28.20. (...).
Not to the end of that age, but of the world; for so the word (...) signifies,
Math. 13.39, 40. the harvest is the end of the world; and so shall it be in the
end of the world. Christ's Kingdom and Officers of it were not only for the
Apostolical and primitive times, but for all times and ages, Ephesians. 3.21. 4
Chap. 11, 12. Rev. 7.14, 15:11.19. otherwise what hope were there for Jews or
Gentiles. If one should leave the Jewish Synagogue, and the other Heathenisme,
whether should they come, if Christ have no true Church, no visible Kingdom.
Herein himself has satisfied us, Joh. 10.16. Other sheep I have which are not
of this fold, them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice, and there
shall be one fold and one Shepherd. The fold was the Church, the sheep to be
brought in, the Gentiles, who were not brought in in Christ's days, nor all in
the Apostles days, or Primitive times; some are yet to be brought in, and
therefore there is yet a fold, and Ministers to cause them to hear the voice
of Christ, that they may come into this fold. For whom he predestinates he
calls, Romans 8.30. and his calling is not immediate, but by the Ministry of
the Word. And though the Ministry now be not infallible, as the Apostles
were, but fallible; yet their fallibilitie does not make void their calling,
nor cause the Churches to be reputed false, as not having the Word of God
taught in them infalliblie. For those holy men who were Prophets and Apostles,
you may find sometimes failing. Nathan faild when he bid David go and build
the house of the Lord, 2 Samuel 7.3. David was out, when he said, he was cut off
from before the Lords eyes, Psalm. 31.22. and when he said, All men were liars,
Psalm. 116.11. Jeremie spoke like a man, when he said, I will not make mention
of him, nor speak no more in his name; and especially when he cursed the day
of his nativitie, and the man brought tidings thereof, Chap. 20.9.14, 15, 16.
Jonas spoke from himself, not from God, when he said, Take my life from me;
for its better for me to die then to live; and I do well to be angry unto
death, Jon. 4.3.9. And Paul professes he had no Commandment of the Lord
concerning Virgins, but gave his judgment as one that had obteind mercy of the
LORD to be faithful, 1 Cor. 7.25. Now though these men had such failings,
spoke from their own spirits, yet were neither the Churches falsified hereby,
nor their callings frustrated. That which was needful to be the Rule and
Standard, was given out by an infallible Spirit. The Spirit of truth took of
Christ's, showed it to them, and led them into all truth. And while the
Ministers now do bring that truth unto you they are infallible. If in their
constructions, interpretations, and expositions of the same, they vary or be
out, you ought to try the spirits, 1 John 4.1. and to hold fast what is good, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. not despising prophecyings, least you quench the Spirit. Its ill
when any destroy commands of God to maintain their opinions. Some would have
the Word only read, and that there should be no preaching, or ^xpounding of
it. It was not the Eunuchs reading, but Philips preaching that wrought faith
in him, Act. 8. The spices of the Scripture send forth the strongest and
sweetest smells, when they are bruised and broken. The fire of the Sanctuary
yields most heat and light when stirred up and blown. Its neither fleshly,
devilish, nor teason to the Father, to make constructions upon the Prophets
and Apostles, and expound their meaning. If so, then Ezra and others who read
the Law and gave the sense of it, Nehem. 8.8. sinned, were fleshly, devilish,
and traitors to the Father. Then Paul gave ill counsel to Timothy, to divide
the word of truth aright, 2 Timothy 2.15. How children should have their milk,
young men their bread, old men their wine, and that only by reading, I see
not. If that could be surely Christ needed not have appointed a wise and
faithful servant over his household, to give them meat in due season, Mat.
24.45. If we may not expound the Word because we are fallible, then why should
any translate the Word out of the Original Tongue into others, seeing they are
fallible, and may, yea have mistaken therein, as well as others in expounding
and preaching: and because it is so, some little regard the Scriptures, Vid
H^n^^^ (...) A^^^ pro Ec^l (...).
expecting Euangelium spiritus sancti and tertium Testamentum. The Jews look
for Messiah, the Papists look for Henoch and Elias, but without warrant, and
so do these men for another Gospel, Gal. 1.8, 9. and extraor^inary men, who
may raise up Churches, and declare what is truth. I beseech you, be content
with, and thankful for those precious, glorious truths the Lord has given you
in the Law and Gospel, studying to know them more fully, and endeavor to yield
unto the Author of them the obedience of faith; acknowledging it an
unspeakeable gift, that you have them, with Preachers and Expositors amongst
you, to further you in the knowledge and practice of them. If this ensuing
Work shall contribute ought that way, I shall be abundantly satisfied therein.
In hopes whereof I commend both it and you to the blessing of the Lord,
subscribing my self

September. 28. 1649. Yours in this Work of the Lord to love and serve, W.G.

An Exposition upon more Chapters of EZEKIEL.
CHAP. VI.
1. And the Word of the Lord came unto me saying,

2. Son of man, set thy face toward the mountains of Israel, and prophecy
against them,

3. And say, Ye mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Lord God, Thus
says the Lord God to the mountains and to the hills, to the Rivers and to the
Valleys; Behold, I, even I, will bring a sword upon you, and I will destroy
your high places.

4. And your Altars shall be desolate, and your Images shall be broken, and I
will cast down your slain men before your Idols.

5. And I will lay the dead carkases of the Children of Israel before their
Idols, and I will scatter your bones round about your Altars.

6. In all your dwelling places the Cities shall be laid waste, and the high
places shall be desolate, that your Alters may be laid waste and desolate, and
your Idols may be broken and cease, and your Images may be cut down, and your
works may be abolished.

7. And the slain shall fall in the midst of you, and ye shall know that I am
the Lord.


IN this Chapter you have,

First, a command to Prophecy, in the two first Verses.

Secondly, the Prophecy it self; in which are three thing:

First, A threatening of desolation to the Land of Judea, the Idols, Altars,
and men thereof; in the 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, Verses.

Secondly, a promise of mercy unto them in their scattered condition, verse 8,
9, 10. Some should escape the Judgments, repent of their evil way, and know
the Lord.

Thirdly, a prefiguration of the grief they should have for the Judgments to
come upon them; which are repented, Verses 11, 12, 13, 14.

Junius observes this Prophecy to have been on the Sabbath day, the one and
twentieth of the fifth month, in the sixth year of their Captivity, and on the
twenty eighth day of the same month, the Prophecy in the next Chapter, and on
the fifth day of the sixth month, the Vision in the eighth Chapter.

God honored his own day, with giving out his Word by Revelations and
Visions; that day they rested from their labor, and were fittest to hear,
see, and receive divine thing. It was now above a year since Ezekiel had his
first Vision; for that was in the fifth day of the fourth month, and fifth
year of the Captivity, this in the sixth year and fifth month.

The Prophets had not all communicated to them at once, but by degrees, as
infinite wisdom saw best, and the Church understands not all at once what
they wrote, but now a little, and then a little, as it pleases God to let in
light.

Verse. 2.
Set thy face toward the Mountains of Israel.
Turn thee unto them, speak boldly, and freely, Prophecy their destruction.
The Mountains of Israel were diverse: There was Mount Ebal, and Mount
Gorizzim, Deuteronomy. 27.12, 13. Mount Carmel, 1 Kings 18.19. Mount Horeb, 1 Kings
19.8. Mount Zem^raim, 2 Chronicles. 13.4. Mount Gilead, Cant. 4.1. Mount Ephraim,
Joshua 17.15, Mount Naphtali, and Mount Judah, Joshua 20.7. Mount Hermon, 1 Chronicles. 5.23. Mount Lebanon, Judges 3.3. Mount Tabor, Judges, 4.6. Mount Bethel,
Josh. 16.1. Mount Moriah, 2 Chronicles. 3.1. Mount Zion, Psalm. 125.1. Mount Olivet,
Luke 19.37. which is called the Mount of corruption, 2 Kings 29.13. because
Solomon had built there High places for Ashtoreth, Chemosh, and Mileome; and
not only in that, but diverse other of these Mountains, were Altars and
Images, which provoked the Lord; and therefore he bids the Prophet to prophecy
against them.

He speaks to the Mountains, Hills, Rivers, and Valleys, to hear the Word of
the Lord. This kind of speaking sets out the weightinesse of the Prophecy, the
vehemence of affection, and seemed to convince the Jews of their
insensiblenesse and incurablenesse; they were so hardened in sin, that there
was as much hope of doing good to these creatures, as to them by the Word.

Here is a Prosopopeia, attribution of sense to dumb creatures, Res
insensibiles videbantur suo modo sentire, sensus autem compotes non sentichant.
which is frequent in Scriptures, Deuteronomy. 32.1. Give ear Oh ye Heavens and I
will speak, hear Oh Earth the words of my mouth. So Jer. 2.12. Isa. 1.2.
Hence the earth it is said to tremble, the hills to move at the wrath of God,
Psalm. 18.7. Psalm. 76.8.114.7. Winds and Seas to obey, Matthew. 8.27. All
creatures are more ready to obey the will of their Creator, then man it.
Apostrophees are therefore often made from the sensible and rational Creatures,
to those that are void of both; to set out the stupidity of Man, and his
unworthiness of the Word. The Lord passes by the Masters, and looks to the
Servants, neglects Men, and speaks to the Mountains, that so he might provoke
them to consider.

To the Rivers. The vulgar is Rupibus, to the Rocks. (...)
Aphikim in the Hebrew does signify Channells, Isa. 8.7. Psalm. 18.15.
The King of Assyria shall come up over all his Channels, and go over all his
banks. 2 Samuel 16.22. The Channels of the Sea appeared. It signifies also the
waters that run in the Channels, Job 6.15. As the stream of brooks they
pass away. And Psalm. 126.4. As the streams in the South. Hence it is rendered,
Rivers, Joel 3.18. Ezekiel. 35.8. from Aphak, which signifies to contain and
corroborate, and both these the Channels do; they contain the Waters, keep
them within their bancks, and strengthen them being kept together, so that they
run with force, and bear burdens.

The Septuagint has it (...), which notes Thickets and woody places which use
to be about waters.

Valleys. By the water sides, and in the Valleys, they provoked God, Jer. 49.4.
Why gloryest thou in the Valleys? They trusted in their flowing and fat
Valleys, Isa. 57.5. They enflamed themselves with Idols under every green
Tree, slaying the Children in the Valleys, under the clifts of the Rocks. And
Jer. 32.35. They built the high places of Baal, which are in the Valley of the
son of Hinnon, to cause their Sons and Daughters to pass through the fire
unto Molech; and this Valley was afterward called, The Valley of slaughter,
Jer. 19.6. and the reason is given, Jer. 7.32, 33. they had slain their
Children there, and God punished them with a great slaughter there, and defiled
the place with their blood, which they had formerly defiled with their sin.

A Sword upon you. That is, the Assyrians, armed with instruments of War,
they should come and lay all waste, break down Altars, cut down Groves,
dig down Hills, dry up their Channels, and let out their waters.

The high places. They are first mentioned in Leviticus, Chap. 26.30. They were
Mountains or Hills where the people worshipped, 2 Chronicles. 1.3.
taken from the practice of Heathens, who chose out pleasant places, woody
Hills and recesses, where they built Chapels, Temples, and Altars to their
gods. Numb. 22.41. Balack brought Balaam into the high places of Baal, where
there was a Temple or Chapel, for the worship of Baal, and therefore in the
next Chapter, he bids him make seven Altars, that they might worship their god
Baal there. Heathens had many such places, Deuteronomy. 12.23. Ye shall utterly
destroy all the places wherein the Nations served their gods upon the high
Mountains, the Hills, and every green Tree, you shall overthrow their Altars,
break their Pillars, burn their Groves with fire, hew down the graven Images
of their gods, and destroy the names of them out of that place. God would not
have his people to worship him in any heathenish ways, or with heathenish
Rites; but they built themselves, High places, Images, and Groves, on every
high hill, and under every green Tree, 1 Kings 14.23. Jeroboam made an house
of high places, 1 Kings 12.31. They were to sacrifice in the Tabernacle: when
they had special and prophetical warrant, they might sacrifice any where, and
after the Arc was taken, which had stood at Shiloh, 343 years, and was
moveable from place to place, then it was lawful for the people to offer in
the high places. Before the Temple was built, notwithstanding the destruction
of the High places threatened by Moses, Levit. 26.30. By Amos, Chap. 7.9. by
Hosea, 10.8. and other Prophets, many of Gods people sacrificed in the high
places, under Trees, and elsewhere; as Gideon, Judges 16.19. Samuel, 1 Samuel
9.19. David, 2 Samuel 24.25. Solomon, 1 Kings 3.4. Manoah, Judges 13.19. Elijah,
1 Kings 18.31, 32, etc. God accepted their sacrifices, and wincked at this
error, but their sacrificing after, in the high places, did bitterly provoke
God, and the complaint was, that the high places were not taken away, 1 Kings
22.43. 1 Kings 15.14. They continued till Hezekiah's days, who removed them, 2
Kings 18.4. But Josiah utterly destroyed them out of the Land, 2. Chron. 34.3.
Yet those Kings that came after, restored them again. It is said of Jehoahaz,
He did evil in the sight of the Lord, according to all that his Fathers had
done, 2 Kings 23.32. Verse. 4. (...)


Your Images shall be broken. Hebrew Chammanechem, the Sun Images. Chammah
is a name given to the Sun, Job 30.28. from Chamam calere, because of the
great heat thereof, and Chammanim is Sun Images. Hence Jupiter Hammon, who
had a famous Temple in Africa, wherein was the Image of the Sun, as A Lapid.
in Levit. 26.30. has it: Macrobius, lib. 1 Saturn. c. 23
and Macrobius shows, that Jupiter and the Sun were the same. The Idolatrous
Jews were accustomed to worship the Sun, 2 Kings 23.5. Ovid. l. 2. Metam.
They burnt incense to the Sun: And because the Heathens were wont to worship
the Sun under the figure of a Chariot and four Horses: it is said, The
Kings of Judah gave Horses and Charriots to the Sun, v. 2. The Rabbis think
these were living Horses, which drew a Chariot daily toward the East, and some
fitting in it did salute the Sun in the Kings name; others more probably
conceive these Horses and Chariots were pourtrayed Effigies, set up at the
entering in at the house of the Lord, in honor of the sun, and so set above
their Altars, 2 Chronicles. 34.4. Buxtorf, and Junius call them, Subdiales statuae,
Statues that stood a broad, and were exposed to the Sun. Aben Ezra thinks they
were houses, or Chapels, made for the worship of the Sun. I conceive they
were Images set up for that purpose; you have mention made of them, in Isa.
27.9.17.8. Some think they were little Courts wherein were Altars and fire
preserved upon them, in honor to the Sun. Calvin thinks them so called, ab
aestu, because Idolaters run after them, as Adulterers do after Whores:
Others from Chemab furor, Deod. on Levit. 26.30.
because they are carried with fury to that service. Vid. Buxtorf. in Chamam,
Isa. 57.5. Inflaming your selves with Idols.

I will cast down the slain men. This seems a strange speech, slain men
are not standing, It is also to profane, pollute.
need not casting down: The Hebrew is (...) which the Vulgar renders
interfectos vestros. They are slain men, that fall down to Idols, that serve
other Gods, men appointed to be slain, or confossos vestros, your wounded men:
For Shalal is perforare, and its probable that many being wounded by the
Chaldeans, would fly out of Jerusalem to the Hills, Altars, Groves, and Idols,
for safety, and there the Lord would destroy them before the Idols; their
enemies should find them out, and make an end of them, Hosea 10.8. They shall
say to the mountains cover us, and to the Hills fall on us. They were in great
fear, distress, and hid themselves, yet that prevented not their death, Jer.
12.12. The spoylers are come up upon all high places through the Wilderness:
for the Sword of the Lord shall devour from the one end of the Land, even to
the other end of the Land, and no flesh shall have peace. They should find no
favor at their Altars, in fight of their Idols.

Idolaters conceit, that the gods, in honor of whom they set up their Altars
and Images, will relieve them in distresses, and turn aside evil from them;
but it should not be, they should find no mercy: Sennacherib was slain before
Nishrosh his god, Isa. 37.38.

It is also in the 5. and 6. verses.
Before their Idols. -- Gillulim, dunghill gods, excrementitious Deities, from
Galal, dung: So its rendered in the 1 Kings 14.10. Quod circumvolutions
emittitur, even man's dung, which is most loathsome and unsavory.

This name is put upon Idols, to show how they do stinck in the nostrills of
God, and make the Worshippers of them filthy stinking creatures; they are like
Swine, that feed upon, and wallow in dung. Idols defile the soul and body
both; for usually spiritual uncleanness, and bodily, do go together:
Idolatry, and Adultery, are companions, Jer. 5.7, 8. They worship other gods,
and neigh after their neighbors Wives. Idols do defile and cause defilement,
Ezekiel. 22.3. Thou make Idols against thy self, to defile thy self. V. 5.
Altar polluitur contactu cadaveris, Calv.


I will lay the dead carcasses of the Children of Israel, etc. They should want
burial, be exposed to open shame, their Altars be defiled with blood and
bones, Josiah polluted the Altar with the bones and carcasses of dead men, 2
Kings 23.16, 20. And Jeremy tells of the bones of Kings, Princes, Priests,
Prophets, Bones, blood, carcasses, pollution because they are signs of death,
and fruits of sin.
and Inhabitants of Jerusalem; that should be taken out of their Graves, be
spread before the Sun, Moon, and host of Heaven, whom they worshipped, and
not to be buried; but should be for dung upon the face of the Earth. They had
served dunghill Idols, and God would make them dung; yea, in the place where
they had so sinned, should they suffer this heavy judgment, even before the
Idols. The Jews used to bury the bones of their Kings, with Gold, Silver,
costly Garments, Crown, Scepters, and Arms: Prophets, and other chief men,
had some precious things buried with them. Josephus tells, Lib. 13. Antiquit.
Lib. 10.
that Hyrcanus took out of David's Sepulcher, 6000 Talents. Curtius tells of
Alexander the Great, that hearing there was much wealth in Cyrus Sepulcher, he
commanded it to be opened, but found none. The Caldeans being covetous, would
search their Sepulchers for wealth, scatter the bones of the dead in disgrace,
and leave them as dung upon the face of the Earth; this Judgment Moses had
foretold them of, Levit. 26.30. I will cast down your Images, and cast your
carcasses upon the carcasses of your Idols. Their worship seemed holy to
themselves, but God would pollute it with their own Carcasses. That which is
of great account among men, is an abomination unto God.

V. 6.
In all their dwelling places their Cities shall be laid waste, etc. Here is
the extent of the judgment, to all their Cities, where ever they dwelt; all
their Cities were defiled with Idols, and Idolatrous worship, Jer. 11.13.
According to the number of thy Cities were thy gods, Oh Judah, and according to
the number of the Streets of Jerusalem, have ye set up Altars to that
shameful thing, even Altars to burn incense to Baal.

Superstition and Idolatry are spreading things, they quickly get into all the
Cities of a Kingdom, Isa. 2.8. Their Land is full of Idols.
and streets of Cities, and head of every high way, Ezekiel. 16.25. Therefore all
the Cities of Judah are threatened, Jer. 1.15. and 9.11. I will make Jerusalem
heaps, a den of Dragons, and the Cities of Judah desolate without Inhabitants.

Dan and Bethel, the Prophets could never get them down, till the Sword came:
The high places stood many hundred years, and were not fully put down till
Josiah's days, and quickly after they were up again. Has not Antichrist and
his abetters, brought in false worship, tyrannical Government into the Church,
and held it in, many hundred years? What ado has there been among us, to
pluck up Popery and Prelacy, which are not yet fully done?

Israel, and laid the Cities thereof waste. Hos. 10.5. The Inhabitants of
Samaria shall fear, beoause of the Calves of Beth-aven. Hosea 13.2, 3. They
had Images and Idols, kissed the Calves; therefore they should be as the
morning cloud, the early dew, as chafe and smoke, verse. 9. Oh Israel thou
have destroyed thy self: thine own Idols have wrought and brought thy
destruction, Isa. 10.11. Samaria and her Idols were destroyed, and such
destruction threatened to Jerusalem and her Idols: And Abijah knew that the
Calves would ruin Jeroboam and his great Army; and therefore says, 2 Chronicles.
13.8. With you are the golden Calves.

away. Sins of this nature make God jealous, furious, cloth himself with
vengeance, and do terrible things, Jer. 2.11. Israel had taken in other gods,
and it follows in the 15 verse, The young Lions roared upon him and made his
Land waste, his Cities are burnt without Inhabitant. God looked upon them as
already burnt. You have the indignation of God against Idolaters and idolatrous
places, fully set out in the 13 of Deuteronomy, from the twelfth verse to the
end. God is so incensed against Idolatry, that he will not endure the Cities
and places where it is.
If the men of a City did fall to Idolatry, the Men and Cattle must be all
destroyed with the edg of the sword, the City and all in it burnt with fire,
and never be built again; and they must not meddle with any accursed thing:
when this is done, God will turn from the fierceness of his anger: Nothing
kindles Gods wrath more then forsaking of, and corrupting his worship. Has not
Popery and popish inventions, cost the Christian World much blood, and the
ruin of many places? Babylon must be destroyed for her whoredom; and Rev.
14.9. If any man worship the Beast and his Image, and receive his mark in his
forehead, or hand, the same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which
is poured out without mixture, into the cup of his indignation, and he shall be
tormented with fire and brimstone, ando. God is severe against false worship
and worshippers. God will lay waste all places and persons rather then not have
men's works out of his worship.

Ahaz would have in Altar Damascenum, and we Altar Romanum. Exodus 20.4.
That men love to have somewhat of their own in worship; they are not content
with what the infinite wise God commends unto them, but will be adding: here is
much of man's mentioned: your high places, your Altars, your Idols, your
Images, and works. The second Commandment shows that man is prone to be
meddling and making something in worship, till he mar all. The people quickly
forgate God, Service Book was patcht together by additions of men.
and made a Calfe, when Moses was in the Mount; and their hearts ever hankered
after Heathenish Gods, Rites, and Ceremonies. Psalm. 106.29. They provoked him
to anger with their inventions: They were given to changing, and adding of
their own, and their additions provoked God: And why so? They were taken more
with their own, then with the Lords: They went a whoring with their own
inventions, Ver. 39.
they pleased and delighted them, as Adulterers are more delighted with their
whores then their Wives; but they are defiling delights, they were defiled with
their own works.

aliquid facis and terrae, they are like their Authors. That which pleases God
must come from God, be set up by him and carry unto him. That which he
appoints, he approves, its pure: that which man brings, he abhorres; its
spurious, pollutes his Ordinances, frustrates his commands, Matthew. 15.6.
therefore such plants God will pluck up, such works he will break down.

Jehovah, not an Idol god, but the true, the living God, that have being of my
self, that give being to my promises and threats, that take being from others;
you would not believe my Prophets, but you shall know there was truth in their
threats, and power in me to make them good.

CHAP. VI.
8. Yet will I leave a remnant, that ye may have some that shall escape the
Sword among the Nations, when ye shall be scattered through the countries.

9. And they that escape of you, shall remember me among the Nations, whither
they shall be carried captives, because I am broken with their whorish heart,
which has departed from me, and with their eyes which go a whoring after
their Idols: and they shall loath themselves for the evils which they have
committed in all their abominations.

10. And they shall know that I am the Lord, and that I have not said in vain,
that I would do this evil unto them.


HERE is the second part of the Prophecy, viz. A promise of mercy.

The eighth Verse is of the nature of the third Verse in the fifth Chapter;
where the Prophet was bid to bind up a few hairs in his Skirts: And here GOD
would leave a remnant, the Sword, and dispersion, should not devour all.

Gods wrath is never so hot against his people, Obser.
but he will show mercy to some. God would bring a sweeping Judgment, lay
Mountains, Hills, Rivers, Valleys, Cities, High places, Altars, Idols, Images,
waste and desolate: yet he would leave a remnant, preserve some, when in the
midst of their enemies, amongst Babylonians, and other Nations.

In the fifth Chapter, verse 12, God would scatter them, and draw out a Sword
after them. It was great wrath, to be driven out of their Country, to be in
banishment, which Lawyers call a civil death; because men in it are divided
from their friends, liberties, and comforts, which sweeten their lives; but to
have the Sword at their heels, added to the weight of wrath, threatens all
their lives; yet notwithstanding this condition, God reserved some from the
Sword in their banishment. They might upon this severe prophecy think, what
will become of the Church, shall all perish, and Gods faithfulness fail? No,
God would have a care of that, a remnant he would save. Storms may be so
terrible and lasting, that the C urch may be brought low, not be visible, yet
it shall never be extinct: when the Prophets were cut off by Jezabel, there
were a hundred hid in Caves by Obadiah, 1 Kings 18. When Elijah thought
himself alone, and his life at the stake too, the Lord told him there were
seven thousand in Israel lay dormant, which had not bowed their knees to Baal,
1 Kings 19.18. When Herod slice all the children in Bethleem, and all the
coasts thereof, from two years old and under, yet Christ escaped, he was
preserved: And as in that storm God preserved the head, so in every storm he
will preserve the body. At the Massacre in France, all Protestants were not cut
off, and the Wars of Ireland have not devoured all. The Church shall never
cease being, the gates of Hell shall never prevail against it.

9.
And they that escape of you shall remember me, etc.
In this verse is the fruit of divine mercy toward them:

First, They shall remember me.

Secondly, Loath themselves for the evils they have committed.

Thirdly the ground of both these, Because I am broken with their whorish
heart, and whorish eyes.

Fourthly, the place where they should do it, Among the Nations.

Remember me. They shall know then that I am God, infinitely differing from the
gods that they have chosen, that my wo^ship is spiritual, and admits not
mixtures of men; they shall remember my holiness, that I hate all false ways
of worship; my Justice, that I have not done any wrong to them in ruining their
Country and Temple, and scattering them in all quarters: they shall remember
my bounty and love to them, and how they forgate me and abused all; they shall
remember my mercy in preserving them from the Pestilence, the Famine, the
Sword, and their taunting Adversaries; and say, we all deserved to have been
destroyed and rooted out for ever; but the Lord is gracious, ha^h had
compassion on us and spared our lives, we will therefore repent of our ways,
return to him, trust in him, and give glory to his name; all which are employed
in the word Remember. So it is used, Psalm. 137.1. There is remembrance and
we^ping joined together. Psalm. 22.27. there is remembrance and ^urning, Psalm.
20 7. Remembrance is there for trusting. Psalm. 63.5, 6. Praising and remembering
go together; and when men fall to Idolatry, they are said to forget God,
Judges 3.7. implying that remembering of God is to worship him his own way, and
so to glorify his name.

Broken with their whorish heart.
The Vulgar reads it Actively, I have broken their heart. The word is Passive,
Nishbarti, I am broken: Here is great difference, and the Vulgar is cor^upt,
and the Greek mistakes, which reads it, (...), I have sworn to their hearts:
the ground of which error is, they took it to be Nishbagnti for Nishbarti: Some
would have it, I have bought their whorish hearts, that were for Idols and any
thing but me: because the word is twice or thrice in the Scripture used in that
sense, Genesis 41.57. All Countries came into Egypt to Joseph for to buy Corn.
Hishbar. ad frangendum: Montanus reads it: Hammashbir faciebat, frangere,
Montanus.
And 42.6. Joseph sold to all the people of the Land, and so in the fifth
verse: But the common sense of the word is to break, and its truly rendered, I
am broken with their whorish heart.

God had taken this people to be his, as a Man takes a Woman to be his Wife;
but they had whorish hearts, and went out from God to Idols: they had a spirit
of whoredoms in them, that caused them to err, and go a whoring from under
their God, Hos. 4.12.9.1. They were not content with Gods love, his Ordinances,
his worship, but they would try what the gods of the Heathen were, what their
way and worship was, prostitute themselves to them, and this troubled the sight
of God, afflicted hi^ soul, brake his heart, as a man's is by the whorish acts
of his Wife. We say, a Man or Woman break much, that have much trouble,
jealousy, care, sorrow: God was troubled with, jealous of, careful and
sorrowful for his people above all others, and this even brake the heart of
God: Their courses grieved him exceedingly: great grief vexes the heart, and
lies like a mighty weight upon it: Hence that in Amos 2.13. Behold I am
pressed under you, as a cart is pressed with sheaves: The grief God took at
their courses was as a great load upon his spirit. Gods eye beheld their
courses, and his eye affected, yea afflicted his heart: Lam. 3.51.
The Vulgar reads it, Oculus meus depraedatus est animam meam, has taken away
the virtue, spirit, and life thereof.

Whorish heart.
A heart hankering after Idols, pleading for them, delighting in them, and
prostituting it self unto them; this people was much addicted unto this sin,
which is often expressed by the name of whoredoms and whoring, Levit. 20.5.17.7.
Judges 2.17.

This sin is so called,

First, Because it is a breach of Covenant, as whoredom is: God marries his
people to himself, he is for them, and they should be for him only, Exodus
20.23. he is a Husband to them, Jerem. 2.2. Hosea 2.19. And now to leave him
for Idols, is to deal treacherously with him, Jerem. 3.9.20. Deuteronomy. 31, 16.

Secondly, Its a pleasing sin, as Whoredom is: Hence all Israel is said to
go a whoring after Gideons Ephod, Judges 8.27. and Isaiah 66.3. Their soul
delights in their abominations, they please their senses, give some
satisfaction to blind consciences, help on their devotions, as they conceit,
which affects much.

Thirdly, Its a defiling sin. Whoredom is a defiling sin, and so is Idolatry,
and all false worship. Exek. 22.3. Jerusalem makes Idols against her self to
defile her self. Acts 15.20. they are called (...), pollutions, and pollute
the persons and places where they are, Jer. 3.9. As pure worship sanctifies, so
false Worship pollutes, Revel. 14.4. They were not defiled with Women: Not with
false Worship, with the Whore of Babylon, or any of her inventions; but were
Virgins that kept themselves chaste, not going out from God to the corruptions
of any.

Fourthly, It hardens, stupifies, makes impudent, Prove. 7.13. and so Idolatry
produces such effects; hence the Jews which were given to it, are called
Impudent Children, Ezekiel. 2.4. Hard hearted, Ezekiel. 3.7. Sottish Children, Jer.
4.22. Jezabel stirred up Ahab to Idolatry, they were both Idolaters, 1 Kings
21.25, 26. they were hard hearted, impudently wicked, Jer. 2.20. Its called
playing the harlot
bloody and cruel; Naboth, and the Prophets were slain by them.

Fifthly, It inflames, and Idolatry does so, Isaiah 57.5. Inflaming your selves
with Idols, slaying the children in the Valleys.

With their eyes which go a whoring after their Idols: Its evil when the
heart follows the eye, worse when the eye follows the heart; this notes
habitual evil, the other but occasional. Their eyes as well as their hearts,
went a whoring; they looked, and lusted; their eyes were eyes of adultery, 2
Pet. 2.14. Ahaz saw the Altar at Damascus, and he must presently have such an
one up at Jerusalem, 2 Kings 16.10. Men follow the sight of their eyes, Eccles
11.9. The lust of their eyes, Its bad when eyes are in amore duces, worse when
in religione duces.
as John calls it, 1 John 2.16. And sensual men are led by the eye in point of
worship, as in point of Women, Ahaz was: But men's eyes and hearts are ill
Factors for worship. Numbers 15.39. Remember all the Commandments of the Lord,
and do them: and that ye seek not after your own heart, and your own eyes,
after which ye use to go a whoring. The eyes are the spies of the body, they
give information to the heart, that lusts, whoredom is committed, and God is
provoked to jealousy. The eyes are called whorish, because they are
Internuncii adulterii and Idololatriae; they dislike, forsake the beauty of
Gods worship, Truth, Ordinances, and spy beauty in corruption, in false
Worship, Superstit^on, Idolatry, men's additions, they see a Decorum in them,
are pleased with them, and draw the heart to them.

They shall loath themselves.
The Vulgar read it, Displicebunt sibimet, they shall displease themselves.
Calvin, pudefient, they shall be ashamed. Junius, fastidium erunt sibiipsis,
they shall be a loathing to themselves; the Hebrew has more in it: (...) Vel
(...) ingem scere. Septuag. is (...).
Nakottu ingemiscent, says Montanus; they shall so sigh and groan, that you
shall see it in their faces. Shindler, offensi sunt in faciebus suis ad mala;
when they saw what they had done, it was offensive to them, and they smote
themselves upon the face for grief: The word notes a cutting, Lavater.
succidentur, Maldon. excindentur: when a man is so ashamed that he dare not
behold God or Man, he is l^ke a man cut down: So its used, Job 10.1. My soul
is weary of my life; its the same word, and rendered in the Margent, cut off:
his sorrow was piercing, and cutting, such should be the condition of those
here, their Idolatry and other evils should be carnifices qui corda eorum
discerperent. There should be actus contritionis ex suiipsius and peccati
displicentia. The meaning is, they should have much shame, sorrow, and breaking
of heart for their sins.

10.
And they shall know that I the Lord, etc.
They shall know experimentally, that I speak and threaten not in vain,
punish not unjustly, but order all things for my glory and their good.

Gentiles, they should remember God: that is, repent, return, and trust in
God, honor him, praise him, and worship him the right way, Psalm. 78.34, 35.
When he slew them, then they sought him, they returned and enquired early after
God, and remembered that God was their Rock, and the high God their Redeemer.
When death devoured some, and mercy delivered others, then their hearts were
affected, and God seriously thought upon. Never is the heart in a better frame
toward God, then when it has been in the jaws of death, and is set at
liberty from the King of terrors. David made the sweetest Psalms when he had
the greatest deliverances, Psalm. 18. the 46.103. and many other; which made him
say, Thou liftest me up from the gates of death, that I may show forth all thy
praise in the gates of Zyon, Psalm. 9.13, 14. God brings his people into trouble
that he may deliver them, and that they may remember him. Psalm. 50.15. I will
deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me: That is, effectually, not in a low,
faint, formal degree: such great deliverances as give life, should cause those
they concern, to look strongly, and live wholly unto God, to glorify him in all
things, to remember him at all times, and to show forth all his praises.

Babylon, a polluted, Idolatrous, heathenish place; there the lives of some of
them are preserved, they being under heavy pressures from God and man, yet they
are brought to know God, to loath themselves and their former ways: these were
times wherein they had no sacrificing, little or no help for their souls, but
lay in darkness, and notwithstanding all this, God showed mercy; neither their
sins, nor the sins of the place, both which were great, nor the time of
wrath they were under (for so its called, Isa. 54.8.) could obstruct the free
grace of God, but some he spares, some he touches with the lively sense of
their sins, and puts into a state of grace in the midst of enemies, of sins, of
judgments. God could show mercy in Babylon as well as Zyon: let the holy Land,
holy City, holy Temple, holy Altar, holy Sacrifices, and all the holy things be
laid waste, and persons be brought to the greatest improbabilities of finding
mercy, be as great sinners as any living, as these were, and in Babylon; yet
God is free, can, will, does, show mercy even to such, in such a place, and at
such a time, when his wrath is pouring out. Manasseh was a great sinner, a
Murderer, an Idolater, a Sorcerer, carried into Babylon, and in the eye of
all, in a hopeless condition; yet there God visits him, his spirit breaths and
blows upon him, 2 Chronicles. 33.11, 12, 13.
he humbles his soul greatly, prays effectually, is returned to Jerusalem,
and knows the God of his Fathers. Nothing could keep off God from showing
mercy. God took Abraham, the Father of the Faithful, from Vr of Chaldaea, he
found favor among Idolaters, and God showed mercy to his Posterity, Genesis 6.
Acts 2.
even in that Land. When all flesh had corrupted its ways, yet mercy was
shown to Noah. Yea those put Christ to death had their hearts pricked: To the
Gentiles that had lived in abominable Idolatries, God granted repentance unto
life, Acts 11.18. There is nothing in man, in any place or time, that can
impede God from showing mercy; that, is an act of his will, nothing in us moves
him to it, nothing in us hinders him from it. I will have mercy on whom I will
have mercy, and I will have comp^ssion on whom I will have compassion, Rom 9.15.

they shall remember me, because I am broken with their whorish hearts: had
they broken Gods heart, he had cause to have broken their bones, and destroyed
them utterly, but the Lord would deal graciously with them, and in stead of
destruction, cause them to remember him, to loath themselves, and to come in to
fear and serve him. They would not fear, remember, and honor God in Zyon
where they had the Prophets, the Ordinances of God, and mercies of all sorts,
but provoked God to plague them, and when they were ripe for destruction, and
nothing to be expected but severity, even then does God deal graciously with
them. Isa. 57.17, 18. says God, For the iniquity of his covetousness was I
wroth and smote him: I hid me and was wroth, and he went on frowardly in the
way of his heart: He adds sin to sin; in a presumptuous manner, and what could
be looked for now but destruction? Does the great and glorious God smite, and
does man sin more? Yes: he does, and God sees it; and what then? I have seen
his ways and will heal him; Not wound him more, not destroy him, but I will
heal him: I will lead him also, and restore comforts to him and to his
mourners. Isaiah 43.24, 25. Thou have made me to serve with thy sins, thou
have wearyed me with thine iniquities: And what then? I, even I, am he that
blotteth out thy transgressions, for mine own sake, and will not remember thy
sins. Gods thoughts are not as man's; that which is argument of death in man's
apprehension, is argument of mercy and life in Gods. Psalm. 25.11. David knew
it, therefore presses God with an argument, might have undone him in the
judgment of reason. O Lord pardon mine iniquity, for it is great. God might
have said, therefore will I not pardon thee, because thy sin is great: I have
suffered much by thee, by thy murder and adultery, and think thou that I
will pardon such great sins? Is this an argument to come to me withal? I have
as great wrath as thou have sins; thou art a man of death for what thou have
done, thou should dye by the Law for thy murder, and dye for thy adultery,
and thou have given the sentence thy self; The man that has done this shall
surely dye, and bound it thou have with an Oath, as the Lord lives, 2 Samuel
12.5. and therefore dye thou must, thou shall. Such language as this might
David have looked for; but he hears of pardon, and that from the mouth of a
Prophet: and when he moved God with the argument of the greatness of his
sins, he did it in the judgment of faith, knowing it would be much for the
honor of God, to pardon great sins; that he was as ready to show mercy, as
his sins had made him ripe for judgment, Hosea 2.13, 14. Israel followed
Baalim and forgate God, had he not now cause to destroy her: It was Gods way
to destroy such, Psalm. 73.27. Yet it follows, Therefore behold I will allure
her, and bring her into the Wilderness, and speak comfortably unto her:
Because she had fo^got God, God would remember her, because she had been
drawn away by Idols, God would allure her from Idols, because she had vexed
God, he would comfort her; Here God lets out choice mercy, when he had cause to
execute severe wrath. When Peter had denied Christ thrice, and forswore him and
the knowledge of him, was there not cause that Christ should have renounced
him, smitten him with some great Judgment, Matthew. 26.72, 74.
and made him an example for Selfe-confiders, and Christ-denyers, to the end of
the World? Surely Christ had cause enough, and the opportunity for it was fair
before him; but Christ turned and looked upon Peter, and in stead of ruining
him, rayses him.

False worship does most afflict God. I am broken with their whorish heart.
Their Idolatries, Superstitions, and corruptions did not simply displease or
grieve God; but oppressed, afflicted, broke the heart of God; great injuries
enter deep, work strongly, eat up the spirits of any they are done unto; and
what greater wrong can be done to God, then to set at naught his counsels, to
forsake his Worship, to withdraw from his Government, and to proclaim to the
World, that there are better ways then his, and better Gods then himself.
Those are Idolatrous, and worship God a false way, they do so by God;
therefore, Jer. 3.5. its said of them, that they did speak and do evil as
they could, men cannot do more to break God, then to worship Idols, wrong
gods, or the true God a wrong way. Such sins break Gods Covenant, Deuteronomy. 31.16.
This people will go a whoring after other Gods, forsake me and break my
Covenant. They break Gods silence, Jer 2.12. Be astonished Oh ye Heavens,
etc. They break Gods patience, Isa. 43.24. Thou have wearied me with thine
iniquities: And here they break even God himself, I am broken with, etc. The
heart should be only for God and his ways, as the Wife should be for the
Husband and his commands, and when God sees the heart which is his by Creation,
by command, by purchase, and by desert, to be after false ways, base
inventions, and giving that honor to them, is only due unto himself; this
pricks him at the heart, and is taken extremely evil, it makes Gods soul to
abhor a people, Levit. 26.30. To loath Zyon, Jer. 14.19. Bring any thing to
one that has an Antipathy against it, and that thing afflicts him grievously,
it makes him fear, sweat, faint, and sometimes swoone away: God has a true
Antipathy and great, against all false ways of Worship; when any therefore is
brought near him, its that puts the Lord more to it then any thing. Levit.
26.11. I will set my Tabernacle amongst you, and my soul shall not abhor
you: That is, I will delight in you, while my Tabernacle and Ordinances are
with you. Amos 5.26, 27. But when the Tabernacle of Molock is amongst them,
when they set up ways of their own, then God abhorres them, and will send
judgments upon them. Let not us retain any thing that tends that way, no
Names, no Ceremonies, no Gestures.

The works of men in Gods worship steal away the hearts of the Worshippers:
They had Idols, Altars, Groves, Images, and High places, and whatever pretenses
they had to color over things with, their hearts went a whoring after these,
and departed from God. There is much, yea all in false worship, that suits with
carnal hearts; therefore that which is of God being spiritual, above the
reach of flesh, yea contrary to corruption, its burdensome and neglected; and
that which is of men being suitable unto man, is closed withal: In Popery you
see how their hearts are taken with that which is from Popes, Prelates,
Councels, their Music, Vestments, Perfumes, Pictures, Images, etc. have their
hearts; and let them pretend they do help their Devotion with these, help up
their hearts more to God, its not so, these steal away their hearts from God;
they are more delighted with these, then with the pure worship of God: Be they
Idols or Images made use of in worship, its all one, that distinction will not
heal a Papists Idolatry, nor fetch back his whorish heart to God, for the
Hebrew word Pesel is in Scripture used promiscuously for both, (...)
and put for an Image, Isa. 44.9, 10. and Imagery superstition draws away the
heart from God, as well as Idolatry.

Were not men affected lately with Innovations, and that so much, that the
Ordinances of God were laid by: what the heart affects that goes up, what it
sleights that goes down, as in Isa 29.13. when the hearts were removed far
from God, then the precepts of men had interest in Gods worship, and what men
commended to them their hearts advanced.

That being in pure worship, is being with God: While they kept to Gods
Ordinances, and were hearty in them, they were with God, but when they
corrupted them then they departed from God.

That men's eyes are Instruments of great evil: They had whorish eyes, they
were the inlets of Idolatrous and sinful motions, which firing, inflamed the
heart after Idols. No sense does more mischief to the soul then the eye; its
an imperial ranging sense, and fetches in far and near, matter of danger
into the bosom, Prove. 17.24. The eyes of a fool are at the end of the Earth.
The Scripture makes mention of a mocking eye, Prove. 30.17. an offensive eye,
Matthew. 5.29. a beamish eye, Mat. 7.3. an evil eye, Prove. 23.6. a lofty eye,
Psalm. 13 1.1. a wanton eye, Isa. 3.16. a painted eye, Ezekiel. 23.40. ad^^terous
eyes, 2 Pet. 2.14. and here whorish eyes, they are the windows at which sin
creeps in: the Prince of darkness convays many works of darkness by the eyes:
the Serpent deceived Eve by the eye, Genesis 3.6. Achan saw a goodly Babylonish
Garment, and a wedge of Gold, and so was snared, Josh. 7.21. Sampson saw an
Harlot and was taken with her, Judges 16.1. Its the color of the Wine invites
the Drunkard to excess, Prove. 23.31. Ahab saw Naboths Vineyard lay
commodiously for him, and so was set on work to cover it, 1 Kings 21.2.

The eyes open the doors first and soonest to let Idols into the heart, and
when they are in, the heart sets the eyes on work to delight in them, Ezekiel.
18.6. They lift up their eyes to behold Idols; they were delectable things to
them, Isa. 44.9. Great use does Satan make of the eye by corruption that is
within us, and the Creature that is without. Job knew it, and therefore makes a
Covenant with his eyes, and would, not only not see, but not think of a Maid,
Job 31.1. and if he did see any object that pleased and stirred corruption, he
would not let his heart walk after his eye, Verse 7. David would not set any
wicked thing before his eyes, Psalm. 101.3. He prays unto God to turn away his
eyes from beholding vanity, Psalm. 119.37. And mine eyes are ever toward the
Lord, Psalm. 25.15. and not only should we have care of our eyes, but of our
hearts also; for such as our hearts are, such will our eyes and other senses
be; if the heart be whorish, the eyes will be whorish; if the heart be
covetous, the hand will be covetous; if the heart be froward, the tongue will
be froward: Therefore Solomon advises to keep the heart with all diligence,
Prove. 4.23.

That true penitents have their hearts affected for their sins and loath
themselves for the evils of their ways: They shall remember me, Ut voluntatis
complacentia ad peccandum, sic voluntatis displicentia ad contritionem
requiritur, na^ unumquodque ut ait Chrysostom. per quascunque causas nascitur per
easdem dissolvitur.
whom they have broken with their sins, be affected with it, and loath
themselves for the evils they have committed in all their abominations.
Repentance is not a sudden or slight sorrow, but that which goes deep and
enters into the heart, as the word here imports, such sorrow as should make
them loath themselves, sigh and groan, smite, yea cut their faces. The
Scripture expressions touching repentance and godly sorrow, are of like nature,
and show the heart is deeply wounded therein, Zach. 12.10.

Its set out by mourning, as for an only Son, and being in bitterness, as
for the loss of a first borne: its drawing of water and pouring it out before
the Lord, 1 Samuel 7.6. Its the breaking of the heart, contrition of the spirit,
Psalm. 34.18. The rending of the heart, Joel 2.13. Plowing up of the fallow
ground, Jer. 4.3. Traveling in child birth, Jsa. 26.17. Pricking of the heart,
Acts 2.37.

All which evidences that repentance is an heart business, it works strongly
upon that, and brings it up to loathing; when the heart is truly penitent,
what it before loved and delighted in, it loathes and abhorres; the voice of
Ephraim repenting, is Hos. 14.8. What have I to do any more with Idols, I now
loath them, will not lift up mine eyes or hands unto them, nor speak a word
for them, nor think of them, Jer. 31.19. After that I was turned I repented, I
smote upon my thigh, I was ashamed, yea even confounded because I did bear the
reproach of my youth: I had sinned in my former days with Idols, false worship,
satisfied my lusts, but now I am confounded with the shame and reproach of
them: Now I loath them, and cannot endure them, Isa. 31.7. when they are turned
unto God: In that day shall every man cast away his Idols of Silver and Gold:
they cannot stand before Repentance, no more then Dagon before the Arc: After
God had scourged and purged them with the Babilonish Captivity, its observed
that they could never abide Idols more, nor would suffer any to come up unto
the Temple: When Caius Galigula sent his Statue to Pretronius President of
Judea, to honor it with a place in the Temple; the Jews professed they would
dye rather then behold that abomination in the Temple; if that came there, they
would not come there; if that lived, they would dye: This is the nature of true
Repentance, that what ever Errors, false Worship, ways, lusts, things it
delighted in before, now it loathes as dung, as filth, and abhorres as
Pestilentiall and deadly: The Jews repenting, cursed their Idols, and their
own madness in running a whoring after them.

Here be three evidences of the reality and truth of this Repentance.

Diotrephes affects pre-eminence, but true Repentance will make the greatest
loath himself, Repentance sees what black defiled creatures they are, Ezekiel.
20.43. You shall remember your ways wherein you have been defiled, and shall
loath your selves in your own sight. A repentant eye sees matter enough of
selfe-abhorrence. Job 7.5.
When Job saw his sores, filth, and worms, in his flesh, he loathed himself,
but not so much as when he saw the sins, sores, 42.6.
and lusts of his heart; then he abhorred himself, and all had excellency in
it before, he though fit to be buried under dust and ashes.

in sin; which is the contrariety of it to Gods will, the offense of Divine
Majesty, its burdening God himself, breach of union between him and their
souls, its violation of his Law, it pollutes the soul, hardens the heart,
turns the Gospel of Christ, all mercies, and means of Grace to our hurt, and
is a foundation of eternal Ruin: It was the evil of sin and not of
punishment, that David prayed against, 2 Samuel 24.10, 17. Psalm. 51.2.

They shall loath themselves for the evils which they have committed in all
their abominations: Its not one or two, but all, comes into question when the
heart is in a penitent way, Ezekiel. 20.43. Then shall you remember your ways,
and all your doings wherein you have been defiled, and ye shall loath your
selves in your own sight, for all your evils that you have committed: Sins,
great or small, in any place, with any person, or thing, but especially of
worship, come into, fall under censure and are abhorred: Manasseh, when he was
humbled in Babylon, he loathed his practices in Zyon, and took away all the
Altars that he had built in the Mount of the House of the Lord, and in
Jerusalem, and cast them out of the City, 2 Chronicles. 33.15.

Let us look back, see the evil of our ways, especially in worship, and loath
our selves for the evil of them all; that we have defiled Gods Name,
Ordinances, our selves, with Altars, Crucifixes, Cringings, conformity to the
Impositions, Innovations of men, Subscriptions, Oaths of Canonical obedience,
supporting of a false and Tyrannical Government in the Church of Christ; have
been contented under a dull formal way of worship, etc. Ezekiel. 43.11. If they
be ashamed of all that they have done, show them the form of the House, and
the fashion thereof: Shame for false corrupt worship opens a door for sight of,
and entrance in of true and pure worship.

1. That before men are afflicted and humbled for their sin, Obser. Ver.. 10.
they refuse and slight the Word of God, let his Prophets come and Preach
powerfully and terribly unto them, lay Gods Judgments before them, they mind
it not, at least tremble not, but they shall know they have refused my word,
and messengers; the time is coming they shall be in Babylon, be sorely
afflicted, and then they shall know as for the precedent time, their hearts
were stout against God, his truth, his servants, and they were secure. Who has
believed our report, says Isaiah, 53. chap. 1.2. and Chap. 44.4. I have
labored in vain, I have spent my strength for naught; his hearers slighted
his Prophesies: So in Zech. 7.11, 12. They refused to hearken, and pulled away
the shoulder, and stopped their ears that they should not hear: Yea they made
their hearts as an Adamant stone, least they should hear the Law, and the
words which the Lord of Hosts has sent in his spirit by the former Prophets.

2. That a heart under affliction broken for sin, and loathing its self for
its own sins, will give due honor to the Word of God, submit to it,
acknowledge him and his Prophets, Then shall they know, etc. That is, when they
have smarted in the Captivity, been cut to the heart for their sins, loathed
themselves for all the evils of them, even then shall they know: Affliction
opens men's eyes, blows beget brains, and men come to see their Ingratitude
toward God, their abuse, neglect, contempt of means, what great loss they
have made thereby, and so mourn for each; prize the Word, tremble at
threatenings, close with promises, subject to commands, honor the Lord and his
Prophets.

The truest Penitent does most abhor himself, his lusts, his errors, his
own ways, and the more abhorrencie of these, the more complacency in Truth,
and the God of truth, such an one understands the dealings of God, acknowledges
the Majesty of God in his Ordinances, the equity of God in his Judgments, the
mercies of God in his deliverances, the faithfulness of God in his Word, and
his infinite love in Christ.

3. What God does in the world he does to fulfill his word, the providence now
extant, are accomplishme^ts of the word of God in Prophesies and Promises.
3. The Lord will not leave his Word (what ever it be) unaccomplished. They
shall know that I have not said in vain I would do this evil, that I would
afflict them. A word is in vain when its not fulfilled, inefficaciously
fulfilled, or unseasonably fulfilled, none of all these befall the Word of God,
threats, or promises, Isa. 55.11. The word that is gone forth of my mouth shall
not return to me void, but it shall accomplish that which I please, it shall
prosper in the thing whereto I sent it: If God give out a word for Wars, for
destruction of Cities, Kingdoms, Churches, for carrying into Captivity, that
word shall take place, and be effectual, Zech. 1.6. My words and my statutes,
did they not take hold of your Fathes: They overtooke them, and Arrested them.

CHAP. VI.
11. Thus says the Lord God, Smite with thine hand, and stamp with thy foot,
and say, Alas, for all the evil abominations of the house of Israel: for they
shall fall by the Sword, by the Famine, and by the Pestilence.

12. He that is far off shall dye of the Pestilence, and he that is near
shall fall by the Sword, and he that remains, and is besieged, shall dye by
the Famine: thus will I accomplish my fury upon them.

13. Thou shall ye know that I am the Lord, when their slain men shall be
among their Idols, round about their Altars, upon every high Hill, in all the
tops of the Mountains, and under every green Tree, and under every thick
Oak, the place where they did offer sweet savor to all their Idols.

14. So will I stretch out mine hand upon them, and make the Land desolate,
yea, more desolate them the Wilderness toward Diblath, in all their
habitations, and they shall know that I am the LORD.


HERE is the third part of the Prophecy, which sets out the great grief they
should have for the sore Judgments of God upon them; which Judgments are
again mentioned, Sword, Famine, Pestilence, Desolation.

In the 11 Verse, their grief is set out by Symbolicall expressions, as
Smiting with the hand, stamping with the foot, and crying Alas: And the
cause of these:

First, their sins.

Secondly, their punishments.

Smite with thine hand, and stamp with thy foot, such Gestures have been used
in contrary cases, as well in great Joy, as in great Grief, Ezekiel. 25.6.
Because thou have clapped thine hands, and stamped with thy feet, and rejoiced
in heart, with all thy despite against the Land of Israel: Its spoken of
Ammon, who used those Gestures in an Insulting way against the Jews; but in
this place, these Gestures declare their unspeakable grief for their sins
and judgments, and were usual in case of sorrow, Jer. 31.19. The Prophet
brings in Ephraim repenting, and that is a Declaration of it; I smote upon my
thigh, and was ashamed; and when God would bring terror upon his people he
bids the Prophet Smite upon his thigh, Ezekiel. 21.12. Sometime in their grief
they did smite upon their thigh, sometimes the breast, sometimes the other hand,
Smite thine hands together: So Balack did, Numb. 24.10. sometimes the head.
Homer has it often, Lib. 3. Tuscul.
(...), He smote on his thigh. And Tully mentions among other kinds of
mourning, their smiting of the cheeks, their breast, their thigh, their head.

Stamp with thy foot: In cases of great and sudden grief, men use to stamp
upon the Earth: Odyss. l. 6.
Homer speaking of Irus, about drawing of Teeth; says, (...), He stamped the
earth with his foot: And Cicero in Bruto, says, Nulla pedum supplosio, There
was no stamping with the feet.

Alas: In Hebrew, (...) The Septuagint, and Theodotian renders it Euge, and
make it a note of rejoicing and exalting, because Idols were destroyed, and
Gods Judgments executed; but its upon mistake of Ach for Heach, which is Euge,
but Ach is always a note of grief, and that exposition of theirs, suits not
with the subject matter, which is Sin and Judgment: Its well rendered by
Jerome, Heu, and by our Translation Alas, a word constantly used to note
grief, Josh. 7.7. Israel fell before Ai; Joshua rends his Clothes, fell on the
earth, and cried Alas, O Lord God, etc. Joel 1.15. Amos 5.16. Revel. 18.10. In
cases of great sorrow they used this word.

These outward signs of sorrow are commended, that the people might be
awakened out of their security, that they might be more affected with the
calamities were coming, and their sins that hastened such calamities upon
them, words are transient, and leave little impression, but visible signs
work more strongly, affect more deeply, and draw the spirits of beholders into
a Sympathy. Obser.


God would have those are his, to mourn for the sins and judgments, are
coming upon a Land and people for them; the Prophet must Smite with the hand,
stamp with the foot, and cry alas, for all the evil abominations of the house
of Israel, and for their calamities: Some do mourn for calamities, few for
sins of the people; but here their sins come in first, and afflicts the
Prophets spirit most, the Judgments afterward, Psalm. 119.136. Rivers of water
run down mine eyes because they keep not thy Law: And ver. 158. I beheld
the transgressors and was grieved: Its safe, do it, Ezekiel. 9.4. Go through
Jerusalem, and set a mark upon the foreheads of them that sigh and cry for all
the abominations: 1 Cor. 5.2. The Apostle blamed them, that they did not mourn
for the incestuous Corinthians. Ver. 12.


Of these sore Judgments has been formerly spoken in the fifth Chapter, that
there is no escaping them, and of Gods accomplishing his fury, he would bear
no longer but utterly destroy them.

That God does often punish men where they sin: Ver. 13.
Their slain should be among their Altars, Idols, in the place where they
offered their sweet savor: Sennacherib was slain in the house of his God
Nisroch, as he was worshipping, Isa. 37.38.

2. That Idolatry and false Worship is costly; They offer sweet savor every
where to all their Idols, they think nothing too much for their false way, the
sweet Incence was very costly, and only for Gods use, not their own houses;
yet their Idols shall have it; men will part with much this way, Isa. 46.6.
They lavish Gold out of the Bag, etc.

Wilderness toward Diblath: Verse. 14.
Some make it to be the same with Riblah, in the 2 Kings 25.6. and Jer. 34.5.
Mentioned also in Numb. 34.11. This may well be, Munster following Rabbi, David
says is put for Riblah.
because of the likeness of and in the Hebrew tongue; and Jerome conceives it
is the same with Riblah, which was a City in the Land of Hamath, where Pharaoh
put Jehoahaz in bonds, 2 Kings 23.33. In the borders of the Moabites near the
Wilderness spoken of in Deuteronomy. 8.15. a great and fearful Wilderness, full of
fiery Serpents and Scorpions, where was drought and no water: God would make
their Land not only desolate, and desolate like this Wilderness, but more
desolate.

I will stretch out my hand upon them:
There is difference between Gods stretching out his hand to a people, and upon
a people: The first notes invitation to repentance, Isa. 65.2. I have stretched
out my hands all they day unto a Rebellious people: The second notes smiting,
punishing, destroying, Isa. 5.25. The anger of the Lord is kindled against his
people, and he has stretched forth his hand against them, and has smitten
them. Jer. 51.25. Behold I am against thee O destroying mountain, and I will
stretch out mine hand upon thee, etc. Upon and Against notes the same thing:
When Gods hand is upon a Land or people, its against them, and so the phrase
often runs, Jer. 15.6. Thou art gene backward, therefore will I stretch out my
hand against thee, and will destroy thee: See Exodus 3.20.

The sins of the people lay wast the Land, they fell to Idolatry, and so God
stretched out his hand upon the Land and laid it waste.

This people were so degenerate, corrupted, besotted, with their own ways,
that they understood little of Gods; they fell to the sins of the Nations, and
those sins in a special manner stupifie: All sin does it, but Idolatry and
false Worship most; hence, Jer 10.14. speaking of such sinners, he says, Every
man is brutish in his knowledge: Idolaters know not God, how he is provoked by
their ways: What foolish doings it is to go out from God, therefore in this
Chapter its four times, They shall know that I am the Lord, 7.10.13.14.

CHAP. VII.
1, Moreover the Word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

2. Also thou Son of man, thus says the Lord God unto the Land of Israel, An
end, the end is come upon the four corners of the Land.

3. Now is the end come upon thee, and I will send mine anger upon thee, and
will judge thee according to thy ways, and will recompense upon thee all thy
abominations.

4. And mine eye shall not spare thee, neither will I have pity: but I will
recompense thy ways upon thee, and thine abominations shall be in the midst of
thee, and ye shall know that I am the LORD.


THIS Chapter, as the former is Prophetical, of the destruction of the Jews,
and of their Land.

First, In it is a denuntiation of their total Ru^^, in the 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 10,
11, 12, 13, verses.

Secondly, In ^he rest of the Chapters, is a Declaration of their calamities,
and the causes thereof.

Of the first Verse has been formerly spoken, and likewise of The Son of
man; and most things (...) se Verses: In the second Verse, the Prophet is in
ge^^^^ll acquainted with the mind of GOD toward Israel, and in the two next
more specially.

(...) Verse 2.
Also thou Son of man:
The Hebrew is, And thou O Son of man: Here is a Nominative case absolute,
without reference to any thing; the like you have Psalm. 41.12. As for me thou
upholdest me in mine integrity: The Hebrew is, and I, in the Nominative. Thou
upholdest me: Ego in integritate supportasti me, Zech. 7.5. Did you fast at all
unto me, even to me, this last me is Ego: Jeiunasti mihi ego, says the
Original: Eccles. 2.15. As it happens to the Fool, so it happens even to
me, Secundum eventum stulti etiam ego eveniet mihi: Such Hebraismes you have, 1 Samuel 25.24. Genesis 27.24. and in Isa. 11.10. Psalm. 11.4. you have Nominative
Cases put absolute, as Thou here in the Text, and it serves to quicken up the
Prophets spirit, and to put him into a readiness of Prophesying; And then
Ezekiel attend, prophecy.

Unto the Land of Israel, or concerning the Land of Israel: Its not spoken of
all the Tribes: Ten were gone long before into Captivity, but by a Synechdoche,
of the Tribe of Judah, which yet remained undestroyed.

An end, the end is come: The word End is doubled and mentioned again in the
third Verse: Now is the end, repeated in the sixth Verse, An end is come, the
end is come; these repetitions are not in vain, they set out, First the zeal,
intention, and speed of the speaker; Secondly, the evidence, certain y, and
weight of the thing spoken of: Thirdly, they serve to make the deeper
impression.

End notes destruction, yea a general destruction, Genesis 6.13. The End of all
flesh is come; God would bring a Flood upon the whole Earth, take away all
flesh; and this is called the End of all: So here, God had dealt mercifully with
them formerly, but now he would be severe, and make an end of them.

Upon the four Corners of the Land: Hebrew is Wings, which metaphorically
expresses the parts of the Land; Wings are extensive things, and the parts of
Judea that extended from Jerusalem, East, West, North, South, are called the
Wings or Corners thereof; and the end should come, not only upon the extreme
parts of the Land, but the whole Land: Upon all their Cities, Habitations, and
Quarters, from one end to the other: What our Prophet calls here the four
Corners or Wings of the Land, Christ calls, Mat. 24.31. the 4 winds, they shall
gather his Elect from the four winds or quarters of the World.

That Kingdoms and Churches have their periods; they may continue for some
hundreds of years, but at length they expire; the Kingdom and Church of Judah
flourished many years: from Saul their first King to Zadekiah their last, were
480 years, but then you see an end is come, the end is come, an end of the
State, an end of their Church, an end of all comforts, of all glory and
greatness: The Assyrian, Persian, Grecian, and Roman Monarchies had their
ends, their glory was laid in the dust, after it had dazeled the Worlds eyes a
few years. Wisdom, strength, greatness, riches, were found in them, but
neither any, or all of these, preserved them from seeing corruption: The seven
famous Churches in Asia are gone, and since that time many other Churches and
Kingdoms have been ruined: Is not an end coming, if not come upon many
Kingdoms at this day, let Germany, Denmark, Ireland speak: No State, no
Church, no condition under the Sun, is everlasting; all have their changes
and their ends, Psalm. 119.96. I have seen an end of all perfection, but thy
Commandment is exceeding broad: There is nothing in the World so firm,
perfect, lasting, bus it is subject to corruption: Kingdoms are subject to
Wars, Plagues, Famines, Treacheries, which ruin them; Churches are subject
to Errors, Heresies, Schisms, corruptions, profaneness, which ruin them. And
all other things have principles of destruction in themselves, which bring them
to an end, within the compass of a few years, But thy Commandment is
exceeding broad, it goes beyond the term of these perishing things, it is not
for a hundred or thousand years, and so to expire, but it abides for ever.



Verse. 3.
3. Now is the end come upon thee: They having the common sickness of mankind
in them, to put off judgments, and the day of evil when threatened, as if
there were no such thing, or at a great distance: The Lord brings the judgment
home to them, and cuts off all their shifts: Now is the end upon thee, now is
the final destruction, and for Thee, not for others that live among the
Nations, not for thy Posterity that comes after thee: Not for the Tribes are
carried away, but for thee that art secure and fear not. Now is the end, its
very nigh; some years were to pass before the end came; it was now the sixth
year of their Captivity, and Zedekiah that succeeded Jehoiachim, was upon the
sixth year of his Reign at Jerusalem, and the ninth year, the tenth month,
began this final destruction, 2 Kings 25.1. Then came Nebuchadnezzar with all
his Forces into the Land, and besieged Jerusalem, and in the eleventh year,
the fourth and fifth months it was accomplished, Verse. 2, 3, 4, 8, 9, 10. So
that here was three or four years before this end came, five and upwards before
it was fulfilled, yet its said, Now is the end come upon thee.

Things future in Scripture are spoken of as present, or past, Isa. 1.8. The
daughter of Zyon is left as a Cottage in a Vineyard, Chap. 24.10. The City of
confusion is broken down: every house is shut up, that no man may come in:
There is a crying for Wine in the streets: This is spoken as present, and it
was yet to come: Chap. 42.22. This is a people robbed and spoiled: Revel. 18.2.
Babylon is fallen, is fallen, and is become the habitation of Devils: John
3.18. He that believes not is condemned already: These Scriptures speak of
things as past and were then to come, the Lord uses to speak so in his word,
of things future sometimes as present, sometimes as past, because with him is
no difference of times, and for that they are as certainly to take place, as
if they were doing, or done.

God looks not upon time as we do, that is future, we think to be at a great
distance, that is to come, 2, 3, 7, 20, or 100. years hence, that we apprehend
very remote, and has little influence into us; or operation upon us, but God
looks upon things at little, and great distances as present: Now is the end
come upon thee: 70 years he calls a present little moment, Isa. 54.7, 8. and 1
Pet. 4.7. The end of all things is at hand: 1 John 2.18. It is the last hour:
It is about 1600 years since the spirit of God spoke thus by Peter and John,
and yet the end of all things is not come, the last hour is not out, times
future are present with God, and so propounded to us that they might work the
more strongly upon us, cause us to fear God more, to be sober and watch unto
Prayer.

I will send mine anger upon thee: God had formerly dealt sparingly with them,
now and then chastised them with rods, now he would be more severe and chasten
them with Scorpions, he had kept in his wrath formerly, but now he would send
it forth in strength, they should not have gentle corrections, but terrible
Judgments; he would send out wrath and not mercy: Anger here is put for the
effects of anger, punishments, judgments, by a metonymie of the efficient.

Will judge thee according to thy ways: Judging is sometimes put for
sentencing of persons or things, Romans 2.16. In the day that God shall judge the
secrets of men: That is, pass a sentence upon them: sometimes for punishing,
Heb. 13.4. Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge: That is, punish: And so
here, I will judge thee: First I will punish, and least it may be thought God
in his anger should exceed measure in punishing, its added.

According to thy ways; not according to my ways, but thine, which in the
judgment of any, or all, must be equal, look what thou have done and
deserved by it, that thou shall have, the word Ways is metaphorical, and
notes men's manners, actions, courses of life, Prove. 21.2. Every way of a man is
right in his own eyes: so Psalm. 1.1.6. Men's own devises, Judges 2.19.
Custom, Jer. 10.2. And in this place, their actions and conversations are
called ways; because their affections, the feet of the soul are in them, and
they lead unto some place as ways do, all actions have a tendencie to Heaven
or Hell. This phrase is expounded by that in Hos. 4.9. I will punish them for
their ways: They have done evil and shall suffer for it.

And will recompense upon thee all thine abominations.
The Hebrew is, I will give, or put upon thee, etc. The Vulgar is, Ponam costra
te.
I will put against thee all; and others have it, I will repose or turn back
upon thee all thine abominations; hitherto thou have put them upon me, Reponam,
Juni.
and I have borne them, now I will return them and lay them upon thy self:
God would now reward them for their abominations, Hos. 4.9. I will punish them
for their ways, and reward them for their doings: Their reward should return
upon their own head, Obad. 15.

Babylon sees it, but they at Jerusalem apprehended it not, none would believe
that destruction should come upon Jerusalem, Lam. 4.12. Ye put far away the
evil day, Amos 6.3. they put it far from their thoughts, hearts, if it came
in at all, they look upon it as coming in after Generations, and not in
theirs, Ezekiel. 12.22. It was come to a Proverb in Israel, the days are
prolonged, and every vision fails, Verse. 27. The vision that he sees is for
many days to come, and he prophesies of the times that are afar of: they
grew secure, feared not the threatenings put upon them at a great distance, and
what lay in them, nul'd the Prophesies, and therefore in the 28 Verse, God
says, There shall none of my words be prolonged any more; God would hasten the
punishment of them, and they should suddenly overtake them: Isa 29.1, 5, 6.
Woe to Ariel, to Ariel, the City where David dwelt. Ariel is Jerusalem, so
called, because there was the Mountain, Temple, and Altar of God; so it is in
Ezekiel. 43.15. The Altar shall be four Cubits; the Hebrew is, Harel, the
Mountain of God, where the Temple and Altar was, but the word is Ariel, not
Harel, and signifies the Lion of God; not because Jerusalem was in the form of
a Lion, but for that it was a strong City, thought to be impregnable, and God
threatens ruin against it: and Verse. 5. It shall be at an instant suddenly,
when men have no thoughts thereof; it should be as sudden as Thunder,
Earthquakes, and Tempests are, Verse. 6. Hab. 1.7. Shall they not rise up
suddenly that shall kill thee; Yes, they should, the Northern Army was upon
them before they looked for them, they cried Peace, Peace, and when it is so
then sudden destruction is at hand, 1 These. 5.3. The old World was secure,
until the day that Noah entered into the Arc, Luke 17.27. and then the Flood
came presently and destroyed them all; they believed neither Noah's Preaching,
nor his preparations for himself and Children: So in Sodom, they were not
awakened out of their security till the fire and brimstone was felt, Genesis
19.28, 29. Agag thought the bitterness of death past, when he was going to
execution, 1 Samuel 15.32. While Belshazzer is drinking healths, God sends a hand
to write a sentence of death against him and his Kingdom, Dan. 5.4, 5, 30. In
a morning shall the King of Israel be utterly cut off; ere he can get out of
his Bed God would let out his blood, Hos. 10.15. What ever men think, the
Judge and Judgment is at the door, its near: Germany, Denmark, Ireland,
England, did not think that such sad bloody destroying Judgments were so near
as now they find them: Let us not be secure but fear, pass the time of our
sojourning here in fear, remembering Solomon's happiness, Prove. 28.14. Happy is
the man that fears always; and Jobs practice, The thing which I greatly feared
is come upon me, Job 3.25. Let Gods Judgments come sooner or later, it is
duty, wisdom, in us, to fear, to prepare for them; its folly to sleep when
thieves are about the house, and may prove death to do it, when a fire is
kindled in the habita^ion.

Deuteronomy. 7.6. A people near unto God: Psalm. 148.14. Wise and understanding:
Deuteronomy. 4.6. They were the Redeemed ones, Isa. 62.12. The holy people, Dan. 8.24.
that knew Gods name, Isa. 52.6. That had Gods Law in their hearts, Isa. 51.7.
That were blessed above all, Deuteronomy. 7.14. They had the holy Land, the Temple,
Worship, Ordinances, Oracles of God, the Prophets, and presence of God only:
All the World besides lay in darkness, were without God; but these were his
strength, his glory, Psalm. 78.61. As dear to him as the apple of his eye,
Zech. 2.8. Yet when these people sinned and rebel'd against God, destructive
judgments came upon them: An end is come upon Thee; Upon thee Jerusalem, upon
thee my people: They were honored with many titles, were Gods Church, yet when
they sinned against God, cast off his Yo^k, none of them, not all their
privileges would protect them from desolation.

I will send mine anger upon thee; God has the command of judgments, as any
man has of his servants; the Centurion had not so much power over his
Soldiers, as the Lord has over punishments, calamities, and ruins of
Kingdoms, be they public or private judgments, they are at the beck of the
Lord: What was the anger and judgment here, the sending of Nebuchadnezzar with
his hasty and bitter Caldeans to destroy the Jewish Nation; God had that King
and all Forces at command to send out of Babylon about his service, to make
War upon his people that were Idolatrous: God has his four sore judgments
to send upon a Land when he pleases, Ezekiel. 14.21. He can send Hornets among
people to sting them to death, Deuteronomy. 7.20. If he do but hiss for the Fly of
Aegipt, and the Be of Assyria, they shall come and do their office, Isa.
7.18, 19. If God call for any evil upon Kingdoms, Cities, Churches, Families,
Persons, they come presently and accomplish the message they are sent for, when
God spoke by Moses, and said, Let there be Froggs, Flies, Lice, Murraine,
Hayle, Locusts, Blood, Darkness, Death, they came immediately: God has called
for a Sword upon most part of the Christian world, and is it not at work? Does
it not eat flesh and drink blood? May we not say, O thou Sword of the Lord,
how long will it be ere thou be quiet, put up thy self into thy Scabbard,
rest and be still: How can it be quiet seeing the Lord has given it a charge
against Ashkelon, and against the Sea shore, there has he appointed it, Jer.
47.6, 7.

God has command of Wars, gives charge to the Sword against Ireland,
England, other places, there has he appointed it; and how can it be quiet? no,
till Gods will and work be accomplished, there is no quiet.

I will judge thee according to thy ways, not as I will, but as thou have
done; not after my ways, or the ways of other people, but after thine own
ways; how just is it that a man should reap what he sows: If men have the Law
pass upon them according to the nature and merit of their facts, what wrong is
done to any, who has cause to complain of the Judge; God knows the nature and
merits of a Nations sins, and proceeds in his judgments accordingly: He is a
righteous Judge, and no man has just cause to complain; he stops the mouth of
iniquity, Lament. 3.39. Wherefore does a living man complain, a man for the
punishment of his sins: he should not do it. Its just, equal, that if a man
sin against God, he should suffer from God; if God bear his sins, he must
bear Gods punishments; let Kingdoms suffer dreadful things from Heaven,
Wars, Famine, Pestilence, what ever is destructive, God is to be justified by
all, he deals with you according to your ways; let the most carping Momus,
the severest Critic, let Satan himself, Gods greatest enemy, examine his
judgments, upon Kingdoms, Churches, together with their sins, and he shall
justify God, and pronounce him clear, equal, righteous; in his ways, God
deals not otherwise with men then their ways require, Zech. 1.6. According to
our ways, and according to our doings, so has the Lord dealth with us:
Therefore justify God and be patient.

I will judge thee according to thy ways; Thy ways bring my judgments,
Proverbs 1.31. They shall eat of the fruit of their own ways, and be filled
with their own devices: What fruit do men's sinful ways bring forth, even
sower and bitter fruit; guilt, fears, sorrows, afflictions, ruin, upon such
fruit they must feed, with such fruit they shall be filled, Hos. 13.9. O Israel
thou have destroyed thy self; Isreal's sins were her wounds, they were the
Plague, Famine, and Sword, that ruined them; the iniquities of a Kingdom are
the deaths of a Kingdom, their sins will find them out, Numb. 32.23. They
are like Bloodhounds that hunt out the Authors of them, and cease upon them,
hence Isa. 59.12. Its said, Our transgressions are with us, to weary us, to
wound us, to destroy us; men cannot shake off their sins they have committed,
they will follow them, seize upon them, hold them fast, Prove. 5.22. His own
iniquities shall take the wicked himself, and he shall be holden with the
Cords of his sins; he shall dye without instruction; wicked men's sins may
take others, and sometimes do, but they certainly take themselves; they twist
Cords to bind, but it is themselves, its to make themselves burnt sacrifices
for Hell.

I will recompense upon thee all thine abominations; God took notice of what
was done in the dark, in the light, upon Mountains, in Valleys, under every
green Tree, no Idols, false Worship, inventions of theirs, but the Lord
observed them, reserved them in mind, and rendered unto them answerable for
them; before he had dealt with them for some, now he would deal with them for
all their abominations, and bring them as an unsupportable burden upon them.

Verse. 4.
And mine eye shall not spare, etc.
Much is said in the sacred Scriptures, of the great and tender mercies of the
Lord, and many patterns of his mercies are to be found therein, and the sinners
in Zyon conceited God to be all mercy, sinned securely, and feared no
judgments; upon this great abuse of Divine mercy, says the Lord, Mine eye
shall not spare, neither will I have pity; you shall find me all justice,
consuming fire, without any sparing or pitying: judgment after judgment shall
come upon you, till you are destroyed, you think to go on in your sinful
ways, and find me merciful; but I am provoked and you shall feel me
dreadful; nothing shall prevail to draw me to any remorse or pity, the
consideration you are my people, not reproach of Heathens round about you, not
your prayers, tears, sufferings, blood, not that you are Abraham's and David's
posterity, not the dishonor my Name shall have by you, I am now hardened
against you, and will punish thee openly according to thy abominations; thou
shall have great punishments in the midst of thee, which will evidence the
greatness of thy sins, and cause thee to acknowledge me to be a just God; of
the words in this Verse. have been spoken, Chap. 5.11. and 8. Verse. and Chap.
6.7. and in the precedent Verse of this Chapter.

CHAP. VII.
5. Thus says the Lord God, An evil, an only evil, behold, it is come.

6. An end is come, the end is come, it watches for thee, behold, it is come.

7. The morning is come unto thee, O thou that dwell in the Land; the time
is come, the day of the trouble is near, and not the sounding again of the
Mountains.

8. Now will I shortly pour out my fury upon thee, and accomplish mine anger
upon thee: and I will judge thee according to thy ways, and will recompense
thee for all thine abominations.

9. And mine eye shall not spare, neither will I have pity: I will recompense
thee according to thy ways, and thine abominations that are in the midst of
thee, and ye shall know that I am the Lord that smites.


SOMETHING I shall open in these Verses, not much:

In the 5. An only evil. Evil befell them before, but none like this, none
so great, so destructive to the Jewish Church and State; it has reference to
that in the 5. Chap. 9. Verse. I will do in thee that which I have not done,
and whereunto I will not do any more the like; No such extreme and deadly
destruction shall befall thee, I have one evil now left for thee, which shall
be without all comparison; there shall need none after this to make a full
Ruin of thee; God has evils to do his will at once, and so it may be called
an only evil: 1 Samuel 26.8. says Abishai to David, Let me smite Saul with the
spear even to the Earth at once, and I will not smite him the second time.
(...)


At once, its the same word with only in this Verse: he would utterly slay
Saul at one stroke, and God with one judgment would utterly destroy the Jews;
such a phrase you have in Nahum 1.9. He will make an utter end, affliction
shall not rise up the second time; God would bring such a judgment upon
Niniveh, that at once it should be destroyed, a second affliction should not be
needful, the evil of that day should be sufficient: (...)
The Caldee reads it otherwise, Evil after evil; showing the succession of
evils that should follow one after another, till they were destroyed: as wave
follows wave, one cloud another, etc. so affliction should come after
affliction; sins go linked together, and so do afflictions, Levit. 26.18,
21, 24, 28. they go by sevens. God can at one judgment at once, destroy
sinners, Hosea 5.
Kingdoms, Cities, he can at pleasure bring many, one after another, destroy
by degrees, be a moth, rottenness, a Lion to Israel and Judah, we should take
heed how we offend such a God.

Verse 6.
It watches for thee:
Thou thoughtest judgment slept, but it is awake, and waits for, or against
thee, thou thoughtest it a dead thing, but it is alive and making have toward
thee: The Hebrew word signifies to be weary, (...)
as if judgment were weary with staying so long, or God weary with deferring
it; now there should be no more delay; it notes also to excite a man asleep,
one dead, as in the 2 Kings 4.31. The Child is not awaked; that is, not raised
from the dead: So here, God had threatened them by his Prophets, Isaiah,
Jeremiah, others, many years, and they thought the Prophets words wind,
because nothing was done, at least that such a judgment would not befall them
in these days, as they had foretold. Ezekiel. 12.21, 27. as if the judgment they
spoke of was asleep, or as a thing dead, therefore its said, it lives, is
awake, and watches as a theife to spoil, as a Lion for a prey; and hereby is
poynted out the suddenness of its coming, and intention of God to destroy
them.

This Verse, the former, and that follows, are full of Divine Rhetoric,
Asyndeton, Anadiplosis, Epanalepsis, Metaphoraes, Paronomasia, Apostrophe, and
others, are evident in them, the Scripture has as great Elegancie as any
Authors whatsoever.

An evil, an only evil, an end, the end is come, is come, is come, is come,
is come, is come, six times, and further, behold, behold its come; the several
expressions of the season, the morning, the time, the day of trouble, and then
it watches, is come, is near, why does the spirit of God repeat all those,
even to awaken them out of their security, to convince them, as of the
certainty, so the suddenness of the judgment, and to make the greater, and
deeper impression upon them, things once spoken, pass away, but being
iterated, are like to take some hold of men's ears, and affections, this
Prophet is very repetitious of Threats and Judgments, and presses them
frequently, they were near final destruction, and therefore the spirit of God
urges such things often in the mouth of this Prophet, that so no means being
left unattempted, he might awaken all and gain some; Christ pronounces the
same words eight times in one Chapter, Woe unto you Scribes Pharisees,
Hypocrites, Matthew. 23.13, 14, 15, 16, 23, 25, 27, 29. to affect them with the
eminency of their danger, and others with the evil of their ways.

Pet. 3.4. Where is the promise of his coming: For since the Fathers fell
asleep, all things continue as they were from the beginning of the Creation:
There is no Christ to Reign or Judge; the Flood is dried up, and the fire to
consume the World is not yet kindled; but Verse 10. The day of the Lord will
come as a thief in the night, in the which the Heavens shall pass away with
great noise, and the Element shall melt with fervent heat: Chap. 2. Ver. 3.
Whose judgment lingereth not, and their damnation slumbereth not.

Gods judgments, what ever sinners think are awake, and footing of it, and
hastening to their Ruin: That which the wicked call a lingering, and
slumbering judgment: Gods spirit calls in the 1. verse. Swift destruction: it
will be upon them before they see their doings, or repent of their Sin,
Revel. 6.2, 4, 8. you shall find that judgments come riding in, they make
haste.

etc. but no one stirs, till he say go, they watch to hear his voice, to do
his will; they move not at the call of man, their motion is only at the
appointment of their great Creator; If he bid Nebuchadnezzar, Nebuzaradan, with
thousands of Babylonians to arise, and hasten to the Ruin of Jerusalem, they
are watchful, swift, and active to execute his commands: All creatures are
Gods Army, and have cause sufficient to watch for the Ruin of man, because
man's sin has subjected them to ruin, and imbondag'd them to corruption; but
here is the wisdom, power, and mercy of God, he keeps all in their banks, and
without warrant from the great General the Lord of Hosts, no attempt is made
against any.

The morning is come unto thee:
That they might be affected, he tells them, the Day is broke, the morning is
come, and the day of trouble begins; he would have them be no longer in the
dark, but to look abroad to see how providence were working to fulfill
Proph^si^^: The Original word is diversely rendered, Some think he alludes to
the practice of the Jews who executed Delinquents in the morning, according to
that in Jer. 21.12. and Psalm. 101.8. God would early bring the Sword upon them,
and there is an emphasis in the word (...) that Morning, which was the most
observable and deplorable morning that ever they had; such a morning was
Sodoms, when fire and brimstone rained upon it, Genesis 19.23, 24. Such a morning
was the King of Isreal's, Hos. 10.15.
it comes from (...) Maturare, mane surgere, and signifies Matutinum quid, some
morning, some early thing: Ex usu Chaldaeo, and Alapide interprets it Primum
germen, the first bud that is upon any tree, the early the morning bud: and so
the sense is, Judgments are budding, breaking forth, appearing, and as near as
Spring and Summer is when a Tree buds and blossoms; or as the word is, The
morning is come; you have thought judgment slept, that it was still evening,
not past midnight, but the morning is come, judgment not only watches, but
is rising, risen, coming forth, and it will be early upon thee.

The Septuagint implies there was a connection and series of evils coming upon
them; Aquila has it (...), (...). Nexus, complicatio.
prospectionem, as if the evil they had foreseen and feared, were now coming
upon them; the Chalde Coronam, diadema, so the word is used in Isa. 28.5. and
because it notes Royal power, its thought the King of Babylon is here meant;
the Vulgar is Contritio, breaking into pieces, La sentence du matin, in the
margent of the French.
grinding to dust is come upon thee: Maldonat, Contractio, besieging is come,
and thou must be in a narrow compass: Shindler, Revolutio ad te,
Nebuchadnezzar shall return, compass thee about as a Crown, and carry thee
into Captivity.

The day of trouble is near.
The Hebrew word notes great trouble, vexation, with tumult and destruction,
Haiom Mebumah, or a day of sore trouble; you may hear the Prophet Isaiah
describing such a day, Chap. 22.5. It is a day of trouble, and of treading
down, of perplexety by the Lord God of Hosts in the Valley of vision, breaking
down the Walls, and of crying to the Mountains. God has days of trouble for
Kingdoms, and when they come there is great distress and great destruction, 2 Chronicles. 15.5, 6. In those times there was no peace to him that went out, nor to
him that came in, but great vexations were upon all the Inhabitants of the
Countries, and Nation was destroyed of Nation, and City of City, for God did
vex them with all adversity: This was a time or day of trouble for Israel: In
Scripture is mentioned a day of Calamity, Psalm. 18.18. a day of Wrath, Job
20.28. a day of Battle, Psalm. 140.7. a day of Vengeance, Jer. 46.10. a day of
evil, Prove. 16.4. of Rebuke, Hos. 5.9. of Slaughter, Jer. 12.3. of Burning,
Mal. 4.1. of Destruction, Job 21.30. And all these may be in a day of trouble.

You shall find many of them together in the 1 Zeph. 14* 15, 16, 17. where he
speaks of the day that Ezekiel does: The great day of the Lord is near, it is
near, and hastes greatly, even the voice of the day of the Lord; the mighty
man shall cry there bitterly: That day is a day of wrath, a day of trouble and
distress, a day of wasting and desolation, a day of darkness and gloominesse,
a day of Clouds and thick darkness, a day of the Trumpet and Alarm against
the fenced Cities, and against the high Towers, and I will bring distress upon
men, that they shall walk like blind men, etc.

Non gloriae montium. Vulgar. Non repercussio montium. Montan. Non Echus
montium. Jun.
Not the sounding again of the Mountains.
The Land of Israel was full of Mountains, Psalm. 125.2. As the Mountains are
round about Jerusalem, and Judah was a Hill Country, Luke 1.39. About these
hills were their Vines planted, and it was a Land of Vines, Deuteronomy. 8.8. Isa.
7.23. and at their Vintage, when they gathered their Grapes, they had many
Laborers, who to sweeten and facilitate their pains, made great shoutings,
Jer. 35.30. An Echo is a reflection of sounds, and is made upon walls, woods,
banks, rocks, hills.
Isa. 16.10. which made the Mountains to Echo and resound, but now there
should be no joyful sound, but the rattling of Arms, noise of Charets,
neighing of Horses, cry of Soldiers, these should be heard in the Mountains:
Or thus, upon the Hills and Mountains they had their Idols and Altars, Chap.
6.13. and where Idolaters sacrificed, there they had their Music, Songs, and
Dances, which made the Mountains to ring, and were as the glory of them, but
now, there should be a day of sl^ughter, and dreadful clamor of enemies
should be in the Mountains, the glory of them stained with the blood of men
slain, there should be groaning, mourning, howling, schreeking of men and
women wounded and wronged.

Or thus, you think all threats empty sounds, as an Echo from a Mountain,
which presently vanishes, but you shall find the day of trouble no Echo
work, it will be real, and make you in the bitterness of your spirits cry to
Rocks and Mountains, and seek to hide your selves in the clifts of them.

Ver. 8.
The eighth Verse has formerly been opened, only you have Pouring out of Fury,
for accomplishing fury, Chap. 5.13. and it is the same for substance; God would
not hold in his fury any longer, he would give full scope unto it, freely,
fully, strongly would he proceed in his fury against them, all which are
included in the word Power out.

So for the ninth Verse, I am the Lord that smites: You think it is the
Chaldeans the second cause, but ye shall know that it is the Lord himself.

CHAP. VII.
10. Behold the day, behold, it is come, behold it is come, the morning is gone
forth, the Rod has blossomed, Pride has budded.

11. Violence is risen up into a rod of wickedness: none of them shall
remain, nor of their multitude, nor of any of theirs, neither shall there be
wailing for them.


IN these Verses he goes on to show the approach and extent of their Ruin, it
was at hand, and none of them should remain, and likewise the causes thereof,
Pride and Violence: Of morning was spoken in the sixth Verse, but I must open
something here, for the words are difficult.

The Rod has blossomed.
By Rod, sundry Interpreters understand Nebuchadnezzar, whom they conceive so
called, Jer. 1.11. and that in Isa. 10.5. O Assyrian the Rod of mine anger,
refers not only to Senacherib, but also to Nebuchadnezzar:

A Rod in the Scripture sense denotes,

First, Power, strength, Psalm. 2.9. a Rod of Iron.

Secondly, Afflictions, heavy Judgments, Psalm. 89.32. I will visit your
transgressions with a Rod. (...)


Thirdly, Rigid and harsh Government, Isa. 14.5. The Lord has broken the
staff, or Rod of the wicked: That is, their rigorous and cruel Government;
Nebuchadnezzar had great strength, sorely afflicted the Land of Judah, he was
an Iron Rod that brake them in pieces, and ruled them rigidly in Babylon,
Jehoiakim was kept 37. years in prison, Jer. 52.31. The rod blossometh: That
is, was in a readiness to come and smite Jerusalem; after blossoming comes
fruit, and the fruit that this Rod bare, was fruit unto death.

Pride has budded.
This King and people lifted up themselves above others, Vir Superbiae Vatablus
turns it, and means it of Nebuchadnezzar.
and prided themselves in their greatness, strength, riches and victories,
Jer. 50.31. God says of Babylon, I am against thee O thou most proud. The
Hebrew is, I am against thee Pride. These Babilonians were pride it self; in
Dan. 4.30. You may hear the King priding himself in this language; Is not
this great Babylon that I have built for the house of the Kingdom, by the
might of my power, and for the honor of my Majesty?

Both King and people were proud, and their pride budded forth and appeared to
all, when they put out Zedekiah's eyes, slew his sons before his face, and
said, sing us one of the songs of Zion, Psalm. 137.3.

Others by Rod understand the state of Judah and Jerusalem: so the word Rod is
used in Scripture, Jer. 48.17. How is the strong staff broken, and the
beautiful Rod: That is, the state and dignity of Moab, and thus we may
understand it.

The word for Rod signifies a Tribe, as in Number. 1.4.16.21. (...)
Either because they grew out of the stock of Jacob, as branches do out of a
Tree, or because the names of the 12. Tribes were written upon rods, Number. 17.2.
and the word being Hammatteh, the Tribe, the rod carries me to conceive its
meant of Judah, rather than of Nebuchadnezar: And the sense runs in a continued
allegory, Judah is compared to a tree that blossoms, buds, and brings forth its
fruit, it had blossomed or flourished: so the word is, Psalm 90.6. And now the
fruit was growing ripe, their sins were great, the measure of them almost full,
and punishment grew near and weighty.

The sins mentioned are, 1. Pride. (...)


That pride: So the Hebrew is, there was eminency in it, Judah was grown very
proud, Jer. 13.9. The Rulers were score full. Isa. 28.14.
I will mar the pride of Judah and the great pride of Jerusalem. And wherein
appeared this great pride, verse. 10. They refuse to hear Gods word, they
walked in the imaginations of their own hearts after other Gods, to serve and
worship them, the proud men told Jeremiah be spoke falsely, Jer. 43.25:

This sin reigned among men and women also, Isa. 3.16. The daughters of Sion
are haughty, and walk with stretched forth necks and wanton eyes, walking and
mincing as they go, making a tinckeling with their feet; They had great
bravery, tinkling ornaments, Caules, round moon tires, chains, bracelets,
muflers, bonnets, leg-ornaments, headbands, rings, eare-rings, nose-jewels,
changeable suites of apparel, mantles, crisping pins, glasses, fine linen,
hoods and vailes. They were clothed with pride, their children carried
themselves proudly against the Ancients, and the base against the honorable;
so great and general was the pride of Jerusalem, that it made the Prophet weep
in secret places, Jer. 13.17. Their pride budded and blossomed, so that the
Prophets eye seeing it, affected his heart, fetched rivers of tears from him,
seeing their destruction now at hand.

(...).
The Septuagint renders this place of our prophet thus; Injury has risen up,
pride is an injurious thing to God and man, it rises up against him, and
thrusts him out of his worship, Ordinances, ways; it disquiets Kingdoms, and
the meek of the earth: It Is injury it self.

(...)
Budds;
That is, puts forth, is green and growing, as a tree, Cant. 7.12. Puts out
buds, in every part of it in the Spring, so as a foul puts out feathers all
over: so did Judah's pride bud forth in all rancks and conditions of people.

2. (...)
The other sin is violence. The vulgar translates it iniquity, the Greeks,
unrighteousness; others, rapine, injury: but the Hebrew is emphaticall, (...).
that violence, that iniquity, etc. It signifies open wrong, as Mercer observes
upon Genesis 6.11. This sin was in strength among this people, Isa. 59.6. Their
works are works of iniquity, and the act of violence is in their hands, they
oppress the poor, they rob and spoil them, and that openly. The act, even
the things they have taken from them are in their hands, Amos 3.10. They know
not to do right, who store up violence and robbery in their palaces: The
Rulers and great men that dwelt in palaces, they oppressed, they robbed, and
stored up what they got in their palaces, that it was known to all, and cried
out of by the Prophet, Mic. 3.1, 2, 3. He tells you of the Heads and Princes
doings, who above others should have seen to the execution of justice: and
they were the men plucked off the skin from the people, and their flesh from
their bones; they flaied, brake, chopped them in pieces as for the pot.

The peoples estates and livelihoods were as their skin, flesh, bones unto
them, but the great ones wrung them from the people, and did live upon the
spoil: They ate the bread of wickedness, and drank the wine of violence,
Prove. 4.17. And this sin staid not in the heads, but descended to the body;
the people generally, they that were rich oppressed the poor, Amos 8.4. They
swallowed up the needy, they made the Epha small, and the Sheckle great, they
falsified the Balances, sold the poor for silver, and the needy for shoes,
verse. 5, 6. Men endued with immortal souls, worth all the world, they sold
for old shoes, and filled the land with violence, Ezekiel. 8.17.

Risen up into a rod of wickedness.
The phrase imports thus much, that their injustice and oppression had prepared
and brought forth Judgment.

A rod of wickedness, that is a rod, the fruit of wickedness, out of their
great sins has sprung up this rod, or thus, a rod of wickedness; that is, a
rod to correct and punish wickedness withal; in both senses it may be called
a rod of wickedness, both because it buds from wickedness, and serves to
beat wickedness. If we refer violence to Nebuchadnezar, then the meaning is,
God will raise up him to be the rod of his anger to beat the Jews for their
iniquity; he shall rise up into a rod of wickedness. If we refer it to the
Jews, then the meaning is, their own wickedness is risen up into a rod, into
judgment, and that rod will be their ruin; such a phrase there is in Pro.
14.3. In the mouth of the foolish is a rod of pride. That is, the proud
speeches in the mouths of fools, offend others, provoke God, produce shame,
trouble, danger to themselves, and so their own sin is a rod to themselves.

Hos. 5.5. Therefore shall Israel and Ephraim fall in their iniquity, Judah
also shall fall with them.

Is Israel proud, so is Judah? must Israel fall, so must Judah? Pride struts
before, and ruin follows at the heels, Prove. 16.18. Pride goes before
destruction, and a haughty spirit before a fall. Haman was haughty, he thought
scorn to lay hands on Mordecai alone, he will have the blood and bones of all
the Jews to satisfy his pride, Est. 3.6. And quickly after he was hanged,
Est. 7.10. Before the worms did eat Herod, his heart was swollen with pride,
Acts 12 23. Nebuchadnezar, Dan. 4.30, 31. David in the pride of his hear^
numbers the people, and the plague sweeps away 70000. of them presently after.
Absalom, Adonijah aspire, but destruction was their end. Pride affects to go
before; but its before a fall, before destruction: If you find pride in the
premises, you shall certainly find destruction in the conclusion; pride
preceded the grand fall of our first Parents, they would be like to Gods
knowing good and evil, Genesis 3.5. And pride preceded the Angels fall in Heaven;
some gather from that in 1 Timothy 3.6. It was so from the beginning, and will be
a truth to the end, Luke 14.11. Whosoever exalts himself shall be abased,
and he that humbles himself shall be exalted: Be they particular persons,
Cities, or Kingdoms; if they exalt themselves through pride, God will throw
them down, Jer. 50.29, 30. Babylon has been proud against the Lord, against
the holy one of Israel, and therefore she should be ruined. I believe the
Kingdoms that are ruining now, have been proud against the Lord and his
worship; they have provoked God with that sin, and he will plague them with his
Judgments; God threatened Jerusalem for this sin, Jer. 13.9. I Will mar the
pride of Judah, and the great pride of Jerusalem. And how, you may see in Isa.
3.24. Instead of sweet smells there shall be a stink, and instead of a girdle,
a rent: Instead of well-set hair, baldness: Instead of a stomacher, a girding
with sackcloath, and burning instead of beauty: Thus God would mar it, Isa.
23.9. The Lord of Hosts has purposed to stain the pride of all glory, and to
bring into contempt all the honorable of the earth: He has purposed, and is
powerful to do it.

David's sin was a rod to himself, 2 Samuel 12.9, 10, 11. Thou have killed
Vriah, defiled Bathsheba, now therefore the sword shall never depart from thine
house, I will raise up evil against thee out of thine own bowels. The Sin
and Rod grew out of one stock; men's sins prove their rods. Joseph's Brethren
sinned in Ganaan, and their sin was a rod to them in Egypt, Genesis 42.21. Judas
treason became the halter that hanged him, Matthew. 27.25. Adam's eating the
forbidden fruit, prepared birch for his own back, and all ours; he world is
whipped with the Rod of his Sin; Sin in the Scripture is called a burden,
weight, Gal. 6.5. It Is that sinks into misery, thorns, briars, Heb. 6.8. It
pricks and scratches, Nahum 1.10. Its a sling, 1 Cor. 15.59. It Is that brings
terrible pangs and pains to all; a snare, Psalm 9.16. and that will take him,
makes and sets it, and here a Rod that caused fear, smart, wounds, death. The
tree bears a helm for the Axe that cuts it self down, the Garment breeds the
moth that devours it, and Judah planted the Rod brake its self in pieces;
while Judah is sinning, Gods wrath is growing; Nebuchadnezar's coming, the Rod
of his indignation. It was Isreal's Idolatrity that ruined Her, Hos. 13.1. And
Judah's injustice, oppression, that ruined her, Jer. 5.1. Isa. 5.7.

None of them shall remain.
God would make a general destruction, yet not so general as not any to
escape; we know diverse did, and some returned, who had seen the glory of the
former Temple. Shall Remain, is not in the Original, its only none of them,
a defective speech, and refers to the Rod of wickedness, and may thus be
supplied, none of them shall go unpunished; they have all sinned, and shall
one way or other smart all of them: and so they did, though all of them were
not carried away, or cut off. (...)


Nor of their multitude.
(...)
The Hebrew is, Tumult, sound, or company making a noise; Where there is a great
number, there is tumultuousnesse, let their number be never so great, none of
them shall escape the Rod; if it destroy them not, it shall wound them, if not
wound them, it shall affright them.

Others interpret it of their wealth: None of their wealth, that is, none of it
shall do them good, or go u^plundered.

Nor any of theirs.
The Hebrew is considerable two ways, either from Hem, and that doubled
Mehemehem of them, of them, and then the sense is, none of them, I say none of
them that have thus sinned, dishonored me before the Nations, shall go
unpunished; Or thus, none of them, of them, none of their seed, none come from
such a race shall escape the smart of that Rod is now growing up. All their
Posterity were not quite ruined, but they all smarted.

Or the Hebrew may be considerable from Hamab, which is to make a noise: and
then the meaning is, none of those men that make a noise shall go unbeaten
with this Rod; none of the great men that with their honor, wealth, train,
make such stirs in the City and Land; none of them that think themselves
through their greatness exempt from all Courts, all accounts, all corrections,
shall be free from the strokes of this Rod, be they never so great, be they
Priests, Prophets, Nobles, Princes, Kings, they shall come under the lash,
neither multitude, riches, nor greatness, will privilege sinners when the Rod
comes. The old worlds multitude, Damascus riches, Jerusalems sons of pride, men
of noise, could not protect them from the wrath of God or man.

Neither shall there be wailing for them.
Though men of quality, yet shall not their friends bewail them in any solemn
manner, the destructions, miseries, fears, through power and insolency of the
enemy shall be such, that they shall not dare to lament the dead openly, nor
much mind their death. Jeremiah speaks of this evil, Chap. 16.4. and 25.33.
Their slain should be so many, death so common, that they should lie unburied,
unbemoaned.

CHAP. VII.
12. The time is come, the day draws near, let not the buyer rejoice, nor
the seller mourn: for wrath is upon all the multitude thereof.

13. For the seller shall not return to that which is sold, although they were
yet alive: for the vision is touching the whole multitude thereof, which shall
not return, neither shall any strengthen himself in the iniquity of his life.


IN these two verses our Prophet sets down what the condition of their
temporal estates should be, subject to spoil and loss, If the buyer bought a
great peniworth, he should have little cause to rejoice, it should be suddenly
taken from him, house, land, cattle, goods. The time was even at hand; and so
if the seller had sold his estate not for half the worth, and parced with his
inheritance which was dear to him, he should not mourn, had he not took a
little for the present, within a few days he should have had nothing, all
should have been taken from him, and he separated from his Inheritance;
Judgment is coming, and so dreadful, that there shall be no leisure to look
at what is sold or bought.

For wrath is upon all the multitude thereof.
The Hebrew word will bear it, upon all the wealth thereof, (...)
and some Interpreters so read it; H^mon, signifies plenty of riches, and also
of other things.

Jerusalem and Judah were rich wealthy places, Psalm 66.12. Thou have brought
us into a wealthy place; and the^e they became great, waxed rich, Jer. 5.27.
and gloried in their riches, Jer. 9.23. But Gods wrath was upon their riches,
he would bring the Chaldeans upon them, plunder and spoil them of all, and
neither buyer or seller should have any advantage.

Upon all the multiude thereof;
Upon all, not any one condition singled out, but upon all, upon sellers, upon
buyers, upon poor, upon rich; all that are in Jerusalem, and Judea, of what
condition soever, wrath is come upon them, they shall be spoiled and carried
captive.

For the seller shall not return to that which is sold.
To understand these words we must have recourse to the year of Jubilee.

Levit. 25.10.13. Wherein first they were to sound Trumpets.





Although they were yet alive.
Though their life were yet in the living: So is the Hebrew. If sorrow, exile,
miseries did not consume them, but they should live to the year of Jubilee, it
should be no advantage to them.

Quest.
But why did Jeremie purchase land after this time. In Jer. 32. you shall find
he bought land, in the tenth year of Zedekiah, when Jerusalem was besieged,
when himself was in prison, verse. 2. He bought, Hanameell sold, subscribed and
sealed the evidences, which Baruch put into an earthen vessel, and hid for
many days.

Levit. 25.24. Ruth. 4.4. But there were Wars in the gate, and when Wars are
awake, Inter arma silent leges.
the Laws do sleep.

2. He had special warrant for it, verse. 8. He says, then I knew that this
was the Word of the Lord, that Hanameel came to him, and bade him buy his
field; he knew that it came from God, and it had been sin in him not to have
done it.

3. He purchased this Land by faith, knowing that the Captivity should not
exceed 70. years; and that there should be a repossession of houses, fields,
and Vineyards after the captivity, ver. 15. and believed that the holy seed
should return: Ezekiel spoke of those present in Jerusalem, that should be
carried away, perish, and not return.

For the Vision is touching the multitude thereof, which shall not return.

These words must be cautiously observed, the multitudes returning must not
here be understood; but the vision shall not return. The Hebrew is, the vision
to the multitude thereof shall not return, or the vision shall not return to
the multitude thereof; there is no which in the Hebrew, which makes the doubt
in the English, and alters the sense. The vision shall not return; that is,
the prophetical threatening I have had touching the besieging and destroying of
Jerusalem, and the whole Land shall not be in vain, the Prophecy denounced
against them shall not return void, be without success; it shall not be
recalled, but stand firm, not be reiterated, once shall suffice, by that time
the truth of this prophecy is executed, and weight of it fallen upon you,
there will be no thought of possessions, or place of inheriting lands.

Some read it, the vision to all the wealth, making the sense to be a
threatening of their estates to be plundered and spoiled, which they trusted so
much unto; this is supposed in the other, for the Prophecy taking hold upon
them, their estates could not be safe.

Neither shall any strengthen himself in the iniquity of his life.
The Hebrew is, a man in his iniquity of his life shall not strengthen: or
thus, a man shall not strengthen himself, whose life is in his iniquity; it is so
in the Margin: Not comfort says the Vulgar; where there is comfort, there is
some strengthening; men have thoughts to strengthen themselves in their wicked
ways: but it shall not be, not their Councels, not their multitudes, not their
riches, not their privileges, not their confederacies with others, not their
Military preparations, not their serving of false Gods; nothing shall
strengthen them against the Chaldeans, to withstand them: The iniquity of their
lives is stronger to ruin them, then all the strength they have besides can
make to defend them; It Is not their art, policy, power, that shall deliver them
from the Judgment decreed and threatened; sometimes men's iniquities, their
malice, violence, blasphemies, stubbornness, makes others forbear them, and
loose their right rather then they will meddle with them: But here it shall not
be so, the greater their Iniquities, the rather, the sooner would God punish
them. Or thus; you have heard many threats and heavy judgments against the City
and Land: but you are secure, you repent not, you go on justifying your ways,
thinking all well, that we the Prophets are liars, that there is no danger or
fear; but you shall know that your ways are sinful, and will not afford
comfort or strength to stand it out in the evil day, no man ever got strength
by, or in Iniquity.

Chaldeans hands: and the price of desirable things was abated, the buyer was
not to rejoice, nor the seller to mourn, for neither the one or the other had
got or lost much, and what ever they had should come to nothing. If men
magnify temporals, and exalt the price of them, God will vilify them, and
make them at a low rate, all the wealth of Judah and Jerusalem was now to be a
prey to the Adversary; yea, their Gardens, Orchards, Vineyards, Lands, Houses,
Wives, Children, and what ever was considerable amongst them, should be taken
from them: Now there was no Terra firma in that Kingdom, all things were
moveable, in flux, upon the wing, and little cause had they to laugh or weep
for those things; the like is our condition at this present, all uncertain,
much in the Enemies hand, therefore as the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.29. Let them that
have wives, be as though they had none; they that weep, as though they wept
not, they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not, and thou that buy as
though they possessed not. Now let men's hearts be off from all, so look upon
all conditions, all possessions, as uncertain, as nothing, as taken from you,
as departing from them. Let your thoughts be upon the inheritance that is
incorruptible, undefiled, and that sadeth not away, which is reserved in
heaven, 1 Pet. 1.4.

Josh. 7.
Achans covetousness caused him to take the Garment, the sheckles of Silver,
and wedge of Gold: But it blinded him so, that he saw not the cursednesse of
them, nor the stony death that followed them. In Lots days there was buying
and selling, till the fire consumed what was bought and sold, together with the
buyer and seller, Luke 17.28, 29. Covetousness is greedy of its prey, even
when death is in it, it will buy houses when fire is kindled in them and land
when the curse of God is upon it; beware therefore of this sin says he, Luke
12.15. For a man's life consists not in the abundance of the things which he
possesses, his death and his destruction may be in them, they cannot add to
his life, or the true comfort of it, but they may take away from it, James 5.3.
The rust of their gold and silver shall witness against them, and eat their
flesh as fire.

an hypocritical nation, Isa. 10.6. And the hope of hypocrites shall perish,
be cut off, be a spiders web, Job 8.13, 14. They grow great and green, but
God has judgments to cut them down, they are fastened to the walls of the house
as the Spiders web: but God has a beesome of destruction to sweep them away;
what ever wicked men's hopes are of greatness here, and happiness hereafter,
yet God in his wrath can, and often does blast them altogether, Job 14.9. Thou
washest away the things which grow out of the dust of the earth, and thou
destroyest the hope of man.

Isa. 43.13. I will work, and who shall let it. When God has not promised,
or threatened, none can let his working, much less when the word is gone forth
of his mouth, and himself is engaged to make it good, see Isa. 55.11. My word
shall not return unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which I please. God
will see to it constantly, that it be so; and seeing its so, and God now
working in his judgments. Let all the earth fear the Lord, let all the
inhabitants of the world stand in awe of him, for he spoke, and it was done,
Psalm. 33.8, 9:

No man shall strengthen himself in the iniquity of his life; there is no
strength comes in by sin, it deprives us of our strength, it blinds the mind,
prejudices the strength of reason, it wounds the spirit, guiltieth the
conscience, which accusing causes despondency, and makes ashamed, it adds
weight to all afflictions, fills with fears, and so produces discouragements;
it keeps out the comfort, benefit of the Ordinances, makes God out with us, all
creatures against us, brings a curse upon our undertakings, subjects us to the
curse of the Law, and sentence of Condemnation; any of these will weaken the
heart of a sinner, much more all. In Ezekiel. 16.8. Jerusalems sins are reckoned
up: and verse. 30. How weak is thine heart, seeing thou do all these things.
They do not strengthen, but sink thee; Innocence, Righteousness, strengthens,
Prove. 28.1.

Levit. 17.14. It maintains and strengthens the life: so iniquity is the life
of all sinful flesh, wicked men live upon wicked ways, It Is pastime to a fool
to do wickedly, Prove. 10.23. There is a life of sin in the soul, and things
of Iniquity maintain that life: Christ lives in, and by the Father, John 6.57.
A godly man lives in Christ, 2 Timothy 3.12. And a wicked lives in sin, delights
in it, feeds upon it, 1 Timothy 5.6. She that lives in pleasure is dead.

Jerusalem had as much to plead as any place in the World, and those people had
the choicest privileges of all others, Amos 3.2. You only have I known of all
the families of the Earth, therefore will I punish you for all your Iniquities.
They were known above others, none had so many miracles, special providence,
blessings, truths, Prophets, ordinances; none were seated better, oftener
delivered, honored with such Titles as they were, and no people sinned as they
sinned, their sins exceeded the Heathens, Ezekiel. 5.6. And now neither their
privileges nor their sins could exempt them from, or relieve them under their
sufferings. Their iniquities hastened the Enemies, sharpened their swords, and
armed them with severity to their utter destruction; there is nothing in
creatures in the ways of wickedness to help in the day of wrath, Amos 2.13,
14, 15, 16.

CHAP. VII.
14. They have blown the Trumpet even to make all ready, but none goes to the
battle, for my wrath is upon all the Multitude thereof.
IN this Verse is set down one of the most grievous calamities that could
befall them, namely despondency of mind; they were called upon to Battle, but
none had a heart to go forth to it, and the cause is given, my wrath is upon
them all.

Some conceive these words to be spoken Ironically, and read them thus: Blow
the trumpet, let all be in a readiness, O ye Jews call forth, call together
your strong Soldiers, let all arm, and hasten to meet the Enemy, he is come
into your Quarters, ready to assault you in your Cities. Where are you? why do
you not appear in the open fields, or stand upon your Guard to defend your
Country and Cities, you are cowardly spiritlesse men.

There is none goes to the Battle.
Such Ironies and Sarcasmes the Scripture sometimes has, Isa. 8.9. Associate
your selves O ye people, and ye shall be broken in pieces, Isa. 21.5. Arise
ye Princes, and anoint the Shield.

Belshazar and his Nobles were voluptuous, the Medes were coming to his
destruction, undermyning the walls of Babylon, and here the Spirit of God
upbraided him and his Princes for their effeminacy and cowardlinesse.

We may take them literally; They have blown the trumpet, given public notice
to City and Country, to make ready for War; but none stirs, none go forth,
they are without spirit. The first mention of Trumpets we find in Scripture, is
Exodus 19.16. And there they were used at the giving and promulgation of the
Law, and to this day in many places Laws are proclaimed with the sound of
Trumpets: They were also used to proclaim Fasts, and convocate solemn
Assemblies, Joel 2.15. Blow the trumpet in Zion, sanctsie a Fast, call a
solemn Assembly, and solemn Feasts, Psalm. 81.3. In worship, 2 Chronicles. 5.12, 13.
In the journeying of their camps, Numb. 10.2. For then the cloud that used to
be over them removed, Numb. 9.22. Then Moses prayed, Numb. 10.35. And then the
Trumpet sounded, verse. 5, 6. It was also used to warn the people against the
danger of War, Ezekiel. 33.3. And in their Wars, Josh. 6.9. Here they blow the
Trumpet to warn them of the danger, to quicken them up to prepare against it;
There was loud sounding, and vehement crying, arm, arm, arm, and none went
out to the Battle; they wanted not Men, Means, Munition, Horses, Chariots,
Spears, Shields they had, but hearts they had not, no courage to fight with
their Adversaries, to stand for Religion, their Country, liberty or lives.



Humane endeavors sink, when they are not s^conded by God; aeconomicall, and
political affairs fall to the earth when they are not upheld by heaven, Psalm.
127.1. Except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build it.
It Is not man and wife can build up a family without God: This the Elders knew
that said to Boaz, Ruth 4.11. The Lord make the woman that is come into thine
house like Rachel, and like Leah, which two did build the house of Israel. So
except the Lord keep the City, the watchmen watch but in vain. Let Cities,
States, Kindoms have many watchmen, let them be faithful and industrious, yet
if God watch not more then they do, more then they, all is lost. Cities have
been suddenly surprised, Kingdoms overrun, notwithstanding all the art,
vigilance, and industry of men. Its not the Counsel, Militia, Magistracy,
Ministry of a City or Kingdom that can secure them, if Gods wrath be upon them.



It Is a great mercy among other necessaries to War, to have men of valor; If
there be money, arms, skill, men, and not courage, all is nothing. When Goliath
defied the Armies of Israel, 1 Samuel 17.10, 11. They were dismayed, their hearts
failed within them, and had not God put courage into David, all Israel had lain
under the reproach of one Philistine.

It Is observable in Scripture, that in Judah were many valiant men, 2 Samuel
24.9. There were 500000. such in David's days. In Abijah's days there was an
Army of 400000. valiant chosen men, 1 Chronicles. 13.3. In Asa's days was an Army
of 580000. out of Judah and Benjamine, and all of them were mighty men of
valor, 2 Chronicles. 14.8. In Ahaz days were 120000. valiant men of Judah slain
in one day, 2 Chronicles 28.6. The men of Judah were famous for their valor, yet
now there were no valiant men left, there were none had hearts to go forth and
give the enemy battle. The promise was, that one of them should chase a
thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight, Deuteronomy. 32.30. The meaning is, they
should mightily prevail in battle; this was in case they provoked not God
against them. And therefore it follows; except their Rock had sold them, and
the Lord had shut them up, if it were come to that, then they should be
faint-hearted and feeble: and so was it now, God their Rock was against them,
he had sold them into the hands of the Chaldeans, and shut up their spirits,
and the strong were become as tow, Isa. 1.31. They were heartlesse, headless,
armlesse, none durst oppose the stout and proud adversary. God has variety of
ways to frustrate the endeavors of men, and one among other, and of the
saddest nature is, to unspirit men. It Is a wonderful judgment, when the
wisdom of the wise does perish, when the understanding of the prudent is hid,
Isa. 29.14. And it is as heavy, strange a judgment, when the mettle and courage
of valiant Soldiers in time of need is not to be found.

The Germans were a warlike people, and Lavat observes, that after the Council
of Constance their spirits failed them, there they dealt unfaithfully with
Husse, and after cruelly and shamefully they put him to death, and attempting
to bring the Bohemians to the old way of worship; they were easily overcome,
and sometimes fled at the sight of their enemies.

Judah as at other times, but they were without spirit, their sins had stirred
up God to bring the Northern Force upon them; Nebuchadnezzar with all his
Forces, they were now entering their land, ready to sit down before Jerusalem,
and they saw now the sad threats of the Prophets fulfilling, God even fighting
against them, and this sunk their guilty hearts, Deuteronomy. 32.25. Terror within
shall destroy the young man: The young men that are full of blood, spirits,
lively, even terror within shall destroy them. Their guilt will not only
unspirit them, but unlife them, Job 15.20. The wicked man travaileth with pain
all his days. He has prickings, stingings within. And verse. 24. Trouble and
anguish shall make him afraid, they shall prevail against him as a King ready
to the battle: There is power in these to destroy a sinner, as in a King armed,
attended with a multitude of Soldiers, to ruin his wounded, his flying
adversaries. Jeremie knew the power of Divine wrath, and therefore prays, Chap.
17.17. Be not thou a terror unto me, thou art my hope in the day of evil. He
feared left he that was his hope should be his terror; the day of evil
awakens sleepy, guilty, dead works, and then God before trusted in, becoms
dreadful; look well to your hearts and consciences, get off the guilt upon
them, and get out the filth in them, Heb. 9.14. The blood of Christ does purge
the conscience from dead works. That is, all sins, and all guilt which works
death, and binds over to death; but that is not all, they lie as dead things in
the soul, and upon occasion revive, have their resurrection, and slay us anew.

CHAP. VII.
15. The sword is without, and the pestilence, and the famine within: he that
is in the field shall dye with the sword, and he that is in the City, famine
and pestilence shall devour him.
OF Sword, Famine, Pestilence I have formerly spoken, God has these Judgments
in his hand, and can let them out when and where he pleases: and when Gods
public Judgments are abroad, there is no safety for sinners in their Cities,
in the Fields, God will pursue them though they fly, and slay them though they
be never so stout. He will not only scare them with these, but he will destroy
them by these.

CHAP. VII.
16. But they that esacaped of them, shall escape, and shall be on the
mountains like doves of the valleys, all of them mourning every one for his
iniquity.

17. All hands shall be feeble, and all knees shall be weak as water.

18. They shall also gird themselves with sackcloth, and horror shall cover
them, and shame shall be upon all faces, and baldness upon all their heads.

19. They shall cast their silver in the streets, and their gold shall be
removed: their silver and their gold shall not be able to deliver them in the
day of the wrath of the Lord: they shall not satisfy their souls, neither fill
their bowels, because it is the stumbling block of their iniquity.


SUNDRY Calamities are set down before, he persists in the addition of more,
every verse has his peculiar calamity. In the 16. is contained their flight;
In the 17. their feebleness; In the 18. their sorrow and shame, and in the 19.
ver. the insufficiency of the creature to help in the time of trouble.

I begin with the 16. It Is misery to be in danger, especially of life, and to
be put to fly for it, as these were, when the Enemy came to their walls and
gates: some fled and escaped to the mountains. The Original is, their
escapers shall escape; those I have appointed to famine, sword, pestilence
shall be consumed by them: but those I have appointed to escape they shall
escape, and get to the mountains, where they shall be like doves of the
valleys.

(...)
The Hebrew, Root, whence Doves comes, signifies to prey upon, to oppress,
circumvent, make sad: and the Dove is subject to prey, oppression,
circumvention and mourning, as much as any Foul.

Hence two things in the Dove are aimed at, Fearfulness and Mourning.

First, the Dove is a trembling, fearful creature, any little noise makes it
fly, Hos. 11.11. They shall tremble as a Dove. The sight of the Hawk, the
noise of her bells, or wings, does multiply fears in a Dove, and so should those
Jews that escaped be full of fears, fly to rocks and mountains as Doves, for
fear of hawks, and dare not stir; they should hide themselves there, and be
afraid to speak, to groan out their grief, lest they should be discovered,
and dye for it.

Isa. 38.14. I did mourn as a dove says Hezekiah. And Isa. 59.11. We mourn
sore like Doves.

Doves sit solitary, and mourn when they have lost their young, their mates,
are wounded by any means; yea, it is their nature as to tremble, so to mourn,
and so should these Jews sit and mourn, they should have no joy of their
lives; their losses, the place they should be in, yea, the thought of life
should be matter of mourning unto them.

Of the valleys.
There were not Doves of mountains, and Doves of valleys, but they are so
called, either because they did often feed and appear there; as Fowls of the
Air are so called, because they are often in the Air, or for that being pursued
by Fowlers, they fled to the valleys and hid themselves there, not enduring
to be in open places; or because they did breed in the holes of rocks, which
were toward the valleys. In Job you have mention of clifts of the valleys, Job
30.6. Or because they mourned in the valleys, there they made a mourning, or
doleful noise.

All of them mourning, every man for his Iniquity.
Here is the cause of their calamity, viz. their iniquity; this was a Serpent
in the bosom, and gave them no rest; had there been no Enemies at their gates,
at their heels, their own sins besieged, pursued them.

Babilonians were so nigh, fearing discovery and death every moment; a spirit
of fear ceases upon sinners at such times, that imprisons reason, and holds
them in bondage.

They are fallen into the hands of Divine judgments, which are dreadful;
those were like Lions before, were as silly Doves, Jer. 48.28.

every one of them shall mourn for his iniquity: before they sported in their
sins, now they should sigh for them; their consciences were asleep through
custom of sinning, Gods judgments had now awakened them, and they brought
their sins so to mind, that they wept and sorrowed sorely for them; they had
gone on in their idolatrous, oppressing, and provoking ways long, they saw no
cause to be sorry, all was well with them; but when trouble came, their sins
appeared, their souls were sad and filled with apprehensions, that drew bitter
tears from them.

What is the fruit of wantonness, whoredom, Prove. 5.11. Solomon tells you that
such a sinner shall mourn at last, when his flesh and his body are consumed.
That of Job is suitable for him; his flesh upon him shall have pain, and his
soul within him shall mourn, Job 14.22, Eves sin had sorrow, and sorrow
multiplied, greatly multipied, Genesis 3.16. God told them, Levit. 26.14.16. That
if they sinned, they should have sorrow of heart. And Deuteronomy. 28.65. Sorrow of
mind. And they had that plentifully, Isa. 65.14. Ye shall cry for sorrow of
heart, and shall howl for vexation of spirit. Sin causes howling and mourning:
David when he had sinned, it made him to roar, Psalm 32.3. only his terrors were
penitential; these unprofitable, showed their misery, but made no way to mercy.

This sorrow was the fruit of sin, godly sorrow is the fruit of the spirit;
that looks at the punishment, which removed, the guilt and filth of sin still
abides, this at the sin, and would have that destroyed, though the judgments
never be taken away, Hos. 14.2.



Verse. 17.
All hands shall be feeble.
Fear made them fly, and fear made them feeble; where great fear falls upon
any, there the hands grow weak, and are not able to do their office; the
spirits retire to the heart, to relieve that, lest life should fail, and
thereupon the hands become weak. The trumpet was blown, all called upon to make
ready; but none went out to Battle: and why, their hands were feeble, they
could not hold and handle their weapons to defend themselves; their knees were
feeble, they could not fly to save themselves.

There is a treble feebleness of hands, one natural, as when a man has
naturally a weakness, lamenesse in his hands.





In this sense we are to take it, and so it is often used in the Scripture, Jer.
6.24. The report of the Northern Forces was come to them, and what then; Our
hands wax feeble, anguish has taken hold of us, Jer. 50.43. 2 Samuel 4.1. Job.
4.3. Ezekiel. 21.7. Isa. 13.7. Je. 47.3. In all these places is mention of
weakness, feebleness of hands, which is to be taken in the metaphorical
sense, their hands were not able to do what they should, and formerly could
have done, and here when they had most need of their hands, they had least use
of them.

All knees shall be weak as water.
These words are in Chap. 21.7. The same they are here: and the Original is,
shall go into water, or fl^w with water.

Some interpret it of sweating; but in great pains, not fears do the lower
parts of the body sweat. Others expound it of urine and seed that in their
fears should flow from them, pollute and enfeeble them more with misgiving
thoughts; this might be, but I take the sense to lie in this; That their knees
should be as water: which is a fluid, and weak thing, their legs should not be
serviceable unto them. It Is a proverbiall kind of speech, weak as water, and
when applied to any thing, or part of man, sets out great feebleness; they
would attempt to fly, and fear would loosen the joints of their knees, so
that they should have no strength, nor stand them in any stead: and it was not
the knees of some few or aged; but all knees, even of youth, and the stoutest
ones, Isa. 40.30. Even the youths shall faint, and be weary, and the young men
shall utterly fall. Their knees and legs should fail them; as waters are driven
this way and that way with the winds, so should they with their fears.

Prove. 24.10.
been without hearts when they have come to battle, Isa. 33.7. The valiant ones
shall cry without, and Ambassadors of peace shall weep bitterly. When
Senacherib was before Jerusalem, their valiant ones were so afraid that they
cried: The Hebrew word, some interpret their Seers, that is, their Prophets;
others their Soldiers that were their watchmen, their hearts melted, and
tears flowed from them: and those that were sent to treat with Senacherib, now
when they should have been fullest of courage, they had none, they made good
what Abishai said, 2 Samuel 17.10. He that is valiant, whose heart is as the
heart of a Lion, shall utterly melt. Their hearts melted away, and their hands
became feeble, and knees weak. God cares not for the arms or legs of men,
Psalm. 37.17.147.10. He brake the arms of Pharaoh, Ezekiel. 30.22. And caused the
sword to fall out of his hands. He loosed the joints of Belshazars loins, and
made his knees war one against the other, Dan. 5.6. So Nineveh's heart melted,
and knees knocked together, Nabum. 2.10. Let none confide in an arm of flesh,
see Jer. 17.5. and Isa. 31.1, 2, 3. They sent to Egypt for help, and relied
too much upon horses, men, Chariots, because they were many and strong, and
looked not to the holy one of Israel; whereupon the Lord tells them, that the
Egyptians are men, and not Gods, their horses flesh, and not spirit. And when
he should stretch out his hand, both the helper and helped should fall and fail
together.

Kings, chief Captains, great, rich, mighty men feared, and hid themselves in
dens and rocks, Revel. 6.15. True valor is the gift of God, that greatens men's
spirits, and lifts them up above fears; Moses feared not the wrath of the King,
Heb. 11.27. He had more then his natural courage, or acquired habits, he had a
principle of grace given, continued, preserved, and that made him truly
valorous.

The truest valor is ever in a gracious heart that fears God, and so all
other fears are swallowed up, that enjoys God, and has divine influence to
uphold it in all conditions, Josh. 1.5.6, 9. I will be with thee, be strong and
of a good courage, be not afraid nor dismayed, for the Lord thy God is with
thee whithersoever thou go. His courage, strength, was upon Divine promise
and presence.

Verse. 18.
They shall also gird themselves with sackcloth.
The first mention we have of sackcloth, is in Genesis 37.34. where Jacob upon
the mis-apprehension of Joseph's death, put sachcloath upon his loins, this was
an indicium of great misery and sorrow, when the famine was in Samaria, and
death ready to eat up them had nothing to eat. The King had sackcloath within
upon his flesh, under his royal garments, next his skin was course rough
sackcloath, 2 Kings 6.30. When Ahab King of Israel had beaten and sore
distressed the Assyrians, they put on sackcloath, and sued to him for pardon
and the life of Benhadad, 1 Kings 20.32. Testifying hereby their misery,
sorrow, humility, and it is sometimes joined with other signs of sorrow, as Est.
^.1. when the writings were sealed and sent out by Haman for destruction of the
Jews, Mordecai rent his clothes, put on sacke-cloath, with ashes. That is, he
sprinkled the sackcloth with ashes, and then put it on. So in Nehem. 9.1. you
have sackcloth and earth joined together; this was at a Fast, and they were
tokens of godly sorrow, they professed they were not worthy of any good
clothes, sackcloth was too good for them, only somewhat they must have to
cover their nakedness: and they had earth upon them, intimating they deserved
to be buried alive; but frequently sackcloth set out their common sorrow for
calamities, and so it is here, they should be a miserable mourning people, not
for a few days, but many years. If they escaped death, they should be girt
with sackcloth, Job 16.15. I have sowed sackcloth upon my skin. There was
no removing of it, he continued in his doleful condition; Gods hand was upon
him, and his sackcloth abode with him as a thing sowed to him.

Horror shall cover them.
The word for horror notes great trembling that comes from fear, Job 21.6. I
am afraid, and trembling takes hold of my flesh. (...)
It Is such trembling as is in Earthquakes, Job 9.6. Which shakes the earth
out of her place, and the pillars thereof tremble. Such an horror, or
trembling should be upon them as should hazard their beings, lives, wits, Isa.
21.4. Fearfulness affrights me. It Is the same word with our Prophets, and
affrightments are dangerous, and sometimes deadly, and probably the meaning
here for it was such horror as should cover them, oppress them, and hide them
from the living.

But there is another sense of the word cover; horror shall cover them, that
is, compass them about; so the word cover is used, Job 21.26. The worms shall
cover them. And Psalm. 109.29. Let them cover themselves with their own
confusion. Psalm. 44.19. Lam. 3.43. In these places covering notes compassing:
And Jon 2.5. compassing is the same with covering; the floods and waters
compassed me about, they did compass and cover him. And here horror did cover
them as a Garment, and beset, compass every part of them; neither hands,
arms, body, legs were free.

Shame shall be upon all faces.
Shame is the blushing of the face upon the sight, hearing, Pudor a rebus
putidis Scal.
apprehension, or doing of something unseemely, dishonest, or fi^thy, as Romans
6.21. Luke 14.9. 2 Cor. 4.2. Phil. 3.19. Shame notes two things.

Psalm. 119.116. Let me not be ashamed of my hope.

Psalm 35.4. Job 6.20. They were confounded because they had hoped, they came
thither and were ashamed. And here disappointment and confusion were upon their
faces, their expectations were disappointed, and hopes confounded.

Shame was upon their faces, that they could not look up to God whom they had
provoked against them; this shaming of sinners is expressed in the Word diverse
ways, Job 8.22. They shall be clothed with shame. That is the garment they
shall wear, Psalm. 44.7. Be put to shame, brought to shame, Psalm. 71.24. Have
their faces filled with shame, Psalm. 83.16. Lie down in shame, Jer. 3.25. Be
covered with shame, Obad. 10. Bear it, Ezekiel. 16.52. Be consumed with it, Jer.
20 18. All these were made good upon these Jews, they were clothed, put too,
and filled with shame; they bare their shame upon their faces, lay down in it,
were covered and consumed with it.

Baldness upon all their heads.
Their miseries and griefs should be so great, that they should pluck off the
hair of their heads and beards, though it were against rule, Deuteronomy. 14.1. God
provided for the comeliness of their heads and faces, yet in their sorrows
they would disfigure themselves as the Heathens did, and add to their own
misery.

Vid. Q. Curt. lib. 1. Hom. l. 1. Iliad Agam: Vellentem capili^s in dolor
indu^ie.
They deformed themselves, Jer. 47.5. and 48.37. Mica 1.16. Amos 8.10. Isa 15.2.
Hair was an ornament, and baldness a reproach, 2 Kings 2.23. Come up thou bald
head.

It was said in the 11. verse. there should be no wailing for them, and here is
mention of sackcloth and baldness, signs of common and great sorrow: There
was no public wailing and solemn mourning at their burials; but privately
they bewailed their friends, mourned for the evils upon them, or some few did
appear that were not considerable.

I^'s questionable whether baldness were upon all their heads, did all tear
off their hair, and make themselves unsightly? Doubtless many of them did,
and all had cause to do it. The Prophet speaks not what every one should do,
but what their condition required; their calamity was such as called for all
signs of sorrow, sackcloth, horror, shame, baldness.

Lam. 4.5. They that were confident themselves of their strength, now trembled;
they were proud of their beauty, had haughty eyes, painted faces, etc. now were
filled with shame, and they that gloried in their hair, now were made bald,
here was the just hand of God, Isa. 3.24. In stead of sweet smells, there shall
be a stink, and instead of a girdle, a rent, and instead of wel-set hair,
baldness, and instead of a stomacher, a girding of sackcloth, and burning
instead of beauty. Wherein they sinned, there God smote them, Psalm. 68.21. God
shall wound the hairy scalp of such an one as goes on still in his trespasses.
They gloried in their hair then, as too many do now, and God would wound them
in that, their hairy scalps should suffer; the Hebrew is, the Crowns of hair
walking in its own wickedness.

The hair holds forth the pride and vanity of the Master thereof, and God would
wound it, and the head bare it; the word for wound, Muscu: and Moller:
interpret, shall make bloody, or dip in blood; they have often powdered their
hair, to dry and sweeten it, and God would dye it in their own blood.

They shall cast their silver in the streets. Verse 19.

That which had been much desired, was gotten with great pains, they should
throw into the open streets for any to take up, they were flying for their
lives, and their bags of silver were burdensome: or they were faint with
famine, so that silver would not relieve, or purchase relief for them, and
therefore must throw it into the streets as dung and filth; there was an
insufficiency in the creature to advantage them in this great distress, and
thereupon despairing, they threw away that they had formerly so prized, so
labored for, and safely kept a long time. When Seamen are in storms and
hazard of their lives, they will throw over board things precious, and this was
the case here. By silver and gold understand not only coin, but place, and
all things made thereof.

Their gold shall be removed.
(...) Procul amovit.
The Hebrew is, for a removal, the Chaldeans shall take it away and carry it
into Babylon, a far off: so much the Original root signifies, to carry it far
from the place where it was; They had hoarded it up in Sion, and now it should
be carried to Babylon. In sterquilinium.
The vulgar reads it, their gold shall be for a dunghill, their great heaps of
gold made dunghils, and the word does something countenance it, which signifies
separation, ob immunditiam, such as is in a menstruous cloth which is thrown
out to the dunghill. Their gold was the gold of their covetousness and
oppression, polluted with Idolatry, and so matter fit to be separated from
them, to the dunghill, that had lain so long by them, and was thought should
never be stirred, that shall be for removal, either themselves shall throw it
out upon, or hide it in the earth, or dunghill, or the barbarous enemies shall
carry it into far Countries.

Their Silver and their Gold shall not be able to deliver them.
They had conceits of, and confidence in their riches, that they would benefit
them one way or other; if Chaldeans came, they would hire them to be gone, if
they took the City, they would buy out their lives and liberties, they dreamed
that money could do any thing with any sort of men, but it was otherwise. If by
gold and silver we understand their gold and silver Gods, they hoped for help
from them; but they being without life, had neither counsel, power, or any
blessing for them.

They shall not satisfy their souls, nor fill their bellies.
Such shall be the famine and want of bread, that all their wealth shall not
purchase bread enough to relieve and satisfy them; though they have houses full
of all wealth, yet their bellies shall have want, and souls faint for hunger.
Soul here is put for the appetitive virtue, as in Math. 6.25. Take no care for
the life what ye shall eat or drink. The word is for the Soul, that is for
the appetite, God will provide. Here they took care for their bellies and
appetites, and had little or nothing.

Because it is the stumbling block of their iniquity.
They had no use or benefit of their estates, when they had most need of them:
and why? here is the cause, they were the stumbling blocks of their iniquity.
By Iniquity, some Expositors understand punishment, and then the sense is, That
their silver and gold were the occasion of these sad judgments fell upon them:
Their Wars, fiering of the City and Temple, and their leading into Captivity.
The former translation has it; For this ruin is for their iniquity; it
renders stumbling block, ruin, and shows the cause, its for their iniquity,
and so iniquity is taken properly for sin, not punishment. They had sinned,
and this ruin or judgment of casting away their silver and gold, of finding
no help, of being hungry and unsatisfied was upon them for their sin.

This sense is truth, but the Hebrew being thus, because it has been the
stumbling block of your iniquity. It leads to this sense, that their wealth
was the matter and occasion of their sin, their silver, gold, and great estates
occasioned them to sin more fully, and more fowly, and therefore these
judgments came upon them, their estates bred their sins, and brought their
judgments.

That wealth is the occasion and fuel of sin appears thus. Rich men in
Scripture are set out as apt to trust in their estates, to be high-minded, 1 Timothy 6.17. To glory in what they have, Jer. 9.23. They are liberal to their own
backs and bellies, but hard hearted to the poor, Luke 16.19, 20, etc. They
answer roughly, Prove. 18.23. They scorn others, Psalm 123.4. They are
covetous, deceitful, having treasures of wickedness in their houses, Mica
6.10. They oppress the poor, corrupt Justice, and fill all with violence,
verse. 12. They keep back the wages of Servants and Laborers; they live in
pleasures wantonly, securely, James 5.4, 5. They little mind Christ and his
ways, John 7.48. Matthew. 19.23, 24. When Christ calls, they have their yokes of
Oxen, which draw them so fast from Christ, that all his sweet invitations
prevail not, they are prone to, and prodigal in false Idolatrous worship, Isa.
46.6. What wickedness does not wealth prompt men unto, Jer. 5.27, 28. They are
waxen rich, and what then, they are fat and shining, their faces, their
apparel glisters; but it follows, they overpasse the deeds of the wicked, the
richer they are, the worser they do; their riches are fuel to their lusts, and
cause them to act with more heat and strength. Hence Christ calls them
unrighteous Mammon, Lu. 16.9.13. Riches are men's Mammons, gods that open the
door wide for, and strongly entice to unrighteous and wicked things, therefore
wealth is called wickedness, Psalm 52.7. Speaking of a wicked rich man, he
strengthens himself in his wickedness. In the margent, its substance, and
notes wealth gotten by a man's labor. Wealth gotten most honestly has
somewhat in it, which through our weakness and corruption may draw us to
wickedness, and therefore here it falls under that notion.

Zeph. 1.18. Prove. 11.4. They cannot deliver, they cannot profit in the day of
man's jealousy; wealth will not profit, much less in the day of Gods wrath.

But its said, Eccles. 7.12. Money is a defense. And Chap. 10.19. Money
answers all things. Money may defend from poverty, humane wrongs, but not
from sickness, death, or the wrath of God: and it may answer for all our debts
to men, but not for our debts to heaven. It Is not the fruit of your body can
answer for the sin of your soul, Mica 6.7. much less the fruit of your
purse.

The profit men labor for in their health, will not profit in the day of Gods
wrath. Judas 30. pieces could not still one throb of his Conscience. Herod's
royal Robes, Scepter, Crown, greatness, could not protect him from the teeth
of a few feeble worms; nor all Jerusalems gold and silver the Jews from the
fury of the M^des, Isa. 13 17, 18. It Is not all your wealth can keep the plague
out of the City, or secure your lives when its come.

In a Famine, is not one loaf of bread more satisfying than all the gold of the
earth. Silver and gold are not eatable, green herbs are more serviceable in
such a case then they are; Let the counsel of Gods Spirit therefore prevail
with you, Pro. 23.4, 5. Labor not to be rich; cease from thine own wisdom.
Wilt, thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? for riches certainly make
themselves wings, they fly away as an Eagle toward heaven. Here are 3.
arguments against it.

1. It Is humane wisdom, not divine to do so.

2. They are inconsiderable things, they have no being in them, they are not
sufficient to help and deliver you in your streights.

3. They are uncertain things, they make wings to themselves and fl^e away,
they are like birds in the nest that seem to dwell there, but presently their
feathers grow, and they are gone, and their wings are Eagles wings, they fly
swiftly, strongly from you: A fire in a night, and^. therefore set not your
hearts to get riches; or if they be gotten, set not your hearts upon them.

2. That wealth in the day of Gods wrath, when he deals with sinners, i^ so
far from advantaging, that it prejudiceth and wounds: They shall cast their
gold in the streets, etc. They found it did them hurt; In prosperity they plead
prerogative, and must have their will: and in adversity they have their
prerogative above others, but it is a prerogative of woes. If any suffer, go
into captivity, they do it first, Amos 6.7. N^buz^radan took the rich and fat
ones with him, and left the poor that had nothing, to dress the Vine-yards,
and possess the Land, Jer. 39.10. These had the privilege of safety, when
others had a prerogative of misery: The wealth of these men did multiply their
woes.

1. One wound to them was, that they had not believed the Prophets threatening
the ruin of their estates.

2. That they had gotten their estates by unlawful means.

3. That they had done little good, but much hurt by them.

4. That they were disappointed now, and could not bribe the Chaldeans with all
their Estates to spare them, they regarded not Gold, Isa. 13.7. Hence the
Chaldee renders that in Prove. 11.4. Riches profit not; A Lie profits not;
Riches are lying and deceitful things, they disappoint, and this wounded them.

5. They were so smitten with fear, distraction, and blindness, that they saw
not what to do with their Wealth, but threw it away, they do not carry it
away.

6. That what they had labored hard for, kept with difficulty, prized so high,
must now in a moment be parted with and thrown away.

7. That all opportunities were now lost of doing good to their friends or
others with their Estates.

8. That they should be exposed to more shame, scorn, misery, and be more
sensible of the same then those that never had any Estates, like one that has
warm clothes, and being stripped of them is more affected with the cold then
Beggars that feels it every day.

9. That they had not sought the eternal good of their souls with their
Estates, but sinned with them, and made way for a dreadful account.

10. And lastly, that their lives were in the greater danger the more wealthy
they were; Riches invite enemies to plunder, Jerem. 49.31. Fat Cattle are
nearest the slaughter; Wealthy men are called Fatt men, they are filled and
fatted with their great Estates, and the wrath of God came first upon them,
Psalm. 78.31. Judges 3.29. It was their Gold that caused the Jews bellyes to be
ripped, when the Romans took Jerusalem.

Mich. 2.2. Isa. 57.17.

They were generally given to covetousness, even great and small, Jer. 6.13.
and 8.10. Their eyes and hearts were for naught but Covetousness, Jer. 22.17.
Wealth was the only object of their eyes, and Idols of their hearts; they had
treasures, but God could give tbem away to Spoylers, Jer. 15.13. Yea all their
Treasures, Jer. 17.3. Little did these covetous Jews think that the
Babylonians should be enriched with their l^bours, wealth and treasures; they
had vexed their heads, hearts, and hands to get Houses and Vineyards, banks of
Silver and Gold, and now mere strangers, men their souls hated must possess
their desirable things, and fill their pockets with their Treasures; this
misery is upon all men, that they cannot foresee who shall enjoy what they get,
and therefore it should prevail with men to labor less for the creature,
seeing they work for they know not whom: It may be a Babylonian, some bloody
Cavalier, Idolatrous Papist, or bitter Enemy to God and his Saints, some one he
never saw, exchanged a word with, had any reference unto; and what thou have
been twenty or thirty years in gathering, he shall possess in one hour:
David, Psalm. 39.6. brands this practice with vanity and disquietment of spirit:
Surely every man disquiets himself in vain; and why? He lays up riches, and
knows not who shall gather them, who shall be owner and take them into his
custody; Solomon upon this ground hated his labor in pursuit of the creature,
because he knew not whether the man came after him should be a wise man or a
fool, Eccles. 2.18, 19. You know neither the man nor his qualities who shall
come after you, and why will you disquiet your selves, for you know not whom,
wise men or fools, Saints or Devils,

You will say its for your Children:

If so, they are either godly or ungodly; if godly, they have wealth enough,
God is their portion, he will bless their endeavors, and provide
sufficiencies; if ungodly, a little is enough, if not too much for them: But
you are not sure to leave your estates to your Children, nor to keep them your
selves; remember Thieves and Robbers are in the Land, and if you labor all day
for Thieves at night what folly, will this be.

4. Abuse of our Estates, defiles them, and brings the wrath of God upon them,
their Silver and Gold they had hoarded up, confided in, maintained their pride,
lusts, Idolatry withal, that must be separated as an unclean thing, Levit.
14.55. The Leprosy defiled Garments, Houses; and sin defiles persons, whole
Estates; when men divert their Estates otherwise, and to other ends then God
has appointed them, they wrong the creature, imbondage it to their own lusts,
they defile it, and bring the curse of God upon it, Isa. 24.5, 6. The earth is
defiled under the Inhabitants thereof, because they have transgressed the
Laws, changed the Ordinances, broken the everlasting Covenant: Therefore has
the curse devoured the earth, and they that dwell therein are dosolate: Their
sin defiled the Land and fruit of it, and brought the curse of God upon all:
When Adam and Eve put the fruit of the Tree to another use then God appointed,
they then brought the curse upon themselves and the whole Earth, Jer. 15.13.
Thy Substance and thy Treasures will I give to the spoil, and that for all thy
sins: If you would not have your substance defiled, and cursed, take heed of
abusing it.

1. First, acknowledge all you have to be the Lords, you are Stewards, not
Owners, Hos. 2.9. God calls it his Corn and Wine, etc. not only receive them as
from God, but acknowledge them to be the Lords.

2. Labor to see much of God in your Estates, most look at the outside, the
glass, the gally-pot, not at what is within: God is in the creatures, Romans
1.20.

3. Make use of all truths you hear about the insufficiency and emptiness of
the Creatures, say here is much Silver, Gold, Bread, but I live not by these,
but the blessing of God, these are nothing without him.

4. Work up your hearts nearer to God by them, Estates should be as Ladders
and Mountains, when you are on them you go up toward Heaven, and when at the
top you are nearest Heaven.

5. Have your eyes ever upon some thing better then your Estates, unto which
make your Estates servicable.

6. Lay out your Estates for God, his Worship, Cause, the Public, the
Spiritual good of your Families and Friends, relief of the poor; Its Christ's
direction, Lay not up Treasures, but lay out, give and it shall be given you,
etc.

7. Meditate often upon that Scripture, Come give account of thy Stewardship,
Luke 16.2. as you do of your Silver and Gold.

CHAP. VII.
20. As for the beauty of his ornament, he set it in Majesty: but they made the
Images of their abominations, and of their detestable things therein: therefore
have I set it far from them.

21. And I will give it into the hand of the stranger for a prey, and to the
wicked of the Earth for a spoil, and they shall pollute it.

22. My face will I turn also from them. and they shall pollute my secret
place: for the Robbers shall enter into it and defile it.


IN these Verses comes the Temple into consideration, and the calamity befell
them in regard thereof, with the cause of it: The Temple here is described;

First, by it is appellation, It Is his Ornament.

Secondly, by it is qualification: Its Beautiful.

Thirdly, From it is end, set for Majesty, or from the manner set in Majesty.

Fourthly, The Author, He set it.

The calamities befell it, and them, are

First, Rejection, or separation of it, I have set it far from them.

Secondly, Tradition of it into hands of others: And they are set out to be;
First, Strangers. Secondly, The wicked of the Earth, v. 21.


Thirdly, Depredation, It shall be for a prey, and for a spoil, Ibid.

Fourthly, Profanation, They shall pollute it, Ibid.

Fifthly, Aversion, and that of the face of God, v. 22. My face will I turn
also from them.

Sixthly, Contamination of the Sanctum Sanctorum, They shall pollute my secret
place.

The cause of all these evils is set down in the 20 Verse, They made the
Images of their abominations, and of their detestable things therein.

As for the beauty of his Ornament he set it in Majesty.
Some Expositors interpret these words, not of the Temple, but of their Silver,
Gold, Jewels, and such like precious things, with which they were decked as a
Bride, for which they should have been dutiful and thankful, but they abused
all to Idolatry, pride, and service of their lusts, and so provoked God to take
all from them.

Others expound them only of the Temple, Jonathas, and Rabbi David de Templo
interpretantur, Maldonat.
to whose judgment I incline, and that upon these considerations.

First, Its said, He set it, which takes off the conection of this Verse with
the former; had it been meant of their Gold, Silver, etc. it should have run
Plurally, They cast their Silver in the streets, they shall not be satisfied;
and so they set the beauty of their Ornament for pride; whereas its He set,
not the people, but God.

And if it be urged, He set their Gold, Silver, the beauty and Ornament of his
people in Majesty, or for Excellency, it suits not with what follows; They made
Images of their abominations, and detestable things therein, it should have
been thereof, (...) in e^ Montan. Piscat. Jun. Polan.
if that had been the sense; but its therein, agreeable with the Original, and
so choice Expositors render it.

Secondly, Those words in the 21 Verse refer more properly to the Temple,
then to their Silver and Gold, holy things are subject to pollution more then
common: Some to help this, Interpret the word for pollute, to kill and make
the sense; (...)
They shall kill their Captives, and so refer it to the men, not their
Wealth; or if to Wealth, then they render it vilify, they shall vilify their
Silver and Gold, they have made their beauty and ornament; but I see no cause
why the sense of the word should be changed in this verse. When its taken for
polluting in the next verse, they shall pollute my secret place.

4. In this 22. verse, he speaks of the secret place, the holy of holies which
was in the Temple, and hence to me is an argument that he spoke of the Temple.

The beauty of his Ornament.
These words are a metaphorical description of the Temple, whereby its likened
to a beautiful garment, which becomes the party wears it, or to any precious
thing that adorns the body, Exodus 33.4. No man did put on him his ornament.
That is, his chief apparel, and other precious things which might adorn the
body. Ornaments were choice things, 2 Samuel 1.24. Judges 8.26. The Hebrew word
signifies choice robes, silken vailes, costly chains, crowns, etc. What ever
excellency may be fastened to the body or garments of a man, such an ornament
was the Temple, to God, and to the Jews.

First to God, It was his dwelling place, Psalm 74.7. And no mean one, Isa.
60.7. He calls it the house of his glory: So great was the glory of it, that in
comparison thereof the second Temple was nothing, Hag. 2.3. There multitudes of
his people met, prayed, whence it is named an house of prayer, Isa. 56.7. There
they sang praises, Psalm. 150.1. and God there inhabited the praises of Israel,
Psalm. 22.3. There they sacrificed, 2 Chr. 11.16. And it was an house of
sacrifice, thither did Kings bring presents unto the Lord, Ps. 68.29. Kings did
honor the place, and garnished the Temple with great gifts: Selucus King of
Asia of his own revenues bare all the costs belonging to the servic^ of the
sacrifice, 2 Match. 3.2, 3. By his worship there he was distinguished and made
known from all false Gods: there the Saints desired to dwell to behold the
Lords beauty, Psalm. 27.4. And see his power, Psalm. 63.2. There every one speaks
of his glory, Psalm. 29.9. The earth is full of the glory of God, but the Temple
is fuller; there is the chief and brightest glory, glory that affects every
eye, heart, and tongue, all these are ornaments and honor to God.

2. To the Jews: If we should look at the structure only, it was one of the
stateliest and most magnificent buildings that ever the world had, there were
150000. workmen employed about it, 1 Kings 5.15, 16. And 7. years in building,
Chap. 6.37, 38. The Apostles wondered at the goodly stones and glory of the
second Temple, Luke 21.5. which were inconsiderable to those of the first, Hag.
2.3. In this respect it was a great ornament to Jerusalem, and the Jewish
Nation: But it was the house of the great God, Ezra 5.8. The house called by
his name, Jer. 7.11. Th^re he made his people joyful, and accepted their
offerings, Isa. 56.7. There they had fatness, Psalm. 36.8. Loving-kindnesse,
Psalm. 48.9. Help in their distresses, Psalm. 20.2. In Ezekiel. 24 21.25. you have
these expressions.

1. It Is called their strength. 2. The excellency of their strength. 3. The
desire of their eyes. 4. That which their souls pittyed (least it should be
destroyed.) 5. Their glory. 6. The joy of their glory; all which show the
Temple was an ornament to them.
The beauty of his Ornament.
The Temple was beautiful, Isa. 64.11. Our holy and beautiful house is burnt
up with fire. There was a material beauty in it, as you may read, 1 Kings 6.
and 2 Chronicles. 3.6.8. He garnished the house with precious stones for beauty, and
the gold was gold of Parvaim, all was overlaid with fine gold, which made it
glorious, there was a spiritual beauty in it, Psalm. 96.6. Strength and beauty
are in his Sanctuary: There was the beauty of holiness, Psalm. 29.2. There was
beautiful order, beautiful worship, beautiful ordinances, and a most beauteous
God, Psalm. 27.4. Whose glorious presence and lovely truths drew the eyes and
hearts of the godly thither, Isa. 2.3. Come, let us go up to the mountain of
the Lord, and he will teach us of his ways.

Hence Sion the Mount, where the Temple was, (...)
is called the perfection, or universality of beauty, Psalm 50.2. There was all
beauty.

(...)
He set it in Majesty.
In magnificent pomp, or for Majesty, Glory, and Excellency; God set the Temple
among the Jews, that it might be their glory, excellency, and make them
glorious and excellent among all Nations, Isa. 60.15. is the same word, and
it is rendered an excellency; it might well be, for so is rendered thrice in one
verse. Exodus 28.2. Thou shall make holy garments for Aaron, for glory, for
beauty.

Or he set it into Majesty, into excellency; the majesty and excellency of the
Temple, was not only the stateliness of the structure, the strength, and
situation of it on a hill; but in that it was sanctified and bare Gods name, 1
Kings 9.7. Chap. 8.29. It was a type of Christ, and the Church, a part of their
worship; in it their gifts and sacrifices were sanctified and accepted, Matthew.
23.19. 2 Chronicles. 7.1. Fire came down from heaven, and consumed the burnt
offering and the sacrifice. There was the Arc of the Covenant, a sign of Gods
presence, 1 Kings 8.6. In it were glorious visions of God, Isa. 6.1. Filled
with glory, 2 Chronicles. 7.1. The people prayed toward the same, 1 Kings 8.38. The
eye and heart of God was there perpetually, 1 Kings 9.3. It was exceeding
magnificall of fame and of glory throughout all Countries, 1 Chronicles. 22.5. In
these and such things consisted the Majesty, glory, and excellency of the
Temple, and therefore it is called their excellency, Ezekiel. 24.21. The excellency
of Jacob, Amos 6.8.

Vide Drus. in locum.
Some refer it to the holy land, to their own habitations, to the City: If
these, any, or all of them were the excellency of Jacob, much more the Temple,
Psalm. 47.4. The Temple and worship of it distinguished them from, and made
them excel all others.

But they made the Images of their Abominations, and of their detestable
things therein.
Here is the cause of all their miseries; God had dealt bountifully with them,
set his Ornaments amongst them, put glory upon them, and distinguished them
from all Nations; but they forgate God, proved ungrateful, and polluted their
glory, even the Temple, with superstition and Idolatry. These words,
Abominations and Detestable things have been opened before.

Therefore have I set it far from them.
Here is one part of their Calamity, God had set the Temple amongst them, a
Divine Ornament for his own honor, their good and glory; but they corruptd
themselves, dishonored God, and defiled his worship, his holy place with their
own inventions, abominations, and detestable things, and therefore I have set
it far from them: or as the Hebrew is, I have made it to them an unclean
thing, or given it to them for separation, it shall now be for their reproach,
rejection, and destruction; it shall be taken from them, and destoyed out of my
sight as a polluted thing.

Zech. 2.5. I will be the glory in the midst of her, meaning Jerusalem. Other
things may be some ornament to a people, as riches, peace, liberty, Cities well
built, peopled, and fortified; Arts and Sciences, wise Counselors, strong
Soldiers, just Judges, good Laws, prudent Governors, these adorn a people,
but their chief Ornament is true Religion, and divine presence. The Gentiles
had those forementioned ornaments; yet because they had not the true God, and
true worship of his amongst them, they were unlovely, accounted of as dogs,
Mat. 15.26. An unhappy, a hopeless people, Ephesians. 2.12. Without Christ,
without God. David tells you what people is happy; even that people whose God is
the Lord. Not those have a false God, and false worship among them: but they
have Jehovah, his Temple and Ordinances with them. Moses knew that the presence
of God and his Ordinances were the honor and chief ornament of a Nation, and
therefore makes a challenge, Deuteronomy. 4.7. What nation is there so great, who has
God so nigh unto them as the Lord our God is. God was nigh them in the pillar
of fire, in the Cloud, in the Tabernacle, in the Arc and other ordinances, and
no Nation under heaven had God so near them, and gloriously amongst them as the
Jews had. No nation though never so wise, wealthy or honorable had such
statutes and righteous judgments as they had.

Moses tells God that his presence would be an argument they had found favor in
his sight, and were a people separated from all people on the earth, Exodus
33.16.

Divine ordinances and God in them is the glory of any people, Jer. 2.11. Psalm.
106.20. Therefore when the Arc was taken a symboll of Gods being amongst them,
and before which they worshipped, Phineas wife said, the glory is departed from
Israel, 1 Samuel 4.22. But when God manifests his presence with a people, then
are they glorious, Isa. 59.21. He speaks of his Covenant with them, and Spirit
upon them: And Chap. 60.1. He says, Arise, shine, for the light is come, and
the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. Darkness shall cover the earth, and
gross darkness the people; but the Lord shall arise upon thee, and his glory
shall be seen upon thee. Others had darkness, but the people where God and his
ways were, had light and glory; when new Jerusalem comes down from heaven, she
is said to have the glory of God, Revel. 21.10, 11. Pray that New Jerusalem may
come among us, that so glory may dwell in our Land, Psalm 85.9.

2. It belongs to God to appoint worship, and the beauty of it; he set the
ornament and beauty of it, not Moses in the Tabernacle, nor Solomon in the
Temple might prescribe any substantial or ceremonial worship, Exodus 35.10.
Every wise-hearted among you shall come and make all that the Lord has
commanded: not what I have commanded, but what the Lord has commanded; though
they were wise, yet they might not do ought after their own hearts or heads,
no not Solomon the wisest of men, 2 Chronicles 3.3. He was instructed for the
building of the house of God. (...)
The Hebrew is, founded; he had a foundation laid in him by the Spirit of God,
before he laid the foundation of the Temple, or did any of the work thereof.

What God appoints is an Ornament, has beauty, is for glory; but let men set
up ought in the worship of God, it has no beauty but blackness, no holiness,
but iniquity, and God must be worshipped in the beauty of holiness, 1 Chronicles.
16.29. Not in the blackness of Iniquity; men think that Ceremonies do decore
the worship of God, that Pictures, Altars, golden Vessels do make it glorious;
but all is deformity which God has not set up, and set up for glory.

3. The people to whom God vouchsafes his presence, his ordinances, they are
his glory above all others, 1 Cor. 11.7. It is said, that woman is the glory of
man, especially when she is adorned with many Jewels, and more virtues; the
Church is compared to a Bride, Isa. 61.10.62.5. And when she is decked with
Gods ordinances, and beautified with the graces of his Spirit, how does he
rejoice over her, delight in her, what a glory is she unto him; the Church is
Gods glory, Isa. 4.5. As the wife is man's, and being under Covert-baron, he will
protect her, and esteems her as his glory. Hence he calls his people his
peculiar treasure, Exodus 19.5. His portion, Deuteronomy. 32.9. His Jewels, M^l. 3.12.
His Anointed, Psalm. 105.15. An holy Temple, the Habit^tion of God, Ephesians. 2.21,
22. The fullness of God, the body of Christ, Ephesians. 1.23. And Christ calls the
Church his Love, his Sister, his Spouse, a Garden enclosed, a Spring shut up, a
fountain sealed, Cant. 4.10.12. The fairest among women, Cant. 5.9. Fair as
the moon, clear as the Sun, Chap. 6.10. And pleasant for delights, Chap. 7.6.
The Church is very beautiful and glorious, a Crown of Glory in the hand of the
Lord, and a Royal Diadem in the hand of her God, Isa. 62.3. The world has
base and low thoughts of the Church and people of God, but they are his glory,
and glory in his hand.

4. That Images in the places of Gods worship are unwarrantable, sinful. Here
God complains, that they made Images, and set them in the Temple; the Hebrew
signifies an Image, (...).
shape of things corporeal, or incorporeall, and its the same with that in
Genesis 1.27. God created man in his own Image, (...).
and this word includes all Images, 2 Kings 11.18. They brake Baals Images: be
they Images of Creatures, or Creator, they may not come into the place where
God has set his Name, and meets his people. The Cherubims were by Divine
appointment, (...)
Exodus 25.18. others were forbidden, Exo. 20.4. Thou shall not make to thee any
graven image. The Targum has the same word is here, and if no Images may be
made for holy places and uses, they may not be brought into them, Protrept. ad
Gent.
being made: Clemens Alexandrinus calls it a deceitful art to make pictures,
and says we are forbidden to exercise it. The Emperor Adrian commanded
Temples to be made in all Cities without Images, bare Temples without such
ornaments; Lamprid. in vita Adriani. Idem in vita Alexand. Seu.
whence came the proverb, Adriani Templum, when the Gentiles built them bare
Temples, and when Adrian made such Temples, it was conceived they were for
Christ; the Gentiles demanding of the Christians why they had no known Images,
Minut: Foelix in vit. Octa. De fug. seculi.
it was answered, what Image shall be made to God, when man himself is Gods
Image. Ambrose says, our Church knows no such thing as pictures. Jerome upon
Ezekiel. 4. says, we worship one Image only, and that is Christ, the express
Image of the Father; no other Image ought to be in the Assemblies but Christ,
and what he appoints. It was a Canon of the Eliberine Council about the time
of Constantine the Great, Council. Elib. c. 36.
It is our mind that pictures ought not to be in the Church, lest that which is
worshipped, should be painted on the walls. There is great danger in them, as
you may read at large in the Homily of the peril of Idolatry, and bitter
contention they caused among the Eastern and Western Christians heretofore, and
still great strife and offense is between Papiste, Lutherans, and others about
them; the Lord convince all of their unlawfulness, throw out all such
abominations and detestable things.

5. Such is the corruption of man, that it is ungrateful for, and abusive of
the choifest mercies; God had set his Temple and pure worship amongst them in
much beauty, for glory to them, and to himself: But they forgetting what a
high favor this was in stead of honoring God in his Temple, and preserving
his worship entire and pure, they bring in the images of their Abominations,
their detestable things, and so blemish their beauty, defile their ornament,
and stain their glory, it was wicked to corrupt themselves with strange
marriages, Ezra 10.2. By dealing treacherously with their lawful wives, Mal.
2.15.16. By making a Calfe to worship, Exodus 32.7, 8. But worse to bring their
detestable things into the Temple, into Gods presence and ordinances; when they
made the Calfe, Moses was in the Mount receiving instructions for worship, yet
they had no place fixed for worship, nor the way of worship clearly opened unto
them; but when God had set his Temple in Zion, they had a fixed place, a settled
way of worship, and the most glorious beautiful worship in the world; yet they
corrupt themselves herein. The Majesty of Gods presence there, his glory, his
commands did not awe them, they were not content with what his infinite wisdom
had prescribed, the abomination and detestablenesse of their Images was not
seen; but they being blinded with their own conceits, and hardened with their
sins, proceeded to corrupt Gods worship, Zephaniab says of them, that they
corrupted all their doings, Chap. 3.7. Even when they had to do with God in
matters of Religion and their Salvation, even there they were corrupters, a
corrupt spring, Prove. 25.26.

6. The Churches unthankfulness for choice mercies, causes upbraiding Buts
from God; he set his Temple, the greatest ornament and blessing they could
have; But they made the Images, etc. Nothing exasperates God more then wretched
unkindnesse after great mercies, Ps. 106. he reckons up Gods great mercies to
them, and they being ungrateful, ever and anon comes in a But, verse.
7.14.25.43. He did deliver them, do great things for them; But they provoked
him, lusted, murmured. Ingratitude is a kicking the Benefactor, Deuteronomy. 32.15.
Jeshurun waxed fat and kicked: The Scripture has observable expressions
touching this sin, Deuteronomy. 32.6, 7. Do you thus requite the Lord O foolish
people and unwise? Is he not thy Father that has bought thee, has he not made
thee and established thee? How did they requite the Lord, they corrupted and
spotted themselves with the sins of the times and places: They were a
perverse people toward God, and therefore says Moses, do you thus requi^e?
etc. It Is folly and madness in you, Isa. 5.2. God repeates the kindnesses
vouchsafed the house of Israel: and verse. 3. He calls the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem and men of Judah to judge between him and his Vineyard. God referres
it to men to judge how kind and bountiful he had been, how base and ungrateful
they, and therefore he would break down the wall thereof, and lay it wast; in
such a case as this he was willing to be judged by men, they could not but see
the great wrong done to God, and justify him in righting himself. Ingratitude
makes the Author worse, and the Benefactor angry and wary.

Angry, for God denounces fix woes against them in the Chapter afterward.

Wary, he would take heed how he bestowed his choice mercies upon such people,
others that would be more fruitful and thankful should have them, Mat. 21.43.
The Kingdom of heaven shall be taken from you, and given to another Nation
bringing forth the fruits thereof. Not their own fruits, but such as Christ and
the Gospel appointed. Alap. in Es.


This sin was so prodigious that Lycurgus would make no law against it; but God
has made a law, Psalm. 9.17. The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the
Nations that forget God. Ingratitude is the greatest and worst forgetfulness:
Judas forgot the kindness and bounty of Christ, he betrayed him, and therefore
was turned into hell.

Verse 21.
And I will give it into the hands of strangers for a prey, etc.
They had sinned shamefully, and God would punish them severely. Strangers, that
is, Chaldeans should come and have Temple, City, them, and all they had in
their hands, and God whom they flattered themselves in, thought still to be
their friend, their help, even he would give all into their hands.

These Chaldeans he calls the wicked of the earth: David calls such men of the
world, Psalm. 17.14. Men of the earth, Psalm. 10.18. That is, base and vile men,
as it is in Job: Children of base men, (...).
viler then the earth, fit for any cruel and bloody designs. The Septuagint
has it, pestilentiis terrae, the plagues of the Earth.

The King of Babylon and his cursed crow went up and down in the world
plundering Nations, shaking Kingdoms, and laying all wast, Isa. 14.16, 17. They
were the pests and vipers of the earth, and into their hands must the Jews,
Gods own people fall; they must spoil the Temple, have all the ornaments
vessels and treasures in it, all the pictures of silver and gold.

They shall pollute it.
The Temple was an holy place, the habitation of the holy God, had in much
reverence by all sorts of people; but now they should see it not regarded as a
thing consecrate to God; now Heathens, uncircumcised ones should enter it,
which was against law, Ezekiel. 44.7. Now their blood should be spilt in it, now
it should be made a prison, a stews, a stable; the Jews had polluted it with
Images, and these Barbarians should pollute it many other ways.

Jer. 11.15. Their lewdness caused the holy flesh to pass from them: they had
the Temple, the beauty, and worship of it for their glory, to make them
glorious within, as well as glorious without; but they abused their mercies,
polluted Gods Ordinances, and therefore he removed the Temple far from them.

He took it away; the Lord had set his Name at Shilo, pitched his Tabernacle
there, Josh. 18.1. and they abused his name and worship as you may see, Psalm.
78.58. Then he was wrath, and greatly abhorred Israel. Then he forsook the
Tabernacle of Shilo, and delivered his strength into captivity, and his glory
into the enemies hands, verse. 59.60, 61. which some interpret of the Arc taken
by the Philistines, 1 Samuel 4.11. And in Jer. 7. when they lived loosely, and
blessed themselves with their carnal confidence in the Temple, and worship of
it, verse. 4.9, 10, 11. God sends them to Shilo, and bids them search and see
what he did there for the wickedness of his people, and threatens to do so by
them, even destroy their Temple, worship, them and their seed; they sinned in
special things, and God punished them in that wherein they sinned; they pollute
the Temple, and God causes the Chaldeans to pollute it; they confide in the
Temple, and God lays it wast; they make an Idol of it, and set it near their
hearts, and God removes it far off; they look upon it as clean, as their
glory, and God removes it as vomit, as a polluted loathsome thing.

Its a dreadful thing when God gives up a Church, a State, either or both to
the wills of wicked men.

I will give it into the hands, etc.
Verse. 21.
I have set it far from them: If evil come to the gates of Jerusalem, and doors
of the Temple, it is from the Lord, Mica. 1.12. And it is very grievous when God
judges Kingdoms and Churches.

First, They fall into the hands of men, strangers they know not, the wicked of
the earth, such as neither fear God, nor regard Men, Bulls, Lions, Dogs, Psalm.
22.12, 13.16.

2. They are for a prey and spoil, their names, estates, habitations,
chastity, children, limbs, consciences, lives, are preyed upon, they eat up
Gods people as they eat bread, Psalm. 14.4. They make them meat to the fowls
of heaven, and beasts of the field. They crush their bones, and shed their
blood like water, Ps. 79.2, 3.

3. Profaning and polluting of holy things; They shall pollute it. Gods holy
name is blasphemed, Psalm 79.10. Where is their God? why does he not now help
them? they have prayed, fasted, hoped in him, made lheir boast of him, why
comes he not to help them, all holy things are defiled: and therefore Asaph in
that 79. Psalm. verse. 1. made upon the destruction of Jerusalem, cries out, O
God the heathen are come into thine Inheritance, thy holy Temple have they
defiled. This came first, and struck deepest into the heart of this holy man,
that heathnish, idolatrous, bloody, profane persons should come and pollute
the holy ordinances of God: The Church laments this as a dreadful evil, Lam.
1.10. The adversary has spread out his hand upon all her pleasant things; for
she has seen that the Heathen entered into her Sanctuary, whom thou did
command that they should not enter into thy Congregation.

4. Removal of all true worship, Divine ordinances, I will set it far from
them. Now they should be without God, the means to know him, and way to
worship him; Now God would have no Oblationt, Incense, new Moons, Sabbaths,
solemn Feasts, or any worship at Jerusalem: There only was he known,
worshipped, and now Temple, Ordinances, and all must down, be taken away, and
God be unknown, unworshipped in the world, no public place for him left.
Isaiah foreseeing this, says, Chap. 42. This is a people robbed, spoiled, and
hereupon having a special quere to make, he calls for attention: Who among you
will give ear to this, and hearken for the time to come, Ver. 23.
and make use of it, will any of you do it? Then thus, Jacob is spoiled; but
who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the robbers? Was not Jacob the
beloved of God, his excellency, his glory, etc. Did not the Lord do it? he
against whom we have sinned; for they would not walk in his ways, nor be
obedient to his laws, therefore he has powered upon him the fury of his anger,
and the strength of battle, and it has set him on fire round about, yet he
knew not, it burned him round about, yet he laid it not to heart. And is it not
so with England? we had need to cry with David, Psalm. 79.8, 9. O remember not
against us former iniquities, let thy tender mercies speedily prevent us, for
we are brought very low. Help us O God of our salvation, for the glory of thy
name deliver us, and purge away our sins for thy names sake.

My face will I turn also from them, Ver. 22.
and they shall pollute my secret place, etc.
This verse is a continuation of their calamities, and has in it two grievous
ones.

1. The aversion of Gods face. 2. The pollution of the secret place.
Concerning the first, it is questionable from whom he would turn his face,
from the Chaldeans, or from the Jews. Some carry it from the Chaldeans, and so
the sense is this: Though they be a barbarous people, and do unheard of
things, pollute my holy place, sack my holy City, burn all to the ground, slay
and captive my people, yet I will turn my face from them, I will not restrain
them at all, but let them go on freely and fully in such ways, and take no
notice of any thing done against me or my worship.

Others to whom I incline, expound it of the Jews, that God would turn his face
from them: and then the meaning is, that God would afford them neither his
presence, counsel, comfort, nor deliverance; but he would leave them to shift
for themselves and take no further care of them. Gods face in the Scripture
signifies;

1. His presence, Psalm 51.11. Cast me not away from thy pr^sence. The Hebrew
is, from thy face.

(...)
2. Counsel, 2 Samuel 21.1. David enquired of the Lord. Hebrew, sought the face of
the Lord: that is, sought counsel of him.

3. Comfort, Psalm 69.17. Hide not thy face from thy servant, for I am in
trouble, shine upon me and comfort me. So Psalm 31.16. Make thy face to shine
upon thy servant: That is, favor, comfort, make him glad.

4. Deliverance, Psalm 31.1. How long will thou hide thy face from me: That is,
deny to deliver me.

There is mention of hiding his face, turning away his face, and setting his
face against.

The first befalls the godly, Psalm. 88.14. and 30.7. The other two the wicked,
as here in our Prophet, they were a wicked Generation, and God turned his face
away from them, and set his face against them, Ezekiel. 15.7.

They shall pollute my secret place.
That is, the Sanctum Sanctorum, the most holy place, where the Arc was, which
had the two tables of stone, 1 Kings 8.9. Into this only came the High Priest,
and but once in the year, and that upon the days of expiation, in which day
he expiated the sins of the whole year by blood, for blood and Incense he
carried in with him, Heb. 9.7. And some think the smoke of the Incense
darkened the holy place, because no man can see God and live.

At first it was filled with a cloud, and God was in that cloud, 1 Kings
8.10.12. Gods nature is invisible, and inaccessible, but in the cloud and
smoke he did manifest his glorious presence to the high Priest, who consulted
with the Lord for the good of the people. The place was called (...).
The Sept. render it, my visitation, because there God and the high Priest
visited one another. It Is observed in Histories, that Pompey went into this
secret place, and being asked what he saw, said a Cloud, and hereupon it was
given out, that the Jews were Cloud-worshippers. One Heliodorus also thrust
into this holiest of places, Cunaeus de republ. Jud. Weems.
who afterward was struck with madness.

Robbers shall enter into it. (...)

The Septuagint has it, They shall enter without restraint, (...).
without any keeping them back: Theodot. Plagues shall enter, men that will be
a plague, infecting and destroying all. The Hebrew notes such Robbers, as do
make a violent entrance into the houses and possessions of others.

Your margents express it, Burglers; and Burglary in the acceptance of Law, is
a fellonious entering into another man's house wherein some person is, or into a
Church in the night time, with intent to steal, or do some fellonious act
there, albeit the act be not done: But in the natural signification of the
word, burglary is a robbing of an house whither by night or day, and these
Chaldeans were Burglers, men that should break into the Sanctuary and secret
place, Ezekiel. 18.10. There is the same word, and it is joined with blood: If he
beget a son a Robber, that is a shedder of blood, a house-breaker, a murderer,
which shows there is violence joined with it, which regards not Laws and
rights.

Also I will turn away my face. He had spoken of sad judgments, some 11. or
12. and yet he comes in with more: There was a succession of sins, and
answerably a succession of Judgments.

Aaron and the Priests prayed for a blessing upon the people, Numb. 6 25, 26.
this was the chief Petition of it, The Lord make his face shine upon thee: The
Lord lift up his countenance upon thee. Intim^ting that if they had these, no
comforts or blessings would be wanting, Psalm. 44.23. The destruction of the
Canaanites, the implantation of the Israelites and their salvation, is
attributed to the light of Gods countenance, as well as to his right hand and
arm, because if they have Gods face and favor, they shall have his hand and
arm to do anything for them; therefore Asaph in Psalm 80. three times prays
thus; Cause thy face to shine, and we shall be saved, verse. 3.7.19. He knew if
Gods face were toward them, Gods power would work for them, and they should
have salvation of all sorts, salvation from enemies, which there he speaks of,
and from errors, Psalm. 67.1, 2. If Gods face did but shine upon them, then his
way would be known upon earth, if not, they should mistake and fall into
errors and foul ways, Prove. 16.15. In the light of the Kings countenance ^s
life, much more in the light of Gods countenance is life, the life of Kingdoms,
Churches, Families, which Daniel knew, and therefore prayed, Chap. 9.17. That
God would make his face to shine upon the Sanctuary which was desolate, the
turning his face to them would quickly re-edifie it, as the turning it from
them had made it desolate. When the Lord does turn away his face nothing but
misery attends a people, Genesis 4.14. says Cain, from thy face shall I be hid.
Thy favor will not be toward me, no shine shall I have, but all shade: and
what then, I shall be a vagabond upon the earth, and fear death by every one
that meets me. When God takes away his face from any, the face of calamity
and destruction is toward them, nay destruction is upon them: No sooner does
God turn away from a Nation, but destruction steps into that Nation, Deu.
31.17. I will hide my face from them, and they shall be devoured, many evils
and troubles shall befall them, so that they will say in that day, Are not these
evils come upon us because our God is not amongst us? Where you may see that
Gods hiding his face is departing from them, and his departing lets in all
miseries; when God is gone, nothing is left but sin and judgment, and they
make fearful work in all places.

If God would pity people under destruction, it were something; but he will not
pity them then, not hear their groans, receive their prayers, or mind their
tears, wounds, blood, death, Jer. 18.17. I will show them the back, and not
the face. And when? In the day of their calamity, when they are in their
greatest distresses, necessities, without council, help, comfort, even at the
height of misery, I will not vouchsafe them one look, but go away from them in
fury, leave them without hope, my back shall be toward them, and not my face,
Jer. 14.12.

3. When the holy God goes away from his holy places, then profane polluting
wretches come into them: I will turn away my face, and robbers shall pollute
my secret place: Thither should they come, whether none but the holy God and
High Priest were to come: and whereas before it was filled with a Cloud, with
Incense, with Glory, and the presence of God, now it should be filled with
Burglers, Idolaters, oaths, and all profaneness, which could not but affect the
Jews that were so zealous of preserving the Temple unpolluted by strangers,
Acts 21.27, 28. A great stir was made against Paul by the Jews, because he had
brought Greeks into the Temple, and polluted it. Joseph l. 7. de Bell. c. 4.
and in his 5. book of Anti. c. 14. he says; capitale erat Gentili ingredi
Templum.
And when the Jews were under the Roman Emperors, they obtained of them, that
none, no not a Roman should enter into the Temple under pain of death; yet
themselves polluted it with false worship, drove God out of it, and of the
holiest of holies, and made way for the worst of men to come in and defile the
same.

CHAP. VII.
23. Make a chain, for the Land is full of bloody crimes, and the City is full
of violence.
IN this Verse is another calamity, and the cause of it laid down. The
calamity is a chain, the cause blood, violence.

(...)
Make a Chain.
Trouble, says the Sept. a Conclusion, the vulgar, the Hebrew is, a Chain,
and so it is rendered in 1 Kings 6.21. Chains, and so the Rabbis take it here;
we may extend it to a roap, a with, a chain, any thing that a man may be bound
with

A chain is an emblem of bondage, Nabum 3.10. Her great ones shall be bound in
chains, Psalm 107.10. Acts 12.6. and Jerem. 28.13, 14. The yoke of Iron that
the Prophet was to make noted the imbondaging of the Nations unto
Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon.

Whether by the Chain be prefigured the siege of Jerusalem as some interpret
it, or leading into captivity as others will have it: Bondage is included in
both: Some think the Lord here alludes to Malefactors, that in chains
answered at the Bar of Justice as Paul did, Acts 26.29. They had freely and
fully run out in vicious courses, but now they were to answer it to God who
was set in judgment, and sentencing them to suffer heavy things: This also
notes bondage, which is the sense of the Prophet.

In a Chain 4 things are considerable.

First, It Is burdensome, heavy, 1 Kings 12.10. Thy father made our yoke
heavy. And yokes, chains, fetters about necks, arms, legs, are grievous;
when Peter was bound with two chains, Acts 12.6. it was troublesome unto him,
and so was the condition of these Jews, the siege, their captivity was very
burdensome; therefore Lam. 3.7. the Church says, he has made my chain
heavy. She calls her bondage a chain, and a heavy one.

2. It Is restrictive, a man's liberty of going and doing is taken away by a
chain, Acts 21.23. When Paul was bound with chains, whither could he go,
what could he do, and bondage by a siege, captivity, Imprisonment, sickness,
or otherwise, is a restraint of a man, which are threatened here: Jehoahaz was
put in bands at Riblath, that he might not reign in Jerusalem, 2 Kings 23.33.

3. Reproachful, 2 Timothy 1.16. Onesiphorus was not ashamed of my chain. There
is shame and reproach attending chain^, and therefore Paul at the Bar, when he
wished Agrippa and others were such as he was, excepted his bonds as
reproachful things, Acts 26.29. This is threatened here, and was made good,
Jerem. 39.7. Zedekiah had his eyes put out, and was bound with two brazen
chains, and so the thing he feared came upon him, mocking and reproach, Jer.
38.19. And not only he, but all of them should be for a curse, an astonishment,
an hissing, and a reproach among all Nations, Jer. 29.18.

4. Tendency to further punishment: Paul was bound, Acts 21.33. with two
chains. And Acts 24.27. two years he lay in bonds, and to what end, that he
might come to judgment, and have further punishment, and he was to that
purpose brought before Agrippa and Festus, Acts 26.29. and that in bonds, they
tend to other and sorer judgments: Hence the Devils are said to be in chains
of darkness reserved unto judgment, 2 Pet. 2.4. Jude 6. They have not their
full damnation, they are semi-damnati, half condemned, and kept in chains for
the rest, and here God would chain up these Jewe with bondage, and rese ve them
in bondage to further pun^^hment, even eternal destruction, Job 21.30. The
wicked are reserved to the day of d^struction, they shall be brought forth to
the day of wrath.

The Land is full of bloody crimes.
The Hebrew is, the judgment of bloods, they gave out unjust sentences that
had power, and condemned the innocent; guilty men were spared, and the good
suffered, 2 King. 21.16. Manasses filled Jerusalem with innocent blood,
Athaliah slew all the Royal seed, 2 Kings 11.1. Naboth is falsely condemned and
stoned to death, 1 King. 21.13. Zechariah is slain by an unjust sentence, 2 Chronicles. 24.21. Joash the King was slain by his servants, verse. 25. Hence its
said, Isa. 59.3. That their hands were defiled with blood, that they were full
of blood, Isa. 1.15. And here, that the land is full of bloody crimes, Ezekiel.
22.6. Every Prince in Israel to his power did shed blood.

By bloody crimes some understand heinous sins, capital offenses, such as
deserved death, and the shedding of men's blood as Idolatry, Deuteronomy. 13.6.9.
Blasphemy, Levit. 24.16. Witchery, sorcery, Lev. 20.27. Buggery, Levit. 20.15,
16. Sodomie, verse. 13. Adultery, verse. 10. Rapes, Deuteronomy. 22.25. False
witnessing, to take away a man's life, Deuteronomy. 19.16.18, 19.21. Stealing, any man,
woman, or child, Exodus 21.16. These, with murder and treason were bloody
sins. So that the meaning may be, the Land was so full of these crimes, that
it could not escape severe punishment, Hosea 4.25. By swearing, lying, killing,
stealing, and committing Adultery, they break out, and blood touches blood,
therefore shall the Land mourn; etc.

The City is full of violence.
This holy City was now so corrupted, that whereas God and men expected Justice
and Righteousness at Jerusalem above all places in the world, there was
violence; yea, a fullness of violence.

By violence, understand what ever was contrary to Justice and equity, as fraud
in bargaining, Thefts, oppression, usury, withholding of rights and wages from
the owners thereof, pillaging men of their estates, etc. Ezekiel. 22.7. In thee,
that is Jerusalem, have they set light by Father and Mother. oppressed the
Stranger, vexed the Fatherless and Widows.

Ezekiel. 12.19. They shall eat their bread with carfulness, and drink their
water with astonishment, that her Land may be desolate from all that is
therein, because of the violence of all them that dwell therein. It Is spoken of
Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 22.4. Thou art become guilty in thy blood that thou have
shed, and have defiled thy self in thine Idols which thou have made, and
thou have caused thy days to draw near, and art come even unto thy years:
therefore have I made thee a reproach unto the Heathen, and a mocking to all
Countries.

Jerusalems sins brought reproaching chains upon her, which grieved and much
vexed her, verse. 5. Zephaniah 3.3. Woe to her that is filthy and polluted, to
the oppressing City. And why woe to her, which includes all miseries, all
judgments, her Princes within her are roaring Lions, her Judges are evening
wolves, they suck the blood, eat the flesh, and gnawed the bones of the
people, and therefore woe to them, Jer. 6.6, 7, 8. Hew ye down trees, cast a
mount against Jerusalem, this is the City to be visited, she is wholly
oppression in the midst of her. As a fountain casts out her waters, so she
casts out her wickedness: violence and spoil is heard in her, before me
continually is grief and wounds. Be thou instructed O Jerusalem, lest my soul
depart from thee, lest I make thee desolate, a Land not inhabited. She refused
instruction, and was made desolate, let us be instructed now we look to have
our chains broken, etc. Jer. 22.15, 16. when Josiah judged the cause of the
poor and needy, then it was well with him and the Land. But when Jehoiakims
eyes and heart were for covetousness, blood, oppression, violence, then God
threatened that he should be cast out, and buried with the burial of an Ass,
verse. 17.19. Isa. 10.1. Woe unto them that decree unrighteous decrees, and that
write grievousnesse which they have prescribed; To turn aside the needy from
judgment, and to take away the right from the poor of my people, that widows
may be their prey, and that they may rob the fatherless, and what will ye
do in the day of visitation, to whom will ye flee for help, and where will you
have your glory. Let Magistrates, Judges, men in place take heed what decrees
they make, what sentences they pronounce in judgment, they may make our chain
heavy, etc. Let people pray earnestly that God would assist them, guide them by
his Spirit, that they may judge righteous judgment, execute justice upon
Delinquents, and keep the Land from blood and violence. Of Edom it is said, for
thy violence against thy brother Jacob shame shall cover thee, and thou shall
be cut off for ever, Obad. verse. 10.

CHAP. VII.
24. Wherefore I will bring the worst of the Heathen, and they shall possess
their houses. I will also make the pomp of the strong to cease, and their holy
places shall be defiled.
IN this Verse he shows what instruments God would use, and they were the
Chaldeans, whose Title is, The worst of the heathen, and they should, 1.
Possess their houses. 2. Destroy the pomp of the Jews, etc. 3. Defile the holy
places, and so lay waste both Civil and Ecclesiastical State.


Worst of the Heathen.
The root whence the word worst comes, signifies to be wicked, (...) malum vel
malignum esse.
to be a Malignant, to do evil, Jer. 4.22. They are wise to do evil. The
Septuagint render it here, The wicked of the Heathen: (...).
And its the same word is given to the Devil, (...) Les plus manvais in the
French.
1 John 3.12. Of that wicked one, the great Malignant of heaven and earth. The
Chaldeans are here called the worst of Nations, or Heathens, as the Hebrew i^,
their wickedness appears in these things: They were a theevish people, they
robbed Job of his Camels, and slew his servants, Job 1.17. They were great
Sorcerers, Dan. 2.2.10. Great Oppressors, Isa. 14.4.17. Very cruel, therefore
compared to Lions, Isa. 5.29. To a Razor, Isa. 7.20. To Cockatrices and
Serpents, Jer. 8.17. They were Idolatrous, Ezekiel. 23.14. A Bitter and hasty
Nation, Hab. 1.6. Terrible and dreadful, verse. 7. All for violence and spoil,
verse. 9. Chap. 2.8. They were drunkards, Hab. 2.15. See Deuteronomy. 28.49, 50, 51.
Proud and unsufferably covetous, verse. 5. and Ezekiel. 23.25. It Is said they
shall deal furiously with thee, they shall take away thy nose, and thine
ears, and deal hatefully with thee, verse. 29. They should stone them,
dispatch them with swords, and burn up their houses with fire, verse. 47. These
were the worst of Nations, or the worst of that Nation should come.

They shall possess their houses.
These wicked and mercil sse wretches, sparing neither man, woman nor child,
should take all into their possession.

(...)
The word for possess has a contray signification, to inherit, possess, Deuteronomy.
4.1. and to dis-inherit, dispossess, Zech. 9.4. The Lord will cast her out.
(...)
It Is the same root* and you have both significations in one verse, Josh. 23.5.
The Lord shall drive them out of your sight, and ye shall possess the Land.
It Is the same root for driving out, and for possessing, this is rare, and for
the learned to observe that a word signifies contrary things.

It Is frequent signification is to possess by hereditary right, to succeed;
but it is used sometimes more largely to possess any way as in 1 Kings 21.15.
Deuteronomy. 2.24. Ahab took possession of Naboths Vineyard, and Moses of the King of
Heshbons land, which was not by succession: and so it is to be taken in this
place, they should come in by force and possess their habitations. And there
is something more in this phrase, possessing notes continuance of habitation in
their hands, as being their own, 1 Cor. 7.30. Let them that buy be as if they
possessed not. Possessors look upon things as their own, and to continue with
them; here by the Chaldeans possessing their houses, is closely pointed out the
70. years captivity, all which time the land and habitations left should be in
the Chaldeans power.

I will also make the pomp of the strong to cease.
What ever lifts up, and causes the spirits of men to swell, it is Pomp, so the
word is used, Jer. 12.5. In the swelling of Jordan, when the waters increased,
and made the River swell over its bancks, which Jordan always did in harvest
time, Josh. 3.15.

Strong or Potent m^n, whence great ones are called Potentates, their riches,
attendance, honors, places, allyances, and the like, do make them proud,
stately, selfe-confident; but their pomp, power, magnificence, excellency shall
all cease and come to nothing. It Is not their Arms, or Armor, their big
looks, insolent speeches, rich attire, honorable Titles, or any thing wherein
they glory that shall advantage them, be it their Soldiery, their strong and
stout men, their pomp shall cease, I will crush their Crests, and bring them
low. Pintus understands it of Zedekiah, and the Nobles of Jerusalem.

Their holy places shall be defiled.
The holy places were the Court, the Temple, and the holiest of all: some refer
these words to person^, and not to places, and read them thus. They shall see
profaned, defiled, which sanctify them: noting the Priests who sanctified the
people by their offerings, and prayers for them, they sh uld not be regarded as
Priests of the highest God; but because they had dealt deceitfully with the
people, corrupted the Covenant of Levi, therefore they should be slain as other
persons, or led into captivity with them.

Others read the words thus: They shall inherit their holy places, the
Chaldeans shall come and take possession of them, because it is said here, Their
holy places, and not Mine. Theod. Lavat.
It Is conceived by some that these were Chapels, or oratories, which they had
made in several places in or near to their houses, and consecrated to God.

Chaldeans he brings to afflict, chain, and captive the Jews; Wicked men have
wicked ends, answerable principles, and mediums to attain those ends, Isa.
10.7. But they are as staves and rode in the hand of God, with which he
corrects hypocritical Nations, verse. 5.6. They are Gods sword, Gods hand,
Psalm. 17.13, 14. and he knows how to use both to effect his own pleasure, and
to execute judgments upon sinners, and that without sin. Has not God brought
in, and set on work the worst of men among us? What Miscreants, Blasphemers,
Plagues, Vermin, what Egyptians, Chaldeans, and bloody merciless wretches
have we doing mischief in this Land, men that justify Chaldeans, that are
skillful to shed blood, to cheat a Nation of its God and Religion, to betray
and undo Kingdoms, many wonder such vile wretches should live and have a
being upon the earth; many are troubled that God uses such filth and scum to
do him any service; but we must know that there is use of Thistles, Scorpions,
and Serpents, and God would not use such men, if there were not good to be done
by them, Isa. 10.12. It shall come to pass that when the Lord has performed
his whole work upon Mount Zion, and on Jerusalem, I will punish the fruit of
the stout heart of the King of Assyria, and the glory of his high looks.

2. That houses, lands, and good things of this world we should not much seek
after, seeing they may fall into the hands of the worst men. I will bring the
worst of the Heathen, and they shall possess your houses. All they had gotten
fell into the hands of Chaldeans.

3. That no external excellency or pomp is to be confided in, God will make the
pomp of the strong to cease; policy, power, riches, honors, strength of
Armies, are not pillars of brass to confide in, they are glass, metal soon
broken, and blown away by the breath of the Lord, when he is in a way of
wrath. Nebuchadnezzar was a proud Tyrant, that with his plundering made the
world a wilderness, Isa. 14.17. That exceeded most Princes of the world in
greatness, in Kingdoms, tributary Princes, honor, strength of Soldiers,
etc. See in verse. 11. what is said of him: Thy pomp is brought down to the
grave, 12. How art thou fallen from heaven O Lucifer son of the morning, how
art thou cut down to the ground which did weaken the Nations. So for Egypt
that abounded in horses, Isa. 31.1. and trusted in their strength, Ezekiel. 30.18.
The pomp of her strength shall cease in her: And Chap. 32.12. By the swords of
the mighty will I cause thy multitude to fall. They shall spoil the pomp of
Egypt, and all the multitude thereof shall be destroy^d; God would destroy
them with a great destruction, and then mercy should come in, then neither the
foot of man nor beast should trouble them any more, then would the Lord make
their waters deep, and make their rivers run like oil, ver. 13.14. Neither
Babylonish nor Egyptian pomp endure long. God makes the arrogance of the proud
to cease, and lays low the haughtiness of the terrible, Isa. 13.11.

This God has done lately before our eyes, Victory at York 2. of July, 1644.
he has made the pomp of the strong to cease, there were the Potentates of the
Earth, Honors, Riches, Strength, Arms, Horses, and what ever might make them
pompous, was with them, great hopes and hearts they had, they looked for the
day, and thought not only the North but the South should be theirs: not York,
but London, yea England to be theirs; but they are disappointed, their honor
is laid in the dust, their pomp cease. We may say according to that in Zech.
11.2.3. Howl Fir Tree, for the Cedars are fallen, the mighty are spoiled,
howl O ye Oaks of Bashan, for the forest of the vintage is come down, their
strength and comforts are abated: There is a voice of the howling of the
Shepherds, (that is, Princes which should feed and seek the good of the
people) for their glory is spoiled, a voice of the roaring of young lions, for
the pride of Jordan is spoiled.

The ceasing of their pomp should be the beginning of our praise, Psalm. 98.1. O
sing unto the Lord a new song, for he has done mavelous things, his right
hand and his holy arm has gotten him the victory. We may sing with Moses,
Exo. 15.6, 7. Thy right hand O Lord is become glorious in power, thy right hand
O Lord has dashed in pieces the enemy, and in the greatness of thine
excellency thou have overthrown them that rose up against thee: Thou sentest
forth thy wrath, which consumed them as stubble. And with David, Ps. 136.1, 2,
3, 4. O give thanks unto the Lord for he is good, for his mercy endures for
ever, etc. And Psalm. 107.8. O that men would praise the Lord for his goodness,
and for his wonderful works to the children of men.

4. Unspirituall worship pleases not God, neither profits the worshippers, they
had the Temple, ordinances of it, appeared often before God, brought their
Sacrifices; but God threatens them, and all their worship, their Civil estate,
and Ecclesiastical also should be ruined; God in worship looks at the hearts
and spirits of men, if they be absent from, but half, or in part in the
worship, God regards it not. Their oblations are vain oblations, Isa. 1.13.
Their fasts and prayers are a trouble, a weariness to God. v. 14. And he tells
them that he had mouth-neerness, and heart-farnesse, lip labor, and
heart-dishonour, Isa. 29.13. yea Ezekiel. 33.31. He had mouth-love, mouth-worship,
when their silver and gold had heart-love, Cor est principium vitae,
cogitationis omnis voluntatis and actionis.
heart-worship. It Is the heart is the principal thing in Gods eye. My son give
me thy heart, Prove. 23.26. If that be not given him in worship, nothing is
given, nothing is accepted that we think given. David therefore prays, Ps.
119.80. Let my heart be sound in thy statutes, that I be not ashamed. If a man
have a deceitful spirit, a rotten heart, he will be ashamed when he shall
find that all his prayers, fasts, services, shall be thrown back as dung in his
face: Oain gave the fruit of the earth, not the fruit of his heart, and it was
not accepted; neither do they gain ought at Gods hands who worsh p him
carnally, 1 Timothy 4.8. Bodily exercise profits little.

5. Men are apt to rest in outside worship, and bless themselves for it, they
cried the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, etc. Jer. 7.4. They look
at the Temple and worship of it, and hence concluded safety to themselves, they
thought it not probable that ever destruction should come to them, their City,
State, and Church; they looked upon their Temple as a glorious thing, and that
worship therein would secure them from all; but God often threatens the
defilement, removal, and destruction of it from this 20. verse. to the 25. The
Pharisee went up to the Temple, he fasted, prayed, gave tiths of all, and in
such outside services did he rest. Men now have their Chapels and Chaplains,
and think that by the prayers of the one, and holiness of the other, they
shall be fitted for heaven.

CHAP. VII.
25. Destruction comes, they shall seek peace, and there shall be none.
HE told them before, that the worst of the Heathen should come, and now that
destruction was coming, and annexeth a new calamity, their vain expectation,
and real disappointment of peace.

Destruction.
The Sept. is quite out in rendering it mercy, (...) Praecisio venit.
propitiation comes. Others read it thus, A straight grief comes. The Heb.
signifies more, a breaking, a cutting off: so the word is used, Isa. 38.12. The
Chaldee has it, precision or forecutting. Piscator excisor, The cutter up, the
destroyer, or man of destruction comes: and he proves it must be taken so,
because its joined with a verb masculine, and so the sense is, Nebuchadnezar
the destroyer, the man that cuts down Nations, that breaks Kingdoms in pieces,
is coming upon you, even Nebuchadnezzar, who is destruction it self.

They shall seek peace.
God had threatened by his Prophets the utter ruin of Jerusalem which they
would not believe; the false Prophets suggested the contrary, they cried peace,
peace, Jer. 8.11. Ezekiel. 13.10. Seduced the people, so that they feared not,
they considered the strength of their Situation, Tower, Temple, Soldiers, and
what these Prophets had said, and would not believe that Enemies should come
within their gates, Lam. 4.12. But when the Enemy was come, they sought for
peace and safety, but found it not. Ezekiel. 38.22.
They excused Zedekiah that he brake with Nebuchadnezzar in the point of
Tribute; they tendered silver and gold to buy a peace, and that would not do
it, Isa. 13.17. Ezekiel. 7.19. They conceived that men come far could not lie
long before their Walls and Gates, but that they would be consumed, or glad to
retire with shame, so they should be safe: Or if things came to the worst, that
the City must be yielded, yet it should be upon good and honorable terms, at
least with security of life and liberty; but neither their money, their policy,
their prayers, or ought else could prevail for peace or safety, they had found
them perfidious, and would hearken to no terms of peace; the Chaldeans were
Cockatrices, and would not be charmed, Jer. 8.17. Therefore its said, v. 15. We
looked for peace, but no good came, and for a time of healing, but behold
trouble.

Some refer this seeking of peace, to God, they should in their streights, at
the destruction by Nebuchadnezzar cry to God, make many fasts and prayers in
the time of the siege, and seek for peace with God whom they had offended with
their grievous sins, and he would not hear them, peace they should not find,
Jer. 14.12. Ezekiel. 14.17, 18.

Nebuchadnezzar, in worse by reason of God, the one threatening their lives, the
other their souls. So that which way soever they looked, peace they saw none:
The winds of affliction stirred the waves of their corruption, Isa. 57.20, 21.
The wicked are like the troubled sea when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up
mire and dirt.

When the great winds are abroad, the Sea has no rest, it cannot rest, it
rages, and throws up and out, mire and dirt: So when great and death-threatning
calamities are abroad, wicked men rest not, they cannot rest, they are mire,
Isa. 10.6. And their expressions are miery, and what is the conclusion, there is
no peace to the wicked says the Lord. They may say they have peace, others may
confirm their assertion, but God says they have none, nothing of that is
included within the sweet name of peace is to be found in them. You may find
Satan there, a hellish conscience there, sinful lusts there fears, sorrows,
terrors there, but no peace there. The way of peace they know not, there is no
judgment in their goings, they have made them crooked paths, whosoever goes
therein shall not know peace, Isa. 59.8.

2. Great necessities and streights cause sinners to seek for that they
formerly neglected, violated, viz. peace with God, and peace with man;
Zedekiah, these Jews had broken the Covenant made with Nebuchadnezzar, they
provoked God, 2 Chronicles. 36.12, 13. And now when destruction was upon them, they
seek peace from heaven and earth; in their prosperity they regarded neither
God nor man; but when both were against them, then they sue, they seek for
peace at their hands. Wen Herod's displeasure was upon the Tyrians and
Sidonians, they sought for peace at his hands, Acts 12.20. and Hos. 5. In their
afflictions they will seek meearly, and earnestly too, Jer. 11.14. They cry in
their trouble: and says the Lord, I will not hear them in the time that they
cry unto me for their trouble.

3. That States may seek too late for peace with God and man, they may defer so
long, that their seeking may be in vain, their endeavors frustrate, and hopes
disappointed, they shall seek peace, and there shall be none, neither God nor
man will give in any peace.

The date of mercy was out, and the door of hope that, therefore Jer. 12.12. God
tells them the spoilers were come, the sword devouring, and no flesh should have
peace, neither young nor old, though they sought it earnestly. In stead of
peace they should be in travel as one with child, their hands should be upon
their loyne^, their faces pale, and cry out, Alas for that day, Jer. 30.5, 6,
7. The time was come, that God had taken peace from the Land, Jer. 16.5. I have
taken away my peace from this people, even loving kindness and mercies. God
had taken it away, and now it was too late for them to seek after it, too hard
for them to bring back, or any friend they had. If they looked that Jeremie,
who was a Prophet, acquainted with, and interessed in God should do it, he was
forbidden to pray for them, Jer. 14.11. Pray not for this people for their
good. If he prayed against them, God would hear him, but not if for them. It
would be sin in him so to do, if they looked for others that they had better
thoughts of then Jeremy. Gods tells them that if they had as good men as Noah,
Daniel, and Job who were acquainted with great afflictions, could pray very
powerfully, and being precious men, righteous, perfect, desirable, as Gods
testimony is of them, yet they should not help them with their prayers at all,
Ezekiel. 14.14. Nay if they should set upon fasting and praying themselves, God
would not hear, or give in any peace, Ier. 14.12. When they fast I will not
hear their cry, and when they offer burnt offerings and an oblation, I will
not accept them, but I will consume them. They beg peace, I will send the
sword: They ask bread, I will send a famine: They desire health, I will bring
the pestilence, and these shall consume them.

It Is dreadful when any come too late unto God, then in stead of mercy, they
meet with judgments. Hence Ier. 8.15. We looked for peace, but no good came,
and for a time of health, but behold trouble. When it will be thus with a Land,
see Ezekiel. 14.13. Prove. 1.24, etc. Matthew. 23.37, 38.

CHAP. VII.
26. Mischief shall come upon mischief, and rumor shall be upon rumor, then
shall they seek a vision of the Prophet, but the law shall perish from the
Priest, and counsel from the Ancients.
HERE is more woe yet discovered, not single, but maltiplyed woes, one
mischief at the heels of another; no sooner shall one be over, but they shall
hear of another: one mischief in the morning, and presently news of another
before noontide, or evening, and after that, another by midnight, and so they
were never free from feeling and fearing miseries.

News they should have of the Chaldeans coming with fury and for spoil,
beset they should be with mischiefs, and when they looked for comfort and
counsel from the Prophets, Priests, and Ancients, there should be no vision,
no law, no counsel, These who had helped them in former times should now fail
them.

Mischief.
Contrition, trouble, woe, Montanus.
this word mischief sometimes notes sin, as Psalm 36.4. and 140.2. Acts
13.10. Sometimes an ill accident befalling one, 2 Kings 7.9. If we tarry till
morning some mischief will befall us. Sometimes judgment, Isa. 47.11.
Mischief shall fall upon thee, and thou shall not be able to put it off. The
stroke of God shall come unavoidably, they were a people set on mischief,
Exodus 32.22 Set upon sinning, and God told them he would be set upon punishing,
Deuteronomy. 32.23. I will heap mischiefs upon them. Which here in the Text were
coming one after another, and crowding in upon them.

Mischief upon mischief notes multiplicity and coherence of Judgments,
Sword, Plague, Famine, and those evils attend them, which are not a few, Job
19.12. You have a like phrase, his troops came together. There was a
multiplicity of calamities, troops and coherency, they came together.

Rumor shall be upon rumor.
The news shall be brought them of the Chaldeans coming from several
quarters, and by several messengers to their City, their ears shall be filled
with tidings and reports of their drawing near. It Is conceived the Jews had
their Scouts and Spies abroad that watched on the tops of mountains, and
places suspected, and when any danger appeared, they gave notice thereof, and
so Rumor was upon Rumor; one brought news that the King of Babylon was in
Arms such a day with so many thousands; a second, that he had marched so far;
a third, that he had invaded the borders of their Land; a fourth, that he had
taken some Towns, put most to the sword, and burnt the Towns, etc. Another,
that they would presently be at the gates of Jerusalem.

Then shall they seek a vision of the Prophet.
Finding no peace, seeing mischiefs multiply, and hearing sad Rumors from all
parts, they had one refuge left, and that they make use of, viz. They seek to
the Prophet for a vision, surely thought they we shall have some good tidings
from heaven when we have none from earth; the Prophet will help us, when all
others fail us. In our great streights we shall have some Counsel or Comfort.

But either there was no vision, or such as was in no stead to them: The false
Prophets had nothing to say, the true they hated, and what they said would not
be believed, or practiced, Jer. 38.14. etc. Zedekiah speaks to Jeremiah for a
vision, he makes known the mind of the Lord, tells him what he must do to save
himself and the City, yield up himself into the hand of the King of Babylons
Princes, and then he should live, and the City be unburnt; this vision was sad,
not entertained, and so as none. Zedekiah and the rest would have had a vision,
that is, Ver. 27.
a word of God by the Prophets to have freed them from the misery and streights
they were in, and there was no such vision.

But the law shall perish from the Priest.
And the law shall perish, many read it so, noting out a further degree of
their misery: Prophecy shall not only fail them, which is extraordinary, but
even that which was ordinary, the preaching and expounding of the Law, the
Priests should have no sound or true knowledge of it.

Read it But the law, etc. The sense will not much differ, they look for
visions from Prophets, But they shall not have the law from Priests, vision and
Preaching both shall fail them.

This phrase To perish from is an Hebreisme, and notes not abolition, but
absence; the law should not be dissolved, lost, But taken from those Priests,
they should be without the law. Take some places where you have the like
speeches, Psalm. 142.4. Refuge failed me. The Hebrew is, perished from me. I
was without refuge, Amos 2.14. Flight shall perish from the swift. Power of
flying shall be absent. And Joel 1.5. Howl ye drunkards because of the new
wine, for it is cut off from your mouth: That is, there is none for you; and so
here, The law shall perish from the Priests: That is, the sound knowledge, and
true interpretation of the law shall be absent from them, their lips shall
preserve no knowledge.

Counsel from the Ancient.
Elders, some refer these to Church Officers, (...) Isa. 37.2. Elders of Priests
the Prophets were to teach them, the Priests to offer sacrifices, and the
Elders to order and discipline them, which required wisdom and Counsel.

Others refer them to State-Elders, in which sense the word is frequently used,
Genesis 50.7. Exodus 17.5. Psalm. 105.22. and is there translated Senators: Take it
in which sense you will, Counsel should perish from them, they should not be
able to advise for the welfare of Church or State.

Saul after he had sinned in sacrificing, rejected God, Samuel tells him that his
Kingdom should not continue, 1 Samuel 13.14. Then 3. Companies of spoilers came.
Mischief from the Philistines, verse. 17.18. Then had they no Smith in all
Israel, v. 19. After, Chap. 15.23. He hears God had rejected him from being
King, that he had rent the Kingdom from him, v. 28. After this he was trobled
with an evil spirit from the Lord, Chap. 6.14. In the 17.10. Goliath defies the
Armies of Israel, Chap. 18.7, 8. David is magnified above Saul, which vexed him
to the heart, and filled him with fear, verse. 29. He is disappointed of David,
whom he attempts to kill, Chap. 19. He distrusts his servants, and complains of
their unfaithfulness, Chapter 22. The Philistims invade his Land, being in pursuit
of David, Chap. 23. David and Abishai came upon Saul sleeping, and could have
killed him, Chap. 26. Being sore distressed, he seeks to the Witch of Endor.
When God was departed, no answer by Prophets, and the Philistims were upon him;
the Witch raises the Devil, who tells him of nothing but his own, and Isreal's
ruin, Chap. 28.19. These tidings struck him half dead, v. 20. After this, his
sons are slain, his Army is routed, he and his Armor bearer ki l themselves,
Chap. 31. here mischief followed upon mischief.

Pharaoh had ten plagues one after another, and in the Revelations you read of
7. Trumpets, 7. Vials, they came not single, but by seavens, and brought in
mischief after mischief, and judgment after judgment, Jer. 51.31, 32. One
Post shall run to meet another, and one messenger to meet another, to show the
King of Babylon that his City is taken at one end, that the passages are
stopped, the reeds burnt, and the men of War affrighted.

Many evils and troubles do befall States and Churches when they are under
Gods wrath, Deuteronomie 31.17. Then my anger shall be kindled against them in
that day, and I will forsake them, and I will hide my face from them, and they
shall be devoured, and many evils and troubles shall befall them, so that they
will say in that day, are not these evils come upon us because our God is not
amongst us.

When God is in a way of revenge, he is continually at his work, so that one
misery is but the messenger of another: and here is the misery of the wicked,
they shall perish rather an hundred times over, then go unpunished.

2. God proceeds by degrees and steps to severity of judgments; though people
be exceeding guilty, deserve as much wrath as is in all the vials of God, yet
he pours not out all his wrath at once, mischief comes after mischief, and
rumor after rumor.

First, Some drops of a vial, then some little streams, Mansuetudo iram
Clementia paenam moderatur.
after that the strength: God has clemency in him, moderating his punishments.
If little ones will prevail with sinners, he will withold the greater:
Sometimes though he see no amendment in the Creature, his own goodness, bowels
and compassion do cause him to forbear, Psalm 78.38. He did not stir up all
his wrath: He had cause to have done it, they flattered with him, lied unto
him, their heart was not right, they brake Covenant, verse. 36.37. And yet he
stirred not up all his wrath: he kindled not the fire so hot as utterly to
consume them: Nay, that wrath which was up, and coming out, he turned away:
And why? He was full of compassion, and remembered they were but flesh: Yet
because they were a stubborn people, profited neither by mercies nor judgments,
but fell to Idolatry, it is said verse. 9. He greatly abhorred Israel, and then
the consuming fire was kindled, verse. 63. At first Gods wrath is little, Psalm.
2.12. I was a little displeased, Z^ch. 1.15. But if sin grow, Gods wrath grows,
as Ahab's cloud, at first little as a hand, but quickly it covered the face of
heaven, it was black with clouds and winds, and there was a great rain. How
little soever Gods wrath be in the rise, it can suddenly cover the face of
heaven, and cause a great rain, a rain of fire and brimstone, an horrible
tempest, Psalm 11.6. God has great wrath, and fierceness of wrath, 2 Kings
23.26. He has a little finger, a hand, an arm, and loins to be heavy upon
sinners: He begins with the little finger, if that do good he will stop, if
not, you shall feel his hand, his arm, and weight of his loins, he has
wrath reserved, Nahum. 1.2. W^ath to come, 1 Thessalonians. 1.10.

3. Wicked men in great streights will sue to them for help, whom before they
hated, they should seek for a vision from the Prophet now they were in
extreamities, and they run from Prophet to Prophet to get some Counsel and
Comfort. The false Prophets who had been countenanced by them, had deceived
them, the true were hateful to them: Jeremiah, Zephaniah, Baruch were left,
and now they sue unto them for visions, see Jer. 37.17. and 38.14.27. and 42.1,
2, 3. There the King, Princes, and people being distressed, seek to Jeremie,
yet he was cursed by them, Jer. 15.10. Beaten and put into prison, Chap. 37.15.
Ahab sends for, and consults with Micaiah, whom he hated, when he was to go
out to War, and in a straight what would be the issue of it, 1 Kings 22.8.
When the Plagues were upon Pharaoh, then he sends for Moses and Aaron, Exodus
8.8.25. and 9.27. and 10.8.16.24. He sends for them in have, and in the night,
Chap. 12.31. Seven times he did it: Prophets are precious in times of trouble;
when men's liberties, estates, and lives are in question, then they are glad to
have help from Prophets, their Counsel, Prayers, holiness, they think may
do them good. Abimilech took away Abraham's Wife, but what said God to him,
Genesis 20.7. Restore the man his wife, for he is a Prophet, and he shall pray
for thee, and thou shall live: If not, thou shall surely dye, and all thine.

Take heed how you abuse, and ill-intreat the Prophets, the time may come, you
may have need of them, and be glad to hide your selves under their wings, ask
their Counsels, importune their prayers.

4. They that will not hear Gods servants when they are at ease, shall not have
help from them in time of their distress; they refused to hearken to Jeremiah,
Chap. 44.16. As for the word that thou have spoken to us in the name of the
Lord, we will not hearken unto thee: And now they seek unto him for a vision,
and there is none for them, or that afflicted them more then if they had none.
It Is just with God to withold visions from the Prophets when people desire
them, who slighted them when God gave them. If people stop their ears, and
will not hear, God will stop the Prophets mouths, they shall not speak, Lam.
2.9. Her Prophets find no vision from the Lord. They sought to the Prophets,
the Prophets to the Lord, but neither found any vision, night and darkness was
upon them, and there was no answer of God, Mica. 3.6.7.

5. That it is a dreadful evil when God takes away the signs of his presence,
visions among the Prophets, the law soundly interpreted by the Priests, and
seasonable Counsel from the Elders, were evident tokens of Gods presence
amongst them; when these failed, they were demonstrations of his absence; here
they should all perish, from the Prophet, the Priest, and the Ancient; now they
should neither have extraordinary, nor ordinary help, as it was with Saul, 1 Samuel 28.15. God answered him neither by Prophets nor by Dreams, which was an
argument he was departed, and hereupon he was in great distress. Micah was
troubled greatly, when the Danites took away his Idols, Judges 18.23, 24. He
thought that a great evil, that the signs of his Gods presence were gone: But
how much greater evil is it, when the signs of the true Gods presence are
taken away, 1 Samuel 4. When the Philistims had routed the Israelites, and taken
the Arc, and a Benjamite brought news of it to the City, and all the City
cried out, verse. 13. Great and small were afflicted at this, that the Arc, the
pledge of Divine presence was gone, and Eli was not so much stricken at the
death of his 2. sons, as at the taking of the Ark; when he heard that was gone,
he could live no longer, he fell backward, verse. 18. brake his neck, and dyed.
So Phineas wife upon this occasion falls into Travel, and names her Child
Ichobod, verse. 21. which is, where is the glory. The Arc is gone, God is gone,
Israel has now no more glory: so here, the tokens of Gods being among them
were removing, vision failing, the law perishing, etc. and where these go
away, it is night, Ignorance comes in, E^rours i^crease, and all woes are at
hand: While God is present by h^s Word and Ministers, what evils soever fall
out, there is relief in the Word and Ordinances against them, thence arguments
are fetched patiently to bear them. But if they be gone, that evil may sink the
heart without others: and when seas of Vinegar, and floods of bitter wa^er
compass you about, you have no oil to allay them, nor sugar to sweeten them.

6. That truths are not confined to any sort of men, not to Prophets, Priests,
or Ministers in these or any days, the Prophets should be without vision, the
Law should perish from the Priests, and Counsel from the Elders. It was a
conceit of old that this rank of men should not be without knowledge and truth,
Jer. 18.18. Come let us devise devices against Jeremie, for the Law shall not
perish from the Priest, nor counsel from the wise, nor the word from the
Prophet, come let us smite him with the tongue, etc. Let us accuse him to be a
false Prophet, get him silenced, imprisoned, put to death. All in authority in
the Church, the Prophets, the Priests, the Elders, are against him, and you
need not fear if he be taken of out the way, though a Priest, a Prophet, full
of wisdom and counsel, there will be others as good as he, more mild and
sweet; it will be no considerable loss, for the law shall not perish from the
Priest.

They were possessed with this apprehension, that truth, knowledge, counsel, and
the Spirit of God was peculiar to them, and should not be removed from them;
but the Lord confutes them, and confounds their conceit, there shall be no
Vision, no Law, no Counsel. Aaron had neither Vision nor Law when he said,
These are thy Gods O Israel, Exodus 32.4. Ahab had 400 Prophets, but no vision
amongst them. Had there been a Council of these Priests and Prophets gathered
to Counsel and d^termine for the good of the Church, what Canons and
Conclusions would they have made: The Papists and some others stick much to
Counsels, and challenge knowledge, truth, and Gods Spirit to be amongst them;
they are the representative Church, and where should light and counsel be, if
not amongst them: Let them and all consider that the Lord is not tied to men,
that truth is not the Inheritance of Priests, Prophets, Popes, Councels, more
then others: The law shall perish from the Priests. And Mar. 14.53. There was a
grand Council, the High Priest, and with him were assembled all the chief
Priests, the Elders, and the Scribes: And verse. 34. you have the result of this
Council, they all vote Christ to be a blasphemer, and condemn him to be guilty
of death, whereupon he was spit on, buffeted, and greatly abused. If a whole
Council have condemned Christ the Head, its like they have condemned many of
the members since.

The great Council of Nyce had erred in point of Ministers marriage, if
Paphnutius had not prevented. That of Arminum held rebaptication of those,
heretics had baptized. That of Constance denied one of the Elements in the
Supper of the Lord to the people. God is not tied to Councels, Aretius de util.
Script. in l. Com. Tertul. in exhort. ad castitatem.
to Prophets or Priests, but is free to be where he please, and to impart truth
to whom he please, and to as few as he please: Vbi tres, sunt ecclesia est,
licet laici fuerint, said Tertullian long since: And if they be a Church, they
may have truth amongst them, and more given in unto them as well as others.

God gives Vision, Law, Counsel, and takes them away at his pleasure, he
creates light and darkness. They shall seek vision of the Prophets, and there
shall be none. Prophets could not prophecy at pleasure: But when God gave in
visions, then they gave out light. Nathan had no vision, no word from heaven to
encourage David to build, he had one to take him off, 2 Samuel 7. Neither had
the Priests the knowledge of the Law always, Hosea 4.6. Mal. 2.8. Neither is
counsel always with the Ancient, Isa. 29.14. You that have Vision, the Law
and Gospel, the Counsel of the Ancient, how soon God may remove it, is a
secret, the light was extinguishing lately, there were many extinguishers,
Jesuiticall, Prelaticall, and others. Be not unthankful for the light you
have, sin not against light by disgracing that as New light which suits not
with your spirits: It was in the womb of the Sc iptures, though not brought
forth till of late. If you spurn a any light, any truths of God, you may lose
what you have; If you receive not the truth with love, God will send you strong
delusions. If you hate those that bring you light, you are in darkness,
notwithstanding all the light that shines amongst you, 1 John 2.9, 10. He that
says he is in the light, and hates his brother, is in darkness until now. He
that loves his brother abides in the light, and there is no occasion of
stumbling in him. Let me say to you as Isa. Chap. 2.5. O house of Jacob, come
ye and let us walk in the light of the Lord. And as Christ to the people, Yet
a little while is the light with you, walk while ye have the light, least
darkness come upon you, John. 12.35. Acts 26.19. Paul was not disobedient to
the heavenly visions he had; be not you, but walk in the light and warmth of
them, and then see what a blessing you shall have, 1 John 1.7. If we walk in
the light as he is in the light, we have fellowsh p one with another, and the
blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin.

8. Those will not do what they know, shall not know what to do: Zedekiah and
the rest would not do what they knew, Jeremie bade them go forth, yield
themselves, and it should be well with them and the City; but they did it not,
and quickly after they knew not what to do, no Vision, no Law, no Counsel; in
a straight, and knew not which way to turn them. Adam knew what to do, but did
it not, and presently after his head is in the thicket, and he knows not what
to do. Saul knew that he should not offer sacrifice, that he should have slain
Agag, spared neither man nor beast, he did it not: and how often he was in
streights, and knew not what to do, you may observe in the story, especially in
that famous place, 1 Samuel 28.15. When the Witch had raised the Devil in
Samuels likeness and mantle, he tells him why he had called him, I know not
what to do, but I have called thee that thou may make known unto me what I
shall do.

CHAP. VII.
26. The King shall mourn, and the Prince shall be clothed with desolation,
and the hands of the people of the Land shall be troubled: I will do unto
them after their way, and according to their desert^ will I judge them, and
they shall know that I am the LORD.
HAving spoken of the Ecclesiastical estate in the former Verse, in this he
comes to the Civil estate, and shows that the judgments should light upon all
sorts, King, Prince, and People; mourning, desolation, and trouble, shall be
upon them; he names the subjects of misery, and the miseries; then he lays down
the causes, the efficient, God, the material and meritorious, their ways,
deserts, then the end of all these Judgments, That they may know-etc.

The King shall mourn:
Hebrew is ijthabbal, the word being in Hithpael, (...) The Sept. is (...),
Which denotes a great measure of sorrow, and expressions of it outwardly.
notes continuation of mourning; some therefore render it, He shall pine away,
or kill himself with mourning: Its mourning with sighing, and sighs are
wasting; and surely Zedekiah had cause of constant mourning, even to his death;
he lost the Kingdom, his Sons, and his eyes at once, which were dear things
unto him; and some observe when the word is referred to Men, it notes mourning
for dear things.

The Prince:
That is, Princes, the Singular Number for the P^ (...) ^^^phet for prophets.

Shall be clothed with desolation:
Its metaphorical, from Garments, which do cover and compass about, so
Desolation should compass the Princes and Nobles on every side: The word notes
such Desolation as breeds amazement in the beholders; which was here when they
saw the City, Moller. Psalm. 143.4.
the Temple, the Kingdom laid waste, all things in them desolated; they were
clothed with desolation, and amazed at so strange a Garment upon them.

The hands of the people of the Land shall be troubled.
When the people should see their King mourning, their Nobles desolate, no
heart or spirit in them for the Church and State, for their Liberties or Lives,
their hearts and hands were troubled.

But he expresses it by their hands, because it was more visible by them, and
set out the greatness of their misery, they had no hands through fear and
faintness, to follow their Callings, no hands to take up Arms to defend
themselves; no hands to lift up in prayer.

According to their deserts.
The Hebrew is, According to their judgments, they have made ill Judgments of
persons and things, and deserve my judgments for them, and answerably I will
deal with them: They have oppressed, they shall be oppressed, they have not
heard the cry of others, Ex judiciis peccatoris judicat peccantem Deus Orig.
they shall not be heard crying; they have rejected me, and they shall be
rejected by me; they have killed, and they shall be killed; they have spoiled,
and they shall be spoiled; and so that of Christ, in Matthew. 7.2. is made good,
With what judgment ye judge ye shall be judged, and with what measure you
meat, it shall be measured to you again: In the 3, 4, 8, and 9. Verses of this
Chapter has been spoken of Judging and recompencing them according to their
ways.

Obser. 1.
That God has times for Kings and Courtiers to mourn in; greatness exempts not
from Gods hand, if great ones sin, they shall smart for their sins: The King
shall mourn, etc. God takes off Royal Robes, and puts sackcloth upon Kings
loins that sin against him; heavy judgments he brings upon Kings; Zedekiahs
sins were great:

First. He was false, a thing too incident to Kings, 2 Chro. 36.13. he violated
the Oath he had taken.

Secondly, Idolatrous; Heathenish Idolatry was practiced in his days, Verse 14.
the Temple and worship of it were polluted.

Thirdly, Trusted too, and sent for Aegiptians to help him, Jer. 37.7. he would
not hearken to Gods counsel, to the true Prophets, to those advised him well,
Jer. 36.25. Chap. 37.2. but to false Prophets, and wicked Counselors.

Fourthly, He hated, imprisoned, and persecuted the Prophets, 2 Chronicles. 36.16.
Jer. 37.21.

Fifthly, Injust and cruel, let Jeremy be put to death say the Princes: Jer.
38.4. Then Zedekiah said, He is in your hands, the King can do nothing
against you, etc. verse 5. He was overpowred by the Princes, and durst not
displease them, but it cost dear at last.

Look upon other Kings, they had their sins and their sorrows; Rehoboham
hearkens to ill Counsel, oppresses his people; and looses ten Trib^s at once
for it: Jeroboam upon wicked advice, sets up Calves, restraines the people from
the true worship at Jerusalem, and Gods sends him a dreadful message by Ahij^h
1 King. 14.6, 7, 8, etc. Ahab did not execute Justice upon Benhadad, a man
appointed to death; and therefore says the Prophet, Thy life shall go for his
life, and thy people for his people, 1 Kings 20.42. The Court was very wicked
then, Jezabell had the greatest power in it. she stirred up Ahab to work
wickedness, she set the Elders and Nobles awork, to accuse, and stone Naboth
to death; but there was a time of mourning for them, 1 Kings 21.23, 24, 27.

Ahaz, was wicked, and the worse for his affl ctions, but God had a sad day for
him, when he lost 120000 valiant men in one day, and had 200000 Women carried
away Captives, 2 Chro. 28. Asa who was a good King, yet he is branded with
trusting in an arm of flesh, 2 Chronicles. 16.7. With oppression of some of the
people, Verse 10. and therefore Hanani tells him he should have Wars; and
besides he was greatly diseased in his feet, Verse. 9.12. Manasses was the great
oppressing King, he shed and filled Jerusalem with innocent blood, 2 Kings
21.16. and as he sound times to shed blood, so God found times to have him in
the thorns, in Fetters, in Captivity, in mourning and humbling himself:
Oppression is the common sin of Princes, because they have greatness and
power in their hands, they think its warrantable for them to do what they
list, Ephraim loves to oppress, Hos. 12.7. The Kine of Bashan, the great ones
that were strong and fat, that had horns and hoofs, they oppressed the poor,
and crushed the needy, a man and his house, a man and his heritage, Micha 2.2.
Naboth and his Vineyard went both at once; Hence the Princes of Jerusalem are
called, Roaring Lions, Zeph. 3.3. they are greedy of their prey, they scare,
scatter, and devour the flock, but God will hunt these Lions, and judge these
men of the Earth, Psalm. 10.18. whose trade is oppression, and has promised a
time when his Princes shall oppress no more, Ezekiel. 45.8. My Princes shall
oppress no more: Either this Prophecy is not fulfilled, or the oppressed in
these days are not Gods people, or the Princes who oppress are not Gods
Princes; and if so, say to the oppressing Kings and Queens of the Earth, Humble
your selves, sit down, for your Principalities shall come down, even the
Crown of your glory, Jer. 13.18. See Acts 12.23. Rev. 6.15.

Secondly, That God has apparel for Princes and Nobles, and what is it?
Desolation, The Prince shall be clothed with desolation; God had an eye to the
clothing of the Great ones, and their sin about the same, and fits Garments
for them, such as they were not formerly used unto; Great ones sin in their
variety of Garments, they have many lie spoiling by them, when the nakedness
of others is seen for want of clothes, therefore God threats to take away their
changeable Suits of Apparel, Isa. 3.22. They sin in the strangeness of them,
they will have strange fashions; therefore, Zeph. 1.8. God threatens to Punish
the Princes and Kings Children, and all such as are clothed with strange
Apparel: The Jews had peculiar Garments appointed them, Numb. 15.38. Deuteronomy.
22.12. but they fetched in Foreign garments, made after the manner of the
Heathens and Nations about them: The Courtiers and great ones then as now,
affected strange and costly apparel, were prodigal of their estates that way,
had their chests and wardrops filled with rich garments, which at pleasure they
put on to draw respect from men; but wrath from God who clothed himself with
vengeance, that he might cloth them with desolation, which was a strange
Garment, never put upon their backs before, Isa. 59.17.
an unchangeable garment which lasted to their death; God stripped them by the
Chaldeans of their proud attire, rich suits, yea of all they had, and clothed
them with desolation; hence Lam. 4.5. They that did feed delicately are
desolate in the streets, and they that were brought up in scarlet embrace the
dunghill.

3. Wheresoever is a generality of sinning, there shall be a generality of
suffering. The King shall mourn, the Prince shall be clothed with desolation,
and the hands of the people of the Land shall be troubled. The whole Nation was
rebellious, Ezekiel. 2.3. From the greatest to the least they were guilty, Jer.
6.13. and therefore they should dye from the least to the greatest, Jer. 44.12.
God is impartial in his judgments, he will not spare Kings, Princes, Nobles,
people; but if their hearts, heads, hands be joined in wickedness, they shall
be joined in punishment. All flesh had corrupted it is ways, Genesis 6. and all
flesh was drowned in the floods of Gods wrath, Genesis 7. The Sodomites were all
guilty, and none escaped the vengeance of eternal fire, Jude 7. And here
having all sinned, the wrath of God seized upon them all, Isa. 65.12. You shall
all bow down to the slaughter, because when I called ye did not answer, when I
spoke ye did not hear, but did evil before mine eyes, and did choose that
wherein I delighted not.

4. That God smites sinners in that they have much offended with, and should
stand them in most stead in times of affliction, The hands of the people, etc.
They had sinned with their hands several ways, in making Idols, Isa. 2.9.
Hosea 14.3. In shedding blood, Isa. 59.3. In acts of violence, verse. 6. They
did evil with both hands earnestly, Mich. 7.3. Even Princes and Judges had
covetous hands, God therefore smites them in their hands: and whereas they
should have been serviceable unto them, now in their distress they were
troubled, faint, unuseful. Before they had hands for the Queen of heaven, Jer.
44.25 but now they had none for the God of heaven. They had hands for the
service of Egyptians and Assirians, Lam. 5.6. But now they had none to serve
themselves in their personal callings, or military affairs.

5. The Lord observes the ways and works of all, no Church, no State, no
Person; but what ever they do, comes under Divine cognizance, their ways and
deserts were known to the Lord: Some are so profane and atheistical, that
they think God sees, regards not the things done here below, Psalm. 94.5, 6, 7.
They break in pieces Gods people, afflict his heritage, slay, murder widows
and fatherless ones, yet say, the Lord shall neither see nor regard it. And in
Psalm. 10.11. He says, God has forgotten, he hides his face, and will never
see it, and not only Gods actual seeing, but his power of seeing and knowing
things here is denied, Jab 22.13. How does God know, can he judge through the
dark clouds? Some have confidence to say God sees no sin in his children, and
others blush not to say he sees not the sins of, and in the wicked, and so God
shall see no sin at all, they make him an unseeing and unknowing God. David
calls this brutishness, Ps. 94.8, 9, 10, 11. He that made the eye shall not be
see? He that teaches man knowledge shall not be know? Yea says he, the Lord
knows the thoughts of men, and that their thoughts are vanity. What is most
remote from man's eye and knowledge, that God knows exactly and afar off, Psalm.
139.2. And denounces a woe to men of such thoughts and practices, Isa. 29.15.
Woe to them that seek deep to bide their counsel from the Lord, and their
works are in the dark, and they say, who sees us, and who knows us. God
sees them, God knows them, and pronounces a dreadful woe against them:
because men's lives do proclaim that they believe not Gods Omnisciency,
therefore God professes it openly, Isa. 66.18. I know their works and their
thoughts. He had observed all within and without, and therefore they should be
consumed. Gods eye is upon all our ways and works, let us every day do as God
did, review them, and see that they be good.

6. God in his judgments will proceed with sinners according to their ways and
deserts, Job 34.10, 11, 12. Elihu proves there that God will not do wickedly,
nor pervert judgment, and why? for the work of a man shall be rendered unto
him, and cause every man to find according to his ways. God is most just, and
therefore takes notice of all thoughts, counsels, projects, attempts and
actions, that so he may deal answerably with men, Jer. 32.19. His eyes are open
upon all the ways of the sons of men, to give every one according to his ways.

That in Revel. 18.6. seems to cross this truth; when God will judge Babylon,
she must have double punishment, her cup must be doubled: God does not command
here that Babylon should be twice punished for the same sin, that were not
according to the rules of Divine Justice. Double here has, reference to
Babylons dealings with the Church; She did greatly afflict Sion, and now God
would have Babylon to have double afflion to that, Babylon did injustly in
oppressing Sion, Sion should do righteously in destroying Babylon, and observe
the word double, render unto her double according to her works. If she have
twice as many strokes, judgments, twice as much blood shed as Sion had, its
according to her works, she deserves it, and nothing can be too much for her;
therefore Jer. 51.49. As Babylon has caused the slain of Israel to fall, so at
Babylon shall fall the slain of all the earth. The Babylonian Empire was a
little world to Israel, and called it is self the universal Empire, and Babylon
said she was the Queen and the only City of all others, Isa. 47.7, 8. The
golden City, Isa. 14.4. But now when God would punish Babylon for her
bloodinesse against Sion: not only should Babylon's chldren that dwell in her
be destroyed, but all her Subjects in her, great Territories should be slain
for her sake, Alapid. understands it of Rome heathnish.
or together with her, which sets out the greatness of her punishment su^table
to her deserts, and is well called double, for the death of one Israelite
deserves the death of two Babylonians.

7. They that will not know God in the way of his mercies, they shall know him
in the way of his judgments. God had walked in paths of mercy amongst this
people many years, and they minded not God, honored him not in the midst of
mercies, but fed according to their pastures, and forgot God, therefore he
brought heavy judgments upon them, and says, They shall know that I am the
Lord. This phrase is used above 50. times in this Prophet, and assures us that
God will be known, and that amidst his enemies, and with an experimental
knowledge; for that is the meaning of the words, not a literal and brain
knowledge, Isa. 26.11. When thy hand is lifted up they will not see: But they
shall see. They will not see to fear, to repent: but they shall see; that is,
have experience of the strength of his hand to their shame and destruction.

The phrase of knowing I am the Lord, sometimes refers to mercies, as Exodus
6.6, 7. God would bring them out from the burdens and bondage of Egypt, take
them for his people, and then they should know him to be the Lord. So in Exodus
16.12. 1 Kings 20.28. God would give them Manna, deliver up enemies into their
hands, And they should know, etc. That is, have experience of his mercy, truth,
and loving kindness. Sometimes, and mostly it refers to Divine judgment,
especially in this our Prophet, God would bring in the Chaldeans with the
sword, and those grievous calamities attend it, and they should know that he
was the Lord, that is, they should have real experience of his Authority and
power over them, they should feel the bitter fruits of his displeasure in them.

CHAP. VIII.
VERSE 1.
And it came to pass in the sixth year, in the sixth month, in the fifth day
of the month, as I sat in mine house; and the Elders of Judah sat before
me, that the hand of the Lord God fell there upon me.


IN this, and the three next Chapters you have the grievous sins, and
answerable punishments of the Jews at Jerusalem laid down, with some other
things considerable.

This eighth Chapter has three things in it:

1. An Introduction to a new Vision, verse. 1.

2. The Vision it self, from the beginning of verse. 2. to the end of verse. 17.

3. A Declaration of Gods severe dealings with them, verse. 18.

In the Introduction to this Vision you have these particulars.

1. The time exactly set down when it was, in the 6. year, the 6. month, the
5. day.

2. The place where it was, As he sat in his house.

3. The persons before whom it was, The Elders of Judah sat before me.

4. The cause of it, The hand of the LORD fell there upon me.

For the time; It was now the sixth year of Jehoiachins cptivity, and in the
sixth month.

The Jews first month is Nisan, the second Jiar, the third Sivan, the fourth,
Thamuz, the fifth Ab, and the sixth Elul, and answers to that is called
August: The fifth day of this month had he this vision, which Junius says
was the Sabbath day, which was a day fitting for visions of God. It was now a
year, two months, and upwards, since he had his first vision.

As I sat in my house.
Having been now six years in Captivity, the Prophet and others had hired, or
builded themselves houses. This was a house of some capatiousnesse, the Elders
of Judah sat before him in it: That is, the chief of those that were brought
with Jehoiachin into Babylon, 2 Kings 24 12. And why they should come and sit
there is inquirable: It was not to catch advantages against the Prophet as some
fancy; Not to consult of their Civil affairs in Babylon, others were more fit
for such things then Prophets; but it was to bear of the Prophet what the Lord
intended to do with Jerusalem and the Jews there, what the meaning of the
types and visions he had was, whether he had any word of their returning from
that condition they were in, or they came to see if he had any word to speak
unto them being the Sabbath day; for on those days it was ord nary for the
people to go to the Prophets, 2 Kings 4.23. And Ezekiel sat composed and
disposed to speak the Word of God to those came to him.

The hand of the Lord God fell there upon me.
The powerful operation of the Spirit of Christ seized upon him, and was as a
hand carrying him on to that work he was appointed unto; he had a mighty
impulse of the Spirit, and was at a man wrapped ou^ of himself, wholly acted by
the Spirit, See Chap. 1.3. where has been spoken of the hand of the Lord.

That the Lord takes special notice of the times in which he gives out truths
and visions to Prophets and people, Obser. 1.
he keeps an exact account of those years, months, and days; In the sixth
year, the sixth month, and fifth day, etc. So in the first Chapter, In the
thirtieth year, the fourth month, the fifth day, the word of the Lord came
unto him; You have the time mentioned in the 20. Chap. verse. 1. The seventh
year, and the fifth month, the tenth day of the month: So in
26.1.29.1.31.1.32.1.40.1. In these places, there is special notice and account
set down of the time, wherein God gave out his truth and visions to the
Prophet, and by him to the people: In the 24. Chap. 1.2. the year, month, day,
and name of the day, are written down, when Jerusalem was besieged, and a
parable put into the Prophets mouth; and not only was it thus in Ezekiels, but
also in other Prophets days, Zech. 1.1. Chap. 7.1. Hag. 1.1. Chap. 2.1.10.
What ever men's thoughts are of truths, when they are tendered unto them, the
Lord looks upon it as a work of great concernment, and registers the time when
its done; in such a year, the City, Land, had Fasts every month, and the
Prophets Preached such Truths, and Texts unto them, such a month they had a
thanksgiving day, and the Text was, etc.

Especially in times of Affliction, God takes notice what truths are commended
by the Prophets unto men, and therefore the time in Ezekiel is more
particularized then any where else, because many were now in Captivity, the
rest were coming, and of all truths, those will cost dearest that are preached
unto us in our afflictions and not improved.

2. That great ones in times of afflictions will seek unto the Prophets, and
prize vision when its rare: The Elders they came to his house, sat there
expecting some word from him; Ezekiel was a Priest and a Prophet, Chap. 1.3.
and Priests did teach as well as Sacrifice, 2 Chronicles. 15.3. Israel was without a
teaching Priest, Levit. 10.8, 9, 10, 11. and Mal. 2.7. The Priests lips should
keep knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his mouth.

These Elders, the Princes and chief ones were come to seek it at Ezekiels
mouth, now they were in captivity, now Priests and Prophets were scarce, and
now great ones, that before, little regarded the Prophets and Priests, that
mocked them, despised and misused them, 2 Chronicles. 36.16. Now they get to Ezekiels
house, wait upon him, and long to hear a word from him.

Afflictions abate the pride of great men's spirits, remove prejudice, awaken
conscience, convince of sin, Gods greatness and Authority over the highest,
the shortness of life, of judgment, and that eternal condition is coming:
and when its so with great ones, they will be glad to go to a poor Prophets
house, and hear a word from him.

Jeroboam when his son was sick, sends to Ahijab the Prophet to know what
should become of him, 1 Kings 14.2, 3.

Naaman in his leprosy goes to the Prophet Elisha for help, 1 Kings 5. see
Isa. 37.2. Jer. 37.3. There you shall find great ones, even the greatest,
seeking to the Prophets in their troubles.

3. Meeting in private houses to enjoy Gods Ordinances, is ancient and
warrantable: The Elders came to the Prophets house, sat there to hear the Word
of the Lord, this was above 2000. years ago, therefore ancient, and the
Prophet taught them in private; they worshipped God in a house, they kept the
Sabbath there, and therefore not unlawful, this was frequent in Christ's, and
the Apostles days, Luke 10.38, 39. In Marthas house Christ preached, Acts
20.7. The Disciples met every first day, in houses and chambers, and when they
were so met, Paul preached to them. And Acts 2.46. They brake bread from house
to house. That is, privately, in opposition to the public, says De. Dieu.
And Acts 5.42. In every house they ceased not to teach and preach Jesus Christ.
In Cornelius house they did it, Act. 10.33, 34. In the Jaylors h^use they did
it, Acts 16.32. The high Priests cried out of such meetings, and thought the
Temple and Synagogues which were allowed by Authority were sufficient. But this
would not suffice the Apostles, they preached in public to convert the Jews,
in private to strengthen the Christians; they would not be tied to places, when
Christ by his Doctrine and practice had warranted them to preach and worship
any where. John 4.20, 21. 1 Timothy 2.8.


In Tertullians time such meetings were counted factious and schismatic: But
he vindicates the same, saying, Hoc sumus congregati quod et dispersi, hoc
universi quod et singuli, neminem laedentes, neminem contri^lantes quum probi,
quum boni coeunt, cum pii, cum ca^ti congregantur, non est factio dicenda* sed
curia: at e contrario illis nomen factionum accommodandum est, qui in odium
bonorum et proborum conspirant, etc. in Apologet.
We are the same congregated, and together, as we are asunder, we hurt, we
grieve none. When good and godly men meet together, it is no conventicle, but a
Court. They are a Conventicle, a Faction, that in hatred of Good men, meet and
plot against them, pretending they are the cause of all evils and disturbances.

In the Prelates days there was much rigor and severity used against godly
meetings of this nature, more then ever we read of formerly: It can hardly be
shown in Scripture, that ever any met together in private to worship the Lord,
were surpised, molested, taken, or imprisoned. For their public preaching
they were frequently questioned, and suffered; Its not so evident that they did
for their private meetings.

These they had in Babylon without imputation or molestation, and shall not
Sion be as indulgent to her children as Babylon was to her enemies? If not,
Babylon will rise up in judgment against such sons of Sion.

4. God honors holy meetings, though they be private, the hand of the Lord
fell there and then upon the Prophet. Where two or 3. meet together in a sacred
manner, God will be in the midst of them, Matthew. 18.20. He will be President of
that meeting, and powerful in it, not only show his presence and power in an
ordinary way, but many times extraordinarily, as at this time, John 20.19. When
the Disciples were assembled in private, Jesus stood in the midst of them,
and said, peace be unto you. And so in the 26. v. when they were met in private
Christ came amongst them, he honored their meetings in a special manner with
his presence, blessing, and miracles. The world has prejudice against such
meetings, speaks ill, and attempts the ruin of them; but Christ thinks
honorably of them, puts honor upon, and manifests his acceptance of them,
Acts 2.1, 2, 3. When the Apostles were got together in a hou e, the cloven
tongues of fire sat upon each of them, and they were filled with the holy
Spirit, Acts 10.44. While Peteter was preaching in Cornelius house, the holy
Ghost fell upon them. And you will scarcely find such visible signs of Gods
presence in public, as were then in private.

I speak not this to disparage public meetings, God is in the solemn
Assemblies, there his glory and power is seen. But to take off that Odium is
in the hearts of many against all private meetings.

5. Those wait upon God in the ways of his worship are not loosers by it. The
Elders came to the Prophet, sat there, expected something from him, and they
had more then ordinary. They beheld the hand of God upon the Prophet, and were
made witnesses of that vision he had, and partakers of the same.

The people that flocked after Christ into the field, had the Word, and beside
that, the loaves and fishes, Joh. 6. When the Disciples were met together to
worship the Lord the first day of the week, Christ came to them, breathed
upon, and gave them the holy Ghost, John 20.19.22 Paul seeks God in prayer,
Acts 9.11. and continued in it; behold he prays, he was at it night and day,
and Ananias was sent to him to help him to his sight, and to the holy Ghost, so
that he might see men, and how to save men. Old Simeon, and old Anna the
Prophetess, they came into the Temple to serve the Lord, and at that time
Christ is brought in, whom they see, and magnify God for, Luke 2. In Acts
16.13. You read how Paul left the City and went to a river side, where women
did usually meet to pray, thither many were come, and to them Paul preaches,
Lidias heart is opened, and Christ let in, who was before a stranger unto her:
and besides this she was baptized, and gained the company of the choicest
Apostles, verse. 14, 15. Cornelius, Acts 10. fasts and prays, and he has an
Angel sent to him, to assure him, that all was accepted in heaven, and to help
him to the speech of an Apostle, whom hearing, he received the holy Ghost,
verse. 44. Men lose not, but gain greatly by waiting upon God in his Ordinances.
If they have not what they expect sometimes, they have more then they look for
at other times. Blessed is the man that hears me says Christ, Prove. 8.34.
watching daily at my gates, waiting at the posts of my doors, They are blessed
already, and unexpected blessings are waiting for them.

6. That former, operations and impressions of the Spirit, suffice not the
holiest of men, when new services are to be done. Ezekiel was a holy Prophet,
he had the hand of God, the virtue of the Spirit falling upon him before,
Chap. 1.3. entering into him, Chap. 2.2. strongly upon him, Chap 3.14. And yet
all this was not sufficient, there was new work for him, new visions to be
seen and given out, and the hand of the Lord fell anew upon him.

New employments must have new influences; new trials must have new strength:
If we trust to antecedent receipts, we shall miscarry. Peter failed when he
came to encounter with a new trial, he leaned upon what he had, and looked not
up for more. Paul he stood, when buffeted by a messenger of Satan; and why?
being conscious of his own weakness, and insufficiency of what he had
received, he sought to God, who told him, my grace is sufficient for thee; not
the graces I have given thee, but the grace I have to give thee. If a messenger
of Satan molest thee, be too strong for thee, I have a messenger, even my
Spirit of grace, that shall come and comfort thee, that is stronger then all,
and shall uphold thee. Paul had experience of this, and therefore counsels
Timothy, 2 Timothy 2.1. To be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus. Though
he had unfeigned faith, knew the Scripture from a child, had a gift given him
by the laying on of Paul's hands; yet he must not be strong in these, but in
the grace of Christ, see his strength lie there: former impressions of Christ
Spirit ware out, and received virtue is soon spent: We must look for new
Influences, Impressions and Operations of the hand of Christ, else all will be
too little, Cant. 4.16. Awake O North wind, and come thou South, blow upon my
garden, that the spices thereof may flow. And Sampson called unto the Lord, and
said, O Lord God remember me, I pray thee, and strengthen me I pray thee only
this once, Judges 16.28.

VERSE. II.
Then I beheld, and lo a likeness as the appearance of fire: from the
appearance of his loins, even downward, fire: and from his loins even upward,
as the appearance of brightness, as the color of Amber.


OUr Prophet being in an ecstasy, the Lord Jesus Christ appears unto him as a
man, and is described,

First, Generally, and that is by a likeness of fire, he seemed to him to be a
man of fire, or as the appearance of fire.

2. More particularly, and

1. From his loins downward, and the appearance thereof was as fire.

2. From his loins upward, the appearance whereof was, 1. As brightness. 2. As
the color of Amber.


Christ being presented here as a man of fire, it is worthy consideration to
examine the grounds of it.

The Jews had sinned exceedingly, provoked God by their Idolatry to great
jealousy, and being now resolved upon their destruction, he gives out a fiery
vision of Christ unto the Prophet, which appearance was suitable to the work now
intended.

Appearances in fire have been formerly, Christ appeared to Moses in a flame of
fire, Exodus 3.2. The Angel there, Interpreters make to be Christ: and God led
the Jews in the wilderness by a pillar of fire, Exodus 13.21. And he was in
that pillar, Exodus 14.24.

Christ is likened to fire.

1. It Is a shining glorios thing, so Christ is glorious, John 1.14. We beheld
his glory as the glory, etc. And Titus 2, 13. his appearing will be glorious,
and so glorious as to lighten the world. When men come to judgment, they come
with some glory and Majesty.

2. He is likened to fire, to set ^ut his knowledge and discovery of things;
Fire is of a discovering nature, and makes manifest, Rev. 1.14. Christ's eyes
are like a flame of fire, they see into every place, and here Christ discovers
to the Prophet the sins of Jerusalem, the hidden Abominations there.

3. To show the active virtue is in Christ, fire is a lively and purging thing,
separating dross from the precious metals, and Christ is of infinite virtue,
he distinguishes between the precious and the vile, Mal. 3.1, 2. He is like a
refiners fire, exceeding active and discretive, he burns with zeal and
jealousy.

4. The severe punishment he would inflict upon this people, fire notes
revenge, destruction, Psalm. 18.8. Fire out of his mouth devoured.

Isa. 66.15, 16. Fire there notes severe punishment and utter destruction, and
Christ now would make a final end of this sinful people, he would be a fire
unquencheable. If they looked to him upwards, they should find him a fire, he
would plead with his Father for their destruction. If they looked downwards,
they should see him kindling a consuming fire amongst them: The law was given
in fire, Deuteronomy. 4.33.5.4. and therefore called a fiery law, and Christ appears
in fire when he comes to revenge the breaches of the law.

In the first Chap. verse. 27. Christ's appearance from his loins upward and
downward is the same; here, downwards, he appears as fire, upwards, as
brightness, fire noting his anger, brightness his clemency, as some conceive.

The word for brightness notes such brightness as is from the morning, the
Firmament, the Sun, (...)
therefore some render it, As the appearance of the bright Sun. Solis rutili
Take the Sun when in it is greatest luster and glory, such was the appearance
of Christ upwards, and may note the glory of Christ in execution of judgment,
in giving out his threatenings to the Prophets against sinners.

As the color of Amber.
Of th^s has been spoken, Chap. 1.4.27. The H^b. Chasmal signifi^^ a coal
intensely hot: and ^uch as a coal is, at the height of its heat, in a fiery
furnace, such was the appearance of Christ, at this time he was in a way of
wrath, and giving out th eats against this people, and filled with the fire of
zeal and jealousy for the Lord.

If the appearance of Christ be fiery and glorious, Obser.
the presence of him will be so much more: appearances are not perfect
expressions of that they resemble. The appearance of fire upon the Tabernacle,
Number. 9.15. had not that virtue and glory in it which real fire had: If real,
it would have consumed the Tabernacle. The appearance of lightning, Dan. 10.6.
is not so glorious as lightning it self, and what the Prophet saw here of
Christ was appearance only, little to that is in Christ.

When Christ shall really be seen not in visions, but as he is, he will be
very glorious, Mar. 13.26. When Christ comes, it will be with great power and
glory. Great, refers to glory as well as power, Matthew. 24.30. There it is with
power and great glory. And if you demand how great, even so great as cannot be
greater, Matthew. 16.27. He shall come in the glory of his Father, and no glory
can exceed that.

VERSE. III.
And he put forth the form of an hand, and took me by a look of my head, and
the Spirit lift me up between the earth and the heaven, and brought me in the
visions of God to Jerusalem, to the door of the inner gate that looks
toward the North, where was the seat of the image of jealousy, which
provokes to jealousy.


IN the former verse you had Christ's person described, in this are his actions
commended to us, which are these; 1. The putting forth of his hand. 2. The
employment thereof, By it he took our Prophet by a lock. 3. The lifting him
up between Heaven and Earth by his Spirit. 4. The bringing him to JERUSALEM,
where is considerable, 1. The manner of his bringing, In the visions of God. 2.
The special place, He was brought to the door of the inner gate that looks
toward the North. 3. The nature of this place, It was the seat of an Image,
which is described, 1. From its name, An image of jealousy. 2. From the
effect, It provokes to jealousy.




He put forth his hand.
He that appeared like fire, that had such brightness, and was so glorious, he
put forth his hand; sent out his hand is the Original.

Not a real hand, but the former likeness of a hand. It was the likeness and
appearance of a man that he saw, and such was the hand here, not a substantial
fleshy hand.

And took me by a lock of mine head.
By the hair, the word signifies, (...)
that which grows out of the head and flourishes there, as grass out of the
ground, or boughs out of a tree.

The Spirit Lift me up between, etc.
It was said the hand took hold of him, did not the hand lift him up? If not,
to what end took it hold: That hand was the holy Spirit of Christ, which in
these visions of Ezekiel. is often called a hand, Chap. 1.3. and 3.14. The Spirit
that lifted him up is called the hand of the Lord, because Christ by his Spirit
does what ever the hand of man can do.

And brought me in the Visions of GOD to Jerusalem.
The Prophet thought himself like a Bird or an Angel flying through the Air,
and carried to Jerusalem; this was no real elevation or corporeal
transportation of the Prophet to Jerusalem, as will appear thus.

1. It Is said it was the form of a hand, the likeness of one, not a hand it
self.

2 Had be been really taken up by a lock, it would have been exceeding grievous
and tormenting to him, if not deadly.

3. He says he was brought in the visions of God to Jerusalem, not in the
reality of his person, all was done as he sat in his house, and the Elders of
Judah before him: The Ancients say, it was in his spirit, not in his body that
he was translated, a mental, not an ocular vision.

Our Prophet being in a rapture, or ecstasy, seemed as a man dead, and had
secret things revealed unto him, which he calls visions of God. Whether these
were to his spirit in the body, or called out of it, is uncertain, 2 Cor. 8.1,
2. When Paul had his Revelation and visions, R^ptus est ab eo quod est secundum
naturam, in id, quod est supra naturam, ex vi superioris naturae elevatis.
Thom. In raptu abstrahitur anima a sensibus and phantasmatibus.
whether it was in the body or out of it, himself could not tell; visions they
both had, and they were visions of God, not delusions of Satan, who can be a
lying spirit in the hearts and mouths of false Prophets, 1 Kings 22. Nor were
they fancies of their own; for when men are in Divine raptures, there is a
cessation of all sensible and natural actions. Nature contributes nothing
thereunto; In some diseases there is a stilling of all natures Organs, and
operations, as when deliquium animae siezeth upon any; but there is nothing
then offered to the soul, as here; such visions had our Prophet as were
clear, and without all doubt he knew them to be visions of God.

The door of the inner Gate.
Rev. 11.2. Mead on Rev.
The Temple was yet standing, and had two Courts, one called the outer Court,
which was the place whether the Israelites assembled for Divine exercise, and
an inner Court, 1 K. 6.36. which was the Priests Court, 2 Chronicles. 4.9. The other
was the great Court, and called Solomon's porch says Maldonat. Into this Court
was Ezekiel brought, and set at the door going into the inner Court.

That looks toward the North.
In the Courts about the Temple there were gates and doors toward the four
quarters of the world, which included this mystery, that in due time the
partition wall should be broken down, that stood between Jews and Gentiles,
and all sorts from all parts should come into the true worship of the true God,
came they from East or West, South or North, there should be a door open to
let them in; at this North-gate was the Image seated that the Prophet did first
see.

Image of Jealousy.
Two things are to be opened here: 1. What this Image was. 2. Why called an
Image of Jealousy.


First, It Is doubted amongst the Learned what Image this should be. The most
agree it was the Image of Baal, it is true that Josiah had taken away Baal and
his Altars, 2 Chronicles. 34. But Jehoiakim and Jehoiachin, and Zedekiah had
restored them again, as is gathered from 2 Kings 23.37. and 24.9.19. 2 Chronicles.
36.1.4.

2. Why called the Image of Jealousy. The Heathens had no Idols or Gods of
that name, nor is it so called.

In reference unto them; but,

1. From the wicked zeal of Ahaz, who as you read, 2 K. 16. sent the pattern
of an Altar at Damascus to Vriah, who set it up for the honor of Baal at the
North gate of the inner Court, and to this Altar did Ahaz bring the Altar of
the Lord, verse. 14. here was his zeal for Baal.

2. Because it provoked God to Jealousy; when God saw his own Altar and Word
to be so abused, subjected to Baal, that his people went a whoring from him to
that shameful thing, he would bear no longer, but was jealous for his honor,
discovers to the Prophet their great sin, and his jealousy burning now against
them.

This Image made the people forsake their God, commit spiritual Adultery, Jer.
7.30. and God would recompense it now unto them.

It was seated at the gate Northward.
Because that way was the most frequent passage to the Temple, Prado.
the ascent being not so steepy and difficult as other sides of the hill, on
which the Temple stood, and for that Sacrifices came mostly from that side.

The Spirit is the agent of Christ, by which he does his works, Obser. 1.
He put forth his hand, and took hold of me. The hand of a man is that which
does immediately take hold of a thing: so the Spirit being the immediate agent
which Christ uses, is called a hand, and does what ever the Lord Christ will
have done. If he would have men walk in his Statutes, keep his Judgments, he
puts his Spirit into men, and by it causes them to do so, Ezekiel. 36.27. That
is the hand which over-acts them. If he would have young or old prophecy, it is
done by his Spirit, Joel 2.28. And the Prophets gave out what the Spirit gave
in to them, Zech. 7.12. If the Lord Christ would not have Paul preach in Asia,
the holy Ghost forbids him, if he would go into Bethynia, the Spirit suffers
him not, Acts 16.6, 7. If he should preach, the Spirit presses him in his
spirit, Acts 18.5. I^s Christ's Spirit that mortifies our corruptions, Romans
8.13. which helps us to pray, verse. 26. Its the Spirit works all graces in us,
Gal. 5.22. It Is not by might or power, but by the Spirit Christ does all, Zech.
4.6.

2. That holy men must be lift up out of themselves, and above themselves, if
they would participate of Divine things.

The Spirit lift up the Prophet between earth and heaven. Paul 2 Cor. 12.4. was
caught up into Paradise where he heard the unspeakable words, the Spirit of God
had lifted him up above himself and all worldly things, and then God spoke
such things to him as he never heard, Revel. 1.10. John was in the Spirit when
he had those great and glorious Revelations, Extra mundem peregrinabatur cum
Domino.
he was in the Spirit, that is, in the hand of the Spirit, and by the power
thereof lift up and carried above, and out of himself; There was not only a
pressure of the Spirit, but a comprehension, the Spirit comprehended him; he
was in a manner all Spirit, and the more spiritual any is, the more fit for
converse with God, and to have visions of God. The natural man receives not
the things of God, 1 Cor. 2.14. Its not flesh and blood that reveals,
receives, and judges of them, men must be lifted up by the Spirit from the
earth, their earthly dispositions and affections, before they are fit for
Divine excellency.

Those have left the earth as Paul did, and have their Conversations in heaven
as he had; they are fitted to know and partake of the great mysteries of Christ.

Self is the great l^t^ to Divine things, therefore Apostles were usually
wrapped out of themselves, when they had their visions.

3. Christ by his Spirit makes known to the Prophet the sins of men, the Spirit
showed him the Image of Jealousy, and the Abominations the people committed
at Jerusalem. Ezekiel was in Babylon, and yet by the help of the Spirit he
comes to see and know the doings of sinners at Jerusalem. When they should
hear Ezekiel had Prophesied or preached of their sins particularly, they would
wonder who had informed him of them, as now when Ministers preach
conscientiously, and meet with the particular sins of men and women, they
think some or other have informed them, told tales of them, when it is only the
Spirit of God has directed them. A godly Minister was charged to be a
Conjurer, because he told men in his preaching of the particular things they
did.

It Is the Spirit helps in studying, and in preaching. The Spirit convinces the
world of sin, John 16.9. and the Ministers of the sins of the world, that so
they may abhor those sins, and denounce the judgments of God against them.

4. Wicked men are wise, and take their advantages to promote their
superstitions, they set their Images of Jealousy at the Inner gate Northward;
that way was the greatest concourse of people, and so the advantage great for
their worshipping of, or before this Image: Men are wise to do evil, Jer.
4.22. They set up Altars in all the streets to Jerusalem, to burn incense to
Baal that shameful thing, Jer. 11.13. They could not suffer any street to be
without an Altar, they were wise and zealous to promote sin. Jeroboam feared
lest the people should go from him, and therefore in his witty wickedness to
prevent it, sets up the Calves at Dan and Bethel, 1 Kings 12.29. The Papists
have had repute for such wisdom, they had their Crosses in high ways, and in
public places where people most frequented.

5. When Images go up, then the worship of God goes down, Ahaz sets up Baal,
and brought the Altar of the Lord to it, Baal was regarded, and the true God
and his worship neglected, 2 Kings 16.14. Men are zealous for their own
Inventions, and jealous left they should suffer.

6. Superstition and Idolatry are provoking sins, they provoke God who is a God
of patience to jealousy, Deuteronomy. 32.16. They provoked him to jealousy with
strange Gods, strange inventions.

Sins of this nature are called provocations, Nehem. 9.18. great provocations.
No sins provoke God more then idolatry and false worship.

1. It Is a breaking of Covenant with God, who had taken people in to be his, as
a Husband does a Wife, and when she breaks Covenant, forsakes the guide of her
youth, and is for others, this provokes the Husband more then any thing besides.

Nos adoramus adoratione latriae imaginem Christi. Part. 3. q. 25. a. 3.
2. Because it is a giving Gods honor and glory to Idols. Aquinas says, we
adore the image of Christ with divine worship. Tom. 1. Controv. 7. l. 2. c. 23.
Bellarmine with many others acknowledge that the Image of Christ may in some
kind be honored cultu la^riae: when Gods glory is given to creatures, this
provokes the eyes of his glory, as it is Isa. 3.8. And he will not ^ndure that
his glory and praise be given to another, Isa. 42.8.

3. They that are guilty this way hate God, Exodus 20.5. Being provoked
therefore, and the spirit of Jealousy kindled in him, he will not put it up,
he will not spare, according to that in Prove. 6.34. Jealousy is the rage of a
man, and therefore he will not spare in the day of vengeance. And Cant. 8.6.
Jealousy is cruel as the grave, no mercy will be shown, God will stir up
jealousy, and prevail against his enemies, Isa. 42.13. Devour whole lands by
the fire of his jealousy, Zeph. 3.8.

VERSE. IV.
And behold the glory of the God of Israel was there according to the vision
which I saw in the Plain.


OUr Prophet being visionally brought to Jerusalem, Christ by his Spirit shows
him glory, which is set forth, 1. Absolutely; The glory of God. The glory of
God, that is, the glorious God was there manifesting his glory to him in some
visible way.
2. Relatively; The God of Israel. 3. The place; There at the Inner gate. 4.
The manner; According to the vision he had seen.


In Chap. 3. verse. 23. The Prophet says, he arose and went into the Plain, and
behold the glory of the Lord stood there, as the glory which I saw by the River
of Chebar. He had twice before seen the glory of God, and now here again he
sees it.

There is nothing difficult in the words, one thing is considerable in them why
the Prophet had now a third time the glory of God presented to him.

1. To keep his heart in an humble and reverentiall frame, that what ever God
revealed to him about the utter ruin of the Jewish Nation, he should not st^ck
at it, decline the revealing of it, because he saw that God was a glorious and
dreadful God.

2. To let him see what unspeakeable wrong the Jews had done him, to forsake
the glorious God, to serve base shameful dunghil-idols; this made God
complain, Jer. 2.11. They have changed their glory for that which does not
profit, the God of Israel for the gods of the Nations.

3. To kindle the zeal of the Prophet, when he had seen God so glorious once,
twice, or thrice, and also what they had done to this God; this could not but
fire his Spirit, and make him burning with zeal in justifying God, and
denouncing threatenings against such Idolaters.

4. To let the Prophet see that he was going away from his Sanctuary, and from
his people, and therefore its said, the glory of the God of Israel was there,
there at the inner gate looking Northward, where the Image which provoked so
much was, not that the glorious God would have Communion with the Image; but to
evidence, that seeing they had brought in a false god, the true God would leave
them.

5. To confirm the Prophet in the truth of this prophecy, and make way for the
high esteem of it in after Ages, being brought in with so many glorious visions.

God of Israel.
Jacobs name being changed to Israel, Genesis 32.28. in time the Jews came to be
called Israelites, Exodus 9.7. The people of Israel, Exodus 19.3. And God taking
them for his people, is frequently styled the God of Israel, Exo. 5.1. Josh.
7.29. And he is so styled here to put them in mind of two things.

1. The Covenant that he made with their Fathers, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and
Moses, Deuteronomy. 29.12, 13. God took them to be his people, and became their God.

2. The great things he had done for Israel above all other people, none of
the Nations had such a God as their God was, the Nations Gods were impotent,
impure, perishing Gods, but the God of Israel was the Lord of Hosts, Jer. 7.3.
Thus says the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel. He had all power, command of
all creatures, and could do enough for them, he was the holy One of Israel,
Isa. 5.19. and would not endure iniquity in Jacob and Israel, The excellency of
Israel, 1 Samuel 15.29. and never failed, and did wonderful things for them, he
brought them out of Egypt, etc. Micha 6 4, 5. He had known them above all
families of the earth, Amos 3.2.

That the true God, the God of Israel, is a gloriou^ God, he is a glorious
Essence, and essential glory, Psalm. 29.3. He is the God of glory. And Psalm
24.7.9, 10. He is thrice called the King of glory Not only has he glory to
dispose of to others, but he is a King all of glory, and glorious
excellencies; his Attributes are glory, his Omnipotence, Omniscience, Eternity,
Immutability, Wisdom, Justice, Mercy, Holi^esse, are his glory, Exodus 15.11.
He is glorious in holiness. It Is said of Aaron he had Garments for glory,
Exodus 28.2. Gods Attributes are his garments for glory, and how glorious is God
who has so many glorious garments on him, there is nothing in God, or about
him, but it is glorious, his eyes are eyes of Glory, Esa. 3.8. his right hand is
glorious. Exodus 15.6. his Arm is glorious Esa. 63.12. His Majesty is glorious,
Psalm. 145.5. His works are glorious, Psalm 111.3. His works of creation,
providence, redemtion are so. His Name is glorious, 1 Chronicles. 29.13. His glory
is so bright, so great, that it fills the earth, Isa. 6.3. His Spirit is glory,
1 Pet. 4.14. His son is the Lord of glory, 1 Cor. 2.8. God is not only
glorious, or glory, but excellent glory, 2 Pet. 1.17. (...).
It excels the glory of the Sun, the glory of all Kings, of all Angels and
glorious ones, of the whole Creation, yea the comprehensions of all Intelligent
creatures, it is so excelling, that none but God himself can measure it.

Let us give glory to the God of Israel who is so glorious, acknowledge what
he has done, magnify his name, multiply his praises; where praises dwells,
God dwells, Psalm. 22.3. He inhabits the praises of Israel. He is the God of
Israel, dwells there, to counsel, comfort, deliver, sanctify and save them;
they praise him, and he is there to give in daily new matter of praise.

2. Sight of the glory of God is a great privilege, it is not for every one to
see. Ezekiel he saw it, not all in Babylon, not all the Elders who were in the
house with him: Ungracious, unbelieving spirits see not Divine glory, John
1.14. We beheld his glory, not others. We that received of his fullness, of his
graces, we had the favor and the power to behold his glory. Many saw Christ's
miracles, but not his glory h^ld out by them, John 2.11. When the water was
turned into wine, Christ manifested his glory, which the Disciples saw, not
others, they believed. And Christ told Martha, if she believed, she should see
the glory of God, John 11.40. Faith is the eye of the soul, and God shows his
glory in Christ to that eye.

3. That whithersoever God calls a man, he can show him his glory, at the River
Chebar he had seen it, in the Plain also, and now at Jerusalem which abounded
with Idolatry.

VERSE. 5, 6.
Then said he unto me, son of man, lift up thine eyes now the way toward the
North, so I lift up mine eyes the way toward the North, and behold Northward
at the gate of the Altar, this Image of jealousy in the Entry.

He said furthermore unto me, son of man, see thou what they do, even the
great abominations that the house of Israel commits here, that I should go
far off from my Sanctuary, but turn thee yet again, and thou shall see
greater abominations.


IN these and the following verses are gradually set out the great
abominations of the Jews at Jerusalem. Their wickedness was not positive
only, but superlative, of the highest nature. Besides the Appellation, son
of man, the fifth verse has in it, 1. Christ's commandment, Lift up thine eyes.
2. The Prophets obedience, So I lift up mine eyes. 3. The thing seen, The
image of jealousy. 4. Tha place where, At the gate of the Altar in the Entry.


Lift up thine eyes.
This phrase imports a through view, an exact notice of things, Genesis 13.10. Lot
lifted up his eyes, and beheld all the plain of Jordan, that it was well
watered every where. He diligently considered the place and commodities of it,
Isa. 49.18. Lift up thine eyes round about, and behold: That is, Consider well
how all that gather against thee shall be for thy good. The lifting up of the
eyes notes a distinct and fuller observation of things: and so here, Ezekiel,
be not remiss and careless in the viewing of things, but lift up thine eyes,
open them fully, observe exactly what is before thee. This you must take to be
meant of the eyes of his mind, not his body; for he was in an ecstasy in the
Spirit at Jerusalem, not in the flesh.

At the gate of the Altar.
No gate was so called originally; but after Ahaz had corrupted the worship of
God by his Altar from Damascus, fixed an Altar by that gate, and brought the
Lords Altar thither, 2 Kin. 16.14. It Is conceived here upon this gate was
called the Altar-gate, there was an Altar for Baal, and a mis-plac'd Altar for
God.

If we will rightly discern the corruption in worship, Obser. 1.
distinguish between what is humane, and what is divine; we must set the eyes
of our minds a work, they must be lift up, be open, and intent to the thing:
There is great difference between the external view, and judgment of the
flesh, and between the internal view and judgment of the spirit. This
Baaliticall Altar, doubtless, was glorious outwardly, as false worship is, (
Jeroboams Calves were golden ones, 1 Kings 12.28.) and affected the eyes, stole
away the hearts of many; but it was loathsome to the eye of a judicious
considering mind; Gods worship was hindered, defiled by it, his jealousy
provoked, and their ruin procured by it.

The Popish Religion is pompous, and to carnal eyes has beauty in it; but to
those that lift up the eyes of their mind, and well consider, it is
superstitious, idolatrous, and abominable; some have called the Ceremonies
used lately in our worship, Innocent: but those examine them well, found them
Nocent, the seed of contention, snares to conscience, and flies in our precious
ointment, John 7.24. Judge not henceforth according to outward appearance, but
judge righteous judgment. See exactly into things, let the eyes be lift up,
and so shall you pass a more judicious sentence.

How pompous was our worship become lately; but since eyes have been lift up,
the vanity, corruption, and superstition thereof has appeared.

2. They may safely observe, examine the nature and sinfulness of false
worship, who have a call unto it: The Lord Christ he bids Ezekiel behold the
Image of Jealousy: See what the People did there, the Prophet did not
willingly lift up his eyes, but at command, and being lawfully called to it,
there was no danger of being seduced, of bowing to Baal, of countenancing false
worship; God keeps those are in the way he sets them. Had the Prophet out of
curiosity and desire to see this Altar, this Image, gone to Jerusalem, he might
have been ensnared, as too many of our Nation by going to Rome, having no
better ground than an itching desire to see and know what is done there.

Romish worship has inveigled them, Jesuitical charms bewitched them, and
lost they have both truth, and innocence, their consciences have been defiled,
and their judgments prejudiced against those ways they were formerly
acquainted with: If the spirits of some have been heightened against those
abominations by the sight of them, this is matter for wonder, not for
imitation: Its not safe entering into the Lions den, because one Daniel was kept
safe there: where one has been preserved, scores have been corrupted, and many
of them insensibly. Philosophers say, an egg wrapped up in salt, looses the good
meat was in it, the shell remaining whole. And so when young ones travail into
those brackish Countries, and live amongst those are salted with Popery, they
lose the good savor they had of true religion, and only the shell remains whole.

3. See here the tractablenesse, the obedientiall frame of the Prophets spirit:
Christ commands him to lift up his eyes, and so he lift up his eyes, he doubted
not, disputed not, he lingered not; but the word being given out, immediately he
obeyes, his spirit was set toward, and suitable to the will of Christ: He
might have stuck and said, it is an abominable Idol, an accursed thing that
provokes thee to Jealousy, mine eyes shall never see that so pollutes thy
worship, and is so contrary to thy glory; but he presently submits, and fulfils
the will of Christ, which is very acceptable unto him. Exodus 4.14.
Moses delays made God angry, and it is the great shift of Satan to keep men
off from obeying the will and voice of God by delaye^. He does not tell men the
commands in Scripture are not the commands of God; but he causes delays, and
so impedes, retards the execution of Divine commands: So that God is hearkened
unto, months, and years, after the command is gone forth, such obedience is
not so precious and acceptable. David knew it, and therefore says, Psalm
119.60. I made have, and delayed not to keep thy Commandments. A lazy,
lingering spirit, is a provoking spirit: David made have and ran when God
commanded, which greatly pleased God. Abraham is bidden to leave his Country,
and go to an uncertain place he knew not whether, he did it presently, and
it is twice recorded in Scripture, Genesis 12.1.4. and Acts 7.3.4.

VERSE. VI.
He said furthermore unto me, son of man see thou what they do, even the
great abominations that the house of Israel commits here, that I should go
far from my Sanctuary; but turn thee yet again, and thou shall see greater
abhominatins.


THis Verse needs little opening, it is probable that some of the Jews were
worshipping before that Idol^ Baal, whereupon the Lord being moved, asks our
Prophet whether he did not see what they did, even such things as would cause
him to depart from them, and to leave them to the spoil of enemies.

They intended not to drive God out of the Sanctuary, but that was the sequel
and fruit of their abhomiotions;

That I should go far off from the Sanctuary.
The Hebrew runs thus; To go far from the Sanctuary, Not I should go, and
so some refer it to the people that worshipped Baal, and so those pervert,
corrupt the worship of God, go from the Sanctuary, they go from God, and have
nothing to do with him; but I conceive it refers to God, who would leave the
Sanctuary, because of the pollutions and corruptions in it.

That where Gods pure worship is, there is his presence, Observe. 1.
God had given them pure Ordinances in the Temple, and there he was, abode,
dwelt, 2 King. 19.15. He dwelt between the Cherubins. They were upon the Arc
of the Covenant in the Sanctuary where God manifested himself, and gave out
oracles to those sought him; hereupon David, Psalm. 27.4. desired to dwell in
the house of the Lord, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his
Temple; there he saw the beautiful face of God, and heard his sweet voice. God
is in his own ordinances, when the Temple is measured out, and the holy City
built according to Gods mind, and then the name shall be Jehovah Shammah, Ezekiel.
48.35.
the Lord is there, and the Churches whilst golden candlesticks Christ is in
the midst of them.

2. Corruptions, Abominations in worship, cause the Lord to leave his people,
to depart from his Sanctuary, they brought in heathnish Altars, set up Baal,
and removed Gods Altar out of its place, and hereupon, God forsakes his
dewlling place, his presence, protection, counsel, countenance, blessings are
all withdrawn from them, and woe is to that people when God goes out of the
Sanctuary, if outward calamities do not ruin them, spiritual judgments
undo them. But see the mischief of false worship, men's additions and mixtures
with the pure Ordinances of the Lord, they are as smoke to Gods eyes, vinegar
and gall to his taste, abominations to his Spirit; If they must into his house,
he will out of it: when the Ark comes in, Dagon goes down: and when Dagon comes
in, the Arc goes out. In Christ's time, the Temple was a den of thieves, and
Jehovah was not amongst them, its needful therefore to stand contend for pure
ordinances, and divine worship.

3. Men may have ordinances, and forms of worship, without God in them; they
had the Sanctuary, Altars, Sacrifices, when God was gone from them, yea far
from them; as they had corrupt ordinances, so powerless ordinances, there was
nothing of God, Christ, or his Spirit in them: when God is out of the Sanctuary
it matters not who is there, or what is done there, all is to little purpose, 1
King. 19.11, 12. There was a wind, an earthquake, a fire, but God was in
neither of them: and let there be Priests and Levites, sacrifice and incense,
preaching and praying, God is not in them.

4. There are degrees of sins; abominations, great, and greater, sins of
ignorance are of a low nature, sins of knowledge higher; the more of the head
and heart is in a sin, the worse, the greater it is; knowledge, and will, do
edify sin much. David's murder, Peter's denial of Christ, were sins more
heinous then others which they committed.

5. God discovers sins by degrees, not all at once, he had shown him great
abominations, and Christ bids him turn, and he should see greater
abominations. Sins are not all committed at once, nor all discovered at once,
they grow by degrees, and are discovered by degrees. Abominations in Kingdoms
and Churches, lie wrapped up in the mantle of secrecy and darkness; but God
has his times to discover and make them known to the sons of men, Hosea:
2.10. Now will I discover her lewdness. Ephraim had sinned, added abomination
to abomination, lewdness to lewdness, and they had been covered up for a
season, but now the discovering time was come, several Murders and Adulteries
were brought to light. Ephraim and Samaria's sins were made known when
Israel was to be healed, Hosea 7.1. When God would come and cover the wounds of
his own people, then the wickedness of their enemies are laid open: It Is
evident in our days, God has been upon healing England, and the sins of
many have been discovered.

Estates and Churches are like bodies full of gross and noxious humors, stir
them a little, and they appear to the danger of the whole.

VERSE. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
And he brought me to the door of the Court, and when I looked, behold a hole
in the wall.

Then said he unto me, son of man, dig now in the wall: and when I had dug
in the wall, behold a door.

And he said unto me, go in, and behold the wicked abominations that they
do here.

So I went in and saw, and behold every form of creeping things, and
abominable beasts, and all the Idols of the house of Israel pourtraied upon
the wall round about.

And there stood before them 70. men of the Ancients of the house of Israel,
and in the midst of them stood Jaazaniah the son of Shaphan with every man
his censer in his hand, and a thick cloud of incense went up.

Then said he unto me, Son of man, have thou seen what the Ancients of the
house of Israel do in the dark, every man in the chambers of his imagery: for
they say the Lord sees us not, the Lord has forsaken the earth.


THese verses contain the second part of the Prophets new vision: where, 1.
You have a new discovery of more Idolatry in the 7, 8, 9, and beginning of the
10. verse. 2. A description of it in the 10. and 11. verses. 3. The ground of
all their vile practices, verse. 12. They say, the Lord sees not.


I shall open what has any difficulty, and so give you the Observations.

The door of the Court.
Another door then that in verse. 3. It was the door of the Levites or Priests
Court, into which none might come that were not of the Tribe of Levi, and
herein the sin of the Priests and people is aggravated; that the Priests
suffered any to come in there who should not, and that the people durst venture
into that holy place, or bring their abominations so near the Lord.

Dig in the wall, and behold, a door.
The door of the Court being shut, he spies a hole, and upon command, digging
in that, finds another door about the gates of the wall, chambers, Ezekiel.
40.10. for the door-keepers and Levites, who had their weekly courses of
administration, 1 Chronicles. 23.28. Luke 10.8. And its likely this door in the
wall was a back-doore, by which the Priests, Levites, and others entered into
their chambers and Chapels of Imagery, secretly: and our Prophet entering in at
this door, sees their gross and brutish Idolatry.

There they had pictured upon the walls the forms of all things creep, and of
beasts. God had forbidden the Jews to mak^ themselves any Images; but now they
not only had Images set them in private, but also in public and holy places,
and those of the basest sort: Crocodiles, Catts, Moles, Beetles, which
creatures the Egyptians worshipped, they had pourtrayed there.

Abominable beasts.
The H^br. is of animal abomination. No creatures of God are abominable in
themselves; some prohibited by the law were unclean, for such and such uses;
but yet good in themselves, the picturing of them and others made them
abominable: and I conceive abomination refers rather to the form of the
creature which they worshipped, then to the creature it self, and may be read
thus, every form of creeping thing, and of beast is abomination. And
secondarily the creatures abominable, for their forms sake which were
worshipped.

For the number 70. its answerable to the 70. souls went down into Egypt,
Deuteronomy. 10.22. and the 70. Elders went up with Moses into the mount, Exodus 24.1.
Seventy men of the Ancients of the house of Israel.
In Numb. 11.16. God bid Moses gather 70. of the Elders together; which done,
he joined them with Moses, to help him bear the burden of the people. These
seventy made a standing Senate, or their Sanedrim: There were 6. out of every
Tribe, which amounted to 72. But were called the 70. as in Luke 10.1: they are
called the 70. Disciples, but in the Syriacke its 72. These met in a great
Court near the Sanctuary called Synedrion from their sitting there, and this
was the great Council, to which were admitted those that were wise, afraid to
sin, meek and able, their qualifications are set down, Exodus 18.21. Deuteronomy. 1.13.
and to these, hard and weighty matters were brought to judge of, as defection of
Tribes, false Prophets, War, and such like. Now this Council, these 70. were
so degenerate, that they were become Idolaters, and offered incense to Idols.

Some think they were all Priests, because every man was with his Censor in his
hand; but then it should have been 70. men of the Tribe of Levi, not of the
Ancients of Israel: and besides its known, that the Sanedrim consisted not all
of Priests, but some out of every Tribe.

In the midst of them stood Jaazaniah the son of Shuphan.
Whom this Jaazaniah was, is uncertain. Deodate in his notes upon the place is
mistaken, he says the name is no ^here else mentioned, whereas you shall find
it twice more i^ ^e 2 King. 25.23. and Jer. 35.3. There were diverse
Jaazaniah's, this in the Prophet is said to be the son of Shaphan, who its
probable was that Shaphan the Scribe in Josiah's days, 2 Kings 22.12.
Grandfather or Uncle to Gedaliah, whom the King of Babylon left Governor in
Judeah, Jer. 40.5.11. So that Gedaliah and Jaazaniah were near of kin, of great
place, whether a Priest, or some chief Ruler. He stood in the midst of the
70. as being principal; for the chief in wisdom they set over the rest of
the Sanedrim, and called him Nasi, the Prince, they sitting in the form of a
half moon before him, or about him: His name signifies harkening of, or to
the Lord; whom had he remembered, he would not have been found in such service.

A thick cloud of Incense went up. (...) Marcellinus and Origines coacti sunt
idolis thus offerre: unde thurificati dicebantur qui metu tyrannorum idolis
thus obtulissent, Polan. Prad. Thus adolere erat species abnegationis and
defectionis signum, P^lid. Virg. de juv. rerum. l. 2. c. 23.

Heh^. is, abundance of a cloud of Incense; that is, the smoke of the Incense
was so thick, that it seemed a cloud.

Incense or perfume was made of sweet and costly things, and was a token of
worship; yea, chief worship says Calvin. Anciently they burnt sweet wood, and
with the smoke thereof worshipped their gods. It Is like the Heathens learned is
from Moses, who was appointed of God to burn Incense to him, Exodus 25.6. and
30.7.8. The intralls of beasts boiled, or roast, the heathens did burn unto
their Gods at first, but afterward used Incense. Tulli^ says, that to the
statues set up for Ca: Marius they burnt Frankinsense or Incense, and wax
Candles, which were in honor thereof. In the Primitive times when they forced
the Christians to Idolatry, they would have them throw a little frankinsense
into the fire, which was a token of worship.

That Idolaters often times act closely, and cover up their works from the eyes
of the world; Obser. 1.
they had their imagery in chambers and secret places, it was walled up, and
unobvious to most eyes: Some covers and pretenses such persons always have for
their superstitions and idolatries: they cover them with their good intentions,
great devotion, religion of their forefathers, such as have some pomp and
state; there be in them such objects as help their memories and affections.
There is say they, some truth, some good, and the rest may be born with: Those
worship so, prosper, and are at ease in their way, they meet not with those
temptations and troubles others do.

2. Such ways of wickedness cannot be carried so close, but there will be
some espiall of them. Let them make walls to cover them up, yet providence will
order it so, that there will be a hole in the wall, some crevice to look
through at, and discern their doings; the mystery of iniquity could not work
so closely, but it was discerned.

Peter S^ave found a hole in the walls of Ro^^, and discovered the Popes
practices to hinder Reformation of Errors in the Council of Trent. The secret
plottings and conveyances to bring in Popery amongst us by Jesuits and others,
were espied, detected, and in due time disappointed.

3. To find out exactly the great evils, abominations in States an^ Churches,
much pains must be taken; the Prophet must dig and dig in the wall; their
Idolatry was fortified and walled up, and clear knowledge of it could not be
attained without great toil.

The Popish Idolatry has been so wal'd up by Romish champions, that it cost
our Worthies and Prophets, Whitaker, Reynolds, Perkins, Ames: and others much
digging to discover the ill-favorednesse of their Imagery. Their strong
arguments are answered, and Popery has a black face: and not only in this
particular must there be digging to find out the mischief thereof, but also in
others. It has cost this Parliament digging to find out the evil in Prelacy
and Malignancy in the Land.

4 Such is the force of Superstition and Idolatry, that men engaged therein go
further, and grow worse; they were not content with the image of Jealousy, but
they had forms of creeping things, and abominable beasts to worship: They
multiplied abominations, Ezekiel. 16.51. and had painted gods upon the wall round
about, (...)
or as the Hebrew is, about and about, double ranks of gods; superstition
knows no end, we were of late in this Kingdom got into the paths of
superstition, and walked daily further and further therein; they had gotten all
gods but the true God.

5. Idolatry is a grievous sin, its abomination, and the Lord therefore calls
the Prophet to see what they did, that he might be a witness of so great and
grievous a sin as that was: and the grievousnesse of it lies in this; 1. That
they had forsaken the true God. 2. Had changed the glory of the uncorruptible
God into the forms of creeping things, beasts abominable. 3. That they had
brought them into the holy place, even where Gods holy ordinances ought to be.
4. That they had driven God out of his holy place. 5. That the chief men were
drawn away, and offered Incense to those dunghill gods. 6. That they said the
Lord sees it not. 7. That they looked for help from those helpnesse gods.


6. Note here that Idolatry infatuates wise men, the Ancients of Israel were
become Idolaters, those that were the Counselors and Judges that should have
maintained the true worship of God, encouraged others by their counsel and
example not to cleave to false worship, but to the true and living God, that
should have punished Idolaters with death according to the law of Moses, even
they become brutish, they worship forms of creeping things; they disclaim the
infinite, glorious, great, holy, and wise God, even the God of Israel, and
adore Bats, Moles, etc. a just hand of God upon men, to whom, because they
receive not the truth with the love of it, or the love of the truth, God sends
strong delusions, that they believe lies.

7. There is consent in wickedness and false worship, 70. of them are of one
mind, they take Censors, and offer Incense to base dunghill Gods; all the
people break off their earrings to make a Calfe, Psalm. 83.5. They have
consulted together with one consent. The Heb. is, with one heart, and are
confederate against thee, hearty consultation, and hearty confederation against
God and his worship, Rev 13.3. And all the world wondered after the beast, and
worshipped the Dragon,

8. See the cunning of Idolaters, the Priests that most usually are first in
such ways, they draw in the great ones to countenance their ways, they let
them offer Incense with their own hands, which was a violence to the
Priesthood, and they do all in darkness, that so objections may be prevented,
some great mysticalnesse be conceited to be in those ways, which may breed
reverence and esteem of them in the hearts of vulgars.

9. Idolatrous and superstitious persons are expensive to maintain their
worship. Here was much Incense burnt to their Idols: A thick cloud went up. In
Exodus 32.3. where their Idolatry first began after their coming out of Egypt,
how prodigal were they of their jewels and earrings to make a false god,
Egyptian jewels given them for adornation, they make an object of adoration:
and when they had made them golden and silver gods, of which God complains,
Ezekiel. 16.17. Their prodigality ceased not there, but they were at daily charges
to honor and maintain them: They decked the high places with garments of
diverse colors, they covered the gods with broidered garments, they bestowed
oil, Sands Europae speculum.
incense, fine flower and honey upon them; yea, they sacrificed their sons
and daughters unto them, Ezekiel. 16.18, 19, 20.

The Papists are profuse in their superstitious worship, the Churches of some
Saints are so stuffed with vowed presents and memories, that they are fain to
hang their Cloisters and Churhyards with them.

Its the nature of Idolatry and Adultery to be prodigal. If Adulterers think
nothing too much for their harlots, Idolaters think nothing too much for their
false worship.

10. God appeals to man in case of great ingratitude and wrong done unto him;
they were unthankful for all the great things God had done, they gave that
honor was due unto Divine Majesty unto Images and Idols, whereupon says God to
Ezekiel, Son of man, have thou seen what the Ancients of Israel do? Judge
thou of it: should not they, being aged, lift up to honor, invested with
power, prevent and punish such sins in a Church and State as here are
committed? should not they counsel and lead others by their example to serve
me the only true living God? should it not be so, I appeal to thee to make
judgment of it; but they do otherwise, are not the Ancients become Idolaters?
have they not chambers of Imagery? Are there not Censors in their hands? See
thou not the smoke of the Incense going up? what think thou, are not these
worthy of death themselves for these sins, who should put others to death for
the like? Speak thy mind, I appeal to thee in this case; the injury is so
notorious thou can not but condemn them, and justify me. It Is frequent in
Scripture for God in such cases to appeal to man and other creatures, Isa. 5.3.
1 Chronicles. 2. Jer. 2.12. Deuteronomy. 32.1. Appeals are ease relief to the hearts of
those are wronged, and grieved, and God in this case deals after the manner of
men.

11. False worship is a work of darkness: Idolaters have corners, chambers,
dark places, these 70. were in the dark, and did the works of darkness.
Idolatry is called a work of the flesh, Gal. 5.19, 20. and all works of the
flesh are darkness.

The Heathens had their opertanea and tenebrosa sacra, Junius. Polanus.
occult and dark worship.

Truth loves the light, but error, iniquity, darkness, John 3.20. Evil doers
hate the light, they sculke and hide up themselves and their ways: These 70.
had power in their hand, yet durst not justify their works openly, but carried
all closely; but how close soever sinners are, God sees them. Those words

In the chambers of his Imagery.
Some render it in the secret of their own imaginations; Lavater. Calvin.
which shows that what ever are the thoughts, workings, and imaginations of men's
hearts, the Lord sees them, and can discover them. They had Idols in their
chambers, and Idols in their hearts.
Idolaters have strong thoughts in their hearts of the ways they are in, of
some mystery and excellency in them, which the vulgar knows not; but let men be
ignorant of them, the Lord sees them, Isa. 29.15. Men think to hide their
counsels, thoughts, practices from the Lord, but he sees the deceitfulness of
their hearts, the wickedness in them: and because they carry things close, he
searches, he tryes them what they are, Jer. 17.9, 10.

12. That atheism, unbelief, and pride, are the causes of men's going out from
God, and falling to idolatrous and other sinful vile practices: For they say,
the Lord sees us not, he has forsaken the earth. Atheism denies his
presence, Infidelity his assistance, and Pride carries them out for help else
where, and tacitly lays the blame upon God, he has left the caring for us,
we are in the midst of dangers, and must seek for protection from some Deity
or other: and if it be a sin, he may thank himself, if he had not forsaken us,
we would not have forsaken him, chosen any other; but we are necessitated to
it. Here Is the pride of Idolaters, and in Jer. 18.15. all these are included in
one word, because my people have forgotten me, they have burnt Incense unto
vanity They forgot God, and hereupon became atheistical, unbelieving, and
proud.

VERSE. 13, 14.
He said also unto me, turn thee yet again, and thou shall see greater
abbominations that they do.

Then he brought me to the door of the gate of the Lords house, which was
toward the North, and behold, there sat women weeping for Tammuz.


HEre you have a third part of the Prophets new Vision containing yet greater
abominations then before; which is set out, 1. From the place, the door of
the gate of the Lords house. It was the Priests Court, and at the entrance into
the Lords house, and the nearer they sinned to the Lords house, the greater was
the wickedness. 2. The nature of the abomination, women sat there weeping
for Tammuz. It was not according to law for any to be in that Court, at that
gate, but Priests only. Now here were women, and women sitting and weeping,
and that for Tammuz, which were greater abominations then what were before.


What or who this Tammuz was, must be opened unto you, the word is not
mentioned elsewhere.

Some Rabbis say this Tammuz was an hollow idol, with eyes of lead under which
they used to put fire, R. David. R. Solomon
and the heat melting the leaden eyes, the idol seemed to weep, and so moving
compassion in the women, they became co-weepers wi^h it; but the Text says not
the Idol wept, but that the women wept. Shindl. says the Idols had their
Prophets, and this Tammuz was vir ex prophetis idoli, one of the idolatrous
Prophets, whom the King slew, in honor of him was set up an Idol, so called
from his name, or because on the first day of the month Thamuz they did
celebrate his festivitie, the 17. day of this month they fasted for the breach
of the Tables of the law, and on the first, feasted, and brake the Law it self
most abhominably.

The vulgar Translation reads it, Adonis, and many Interpreters so carry it.
Adonis was son of Cinara King of Cyprus, a great lover of pleasures, chiefly
of Garden-delights, whence arose the proverb, Adonidis horti, the gardens of
Adonis, which were curious and choice, but soon fading away.

This Adonis was a great lover of Venus, and being unhappily slain by a Boar,
great lamentation was made for him, and the rather because he had a sweet
voice, and delighted men and women with his singing, Adonis (...) a Canendo.
from whence his name seems to be given him, and by the lovers of music
amongst them he was accounted for a God, and yearly solemnities instituted for
him, in which were the weepings of women.

Lucian in his Dialogues says, De dea Syria.
that yearly in memory of Adonis death by a Boar, they did beat themselves
and weep; after which, they sacrificed to Adonis as dead: and a day after, they
thinking him alive; shaved their heads, and those women would not do it, were
to prostitute their bodies to all strangers, for a day, and the gain gotten,
was given in sacrifice to Venus. In vita Alcibiad. Vid. pradum.


Plutarch says, women did bring to the solemnities of Adonis, Images like dead
bodies, and wayling, sang funeral verses.

Maternus Firmicus tells us that an Image was put in a bed bewailed by many: and
they having satisfied themselves with weeping, a light was brought in, (...).
Theod. Scalig. de emendat temp. Lactant. divin. instit. l. 1. c. 21. Poeticum
Dictionarium. In verbo Apis Plut. lib de Isid. and Osyrid.
and the faces of all that wept were anointed, and these words softly
pronounced, Trust in the God, he will deliver us from our miseries, and so they
unbed the Idol with much joy.

Others make Tammuz to be Osyris husband, brother, or son of Isis (for
Authors vary about it) and King of Egypt, the same with Apis or Serapis, who
coming into Egypt, and teaching them civility, and how to dress Vines, was
chosen their King, and having governed them well, at his death was honored as
a God under the form of a black Ox. Suidas says, he was an Egyptian god,
worshipped for the Moons sake. The Egyptians called this god Tammuz, or Ammuz,
which signif^eth in their language, Hidden, because the sacra of this Idol
were covered and secret; those were so they called Pammelia, from her was the
first and principal Priestesse; some others there were obscene and public
women, carrying about signs of those parts nature abhors to discover, and they
were called phallephori^.

Ludovicus Vives in his notes upon August. de Civ. dei. l. 6. c. 10. tells us,
that Osyris was torn in pieces by his brother Typhon, (which some say was for
his whoredom with Isis, wife of Typhon, and all his members thrwone into
Nilus) this fact greatly afflicted Isis, who with much search and labor, got
the dispersed members of Osyris again, which caused great joy in her. Hereupon
she appointed a set time for seeking of Osyris, with weeping and howling.

Some affirm, Isis buried Osyris members, being found, in a fenny Island near
Memphis, which she called Stix, whether went certain mitred persons at set times
to mourn and weep: and a goodly Ox appearing unto them, they thought it
Osyris, whereupon the Egyptians adore an Ox for their god, and call it Apis
Osyris. This Idol being brought to the Temple, (...) or (...)
was their Tammuz. Junius fetches it from a root, signifies to burn, inflame,
and thinks thereby is meant the God of the Phaenicians, which is the god of
harvest and hot weather; but we may add also, that his worshippers were
enflamed with lust and heat, with the f^re of concupiscence, they forgate all
bonds of modesty, and discov red their nakedness unto this Idol. He conceives
it to be the same with Osyris (which signifies blessed or inlightning all
things) and with Adonis.

Women sat here:
These women were the She Priests of Isis, and did wear linen garments, and
performed many of their wretched rites, in woven houses, of which you read, 2
Kings 23.7. The word hangings in the Hebrew is houses: women that lived in
filthy houses, did weave those houses, or Tents, to cover the lewdness of
other women when they came to honor Tammuz. There dwells near to this Idol
youths, the servants of Tammuz, which were for all naughtiness, and now at the
Temple was practiced Sodomie and all uncleanenesse: There were houses of
Sodomites by the house of the Lord.

Weeping for Tammuz.
For his death, many tears were bestowed upon this Idol, (...)
and being the same with Adonis, is etymologiz'd thus, the Lord or God of
sorrow. (...).
And Theocritus calls him the God honored with tears, and also the god worthy
of threefold love, which they expressed not only in their tears, but in
adoration, in handling and kissing the uncomely parts of the Idol, and
offering themselves to commit filthiness with it.

That when men leave the true God and his worship, Obser. 1. Judge. 5.8. They
chose new gods, Micah had a house of gods, Judge. 17.5. Judah had as many gods
as Cities, Jer. 2.28.
they fall upon, and fetch in any gods; inventions, abominations are
increased. If they have gods of their own making, that suffices not, but they
will have gods other Nations have made; therefore it is said, Turn thee yet
again, and thou shall see greater abominations.

The Jews after once they fell to Idolatry were not contented with one or two
gods, but had a multiplicity of gods.

Baal Peor, Numb. 25.3. of the Moabites.

Ashtaroth the goddess of the Sidonians, The Romans had a Temple called
Pantheon wherein they worshipped all god, only the God of Israel they had not,
neither would have, because he must be worshipped alone, and they would not
reject all their other gods for one.
1 Kings 11.5.

Chemosh the god of the Moabites, 1 King. 11.33.

Milcom^ the abomination of the Ammonites, 2 K. 23.13.

Molech the abomination of Ammon, 1 K. 11.7.

Baal ^bub the god of Ekron, 2 K. 1.2.

Baal, 1 Kings 16.31.

The gods of Syria, and the gods of the Philistines, Judges 10.6.

The gods of the children of Seir, 2 Chronicles. 25.14.

The gods of Damascus, 2 Chronicles. 28 23.

These with other gods they had, yet were not content with them, but sought
after more, the gods of Edom, 2 Chronicles. 25.20.

Thus is it with Rome, they are not satisfied and settled in their old way, but
still multiply Saints, orders of Friars, Jesuits, Articles of Faith, and an
infinity of intricate dumb ceremonies. San^


2. That false worship, and filthiness, do usually go together, spiritual
and corporal whoredom, idolatry, and adultery, these she-servants of Isis
wept for Tammuz, but were wanton, lewd with the men that looked to this Idol.
Houses for all uncleanness were near the Temple, and this Idol.

Herod: tells us that the Babylonians were wont to send their women once in
their lives to Venus Temple, called Melitta, where sitting, Ruffinus, l. 2. c.
25. sais that one Tyrannus a Priest was wont to call out women, ad nocturum
colloquium Saturni sui deastri, and then abused them shamefully.
some stranger called them out, casting money into their bosoms, and had their
pleasure on them, as long as they pleased: where the worship is impure, there
will be impure doings.

In Italy, where is notorious Idolatry, the Country overflows with filthiness
of speech, and beastliness of actions, as Sands observes, and three great
faults are charged upon the Italians; Malice, in which they are unappeasable;
Cunning, by which they deceive the whole world: and Lust, in which they are
unnatural.

3. Idolatry spreads unto both sexes; not only men are drawn away to that
sin, but the women also they sat before Tammuz. Idolaters fetch in many
gods, he-gods, and she-gods, Ashtoreth was a Goddess, and the Grecians think
Tammuz or Osyris was not a man, but their Goddess Ceres, and these gods or
goddesses draw persons of all sorts and sexes unto them, Jer. 44.9. Their wives
are taxed for their Idolatry,

4. Women could weep for Tammuz. Osyris, who for his filthiness justly
suffered, they supposed him wronged, and therefore laid out their hearts for
him; how much more should we weep for the great and glorious God, who
unjustly suffers by all sinners in the world. They wept for an Idol, for
remembrance of a wicked wretch, when their tears did neither themselves, nor
the Idol good: If we weep for God and his wrong, it will please him, profit
us. David did so, Psalm. 119.136. Rivers of water run down mine eyes, because
men keep not thy law.

5. Idolatry which is a shameful thing, makes persons shameless; these
persons discovered their nakedness to the Idol, and offered themselves to
commit filthiness with Tammuz; who could have believed that the Jews,
instructed in the law of Moses, would have fetched in such an Idol, so beastly,
from the Egyptians, and that Jewish women should so far forget the law of
God, and the law of nature, as to prostitute themselves in so obscene a manner
to so filthy an Idol as this was? but Idolatry besots, and God in justice
gives up to a reprobate sense, Romans 1.25, 26.28.

Idolatry is shameful, Hosea 9.10. Dominus apertionis.
They went to Baal-Peor and separated themselves to that shame. It was a
shameful Idol, and made them shameless; for its judged they did also before
this Idol discover their nakedness.

Among Papists, where Idolatry is in countenance, Modesty is in disgrace,
Priests and Friars strive to exceed each other in impudence, and what
elsewhere would not be tolerated, Sands in his Europae speculum, page 19.
in Italy is in high honor: and what in other places, a loose person would be
ashamed to confess, that Priests and Friars there refrain not openly to
practice.

VERSE. 15, 16.
Then said he unto me, have thou seen this, O son of man i^ Turn thee yet
again, and thou shall see greater abominations then these.

And he brought me into the inner court of the Lords house, and behold, at the
door of the Temple of the Lord, between the porch and the Altar we^e about
25. men with their backs toward the Temple of the Lord, and their faces
toward the East, and they worshipped the Sun toward the East.


IN the 15. verse is a transition to the last part of the vision lying in the
16. verse, and this abomination yet greater then the former of the image of
Jealousy, the mixed forms of be^sts and creeping things, then Tammuz is
described,

1. From the place in general, The inner court.

More particularly, The door of the Temple.

And yet more specially, Between the porch and the Altar.

2. The persons with their number, 25. men.

3. Their posture; with their backs toward the Temple, and faces toward the
East.

4. Their act, They worshipped the Sun.

This Idolatry was in the Temple it self, and acted by the chiefest persons;
Its conceived these 25. were the King and his Council, there were two Tribes
left, and 12. out of each, who with the King made up that number; its thought
these 25. are mentioned again in the 11. Chap. verse. 1. where two Princes are
named, and therefore probable to be the King and his Nobles, the chief and
heads of the people, these stood between the porch and the Altar, which was
near to the Sanctum Sanctorum, and where the Priests used to weep and pray,
especially in times of common calamities, Joel 2.17.

With their backs toward the Temple of the Lord, etc.
The Temple was so built, that the Sanctum Sanctorum was in the wester^e part
of it, the entrance into it, in the Eastern part, and when any service was done
by the people or Priests, in prayer or sacrifice, they did it with their faces
west-wards toward the Ark and holiest of holies, and their backs were
Eastward, which the Lord in wisdom, and purposely ordered to be so, that he
might prevent Eastern and Sun-worship, which was the practice of the Gentiles:
whereupon says Job, Chap. 31.26. If I beheld the sun when it shined, if I
looked upon it to adore it as others did. It was the practice then. Of it
speaks Mercur: In fine Asclepij.
Trismegristus, when the Sun rose they minded the East, but when it set they
would not look Westward, lest seeing their God dying, Lib. de Arch. 4.
in cultu ejus tepescerent. And Vitruvius says, their Temples were so built,
that they might pray looking to the Sun rising. The learned observe, that the
Sidonians, Grecians, Romans, Assyrians, Egyptians and Persians, did all
worship the Sun, each giving a several name to this god of their^. The
Persians especially, honored and stood for this god, whom they called Mithra,
that is, Lord or mighty; For in the year 612. when Heraclius the Emperor sent
to Cosroe King of the Persians, for peace; his answer was, he would not lay
down Arms till he had brought him to worship the Sun; but Heraclius prevailed
in the Wars, and burnt his Idol Temples of the Sun. From whomsoever the Jews
learnd this custom, God had forbad them expressly to worship the Sun, Moon, and
Stars, Deuteronomy. 17.3. And appointed them to worship with their faces Westward;
yet they turn their backs upon God, as if he were unworthy of any respect from
them, and looking toward the East, adore a creature which God had made to
serve them.

It Is wisdom not to give way to any sin, Observe. 1.
but to stop sin in the birth, crush it in the conception; you see what
abominations after abominations, greater and greater come in here. Lesser
sins make way for greater, superstition for Idolatry, yea the worst of idolatry
and other sins.

2. That the nearer destruction, the worser they grow in Church and State, all
was out of order, great confusion amongst them; the land was filled with
corruptions, the Image of Jealousy, chambers of Imagery, howses for Stews were
about the Temple: Tammuz a most abominable Idol set up, adored in it, women
suffered to come there, and do shameful things; the Ancients offer Incense to
those were no gods; the King and Nobles come into the Priests Court, turn their
backs upon God, no Priest had any zeal for God to reprove these things, but
were deeply in themselves, the land filled with violence, their abominations
greater and greater, and judgment at the door.

3. That in corrupt times great persons are generally very profane; the 25.
turn their backs upon God, slight him and his worship, disgrace, reproach the
same. What greater indignity could they do to God, then to come into his
Temple, to the holy place, and there turn their backs upon him, and worship the
Sun in his presence; it is as if a woman should cast off her husband, and
commit lewdness with another man before him.

When Jeremiah's roll was read, the King cut, and cast it into the fire, which
others consented unto, Jer. 36.23, 24. After, he and his agents cut in pieces
the vessels of the house of God, shut up the doors of the Temple, and would
suffer the Lord to have no sacr fice, no incense, no Priest: and when God
distressed him for his wickedness, he sinned more and more, 2 Chronicles. 28.22.24.
Belshazzar and his Princes drank wine in the sacred bowls of the Temple, and
prai^e their idol gods, Dan. 5.2, 3, 4. And not only in corrupt times, are
great ones profane, but even in reforming times, Nehem. 13.17. The Nob es of
Judah profaned the Sabbath, and increased wrath. Such profane acts God takes
very ill, and will requite in their kind. They have turned their back unto me,
and not their face, Jer. 32.33. And therefore I will turn my back and not my
face unto them in the day of their calamity, Jer. 18.17.

4. That Kings and Princes are not to be patterns to us in point of Religion
and worship, if we will follow them, we may suddenly be led into Idolatry.
Here be 25. the chief in the City and Land, and they turn their backs upon
the true God and his worship, and choose heathnish religion, and heathnish
practices, the people were not bound to follow them. Great ones soonest go out
of Gods way, 2 Chronicles. 24.19, 20. After Jehoiada's death, the Princes came and
bowed to Joash, gave ill counsel, and with them he hearkened, and they
together, leave the house of the Lord, his worship, and fell to false worship.
Jeroboam and all the Kings and Princes in Israel after him, went the wrong way,
and never pleased or truly served God for hundreds of years together. We must
not follow great ones in matters of Religion, and say we will be of that
Religion the King or Parliament are of. Great ones do greatly mistake in the
things of God and Religion: The Princes of this world neither know the wisdom
of God, nor the Lord Christ, 1 Cor. 2.7, 8. and to this day few of them do know
the truth; For not many wise, mighty, or noble are called, 1 Cor. 1.26.
Therefore fetch your Religion from Christ, and the Apostles who gave out
truths, came down from heaven, which embraced, will sanctify you, and fit you
for heaven.

5. That adoration toward the East was taken up from the Heathens, the Jews
had it from them, and it was displeasing to God, and that practice crept in
amongst Christians. Tertullian says, In Apolog.
it was a known thing that the Christians prayed with their faces toward the
East; but the Heathens stumbled at it, and said the Christians God was the Sun.
Some Fathers held it an apostolical tradition, Justin. Mart. Basil. Greg.
that Christians should pray with their faces that way: but traditions of
Fathers are no warrant for worship, or postures in it; we have nothing from
Christ or Apostles leading us to do so, and from others we may not take up
such a practice though ancient, holy, and learned; Christ and the Apostles were
before them more holy, more able then they, and in their Writings and Practices
we find no such thing.

The Papists, and some among us do yet plead for Eastern Worship, and would
have Christians look that way, because Paradise is that way, because Christ
was crucified with his face Westward, because he is the light of the World,
ascended to Heaven there, and shall come again there. These be weak grounds
to draw us from that liberty the Word gives us, to a superstitious, Jewish,
Heathnish practice (for deliberately and determinately to do it, in reference
to Paradise or Christ, is no better) 1 Timothy 2.8. We have liberty to pray any
where, and any way, so it be without wrath and doubting.

As this facing the East sprung from them, so it is as likely that the building
of Temples East and West, that the people may sit with their faces Eastward,
and burying of the dead with their heads into the West, that they may rise with
their faces Eastward, came from them, however it savours strongly of
Superstition, if not of Heathnisme to do so.

VERSE. 17.
Then he said unto me, Have thou seen this O Son of man? Is it a light thing
to the house of Judah, that they commit the abominations, which they commit
here? for they have filled the land with violence, and have returned to provoke
me to anger: and lo, they put the branch to their nose.


THis verse has in it the sum of all the evils before spoken of, and an
addition of some what else: an appeal to the Prophet for to be judge in it:
Have thou seen the Image of Jealousy, etc. Is it a light thing, give thy
sentence supra totam materiam, that all these abominations are done in, and
about the Temple: and besides, they have oppressed every where, wronged all
sorts, filled the whole land with violence: and as if that were nothing to
provoke to wrong, men, they return to the Temple, and provoke me, they put the
branch to their nose.

The branch to their nose.
(...)
The Hebrew word for a branch is rendered by some a sound, or song; as if they
sung, and made a noise with their nose, in disgrace or contempt of God. Some
render it a st nke or ill savor, noting how unclean and loathsome Idolaters
are that delight in impure sacrifices and corrupt wo^ship, which are a stink in
the nostrils of God and good men. (...)
W^ have it a branch, pulled or cut from the tree, which is the proper sense of
the word, it comes from that Hebrew root, which signifies to cut, lop off: and
so it is expressed, Numb. 13.24. The cluster or branch of grapes cut down.

For the better understanding of this expression, we must know that the
Heathens honored their gods by dedicating certain trees unto them: Gyrald:
Syntag. 2 Machab. 6, 7. the sacrifices, Arnob. l* 7. etiam dij sertis coronis
and sloribus afficiuntur.
and when they sacrificed, they adorned their Altars and themselves with some
boughs of those trees were so dedicated unto them. To Jupiter the Beech tree
was sacred, to Minerva, the Olive, to Venus, the Myrtle tree, to Hercules, the
Poplar, to Bacchus, the Ivy and Vine, to Apollo, the Laurel.

Among the Thracians it was a law to wear garlands of Ivy when they
sacrificed. The Egyptians wore garlands of Ivy and Bays, and the Israelites
here learning from them had branches in their hands, which either they took
from the Altars or heads of the sacrifices or sacrificers: and after they had
put them to the Idol, or sprinkled them with the blood of these vile
sacrifices, or sweetened them with some Idolatrous perfume, they put them to
their nostrils, and kissed them, in honor of the Sun. It Is conceived they
were branches of the Laurel which were dedicate to the Sun. And that they
carried these branches to their houses, and often they put them to their nose
in memory and honor of the Sun, by virtue of whose influence the Laurel did
grow and receive its sweet savor.

Some take it to be a proverbiall speech, noting out they were authors of their
own punishment and destruction; they sin, and put the branch to their nose,
and this will be their destruction.

The greatness or littleness of sin is to be measured, not by man's, but Gods
account of it. Observe. 1.
Is it a light thing to the house of Judah? They think it so, but its
otherwise; the Intrerogation sets out the greatness of it, Is it so? No, its
not light, but grievou^, this expression sets out the weightinesse of a thing,
1 Samuel 18.23. Seems it to you a light thing to be a Kings son in law? No
it is a great matter for a poor man to be so advanced, what ever your thoughts
are; and let men think sin a light matter, its far otherwise, there is lead in
it, and will weigh them down, 1 K. 16.31. speaking of Ahab, the Scripture
says, And it come to pass as if it had been a light thing for him to walk in
the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, that he took to wife Jezabel. The
Heb. is, was it a light thing for him to commit the sins of Jeroboam? Yes, he
thought so, esteemed them light, and went to serve Baal; but they were
nototious weighty sins, Kingdom and Church-destroying sins. Men pare, and
lessen their sins, they make little account of them, Prove. 14.9. Fools make a
mock at sin as an inconsiderable matter. And Chap. 10 23. Its a sport to a
fool to do mischief, its no heavy thing to his conscience, but a light thing
like a feather, with which he can sport and play, Job 15.16. Man drinks
iniquity like water, he delights himself with sin like a fish, that draws in
the water, and spouts it ^ut again in a sporting way: so does man, to him sin
is sweet, delightsome, Job 20.22. not burdensome, Math. 22.5. When they
refused Christ and his offers of grace, mercy, and salvation: when they sinned
with a high hand, yet they made light of it, and went their ways: And in Isa.
when they committed Idolatry, sell to other gods, they looked upon it as a
sporting business, Isa. 57.4. Against whom do you sport your selves? against
whom do you make a wide mouth, and draw out your tongue? What men's thoughts
are of their sins, you see, they weigh them in false balances, and make them
light; but when they come to the balance of the Sanctuary, they will be found
heavy. Is it a light thing such abominations are in our land?

2. To sin where God manifests his presence, and vouchsafes the means of grace
and choice mercies, is a great aggravation of sin and grievous provocation of
Divine Majesty. Is it light that ye commit the abomination which ye commit
Here, in the Temple, the place of my presence, where I have given them mine
Ordinances, and do meet them for my worship, to set their Idol of Jealousy
near that place, have their chambers of Imagery, their Tammuz brought into the
Temple, and women weeping about that filthy Idol, and men standing with their
backs toward God, and worshipping the Sun: This aggravated their sin, and
provoked bitterly: here, here they do such things, Psalm 106.19. They made a
Calfe in Horeb. Was this more then if they had made it in Egypt, or some other
place? Yes, Horeb was the same with Mount Sinai, if you compare Deuteronomy. 4.10, 11.
with Exodus 19.18, Its evident, and there God appeared, gave out the Law, and
made a Covenant with them, Deuteronomy. 5.2. And it was called the mount of God, 1 K.
19.8. Now here they made a Calfe, here they sinned, and this was a great
aggravation of their sin, insomuch, that Deuteronomy. 9.8. Moses says, In Horeb
they provoked the Lord to wrath, even destroying wrath. So touching Gilgal, the
Scripture speaks of Gilgals wickedness, Hosea 9.15. Of sacrificing Bullocks
there, Hosea 12.11. And multiplying transgression there, Amos 4.4. The Lord
took their sins at Gilgal very heinously, and cause he had for it. At Gilgal
were the 12. memorial stones of their passing over Jordan pirched, Josh. 4.20.
At Gilgal they were circumcised, and God rolled away the reproach of Egypt from
them, Josh. 5.8, 9. There they had the Pass^over, verse. 10. Gilgal being a
place famous for these things; their sins at Gilgal did i^crease their
reproach, and aggravate their villainy. Where God ha^h manifested himself, and
done remarkable things, sin there is double sin, Psalm. 106.7. They provoked
him at the sea, even at the red sea. Where God pitied them being in a great
straight, where God showed his mighty power in dividing the seas, in leading
the Israelites safely through, and in drowning the proud, cruel, bloody
adversaries, yet there they provoked him at the sea, even the red sea. So for
Canaan, which was the holy land, the land of uprightness, the land where God
had shown and done great things for them, sin there has an emphasis set upon
it, Isa. 26.10. There they deal unjustly, Ezekiel. 20.8. When I had brought them
into the the Land for which I lifted up m^ hand to give it to them. Four times
he accents their sin, there they offer their sacrifices, there they present the
provocation of their offerings, there they made their sweet savor, there they
poured out their drinke-offerings. God has given us in this Land, in this City
many choice mercies, done wonderful things for us; shall it be said, Here they
commit sin, where the Gospel and means of grace are, where they have lately
entered into Covenant with me, where they have seen my hand stretched out to
do many great things: If it be so, there will be an accent upon our sins.

3. Violence is a spreading sin; they have filled the Land with violence, with
wrong, injustice, opp^ssion. The Princes had violent hands, they oppressed and
exacted of the people, The Judges were evening wolves that sought prey,
devoured greedily, Zep. 3.3. that oppress a man and his house, Mica. 2.2.
Ez k. 45.8, 9. The rich men, they were full of violence, Mica. 6.12. and
wronged the poorer sort; servants were infected with this sin, and filled their
Masters houses with violence and deceit, Zeph. 1.9. The Priests they violenced
the law, Z^ph 3.4. Ezekiel. 22.26. They corrupted it with their glosses, forced
interpretations, constructions, such as God never put into it; they set by the
law, and set up their own inventions, wills, traditions, by which the law was
made void. Thus violence had filled the Land, the City, the Sanctuary, and ran
through all sorts of men. If freedom from this sin had been any where, it is
probable in Jerusalem some should have been found free; but Zeph. 3.1. Woe to
the oppressing City. And Jer. 6.6. She is wholly oppression in the midst of
her. Not only oppressing, but oppression, she was thoroughly grown and perfect
in that sin: and not only oppression, but wholly oppression, nothing
remaining in her but oppression, and this evident, vibsile, in the midst of her
Princes, Priests, rich, servants, poor, oppress, wrong, offer violence one to
another, Jer. 5.1. Run, see, seek, if there be a man that executes judgment.
All were for violence, none for justice.

4. Injustice is abomination unto God, and the more it spreads, the greater
abomination it is; the Lord calls them abominations, for they have filled the
Land with violence; violence in the Princes was abomination, violence in the
Priests was abomination, oppression in the rich was abomination, injustice in
their Judges was abomination, injury and wrong in their servants and officers
was abomination, and all these amounted to abominations.

Injustice and violence are crying sins, Isa. 5.7. The Lord looked for
judgment, but behold oppression; for righteousness, but behold a cry. There
were hundreds and thousands crying, because their Orchards and Vineyards were
taken from them, their wages detained, and themselves and their houses ready to
be swallowed up by the mouths of the violent. The word for oppression, Behold
oppression, Mishphat, and behold Misphak.
in Hebrew is a scab, a wound, a leprosy, when a body is free from these, its
beautiful; but when overrun with these, its loathsome. Injustice was a scab,
adherent to the Jews, and made them abominable. Oppression was a wound, and
made them incurable. Violence a leprosy, and caused them to be separated from
the sight of God.

Is our State free from this sin, may we not fear God looked for judgment,
and behold, oppression, a scab, a wound, a leprosy. Is not truth oppressed,
are not the righteous and innocent oppressed, and may not many of us take up
that of Job, Chap. 19 7. Behold I cry out of wrong, but I am not heard. Let
oppressors of others, be it in their names, liberties, estates, consciences,
know, their sin is abomination to the Lord, and that there is a cry in heaven
against them; the oppressed cry, break in pieces the oppressor, Psalm. 72.4.
and judge the fatherless and oppressed, that the man of the earth may no more
oppress.

5. State-oppression, and Church-corruption go together; in the Temple were
pollutions, and in the Land violence: The Princes and Judges they wronged men,
the Priests and Prophets they wronged God, Zeph. 3.23. There you find them
linked together, Princes and Judges oppressed the State, removed the bounds,
the Prophets and Priests polluted the Sanctuary, and violated the law, they
brake both Tables. When one is eminently violated, breaches are quickly made
upon the other. If there be violence in a Land, there will be corruptions,
pollutions, abominations, in the Sanctuary. If there be superstition, Idolatry
in the Church State, there will be oppression, injustice, and spoil in the
Civil-State: When the Temple is a den of Thieves, the Land will be a den of
oppressors and murderers, Jer. 7.9.11.

6. Men's intentions to please God, often prove provocations of God; they intended
not to provoke God, but returned in their apprehensions to worship God in the
Temple, and to please him. Not their purpose, but the event was the
provocation: So in verse. 6. Their abominations drove God far from the
Sanctuary. They did not purpose and intend to drive God away, but that was the
event and issue of their actions, with which they thought they pleased God,
Jer. 7.9, 10. Will ye steal, murder, commit adultery, swear falsely, burn
incense to Baal, walk after other gods, whom you know not? Come and stand
before me in this house, and say, we are delivered?

They returned from their vile and sinful practices to Gods house, and thought
by their sacrifices and prayers to please the Lord, when as in truth they
provoked him greatly, as you may see in the 12.14, 15. v. where he tells them he
will destroy the Temple, as he did Shilo, cast them out, as he did their
brethren, the whole seed of Ephraim, and forbids the Prophet to lift up a cry,
or prayer for them, verse. 16. So in Isa. 1.13, 14. That they did to please God
was vain, abomination, iniquity, trouble, hateful, such as he could not away
with. Nad^h and Ahihu thought not to provoke God with their strange site, but
did to their own ruin, Numb. 3.4. John 16.2. They shall put you out of their
Synagogues, and think they do God good service when they kill you, says
Christ: But they provoke God against their own souls, Isa. 7.12. Ahaz thought
it would please God not to ask a sign, but it was otherwise, Mat. 23.29, 30,
31. They thought they did well in building the Tombs of the Prophets, and
garnishing them; but thereby they provoked God more against themselves.

7. God sets a special mark upon those do put the branch to their nose; lo
they put the branch to their nose, such are

1. Those adorn Idols and Images: Isa. 30.22. They covered their Images, and
put ornaments upon them, but they were no better then a menstruous cloth. And
Ezekiel. 16.16, 17, 18. They decked their high places with colors, jewels, and
broidered garments: This provoked the Lord, and is branded with fornication,
verse. 15. and abomination, verse. 22. have not many among us gilded and adorned
Crosses, Altars, Crucifixes, etc.

2. Those find any content, delight, in superstitious and idolatrous practices,
Ezekiel. 16.18, 19. God tells them they had set his Oil and Incense before the
Image for a sweet savor; the Hebrew is, (...)
for a savor of rest, they were pleased, and rested in what they had done,
thinking also that the Idol was delighted therewith, Exodus 32.6. They took
pleasure in their new God, and danced about the golden Calfe, and such
expressions as these you have. Their heart went after their Idols, Ezekiel. 20.16.
Their eyes go a whoring after their Idols, Ezekiel. 6.9. Inflamed with Idols,
Isa. 57.5. Mad upon Idols, Jer. 50.38. which do show the pleasure they had in
these evils, and how God brands them for the same.

3. Those that acknowledge any blessings to be from Saints and Images: they
here adored the Sun as author of trees and fruits; and Jer. 44.17, 18. They
burnt incense to the Queen of heaven, and acknowledged their welfare and plenty
to be from her. Papists at this day acknowledge the cure of many diseases to
be from such and such Saints.

4. Such as preserve relics in memorial of their Images and gods: they
touched the Image with it, and put it to their noset in memorial of the Sun,
Deuteronomy. 7.26. The silver and gold that was on the images they might not desire or
take unto them, lest they should be snared therein; no relics, though never
so precious, were permitted them to take, they were abomination to God, and
would be snares to them; whence the Rabbis observe, that the Idol, and things
serve it, offered to it, and made for it, are unlawful for any use: The
Papists abound with relics, and so with abominations.

5. Those give divine honor to creatures, Psalm. 106.19. They worshipped the
molten Image. Jeroboam sacrificed unto the Calves he had made, 1 Kings 12.32.
And said to the people, behold thy gods O Israel which brought thee up out of
the land of Egypt, v. 28. Here was divine honor given to dumb Idols, but he is
branded for this frequently, Jeroboam that made Israel to sin. And 1 Kin.
13.34. Its said this thing became sin unto the house of Jeroboam, even to cut
it off, and to destroy it from off the face of the earth.

6. Idolatrous worship is stinking, and brings destruction to the Authors,
verse. 10. All the Idols in the Heb. is omnia stercora, Col. gilluler.
all the dunghill Images, and Image Worship, are dunghill, stinking, loathsome
things to God and man, and they brought destruction upon the whole seed of
Ephraim, even the ten Tribes, Psalm. 16.4. Their sorrows shall be multiplied
that hasten after another God. Jeroboam did so, 1 Kings 12. and Chap. 13. A
Prophet prophecyeth against his Altar and Calvish gods, his hand was dried up:
And Chapter 14.10, 11. most grievous things are threatened against him and his, Jer.
7.18, 19* when they had sacrificed to the Queen of heaven, do they provoke me
to anger says the Lord? do they not provoke themselves to the confusion of
their own faces?

VERSE. 18.
Therefore will I also deal in fury, mine eye shall not spare, neither well I
have pity, and though they cry in mine ears with a loud voice, yet will I not
hear them.


HEre is a sad Epiphonema or conclusion: he had often in the Chapter called upon
Ezekiel to see the doings, which being shown unto him, the Lord sounds in his
ears, what dreadful things he will do.

Deal in fury, etc.
The Scripture mentions Gods anger, Psalm. 30.5. his indignation, Psalm. 69.24.
his wrath, Isa. 54.8. and his fury, Jer. 10.25. and these exceed each the
other. Anger is the displeasure of God against sin; indignation is anger more
intense, therefore, Isa. 30.30. its called indignation of his anger. Wrath is
yet higher and permanent, according to that in Nahum, 1.2. He reserveth wrath
for his enemies, Arist. 4. Ehic. c. 5.
and fury is highest, Job 20.23. The fury of his wrath. Its ira nunquam
conquiescens donec sumatur vindicta. In Jer. 21.5. Fury and great wrath go
together, and when God is in his fury, he rests not till he be revenged, Jer.
7.20. My fury shall be powered out upon this place, upon man and beast, upon the
trees, fruit, and ground, and burn unquencheably, Ezekiel. 16.41, 42. When
Jerusalem should be destroyed, then God would make his fury to be at rest.

Mine eye shall not spare, neither will I have pity.
Of these words has been spoken before.

Observe. 1.
There is a time when God who is patient, gracious, and slow to wrath, will
deal in fury, he that delights in exercising mercy, has a time for fury, and
trading in it; he that is patient and long-suffering, has times of being
furious.

When is it that God will deal in fury?

1. When lesser judgments will not serve turn; if he threaten in anger, smite
in his indignation and wrath, and there be no good use made of those strokes,
then will the Lord appear in fury, Levit. 26. God threatens them with sundry
inferior judgments, and if they do not work, but still walk contrary to God,
verse. 28. then says God I will walk contrary unto you also in fury. If they
grew worse, God would be more violent and furious.

2. When a reformation is offered and r^fused, Jer. 51.9. We would have healed
Babylon, but she is not healed; forsake her, for her judgment reaches to
heaven, and is lifted up to the skies. So much fury should be poured out upon
Babylon, that heaven, air, and earth should wonder at it, Ezekiel. 24.13, 14.
Because I have purged thee, and thou wast not purged, thou shall not be purged
from thy filthiness any more till I have caused my fury to rest upon thee, I
the Lord have spoken it, etc. When God tenders a Reformation to a people, it is
great love, rich mercy; and mercy refused, is mercy abused, and that turns
into fury: and Gods fury shall not only be powered out against such a people,
but rest upon them, which is much more.

3. When men are furious against God, his servants, and ways, when they cannot
endure his Prophets, Saints, and Ordinances, then is a time for Gods fury to
break out: When the Husbandmen in the Parable would not endure Christ's
servants, nor himself, but beat and stoned them, then fury came forth, and
miserable destruction was the portion of those men, Mar. 21.35, 36.38.41. When
righteous Lot being abused, was got out of Sodom, then God sent fire and
brimstone upon it, and poured out his fury like fire, as it is in Nahum 1.6.
and 2 Chronicles. 36.16, 17, 18. They mocked the messengers of God, despised his
words, misused his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose, and it rose
very high, even to the height of fury, for he brought the King of Babylon in
fury upon them, who slew their young men in the Sanctuary, who had no
compassion upon man or maiden, young or old, all men and things were given into
his hand, all their glorious things were burnt and laid wast.

4. When there is a general corruption in State and Church, then the fury of
the Lord will appear, then will he deal in fury, Genesis 6.5, 6, 7.13. This will
appear more fully in the next obse^vation.

2. Oppressions in a State, Superstition and Idolatry in the Church, do cause
God to deal in fury; there was violence in the land, and the branch at their
nose, and therefore God would deal in fury, J^r. 21.12. O house of David, thus
says the Lord, execute judgment in the morning, and deliver him that is
spoiled out of the hand of the oppressor, lest my fury go out like fire, and
burnt that none can quench it. Where there is want of Justice, there will be
plenty of Oppression, and where that is, the door is open for Gods fury, it is
kindled, and will break out against such a State whatever it be, and for
Idolatry, see Ezekiel. 16.36. Because thy filthiness was poured out, and thy
nakedness discovered through thy whoredoms with thy lovers, and with all the
Idols of thine abominations, Verse. 38. I will judge thee says God, as women
that break wedlock, and shed blood are judged: And how is that, Levit. 20.10.
Genesis 9 6. They were without mercy to be put to death, and so God would do; I
will give thee blood in fury and jealousy.

If these sins be amongst us, we have cause to tremble, for they will cause
God to deal in fury, to cast upon us the fury of his wrath, as it is Job 20.23.
They will cause fury to be upon our Armies, Isa. 34.2. and Jer. 21.4, 5, 6.
Behold, says the Lord, I will turn back the weapons of War that are in
your hands, wherewith you fight against the King of Babylon, and against the
Chaldeans which beesige you without the walls, and I will assemble them into
the midst of this City, and I my self will fight against you with an out
stretched hand, and with a strong arm, even in anger, and in fury, and in great
wrath: And I will smite the Inhabitants of this City both man and beast, and
they shall dye of a great pestilence: And those dye not, shall be mad, when
they are made to drink of the cup of Gods fury, Jer. 25.15, 16. Gods fury is a
trampling thing, Isa. 63.3. A bloody thing, Ezekiel. 16.38. Fiery, and plentiful,
he powrs it out like fire, Lam. 2.4. therefore let us tremble, and prevent Gods
fury which is so terrible, and do as is written, Jer. 4.3, 4. Break up the
fallow ground, sow not among thorns, circumcise your selves to the Lord, and
take away the foreskin of your hearts, ye men of Judah, and Inhabitants of
Jerusalem, lest my fury come forth like fire and burn that none can quench it,
because of the evil of their doings.

3. Gods dealing in fury is dreadful, he will not spare, not pity, nor be
moved to mercy: And is not this dreadful? You may think, it is never so with
God; but the Scripture says it here, and in other places, Ezekiel. 24.13, 14.
Thou will not be purged, I will cause my fury to rest upon thee, and what ever
you commit, I the LORD have spoken it, it shall come to pass, and I will do
it, I will not go back, neither will I spare, neither will I repent,
according to thy ways, and according to thy doings shall they judge thee says
the Lord God. Men are apt to think GOD is all mercy, but they will find it
otherwise.

His eye that spared them in Egypt, that looked upon them, and pittyed them
there, his eye will not spare, himself will not pity them in Sion. Their
provocations were great, he that spared Nineuites, will not spare Israelites.

When God deals in fury, there is no dealing with him then, he is a consuming
fire, and nothing will prevail with him.

What if they cry, will not that prevail? Is not God a God hearing prayer,
does he not hear the cry of Ravens? Jer. 11.11. Though they cry unto me, I
will not hearken unto them, Isa. 1.15. Mic. 3.8. Deuteronomy. 1.45.

What if Noah, Job, and Daniel should pray, would not God be entreated, pity,
and spare them? see Ezekiel. 14.14.18.20. God forbade Jeremiah, Chapter 7.16. to
pray for them, Pray not for this people, neither lift up cry or prayer for
them, neither make intercession to me, for I will not hear. His ear is deaf,
his heart is hardened, when he is in fury, and deals in it: fury lies in
severity, where there is no sparing; in implacability, where is no hearing.

4. That wicked men in their streights will cry to God, and cry aloud. When
Nebuchadnezzar came, besieged the City, when P^^gue and Famine increased, then
they fell upon their knees and cried to God for help, as M^lefactors when the
Judge is ready to give sentence, cry out, and importune him to spare their
lives: Such prayers, are the voice of the flesh, not of the spirit, forced, not
free, faithless and unseasonable prayers, coming too late, and therefore
unacceptable. Let men therefore not defer seeking of God till necessity puts
them upon it.

CHAP. IX.
VERSE I.
He cried also in mine ears with a loud voice, saying, cause them that have
charge over the City, to draw near, even every man that has his destroying
weapon in his hand.


IN the eighth Chapter Ezekiel saw in a vision the sins of the City
Jerusalem; here the vision proceeding, he sees the judgments of God to be
executed upon them for those sins, and by whom.

The Chapter conteins, 1. A narration of judgment to be executed upon
Jerusalem in the first seven verses. 2. The Prophets intercession for Israel,
verse. 8. 3. An answer thereunto, verse. 9, 10. 4. A report of what was done,
verse. 11.


In the Narration you have, 1. A commission given to the Prophet to cause
Military men to appear, verse. 1. 2. Their number and manner of appearing,
verse. 2. 3. A mandat given, 1. To mark the mourners, verse. 4. 2. To slay the
rest, verse. 5, 6, 7.
4. Mention of the glory of God departing, verse. 3.


The first verse has in it, 1. The author of this Commission: He. 2. The
manner of giving it out by way of cry, and that with a loud voice. 3. The
witness before whom it was done, and that was Ezekiel. In mine ears. 4. The
Commission it self, Cause them that have, etc.


Where we have, 1. The persons specified, and they are such as have charge over
the City. 2. What they are to do; to draw near. 3. The manner; with a
destroying weapon in each hand.


He cried.
Not an Angel, but the Lord, whose glory he had seen at the Temple, who had
shown him the several abominations ^f the people, and who had authority to
call for excutioners of his fury upon these notorious delinquents.

He cried.
Crying in man is intense or loud speaking, when it is expres'd by a loud voice:
but God cries not as man. His crying is the efficacy of his Spirit, or force
of his providence strongly moving the creature to the execution of his will,
Zech. 7.7. The Lord cried by the Prophets, his Spirit moved them to cry unto
the people. And 2. Sam. 16.10. God said unto Shimei, curse David; that is,
Divine providence moved him to do so. God cries to the Ministers of Justice,
when he moves their wills to come and do execution upon a sinful people. Here
God spoke to the Prophet, not providentially, but by the inward language of his
Spirit, and visionally.

The reasons of his calling or crying aloud were,

1. To declare the weightinesse of the thing he was now about namely to bring
a final destruction upon Church and State according to that Chap. 7.6. An end
is come, and this was a business of high concernment, that that people which
had been so beloved, so honored, so delivered, so observed in the world,
should now be utterly ruined: So when the 7. thunders were to be, the Angel,
Rev. 10.3. cried with a loud voice.

2. Gods serious intentions to destroy them, he was impatient now of bearing
any longer with them, he was burdened, wearied with their iniquities,
therefore cried out of them, and called for destroyers, Isa. 1.14. Ah, I will
ease me^ of mine Adversaries.

3. To quicken and hasten the instruments he should use in that service. When
great persons are intense in their voices and commands, it edges their spirits
who are employed, and makes them quick, active, loud cries leave deep
impressions.

4. In reference to the wickeds sins, and mourners prayers, the sins of the
one, and prayers of the other cried aloud in Gods ears, and now God cries too,
and adds cry to cry: they cried for vengeance, and vengeance they shall have.
Come, Ezekiel, send for such and such men which may destroy the wicked, and
deliver the mourners.

In mine ears.
That i^, I hearing, the Lord spoke aloud, and the Prophet heard him. So the
like phrase in Genesis 2.8.44.18. is to be understood. God honored Ezekiel here
with the knowledge of what he was about, and singled him out to be a witness
of his proceedings.

Cause them that have charge over the City to draw near.
The Hebrew is, the visitations of the City have drawn near; or let the
visitations of the City draw near. Here is the abstract put for the concrete,
Visitation for visiters, which is frequent in Scripture, as Col. 1.16. Thrones
are put for Kings, Dominions for Lords, Rulers, Principalities and powers for
them are in chief places, Isa. 60.17. I will make thy Officers pe^ce. The Heb.
is, thy visitation in the abstract, and rendered in the concrete, officers or
visiters, and so here. Some read it the men of visitation; others the visiters
of the City: our translation, Praefecti urbi^.
those have charge over the City, especially the Military affairs.

Who these were is to be examined; not the Ancients of Israel, mentioned in the
former Chapter, who were to be destroyed, and not to destroy; but they were
certain Angels or Archangels, to whom the Lord had committed the custody of
Jerusalem; For Angels have the care of Kingdoms, Provinces, and Cities, Angels
or Chaldeans they were such as were appointed to execute divine wrath.
and these God calls for, and empl^yes yet to fetch in the Chaldeans for
destruction of the City, and inhabitants of it.

Angels are defenders and destroyers of Cities. Chaldie is qui constituti sunt
ut perdant civitatem.

Every man with his destroying weapon in his hand.
A man in the Hebrew, it is not every man; but the meaning is, that not any
should appear without his weapon, every one that came should bring it in his
hand.

Destroying weapon;
Heb. Instrument of his destruction; that is, not with an instrument to destroy
himself, but with an instrument to destroy othe^s, a deadly instrument.

Observe. 1.
The Lord will not always be silent, and bear with sinners, he will cry out
against them; the longer he has been silent, the louder he will cry at last;
here God held his peace long, or spoke in secret to the Prophet, showing him
the sins of this City, how grievous they were, what abominations they had
committed: and that being done, he cries out of them, calls for executioners to
be avenged on them, Isa. 42.14. I have long time holden my peace, I have been
still, and refrained my self: now will I cry like a travailing woman, I will
destroy and devour at once. A travailing woman feels pain; but keeps as long
as she can from discovering the same; but when her throws and pangs come
strongly upon her, she cries out of her pains, and calls for help: So God had
borne with their sins, restrained his fury and vengeance; but being overcome
with the greatness of their sins, wearied with their iniquities, he cries out
and calls for help of Angels and men to avenge him of his adversaries, Mica 6.9.
The Lords voice cries unto the City. He called aloud unto them, his patience
was expired, Sp^ri^ exasperated, his voice was now intended, as being in a
straight, and decessic^^ed to proceed to judgment, Amos 2.13. Behold, I am
pressed under you, as a cart is pressed that is full of sheaves. A cart is long
a loading, and when its greatly loaded, often it break, and all is laid in the
dust: So God, being pressed, breaks silence, brings in dreadful and inevitable
judgments, therefore the flight shall perish from the swift, etc.

2. The Lord usually makes known his judgments before he executes them. He
cried in mine ears.

Ezekiel shall know the Lords intendments, before he does any thing against the
City and people; before notable judgments come upon men, Gods method is to
reveal them: God told Noah of the flood, Genesis 6.13.17. The captivity of the
ten Tribes was not hid from the Prophets, 2 Kings 17.14, 15, 16. This
Babylonish captivity was known to Isaiah, Jeremiah, Amos 7.7, 8, 9.
Ezekiel and others, 2 Chronicles. 36.15, 16, 17. Christ told the Apostles of the
destruction of the Temple, and miseries that should befall the City, before
they fell out, Mat. 24.1, 2. Luke 19.41, 42, 43, 44. Upon this ground Amos is
bold, and says, Surely the Lord God will do nothing: but he reveals his
secrets unto his servants the Prophets, Chap. 3.7. There is no necessity upon
God for revealing his judgments; he does execute many secretly, and openly,
which were never heard of, till felt; but Gods ordinary way with his people
was, to let them hear of his judgments beforehand, he made them known to the
Prophets and Prophetical men. Joseph had the 7. years famine revealed to him,
Genesis 41. And God would not hide his purpose of ruining Sadome from Abraham,
Genesis 18.17. Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do? No, I will not,
Abraham is my friend, he shall know my thoughts. Jonas is acquainted with Gods
intentions touching Nineveh, that great City: and the judgments now upon us
were not unfore-seen; the servants of the Lord had notice of them many years
since, and spoke of these tempestuous days. This God does to stop the mouth of
iniquity, that wicked men may not object God came upon them without warning.
This Lion roares before he devoures the prey: The Lord of Hosts sounds the
Trumpet before he comes to battle; he tells his Prophets and Ministers of
Justice, that they may give warning unto others, that they may prepare to meet
the Lord, that they may tremble at his judgments, repent, reform, return to
God, or else perish most justly: and that the godly seeing his care herein, for
ye might work out your salvation with fear and trembling, draw others out of
their dangerous conditions, exercise their graces more fully, and intercede
earnestly with God for averting, mitigating, removing or sanctifying of his
judgments. Abraham entreated for Sodom, and Jeremiah for the Jews, when they
knew GODS mind was to destroy them.

3. No judgments, evils, come upon any States or Churches but at the Lords call
and appointment: Let the visitation of the City draw near; or, cause the
visiters to come. God has sovereign authority over all creatures, he is Lord
of Hosts, and when he gives out the word, then judgments step forth, and the
executioners of them appear, 2 K. 8. 1. There was a seven years famine in the
Land, and how came this? Elisha tells the Shunamite woman, that the Lord had
called for it, he commanded it to come forth of his treasury of judgments.
When David had sinned in numbering the people, God sent him a sad message by Gad
his seer, which was this: Shall seven years famine come unto thee in thy land?
or will thou flee three months before thine enemies while they pursue thee? or
that there be three days pestilence in the Land* One of these David was to
choose, and the Pestilence he chooses, which God sent amongst them, 2 Samuel
24.12, 13.14, 15. Judgments are in Gods hand, and let out at his pleasure. He
calls for the sword, and gives it commission to go up and down, Ez^k. 14.17.
He says sword go through the Land. Hos. 11.6. Abide on the Cities. He causes
his sword to devour flesh, and his arrows to be drunk with blood, Deuteronomy. 32.42.
Judgments come not till God call them, they go not but where he directs them,
they hurt not any, or more then he appoints, nor cease till he command: There
is nothing casual, accidental in them, but they are by the determinate
counsel and will of God.

4. When the Lord is in his fury, he is not only intense upon, but hastening of
judgments: He cried with a loud voice, which sets out his intention; he would
have executioners of his judgments draw near. (...)
Polan: renders the word appropinquate celeriter seu omni conatu and studio,
make speed and hasten, Zeph. 1.14. The great day of the Lord is near: it is
near, and hastes greatly. The time was near, and all things in heaven and
earth making have to their destruction, yea great have. God brings on judgments
sooner then they are expected. Did not the Chaldeans come with speed and have
upon them, his horses were swifter then Eagles, Jer. 4.13. Then Leopards, Hob.
1.8. And are any creatures swifter for wing or foot then the Eagle or Leopard,
yet the Chaldeans judgment was swifter then they. Jeremiah, Lam. 4.19. Our
persecuters are swifter then the Eagles of heaven, they made great have.
Sinners are secure, and dunk judgments slumb^r, when they are upon their march,
upon the wing, Jerem. 48.16. Moabs affl ction hasted fast, it came flying: And
Isa. 5.26. God hissed for the Chaldeans, and they came with speed swiftly; God
hastneth judgment, and no marvail, he is provoked to it, as an Army is
provoked sometime to fight, when there was no intention; or if intention, being
stirred, falls to fight immedia ly, Isa. 5.19. Wicked men say, let him make have,
and hasten his work that we may see it, and let the Counsel of the holy one of
Israel draw nigh and come, that we may know it. They mocked the Prophet that
told them of judgment, captivity, and destruction. You say such things are
decreed in heaven, and must take place; let us see them, let them come,
Jerusalem is strong, well fortified, etc. As these provoke him by their sins, so
the godly importune him by their prayers, Luke. 18.8. He will avenge them
speedily.

5. That Angels have the care of Cities, Kingdoms, and Communities committed
to them. Cause th^se have the charge over the City: That was the Angels, say
interpreters: and in the opening of the first Chapter, I showed you, that
Angels were employed in the government of the world, Deuteronomy. 32.8. Juxta numerum
Angelorum dei.
He set bounds according to the number of the child^en of Israel. The Sept.
has it, according to the number of the Angels of God, as if they had the land
divid d first among them, and then the people were settled according to those
divisions: That in Dan. 10.20. Per gentes and civitates divisae sunt Angelorum
praefecturae. Clem. Alex. l. 6. S^rom l. 7. jussu divino and antiquo per gentes
sunt distributi Angeli.
is more clear and full, where the Angel tells Daniel, that he would fight
with the Prince of Persia, he would prevent his hindering their return to
Jerusalem, and when he should go forth and leave the care of that Country, the
Prince of Greece should come, namely Al^xander the Great, and overthrow that
Monarchy, Clemens says, the charge of Angels was divided by Nations and
Cities. And Epiphan. Hores. 51. regna and gentes sub Angelis posita sunt.

6. When God calls Angels or any creatures, at his command they come, and are
willing to contribute any power or strength they have, to damnifie and destroy
Gods enemies, Psalm. 78.49. 2 Chronicles. 32.21. 2 Samuel 24.16. It was at Gods command
that the waters drowned the world, that fire and brimstone consumed Sodom,
that the stars fought against Sisera, and that the earth opened her mouth,
and swallowed up Corah, Dathan, and Abiram.

VERSE. 2.
And behold, six men came from the way of the higher gate which lies toward
the North, and every man a slaughter weapon in his hand, and one man among them
was clothed with linen, with a writers inkhorn by his side, and they went in
and stood beside the Brazen Altar.


IN this verse you have the effect of the former command, those had the charge
of the City being called, appear, and here is considerable, 1. How they are
called, Men. 2. Their number, 6. men. 3. Whence they came, From the way of the
higher gate, etc. 4. The manner of their appearance, Every man with a slaughter
weapon in his hand. 5. Another man added and described, 1. From his place,
among them. 2. From a double adjunct. 1. Of his clothing, he was clothed with
linen. 2. Of an Inkhorn, he had a writers inkehorn by his side.
6. What they did: They went and stood at the Brazen Altar.


Men.
They were Angels, but are called men, because they appeared in humane shape,
which was ordinary in ancient times, Genesis 18.2, 3. Angels like 7. men appeared
to Abraham; the Angels came to Lot were like men, Genesis 19.5. And Gabriel that
came to Daniel, is called the man Gabriel, Dan. 9.21. They have not the true
bodies of men, but are real bodies formed into the likeness of men's bodies,
which are easily assumed, and easily deposed; for the union between the Angel
assuming the body, and the body assumed, is not substantial, like the union
between man's soul and body, nor hypostaticall like the union between Christ's
humane and divine nature, nor accidental, but it is assistentiall; Suarez. de
Angel. l. 5. c. 36.
the Angel is in the body per intim^m substantialem presentiam tanqum motor ad
mobile cum particulari respectu ad peculiarem usum ejus. As the body holds out
something of the soul, so does the body assumed, hold out somewhat of an
Angel, and therefore when Angels appeared, they feared they knew them to be
more then men.

Six men.
Six Devils says Jerome, six Angels says Theodoret, and most Interpreters
go that way.

Some think by these six, were represented the principal leaders of the
Chaldean Army, mentioned, Jer. 39.3. Nergal* Sharezer, Samgar-Nebo, Sarsechim,
Rabsaris, Nergal-Sharezer, Rabmag. But here were 7. or 8. as the Original
runs, and other Princes beside.

Others interpret these six of the Kingdoms that helped Nebuchadnezzar in
this service, as the Elomites, Ammonites, Idumeans, Moabites, Midianites, and
some of Palestine.

Others, to whom the chief care of the War was committed. More probable it is,
that six are named in reference to the three parts of Jerusalem, and the
chief gates therein, 2 Kings 14.13. There you have the gate of Ephraim, and
the corn gate, and these were in oppido Benjaminis, Neh. 12.39. Zach. 14.10.
You have the old gate, Jer. 1.16.
and the fish-gate, and those were in the City of David, Neh. 3.14. The dung
gate, and porta gregis, and they were in oppido Judae, these were the chief
gates, and led into the chief street: To these its likely do the six Angels
refer, intimating that a destroyer should come in at every chief gate of
Jerusalem, these six Angels should bring in the chief leaders of the Chaldean
forces with their Regiments at these gates. Or by these six you may understand
the whole Army of Nebuchadnezzar, a part being put for the whole.

Came from the way of the higher gate toward the North.
This gate was a Temple-gate, not a City-gate, 2 Chronicles. 27.3. Jotham built the
high gate of the house of the Lord, and this was called the Newgate also, Je^.
20.2.
Jer. 26.10. The Princes sat down in the new gate of the Lords house. This
gate looked Northward toward Chaldea, and that way these six men came,
pointing out whence their misery should come, and where it should begin, Jer.
6.2. Evil appears out of the North, and great destruction.

Pradus in loc.
On the Northsid Nebuchadnezzar made his entrance, and not only he, but
Antiochus and Titus, as Josephus observes.

Every one appeared with a slaughter-weapon in his hand.
(...)
The Hebrew is, an instrument of contrition or dissipation, Prove. 25.18. Its
translated a Maul, an instrument to bear out a man's brains. The Sept. renders
the word here an Axe, it may be interpreted a sword, or any weapon that
suffices to kill a man with.

Observe. 1.
That there is power, efficacy, in the calls and commands of God. When he said,
Cause them have charge over the City to draw near, you see it here fulfilled,
Behold, six men came. Ezekiel called, told them the mind of God, but there was
not power in him to bring these slaughter-Angels before the Lord, Divine
provide^ eacted, the secret virtue of the Lord did it. There is power in
commands of God, and when that goes along with his word it produces any
effects: his word and power brought the flood upon the world at first, and will
bring the fire on it at last.

2. When God is against a City, he sets Angels against it also. Here were 6.
Angels that appeared at his call for the destruction of the City; those who
before he had appointed to preserve it, now he calls forth to destroy it. Sin
makes God our enemy, and when he is out with us, who can be friends to us; If
the King frown, the Nobles and Courtiers will do it also. While God is our
friend, Angels are, and all other creatures, 1 Cor. 3.21. Paul says to the
Corinthians, All things are yours, your servants, your friends for your good,
and why? ye are Christ's, his friends, his servants; if they had been enemies
to Christ, all things had been enemies to them: what the wise man says of any
man, Prove. 16.7. When a man's ways please the Lord, he makes his enemies to be
at peace with him. Its true of any City, when they please God, he makes their
enemies to be at peace with them. Babylon was ever an enemy to Sion, but never
harmed Sion, till Sion had offended, or lost her God, and when Cities have
provoked God against them, he makes their friends their enemies, and their
enemies enmity unto them. Have not we kindled divine wrath by our sins, caused
him to deal in fury, to set Angels and men against us; are they not abroad
with slaughter-weapons? Jerusalem improved not the sword of Justice, the
Magistrates were neglective of punishing Delinquents, of righting the wrongs of
the oppressed, and therefore God put a sword into the hands of Angels and
Chaldeans to destroy both Magistrate and Subject. Let us take heed how we
make God our enemy, by all means make him your friend, Job 5.23. Stones and
beasts will be at league, at peace with you, compare it with Deuteronomy. 32.13. Isa.
11.6, 7, 8.

3. At what gate men drive God away, at the same gate they let judgment in; At
what door men let in sin, at the same door they let in wrath; the
destroying Angels came from the North to the North-gate, there was the Idol of
Jealousy, (...) Iniquity and judgment.
Chapter 8.3. by the brazen Altar, this way came in Idolatry, this way God was
driven from them, and this way came the Angels, came the Chaldeans to be
avenged on them; they sinned Northward, and from thence came their judgment.
At that gate was the great concourse of people, there they worshipped the Image
of Jealousy, and that way came in the greatest evil they ever had, the
Prophets often mention the Northern evil, Jer. 1.14. Out of the North an evil
shall break forth upon all the land. Chapter 4.6. I will bring evil from the
North, and a great destruction. And Chap. 6.1.22, 23.10.22. A great commotion
out of the North, to make the Cities of Judah desolate, and a den of dragons.
Judgment came to that gate they sinned at; sin lay behind the door, called
for, and let in the enemy. Genesis 4.7. God told Cain if he did not well, sin
lay at the door. That is, punishment, judgment, lay at the door, and would
quickly come in at that door sin had opened, Romans 5.12. By sin death entered.
Sin opened a door, it brake open Gods command, and so let in death, and all
judgments beneath death.

Ahaziah sends to Baalzebub the god of Ekron about his recovery, being sick;
this so offended God, that an answer was returned him, that therefore he should
not come down from his bed, but should surely dye, 2 Kings 9.4. Gideons Ephod
was a snare to him and his house, Judge. 8.27.

4. When God comes against a people, he will surround them with judgments, at
all the chief gates there should be Angels, Chaldean forces, so that if they
would fly to the gates of any of the streets, to the gate of Ephraim, to the
corner-gate, the old gate, or fish-gate, the dung-gate, or common-gate, or
other gates whatsoever, they should find Angels with destroying weapons in
their hands: And see themselves so beset with judgem n^s, that there should be
no escaping, they might run from street to street, from gate to gate, and
hope to get away; but Jer. 11.11. I will bring evil upon them, which they
shall not be able to escape: Their hearts, heads, hands, heels, shall not
avail them to an e^c^pe, if they fight or fly, if they entreat God or man,
seek secretly to steal away, it is in vain, they shall not be able to ^scape.

5. When God is upon acts of Justice, and calls for Angels or any creatures at
his command, they come, and willingly contribute what power they have to
damnifie and destroy his enemies, every one came here with a slaughter-weapon
in his hand; the creatures are ready to execute vengeance upon their
fellow creatures, when the glorious Creator being offended, calls for it, Isa.
37.36. An Angel at Gods appointment went forth and slew 185000. He had his
slaughter-weapon ready, and acted like an Angel, slaying so many in one night.
It Is said of Angels, Psalm. 103.20. that they excel in strength, that they do
the commandments of the Lord, harkening unto the voice of his word: If he do
once speak, they heart, yea, they put forth their great strength, and do that
strongly they are sent about.

One man among them was clothed with linen.
Who this one man should be, is questionable. Some make him to be an Angel,
and the grounds they go upon are these.

1. He is clothed with linen, in which kind of garment Angels were wont to
appear, Acts 1.10. Luke 24.4. John 20.12.

2. In the end of this Chapter this man says, I have done as thou commandedst
me, which respect an Angel rather then Christ, who being equal from the
Father, receives not commands from him, Angels being his servants, and
ministering spirits, are fittest to receive commands.

For the first of these arguments, it is true, that Angels have appeared often in
white linen, and shining garments, but not they alone, Rev. 4.4. The 24.
Elders were clothed with white linen. And Chap. 9.7. A great multitude stood
before the throne, and the lamb, clothed in white robes. And Christ in his
transfiguration had his raiment white as the light, Math. 17.2. It is not
sufficient therefore to say this man was clothed with linen, a white garment,
and therefore was an Angel.

To the 2d. That commands are unsuitable to Christ; hear what Christ says,
John 14.31. As the Father gave me commandment, even so I do. Chap. 15.10. I
have kept my Fathers commandments. So Chap. 12.49.10.18. He received commands
from his Father, and kept them. This was no disparagement to Christ, as God, he
was equal with his Father; as man himself says, the Father is greater then
I, John 14.28.

Others by this one man understand the Lord Christ, the Angel of the Covenant,
and those contend that in the letter here, is meant an Angel, and makes that
Angel representative of Christ: so that the difference is not much; but I join
with them that make this one man to be Christ, and that 1. B cause he is
brought in as Mediator here with an adjunct of one-nesse, as in 1 Timothy 2.5. One
Mediator, etc. the godly Jews had no other Mediator. 2ly. Here are employed
the three offices of Christ.


1. His Kingly office, whereby he rules and commands all creatures, (...)
and that is couched up in those words, Among them, or in the midst of them,
as King and Commander, he appears in the midst of those Angels which had the
destroying weapons in their hands. He was their General, and showed himself
in the midst of them, Josh. 5.14, 15. He appeared to Joshuah with a drawn
sword, and told him he was Captain of the Lords boast; whereupon Joshuah fell
down and worshipped, which had been sinful if it had been an Angel, not the
Lord General of men and Angels.

(...)
2. His Priestly office, employed in his linen clothing, the Heb. signifies
flax, especially white flax or silk which was used in holy vestures, 1 Samuel
2.18. Samuel ministered to the Lord girded with a linen Ephod. (...) bissum
Chald. Not. Hist. l. 19. c. 1. Vestes inde sacerdotibus Aegypti gratissimae.
That is, with an ephod of fine fl^xe, or silk, which grew in Egypt, and was
called Shesh, Ezekiel. 27.7. Gossipium by Pliny, whereof he affirms were made
garments for the Egyptian Priests, who, doubtless took it up from the Jewish
Priests, who were appointed by God to wear such garments, Exodus 28.42, 43.
Levit. 6.10.16.4. Whereby was set out the innocence and purity should be in the
Priests, who were to intercede with God for the people. In such a garment does
Christ appear, a sacerdotall ga^m^nt, pointing out his holiness, innocence,
and Priestly office, whereby he intercedes for sinners.

3. His Prophetical office, shadowed out by the Inkehorn he had by his side;
Is signator fuit omnium consensu Cristus Mediator Pareus in Rev. 7.
Prophets were to declare the mind of God by speaking and writing, to discover
who were good, who bad, whose names were in the book of life, whose not, and
so Christ here would make known the mind of God, and ma^k out those who were
for deliverance, and those were for destruction.

A writers Inkehorne.
The Sept. reads it a sapphirine girdle about his loins, mistaking Sopher for
Saphir, some have it the Tables of a writer, or Table Book. Others te^me it
(...) Calamarium, a case for pens, we an Inkehorne, (...), that which contains
the ink, and has the penne-case joined with it. Some taking it for a book,
conceive Christ writ in the names of those should be spared, or made known
whose names were written already in this book. The Scripture mentions a book
of life, Exodus 32. Psalm. 69. But that Christ declared out of this book, the
names of the inwritten, is groundless, we are to take it for an Inkhorn, which
notes Christ giving instructions to these Agents, his observing, recording of
all things, and his distinguishing between the precious and the vile, and his
readiness to seal and instruct those that are the Lords. Or it notes a
manifesting the decrees of God touching Jerusalem.

It was Christ sat upon the Throne who spoke to Ezekiel, Quest.
and how could this one man among the Angels be Christ? This is the only
difficulty against this interpretation, that the same person in the same vision
should be represented diversely.

Christ having diverse offices which cannot be typified or shadowed out by any
one thing, Answ.
it pleases him to represent himself variously to us in the same v^sion, as
in Rev. 5.1. There is one sits upon a Throne, and this was Christ (as appears,
Chap. 1.18.21.6.) he had a book in his hand sealed, which none being able to
open, caused great weeping: and v. 6. there is Christ represented as a Lamb,
who verse. 7. came and took the book out of the hand of him that sat upon the
Throne: Here Christ is variously represented, he sat in the Throne as God, and
held the book in his hand, he took it as Mediator, and opened it unto men.
Christ is the Priest, the Sacr^fice, and Altar, but under a diverse
consideration: And so in this vision, som^times Christ is represented as God
sitting in his Throne; sometime as a Prophet, instructing Ezekiel; sometimes as
Mediator, interceding for the Elect: It Is not incongruous therefore to see the
same person, having several offices, and conveighing seve^all benefits to his
Church, represented in a v^sion several ways at the same time.

They went in and stood beside the brazen Altar.
The Scripture speaks of a golden Altar, 1 King. 7.22.7.48. and this was before
the Oracle. There was also a brazen Altar 1 Kings 8.64. which was for holocaust
as the other for Incense, and stood in the midst of the Court before the
Temple; but at this time it was removed, and the Damascens Altar set in the
place of it, where the Idol of Jealousy was honored.

Now these men came not to this idolatrous Altar, but went to the brazen Altar
which was near, though out of its place. There they stood to receive answers,
they would not go to the other where false worship was, lest they should seem
to countenance it; but to the other deserted, despised altar, to which the
sacrifices belonged, and where GOD gave them true answers.

There they stood; which phrase implies a readiness in whomsoever, to hear,
receive, and execute the commands of those they stand before. If Levites stand
before the Lord, it imports a promptness in them to Minister unto the Lord,
Deuteronomy. 10.8. If servants, 2 Kings 15.25. If great ones, 2 Kings 8.9. stand
before others, it argues a pronenesse in them to hearken to what shall be given
out, and imposed upon them, so here.

Obser. 1.
Elect Jews under the law were saved by the Mediaterian work of Christ
incarnate, as we are under the Gospel: Christ frequently appeared as man,
intimating thereby his future incarnation, and that that nature must concur to
the making up of his Mediatorship, he did not mediate for them as God, for ^^
as man; but he mediated then ut homo promissus, now he mediates ut homo
exhibitus. Isa. 53.5. The Prophet speaking of Christ, says, he was wounded for
our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities, the chastisement of our
peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. The Prophets faith, and
in his, the faith of the Jewish Church looked upon Christ as already wounded,
slain, and fetched healing virtue from his stripes. Christ's death was their
life, his Cross, their crown.

2. That the Lord Christ is the chief Commander of all Angelical and humane
forces; he was in the midst of these six military Angels that were to bring in
the Chaldean forces at the several gates of the City; He was their General,
from him they had their Commissions, and without a word from him they could not
stir. All power in heaven and earth was given him, Math. 28. His prerogative
it was and is, to call forth Angels, and send out Armies, Rev. 19.4. The Armies
which were in heaven followed him; that is Christ, he was their Leader, and
his name is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, verse. 16. And certainly where
Christ goes in the head of Armies, there will be great slaughter.

3. When judgments are abroad, and the godly are in danger, Christ mediates
and intercedes for them: Now the Jewish Church and State were at the door of
destruction, and publ^que calamities ready to involve all; Christ he appears
like a Priest with linen clothes, to offer sacrifice on their behalf, and to
mediate for them. When imminent dangers were at hand, or judgments upon the
people, the P^iests were to appear, to stand between the Lord and them, making
intercession for them, Number. 16.47. And so in Joel 2.17. Let the Priests, the
Ministers of the Lord weep between the porch and the Altar, and say, spare thy
people O Lord. And here Christ being a merc full h gh Priest, shows himself,
and interposeth for the Saints, who were to meet with a terrible tempest. The
like did Christ, when he was in the flesh on earth, he saw what a storm was
coming upon Jerusalem, what persecution upon the Saints, and therefore John
17. he intercedes with his Father for Apostles and believers, verse 16.20. When
Steven was questioned, and in jeopardy of his ^if, heaven was opened, and he
saw Christ standing at the right hand of God. Christ pleaded his cause,
propitiated for his sins, and encouraged him in his sufferings.

4. Christ has a special care of his in times of trouble, he appears with an
Inkhorn to write down w^^^ is said and done against them, to make known the
mind of G^d to them, to seal and discriminate them from others, to giv^^
m^^^ssi ^s to those he employes, to cut off the enemies of ^is peo^l^, Rev. 7
2, 3. There were four Angels had power given them to ha^^ the earth and sea;
but there was another Angel ascending from the East, having the seal of the
living God, viz. Christ, for so Expositors understand it, and this Angel the
Lord Christ cried with a loud voice, saying, hurt not the earth, neither the
sea, nor the trees, till we have sealed the servants of God in their
foreheads. Christ had great care of his Churches; for by Earth, Sea, Trees,
some of the learned understand the Church in several places, by Earth, the
Inland Churches, by Sea, the Maritime, and by Trees the mountain and woodland
Churches, Christ would not have these hurt till all the godly in them were
sealed. Its prophesied in Mal. 4.1, 2. That when it is a fiery day of the LORD,
the Son of righteousness shall rise with healing in his wings to them that
fear the LORD, Chap. 1.3, 4. When the locusts came out of the bottomless pit,
and had power like Scorpions given them to sting and do hurt, there was a
command, that they should not hurt the grass of the earth, nor any green
thing, nor any tree; That is, No Christian that had life in him weak or strong,
but only those had not the seal of God in their foreheads; that is, those had
no life, no greenness in them, and they were subject to hurt others. Mar. 4.
when the Disciples were in a grievous storm, the waves beat so into the shipp,
that they filled it, they were afraid, and suspe^ted the care of Christ, and
therefore said, Mr. carest thou not that we perish? Yea says Christ, I have a
special care of you, and presently you shall see it; he rebuked the winds,
said to the sea, peace, he still, and immediately the wind ceased, and there
was a calm. And from rebuking the winds and Seas, he falls to rebuke them for
their fear and faithlesnesse; they perceived not yet that he cared for them
as well sleeping as waking, though his body slept, yet his spirit was awake, his
care for his is constant and intense. When he was to leave the world, how full
of trouble were the hearts of his Apostles, and how full of care and compassion
was Christ toward them laying down several grounds of comfort for them in the
14, 15, 16, and 17. Chapt. of John.

5. Those are upon great and public designs, should begin with God, consult
with him. These 7. here go in and stand by the Altar, enquire of God what his
pleasure is, whither he will send them, what he had to do for them, and what
ever it was that he would counsel and prosper them. So have the Worthies of
God done, Ezra 8.21. When he was to come from Babylon about the great work of
the Temple, he sought God extraordinarily for direction, assistance, and
protection, which he obtained of God, verse. 23. Jehoshaphat, when the Moabites,
Ammonites and others came out to war against him, he began with the Lord in
prayer and fasting, and from him had encouragement and success, 2 Chro. 20. So
Asa, he began with God, when Zerah had a thousand thousand in the field against
him, he knew that the Lord was the Lord of Hosts, and that th^^e uncircumcised
ones came against him; therefore looks up to him, and says, O Lord, thou art
our God, let not man prevail against thee, and hereupon the Lord smote the
Ethiopians, 2 Chronicles. 14.11, 12. One reason why Armies miscary, is, because they
confide in their own strength and policy, and lean not wholly upon the Lord,
seeking to him in the first place. Joshuah miscaryed in a great business in
making peace with the Gibeonites, Josh. 9. and the reason is given; they asked
not counsel at the mouth of the Lord, verse. 14. All businesses for the right
managing and success of them, depend upon the Lord, it is he blesses or curses,
therefore it is wisdom, it is necessary to look up to him at the beginning,
lest through neglect of Divine Majesty we lay the foundation of our
enterprises in wrath: Christ being to choose Apostles, which was a great work,
he prayed all night before, Luke 6.12, 13. And the Angels that were to power
out the vials of wrath, are said to come out of the Temple, they had been there
before the Lord.

6. Those are employed by the Lord, must be careful that they countenance no
corruptions in worship. Neither Christ, nor the Angels would come at the false
Altar, which Ahaz had caused to be set up; but they go to Gods Altar, the
Brazen Altar, by this they stood, not the other. Symbolizing with Idolatrous
worship, persons, and things, God allows not, Deuteronomy. 12.30. They must not
enquire after the Nations gods, Levit. 18.3. They must not do after the doings
of Egyptians, or Canaanites. When Gods people were in Babylon, (of their
condition there the Prophet speaks) they must not touch any unclean thing,
Isa. 52.11. much less may they touch any in Sion; therefore Paul press^th that
phrase, 2 Cor. 6.17. upon the Corinthians, who were too forward to symbolize
with corruptions, touch no unclean thing, marry not with unbelievers, be not
at their feast eating idolothytes, go not to law before the Judges, u^e none
of their rites, countenance nothing of their worship, you will be defiled,
offend your weak brethren: Let all those things go, and what ever you lose or
suffer, I will be your Father, receive you, if you be cast off or out, and make
good all your losses. God would not have his touch, or countenance any
corruptions in worship: The primitive Christians would not cast a little
incense into the fire to countenance an Idol. You know in Tertullians days it
was counted unlawful for Christians to wear a garland, because it conformed
them unto heathens: and what warrantablenesse has been in our surplessing,
crossing, kneeling, cringing, aloaring, observation of days, consecration of
places? These have conformed us to Papists, and brought an imputation upon us,
On Rev. 1.10.
that we have Romaniz'd, rather then Evangeliz'd. The Rhemists condemn the
Heathenish names of the week days, Sunday, Monday, etc. because it is a
countenancing of Heathen corruption; it were well that we let fall all holy
days, because the keeping of them is a countenancing of their corrupt
observations of them, In Psalm 16.4.
and Calvin says, Fidelibus fas non est ullo symbolo ostendere sibi cum
superstitiosis esse consensum, by our ceremonies and service we hardened the
Papists, begat hopes in them of our return to them, and grieved, if not
stumbled, wounded the godly and weak amongst us.

7. In times of judgment, as God discountenances false worship, so he
discovers and countenances his own way of worship. Christ and the six Angels
here came not at the Altar and Idol of Jealousy which was now in credit, but
to the brazen Altar which they had set by, and now the false worship must
down, the true and good way be countenanced. Ahab maintaining Baalitish
worship and Prophets, God sent a famine, 1 Kings 18. which brought them all
low, and God now stirred up the spirit of Elijah to ruin the false prophets
and worship, and raise up his own; therefore by sacrificing he discovers the
false and true worship, the false and true God: and therefore after
sacrificing, the people halted not any longer between two opinions, but their
hearts were turned back to the Lord, and they cried, The Lord he is the God,
the Lord he is the God, verse. 39.

In Josiah's days Gods wrath was abroad, 2 Kings 22.13. and then was the Law
found, and Idolatry rooted out, Chap. 23.4.

When God visits for errors and corruptions in worship, then he opens a door
for truth, which was shut up; and there is great reason for it, that he may
clear and vindicate his proceeding^. When truth and Gods ways are discovered
and countenanced, then stoners see they have been out, acknowledge the equity
of Gods judgments, if not repent of their follies.

The axe was at the root of the tree when the Gospel came in, their corruptions
of the law, false interpretations and traditions were discovered, condemned,
and the glorious truths of the Gospel by degrees were let in. When Christ had
the whip in his hand, and was purging the Temple, he had the truth in his
mouth; My house shall be called the house of prayer, John 2.15, 16. Math.
21.12, 13.
and ye have made it a den of thieves.

VERSE. 3.
And the glory of the God of Israel was gone up from the Cherub whereupon he
was, to the threshold of the house, and he called to the man clothed with
linen, which had the writers Inkehorne by his side.


HEre our Prophet has a sad sight, he sees the glory removed from its place,
and going away, which presaged no good to Jerusalem.

The parts of the verse are these, 1. The subject of this glory; The God of
Israel. 2. The motion of this glory, or glorious God, he was gone, and in his
going you have, 1. Terminu^ ^ quo, from the Cherub, etc. 2. Terminus ad quem,
to the threshold of the house.
3. What he did, he called. 4. To whom, to the man clothed with linen, etc.


The glory of the God of Israel.
For the glori^us God of Israel some take it per hypallagen. I have spoken of
these words before, Chap. 8.4. We may hold to the words, and understand thereby
some visible sign of the gracious presence o^ God. It Is thought our Prophet
alludes to that in Ex^d. 25.22. Upon the Arc were two Cherubims, between those
the mercy-seate wa^, where God appeared, and from whence he gave ou^ his mind
to Moses and others, Numb. 7.8, 9. Moses heard God speak from the mercy-seate,
and that God now had left his place he had dwelt and sat in so long; for those
expressions you have, 2 K. 19.15. Psalm. 99.1. now he was withdrawing his
presence, and denying them assistance.

Others think by the glory of God here, to be meant that glory which the
Prophet had formerly seen, Chapter 1.28.3. Chapter 23 8.4. This visionall glory, the
sign^ of Gods presence, went away, according to that Chap. 10.4. The glory of
the Lord went up from the Cherubims: Cherub being put for Cherubims, which is
usu^l in Scripture to put one number for another. We may safely take either of
these senses, because this vision Ezekiel had of Christ was a sign of D vine
presenc^, as the mercy-seat was, the going away of it or this glory, do both
clearly evidence to us that God was departing, which is the scope of the Spirit
here.

Gone up from the Cherub.
Pradus denies that the Lord left the Cherubims, and went without them to the
threshold, but together with them, and Deodate seems to be of that opinion, in
his notes upon the place: but the Text it self leads us to think otherwise; for
Chapter 10.18. The glory of the Lord departed from off the threshold of the house,
and stood over the Cherubims, which shows that the glorious Lord returned to
the Cherubims he had left.

To the threshold of the house.
The Sept. have it (...) in serenum, sub dio, they say the Lord went out of the
Temple into the open air; b^t it is said, the glory of the Lord went to the
thresh^ld, not over it, or beyond it, and its conceived to be the thresh^ld of
the Priests Court. The Lord went thither.

1. To show he was now going from the Temple, where was such impure worship,
and leaving his glorious high Throne, a^ i^'s called, Jer. 17.12. The Jews
thought the Lord was co^fi^'d to the Temple, and the Prophets to the holy land.

2. Because he was to pronounce sentence against this wicked, idolatrous,
oppressing people, which he would not do in Sancto Sanctorum, or in the
Temple, which was the place of his gracious presence, and a type of Christ, and
mercy by him. In the gates of the City they sat in judgment, Amos 5.15. And
God here at the threshold gives sentence against them.

3. To treat with the men stood at the braz^n Altar, and to give them
commissions and instructions touching those were to be spared and destroyed.

The Lords way of manifesting his gracious presence in his Church, was by some
notable sign or other: Observe. 1.
The glory was gone up, it was there before. When God was pleased with his
people, he evidenced his presence by some special sign, Exodus 13.21, 22. When
the Church came out of Egypt, the Lord came before them by day in a pillar of a
cloud to lead them the way, and by night in a pillar of fire to give them
light. They had guidance and protection from the Lord Christ, whose presence
was evidenced by these visible signs, out of which the Lord also spoke
sometime, Psalm. 99.7. After they had the Tabernable, Arc, and Mercy-seat where
God met them, and communed with them, Exodus 25.22. They had the Vrim and
Thummim, to enquire of God, and receive answers by, Numb. 27.21. 1 Samuel 28.6.
In Solomon's days God manifested his gracious presence in the Temple by a cloud,
1 Kings 8.10. God answered Elijah by fire, and manifested with whom his
presence was, 1 Kings 18.38. And so under the Gospel, Christ the Lord
manifested his presence with his Church by visible signs, Acts 2.3. Cloven
tongues like fire sat upon each of the Apostles. And Chap. 4.31. The place was
shaken where they were, and they were filled with the holy Ghost. And Christ
has left his Word and Sacraments as signs of his presence in the Christian
Church.

2. The signs of Gods presence are the glory of God: So the Text calls them,
The glory of the God of Israel was gone up: All those visible signs before
mentioned were the glory of the Lord, so the spirit is pleased to call the sign
of Gods gracious presence, 1 Kings 8.10, 11. The cloud that filled the Temple
its called the glory of the Lord index and symbolum gloriae Domini. A lapid.
Psalm. 29.9. In his Temple does every one speak of his glory. The Ordinances
there have much of GODS glory in them, and they are his glory.

3. Gods withdrawing the signs of his gracious presence from his Church and
people, is a forerunner of heavy judgments. Here the glory of the God of
Israel went up from the Cherub, and shortly after, the men with their
slaughter-weapons are set on work to destroy. It Is Gods method to take away the
special tokens of his presence and love from a people, and then to bring in
sad judgments. People sin, and hereupon the glory removes, and jugments draw
near, Exodus 32. The people made a Calfe, upon which God denies to go with them
as he had done, Chap. 33.3. now they should not have visible signs of h^s
presence. And of them it is said verse. 35. of Chap. 32. The Lord plagued the
people because they made a Calfe, etc. When God would not answer Saul by
dreams, by Vrim or Prophets, then his destruction was near at hand.

Among other signs of GODS presence, there be these;

1. Efficacy of the word, that it works mightily in the hearts of people; The
Lord was with the Apostles, and how mightily did the word work; but when the
word is inefficacious and powerless, its evident the glory of the Lord is
departing, and judgments dreadful enough at hand. The Prophet prophesied to
the people, but the word wrought not, Isa. 6.9, 10. Hearing they understand
not, seeing they perceive not, their hearts were fat, their ears heavy, and
their eyes shut. Now the word was inefficacious to them, and how long shall
this be says Isa. Until the Cities be wasted without Inhabitant, the houses
without man, and the land be utterly desolate. Six times is this Scripture
quoted in the N. T.

2. Unity and love of S^ints, Psalm. 133.1. Isa. 19.14. A perverse spirit.
Where brethren dwelt together in unity, there the Lord commanded the blessing,
verse. 3. and showed his gracious presence; where love is, God dwells, 1 John
4.16. But where bitterness and division increase, Satan has much interest;
hearts, heads, tongues, hands, are divided every where, Isa. 9.21. Manasseh is
against Ephraim, Ephraim against Manasseh, and both against Judah. Mat. 24.
love is grown cold. Instead of fervent love, are fervent contentions; in stead
of love without dissimulation, are crafty underminings; in stead of covering
infirmities, are rakings in one another hearts.

When the breaches were stopped in the walls of Jerusalem, the enemies were
very wrath, Neh. 4.7. God has promised to close breaches, Amos 19.11. Let us
improve the promise, and importune him to fulfill it, for rich mercy depends
upon is, Isa. 30.26. Unity is an humane savior of Kingdoms and Churches,
division is Abaddon, Apollyon, an hellish destroyer, Mat. 12 25. A Kingdom
divided cannot stand, God is departed from it.

Division has turned Religion into disputation, driven God from the heart to
the head: and now men are polemical, rather then practical in Divinity.

3. Activity of men in place for God, where God is present, there is courage,
Josh. 1.9. 2 Chronicles. 13.12. But when he withdraws, men are without spirit,
divine influences cease, a numnesse seizes upon them, and they act faintly, be
it in Church or State, Hos. 7.11. God was departing from Ephraim, if not
departed, and Ephraim was a silly dove without he^rt, void of counsel and
courage, and so fit for prey and spoil: Ephraim was quickly spoiled after the
Lord left them.

4. Safety, protection, Jer. 1.19. Psalm. 46.5. and Isa. 27.3. Judges 16.20, 21.
When God was departed from Sampson, the Philistims took him and put out his
eyes.
Least any hurt it I will keep it night and day. Where there is keeping,
watching, there is presence; but is not our safety almost, i^ not altogether
gone, can we challenge safety of any thing, estates, liberties, lives,
religion: have not our Armies smarted, had blows, and breaches, is not our land
spoiled, and under grievous pressures; Are we not for a prey, and none
delivers, Isa. 42.22.

4. The Lord does not willingly depart from his people when they have provoked
him. He goes from the Cherub to the threshold of the house, and there stands
as loath to go any further; he had rather stay with them, then depart from
them, if there were any hope of amendment, Hos. 11.8. How shall I give thee up
Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee, Israel? how shall I make thee as Admah? how
shall I set thee as Zeboim? mine heart is turned within me, my repentings are
kindled together. Ephraim had deeply corrupted her self, swearing, lying,
killing, stealing, adultery, idolatry, oppression, were found in Ephraim, and
yet God says, how shall I give, etc. And further, that God is unwilling to
leave his people, is evident, 1. He desires they should prevent it, Isa. 1.2,
3, 4.16.18. 2. Does upon easy terms offer favor, Jer. 3.13, 14. Only
acknowledge thine iniquity, for I am married unto thee 3. Uses strong
arguments to persuade his people to turn to him, Ezekiel. 33.11. As I live says
the Lord I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked. Turn, turn, etc.
Chap. 18.31. 4. He is troubled when it comes to departing.


5. When the Lord goes from a people, it is not suddenly, but by degrees; He
did not here in a moment leave the Temple, but moved first to the threshold,
afterward it went up over the threshold, Chap. 10.4. then higher, toward
heaven, verse. 19. then to the midst of the City, Chap. 11.23. and from thence
to the mountain on the east side of the City, ibid. and so went wholly from
them, thus God step by step left them.

VERSE. 4.
And the Lord said unto him, go through the midst of the City, through the
midst of Jerusalem, and set a mark upon the foreheads of the men that sigh,
and that cry for all the abominations that be done in the midst thereof.


IN this verse Divine pleasure is made known to him had the Inkehorn by his
side, and it consists in a double command, 1. He is commanded to go through
the midst of the City, and find out who sighed and cried for the abominations
therein. 2. He must set a mark upon the foreheads of them who sighed and
cried.


Set a mark.
What this was is much disputed: Popish Expositors say it was the letter Tau,
which prefigured the cross of Christ. Some Heb. by that mark Tau understand
those have perfect knowledge of the law: Some, those who kept the law, Tau
standing for Thorah, signifying the law. Others understand believers in the
Messiah, Tau noting a cross. Jerome and some with him think the Hebrew Tau
was originally like the Greek Tau, representing a cross. and that Ezra
returning from the captivity, found out new characters, which are those we use:
and Pradus says, Arius Montanus had a silver shekel, in which the Hebrew
letters were not unlike the Greek, and this shekel himself had seen; but it
is not evident says Sanct: that the moneys or shekels which were before the
captivity had any letters upon them, they were not known by any stamp, but by
their weight, and its not probable Ezra should reject the original characters
of the sacred tongue, and devise new himself. Asconius Pedianus cited by
Alapid.
Some that will have the mark Tau meant here, make it a sign of life, as (...)
was of death, Judges marked those were condemned with a (...), and those were
to be freed with Tau. If conjectures might take place, thus Tau is the basis of
the Hebrew Alphabet, and marking by Christ is the basis of all true comfort and
sound profession: but to leave conjectures, and to feed you with truth. Set a
mark refers no more to one letter then another, not to the Greek Tau, or Latin
T. because the Lord spoke not in those languages, but in the Hebrew: (...)
and he means not the letter there, but a sign in general, as the word (...)
not the letter signifies; for the original is sign, a sign: Taf signum, from
Tinuah signare, and so its used in Job, 31.35. Behold my desire is, that the
Almighty would answer me. The Hebrew is (...) Behold my sign is, that the
Almighty would answer me. So it is rendered in the margent, in this sense also
the Sept. renders it, (...).
give or put a sign, and so Symmachus and Aquila.

This sign was no corporal sign, as if the Lord had made some impression in
their foreheads, whereby to distinguish them from others; for this was a
vision, not to be taken really, but in a spiritual sense: The Lord Christ
took special notice of these, and did distinguish them by special providence
from those who were to perish in the destruction of the City; he did not go
up and down from house to house, and set a mark in their foreheads, he
applied his blood and merits, and sealed them by his Spirit; not that they were
not washed in the blood of Christ before; but now there was a new and special
evidence of it.

Upon the foreheads.
Not on their backs, breasts, arms, but on their foreheads. Some think the
Prophet alludes to a practice of marking servants in the forehead, Rhodigim,
l. 5. c. 31. Vid. Sen. l. 4 de benefic. c. 37, 38.
who had their Masters names fixed therein, whence they were called inscripti
literati servi: and its the use among us to brand some Delinquents with a T in
the shoulder, hand, or forehead: and as before was said, Judges marked those
who were questioned, and to be freed with Tau. Here was nothing writ upon their
foreheads, but something is held out by these words unto us, Christ having
intimated their election, effectual calling, It may be taken from the practice
of Generals, who when they besiege Cities and inte^d to spare some, give order
that they should be marked as Rahabs house was.
justification by his blood, intercession for them, providentiall care over
them, in the dreadful judgments coming upon them, does by this phrase
declare his public owning, and caring for them. The forehead is an open
place, exposed to view of all, and what ever is there, is visible, Rev. 13.16.
The mark of the beast was in the hand and forehead; one was secret, more
private, the other more open. Christ would so deal by these persons, and so
deliver them, that it should openly appear he had distinguished them from
others.

2. Upon their foreheads is specified to let us see here was a personal, not
a family deliverance intended.

Q. Were all delivered who were marked?

A. It Is believed that some god^y ones suffered by the sword and famine, that
some also were carried away captive. Jeremie himself was not free from
sufferings.

Q. For what end were they then marked?

A. 1. To secure them of their eternal condition, that their sins were
pardoned, and persons accepted.

2. To assure them that he was with them, and would work all things for their
good, and increase of their glory*

3. To encourage their hearts against all opposition and hardship whatsoever.

The men that sigh.
The word notes sighing for grief of mind: grief is a heavy burden, and
causes men to sigh as those that are burdened, Exodus 2.23. The children of
Israel sighed by reason of bondage. The heavy bondage they were under made them
groan and sigh, and so these here had the burden of Jerusalems abominations
upon them, and that made them sigh, Prove. 29.2. When the wicked bears rule,
the people mourn: It Is the same word, they mee^ with heavy pressures make them
sigh. (...) Gravius sonat. quam and ana graviorem notat gemitum quam ana.


That cry.
This notes such sorrow as exceedes sighing, and must vent it self in a more
full way, viz. with crying vehemently, as wounded men use to do when they
breath out their souls, Ezekiel. 26.15. The wounded cry when the slaughter is
made. And Jer. 51.52. Through all the land her wounded shall groan or cry:
It Is the same word: so that the meaning is, they did sigh greatly, and cry out
bitterly for the abominations were in Jerusalem.

Obser. 1.
The Lord looks upon the world with a discriminating eye; some he looks upon to
be marked, and some to be left unmarked, all are not equal in Gods thoughts or
eye; some from eternity he predestined, some he passed over, and now in time
some he eyes for salvation, Prove. 15.3. The eyes of the Lord are in every
place, beholding the evil and the good.
some he sets by for perdition, his eye distinguishes between the precious and
the vile, Psalm. 34.15, 16. The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and the
face of the Lord is against them that do evil. He beholds both, but with a
different aspect; one sort he beholds to do good, the other to cut off, Psalm
11.4. His eyelids try the children of men, he looks fixedly upon them, and as
they are, so he deals with them, Job 36.7. It Is said, he with-draws not his
eyes from the righteous. They are the delight of his eyes, but the wicked are
thorns, provocations to his eyes, Isa. 3.8.

2. When the Lord proceeds to judgment of Cities, Churches, People, Kingdoms,
he does it judiciously, considerately: he does not power out wrath from heaven
at all adventures, let it light where, and upon whom it will; but he makes
enquiry who are fit to be punished, and who to be spared, Psalm. 9.7. The Lord
has prepared his throne for judgment. And then verse. 8. He shall judge the
world in righteousness. And verse. 12. He makes inquision for blood. The
oppressed he will relieve, the oppressors he will cut off. When judgments are
abroad, especially Wars, all things seem to move confusedly, and wicked men
to do what they list, they will destroy all before them: but they cannot, the
judgments are the Lords, and he carries them on judiciously; there be eyes in
the wheels, and a Divine spirit in them, and they do not move, they cannot
move otherwise than the wise God will have them.

3. In the worst times God has some who are faithful, and serve him. Violence
had filled the land, the Idol of Jealousy was set at the Altargate, chambers
of Imagery in the walls of the Temple, the Ancients of Israel worshipped the
forms of creeping things and abominable beasts, the women wept for that
shameful Idol Tammuz, corruptions abounded in Church and State, yet some
faithful ones the Lord had, that were undefiled. The Church of God did never
totally fail, nor ever shall: When all flesh had corrupted its ways, the
wickedness of man was grown great: When the earth was filled with violence,
Genesis 6.5.11, 12. yet then, even then was Noah untainted, He was just and
perfect in his generation, and walked with God, verse. 9. In Ahabs days, when
Jezebel cut off the Prophets of the Lord, and he vexed the righteous with his
will worship, abominable idoletries, and forced them to fly to Jerusalem, and
things were so extremely ill, the righteous so wasted, that Elijah a Prophet
thought there was none left in Israel but himself, even then the Lord tells him
there were 7000. which had not bowed their knees to Baal, nor kissed him, 1 K.
1.18. They have showed that false god no reverence, contracted no pollution by
doing as the rest did: when Ahaz who is stigmatized for his wickedness, 2 Chronicles. 28.22. when he reigned, cut in pieces the vessels of the Temple, and
shut up the door^ of the Temple, and made Altars in every corner of Jerusalem,
verse. 24. yet his own son Hezekiah was godly at that time, and hated the
ways of his Father. When Christ came, there was a Joseph, and Mary, a
Zachariah, and Elizabeth, a Simeon, and Anna, with some few others, and the
times were exceeding bad then. In the depths of Popery were pauperes
lugdunenses, of whom Reinerus a Popish Inquisitor writes, that they had a great
show of godliness, because they lived justly before men, believed all things
well concerning God and all the Articles of Faith, only they blasphemed and
hated the Church of Rome. God had his Hus, Jerome of Prague, and Luther, in
times bad enough.

4. The number of men to be saved in Jerusalem is few, Commission is given to
the man with the Inkhorne by his side, to go and search through Jerusalem, and
where he found any mourning, sighing, to mark them, and surely this number was
very few; he is not to mark stree s, families, but particular persons, which
notes the paucity of those that were truly godly, and to be saved. In Egypt
the blood was upon the lintell and side posts of the door, and so whole
families there escaped; but here in Jerusalem the mark is not upon the door,
but the forehead; many doors, whole families were passed over, here and there
one found and marked; take a place or two to this purpose, Jer. 5.1. Run to
and fro through the streets of Jerusalem, and see now, and know, and seek in
the broad places thereof if ye can find a man, if there be any that executes
judgment, that seeks the truth, and I will pardon it. Here God bids them
search and see if they could find a man and bring forth, so that the City
might be spared, but they could not find one. This satisfied not God, they
might be careless in that work, overlook some man that did it, God therefore
will search himself, Ezekiel. 22.30. I sought for a man among them, that should
make up the hedge, and stand in the gap before me for the land, that I should
not destroy it, but I found none. Neither man nor God could find any, these
expressions show that the number of the godly was very few; that those were so
durst not appear in public, because the times were so profane and
perilous, but hid themselves and mourned in secret. Few is the number of true
believers, and true mourners; there were two Prophets, Jeremiah and Vriah, the
Rechabites, Baruch the Scribe, Ebedmelech the Black-a-moor, with some few
beside. The thought of the scant number of the good ones sadded the heart of
the Prophet Micah, Chap. 7.1. Woe is me, for I am as when they have gathered
the summer fruit as the grape gleaning of the Vintage, there is no cluster to
eat.

5. The Lord has a special care of his Saints when dreadful and destroying
judgments are coming upon others. Go set a mark upon them that sigh, etc.
provide that they be secured, distinguish them from all the rest, and let them
have mercy in the common calamity: It appears,

1. From the person employed to do it, and that is the Lord Christ, who was
the man with the Inkhorn by his side; when God shall employ not a Prophet, not
an Angel, but his own dear son to do this work, to mark the godly, it is
argument of tender care toward them.

2. He must go through the midst of the City, and look into every place,
make an exact search, and find them out where ever they were hid; God would not
have him neglect any place, lest he should pass by any Saint. Math. 28. Herod
would have the wise men make diligent search for the young child, and God would
have Christ here make diligent search for mourning Sts. they are his treasure,
and Christ would search for them, as for hid treasure.

3. He must surely mark them, vehithvitha Taf, you shall sign them wish a
sign, that is, certainly sign them; the doubling of the word notes Gods
intention and care to have it done; It might have sufficed to have said, you
shall sign them; but he adds with a sign, to put it out of doubt.

4. From the persons sealed,

1. Men, it is put indefinitely, not confined to noble, wise, rich, learned, but
any condition of men that were godly, any poor man, any servant, any child,
any little one, let their grace be never so mean, if they had any grace at all,
they should have the seal as well as the best.

2. Mourners; when filled with sorrow for the sins of the land, with fears for
the judgments were coming upon the land, all in a confusion, every one at a
loss, not knowing what to do, which way to turn themselves: Liberties,
Ordinances, City, Sanctuary, all comforts, all friends being upon departure,
now to be marked out for life eternal, now to have the consc^ence sprinkled
with the blood of Christ, the spirit to bear witness and seal up the soul,
with assurance of Gods love, this shows God has a great care of his in time
of dangers.

Not only at this time, but in all times of judgments God has been careful of
his. Lots righteous soul was vexed at the unclean conversation of the
Sodomites: and when fire and brimstone scorched, consumed Sodom, God sent his
Angels to find, Genesis 19.
hasten, and force Lot out of that wicked place. The flood that drowned all the
world, could not hurt Noah, Genesis 7.
God put him into the Arc, shut him in, and kept him safe there. When the
destroying Angel comes forth to destroy the firstborn of Egypt, Exodus 12.22,
the Israelites posts were sprinkled with blood, and no blood must be shed
there, they were marked for deliverance.

When Jericho was taken and destroyed, Josh. 2. and 6. Chap.
the scarlet thread in the window was a sign of deliverance to her and hers,
Rev. 7.2, 3, 4, 5. Christ the Angel of the East, who had the seal of the
living God, viz. the Spirit, forbids the Angels to hurt any, till the 144.
thousand were sealed in their foreheads. When Paul was brought before Nero,
and all left him in the jaws of that roaring lion, the Lord stood by him and
strengthened him: the more careless others were of Paul, the more careful was
God of him. A little before Jerusalem was taken by the Romans, a voice was
heard, Mal. 3.16, 17.
Ite Pellam; the faithful no sooner escape thither, but the City was ruined,
and all the foretold woes accomplished in it.

6. It is the Lord Christ who is the marker of the Saints, all power in heaven
and earth is given to him; sealing and saving power, as well as rejecting and
destroying power. He is said to have the seal of the living God, Rev. 7. and
to take order for the sealing the servants of the Lord, Rev. 3.12. Him that
overcomes will I make a pillar in the Temple of my God, and he shall go no
more out: and I will write upon him the name of my God, and the name of the
City of my God, which is new Jerusalem, which comes down out of heaven from
my God, and I will write upon him my new name. Christ makes him a pillar in the
Temple, that is great honor; but that is not all, Christ writes three names
upon that man; the name of his God, of new Jerusalem, and his own name; he
causes him to know he is the Son of God, a Citizen of the heavenly City, and
should have interest in the glory and dignity of Christ, Phil. 2.9. Heb. 2.7.
which Divines call the new name given him after his passion and ascension,
such marking have the Saints and faithful servants of Christ. The Scripture
tells us of another marker besides Christ, and it is the Beast mentioned, Revel.
13.16, 17. who causes all to receive a mark in their right hand and forehead.
Christ had sealed his, Rev. 7. to separate them from the world and danger: and
the Beast seals his, to separate them from Christ's sealed ones, and for the
world, that they might buy and sell: this sealing was not for deliverance, but
for destruction, Rev. 14.9, 10. If any man receive the beasts mark in his hand
or forehead, the same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, and be
tormented with fire and brimstone. Rev. 19.20. The beast with his mark ones
are cast into hell.
Here was a dangerous mark, whether it was the mass, sign of the Cross,
profession of Popish worship, subjection to the Pope as head of the Church,
obedience to his canons and decrees, observation of his fasts, days, rite^s,
whether auricular confession, Popish orders, any vows or oaths to maintain the
Pope and his power, such as Otho took in the year 960.

7. God and Christ are not ashamed of theirs in the worst times, and greatest
dangers; God will have them marked, Rev. 22.4. His name shall be in their
foreheads, the beast had marked and owned those were here, and Christ would
do so by his, it was vindicationis nota.
and Christ does mark them in the forehead. In Sodom God owned Lot, in Rome
he stood by Paul, 2 Timothy 4.17. When 4. destroying Angels were come abroad, the
Lord Christ seals 12000. of every Tribe in their foreheads, Revel. 7.3.5, 6,
7, 8. Christ ownes his here and hereafter, see John 10.3.14.27. He calls them
his sheep, his friends, Chap. 18.15. his brethren. I ascend to my father, and
your father, to my God, and your God, John 20.17. When Christ was in heaven, he
owned Steven being amidst his enemies, Acts 7.55.56. And he promises, Math.
10.32. to confess and own the man before his Father in heaven, who shall
confess and own him here on earth. Its a great privilege to be owned by the
Lord, Heb. 11.16. God is not ashamed to be called their God: Notwithstanding
all the Saints sins and infirmities, God is not ashamed of them. When they
were in Egypt, God owned them, Ezod. 3.6, 7. he tells Moses he was the God of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and that he had surely seen the affliction of his
people.

Victoria a holy Virgin under Dioclesian, being asked by the Proconsul if she
would go with her brother Fortunatianus, a Heathen; answered, no, because I am
a Christian, and they are my brethren which keep the commands of God.

Let not us be ashamed of God and his cause, but openly and truly profess him
and his ways, we shall loose nothing by it, 1 Samuel 2.30. Them that honor me,
I will honor, and they that despise me shall be lightly esteemed. If we have
shame with men, and honor with God, vilified on earth, and be accepted in
heaven, we have no cause to be discouraged. Its likely the godly here were
reproached, threatened, hardly used; but because they honored God, God owned
them, and who ever honored God, and was not honored by him? The 3. children
would not obey Nebuchadnezzars command, nor worship his image, Dan. 3.
but honor the God of Israel, trust in him for help; rather dye in his cause,
then dishonor him at all, and did not the Lord honor them with his presence,
Acts 3.18, 19, 20.31.
with safety and deliverance. When Peter and John were bold in the cause of
Christ, and would preach the truth notwithstanding the command of Rulers to the
contrary; presently after God honored them miraculously, shaking the house,
and filling them all with the holy Ghost: and if you ask how you shall honor
God; it is answered, by purging your selves from the corruptions of the times, 2 Timothy 2.20. If a man purge himself, he shall be a vessel unto honor, and by
standing for the truths of the times.

7. Another observation is, that the faithful are so far from complying with
the wickedness of the times, that they sigh and cry for the abominations
thereof.

1. They comply not; wickedness is powerful, and has its arguments of
pleasure, profit, countenance, to draw good men to side with her; but they are
things intractable: How can I do this wickedness, Genesis 39.9.
and sin against God. David, he would not sit with the wicked, he hated the
congregation of evil doers, Psalm 26.5. And see what he resolved upon, Psalm.
101.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. he would rather cut them off, then countenance them. Grace
is as strong in the Saints, as corruption is in the wicked. The vigor of faith,
1 John 5.4. The power of the Spirit, 1 John 4.4. And the efficacy of Christ's
prayer, John 17.15.20. do keep the servants of God from complying with the
wicked. When all flesh had corrupted its ways, yet Noah was incorrupt, Genesis
6.9. Noah was a just man, and perfect in his generation. Ahab could not get
Micaiah to comply with the Court, and suit with the humor of the times. Godly
are like fish in salt waters, they grow not brackish, they loose not of their
sweetness: Zachary and Elizabeth, in the great corruptions at Christ's
coming, in the great scarcity of good men, yet they walked in all the
commandments of the Lord blameless, not in the commands of the high Priests
and Pharisees: Isa. 8.11.
God has spoken to the righteous with a strong hand, and instructed them that
they should not walk in the ways of the wicked; here the godly did not bow to
the Image of Jealousy, join with the 70. Elders in offering Incense, they
wept not for Tammuz, they put not the branch to their nose.

2. They sigh and cry for the abominations are in their times, they bewail
the sins of others, Psalm. 119.53. Horror has taken hold on me, because of the
wicked that forsake thy law, verse. 158. I beheld the transgressors, and was
grieved, because they kept not thy word.

Lot, 2 Pet. 2.7. was vexed with the filthy conversation of the Sodomites: Yea,
vexed from day to day; what he saw and heard was a continual vexation unto
him. The Lord Christ, Mar. 8.12. He sighed deeply in his spirit, and said, why
does this generation seek after a sign.
when they honored him with their garments cast in the way, when they
acknowledged him King, and magnified him, Luke 19.36.38. even then he weeps
over Jerusalem for her impenitency, others sins, and the judgments of God
coming upon her, verse. 41.

The two witnesses, Rev. 11.3. prophecy in sackcloth, which was the habit of
mourners: Mordecai, Daniel, the Ninevites, and others, when they mourned, wore
sackcloth: so did these witnesses bewailing the abominations and tyranny of
Antichrist, the desolations of the Church, and delusions of the people.

2 Cor. 12.21. When I come again I fear my God will humble me among you, and
that I shall bewail many which have sinned already and have not repented of
the uncleanness, fornication, and lascivious- which they have committed.

This mourning is 1. hearty real, they sigh, they groan, it is not a light
matter, the abominations were weighty, and pressing upon their spirits, 2 Pet.
2.7. the word there for vexed, (...). apud Laert: in lycone Morbo ^ confectus,
debilitatus.
is (...), and its then to be rendered word for word, oppres'd under the
conversation of the ungodly in wantonness; the ungodli's wanton, wicked
conversation is an oppressing evil unto the godly, and afflicts their hearts,
as the Egyptians afflicted the Israelites Acts 7.24. Moses avenged the
oppressed (...), Lots soul was vexed, verse. 8. (...), he tormented, wracked his
soul, a metaphor taken from engines they did torment withal, his soul was
troubled as a man upon the wrack, Ier. 4.19. My bowels, my bowels, I am pained
at my very heart. What was the matter, there was the sound of the trumpet, and
war.

2. As it was cordial, so it was constant and great grief; they sighed and
cried, a little sufficed not, it continued, Ier. 9.1, 2. Oh that my head were
waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night.
The Prophet wished himself turned into waters, into a fountain, that weeping
day and night, he might with a flood of tears carry down the floods of
iniquity which he saw. So Ezra, 9.3. when he saw the holy seed match with
strangers, the Princes and Rulers to be chief in the trespasses, he rent his
garments, plucked off the hair of his head and beard, and sat down astonished;
his grief was such as made him astonished.

3. Its inward and outward; they sigh, they cry, there are expressions of their
grief, it was not hidden, but ev'dent; they declared how their souls were
oppressed, how they were filled with grief, and could not forbear; Christ wept
over Jerusalem: Micah when he considered the sins of Samaria and Jerusalem,
with the heavy judgments were coming, Chap. 1.8. says, I will wail and
howl, I will go stripped and naked (as if sorrow had bereft him of his wits) I
will make a wailing like the Dragons, and mourning like the Owls. Vid. a
Lapid. and Sanct. what they say of the Dragon and Owls mourning; great
mourning with outward expressions are set out thereby, Job 30.29. I am a
brother to Dragons, and a companion to Owls or Ostriches.

4. Universal, not for some few or great abominations, but for all the
abominations, Church, State, City, Family-abhominations; they laid all to
heart, and left none unbewail'd.

Why do the godly sigh and cry?
1. God is dishonored by the sins of others, as well as by our own, and the
godly are grieved when God is dishonored by any, Psalm 119.136. Rivers of
waters run down mine eyes, because they keep not thy law. David's afflictions
drew not so many tears from him, as the sins of others; not his banishment by
his son, as the breach of Gods law by the wicked. Nothing went so to his
heart as the dishonor of God, whose glory shining in his word and Ordinances,
is dearer to the godly then their lives. Elijah desired to dye when he saw God
so dishonored by Ahab and Iezabel. The eye is for two things, for sight and
tears; if we see God dishonored, presently our eyes should be filled with
tears.

2. If we mourn not for the sins of others, we draw them upon us, we make them
ours; they mourned here for all their abominations, left they should be found
guilty of any: And 1 Cor. 5. The Corinthians were d filed with the sin of the
incestuous person, because they did not mourn and do their duty to affect his
heart, or remove him from their body: Bradford praid the Lord to forigve him
his other men's sins.

3. It Is argument we mourn for sin as sin when we mourn for it in others. Sin
is the breach of the Law any where, and if I grieve, sigh, cry for it in my
self, and not in others, its some selvish respect, not the nature of sin
which causes that mourning; he hates poison as poison hates it every where, in
whose handsoever it be, and he mourns for sin as sin, would neither himself,
nor have others violate the law of God.

4. The sins of others are of a destroying nature as well as our own; they may
destroy Armies, States, Churches, Councels, Eccl. 9.18. One sinner destroys
much good. One Achan, one murderer may undo a land, he defiles it, brings
peril upon it: 2 Samuel 21. 1, 2, 3.
God appointed a special sacrifice to expiate murder, Deuteronomy. 21. and no
satisfaction was to be taken for a murderers life, Numb. 35.31. Saul slays the
Gibeonites unjustly, and the 3. years famine is upon David and his people. The
death of the Levites Concubine, and Benjamins refusal to deliver up the
Delinquents to justice, caused a bloody War, and the death of above 65000.
men.

5. It argues strength of grace to mourn for others sins, censuring and
reproaching of others for their sins argues strength of corruption; and
mourning for them argues strength of grace, a sound spiritual constitution;
such an one was in Christ, he prayed for the hardness of others hearts, Mar.
3.5.

6. They mourn for abominations, they do great service for the places where
they live, they stand in the gappe, they keep off Gods judgments. When the
people had sinned in making a Calfe, and Gods judgments were breaking in upon
them, did not Moses mourn, weep, pray before the Lord, and keep off the sad
things were hastening toward them, Psalm. 106.23. He said he would have
destroyed them, had not Moses his chosen stood before him in the breach to turn
away his wrath least he should destroy them. Mordecai is bitterness, he
mourned for Hamans villainy, bloodines, evil, befalling Gods people, and proved
a deliverer of them, he was a son of contrition, and after a son of
consolation.
The mourners tears often quench the fire of Gods wrath, divert judgments, if
not, but destruction comes as here, yet the mourners have this testimony in
their breast, that they drew not down the vengeance on the Church or State.

7. They are blessed that mourn, Math. 5. These here were marked, had
testimonies of Gods good will toward them: Jeremie was a mourner, Chap. 9.1.
and Chap. 15.11. says God there, I will cause the enemy to entreat thee well
in the time of evil. Here was a blessing promised, and the faithful God could
not but perform it: When the earth is watered by the heavens, its blessed; but
when the earth waters the heavens, when we put tears into the Lords bottle,
when we mourn and weep for the abominations of the earth, there is a greater
blessing, Psalm. 12.5. For the sighing of the needy, I will arise and set, etc.
Isa. 57.18. I will restore comfort unto him and to his mourners.

8. Others mourn for the sins of men that are not men,: The land mourns because
of swearing, Ier. 23.10. The whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain,
Romans 8.22.

For what should we mourn,

1. For effusion of so much blood in the Kingdom, and spoiling so many Towns:
when Ziklag was burnt, its said, David and those with him wept till they had no
more power to weep, 1 Samuel 30 4. What would David do, if he were now alive and
amongst us, to see Countries and Kingdoms consumed with civil wars, Isa.
22.4. Look away from me, I will weep bitterly, labor not to comfort me
because of the spoiling of the daughter of my people. For it is a day of
trouble and treading down, Josh. 7.9.
and of perplexity by the Lord God of hoasts in the valley of vision, breaking
down the walls, and flying to the mountains, Ier. 31.15. A voice was heard in
Ramah, lamentation and bitter weeping, Rachel weeping for her children, refused
to be comforted, because they were not. Rachel was buried in Bethlehem, Genesis
35.19. and Rama was not far from it, she is put for the Bethlemiticall women,
who wept bitterly for their children were slain, and carried that way into
captivity: and should not England weep because thousands of her children are
not; many precious ones are gone, the sword has drunk their blood. If Martha
and Mary wept for one Lazarus, the friend of Christ, why should not all our
Martha's and Mary's weep when so many Lazarusses, so many friends of Christ
have been cut off, Isa. 57.1. The righteous perish, and no man lays it to
heart.

2. That Justice takes not place, but rather injustice and oppression, Isa.
59.11. We roar all like bears, and mourn sore like doves, we look for
judgment, but there is none: And verse. 14, 15. Justice stands afar off, equity
cannot enter; he that departs from evil makes himself a prey: and the Lord
saw it, and it displeased him that there was no judgment. The oppressed cry.

3. For the sinful selvish policy has been in the great businesses of the
Kingdom which are to carry on Reformation; they carted the Ark, when their own
shoulders should have carried it; their prudence in the things of God made way
for Vzzah's sin and suffering, and hindered the progress of the work; there
has been too much of man seen in our undertakings! O the policy, falsehood,
treachery, that has been among us: what was it made Jeremie weep and mourn so,
Chapter 91.2. it was because they were adulterers, an assembly of treacherous men.

4. For the great and bitter divisions are among us, Thou make us a strife
unto our neighbors, and our enemies laugh among themselves, Psalm 80.6.
not only among those are wicked or indifferent, but even among those are
godly; they shoot their arrows one at another, even bitter words and bitter
actions. Is it not sadd when Christ's Disciples and Apostles fall out, Matthew.
20.24. The ten were moved with indignation against the two brethren. It
troubled Christ to see such variance between them, and had he not wisely and
speedily taken up the matter, the issue might have been very ill; when brethren
wrong one another, it will affect a Moses, Acts 7.26. Is it not to be lamented
when our fountains run salt water,: When brethren speak evil one of another,
and so speak evil of the law and Gospel also, Gal. 5.15. It troubled Paul's
spirit to see such biting and devouring of one another. Certainly if we should
see two or three dogs biting of a man, it would much work upon us, and move us
to rate and beat them off: And can we see men biting men, and not be affected
with it? to see men destroyed with a spirit of bitterness, when they should be
restored with a spirit of meekness, is mourning to some, however it be
music to others.

5. That Gods judgments have been so long upon us, and done us so little good,
God has given us much physic, and it does not work, we may be a dying people
as these Jews were, Ezra. 10.9. Amos 6.6. we drink wine in bowls, and anoint,
etc. Intus vino, extus oleo.
Its said there that all the people sat in the street of the house of God
trembling, because some were carried away captive, and for the great rain, the
great showrs which beat down their fruit and corn. We have had many taken
prisoners, carried away captive, used barbarously; we have had great rains of
blood, and have we yet trembled? have we learned righteousness, and beheld the
Majesty of the Lord, Isa. 26.9, 10. may it not be said, as its Jer. 5.3. Thou
have stricken them, but they have not grieved, thou have consumed them, but tey
have refused to receive correction, they have made their faces harder then a
rock.

6. That so many thousand have perished in their sins and multitudes are in a
perishing way, Romans 9.2. I have great heaviness and continual sorrow in my
heart, and I could wish my self separated from Christ, for my brethren, my
kinsmen according to the flesh, he feared they would perish eternally, and
therefore mourned continually. Granctensis tells of a woman that wat so affected
with souls miscarryings, that she besought God to stop up the passage into
hell with her soul and body, that none might have entrance. Do not people
perish for want of vision, and few lay it to heart.

7. That Gods name suffers so much amongst us; Gods name should be dear to us,
the Scripture tells us its glorious and fearful, Deuteronomy. 28.5.8. Great and
terrible, Psalm. 99.3. Holy and reverend, Psalm. 111.9. Honorable, Psalm 66.2.
And that this name of God should suffer by sinful wretched men is matter of
sighing and crying: some despise his name, Mal. 1.6. some profane his name,
Levit. 21.6. some blaspheme his name, Isa. 52.5. and most darken the glory of
his name: and as it was to Ioshuah a great grief, bitter affliction when his
name suffered, so it should be to us.

VERSE. 5, 6, 7.
And to the others he said in mine hearing, Go ye after him through the City,
and smite: let not your eyes spare, neither have ye pity.

Slay utterly old and young, both maids and little children, and women: but
come not near any upon whom is the mark, and begin at my Sanctuary: then they
began at the ancient men which were before the house.

And he said unto them, Defile the house, and fill the courts with the slain,
go ye forth: and they went forth and slew in the City.


THE Lord Christ having marked some for mercy; in these verses is declared,
what was to be done with the rest.

1. Here is a command to execute them.

2. The execution it self.

In the command you have these particulars, 1. The party commanding; he said.
2. The parties commanded; the others. 3. The witness of what was commanded,
and that is Ezekiel: In mine ears. 4. The things commanded, which are these;
1. To go; they must go after him mark's the mourners. 2. To smite, v. 5. to
slay, v. 6. to defile, to fill the courts of the Sanctuary with the slain, v. 7.



3. A double prohibition.

1. Of mercy to the wicked; Let not the eye spare, neither have pity, v. 6. 2.
Of meddling with the marked: Come not near any upon whom the mark is, v. 6.
4. Whom they must smite, slay, old, young, maids, children, women.

5. The place where they must begin, and that is the Sanctuary, v. 6.

6. Then the execution it self, They went forth, etc.

I shall open the words wherein any thing seems difficult, and then give you
the observation.

The others.
They were the 6. Angels who had the slaughter-weapons in their hands, they
must now go and make use of them, they were not called for in vain.

Let not your eyes spare.
This phrase is sometimes referred to things without life, as Genesis 45.20. Regard
not the stuff. The Heb. is, let not your eye spare your stuff. It Is Joseph's
speech to his brethren, when he was inviting them to come to Egypt, and his
meaning is this; when you shall look upon the furniture of my fathers house,
and see what goodly, rich, and useful stuff it is, you will be loath to leave
it behind you, your eyes will be affected with it, you will say you cannot be
without it, though you know not how to bring it; but let not your eyes spare
it, look on it as a needless thing, regard it not, Egypt is before you, and
there is enough to supply and suffice you.

Sometimes its referred to things with life, as men and beasts, and notes thus
much, that there should be no sign of mercy in their eyes, not a look, not a
favorable aspect toward those they were to execute: (...)
their eyes must be terrible, and not spare from vengeance, they must show no
pity: and the word in Scripture is so rendered, Deuteronomy. 13.8. Thine eye shall
not pity him, neither shall thou spare: That is pity here is spare in my
Text, and that is spare in my Text, is pity here. And Deuteronomy. 7.16. Thine eye
shall have no pity upon them. The Heb. is the same word, thou shall not spare
upon them, spare to execute vengeance upon them: so that they are used
promiscuously, and one interprets the other; an eye not sparing, is to show no
mercy, no pity. That in 1 Samuel 24 10. clears it, when some bade David kill
Saul when he cut off the skirt of his garment, says he, but mine eye spared
thee, that is, had pity on thee, and I killed thee not; if mine eye had not
spared thee, I had killed thee without pity, without mercy, Jer. 21.7. He
shall not spare them, neither have pity, nor have mercy, lo jachum velo
jachmol velo jerachem, the two first words are in my Text, and they are both
interpreted by the last not to spare; not to pity is to have no mercy, what
ever motives be thereunto.

Slay utterly old and young.
In the Heb. it is the old man, the young man, the maiden and little child, all
in the singular number, which is put for the plural.

Q. Here a great question is moveable, how it stands with the justice of God to
give charge for the destruction of little children which were innocent?

A. The word (...) for little children, some take to be meant of such as could
play in the streets, and were under 20. years, Genesis 47.12. Joseph nourished his
Father and his brethren, and all his Fathers household with bread according to
their families (...) according to the little ones; Ad os parvuli.
they were not sucking children, but such as could run up and down that Joseph
nourished; now if the little children be taken for such, they might be guilty
of great sins, as the children that mocked the Prophet, and so deserve death.

But take little children for such as have not committed actual sin, even
babes, new born, in the womb, of which sort many perished in the flood, and
many in Sodom, such God may cut off without impeachment of his justice.

1. He has an absolute dominion over his creatures, he is the potter, and we
are the clay; if he make the vessel, he may break the vessel, shall he not
do with his own as he please? he gives life to babes, and he may take it from
them when and how he pleases.

2. They were defiled with original sin, and deserved death; the wages of
sin, be it original or actual, is death, and it matters not whether a
natural, or a violent death, therefore he forbade Jeremie to take a wife, to
have sons and daughters in Jerusalem, and as for those sons and daughters
should be borne there, they and their fathers and mothers should be consumed by
the sword, and by famine, Jer. 16.2, 3, 4.

3. They are parts of their parents, part of their family, part of their
substance, and God may punish the sinning parent in his child, as well as in
his stock.

4. Had they lived, it is likely they would have trod in their fathers steps,
and sinned those great sins they did, like them in Jer. 7.18. Children gather
wood, and the fathers kindle the fire, and the women knead the dough. Neither
does God punish upon prevision of future sin, but takes them away from
present and future pollution.

5. God might notwithstanding this outward temporal judgment have mercy on
their souls, questionless many children dye more terrible deaths then by the
sword, and yet perish not eternally.

Come not near any upon whom is the mark.
Q. If this mark were not a visible mark, how should they know them, and
spare them?

A. The Lord knew who were his, though men knew them not, and it is probable
such is the rage of the wicked against the godly, that if they had had a little
distinguishing character from others, they would the rather have fallen upon
them, and cut them off; but the Lord ordered the judgment so, and their
spirits so, that they came not near them. The mark was inward in the
foreheads of their consciences, and providence watched and wrought for them
without. God might dart a fear into them, disable them from doing the marked
ones any hurt, divert them to other families and persons, and this manner of
speech is more then if he had said do not kill them, they might do much hurt
to them, yet not kill them; but when he says Come not near them, God does
make a fence about them, and compasses them with this command and his favor
in it, as with a shield against all evil and wrong.

This deliverance of the marked ones from the slaughter-men, is a type of Gods
preserving his in all great and general calamities, and especially of freeing
his Elect ones from hell and the furies thereof. The Chaldeans must not
come-neare the marked ones to destroy them, and Devils must not come near
those Christ has sprinkled with his blood, to ruin and destroy them, They are
freed from the power of Satan, and eternal death.

Begin at my Sanctuary.
This was the holy place, the habitation of God, where his worship was, where
he gave out gracious answers unto them, yet here they must begin.

Why here,

1. They trusted in the holiness of this place, Jer. 7.4.10. When they had
sinned grievously, they thought that if they came and worshipped there, all was
well, they were delivered and cried out, the Temple of the Lord; God would
begin with their confidence.

2. They had greatly polluted that holy place: there was the Idol of
Jealousy, there was the form of every creeping thing, and abominable beast
pourtraied upon the walls, there were men offering incense to those Idols,
there was the filthy Idol Tammuz, and women weeping for it; there were men
with their backs toward God, the Arc, and worshipping the Sun Eastward; there
they put the branch to their nose, great abominations were gotten into the
Temple, they must therefore begin there.

3. The sins of the Priests and Prophets who belonged to the Temple, were
exceeding great, they were messengers of God to the people, and mouths of the
people to God, and above others should have been clean, holy, gracious, free
from the sins of the times; they should have been exemplary unto others; but if
you observe the Scripture a little, you shall find they were patterns of all
impiety to the people, they were ignorant, blind, dumb, drunken, Isa.
28.7.56.10.12. Unclean, filthy, strengthening the hands of the wicked, Jer.
23.14. Covetous and cruel, Isa. 56.11. Micah 3.5. Conceited of their own
abilities, Jer. 8.8. Flatterers, and dealt falsely with the people, Jer. 6.13,
14.27.15. They perverted the word of the Lord, Jer. 23.36. They rejected his
word, Jer. 8.9. They prophesied their own dreams, Jer. 23.7. and put it upon
God, saying, he says, v. 31. They ruled with rigor, Ezekiel. 34.4. They
reproached, slandered, and complained of the true Prophets, stirring up enemies
against them, and seeking their liberties and lives, Jer. 26.8, 9.11. Amos
7.10. This made Jeremie conclude, Lam. 4.13. that Jerusalem was destroyed,
chiefly for the sins of her Prophets, and the iniquities of her Priests, that
shed the blood of the just in the midst of her.

Obser. 1.
When God is upon executing judgment, he first manifests, yea, vouchsafes mercy
to his friends, before he lets out wrath upon his enemies. Go ye after him;
one was sent to mark the mourners, before those with the slaughter-weapons had
commission to destroy the rest. His mercy acts before his justice, he separates
the righteous, Mal. 3.17.4.1.
before he destroys the wicked, he makes up his Jewels before the day comes
that burns like an oven: He prepares an Arc for Noah, before he sends a
flood upon the world; God sends an Angel to fetch Lot out of Sodom, before he
raines fire and brimstone upon them: And at the last great judgment, the Sheep
shall have mercy, before the Goats shall have judgment: Matthew. 25.34.41.
Come ye blessed, that joyful sound shall be heard first, and after depart ye
cursed. Mercy is Gods firstborn, and visits the Saints ere judgments break out.

2. When the godly are secured, then judgment delays not; when the mourners
are near marking, then the six men follow him presently that marks them, and
they do their office. When Lot is out of Sodom, fire and brimstone comes into
Sodom, God could do nothing while he was there, Genesis 19.22. But when he was
gone, he consumed them with the vengeance of eternal fire. Judgments sometime
do linger, and what is the cause? some servants of God are not marked, secured,
got into their chambers of safety; if they were, judgment would quickly be
upon the backs of the wicked, Isa. 26.20, 21. Come my people, enter thou into
thy chambers, and shut thy doors about thee, hide thy self as it were for a
little moment, until the indignation be overpast. For behold, the Lord comes
out of his place to punish the inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity.
When once they were got into safe places, then would indignation come upon the
wicked. When swallows and other birds fly from us, it is a sign of Winter
approaching: and when good men are removed out of places, are driven into
corners, it is a sign of of judgment upon that place.

3. Sinners may so provoke God, that he will neither show them mercy himself,
nor let others do it; no pity, no mercy should they have from God or man. Go
through the City, from one street to another, from gate to gate, and smite,
smite every one of them, slay utterly, do not wound or weaken, but tahargu
lemaschith, slay to perdition: and though they fall upon their knees, beg
hard for their lives, promise you great matters, yet spare them not, neither
have pity, be not affected with ought they say, do, or suffer; God hardened
them here against them; but might they not find some sparing and pitying from
God, if none with man, Ezekiel. 5.11. Mine eye shall not spare, neither will I have
any pity, and he ratifies it with an oath there.

What were their sins which made the LORD deal thus severely with them?

1. Their defilement of the Temple with such abominations as they had done,
provoked desperately, they despighted God thereinto his face; there he
vouchsafed his presence, heard their prayers, accepted their sacrifices,
bestowed choice mercies upon them, and yet to defile that with their
abominations, this greatly provoked.

2. Their abuse of the true and faithful Prophets, Jeremiah forbid to
prophecy left he dye for it, Jer. 11.21. They laid hands on him, and said he
should dye, Jer. 26.8. and 2 Chronicles. 36.16. They mocked the messengers of God,
despised his words, and misused his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord
arose against his people. These sins made it rise to a great height, even such
a height, that all pity and mercy were laid aside.

3. Their great unfruitfulnesse under means and mercies, Jer. 20.8, 9. They
reproached and derided the word, and those that believed and obeyed it, Isa.
8.18. You know what pains God took with his Vineyard, he gathered out the
stones, planted it with the choicest vine, built a tower in it, made a
wine press, did all which was do able for it, and now he looked for grapes,
and it brought forth wild grapes; this kindled Gods wrath, and banished pity,
mercy from his heart, I will take away the hedge, break down the wall, lay it
wast, it shall have no digging, pruning, clouds or rain, but it shall be
trodden down, and eaten up, by whom? by Chaldeans, those briars and thorns
should scratch and tear it in pieces. Man's unfruitfulnesse makes God
merciless, Luke 13.7. when the Lord came to the Fig Tree, planted in his
vineyard, and found no fruit on it, what says he, cut it down, why cumbers
it the ground.

4. Pittilesnesse to one another, Mic. 3.2, 3. The Princes and Rulers did
pluck off the skin, and flesh from the bones of the people: they brake their
bones, and chopped them in pieces. In their skirts was found the blood of the
souls of poor innocents, Jer. 2.34. and Manasses had filled Jerusalem with
innocent blood, which made the Lord to say, Ier. 15.5. Who shall have pity
upon thee, O Jerusalem? neither God nor man

4. Nothing will privilege sinners in the day of Gods wrath; when he gives out
commission to destroy, there will be a general destruction: Old, young, maids,
children, and women, they must all suffer, all dye. In their military oath this
was one branch, Ne quis laedat faeminas, pueros, senes, aegrotos, even nature
pleads strongly for such who are fearful and feeble, not able to help
themselves, Deuteronomy. 20.14. When the Jews took a City, they were to spare the
women and the little ones, and when they took Midian, they spared the maids
and the little ones, Numb. 31.9.18. But here neither oath nor nature should
take place, neither age, sex, or condition should advantage or secure them; not
the hoary head of the aged, not the beauty of the virgins, not the tears of
the mothers, nor the tenderness of the babes, but all must dye: So 1 Samuel
15.3. Samuel says to Saul, go smite Amelech, utterly destroy all that they
have, and spare them not, but slay both man and woman, infant and suckeling,
ox and sheep, camel and ass. Amalech sought the ruin of Israel, therefore
God would have him utterly ruined; when judgments are general, sins are
grievous.

5. Open sins involve not only themselves, but those are dearest to them into
open destruction. The ancients offered Incense to Idols, the women wept for
Tammuz, others worshipped the Sun, and these brought famine and sword not only
upon themselves, but upon the young maids and little children which were free
from those sins; the parents sins ruined the children, and wrapped them up in
an open and public calamity. Corah, Dathan, and Abiram rebel against Moses,
and the earth swallowed up them, their houses, and all belonged to them, Numb
16.31, 32. The Sodomites sins caused themselves and their little ones to be
roasted in fire and brimstone: so Princes, their sins bring down vengeance
upon themselves, their posterity and Subjects. All sorts should therefore take
heed of sinning against divine Majesty who is so dreadful in his judgments;
If they will not pity themselves, yet they should pity those are theirs, and
dear to them.

6. The lives and comforts of all Gods marked ones are dear unto him; he gives
order that they should not only not take away their lives, but also that they
should not endanger their comforts: Come not near any upon whom is the mark,
do not fright them with your stern looks, bitter words, rough handling, keep
your distance, they are very dear to me, and I am very tender of them. The
marked ones are a people near to God, Psalm 148.14. and he will not suffer
them to be wronged, Psalm. 105.14, 15. He suffered no man to do them wrong, he
reproved Kings for their sakes, saying, touch not mine anointed. Gods anointed
ones are his marked ones, and they must not be touched, which is as much as
come not near them. God does not only keep the wicked from harming them,
keep off judgments and blows from them, which is called sparing them, Mal.
3.17. But he makes them up as his jewels: they lie scattered as common stones
here and there; but God has his days to make them up, to set them in ranks
and orders, that they may shine more gloriously, and live more comfortably: Or
thus, when a house is on fire, the owners will be sure then to look after
their jewels, and to take, and make them up, above all the rest: So God, when
judgments are upon Cities, Towns, Kingdoms, will have special care of his
jewels and peculiar treasure, Luke 17.34, 35. Two men shall be in one bed, the
one shall be taken, etc.

7. See the order of Divine judgment here; those were ringleaders to others,
and drew them to sin by their place, authority, counsel, example, they must
first be slain; Begin at my Sanctuary, there were the 70. Ancients of the house
of Israel, mentioned, Chap. 8.11. There were the Priests, who had the charge of
the holy things, and should not have suffered such corruptions, pollutions, to
have come near the Temple; but both the Princes and Priests were foremost in
iniquity; they should have preserved the worship of God pure, kept the people
from idolatrous practices, into which they drew them, and made Isaiah say
twice, that their leaders caused them to err, Isa. 3.12.9.16. there was
enforcing virtue in them, constraining the people to err, and run upon their
destruction, and therefore now seeing they were first and deepest in sinning,
they should be first and deepest in punishment, the slaughter-men, representing
the Chaldeans, must begin there, while they were fresh, strong, they must bath
their swords in the bowels and blood of Princes and Priests. Many times its so,
that those are great first in wickedness, are first smitten, Numb. 25.4. Take
all the heads of the people, and hang them up before the Lord against the
Sun. They had been principal actors in whoredom and idolatry, led others to
those sins, and their heads must off first: Numb. 16.
So Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, they were prime Rebels, made seditious work
amongst the people, and went not they down first alive into the earth? and did
not fire from heaven consume the 250. Princes that offered Incense? It Is too
well known that men eminent in place, are eminent in sin, be they in the State,
or in the Church; and it is just they should be eminent in punishment.

Our Prelates who were Sanctuary-men, and pretended divine institution for their
standing, declared by their fruits that they were not from above, but from
beneath: an earthly generation that has been eminent in Treasons,
Conspiracies, Rebellions, seditious Innovations and corruptions of Religion as
ever was; but God has found them out, powered contempt upon them, plucked them
up by the roots. Strafford and Canterbury were heads of wickedness in the
Church and State, and God has lopped off their heads. Great ones make great
breaches for others to perish in, and God begins with them to stop those
breaches, and prevent open ruin. The Devil carried Christ to the Temple, and
the pinnacle of it, and tempted him from thence to cast himself down, knowing
that the sins of those belong to the Temple are most conspicuous and
beneficious to him and his Kingdom.

8. It Is not the holiness of any place can mitigate or avert the wrath of God,
when those belong to it have defiled the place with their abominations. The
Temple was the holiest place in the world, 2 Chronicles. 36.14. All the chief of the
Priests and people transgressed very much, and what was their transgression,
they polluted the house of the Lord which he had hallowed; not which men had
hallowed, but which he had hallowed in Jerusalem: Judgment begins at Gods
house. Isa. 10.12.
No where else had he hallowed any any place, yet that holy place they
polluted, and the Lord therefore bids the slaughter-men begin there, and defile
it; they had defiled it with sin, and now God would have it defiled with the
coming of Heathens into it, with blood, with dead corpse, etc. which made
Jeremie to sigh and say, The Lord has cast off his Altar, he has abhorred his
Sanctuary: he has given up into the hand of the enemy the walls of her
palaces, they have made a noise in the house of the Lord, as in the day of a
sollemn feast, Lam. 2.7. It was music to the enemy to slay them in the
Temple it self, to dash out their brains against the Arc and Altar, 2 Chronicles
36.17. They slow their young men with the sword in the house of their
Sanctuary, and had no compassion on young man or maiden, old man or him that
stooped for age. As they regarded not sex or condition of men, so not the
place, though holy. Holy places were wont to be refuges unto those fled to
them, even heathens would spare those betook themselves to the Temples of their
gods when they took the City; Hosts qui ceperant civitatem, parcerent eis
quos ad deorum suorum Templa censugisse compererant. August. de civ. dei, l. 1.
c. 2.
but in this destruction of Jerusalem, those fled to the Temple sound no favor
from God or man: Slay them utterly said God, defile the Temple with their
carcasses, blood, dung, and they did it, and filled the Temple with such
sacrifices it never had.

9. Divine justice often smites sinners in the place where they have sinned; they
had defi 'd the Temple with their abominations, with idolatry, false worship,
hypocrisy and vain confidence in it, and there God commands them to be put to
death. God had manifested great love, bestowed great mercies, imparted much
light to them, heard their prayers, accepted their sacrifices in the Temple,
and now seeing there they sinned against him, there he would have shem
punished. When Ahab had murdered Naboth, 1 Kings 21. this message was sent
unto him: In the place where dogs licked the blood of Naboth, shall dogs
lick thy blood, even thine, verse. 19. and it was made good, Chap. 22.38. 2 K.
9.26.

10. Gods judgments are as extensive as sinners sins, they must slay not only
Sanctuary-sinners, but City-sinners; they had sinned every where, the Land was
full of violence, and now the Land, City, Sanctuary, were full of bloody men,
and bloody judgments, and as they had filled all with sin, so they must fill
all with slain ones. When sins are general, judgments are answerable. Isa.
8.8. speaking of the King of Assyria, it is said, he shall pass through Judah,
he shall overflow and go over, he shall reach unto the neck, and the
stretching out of his wings shall fill the breadths of thy land. This is spoken
of Senacherib, who like a flood over all the land came up to the neck, viz.
Jerusalem; but Nebuchadnezzar came not only up to the neck to Jerusalem, but
into it, and overflowed the head, he drowned all in blood; where there was no
mark, there was no mercy to be showed.

11. God after long forbearing, is intense upon, and speedy in his judgments,
observe the phrases in these verses which show it; Go ye through the City,
spare none, slay utterly, begin at my Sanctuary, defile the house, fill the
courts with the slain, go ye forth. These expressions set out the bent and
intensivenesse of Gods spirit in this work, he would have his executioners
hasten about it, and dispatch all out of hand.

12. Gods instruments do readily obey his commands, of what nature soever they
be; here they are appointed to harsh and bloody services, to destroy utterly
all sorts and conditions of men, women, children, without pity, and they went
forth, and slew in the City. God commanded, and they presently obeyed; not
holiness of the place, multitude of persons to be destroyed, or danger of
mistaking the marked ones did retard them.

VERSE. 8.
And it came to pass while they were slaying them, and I was left, that I fell
upon my face, and cried, and said, Ah Lord God, will thou destroy all the
residue of Israel, in the pouring out of thy fury upon Jerusalem.


THis verse is the second general head of the Chapter, and contains the
Prophets intercession for Israel, when he saw what bloody doings was in the
Temple and City by the slaughter-Angels, he is affected therewith, he cannot
hold, but falls down, and cries out, Ah Lord God, etc.

In the verse you may consider, 1. The occasion of the Prophets interceding, or
moving cause thereof, which is double. 1. The peoples slaughter. 2. His own
solitariness, I was left.
2. The circumstances or adjuncts thereof, which are 1. Falling upon his face.
2. Crying.
3. The intercession it self; where you have, 1. A patheticall invocation of
God: Ah Lord God. 2. An efficatious deprecation of judgment, will thou destroy
all the residue, etc.



For opening of the words,

1. We must enquire how the Prophet here says, I was left. There were many
sealed and spared, which makes the difficulty; Some think the Septuagint passed
by these words, and left them out, left they should seem contrary to what went
before. Theodoret adds (...), I was left alone; but the Hebrew is, I was left.
(...)
For understanding of this phrase, you may take notice that its usual in
Scripture, when great destructions are, to say few or none are left, Judge.
4.16. All the host of Sisera fell upon the edge of the sword, and there was not
a man left; yet Sisera, if no others was fled: So in 1 Kings 19.14. Elijah
says, They have slain thy Prophets with the sword, and I, even I only am
left, when there were 7000. that bowed not their knees to Baal: If this
satisfy not.

2. I was left: That is, left with the sealed ones, all were destroyed besides:
or,

3. Of these in the Temple, or belonging to it, I was left. Our Prophet saw
them all slain, and the slaughter-men were gone out into the City, and there
they were destroying: and as they had spared none in the Temple, so he might
fear there would be few spared in the City. and so safely say, I am left.

That they in the Temple were not spared, appears thus, they were not sealed,
and all such were to suffer; the destroyers commission was not to come near
the marked ones, but to slay without pity all others: And besides, the man
that marked them was bid to go through the City and mark there, not to come at
the Temple at all, there were none to be marked, there they practiced and
justified abominations, they did not mourn for them: Those had to do with the
holy things were most unholy, and suffered in the Temple; yet it is not safe to
think, or say, that all the Leviticall race were cut off at this time, and in
this place; for Jer. 52.24. Seraiah the chief Priest, and Zephaniah the 2d
Priest, and three keepers of the door, with others, were carried to the King of
Babylon, and put to death in Riblath.

I fell upon my face.
Falling upon the face in order to prayer, notes great sorrow and humiliation,
Numb. 14.5. when the people would make a Captain, and return to Egypt, Moses
and Aaron fell on their faces before the Assembly; they were deeply affected
with that evil. So Moses, when he heard what Corah, and those of his faction
said, he fell upon his face, Numb. 16.4. And Joshuah, when Israel fell through
Achans sin, he falls to the earth upon his face, and prays. Chap. 7.6.
Sometimes they stood and prayed, 1 Kings 8.22. Sometimes fitting, Neh. 1.4. So
Christ sits at the right hand of God, and makes intercession for us.
Sometimes kneeling, Dan. 6.10. Sometimes prostrate upon their faces, as here;
and when it comes to this posture, it argues great grief and sorrow, as in
Christ, Matthew. 26.38. My soul is exceeding sorrowful: And v. 39. He fell on
his face and prayed. So Ezekiel being filled with sorrow that all sorts were
now a slaying, that no mercy must be showed, he falls upon his face and cries
out;

Ah Lord God:
The Hebrew, (...) is a token of grief, and used in such cases, as they cried
out for grief, Jer. 1.6.4.10. and is sometime expressed by alas, Josh. 7.7.
Judge. 6.22. Joel 1.15. Sometimes by woe, as Ezekiel. 30.2. Woe worth the day,
where it is (...) for (...).

Lord God (...).
These be two chief names of the most High, the one noting his Dominion, the
other his Essence; the Prophet had an eye to these, seeing God about to
destroy, as if he should have said, thou have being of thy self, and have
given being to these; thou that art Sovereign over all, and can call back
the destroyers, ah Lord God do it.

Its Jehovih, not Jehovah, and some observe that its used so, when the servants
of God were most intense and affected in prayer, as in Deuteronomy. 3.24.9.26. and
Genesis 15.28. in which places its Jehovih, and both Abraham and Moses were
exceeding earnest with God.

Will thou destroy all the residue in Israel, etc.
This deprecation is very argumentative, and has many considerations to divert
God from destroing of them.

The first lies in the word Thou; will thou who have chosen Sion, and said it
should be thy rest for ever, Psalm. 132.13, 14. Will thou who have made a
Covenant with the p ople, and twearest by thy holiness to David, that his
seed sh uld endure for ever as the Sun and Moon, Psalm. 89.35, 36, 37. Will thou who promisedst Abraham that in his seed all the nations of the earth
should be blessed, will thou now disannull thy promises, break Covenant, and
show thy self forgetful of all, yea unfaithful?

The 2d is in the word Destroy; what? will nothing suffice but destruction?
thou said, If they brake thy Statutes, and kept not thy commandments, that
thou would visit their transgression with the rod, and their iniquity with
stripes, but thy loving kindness thou would not utterly take from them, nor
suffer thy faithfullness to fail, Psalm. 89.31, 32, 33. But if thou destroy and
that without pity, mercy, where is thy loving kindness, where is thy
faithfulness?

3d. Is in the word Israel, which was a moving word, and put God in mind how
dear they had been unto him. Israel was his Son, his Firstborn, Exodus 4
22. His chosen ones, Isa. 44.1. His glory, Isa. 46.13. Israel he had brought
out of Egypt, and done great things for, Exodus 18.1.8, 9. Its Israel is so
dear to thee, whom thou have done so much for, and will thou destroy Israel?
Israel here is put for Judah, by a synechdoche.

4. In the residue of Israel, there be ten tribes gone already into captivity;
yea, a great part of the other two tribes are now in Babylon, and wilt not thou
have compassion on the little remnant that is remaining?

5. All the residue: What? shall all of them be destroyed, and utterly? man,
woman, child, they are all slain in the Temple, most in the City? Did not
thou bid me bind up a few hairs in my skirts, Chap. 5.3. thereby typifying out
that some should be saved? Did not thou tell me, Chap. 6.8. Yet will I leave
a remnant? and what now Lord, must all the residue be cut off? I be a lying
Prophet, and thou false in thy word? O do it not, do it not.

6. In pouring out of thy fury, it notes emptying of himself, as clouds,
vials, buckets, when all is in them is powered out, and the argument runs thus;
Lord, must all thy fury be powered out at once? where are thy bowels, thy
mercies, thou say thou reservest wrath for thine enemies, Nahum 1.2. will thou power it all out upon thy people, and reserve none for heathens, for thine
adversaries, for whom properly thy fury is, Isa. 59.18. O reserve thy wrath for
them, and power it not out upon us.

7. Upon Jerusalem: This is the place thou chosest, and where thou did set
thy name, 2 Kings 23.27. This City was the perfection of beauty, and joy of the
whole earth, Lam. 2.15. The City of God the great King, and Lord of Hosts,
Psalm. 48.1.28. The holy City, Isa. 52.1. It had the holy Temple, the holy Ark,
the holy Sacrifices and Ordinances, the holy Priests and Prophets, the holy
Law. Here only was God known, and his name great; Lord, will thou power out thy
wrath upon Jerusalem, thou will then have no place left thee in the world to be
worshipped in; what will become of thy name, thy glory, all thy holy things.
Thou will have no Church, no people, no praise in the earth: Nay, the adversary
will mock and blaspheme, and what will the marked ones think and say, when
Jerusalem is laid wast, the pledge of their hope, may they not say we looked
for light, but behold darkness, we expected a Messiiah, but our hopes are cut
off, we have our lives for a prey, and that is all.

The godly do sympathize with the miseries of others, Obser. 1.
the Prophet here is affected greatly with the judgments of God upon this
people: When the Prophets told them of Gods judgments coming upon them, they
thought hardly of the Prophets, they could not hear them, 2 Chronicles. 36.16. they
conceived the Prophets hated them, and meant them no good; but when the things
they foretold came to pass, they pitied them, and mourned for them: Ezekiel
through deep sense of their slaughter, falls down, and shed tears as they
shed blood: their bodies were wounded, and his heart was wounded, wounded for
their sins, wounded for Gods wrath and heavy judgments were now upon them,
Jer. 9.1. Oh that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears,
that I might weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of my people.
Jeremiah so sympathiz'd with them, that he had a mind neither to eat, drink,
or sleep, but only to weep night and day; tears should be his meat, drink, and
sleep. Such a sympathizing man was Moses, Deuteronomy. 9 12, 13. When the people had
sinned in making them a Calvish god, and Gods wrath was coming out to their
destruction, what did Moses, verse. 18. He fell down before the Lord forty
days and forty nights, and did neither eat bread, nor drink water, because
the people had sinned, and provoked God to anger. Here was a man affected with
their miseries, (I was afraid says he, of the anger and hot displeasure
wherewith the Lord was wrath against you to destroy you.) Forty days did Moses
mourn for them, and humble himself: and this kind of mourning 40. days in
case of judgment, some think rises from Gods raining upon the world 40.
days, and 40. nights. Answerable to which, Moses, Eliah, and Christ fasted,
mourned and prayed, and so to Nineveh 40. days was given them to prevent their
destruction.

This duty of sympathizing with others in their misery, was David's practice;
though they were wicked, and rewarded him evil, yet if they were in misery,
Psalm 35.11. he would share in it. When they were sick, his clothing was
sackcloth, he humbled his soul with fasting. Wicked men laugh and are glad
at the miseries of the godly, but the godly sigh and mourn at, and for the
miseries of the wicked, they remember the Apostolical command, Romans 12.15.
Weep with them that weep, that will be some ease to them to see others
sensible of their condition. This makes them like to Christ himself, Heb.
4.15. He is touched with our infirmities. Judgments are upon the Kingdom:
many of Gods dear servants as well as others suffer hard things.

1. Take notice of their grievances, burdens, dangers.

2. Mind them.

3. Be tender affectioned toward them.

And 4. help them what you can, and this is true sympathy.

2. The servants of God that draw near him in time of his judgments, are
conscious to themselves of their own weakness, sinfulness, and unworthiness.
Ezekiel falls down upon his face as unworthy to look upon the great and glorious
God, his own sins and infirmities made him hide his face, and the great wrath
of God against his people made him tremble. When Abraham parlied with the Lord,
being about to destroy Sodom, he remembered that he was dust and ashes, Genesis
18.27. God is terrible in judgment, and humility is the best posture an angry
God can find any in; when we lie prostrate at his feet he will not destroy
us.

3. Those are faithful messengers of God will deprecate judgments when they
are coming upon the people. Ah Lord God, will thou, etc. So did Moses that was
faithful in Gods house, Exodus 32.11, 12, 13.32. where he uses strong
arguments to press the Lord to forgive their sins, to divert his wrath, and to
spare their lives, or else to blot him out of his book. Joshuah and the Elders
of Israel lie upon their faces, put dust upon their heads, and pray earnestly
to God not to deliver them into the hands of the Amorites, and to remember his
great name, Josh. 7.6, 7.9. Samuel thought it a sin for him not to pray for the
people when they were in danger of destruction, 1 Samuel 12.19.23. God forbid
that I should sin in ceasing to pray for you. He had done it, and would
still do it, and if possible, turn away the displeasure of the most High.
Jehoshaphat, when a great Army was coming upon them, and ready to over-runne
all, he makes an effectual prayer, produces strong arguments, which you may
read, 2 Chronicles. 20.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. from Gods power in heaven and earth,
from the experience they had of him, in driving our enemies, and giving them
the Land, from the Sanctuary built for honor of his Name, and his promise to
hear prayer there; from the spring of the enemies when they came out of
Egypt, and their intentions now to cast them out of Gods possession, and then
concludes with a conquering argument of faith: O our God, will thou not judge
them? for we have not might against this great company that comes against us:
neither know we what to do, but our eyes are upon thee. He first overcame God
by his mighty prayer, and then overcame the enemies. Jeremie seeing a great
famine upon the people, he sees upon God, Chapter 14.7, 8.9. O Lord, though our
iniquities testify against us, do thou it for thy names sake: O the hope of
Israel, the Savior thereof in the time of trouble, why should thou be as a
stranger in the land, and as a wayfaring man that turns aside to tarry for a
night. Why should thou be as a man astonished, as a mighty man that cannot
save. Yet thou O Lord art in the midst of us, and we are called by thy name,
leave us not. Do not according to our sins, but thy Name, thou art the hope
of Israel, and it has been thine office, work, to save Israel, why should
thou be a stranger, as if thou had nothing to do, no right in us.

4. Gods judgments puzzle even Prophets, they see not into the equity and
depths of them: Now that all were slain in the Temple, the City, and all in
it ruining, the Prophet is astonished, and knows not what to make of it, that
wrath should be so fully powered upon Jerusalem; that God would leave himself
no people, no place to be worshipped in, frustrate the hopes of his people
touching the promised seed, and make void all promises thereabout, and give up
the holy land to profane uncircumcised wretches, this puzzled him.

There is something ever in Gods judgments which we cannot reach, and then
because they proceed cross to our wills, expectations, desires, we are ready
to think hardly of them, and boil in our spirits against heaven; but we must
remember Gods ways are not ours, he is ever righteous in his judgments,
though we see not the reason thereof, Psalm. 36.6. Thy judgments are a great
deep. Some refer it to providence, thus, men's sins are a deep sea of
wickedness, yet Gods providence is a greater deep, which orders them,
sinners, and all things.

Others take it literally; Gods judgments in punishing sins is such a depth
that no humane understanding can sound: Our Prophet could not do it, neither
the Apostles, and therefore cries out, how unsearcheable are his judgments.

(...).
When States, Churches, or persons suffer hard things, let us not think them
wronged, they suffer not more then they deserve, no nor so much, Ezra 9.13.
Thou have punished us less then our iniquities.

VESS. 9, 10.
Then said he unto me, the iniquity of the house of Israel and Judah is
exceeding great, and the land is full of blood, and the City full of
perverseness; for they say, the Lord has forsaken the earth, and the Lord
sees not.

And as for me also, mine eye shall not spare, neither will I have pity; but I
will recompense their way upon their head.


THe Prophet having pressed the Lord with many strong arguments to spare
Jermsalem. In these verses he has an answer from God, and the reasons thereof.

The answer is negative, verse 10. Mine eye shall not spare, neither, etc.

The reasons of this answer are in the ninth verse, which are strong and
weighty.

1. A general reason; The iniquity of the house of Israel, etc.

2. Particular ones, which are three.

1. The land is full of blood. 2. The City is full of perverseness. 3.
Atheism, a ground of all the former reasons; For they say the Lord has
forsaken the earth.
The iniquity of the house of Israel.
By house of Israel some understand those that had be taken themselves from the
ten Tribes to those of Judah, whereof was, spoken, Chap. 4.4. But I conceive we
may interpret it of the 10 Tribes, whose sins contribut^d much to the final
destruction of all. Though they were gone into captivity, yet their sins stand
behind them, and had defiled the whole land.

(...)
Is exceeding great.
The Hebrews when they would make a thing superlative, express it by
gemination of the word, and so its here, their iniquity is great, in valde
valde, and the vulgar has it, nimis valde, it is come to the height, and
scarcely admits of more degrees. A like phrase you have in Genesis 26.13. He grew
until he became very great. So Matthew. 2.10. and 2 Cor. 4.17. there is
duplication of the word to set out the greatness of the thing.

The Land is full of blood.
Hebrew is, bloods, bloody sins, Isa. 1.15. Their hands were full of blood. And
Manasses filled Jerusalem with blood, 2 Kings 21.16. And not only Kings did
it, but the Prophets and Priests shed the blood of the just in the midst of
Jerusalem; their preaching, prophesying, counsels and discourses tended that
way, and therefore they are said to shed their blood: So Athaliah slew all the
Royal seed, 2 Kings 11.1. Naboth is stoned to death for his Vineyard, 1 Kings
21.13. and Hos. 4.2. Blood touches blood. There were continual and daily
slaughters, so that blood streamed every where.

Blood notes also heinous sins, as oppression, cruelty, Hab. 2.12. Woe to him
that builds a Town with blood: That is, by oppressing the hireling and
labourer, by grinding the faces of the poor. In Zeph. 3.1. Jerusalem is called
the oppressing City, her Princes were roaring Lions, and her Judges evening
wolves, verse. 3. see Mica. 3.2, 3. 2 Chap. 2. They did not strengthen the hands
of the needy, Ezekiel. 16.49.

Bloody intentions against the Prophets and others who were godly, Ezekiel. 22.6.
Behold, the Princes of Israel, every one were in thee to their power to shed
blood. They hated the Prophet Jeremiah, smote him, put him in the stocks, Jer.
20.2. into the dungeon, Jer. 37.16. They judged him worthy of death, Chap.
26.11.

Soule-murther, Ezekiel. 33.8. If thou speak not to warn the wicked from his
way, be shall dye in his iniquity, but his blood will I require at thy hands.
Here the destruction of souls is expressed by blood, as also in Ezekiel. 3.17.
and Hos. 4.6. My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge.

The City full of perverseness. (...)

The Hebrew word for perverseness is mutteh, and may be rendered perverse, a
perverse thing, the City is full of that is perverse, is comes from (...) which
signifies to decline, withdraw, pervert: the vulgar reads it aversione, the
City is full of turning from God.

This City that was once called the faithful City, was now become an Harlot:
Jerusalem had left God, his worship, his laws, his Ordinances, and taken in
other gods, other laws, other ways of worship. Not only Israel is branded for
backsliding, Ier. Jer. 2.36. Why gaddest thou about so much to change thy ways.
3.6.8.11. But Judah was treacherous, verse. 7.11. and her backslidings many,
Jer. 14.7. And being once fallen from God, she loved to wander, verse. 10. after
the gods and ways of other nations. They grew worse and worse, and were
perverse in their judgment of things, Isa. 5.20. They called light darkness,
and darkness light: They were perverse in their practice, walked after their
own thoughts, Isa. 65.2. They chose their own way, and their soul delighted in
their abomination, Isa. 66.3. Here was perverseness to leave what God had
chosen for them, which was their glory, and to choose that was abominable, and
delight in it: and when God corrected them for such perverseness, they grew
more perverse, Isa. 1.5. Why should ye be stricken any more, ye will revolt
more and more.

There is another exposition of the word, It Is referred by some to law-cases,
and when Saints were brought before them, they perverted judgment, Micah 3.9.
The heads of Jacob, and Princes of Israel abhorred judgment, and perverted all
equity. So in Amos 5.12. They afflict the just, they take a bribe, and turn
aside the poor in the gate. Their cause could not be heard; or if heard, it
was to their grief and prejudice, Mal. 3.5. They turn aside the stranger from
his right, and fear not me says the Lord of Hosts: No, they were turned from
GOD, and turned away all equity.

The Lord has forsaken the earth.
This phrase you find not elsewhere then in our Prophet, and only twice, Chap.
8.12. and here. It sets out the rank atheisticalnesse of those times, denying
Gods presence, counsel, blessing and assistance, they thought God was gone out
of the world, that there was no God in Israel, that God left men to think,
speak, and do what they listed.

The Lord sees not.
This is a higher degree of impiety blasting divine omnisciency, before his
omni-presence suffered, now his omni-vision; he is a blind God say they, or
sees not at such a distance; he is shut up in heaven, and takes no notice of
our Temple, City; or Country affairs: Such an expression you have in Psalm
10.11. He will never see. They did wickedly, and boasted, that God neither
did, nor would take any notice of it. In Psalm 94.7. they proceed higher in
their profaneness: The Lord shall not see, neither shall the God of Jacob
regard it; as if they had power to restrain God, and shut the eye of
providence, Isa. 29.15. Who sees us? who knows us? Men entertain Atheistical
thoughts of God, that they may go on more securely and fully in sinful
courses. They filled the Temple with idolatry, the City with perverseness, the
Land with blood, and say, the Lord sees not: When Atheism has got possession
of a people, that people runs riot into wickedness, fear of a Deity cease,
and the door is open to all profaneness. Atheism is worse then Idolatry;
this robs God of his worship, that of his attributes and being.

Obser. 1.
The Lords readiness to give account of his judiciary proceedings unto the
Prophet. Then said he unto me: The Prophet had questioned God about the
destruction of Jerusalem: will thou destroy the residue, etc. He brake in upon
God, and interrupted him in his way he was in; but because it was in prayer,
out of respect to his glory, and tenderness to the people, the Lord does not
reject him, but condescends and gives him an answer: and this he does,

1. To clear the equity of his proceedings which lie in the dark, and are not
apprehended by all, no not by Prophets; God will make it out that he is
righteous and just in his judgments, whatever thoughts men have of them. When
Abraham moved the question to God, Genesis 18.23. Will thou destroy the righteous
with the wicked? shall not the Judge of all the earth do right? What if there
be 50.40.30.20.10. righteous in it? says God, if there be but ten righteous
I will not destroy it. It Is true, their cry is great, and their sin grievous,
yet I am so just in my judgments, that while righteous Lot is in it I will not
destroy it; but when he is gone, and none but filthy Sodomites left in Sodom,
I will rain down fire and brimstone upon them.

2. To quiet the minds of his servants which are troubled, yea perplexed at the
severity of Gods judgments. When our Prophet saw all slain in the Temple, and
the slaughter-men gone forth, utterly to slay, without pity, old and young,
maids, little children, and women, he was greatly distressed and perplexed in
his spirit, and knew not what to think of such dreadful dealings; therefore
the Lord tells him the ground of his proceeding.

2. Sins of people may be such as God will not hear their prayers, or others
for them. Many amongst them prayed, and the Prophet prayed for them, but God
had no ear to hear them.

1. For their own prayers, Jer. 11.11. I will bring evil upon them which they
shall not escape; but they will cry to God when they are in affliction, and he
is merciful. What follows then? Though they shall cry unto me, I will not
hearken unto them. But what if they cry aloud, will not God hearken then? Ezekiel.
8.18. Though they cry in mine ears with a loud voice, yet will I not hear
them. But what if they fast and pray, will not the Lord hear them then? Jer.
14.12. When they fast, I will not hear their cry. But what if they spread
their hands to heaven, and make many prayers? Isa. 1.15. When you spread forth
your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you; yea, when ye make many prayers I
will not hear. But what if they weep before God? Deuteronomy. 1.45. Ye returned and
wept before the Lord, but the Lord would not hearken to your voice, nor give
ear unto you.

2. For others, Ezekiel. 14.14. Though these 3. men, Noah, Job, and Daniel were in
it, they should deliver but their own souls. These were holy and choice men,
Genesis 6.9. Noah was a just man, and perfect in his generations, and walked with
God. Daniel was the wisest of men, Ezekiel. 28.3. It was a proverb, as wise as
Daniel, and he was innocent, Dan. 6.22. A man greatly beloved, Dan. 9.23. Job
he was a perfect and upright man, one that feared God, and escheated evil.
There lay no ^xception against these m^n, they were acquainted with God and his
ways, they were great sufferers, and men of prayer. Noah had prevailed for his
family, Daniel for the wise men of Babylon, when they should have dyed for not
discovering Nebuchadnezzars dream: Dan. 2.
and Job, for his 3. friends.

Try two more, Moses and Samuel, they were heads of the people, holy men, full
of bowels, mighty in prayer, interceded with God for the people, and prevailed,
Exodus 32.10. Let me alone says God, that my wrath may wax hot against them,
and that I may consume them, and I will make of thee a great Nation. But Moses
would not let God alone, verse. 11, 12, 13. he presses him with strong
arguments, and told God, if he would not forgive their sins, he should blot him
out of his book, verse. 32. So Samuel, 1 Samuel 7.9. when the Philistime came up
against Israrael, prays, and fetches thunder from heaven, and ruins a whole
Army of the enemies, and Chapter 12.17, 18. He prayed, and thunder and rain came
in harvest, so that they word in danger of death, and sued to him to pray for
them. Now Jer. 15.1. Notwithstanding these two were such powerful praying men,
ye says God there, Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, y^^ my mind could
not be toward this people, all their prayers could do no good.

What if Jeremiah, who lived in those times, and was acquainted with their
condition, should pray for them, he was a praying and weeping man, Jer. 9.1.
Yet see Jer. 7.16.11.14.14.11. and you shall hear GOD in those 3. places
forbidding him to pray for them.

God will not hear;

1. Because people are incurable, they reject God, Jer. 2.13. They have
forsaken me the fountain of living waters. And verse. 31. We are lords, we will
come no more to thee. They reject his word, Jer. 8.9. Ye reject the word of
the Lord, and what wisdom is in you: and you may hear them doing it, Jer.
44.16. As for the word that thou have spoken to us in the name of the Lord* we
will not hearken unto thee: but we will certainly do whatsoever thing goes
forth of our own mouth. And 2 Chronicles. 36.16. Their sins were such, as that
there was no remedy but destruction.

2. Gods heart is gone from such a people, Jer. 15.1. Though Moses and Samuel
stood before me, yet my mind could not be toward this people: They are turned
from me, and I am turned from them, and it is not the prayers of men and Angels
can reconcile us, I am against them, Ezekiel. 5.8. Behold I, even I am against
thee. I that have heard so many prayers, been so often for thee; I that have done
so great things, destroyed such mighty enemies of thine: I am against thee.

3. If God should hear prayer for them and spare them, it would encourage them
to go on in their sinful ways, they would presume, grow more confident and
corrupt if possible, Ier. 7.9, 10. Will ye steal, murder, and commit
adultery, swear falsely, and burn Incense to Baal, and walk after other gods
ye know not: And come and stand before me in this house which is called by my
name, and say we are delivered to do all these abominations? When they were
smitten they grew worse, much more would they if spared.

4. The condition of the Church requires it, that is in imminent danger of
being ruined: when the weeds overtop the corn, briars and thorns are grown
great, thick, high above the Vine, the Lord must cut them down, else there
will be no harvest, no vintage. When all flesh had corrupted its ways, the
flood must come in, lest the corruption should infect Noah.

5. To vindicate his name, providence, honor; when God is silent in a wicked
time, and spares sinners, they think him like themselves, Psalm. 50.21.
Altogether such as they are; But Ezekiel. 6.14. I will stretch out my hand upon
them, and make the land desolate; yea, more desolate then the wilderness
toward Diblath in all their habitations, and they shall know that I am the
Lord. Now my Name is not feared, my providence is denied, and my honor is laid
in the dust, but they shall know what a God I am. So in Ezekiel. 28.22. Behold I
am against thee O Zidon, and I will be glorfied in the midst of thee; they
shall know that I am the Lord, when I have executed judgment in her.

3. Gods judgments though great, yet do not exceed men's sins; that Temple,
City, Land, and those in them should be destroyed, was grievous, but their
iniquity was exceeding great. If there be National judgments, there be
National sins: The land is full of blood, and the City is full of
perverseness. If judgment was in every place, sin was in every place; if
there were fullness of wrath, fullness of sin proceeded. Jobs sufferings were
great, and just punishments for his sins, as Zophar thought, and therefore
prays, Chap. 11.5, 6. O that God would speak, and open his lips against thee,
that he would show thee the secrets of wisdom, that they are double to that
which is, etc. His meaning is this, Job thou justifiest thy self, thou say
thy Doctrine is pure, and thy self clean in his eyes, and that thy sufferings
are greater then thy sinnse; but thou art deceived: If God would be pleased to
speak, and open the secrets of wisdom which are shut up from thee, thou
should see God just in his judgments, and merciful toward thee; for there
is double to that which is, double wrath, double punishment due to thee; thou
have but a little inflicted upon thee, and there is a double portion yet behind
due to thy sin, therefore do not complain of God, or justify thy self any
more; for know that God exacteth of thee less then thine iniquities deserves.
Though thou have great affliction, yet he may justyl afflict thee with more,
thy Doctrine is not pure, thy person is not clean, that thou think is
acceptable with God, that provokes him: and where thou expectest favor, there
wrath is due; you shall find in sacred writ that God punishes less then men's
sins deserve, but never above; according to their sins is the usual phrase,
Psalm 28.4. Give them according to their deeds, and according to the
wickedness of their endeavors; give them after the works of their hands,
render to them their desert. All these phrases evidence, that God in the
punishment of sinners exceeds not the merit of them, if he come up to that, its
all.

The judgments now upon Germany, Ireland, England do not exceed the sins of
the places: The iniquities of them are exceeding great.

4. Gods patience is exceeding great, he bears long, til sins be excessive;
the iniquity of the house of Israel and Judah is exceeding great, God might
have prevented the greatness of it, cut them off many years before, but he let
their sins grow great, to manifest the greatness of his patience: He is often,
ten times in the Scripture said to be long-suffering. When he was provoked much
by his people, and they deserved that his patience should end, and wrath begin;
what says the Text, 2 Kings 13.23. He would not destroy them, nor cast them
from his presence as yet. Yet there was more patience in God, yet it was not
long-suffering. So Chap. 8.19. Iehoram King of Judah walked in the ways of
Ahab, and did evil in the sight of the Lord, yet the Lord would not destroy
Judah. His compassion would not suffer him to grow into passion; rather then
destroy them for their sins, he would yet bear the burden of their sins. So
Jer. 34.4. Yet hear the word of the Lord O Zedekiah King of Judah. Gods
patience is not yet worn out, it will be very shortly: O yet hear the word of
the Lord, and ye shall not dye by the sword; God bears long with sinners, but
he will not always forbear, Psalm 37.10. Yet a little while, and the wicked
shall not be, yea thou shall diligently consider his place, and it shall not be.

5. That Churches and States degenerating from Gods ways, go on to a height of
sinning, their iniquity is exceeding great, the land is full of blood, the City
full of perverseness: When they fell to Idolatry, they were idolatrous to
purpose; they multiplied Gods Altars, sinned more then the Nations round about
them, Ezekiel. 5.7. They fetched in the gods of all Nations to them, they had the
Image of Jealousy, every form of creeping things and abominable beasts, and
all the Idols of the house of Israel, Ezekiel. 8.5.10. They wept for Tammuz, and
worshipped the Sun, and when they began to shed blood, they made progress in
bloody passages, till the whole land was filled with blood: and when they began
to be perverse, the City was filled with perverseness of spirit, perverseness
in opinions, perverting of judgment; its not easy to make stay in the ways
of sin, its going down hill; wicked men, wicked States and Churches grow
worse and worse, Ezekiel. 16.25. Thou have built thy high places at every head of
the way, and have made thy beauty to be abhorred, and have opened thy feet to
every one that passed by, and multiplied thy whoredoms. Jerusalem abounded in
Idolatry, and was insatiable in wickedness, v. 28, 29.

When it is ill in the Church, its not well with the State; If there be
corruptions in the one, there will be confusion in the other. Idolatry, denial
of providence, and Divine presence was in the one; and shedding of blood, and
perverting of justice was in the other. When the first Table is violated, the
second Table will not be preserved. If men make not conscience of sins against
God, they will not make conscience of sins against men. If there be Atheism in
the Church, there will be Tyranny in the State: If Idolatry in the Sanctuary,
there will be perverting of equity in the City.

VERSE. 10.
As for me also mine eye shall not spare, neither will I have pity, but I
will recompense their way upon their head.


IN this verse is presented to us: 1. Gods severity, He will not spare, he will
not pity. 2. The equity of his dealing, I will recompense their way upon
their heads.


These words have been spoken of, Chap. 5.11. and 7.4. Gods not sparing, not
pitying, intimates a contrary disposition, severity, cruelty, Isa. 13.18. They
should have no pity, they should not spare, but dash the young men to pieces,
they should be cruel to all sorts. When God handled Job so sharply, Chap.
16.13. what said he. His archers compass me round about, he cleaves my reins
asunder, and does not spare, he powers out my gall upon the ground. Here was a
contrary disposition to pity and sparing: And Job 30.21. he tells God that he
is become cruel to him. And God professes, Jer. 30.14. that he had wounded
them with the wounds of an enemy, and with the chastisement of a cruel one.

Upon their heads, that is, upon themselves, the head is put for the whole man,
2 K. 2.3. Know thou that the Lord will take away thy Mr. from thy head to
day, that is, from thee, Pro. 10.6. The blessing of the Lord is upon the head
of the just, that is, upon the just, Psalm. 66.12. Thou have caused men to ride
over our heads; that is us: Head here may be mentioned, because they devised
mischief therewith.

The sins of Gods own people fetch the greatest severity from him; Obser. 1.
the iniquity of the house of Israel and Judah is exceeding great, and as for
me, mine eye shall not spare, etc. No people under heaven were so dear to God
as the Israelites. Hence Israel is put for Gods Elect ones, both Jews and
Gentiles, Romans 11.26. Gal. 6, 16. And a Jew for a true worshipper of God, Romans
2.29. Yet when these sinned, God became more severe against them then others,
Ezekiel. 9.8, 9. Behold I am against thee, and will execute judgments in the
midst of thee, I will do in thee that which I have not done, and whereunto I
will not do any more the like. No such dreadful judgments ever before any
City as Jerusalem: No such wrath powered out upon any as upon the Jews: As they
had more love and favor from God then others, whilst they were faithful to
him, so they had more wrath and fury from him when they forsook him, Amos 3.2.
You only have I known of all the families of the earth, therefore will I
punish you for all your iniquities. They only were the family of his love, and
they only were punished above others. They were made as evident a pattern of
justice, as ever they were of mercy; for God executed judgment among them in
anger, in fury, and furious rebukes, Ezekiel. 5.15. Yea, he set his jealousy
against them, and dealth furiously with them; he delivered them up to those
dealt hatefully with them, Ezekiel. 23.25.29. There Is one passage very observable
in 2 Kings 23. When Josiah had done great things, caused the people to enter
into a Covenant with God, destroyed Idolatry and Sodomie out of the land, kept
a sollemn Passover, such an one as had not been from the Judges time, now in
400. years before, when he turned to the Lord with all his soul and might, and
none like him rose up afterward: would you not look now that God should be
propitious to his people, and to Jerusalem? But hearken what is said in verse.
26. and 27. Notwithstanding the Lord turned not from the fierceness of his
great wrath, wherewith his anger was kindled against Judah because of all the
provocations that Manasseh had provoked him withal: And the Lord said, I will
remove Judah also out of my sight, as I have removed Israel, and will cast of
this City Jerusalem which I have chosen. We have done something in way of
Reformation, kept Fasts, taken a sollemne Covenant, etc. But may not the Lord
for the blood shed in Qu. Mary's days, and of later days, say, I will remove
England or London out of my sight.

2. God deals equally with sinners, he recompenceth their own ways upon
their own heads, he sets their sins in order before them, lays the burden
of them upon them, and causes them to eat the fruit of their own works, and
what can be more equal, Obad. 15. As thou have done, it shall be done unto
thee, thy reward shall return upon thine own head. Edom had afflicted and
spoiled Gods people, and the like should befall Edom, Ezekiel. 35.15. As thou
did rejoice at the inheritance of the house of Israel because it was
desolated, so will I do unto thee; thou shall be desolate O mount. Seir and
all Idumea.

VERSE. 11.
And behold the man clothed with linen which had the Inkeborne by his side,
reported the matter, saying, I have done as thou have commanded me.


THese words are the fourth and last part of the Chapter, in which you have, 1.
A reporter. 2. His report.


The reporter is Christ, who was sent to seal the mourne^^, and is here
described by two adjuncts.

1. He is clothed with linen. 2. Has an Inkhorn by his side; of which has
been spoken in the 2d verse.
The report is in these words, I have done as then have commanded.

Reported the matter.
Hebrew, returned the word, or caused the word to return; that is, gave in an
answer.

Qu: Why does only Christ report what he had done, and not the other six who
had commission also to slay those who were unmarked.

A. 1. To let us understand that the Lord is more solicitous about the welfare
of the godly then the ruin of the wicked; he had a tender care of his mourners
and marked ones, he was desirous to hear of their safety, and acceptance of his
love, and therefore Christ hastens to make report of what was done; they are all
sealed, and so secured.

2. To revive the drooping spirit of Ezekiel. who was perplexed and greatly cast
down at the bloody slaughter of his people. He was yet in the Temple, and the
report was made in his presence, that so he hearing it was well with all the
godly mourning party, might be comforted. Had the other six come in and told
how many thousands they had slain, this would have added affliction to him that
was afflicted.

That Christ is a faithful and forward executioner of Gods will: God bid him
go and seal those mourned in Jerusalem, Obser. 1.
and presently he did it, comes and informs his father of it, I have done as
thou have commanded me, both what was commanded, and as it was commanded, Job.
14.31. As the Father gave me commandment, even so I do. He does the will of
his Father, and no otherwise then he would have it done, he minded what was to
be done, and the manner of doing it. Here is a precious pattern of obedience
for us: Does Christ do the will of his father, not his own; and shall we do
our wills and not the Lords? Its argument then that we are neither of Christ,
nor of God, but of our selves. Most men when God appoints, commands, they
either neglect or do it not speedily, or not in that manner they ought to do.

2. Those that faithfully and conscientiously execute the commission given them
of God, may boldly give up their accounts to God. The man here clothed with
linen had done his duty, executed his Commission to the full, and he could
with cheerfulness and confidence come before the Lord, and say, I have done as
thou have commanded me. When Christ was on earth, and had many commands from
his Father, and great work to do, he did perform what was imposed, and so
exactly, that he could at end of the day when his work was done, with
confidence give up his account, give in his report, and say, I have glorified
thee on earth, I have finished the work thou gave me to do, and now O father
glorify me with thy self. He did not his own will, but his Fathers will, not
his own works, but his Fathers works. If we do the will and work of God, we
shall be able to lift up our heads, and comfortably to make report of what we
have done.

The unjust Steward when called to give account, could not do it with comfort
or confidence; those abide in the doctrine and work of Christ shall have
confidence before Christ at his coming: You are in place look to your charge,
can you say with him in the Gospel, Luke 14.22. Lord it is done as thou have
commanded.

3. Christ delights in doing good to, and securing of those his Father affects:
Mourners here pleased God; he sends Christ to seal them and comfort them, and
quickly returns to satisfy the mind of his Father, and to show what
delightful work that is unto him. Christ was as careful afterward as now,
John 6.39. This is the Fathers will which has sent me, that of all which he
has given me I should loose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last
day.

CHAP. X
VERSE. 1, 2, 3.
Then I looked, and behold, in the firmament that was above the head of the
Cherubims, there appeared as it were a Sapphire stone, as the appearance of a
throne.

And he spoke unto the man clothed with linen, and said, Go in between the
wheels, even under the Cherub, and fill thine hand with coals of fire from
between the Cherubims, and scatter them over the City. And he went in my sight.

Now the Cherubims stood on the right side of the house when the men went in,
and the cloud filled the inward Court.


OUR Prophet had already seen many visions, Their sins being great, as you
heard, Chapter 8. and slaughter men being sent out utterly to destroy; here
likewise the Lord manifests his purpose to go on in judgments, he would leave
them and burn their City.
and being by the Spirit in a vision, yet at Jerusalem, Chap. 8.3. He has in
this tenth Chapter a vision much like that, mentioned in the first Chapter, yet
with some difference, as will appear in the opening.

Three things chiefly are observable in this Chapter.

1. The scattering of burning coals over the City Jerusalem, which some call
the vision of coals, v. 2, 3.6, 7.

2. The Lords change of his place, 4.18, 19.

3. A description of the Cherubims in the 5.8, 9, 10, etc.

The scattering of the coals is specified in the 2d verse, and prefigured the
burning of Jerusalem, and this is set out to us, 1. From the Author commanding,
who is the Lord in the (...), verse. 1. 2. From the instrument acting, the man
clothed with linen, verse. 2. 3. From the command it self: where we have 1.
The place whither he was to go, in between, etc. 2. What to do, 1. Fill his
hand with coals of fire. 2. Scatter them over the City.

4. The execution of the command, verse. 2.6, 7. He went; and this is
illustrated, 1. From the witness thereof, Ezekiel, in my sight. 2. From the
place where the Cherubims stood, on the right side of the house, v. 3. 3. From
the event, the cloud filled the inward Court, Ibid. 4. From the manner of
conveying of the fire, verse. 7. A Cherubim put forth his hand, took fire, and
put into the hand of him clothed with linen.



In the first verse. the Majesty and greatness of him commands is set out, 1.
By the Firmament above. 2. By the Cherubims underneath. 3. By a throne which
was of Saphir.


In the first Chap. 22. has been spoken of the firmament Rachiah from (...) to
extend, expand; expansum, because stretched out over the whole earth. The Greek
is (...) because of it is strength and firmness, not melted or changed by its
motion: This firmament the footstool of the Lord was over the head of the
Cherubims.

Cherubims.
This word is not in the first vision, Chap. 1. there they are called the living
creatures; here Cherubims, which is evidence that they are the same, and may
strengthen the interpretation given to be of the Angels.

There is a difference between the words, Chap. 1.22. where it is said, the
firmament upon the heads of the living creature: And the words here which are
the firmament that was above the head of the Cherubims; there its living
creature and heads, here its Cherubims and head, which may mind us of their
oneness and consent in judgment and operations. If there be heads, its but as
one living creature acts from those heads; if there be Cherubims, they have all
but as one head.

Why are they called Cherubims here, and not living creatures as before?

I suppose the reason is this: The former vision was at Chebar, in the open
field by a rivers side, this was in the Temple where the Cherubims were, 1
Kings 8.6, 7. and so that notion suited with them there.

2. In Babylon, a profane land, the Prophet sees living creatures, he had a
general and confused apprehension of them; but when he is in the Temple, he
has a more clear and distinct knowledge of them. Hence you have this note,
The Lord did more clearly make known himself and mysteries in the holy land
then in other places, Psalm. 76.1. In Judah is God known more fully and
familiarly then elsewhere: A vision in Babylon is not so clear as a vision in
Sion, Psalm 29.9. In his Temple does every one speak of his glory.

A saphir stone.
Jerome derives it from shaphar pulcher, because these stones are fair and
pleasant to the eyes. Coelesti Color conspicui sunt. Ruens.
The Saphir notes,

1. Liberty, Exodus 24.10. God appeared to them with a paved work of Saphir
under his feet when the Israelites were going from bondage to liberty.

2. Purity, therefore its brought in a foundation stone of the new Jerusalem,
Rev. 21.19.

3. Of chastity, Cant. 5.14. Christ's belly is overlaid with Saphirs, and his
Spouse must be chaste.

4. Glory, greatness; among the Egyptians, the chief Priests being Judges,
wore a Saphir about their necks; these and some other particulars were spoken
of in the first Chapter, verse. 26.

Throne.
A Throne is a seat of Majesty, and belonging to Kings and great Governors,
John 3.6. 2 King. 11.19. Neh. 3.7. and therefore

1. are called Kingly, Dan. 5.20. and put for Kingdom, Prove. 20.28. for
government, Heb. 1.8.

2. Glorious, Isa. 22.23. and hence are put for Angels, Col. 1.18. for heaven,
Acts 7.49. for great dignity, Job 36.7. Here it notes a seat of judgment,
according to that in Psalm 122.5. There are set thrones of judgment. Here was
a Throne of judgment set, and that of Saphir, holding out the Majesty, power,
and greatness of him sat in it, who was in a readiness to give out sentence
against Jerusalem.

The Firmament, Cherubims, Sapphire, Throne, are mentioned, but not he sat in
it; that one was in it, is evident from the next verse. He spoke unto the man
clothed, etc. that was he in the Throne. In the first vision, one like the
appearance of the Son of man was in the Throne, and because no such
appearance is here, its conceived to be Jehovah.

Obser. 1.
The Lord is King, and has Kingly power, he has a throne: and Isa. 66.1.
Heaven is my Throne. And he sits King for ever, Psalm. 29.10.

He has a double Throne,

1. A throne of justice, Psalm. 9.7. He has prepared his throne for judgment,
and this throne is terrible, Dan. 7.9, 10. It Is like a fiery flame, and sends
out a fiery stream to scorch and consume delinquents. The law is called a fiery
law, Deuteronomy. 33.2. and the breath of him sits in this throne; its fire, and
kindles upon those appear before it unquencheablie.

2. A throne of mercy and grace, Heb. 4.16. no sinners dye before this throne,
they may come boldly to it, and find, yea, obtain mercy and grace to help in
time of need. Jerusalem was at the throne of justice, and coals of fire were
giving out to burn her to ashes.

2. His throne is the chiefest of thrones, its in the Firmament, Psalm. 11.4.
The Lords throne is in heaven, its above all thrones, he has Angels, men, and
D^vils under his command; the Cherubims heads were under the firmament whereon
his throne was, those immortal and glorious spirits, He is King of nations,
Jer. 10.7. Of all the earth, Psalm. 47.7. A great King above all gods, Psalm.
95.3. They have their expansums over their heads, of some rich stuff, which
shows their subjection to some other; but its otherwise with God, he is above
the expansum. He is the blessed and only potentate, the King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords, 1 Timothy 6.15.

3. The Lord who has so glorious a throne, is much more glorious himself; his
throne is saphirine, very beautiful, like the color of the heavens. If an
earthly throne be a throne of glory, as Hannah styles it, 1 Samuel 2.8. what is
this visionall throne, a more perfect pattern of the throne of his glory;
Surely, if such thrones be glorious, he is in them exceeds in glory; the glory
of heavenly things is far beyond the glory of terrene things, and the glory
of God is infinitely beyond them both, he is not only glorious, and that in
holiness, Exodus 15.11. In name, Deuteronomy. 28.5.8. Isa. 33.21. In majesty, Psalm.
145.12. But he is glory it self: and therefore Acts 7.1, is called the God of
glory, Psalm. 24.7. The King of glory, Ephesians. 1.17. The father of glory, he that
creates, begets, disposes of glory, must needs be glory it self, and not only
glory, but excellent glory, 2 Pet. 1.17.

4. Note what stones God takes pleasure in, not any stones, but in precious
ones, such as Saphirs are, Exodus 24.10. Under his feet was a paved work of a
saphir stone. He walks among Saphirs, The Temple was made of stones, glistering
stones, all manner of precious stones, and marble stones in abundance, 1 Chronicles.
29.2.
sits in a sapharine throne. Stones which are beautiful, and of a heavenly
color, he affects, of such he makes his throne. Now the Church in Scripture is
called the throne of God, Jer. 3.17. and Isa. 54.11, 12, 13. speaking of the
Churches of the Gospel which are the thrones of God and Christ, he says, I
will lay thy stones with fair colors, and thy foundations with saphirs: I
will make thy windows of Agates, and thy gates of Carbuncles, and all thy
borders of pleasant stones, and all thy children shall be taught of the Lord.

You see what stones God would have in his Temples, in his Thrones; not
ordinary common high way stones, 1 Pet. 2.5. As lively stones be ye built up a
spiritual house. Here Is a house, a spiritual one to be made, and whereof, of
lively stones; there must be not only life in them, but liveliness, dead and
dull stones are not so fit for that service; stones they must be, that it may
be a solid building; lively, that it may be a spiritual and useful building:
and saphirine, that it may be a pure and glorious building.

5. Holy and good men are not able to bear Divine excellencies in their own
nature, not capable of immediatenesse to God: here is a Firmament, a Saphir
stone, a throne, and these but in appearance, and then a voice heard, none
seen: Had the Lord showed himself as he is, Ezekiel could not have endured
it, the glory and majesty of God would have confounded him. If God should not
regard man's weakness, and muffle up his excellencies some way or other, we
could have no communion or converse with God, Moses himself is not able to
behold the glory of

6. Angels and all creatures are in a readiness to do the will of God.

God when he is upon judiciary designs; the Cherubims were under the Firmament
near to the throne, and if the Lord did but speak the word, presently they
were ready to execute his pleasure, Psalm. 103.20. They do his commandment,
harkening to the voice of his word: As soon as the sound comes to them, they
do it; if he bid them go and stir up Nebuchadnezzar, and the Babylonian
Soldiers to come, they do it.

7. The Lord is not forward to the execution of judgment, here is the Lord
sitting in judgment, but yet they were not destroyed: The Prophet has vision
after vision, eats a roll full of lamentations, mourning and woe, sits 7.
days at Telabib, then is carried into the Plain, bound, dumb, must pourtray
Jerusalem upon a tyle, lay siege to it, lie upon his side 390. days, then take
a razor, shave his head, beard, burn, smite, scatter, bind up a third part of
the hair. After, has a type of a chain, then is led by the Spirit to see
Jerusalems sins: After this, sees the six slaughter-like men sent out to
destroy, and here the Lord is sitting in his throne, and giving out judgment
still against Jerusalem, and all this time nothing is done.

VESS. 2.
And he spoke unto the man clothed with linen, and said, go in between the
wheels, even under the Cherub, and fill thy hand with coals of fire from
between the Cherubims, and scatter them over the City: And he went in my sight.


IN this verse you have; 1. The speaker, He; that is the Lord, Jehovah who was
in the Throne, some make it Christ. 2. The party spoken to, The man clothed
with linen, and who this was, you heard opened in Chap. 9. verse. 2. namely
Christ, who in regard of his offices is the servant of his father, Isa. 44.1.
Behold my servant whom I uphold. He had done service in marking the mourners,
and now was to do it another way. 3. The thing spoken or Commanded.


1. Go in between the wheels, even under the Cherub.
The wheels have been largely opened in the first Chapter, the world and
motions of it are set out thereby. There were four wheels by each Cherub; one
as appears by verse. 9. Some take it thus: Conceive the form of a wagon in the
mids, on each side two wheels, the Cherubims riding in it, or carrying of it,
two in the former part, two in the hinder, the Arc in the midst of it, the
footstool of Divine Majesty, and before this the Altar where the fire was:
and you may apprehend how the man was to go between the wheels, under the
Cherub; that is, per enallagen numeri, under the Cherubims, and so to reach up
his hand to the Altar, and take coals. This way its easily comprehended; but
if we come up close to the examination of the wheels, we shall find they were
not at such a distance as here is made; but one in another, per angulos rectos,
verse. 10. a wheel seemed to be in the midst of a wheel, and how the man
clothed with linen went between them I cannot express; but that he did the
Text affirms, and notes Christ's interest in the wheels and Angels.

2. Fill thy hand with coals of fire from between the Cherubims.
The altar was near the oracle before the Cherubims, 1 King. 6.22.
The fire was between the Cherubims, and the Cherubims above, between the
wheels, and the man must come between both to fill his hand with coals of fire.

There was fire you know in the Temple on the Altar, and it never went out,
Levit. 6.13. the fire shall ever be burning upon the Altar, it shall never go
out. The Jews say of this fire that it was that Angels ladder to go up to
heaven by, Ezekiel. 9.2. The 6. man, 6. Angels stood by the brazen Altar, and
Judge. 13.20. The Angel appeared to Manoah and his wife, ascended in the flame
of the Altar: Whether it was a ladder for Angels may be questioned: but
certainly it was a ladder to carry up their Incense and sacrifices unto God,
Ignis altaris erat quasi anima populi.

It might represent the Altar-fire, of which its probable the Caldeans took and
fired the Temple, if not the City. (...)


whereby God was propitious unto them, and so was ignis reconciliatorius; but
this fire here is mentioned in opposition to such an effect, and was ignis
exitialis, a destructive fire, like that went out from the Lord, and destroyed
Nadab and Abihu. It sets out Gods wrath, which is frequently in Scripture
expressed by fire.

Fill thy hand.
He must not take a coal or two, but his hand full: neither one hand, but
both; for the word is in the duall number, and notes the hollow of the hands,
the most capacious parts, those he must fill.

3. And scatter them over the City.
He must take his hands full of coals: and what then? not keep them in his
hands, but scatter them; not upon a house or two, one street or two, but over
the whole City: Gods intentions was to destroy the City by fire; (...)
and here its represented to Ezekiel: by coals, and those scattered over the
City, the Hebrew is emphaticall.

This part of the vision, with that in Ezekiel. 9.4.15. where Christ is brought in
marking the mourners, and here scatering the coals of fire over Jerusalem,
seems to represent the double coming of Christ:

1. That coming of his in mercy, when he took our nature upon him, and sought
out that was lost, healed the broken hearted, preached deliverance to the
Captives, set them at liberty were bruised, and refreshed those were weary and
heavy laden.

2. His coming in judgment, which will be in flames of fire to take vengeance
on them that know not God; then Christ will come with both his hands full of
fire, 2 Pet. 3.10.12.
and scatter those coals all the world over, and set it on fire, and sentence
the reprobate to eternal fire.

God looks upon, and after the things of the world, Obser. 1.
the ways of men, what ever the thoughts of men are concerning him. In Chap. 9.
verse. 9. They said the Lord had forsaken the earth, the Lord sees not; but here
you may see he saw the wheels, all the motions of things in the world, and
especially at Jerusalem, where they thought themselves secure, the Lord saw
into their hearts, knew their thoughts, and heard their atheistical speeches.

2. Christ receives authority and commission from the Father, for what he does.
He in the Throne said to the man clothed, go. John 5.19. The Son can do
nothing of himself. And v. 22. The Father has committed all judgment to the
Son. He has the keys of hell and death in his hand, Rev. 1.18. and they were
put into his hand, Matthew. 28.18. All power in heaven and earth is given unto me.

3. The Cherubims or Angels have power over the wheels, they move not of
themselves, they are under the Cherubims, under their command, at their
disposing. Angels have great interest in the affairs of the world; there are
scarce any natural motions, but they have influence into them, winds,
tempests, thunders, earthquakes, plagues, famines: so for other wheels in
Kingdoms and Churches, which have voluntary motions, as wars, tumults,
divisions, changes, etc. these be not accidental, casual, but have superior
agents.

4. The Lord does use the Ministry of Angels in the execution of his
judgments, especially his fiery judgments: The fire was between the
Cherubims, God had given them charge of the fire, and they were to kindle a
fire in Jerusalem. You heard in Chap. 9. of the 6. Angels that had their
slaughter-weapons, and were sent out of God to destroy utterly, man, woman,
maid, and child, they are ready to execute his judgments, they are flames of
fire, Heb. 2.7. and its suitable to them to be employed in fiery judgments.

5. The Lord Christ has power over the Angels and all inferior creatures, the
Cherubims are over the wheels, and Christ is over them and the wheels too; he
goes in between the wheels, and takes fire that is between the Cherubims. Let
services of what nature soever be in the hands of the creatures, men or Angels,
Christ can step in and do what the Father has appointed, overruled the motions
of the highest and lowest wheels, of the noblest or meanest creatures.

6. Christ has variety of dispensations, he is a dispenser of judgment as
well as mercy, he dispenses the favors of the Father, and the wrath of the
Father. In Chap. 9. he marks the mourners, and here he scatters coals of fire:
He represents several persons; sometimes the same man has sat in Parliament,
has been a Warrior in the fields, a Father in the family, and acted
answerably. A Steward provides for those in the family, and punishes those are
Delinquents in it. So Christ is sometimes upon the Throne, doing acts of mercy,
sometimes acts of justice, and sometimes he is off the Throne, and acts as a
servant.

7. When the Lord is wrath with a people, and intends judgments, he turns those
creatures have been very comfortable and useful unto them, to a terror unto
them: Fire, what a necessary, what a refreshing creature is it? and now fire
must be taken to fire their City, to burn down all, that through the help of
fire was built; they had abused fire to maintain their gluttony, for fullness
of bread was one of their sins, they burnt Incense to Idiot, and abused the
Altar fire, which had been the greatest refreshing to their souls; their
sacrifices were by fire, and were consumed by fire, they had acceptance with
God, atonement was made, and now even this fire kindled upon them.

8. Terrible judgments are in the hand of Christ, and come out from him: Fill
thy hand with coals, and scatter them over the City. This is spoken humanitus,
not that Christ took coals, but he has that is analogous unto coals, fiery
virtue, creative power of any dreadful judgments. When Christ said to the man
had not on the wedding garment, friend, how, etc. take him, bind him hand and
foot, cast him into utter darkness, this was dreadful. In Chap. 1.27. and
Chap. 8.2. Christ appeared like a man of fire. And Rev. 1.14, 15. Christ's eyes
and feet were like unto fire; in the two first places he was in a way of
judgment against Jerusalem, in the last, against the Churches, and had fiery
judgments in his hand. They are in his power to produce, to increase, to order
and moderate; he can make a judgment terrible and fiery, continue it as long
as he pleases. He has fire in his hand, and can scatter it when and where he
pleases; he scattered it upon Jerusalem here, upon it afterward when Titus
besieged it; he scattered fire upon the Jews, which consumes and wastes them to
this day; he scattered fire upon the 7. Churches, which dissolved them: and
has he not scattered coals of contention and war among us, which burn and
consume us daily, and threaten the foundations of Church and State? We may
think its this man and that man that throws the coals, but its Christ does it,
Luke 12.49. I am come to send fire on the earth. That fire comes out from a
bramble, Judge. 9.15. is not so much: but that fire should come out from the
vine, from Christ, this is strange.
And Mat. 10.34. Think not that I am come to send piece on earth, I came not
to send peace, but a sword; for I am come to set a man at variance against his
father, and the daughter against her mother, and the daughter in law against
her mother in law, and a man's foes shall be they of his own household. The
coals are scattered, the fire is kindled, and who can put it out; its Christ
has power over fire, you must sue earnestly to him to quench the violence of
that fire burns amongst us.

9. None can destroy or fire a City, unless God give command and commission
for it; go, take coals, and scatter them upon the City: The Chaldeans could
never have burnt Jerusalem, if the Lord had not bid them. Hence says the
Prophet, evil came down from the Lord unto the gate of Jerusalem, Mich. 1.12.
It Is an evil that Jerusalem shall be burnt; but this evil was determined in
heaven, a commission for it came from thence, and it is the Lord sends the fire
to the gates thereof. Till God give out the word, it cannot be done, how
sinful soever Cities be: Jerusalem was full of pride, gluttony, oppression,
blood, atheism, idolatry, etc. yet none could fire it, till God said, scatter
coals upon the City: and when he says so, nothing can privilege a City
from burning. Jerusalem was the City he had chosen, 2 Kings 23.27. There was
the Temple, and all the chief worship, 1 Kings 8. So famous was it for vision,
that it was called the valley of vision, Isa. 22.1. The City of solempnities,
Isa. 33.20. The City of God, Psalm 46.4. And the Inhabitants of this City were
Abraham's seed, Mat. 3.9. Gods firstborn, Exodus 4.22. and Romans 9.4, 5. You
have 8. privileges of theirs set down together; the adoption, the glory, the
covenant, the law, the service, the promises, the fathers, and descent of
Christ were all theirs. Yet notwithstanding the City was such, and Inhabitants
so privileged, yet God would have Jerusalem burnt, he destroys the people,
and their chief glory with them: Let no Cities stand upon their privileges
after Jerusalem. Rome thinks she has much to glory in; but Rev. 18.8. She
shall be utterly burnt with fire, and Kings who have served her, shall see and
bewail the smoke of her burning, v. 9. The coals may be now scattering in
Italy, which may burn Rome and its sure, and so comfort to us, she shall be
burnt, let us repent, else we may perish, Luke 13.3.

10. Christ is obedient to the commands of his Father, even in execution of
severe judgments. When the Lord bade him seal the mourners, he did it, and
now he bade him take and scatter coals over the City, he went about it; he did
not dispute, delay, but immediately did what his Father commanded. This should
beget in us such a tractablenesse and conformity to Christ, that whatever our
heavenly Father counsels or commands us, we should presently hearken thereunto,
and yield obedience.

11. God makes known to his Prophets what he will do; all was said and done in
Ezekiels presence, he was privy to, and witness of all. Its a great honor to
be near, to see and hear the transactions of God and Christ: Such honor had
our Prophet, other Prophets; and such honor have many of the Saints.

VERSE. 3.
Now the Cherubims stood on the right side of the house where the man went in,
and the cloud filled the inner Court.


BEfore the accomplishment of what was commanded, some circumstantiall things
are premised, Christ being to go in between the wheels, and to take coals.

1. The Cherubims stood. 2. A cloud filled the inner Court.
1. The Cherubims stood,
When Christ, the man clothed with linen, came upon that great service of his
Father, the Angels stood cither to receive commands from him, being supreme,
and over them, or to adore him being come into the Temple, both which are
testimonies of Divine Majesty.

On the right side of the house.
Which side this was is doubtful, some make it the North side, and so to note
the Babylonians coming from the Northern parts to burn and destroy all. Others
make it the South side; but when they came in at the eastern gate or door, the
South was on their left hand, and North on their right. We have a place of
Scripture will help us in this straight, 1 Kings 7.39. 2 Chronicles. 4.10. He set
the sea on the right side of the East end over against the South.
He put five bases on the right side of the house, and five on the left side of
the house, and he set the sea on the right side of the house Eastward, over
against the South. Hence it appears that the North part was the right side:
Therefore they are out, that make the North part the left side, and say the
Cherubims stood not there, because that side was defiled with Idols. The whole
house was polluted where ever they stood, and on the right side they did stand,
which might intimate the Lord of the Temple was there, and if any side were
more honorable then other, he ought to have it.

The cloud filled the inner Court.
God has often appeared in a cloud, he went before the Israelites in a cloud,
Exo. 13.21. He gave the law in a cloud, Exe. 19.16. Deuteronomy. 4.12. Christ was
transfigured in a cloud, Math. 17. and clouds have been symbols of divine
presence, as Exodus 40.34. A cloud covered the tent of the congregation, and the
glory of the Lord filled the Tabernacle. By this cloud God took possession of
the Tabernacle, manifested his good pleasure toward them, in his intention to
dwell among them: So Numb. 9.15. and 1 K. 8.10.12. By a cloud, God manifested
his gracious presence: That here was the presence of Christ, is not doubted,
but whether the gracious presene was questioned. Christ came to take fire, and
scatter over the City, and the cloud here is rather a testimony of his
displeasure and departure from the Temple, then of his favor and purpose
graciously to be with them. The Scripture signifies Gods angry presence by a
cloud or smoke, for they in Scripture language are one, Ezekiel. 8.11. A thick
cloud of Incense went up, Isa. 6.4. When God manifested his presence, the house
was filled with smoke; but this presence of God was to send out Isaiah a
messenger of death unto them, Revel. 15.8. The Temple was filled with smoke
from the glory of God, and from his power, and no man was able to enter into
the Temple, till the 7. plagues of the 7. Angels were fulfilled. There was
wrath going out from the Temple, and now Christ appeared here, the inward
court, the Priests court was filled with a cloud, intimating Divine Majesty,
the Lords departure and darkness following thereupon.

Obser. 1.
Heavenly creatures attend upon Christ: The Cherubims stood, and tendered their
service, they acknowledge and adore his Majesty, and expect his will, his
commands. No creatures are too great, too good, or glorious, to wait upon
Christ in any ministrations of his, Heb. 1.6. Angels, and all of them wait upon
and worship him, and are sent forth at his pleasure to Minister to whom he
pleases, v. 4.

2. The Angels are desirous to know the things of God and Christ in the Church;
they stood, but where? in the house of God, in the Temple: They are knowing
creatures, but they know not all things, there be mysteries in the ways of
Christ, that they desire to look into, 1 Pet. 1.12. and Paul tells us there is
wisdom made known by the Church to Principalities and powers in heavenly
places, Ephesians. 3.10.

3. The Lord manifests his pleasure by signs and actions, as well as by
speech. They stood on the right side of the house: that side was Northward
toward Babylon, and this signified that thence should come their destruction;
they had seated the Image of jealousy there, which provoked God to jealousy,
and he stirred up the Babylonians to come out of the North and lay them wast.

4. Chirst he is Lord of the Temple, He went in, and then the Cherubims stood,
then the Court was filled with a cloud, which notes a glorious Majesty and
royal presence, 2 Chronicles. 5.13, 14. The house was filled with a cloud, so that
the Priests could not stand to Minister by reason of the cloud, for the glory
of the Lord had filled the house. It Is Christ who has all to do in the
Temple, when he in the days of his flesh came into it, he thrust out all
corrupters and corruptions, he walks in the midst of the 7. golden Candlesticks.

5. When Christ is in the Temple, doing the will of his Father, any part of his
office, then does his glory appear; now he went into the Temple about judiciary
service, and it was filled with a cloud, which sets out the Majesty and glory
of Christ. When he preached in the Temple or Synagogues, his glory appeared;
Never man spoke like this man, all his Ministrations were beautiful and
glorious, John 1.14. We beheld his glory, his glory appeared in all his works.

6. Divine glory is usually hidden up in cloudy darkness: when Christ came
into the Temple, here was a glorious Majesty, but a cloud presently filled the
Court, covered up the glory. When God came into the Temple in Solomon's days, a
cloud filled and covered all: So Numb. 16.42. A cloud covered the Tabernacle,
and the glory of the LORD appeared in the cloud.

VERSE. 4.
Then the glory of the Lord went up from the Cherub, and stood over the
threshold of the house, and the house was filled with the cloud, and the Court
was full of the brightness of the Lords glory.


THis verse mentions the first removal of glory, where we have, 1. Whence the
removal was, from the Cherub. 2. Whether it was, to the threshold, it stood
over, etc. 3. The events thereupon, and they are 1. The filling of the house
with a cloud. 2. The Court with glory. 3. The sound of the Cherubims wings,
which is in the next verse.



God had his Temple at Jerusalem, in the most holy place of it was the Arc,
and the Cherubims covering it; between these God was said to dwell or sit,
because he gave out answers thence in difficult cases, and there he would be
worshipped. The Jews grew proud of Gods presence, and because they did not
glorify him as God, but set up Idols, and provoked him many ways, therefore
the Lord resolved to leave them and ruin them, and that is the scope of the
vision here.

The glory of the Lord.
This was Christ say Expositors, who was in his glorious apparition, and now in
the Temple, but going out of it. He had once before done thus, gone off from
the Cherub to the threshold, Chap. 9.3. but was returned again, and here the
second time does it, he was now in a judiciary way, and would leave the Temple,
if they did not presently prevent it by repentance.

Christ standing thus upon the threshold, and being upon terms of departure,
behind him was the cloud that filled the house, there was darkness: but
before the Lord Christ was light and brightness, the Court which he stood
looking into was full of brightness of the Lords glory: The glory was now gone
out of the Sanctuary into the Court.

Observations suitable to this verse see upon Ezekiel. 9.3. yet take here these
following.

When God is about to visit his Church with some sharp judgments, he gives out
some evident signs and tokens thereof. Obser. 1.
He was now bringing in a sad judgment upon the Jews, and their glory goes
up from the Cherub to the threshold, which showed God was about some great
change. God testified by the Arc which Noah made, that he was about some great
judgment, and alteration of things in the State.

2. Again note, that Christ with the signs of his presence is the glory of the
Temple; where Christ is, there is glory, Hagg. 2.9. The glory of this latter
house shall be greater then of the former: How was that? when as, v. 3. the
glory of the latter Temple in comparison of the former was as nothing, Christ
should personally come into it, teach in it; this was more then all typical or
visionall glory, and external beauty the other had. Where Christ is, there is
glory, and where his ordinances are, there is glory.

3. When Christ leaves the Temple, nothing but darkness remains; when he was
upon the threshold, there was a cloud behind him; when he goes out of the
Church, glory, light, truth go, but night, darkness come in, Isa. 6.4. that
he calls here a cloud, there he calls smoke: and when God leaves the Church,
then smoke and little else is to be found in it; smoke of ignorance, smoke of
errors, smoke of divisions, smoaky and false worship, and quickly after,
smoking judgments. The Churches of Asia, when Christ left walking among them,
darkness overspread them, and smoaky judgments consumed them.

4. The way Christ goes, is glory or glorious; he goes out of the Temple, and
now before his face as he stands upon the threshold in the Court is brightness
of glory; his glory goes with him, before him; he leaves darkness behind him,
but has brightness before him. His departure from his people is glorious, his
ways and works of judgment are glorious.

VERSE. 5.
And the sound of the Cherubims wings was heard, even to the utter Court, as
the voice of the Almighty God when he speaks.


HHre is the 3d event upon the Lords coming to the threshold, and hastening to
give judgment against this City, the Angels do rejoice at it, and applaud the
act of Christ, which the sound of their wings imports: of this verse was spoken
Chap. 1.24.

This sound of their wings is described 2. ways, 1. From the extent, It was
heard even to the utter Court, which was a great distance. 2. From the
resemblance of it to the Lords voice, as the voice of the Almighty God when he
speaks; that is, like a mighty voice, even the voice of thunder.


Obser. 1.
The Angels do applaud the righteous judgments of God, and Christ against
sinful Cities, Churches, States, or persons.

Here Christ was leaving the Temple, the City, this people, and ready to
scatter fire among them, and the Angels made a joyful sound at it. The Temple,
the inward and outward Court rang of it; their voice (which is meant by the
sound of their wings) was a mighty voice like thunder, it is music to them
that God has the glory of his judgments as well as of his mercies; that
obstinate sinners be destroyed, as well as mourners be marked. The Angel was
glad when Babylon was fallen, and Gods judgments executed upon her, Rev. 18.2.
He cried mightily with a strong voice, Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen.

VERSE. 6, 7.
And it came to pass, that when he had commanded the man clothed with linen,
saying, Take fire from between the wheels, from between the Cherubims, then
he went in and stood beside the wheels.

And one Cherub stretched forth his hands from between the Cherubims, and took
thereof, and put it into the hands of him that was clothed with linen, who
took it, and went out.


IN the sixth verse is a repetition of what was said in the 2d verse, there God
spoke to the man clothed with linen, here he commanded the man, etc. there
it is go in between the wheels, and fill thy hands with coals of fire from
between the Cherubims: and here it is take fire from between the wheels, from
between the Cherubims. Then the obedience of the man clothed with linen is
set down, he went: so here, he went in. Only there is this addition, and stood
beside the wheels.

This repetition of the same matter argues not backwardness in Christ to do
the commands of his Father, but sets out the earnest intention of God to have
this fiery judgment accomplished; now he would not have it delayed, but
hastened.

Stood beside the wheels.
I find not any Interpreter to touch at all upon this Christ's standing beside
the wheels, and yet surely there was something in it. The Lord had bid him go
in between the wheels, and take fire from between them; but Christ stood beside
them, he did not neglect or cross any thing his Father commanded; he was
between the wheels, when he stood beside them, or near them, juxta rotam this
might be. (...)


1. To acquaint the Cherubims with the command the Father had given him, they
were at some distance from him sat in the throne, and from the man clothed in
linen, its said he went.

2. To try their spirits, how they affected this judgment.

3. To consider the mutability and uncertainty of all things.

Obser. 1.
Christ being in the form of man is under the command of his Father; he
commanded the man clothed with linen. Hence he calls him his servant, Mat.
12.18. Behold my servant whom I have chosen; he was the most able, diligent,
and faithful servant that ever God or man had, therefore the Lord says of
him, my beloved, in whom my soul is well pleased. God was not only contented
with Christ, and what he did; but satisfied, well pleased; he being under his
commands, performed them fully. John 12.49. says Christ of his Father, He gave
me commandment what I should say: and John 14.31. As the Father gave me
commandment, even so I do: and Chap. 15.10. I have kept my Fathers
commandments. If Christ, when he appeared in the form of man, and when he was
man, were under the commands of God; let not us think much to be under his
commands.

2. That judgments are in Gods power, and at his dispose, he says, go, take
fire. It Is the Lord that creates the fire, keeps, and gives it out, when, by
whom, and where he pleases; he had fire in store, he bids the man clothed
with linen take of it, and scatter it over the City. No judgments but are at
the Lords command, Jer. 25.29. I will call for a sword upon all the inhabitants
of the earth. It Is at Gods call, and only his call does it, if he say the word,
there shall be wars in all kingdoms: He brings diseases and plagues upon
people when he will, Deuteronomy. 28.10. he sends enemies to tread down his people
like mire in the streets, Isa. 10.6. He stirs up the scourge when it comes,
verse. 26. He throws down, Mal. 1.4. he powrs out wrath like water, Hos. 5.10.
he kindles fire to burn the green and dry tree; yea, such fire as none can
quench, Ezekiel. 20.47. All judgments lesser or greater are at his command, and
therefore he takes it to himself, Isa. 45.7. I form the light, and create
darkness: I make peace, and create evil, I the Lord do all these things.
Let us fear, and not provoke this God, who can command fire to burn Cities at
his pleasure.

3. Christ proceeds in execution of his Fathers will considerately; he stood by
the wheels, informs the Angels, tryes their spirits, and observes the motions
of all things, and sees what equity there is to take fire and throw upon the
City.

VERSE. 7.
And one Cherub stretched forth his hand from between the Cherubims, etc.


THis verse presents to us the way how the fire was conveyed to Christ. He
being come to the side of the wheels, one of the Cherubims stretches out his
hand, takes fire, and puts it into the hand of Christ, the man clothed with
linen.

Angels have no hands, they are spirits without humane parts; visionally they
had hands, they appeared so to the Prophet.

The fire they took of we must a little enquire into; if we will refer it to
material fire, it was that of the Altar, of which I spoke before, verse. 2. But
we may understand by fire that active virtue and power is in the Angels; they
are glorious creatures, likened to flames of fire, Heb. 1.7. and the taking
fire here, and putting it into the hands of Christ, is their yiedling up their
strength, power, and activity to further the design, and do the will of
Christ, in executing of the judgments intended. Fire has light, heat, and
activity in it, and the Angels have much knowledge, zeal, and active virtue in
them, all which they tender to Christ.

Who took it and went out.
Here is no mention made what the man clothed with linen did with this fire,
viz. their resignation of them, and their active virtue to be at his dispose.

Some think that Christ presently executed the command of his Father, though
it be not specified. In the 2d verse. he was bid to scatter the coals over the
City, and now it was needless to re-mention it.

Others are of judgment, to whom I consent, that Christ did not presently set
fire on Jerusalem, or employ the Angels to the destruction of it, and the
reason given is this, and has weight in it. Our Prophet was now in a vision at
Jerusalem, and as he had had many things offered to his sight, so many things
were yet offering, and to be offered to his view; all which had been disturbed
and prevented if there had been present execution of the command; he could not
have seen what follows here in the vision, nor that in the next Chapter:
Further I conceive sometime was allotted between the command and execution for
repentance. Obser. 1.


Angels watch, and take opportunites to serve Christ; he comes unto them to
take fire, and presently one of them takes the fire and puts it in his hand,
being glad of such an opportunity to do him service. Angels are vigilant
creatures, and wait for opportunities, and when they come they will not lose
them, Psalm. 103.20. They hearken to the voice of his word, they neither slumber
nor sleep, but hearken constantly what the Lord will say, what opportunity
there will be for action: so in Ezekiel. 1.11. they are described with their wings
stretched upward, manifesting their watchfulness and readiness for service.
When Christ was born, a multitude of them appeared and celebrated his nativity,
Luke 2.13. When Christ was taken by Judas and his train, Peter drew his sword
in his Masters defense; but what says Christ, put up thy sword, it is not a
time now to fight, but to suffer; think thou that I cannot now pray to my
Father, and he shall presently give me more then 12. legions of Angels? It Is
not a time now to pray for help, I must dye, and Scripture must be fulfilled;
but if I would, my Father would bid the Angels to aid me, and they presently
would come, whole legions of them, yea all the Angels in heaven. Let us learn
of Angels, watch opportunities, and take them. There be nicks of time wherein
to do the works of Christ, Eccles. 3.1. To every thing there is a season, and
a time to every purpose under the heaven. It Is wisdom to observe those seasons
and times, Romans 12.11. (...).

2. Angels do honor the Lord Christ exceedingly, to their utmost; they
resign up themselves and all they have to the will and command of Christ;
their wings, hands, feet, faces, their natures, their knowledge, zeal, active
virtue shall be all for Christ. One took fire and put into his hand. This is
great honor to Christ when any creature gives up what it is, what it has, and
what it can do unto him fully. More cannot be required or expected by any
superior and divine power, more cannot be performed by any creature: They are
Angelical, who can resign up all into the hand of Christ. Let us learn this
duty: The Scribe, Matthew. 8.19. said well, Master I will follow thee
whithersoever thou go: I will trace thy steps, learn thy doctrine, do thy
will, be at thy dispose: And Isa. Chap. 6.8. Here am I, send me Lord, I give up
my self unto thee; all the fire in me, all my knowledge, zeal, active virtue
are at thy dispose: So Paul, Acts 9.6. Lord, what will thou have me to do? I
have been against thee, I will now be for thee, I give up my self to thee
wholly. If Angels did it, whose nature Christ took not, for whom he dyed not;
how much more should we do it, whose nature he took, for whom he did and
suffered all.

3. Things done seasonably are acceptable to Christ, the Angel observed Christ
coming for fire to demand their service, and he takes fire and puts into
Christ's hand, and Christ took it; which notes his acceptance. He neither
reproved nor rejected the Angel or his service, but was well pleased, the
putting fire into his hand was seasonable, and so acceptable: There be seasons,
which if taken, sweeten actions, and open the door for their better
entertainment, Prove. 25.11. A word fitly spoken is like apples of gold in
pictures of silver. The Heb. is, a word spoken upon its wheels. Fit times and
seasons are wheels to carry words with great advantage: and so for actions;
when things are done in the due time, they are beautiful, acceptable; when God
gives rain to a Land in season, how acceptable is it; when a tree bears fruit
in its season, its grateful: So when Angels or men do things seasonably, its
pleasing to the Lord Christ: there be idonea tempora, which if we miss,
actions are unlovely, and miss of their aims, Psalm. 32.6. For this shall
every one that is godly, pray unto thee in a time when thou may be found.
There be times, if we have the wisdom to discern them, when prayer will be
seasonable, acceptable, effectual.

VERSE. 8.
And there appeared in the Cherubims the form of a man's hand under their wings.


OUr Prophet having seen the Cherub stretch out a hand, take fire, and put it
into the hand of the man clothed with linen, here he describes what kind of
hand it was, and where it was; For the kind, it was a man's hand, there appeared
the form of a man's hand; for the place, it was under their wing. I have spoken
hereof, Chap. 1.8.

There is mention of hands, here of a hand; not that they had only one hand,
but under every wing was a hand; they had wings, and under them he saw the form
of a hand.

Their wings set out not only their swiftness in motion, but also their divine
instinct and secret guidance of God, which carries them as wings this or that
way, to this or that action, and hand imports both vigor to act, and action:
active virtue, and the activity it self.

Oeserv. 1.
Angels are furnished with abilities, and are fitted for employments, they have
hands and wings; what ever the Lord calls them to do, they want not ought
tending to the accomplishment thereof: If speed be required, they have wings to
fly: If work be to be done, they have hands, and can do much in a little time.

2. They do not things rashly, but advisedly, judiciously, they have the hands
of a man; men's hands are ordered by judgment in their operations, and so are
Angels; they do all things wisely, understandingly, they observe the best
seasons, and all circumstances which may add beauty and advantage to their
actions; and therefore verse. 12. it is said, their hands were full of eyes, they
see into all the intrinsicals or extrinsicals of any business.

3. The works of God are done by hidden and secret means, by ways unthought
of, by hands under wings. Here a Cherub stretches out a hand from under a wing,
takes fire, and puts into the hand of Christ.

God has secret hands to do his work; sometimes angels hands, sometime the hand
of providence, sometime the hand of his spirit, Angels are invisible agents,
and we have unknown mercies from their hands; an Angel rol'd away the great
stone from the Sepulcher, and they remove many difficulties out of our way; it
was the hand of an Angel that brought the Apostles out of prison, Act.
5.19.12.9. Angels encamp round about them that fear the Lord, Psalm. 34.7. They
are invisible guards, and do invisible things for us, their hands work when we
feel them not: so the hand of providence is doing when we slumber, and discern
it not. Joseph is sold into Egypt, and it was not discerned by the sellers, or
the sold, what work God was about; the hand of providence was secret, but
wrought strongly for the raising of Joseph, and safety of Jacob, and many
thousands besides. Mordecai will not bow to Haman; was the hand discerned here
which was working Hamans ruin? I believe not; Haman goes on, plots the death
of all the Jews, had almost accomplished his desire, but providence acts in an
unexpected way, and cuts off this bloody man. A secret hand of heaven has done
the great things in all ages, invisible virtue has done more then all visible
instruments. In our Counsels, Armies, undertakings, had not Gods hand of
Providence wrought, we had been ruined. Was it not a strange hand of Providence
that began the work in Scotland? If ought be done in the work of Reformation
amongst us, is it not the hand of God rather then the hand of man? Isa. 1.25. I
will turn my hand upon them, and purely purge away their dross. Math. 8.3.
Jesus put forth his hand, and healed the leper. If our leprosy he healed, or
healing, it is by the hand of Christ put forth. The safety of this Nation is
from a secret hand, we are held and hid in the hollow and shadow of an
invisible hand: So the hand of the Spirit does secret work in Sion. Christ by
the finger of God, Luke 11.20. by the spirit of God, Mat. 12.28. cast out
Devils. Its this hand that mortifies and kills the lusts, Romans 8.13. It Is this
hand which quickens and brings life, Job. 6.63. It Is this hand works holiness
in you, that comforts and supplies you, that guides and seals you; its this
hand that brings you out of the ways of sin, error, death, into the ways of
Christ, truth, and life, its this hand makes all ordinances effectual, 2 Cor.
10.4. Our weapons are mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong holds:
Through God, that is, through the spirit of God; weapons must be in some hand
or other; these were spiritual weapons, and in the hand of the Spirit, as well
as in the Apostles hand, else had they not been able to pull down strong holds.

4. When Gods work is done, we should hide up our hands that do it; the Cherub
stretched out his hand, took fire, put it into Christ's hand: and what then? the
hand is hid under the wing. Angels are not vainglorious, they seek not
themselves, but the honor of him they serve; they say not, this have I done,
has my hand wrought; they hold not forth their hand for mortals to admire or
adore; but rejoice the work is done, and hide up their hands. This is a good
president for us who are apt to be puffed up with what we do, and to expose not
only the work, but the hand also too much to view. If actions be done, and
others reap the good thereof, without selvish respects of ours, it is
Angelical. Paul was of this judgment, and practiced answerably, 1 Cor. 15.10.
I labored more abundantly then they all, yet not I. See here how he hides up
himself, and puts all upon God; Not I, but the grace of God which was with me.
It was not Paul, but Gods grace that did all the work: So Isa. 26.12. Thou have
wrought all our works in us, we have done nothing, but thou have done all.

VERSE. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
And when I looked, behold, the four wheels by the Cherubims, one wheel by one
Cherub, and another wheel by another Cherub: and the appearance of the wheels
was as the color of a berill stone.

And as for their appearances, they four had one likeness, as if a wheel had
been in the midst of a wheel.

When they went, they went upon their four sides; they turned not as they went,
but to the place whether the head looked, they followed it, they turned not as
they went.

And their whole body, and their backs, and their hands, and their wings, and
the wheels were full of eyes round about, even the wheels that they four had.

As for the wheels, it was cried unto them in my hearing, O wheel.


IN these verses, and most of the rest to the end, is a description of the
wheels and Cherubims, which represent things earthly and heavenly, and both
under the command and dispose of Divine Majesty; take things below in States or
Churches, they pass not without the interposure of Providence; the hand of
heaven acts in them; takes things above, they are not absolute, there is one in
the Throne overrules them.

For the wheels, which are the Principal subject of these verses, and note out
inferior things and causes unto us; they are, 1. Described. 2. Explained.


They are described, 1. From their number, four wheels. 2. By their reference,
dependency, or situation, they were by the Cherubims. 3. By a particular and
special distribution of one to another; the 4. wheels were not altogether by
the 4. Cherubims, but one wheel by one Cherub, another wheel by another Cherub.
4. From their appearance or likeness, which was as the color of a berill
stone, and those four are in the ninth verse. 5. From their likeness and
coherence among themselves, they 4. had one likeness, etc. verse. 9. 6. From
their motion, verse. 11. They went: which is set out: 1. From the way they went
to those parts, were upon their sides, into those quarters of the world which
were next them, whither the head looked. 2. Their progress; they turned not
back, but went on.
7. From their eyenesse, verse. 12. Their whole body, backs, hands, wings, were
full of eyes.


2. The explication of the wheels, and that is in the 13. verse: it was cried O
wheel! O world!

I have spoken largely of the wheels in the first chapter, and therefore now
shall say little of them; the most will be of those particulars wherein there
is difference from what is there set down.

In the first Chap. mention is made, 1. of the living creatures, and then of
the wheels; Here the wheels are first set down, and after them the Cherubims or
living creatures: Why there is a great inversion and change made in the vision,
I find no reason given, neither do I conceive any satisfactory reason can be
given, but the will of the Lord, it pleased him to represent the vision in that
way to the Prophet, and that may suffice us. Yet if we may conjecture, the
wheels are set first here, for that changes and motions of 2d causes in the
world are more obvious unto our eyes, we observe them first, and that virtue
acts them is more out of sight.

In the first Chap. v. 15. there is one wheel upon the earth by the living
creatures; here in the 9. verse. are 4. wheels by the Cherubims, and the
assignment of one wheel to one Cherub, which makes this part of the vision more
distinct and clear.

Wheels set out all the motions and changes of things here below: and the 4.
wheels, all that are in the 4. parts of the world, and a wheel is a fit
instance to resemble them by, as has been shown; and what ever appears
casual, accidental, confused and contrary, comes under the notion of the
wheel.

That all things in this world have dependencie upon higher causes; the wheels
consist not of themselves, Obser. 1.
but are by the Cherubims, they have reference unto, and dependence upon them.
The creatures are servants, not Masters or Lords: and how ever things seem to
be carried in the world confusedly, without any respect to any superior
causes, yet the wheels are regulated, they are by the Cherubims, they have
influence into them, and order them.

2. The Lord is methodicall in disposing the things of the world, each one of
the Angels has his wheel; they were not all by one Angel, or all 4.
promiscuously by the 4. Cherubims, but the wheels were methodically disposed
of, to each Angel one, and so they acted methodic^lly, and looked to their
wheels in their several quarters. God has set a wheel by every one of us;
something he has committed to our care and government, let us look to our
wheels.

The 10. verse. you have in Chap. 1.16. only a little alteration of the words.
In the first place it is they four had one likeness, and their appearance was
as it were a wheel in a wheel; in this place its, As for their appearances,
they four had one likeness, as if a wheel had been in the midst of a wheel.

They were like in figure, in color, and equal in quantity, as if one had
been made by another.

Quest. But if the wheels prefigure the motions and changes of things in the
world as is affirmed, are the motions and events of things alike every where in
all quarters of the world?

Answ. We see that otherwise; there be wars in one Kingdom, and peace in
another; Riches in one City, and poverty in another; the Gospel leaving one
place, and going to another, yet are they alike in that they represent.

1. There are changes every where, good and bad, one generation goes, another
comes.

2. There are great difficulties, perplexities in all mundane affairs, not only
in one place, but in all places.

3. In that they all work, and further Gods great designs in the world, they
go on in one Kingdom as well as another.

4. In that they are all ordered to produce that great end, Gods glory, not any
wheel but is productive of it.

As if a wheel had been in the middst of a wheel; some think there were in
every wheel four semi-circles, or half wheels, which appeared as a wheel in
the midst of a wheel, but we find no warrant for that; the Text speaks of a
wheel in a wheel, it may be transverse, one crossing and cutting another, it
may be comprehensive, as one Orb in another.

Obser. 1.
That the wheels in all places are alike, they are not the same, but they are
alike. Such is man's nature, that it is not long contented with it is condition,
but thinks that all things move better elsewhere then at home, and hereupon
many have made trial of foreign Nations, remote parts of the world, and found
the wheels there like the wheels in their own Country, full of changes and
intricacies, so they were in Ezekiels days, so they will be in our days: so
they were in Babylon, in Sion, so they are in England, and will be; we should
learn to make the best of our condition; if the wheels be alike in changes and
perplexities, then they are alike in furthering Gods designs, and producing
Gods glory, and this they may do as strongly and speedily at home as they do
abroad.

2. Man is not able to judge of Gods works and ways in his administration of
the world. They are so intricate and perplexed, that Ezekiel knew not what to
make of them, he saw as it were a wheel in the midst of a wheel, one wheel
entangled in another. The acts of Providence at this day in Churches and States
are so various and dubious, that created abilities cannot comprehend Gods
intentions. It Is said, Zach. 14.6. In that day the light shall neither be clear
nor dark: Men shall be puzzled not knowing what to judge: this day is come
upon us, can you tell what to judge of the wheels and their motions amongst us,
they are much entangled; we have cross motions from without, and from within;
is there any great or public business in the Kingdom, but is perplexed, and
the issue of it uncertain: Our Councels are entangled, our Military affairs at
Sea and Land, our City and domestics businesses are not without wheels in them.

3. There is a coherence of the 2d causes and motions which are from them, they
are knit and linked together; our Prophet saw a wheel in the midst of a wheel,
one change follows upon another, and there is a concatenation of causes; and
their operations. The Cherubims were by the wheels, and wheels in the wheels,
Satan, Chaldeans, Sabeans, the winds and humors in Jobs body did all conspire
to humble and afflict him; after these, his 3. friends tread in the same path,
and add to his affliction, night and day, winter and summer have not a nearer
coherence then the wheels: They so run among us, that we are necessitated to
sit in Counsel, and Counsels beget actions, actions make alterations,
alterations make strange impressions in men's spirits. It Is easy to see the
puzling intricacies of the wheels, how crosly, perversely things move every
where; but the coherence and harmonious part of them is not so quickly
discerned, the lines in a globe, the roaps in a ship cross one another, which
every eye sees, but their harmony and use is not so discernable. The Bees when
they swarm without, and work within, make a thousand cross motions, and yet
there is sweet harmony in their Commonwealth.

The 11th verse, which speaks of their motion, agrees in part with the 17. of
the first Chap. where it is said, when they went, they went upon their four
sides, and so the words are here, and they returned not when they went, here it
is, they turned not as they went, and it is twice so; then here is an addition
which is not there. But to the place, whither the head looked they followed it.

The meaning of the words is, that they went to those parts of the world which
were upon their sides, and their motions in those ways were like and uniform,
none went backward when others went forward.

Whither the head looked.
Jerome refers it to the wheels, whither the head wheel went, but the wheels
were equal.
What is intended by the word Head we must enquire; the Hebrew is, (...) some
render it the first, and so make the sense this, whether the first Cherub went,
thither went all the rest; but the Text will not indulge this interpretation;
for it is said, they went upon their four sides; that is, into the several ways
their sides were toward, and so could not follow one another. Others
understand by head the Cherub designed to each wheel, as verse. Caput cujusque
so Pisc. renders the word.
9. the four wheels were by the Cherubims: One wheel by one Cherub, and
another wheel by another Cherub, so that every wheel had his head, that is, his
Cherub, and whither that head looked, thither went that wheel; but we may
ascend somewhat higher, and make the head, either he sat in the Throne and
spoke to the man clothed with linen, or the spirit who guided the motions
both in the living creatures and the wheels, Chapter 1.12.20. whither the spirit
was to go, they went: Here the Spirit was (...) the head or first mover, and I
conceive there is no danger in putting it higher then the Cherubims.

Obser. 1.
The motions of all inferior things are directed by a superior Head which is
over them, they move not when and whether they lift, but as their Head will
have them, be the Head the Cherubims, the Spirit, or Jehovah. It Is the head
regulates and orders them, they cannot move of themselves, they go whether the
Head looks, whither the Spirit will have them go, and when the Lord commands.
The body of man goes that way, and then, when the head will have it, and so
it is with all wheels, all creatures, their motions are at the Lord will have
them. If Angels move the wheels, the Spirit and the Lord move the Angels, and
they cannot but make such motions and commotions in the world. If there be
great winds, tempests, wars, bitter divisions, falsehood and treachery,
plundering, burning, oppression, etc. the wheels move that way their head
looks, and follow their head, a superior guide leads them. If they break some,
raise others, if their motions be swift, dangerous, bloody, they are moved by
one is over them.

2. That the wheels are constant in, and intent too, their motions appointed,
they turn not as they go, they keep on their way, and it is twice mentioned,
they turned not as they went; they followed their head, they turned not as they
went. Which double mentioning of their not turning sets out their intentnesse
upon their way and work, and that we should take special notice of it,
because we think the wheels may move otherwise and other ways, but they cannot,
the Lord sits in the Chariot commanding the wheels, what way, and how to move;
the Spirit is in them, and carries them on, the Cherubims are by, and help
forward the motions, so that the wheels must oppose the Angels, and God
himself, if they move otherwise then they do, they cannot stop their motions,
much less turn their motions.

The 12. verse tells you of their eyenesse, body, backs, hands, wings, wheels.

Body.
In the Hebrew it is flesh. Some expound, Vulg. corpus earum.
all said here of the wheels, both Jerome and others; by body or flesh they
understand the bulk of the wheels; by backs, the rings about the wheels: so
they are called, Chap. 1.18. (...)
and the Hebrew word is backs. By hand and wings they mean the spokes of the
wheels, which extend themselves like hands and feathers from the gnavestock to
the circumference: By the wheel some intend the Globe or Gnavestock in the
midst, in which is the Axletree; Others, the whole Chariot, and the only reason
I find given is this, He had spoken immediately before of the wheels, and after
in this verse is mention of them, and why the Cherubims should be brought in
here, seems not so reasonable: But it is not so harsh as to expound flesh,
hands and wings of the wheels: and we know that he had spoken not long before
of the Cherubims, verse. 9. And if head refer to the Cherubims as some make it,
then they are spoken of in the 11. verse. immediately before this, and if
because eyes were given to the wheels in the 1. Chapter, and not to the
Cherubims, therefore here they must be confined to the wheels, upon the same
ground. Their hands and wings, because they are given to the Cherubims in the
1. Chapter, and not to the wheels, must here be confined to the Cherubims: I
do therefore fall in with them who do refer Body, Backs, Hands, Wings unto
the Cherubims, which in these visions do more properly belong to the
Cherubims, then to the wheels.

Full of eyes round about.
Here is a difference from that in the 1. Chap. verse. 18. It Is said there the
Rings were full of eyes; here, that all, even wheels and Cherubims were full of
eyes, and he that sat in the Throne, even the Lord, he is full of eyes.

Obser. 1.
That the motions of causes and creatures here below, are not casual or
disorderly; the wheels and Cherubims are full of eyes, they see and know their
way, the work they have to do, the place they are to go unto, the eye of
providence is in every creature, and every motion. Things appear to us very
casual and disorderly; but there be eyes in the wheels, no motion of them is
injudicious or out of course. If these eyes were blind, sleepy, vitiated, or
shut, then there would be strange motions, just ground of complaint; but the
eyes of Providence are ever open, they slumber not, they are not corrupted with
any vicious humors, they see clearly and distinctly, and in what ever they
are, as they are in all wheels, public or private, little or great, they make
the motions judicious and orderly. When things fall out contrary, or besides
your expectations, you say they are mischances; but you are mistaken: In Sea or
Land affairs, in Martial, Magisteriall, or Ministerial, yea domestic
affairs, what ever falls out is an act of Providence; surprising or sinking of
ships, disappointment of Counsels, defeating of Armies, escape of Prisoners,
interception of Letters, firing of Towns, drownings, selfe-murtherings,
divisions of brethren, clandestine marriages, abortions, divorces, the eyes of
Providence are in them all, and heavens intentions are accomplished in them.

2. There is much glory and beauty in the works of Divine Providence, all the
wheels and Cherubims are full of eyes, the wheels have eyes round about, not in
one place, but in every place; the Cherubims their bodies, backs, hands and
wings are full of eyes: And Rev. 4.8. They are full of eyes within, they are
inwardly and outwardly glorious, beautiful. Man's eyes add not so much beauty
and glory to his face, as these eyes do to the works of God in the world. The
Peacocks train which is full of eyes, how beautiful and glorious is it, yet
far short of the beauty and glory is in Gods government of the world. When
the Queen of Sheba saw so much wisdom in a man, so much glory and beauty in
the order of his house, she admired, and had no spirit left in her, 1 Kings
10.4, 5. And could we see the wisdom is in God, the glory and beauty is in his
ordering the wheels, we would be so far from complaining of any wheels motion,
that we would admire every wheel, the order and motion of it; but oh how blind
are we, who hardly have an eye to see any of these eyes. David's eye was open
and observant in the 104. Psalm, where he declares and delights himself in the
wonderful providence of God, ordering all things, and hear what he says,
verse. 31. The glory of the Lord shall endure for ever: He saw glory in them,
there is glory in all the works of Providence, and such glory as abides for
ever to all generations; there is glory now in them, as well as in David's days,
there were changes, breaches, troubles then, as you may see, verse. 29. yet they
hindered not, but rather added to the glory of providentiall works, and so do
our changes, breaches, differences: When a man is on a high hill, there be many
hedges, ditches, and separations of one piece of land from another, there be
low shrubbs, and higher trees, here a hill, and there a river, yet all
contribute something to make a beautiful and glorious prospect to the eye, and
so it is in the works of Providence. If we were lifted up by the Spirit to view
the wheels and their motions, we should find that all those things seem
grievous to us; our wars, divisions, taxes, burdens, and such like do
contribute much toward a glorious prospect.

VERSE. 13.
As for the wheels, it was cried to them in my hearing. O wheel.


THis verse is an exposisory verse, and gives light to the vision of the
wheels, yet it has need of exposition it self. In the words you have, 1. One
crying, which is employed; It was cried. 2. The cry it self; O wheel. 3. Unto
whom or what the cry was made; it was unto the wheels. 4. In whose presence
this cry was; in Ezekiels, in my hearing.


Who cried is not set down, some th^nk one of the Cherubims. That Cherub which
stretched out his hand, and reachd the fire to the man clothed in linen, he
cried O wheel, and commanded it to hasten to the destruction of Jerusalem; but
that any Cherubim should cry out so, unless he had command from above, is not
probable, and the Text affords us no encouragement so to conceive. Others
therefore affirm it was the Lord, who sat in the Throne, who commanded the man
clothed in linen to take fire, he cried unto the wheel, and his cry was

O wheel.
The Hebrew is, (...) Hie orbis, this name does the Lord give to the wheels, to
instruct the Prophet, and us by him, what he meant by the wheels, viz. the
world and motions in it. The vulgar renders the word volubiles, and so make it
an adjective, agreeing with the substantive, wheels, rotas istas, vocabit
volubiles, this will hold in the Latin, but not in the Hebrew, for it is
laophannim lahem. Korah, Haggalgal, laophannim is plural, and Haggalgal is
singular, a substantive, not an adjective, and is set down by way of
distinction and demonstration, thus, as for these wheels would you know what
they are. It was cried in mine ears Haggalgal, their name is This world, I the
Lord call them so. And here you may observe how the Spirit of God leaves the
word ophannim, by which only he expressed the wheels in the first Chap. and
here also 'til now, and takes another word Haggalgal. Ophannim is a more common
and doubtful word, Haggalgal more distinct and certain, and so the Prophet by
it came to know what the vision of the wheels held out to him.

Why the Lord should cry out thus, O wheel, is doubted: it was not the
greatness, work, or use of it which could beget admiration in God. It Is
thought somewhat is concealed which the Lord said; probably he gave out some
command to the wheeels, touching the motions and work of it: Or rather it may
be a complaint! O world, how instable and changeable are thou.

Unto them.
He cried unto the wheels, O wheel! There were 4 wheels, v. 9. and they went
into those parts of the world which were upon their 4. sides, verse. 11. and
these wheels represented the world, which is one, and therefore it is cried unto
them, O wheel! O world!

In my hearing.
There was a voice, and such as came to Ezekiels ears, and informed him in
this difficult vision. He was an eye and ear-witnesse of it, his eye bred
admiration in him, but his ear let in the information what it was.

The Lord speaks to all creatures, and they are under his command, they hear
his voice; Obser. 1.
we think Angels and men only are capable of hearing God speak. There is not a
creature God has made, but hearkens to the voice of its Creator: He says, O
wheel! O world! and nothing in it acts or moves without him: If he speak, the
wheels move what way he pleases; when there is thundering, lightning,
earthquakes, storms, war, peace, famine, plenty, divisions, etc. Gods voice
has been there, Psalm. 119.91. The creatures are called Gods servants, they
hear and obey his voice as servants do their Masters, Psalm. 147.18. when
there is ice and snow, he sends out his word and melts them: They come not
without his word, they melt not away without it, the creatures hear and obey.
Mar. 4. when a great storm was at Sea, and all in danger of their lives, Christ
rebukes the wind, and says unto the Sea, peace, be still, and those
incontroulable creatures heard his voice, the wind ceased, and there was a
great calm, which made them relent, wonder, and say, what manner of man is
this, that the wind and the sea obey him.

2. Its the Lord has his times to make known distinct things. In the first
Chap. the Prophet had this vision, without any hint or light what was meant by
it: Here the Lord does speak and instruct the Prophet something concerning the
meaning thereof. He cries in the ears of Ezekiel, O wheel! O world! and by
this he came to understand part of Gods mind in it. Sampson had a time to
unfold his riddle, Christ his parables, and God his difficult visions. Pharaoh
and Nebuchadnezzar had dark difficult dreams, and God by Joseph and Daniel
interpreted them. Yea, Daniel had visions, and God sent Gabriel to him to make
him to understand those visions. The Revelation has many things beyond our
reach, but God has his times to expound the same unto us.

VERSE. 14, 15, 16, 17.
And everyone had four faces; the first face was the face of a Cherub, and the
second face was the face of a man, and the third the face of a Lion, and the
fourth the face of an Eagle.

And the Cherubims were lifted up: this is the living creature that I saw by
the river of Chebar.

And when the cherubims went, the wheels went by them: and when the cherubims
lift up their wings, to mount up from the earth, the same wheels also turned
not from beside them.

When they stood, these stood, and when they were lifted up, these lift up
themselves also: for the spirit of the living God was in them.


IN these verses and those after the 18th, you have a description of the
Cherubims.

1. From their faces, verse. 14. 2. From their actions and motions, verse. 14,
15. 3. From the harmony between them and the wheels, verse. 16, 17.
Of these has been spoken in the first Chapter, what I find differing from
the vision there, I shall most insist upon.

In th 14. verse it is said every one had 4 faces, this is the same with that in
Chap. 1.6. and their faces agree with those, verse. 10. only one face is
otherwise presented here, then it is there; instead of the face of an Ox, you
have here the face of a Cherub, which is set first in order, whereas the other
was the 3d. This alteration has occasioned diversity of opinions among
Interpreters. Some affirm, that anciently they pictured the Cherubims with the
face of an Ox, and that there is no difference between their faces; but we
find no proof of this, and it is as easily denied as affirmed. Others think the
vision was so, that the Prophet first saw an Oxes face, which he knowing, calls
the face of a Cherub. Flavius Josephus affirms the face of a Cherub to be the
face of a Bird, whose likeness God showed to Moses in Mount-Horeb, but was
never seen of of men. Some think, that further off, this face appeared as the
face of an Ox and nearer, at the face of a Cherub. Some make this face of a
Cherub to be the face of a child, Rabbi David pagn. in lexico. Solom:
and the common form of picturing Cherubims has been like a young man or boy;
therefore a Rabbi says, Cherub esse puerum elegantem, and many are of that
judgment. Even Lavater he makes the face of a Cherub to be the face putri
alait. Cherub sounds like Recheb, a Chariot, and the Cherubims are called so, 1 Chronicles. 28.18. And the Angels they are the Lords Chariots, Psalm. 68.17. The
chariots of God are 20000. and even thousands of Angels, Psalm. 18.10. He rode
upon a Cherub. But if we should grant that the face of a Cherub is the face of
a child, or young man, it would be the same with the face following, viz. the
face of a man, whereas the vision holds out distinct faces. Some Expositors
render is the face of an Ox, and their reason is this, (...) by a metathesis
of the letters is from (...), which signifies to ride, to be carried in a
Chariot, and so they will have the word Cherub to note out ageus carrum, and it
being proper to an Ox or Bullock to draw, they conceive here, by Cherub, is
meant an Ox, by face of a Cherub the face of an Ox. But I find no warrant
given us to transpose letters in the words of sacred writ, and thereupon to
make expositions. The Text says, it was the face of a Cherub: and if the
Spirit of God had meant the face of an Ox, he could have as easily said here
(...) as (...) I conceive therefore that here is some differing thing intended
from the face of an Ox; the former vision was in Babylon, near unto the river
Chebar, this was in the Temple, and that he might more fully understand the
vision, that by the living creatures were meant the Angels: Here he sees the
face of a Cherub, which had more glory and Majesty in it then the other faces,
and is therefore set first in order, as before man's face was set first, which
was the principal: what manner of face it was is not expressed, only in
general the face of a Cherub, and doubtless some special thing is in it, not
only the making known the living creatures he saw before to be Angels, but to
note the had a heavenly ministration, an ardent desire to do the will of God,
and were restless till it were done.

One thing lies in our way as an objection, and must be removed, it is this, v.
15.20.22. it is said it was the living creature he saw before at Chebar, and
that the likeness of their faces was the same; if this face of a Cherub differ
from the face of an Ox, how is it the same living creature: how are the faces
said to be like, or the same?

The Scripture calls that sometime the same, which is near or like unto it,
and tends to the same end, as 1 Cor. 10.3, 4. The fathers did all eat the same
spiritual meat, and drink the same spiritual drink. Mannah was their meat,
and water out of the rock was their drink, these differ from the Bread and Wine
in the Supper of the Lord; yet because they tended to the same end, and had
some likeness, he calls them the same: So here, there was much likeness, and
they tended to the same end the former faces and living creatures did, and
therefore he says it was the living creature he saw before, and the faces the
same; three differed not at all from those he saw before, only one, which made
it not another creature, nor the faces other faces.

There be diverse questions moveable about this face of a Cherub, as why it is
put off, and the face of the Ox left out; whither the Prophet had in this
vision only the appearance of the face of a Cherub, or of an Ox also; why not
some other face left out, rather then that of the Ox, which are curious and
needless I shall pass themby, only one question I shall answer.

Qu. Why are they called Cherubims rather then Men, Lions, Eagles, seeing they
had one face of a man, one of a lion, and one of an eagle, as well as of a
Cherub?

Answ. Every one had four faces, and the face of a Cherub was the chief,
something divine and more excellent appeared in it, then in the others, and
denominations are a praestantiori.

2. It was Gods Spirit directed our Prophet to call them Cherubims, what ever
their faces were, v. 20.

15.
The 15. verse has the Cherubims action, and the Prophets declaration of his
judgment touching the Cherub.

Their action is in these words, were lifted up, the English is passive; but
vajerommu is interpreted by Montanus and others actively, exaltaverunt se, they
lift up themselves. If the English words be taken in this sense, they were
lifted up namely by their wings, it is in effect thus much, As it is in the 16.
verse.
they lift up themselves by their wings, and seeing their Lord going away, they
would follow and attend him.

This is the living creature.
The singular number here is put for the plural, creature for creatures, these
are the living creatures which I saw at, etc. This sets out the certainty of
the vision; had not the Prophet seen it again, he might have do^bted whither
such strange things had been real or no; but now seeing all again, he was
assured of the reality of them, and therefore verse. 20. he says, this is the
living creature that I saw by the river of Chebar, and I knew that they were
the Cherubims.

Obser. 1.
To see and hear the same things again, is not damage, but advantage to the
servants of God: Ezekiel sees the same vision he saw before, the same wheels,
and same Cherubims, and comes thereby to more distinct knowledge of them, to
fuller certainties of particulars; all things are not seen or understood at
first, therefore a second sight and second hearing of the same thing may be
needful. Man is apt to doubt, ready to mistake things, backward to practice,
and therefore God gives in truths and visions double often times, that so he may
help our weakness, prevent mistakes, provoke us to practice; you have the same
truths often in the Psalms, in the Prophets, in the Gospels, which serve to
strengthen and comfort. Paul tells the Philippians, that to write the same
things, as it was not grievous to him, so it was safe for them, Chap. 3.1.
it is likely they affected variety and novelty, slighting wholesome and ordinary
truths, a common disease of all times, when they had Manna, they loathed it,
they would have h^d change, and something new; but Paul intimates there was
danger in that novellous humor, and therefore says it was safer for the
Philippians to hear the same things again and again, to hear them preached, to
have them written: and Pet. tells those he writ to, that he would not be
negligent to put them always in remembrance of those things they knew, 2 Pet.
1.12.

16.
The 16. verse has been spoken of, Chap. 1. verse. 19, 20, 21. where the going,
lifting up, and standing of the creatures and wheels was handled. Here is a
little difference from what is there, and that in two things;

1. Is of the Cherubims, there it is said, when they were lift up from the
earth; here it is, the Cherubims lift up their wings to mount up from the
earth, and so by their wings were lifted up.

The 2d difference is concerning the wheels, in the 1. Chap. It Is said they
were lifted up over against them; here it is the same wheels also iurned not
from beside them. It Is the same thing in diverse phrases, when the Cherubims
were lift up, the wheels that were against their sides were also lifted up,
and turned not any way, but went along beside them, which way soever they went.
The Cherubims had their free motions, and did the will of God readily, and the
wheels followed their ducture, and went no other way then they would have them.

Inferior causes are acted and led by the superior; when the Cherubims went,
the wheels went; when they were lifted up, these attended them: No creature
moves here below without a guide.

17.
The 17. verse you have in a manner word for word, Chap. 1. verse. 21. shows
there is a dependency and convenience of causes, one upon, and with another;
the motions and stations of inferior things of all the wheels depends upon the
higher, viz. the Angels, when they stand or move, so do these.

The spirit of the living creature. Heb. The spirit of life was in them.

The spirit of God is in all creatures, and acts in and by them, Obser. 1.
it does not only support all by divine virtue, but is present in all, sets all
wheels a running, stops all at it is pleasure, orders and moderates all their
motions and operations. The spirit of life was in the wheels, and in the
Cherubims. There is no public or private agent, rational or irrational
creatures used in the motions of the world; but the spirit is in them all, the
spirit was at the creation of all, Genesis 1.2. Job 26.13. and the spirit is in
the operations of all, 1 Cor. 12.11. What ever gifts men have, its the spirit
works them, and works in and by them: And so in the other creatures, what ever
virtues, qualities, instincts, dispositions, operations they have, the spirit
of life wrought them in them, and works by them. This may quiet our spirits,
whatever is done in the world by the creatures; however the wheels move, they
move not of themselves, but the spirit is in them moves them.

2. The stands and motions of Cherubims and wheels are neither disorderly, nor
unseasonable; they stop, they stir at the dictates of the spirit of life which
is in them, and that spirit is a spirit of wisdom, appointing nothing to be
done disorderly or unseasonably; When great stops are made on public or more
private businesses, when they seem to us to go backward, cross, to be
untimely, it is the spirit of life that is in, and acts by the second causes,
and who may with safety blame the spirit of God for stopping or turning the
wheels, the times of the Spirit in all providentiall things are most
seasonable, and act most orderly.

3. We should not terminate our thoughts upon second causes, but look up to the
supreme overruling cause; here the Prophet is led up to the spirit, he does
not look at the Cherub: and wheels standing or moving only, but his eye is
higher, it is upon the spirit of life that was in them, we are apt to look at
that instrument or cause is next us in present view, and there to terminate.
This is a great evil to eye the creature, and forget God, it is his spirit that
acts in the wheels, and if we take not notice of it, how can we be thankful,
when the creature is instrumentive of good to us? how patient when it is
instrumentive of hurt to us? If the creature smite and damnifie you, it is the
spirit of life in that creature, which set it on work: and if it profit and
please you, it was the same spirit moved it to do so. Many are so blind that
they see nothing of the spirit in any wheel or in any motion.

VERSE. 18, 19.
Then the glory of the Lord departed from off the threshold of the house and
stood over the Cherubims.

And the Cherubims lift up their wings and mounted up from the earth in my
sight: when they went out, the wheels also went beside them, and every one
stood at the door of the Eastgate of the Lords house, and the glory of the
God of Israel was over above them.


THese verses contain a farther removal of the glory in the 9. Chap. 3. verse,
there was one removal from the Cherub to the threshold. A 2d is in this Chap.
verse. 4. where it is said, the glory went up, and stood over the threshold. A 3d
in this verse. where we have, 1. The terminus a quo, from whence it departed,
from the threshold of the house. 2. Terminus ad quem, it stood over the
Cherubims.


The Jews thought themselves safe; while the Temple stood, God dwelt there,
and would preserve it and the City from all evils, and all enemies: what could
other Nations do to them, being without God, and what should they fear, seeing
they had God shut up in their Temple, and were persuaded that he would never
leave them. This foolish conceit undid them, for they observed not the Lord to
worship him purely, and only according to his will and rules given them; but
defiled the Temple with all abominations, and constrained the Lord to leave
them; therefore says the Prophet, Then the glory of the Lord departed off the
threshold. When he saw their vain confidence, notwithstanding all their
pollutions, that they took no warning by his Prophets, observed not his
judiciary threatenings and proceedings, repented not of their evil ways,
continued still the same, having told them of his departure from them, and
begun it.

I have spoken before often concerning the glory of the Lord, Chap. 8.4.9.3. in
the 4, verse. of this 10. Chapter and therefore now shall not need to enlarge:
S^nct. thinks that the glory had not left the Cherubims, but only was hid from
the eyes of the Prophet by the cloud, and that he makes the departure of the
glory from the Cherub; but this is clouding of the Text, which says, the glory
of the Lord was lifted up from the Cherub, and stood over the threshold: The
Cherubims were not at the threshold, but at the right side of the house, verse.
3. and here in this 18. verse. The glory departed from off the threshold of the
house, and stood over the Cherubims.

In Isa. 6.2. its said, the Seraphims there stood above the Throne: and here,
the glory and Throne were over the Cherubims. Some make these distinct visions,
the one being of Seraphims, the other of Cherubims, they having six wings,
these 4. and then they being above, and the Cherubims under, here is no
opposition.

(...)
Others think it the same vision, and then here is a difficulty, the Seraphims
are above, the Cherubims under the throne of glory. Musc.
The words in Isa. above it, by the Sept. are turned (...) in circuitu ejus,
they compassed the Throne about. Rabbi Kimchi has it, near him, before his
face: They were not above their Lord, and Master, but seemed to stand above to
the Prophets eye, who represents them as they appeared to him. Some render the
Heb. word juxta, by or nigh, as Exodus 16.3. When we sat by the fleshpots, not
above, or upon them: so Psalm. ^4.2. He has founded the earth upon the seas.
It Is a hard speech, nigh the seas is better. And Psalm. 137.1. By the waters of
Babylon we sat down: The Hebrew word is the same, juxta, not supra, they sat
not upon, but by them: so here, the Seraphims were not above, but by, about the
Throne.

The glory departed from the threshold of the house, the threshold of the
Priests Court, to the door of the Eastgate, where the Cherubims stood. The
Eastgate was the gate of the Court where the people met, the outward gate at
which they came in, and prayed with their faces westward.

Observe. 1.
How unwilling the Lord is to depart, and leave that people he has dwelt
amongst, and been engaged unto; he had taken in this people to be his, and now
though they had provoked him bitterly by their Idolatry in his worship, and by
oppression in the State, and had great cause to have left them utterly at once,
yet see how he goes away in a graduall manner, step by step, this was the 3d or
4th step he had taken; he was before removed to the side of the Temple, and
then from within the Temple to the threshold, and now he steps to the
Eastgate, expecting that upon every step they should have been affected, and
used means to have kept the Lord from departing from them; He looked that they
should have repented of their evil ways, purged their Temple from false gods
and worship, have executed justice, and showed mercy to the afflicted, and
walked in his ways, and then he would not have left them.

2. No visible Church but may fall, and cease to be; Here was the only visible
Church in the world, and the glory departed from it, and quickly it became no
Church. The 7. Churches of Asia were famous visible Churches, and is not their
glory long since departed from them: No visible Church but may cease it is
being; all the Churches in Judea are dead and buried in obscurity; meetings of
Gods people may cease, Ordinances, Ministers, and Administrations may all be
taken away, and so the visibility of the Church. I do not say visible Saints
shall all fail, but visible Churches may, the glory may depart from them, the
signs of his presence and grace may leave them. God is not tied to any place,
to any people; but if they corrupt his worship, he may withdraw; He did
depart from Jerusalem, from the Temple, and they were unchurched.

3. When the Lord goes from a people, then the protection and benefits they
have by the Angels go away; when the glory departed, then the Cherubims
mounted up from the earth, they would not stay to comfort, guide, protect that
people which had driven away their Lord and Master, seeing he left them, they
would leave them also. One evil followed another; When the Sun is in Apogaeo,
gone from us, we have short days, and long nights, little light, but much
darkness: and when God departs, you have much night, and little day left, your
comforts fade suddenly, and miseries come upon you swiftly. When God and his
Angels go from a Church, the Dragon and his angels get in; when men's
inventions prevail, they are subject to all woes and miseries, Hos. 9.12. We
to them when I depart from them. Let us take heed we cause not the glory to
depart from us, then the Angels that are present at our sollemn and public
meetings will leave us, they will not pitch their Tents about us any longer,
Jer. 6.7.8. As a fountain casts out her waters, so she casts out her
wickedness, violence and spoil is heard in her, before me continually is
grief and wounds. Be thou instructed O Jerusalem, lest my soul depart from
thee, lest I make thee desolate, a land not inhabited. Be we instructed to
cease from wickedness, violence, spoil, else God will depart from us, Angels
leave us, and both be against us.

4. God would have men take notice of his departure; the Cherubims stood at the
door of the Eastgate, and there the glory stood over them; that gate was so
seated in Mount-Sion, that they might see the entrance by it from most parts of
the City, and here the glory now stood, it was come forth from the Temple, and
now exposed to public view, that they might enquire what was the matter, use
all means to recover the glory was going.

VERSE. 20, 21, 22.
This is the living creature that I saw under the God of Isral, by the river of
Chebar, and I knew that they were the Cherubims.

Every one had four faces a piece, and every one had four wings, and the
likeness of the hands of a man was under their wings.

And the likeness of their faces was the same faces which I saw by the river
of Chebar, their appearances and themselves, they went every one straight
forward.


FOr the 20. verse you have heard of it in the 15. he called them living
creatures in the first Chapter, not knowing them so fully at fi st view as
afterward. Now beholding them in the Temple, he had there more distinct and
clear knowledge of them, he knew what they were, viz. Cherubims, glorious
creatures, of great wisdom, strength, and agility, subservient unto the Lord,
and therefore are said to be under the God of Israel. He has Cherubims and
Seraphims at his command; be creatures what they will, they are under God.

The God of Israel.
Because he appeared to Jacob, changed his name to Israel, whence his
posterity were called Israelites, and God having made a Covenant with him and
his seed, Genesis 28. and Chap. 32. hence he was called the God of Israel.

Some have thought here were not four living creatures, but one, which in
diverse respects repres^nted those four: By face they understand not the
countenance, but any figure, form, aspect, or habit of the body, and thus they
make it out; the creature had the face of a man, in regard of his mouth, hands,
thighs, and straight body; he had the face of a Lion, in respect of his neck,
shoulders and breast. Of an Eagle in respect of his wings, and of an Ox in
respect of his cloven hoofes; but why the word face should be so interpreted,
there is no reason; besides verse 9. it is said, by each Cherub there was a
wheel, noting they were several creatures, not one: and in this 20. verse,
the Prophet says, he knew they were the Cherubims, not one Cherub: And verse
7. he distinguishes that Cherub from the rest, which took fire and put into
the hands of CHRIST. And in the 21. verse. its said, every one had 4. faces and
4. wings, therefore this could not be one living creature, it is called the living
creature, per enallagen numeri -- the singular number is put for the plural.

21. Every one had four faces a piece.
The Hebrew is four, four faces to one, which repetition expresses the force
of the cardinal number among the Hebrews, when that number is repeated, it
stands for the ordinall or distributive, which they want: It notes thus much,
there were 4. faces to each of them.

Verse. 22. Of this verse was spoken in the first Chapter, and thither I refer
the Reader.

CHAP. XI.
VERSE. 1, 2, 3.
Moreover the Spirit lift me up, and brought me unto the East gate of the Lords
house which looks Eastward: and behold, at the door of the gate five and
twenty men: among whom I saw Jaazaniah the son of Azur, and P^latiah the
son of Benaiab, Princes of the people.

Then said he unto me, Son of man, these are the men that devise mischief,
and give wicked counsel in the City.

Which say, it is not near, let us build houses: this City is the couldron, and
we be the flesh.


EZEKIEL as you have heard was in a vision at Jerusalem, Chap. 8.3. the 9. and
10. Chapters were parts of that vision, and so also is this Chap. In it you
have two parts, 1. A further addition to the vision our Prophet had to the 24.
v. 2. The conclusion of the vision, from the beginning of the 24. verse. to the
end.


In the first part you have these things: 1. A manifestation unto Ezekiel of
those gave ill counsel, and seduced the people in the 3. first verses. 2.
Denunciation of judgment against those evil counselors and seducers, from
the 3d v. to the 13. wherein the death of one of the chief of them is laid
down. 3. The Prophets complaint, verse. 13. 4. The Lords answer to his
complaint, verse. 14, 15. 5. Comfort for the captives, from verse. 15. to the 22.
6. The departure of the glory out of the City, v. 22, 23.


In the verse read we have the manifestation of the ill counselors and
seducers to our Prophet, where these several particulars fall into
consideration.

1. The efficient cause showing the Prophet these ill Counselors, the spirit.
2. The place where he saw them, at the East gate, etc. 3. The number of these
men, 25. 4. The names of two of them, described also from their parents,
Jaazaniah, etc. and Pelatiah, etc. 5. Their dignity, Princes of the people, and
all these in the first verse. 6. The complaint made against them, which is set
down. 1. In general, v. 2. 2. Specially, v. 3.

The Spirit lift me up.
It pleased the spirit of God to take Ezekiel and carry him to Jerusalem, and
there to remove him from place to place; he did nothing of his own head, but as
the Spirit ordered him, the Spirit moved the wheels, the living creatures, and
our Prophet also; it was not an Angel nor his own spirit moved him, but the
Spirit of God.

And brought me to the Eastgate which looks Eastward.
The Hebrew is (...) Pol. renders it ad ortum solis. Pisc. orientalem ventum
versus, toward the Sunrising says one, toward the East wind says the
other. Sanctius thinks this gate was in the innner Court, and therefore it is
called the gate of the Lords house to which the Prophet was brought; not as
being out of the Temple, but removed from another place thither. But our
Prophet was in the inner Court before, Chap. 8.16. and we find not that he was
removed from that place till now. It Is not evident therefore that this East
gate should be in the inner Court, and other gates were called the gates of the
Lords house, Chap. 8.14. The North-gate was called the gate of the Lords house,
that is therefore no argument to prove it to be in the inner Court. Others
therefore more judiciously conceive, that our Prophet having seen the
slaughter of all in the Temple by the six men, Chap. 9. and heard the sentence
of burning the City, by scattering of coals, chap. 10. and that in the inner
Court; he was now removed out of the Temple to the East gate of the outward
Courts whither the glory was gone, chap. 10.19. This gate was famous and very
obvious to view Eastward, North-east and Southeast; here stood the glory of
the Lord now, here were the Cherubims under the glory, here were the wheels
under the Cherubims, and hither was the Prophet brought; there he seeing God
going away, might shortly declare the mind of God against the Jews at
Jerusalem.

Behold at the door of the gate 25. m^n.
Here is the number of them. In Chapter 8. v. 16. were 25. men mentioned, and the
quaere is, whether these be the same. Some affirm they were the same, but I
incline to think otherwise.

1. Because our Prophet had seen them formerly, and why should he see them
again.

2. They were in the Temple, worshipping the Sun with their faces toward the
East, and these were out of the Temple at the East gate: and if it be said they
might return from their Idolatrous Sun-worship within to this Eastern gate
where the Prophet now saw them: we must rem^mber that the Prophet saw those in
the Sanctuary slain, Chap. 9. 6. the destroying Angels were to begin at the
Sanctuary, and they began at the ancient men which were before the house: and
though they were but visionally slain, yet that was sufficient to keep them
from being presented to the Prophets view the second time.

The ground for their opinion is this; It Is conceived by some of the learned,
that the Prophet had the vision of this 11. Chap. before the 9. and 10. and
therefore they read the first verse thus, the spirit had lift me up, and had
brought me; but this is not sufficient to persuade us to be of that judgment,
for,

1. In the vision is set out to the Prophet the order of Gods departure from
them, Chap. 8.4. the glory of the God of Israel was there. Chap. 9.5. It went
to the threshold of the house, Chap. 10.4. It went up over the threshold, then
verse. 19. It departed to the East gate; after this it went to the midst of the
City, and from thence to the mountain out of the City, Chap. 11.23. so that
the graduall departure of the glory does evince that this Chap. was not before
the 9. and 10. but following, as in order it lies.

2. The conclusion of the vision confutes that opinion; for verse. 24, 25. it is
said that the vision went up from him, that he was carried into Chaldea, and
that he spoke to the Captives what he had seen. If this Chapter were to succeed the
8. and preced^, the 9. and 10. he had been excluded from a great part of the
vision, and in Chaldea before those parts had been given in to him.

These 25. men were principal men, and Pradus informs us from the Jewish
writings, that Jerusalem had 24. Divisions or Wards, which were governed by 24.
choice men, who are in the verse. called Princes of the people; they with the
Governor of the City, who is thought to be a Prince of the house of Judah, and
for the King, considered of the City, and State affairs, and these 25. were at
the East gate. The Magistrates and Gov^rnors were wont to sit in the gates, and
hear causes, and consult of their weighty affairs, Jer. 26.10. When the
Princes of Judah heard these things, then they came up from the Kings house
unto the house of the Lord, and sat down in the Entry of the new gate of the
Lords house, and there they heard the accusation of Jeremiah.

Others think they were principal men chosen out of the two remaining Tribes,
12. out of each, and a President amongst them, who was Ruler of the City.

Jaaz^niah.
This Jaazaniah differs from him in Chap. 8.11. who was the son of Shaphan,
and this was the son of Azur, whither it were that Azur mentioned, Jer. 28.1.
is not known; that Azur was a Prophet, and if a true one, a helper as his name
signifies.

Pelatiah the son of Benaiah.
The French has it Pheltias fills de Benaiat: The Tigurine reads it Pelatiahn
the son of Benaiahu most near the Hebrew. This Benaiah might be he mentioned
in 2 Chronicles. 31.13. who was one of the overseers for the things dedicate to the
house of the Lord, and so according to his name was a builder of the Lords.
It Is like our Prophet knew not any of the rest, and therefore mentions these
only, and this last he names, because presently he was made an example of the
just judgment of God, verse. 13.

Princes of the people.
That is, chief rulers, Numb. 7.2. The Princes of Israel, heads of the house
of their Fathers, who were the Princes of the Tribes, and were ever them that
were numbered: And this was a great honor to be a Prince of the people; when
God will honor a man in this life, he is said to set him with Princes, even
the Princes of his people, Psalm. 113.8.

VERSE. 2.
These are the men that devise mischief.


HEre begins the complaint against these men, and the first part of it they
devise mischief.

2. They give ill counsel.

Devise mischief.
The Hebrew word (...) is not simply to think, but excogitare to set the head
and heart on work to find out something, it carries the intention of the mind
with it, Jer. 18.18. Come, let us devise devices against Jeremie. It Is the same
Heb. word, and they would set themselves wholly, fully to devise dev^ces, they
would be solicitous in it, and to find out some way to mischief Jeremiah.
Perseras, tresmanvaises cogitations. French Bib.
So the word is used, Ezekiel. 38.10. Thou shall think an evil thought. The
other translation has it, evil thoughts; it is spoken of G^g, who should have
many evil thoughts against the people of God, and be set upon devising evil.
It notes intention and solicitousnesse, 1 Cor. 7.32. (...) cares for; the
vulg. has it, sollicitus est, and Cyprian, cogitat, to think of a thing with
care, and with intention, this is the word here.

Mischief.
Junius has it vanity; the Sept. have it (...) vain things, the vulgar,
iniquity, and so the French, qui present iniquity: so the Tigurine, qui
cogitant iniquitatem; Castalio, qui nefas cogitant; the H^b. is (...) which
includes all these, and is well rendered mischief, which is such evil as
tends to the ruin and destruction of a State or Church; such was the device of
Haman against the Jews.

And give wicked counsel.
They do not only devise mischief, but give it out being devised; the Hebr.
runs thus, and counselling ill Counsel, haioatzim atzah rahechrogn, which the
Greeks render (...) Castal: qui malum consilium ineunt: The vulgar, qui
tractant consilium pessimum: The French, and traittant manvais conseil.

VERSE. 3.
Which say it is not near, let us build houses.


THese words are variously rendered and interpreted; some expound them thus,
many are carried into captivity, the wrath of God is over-past, not near, let
us therefore build houses. The vulgar is, nonne dudum aedificatae sunt domus?
were not houses built long since? and their meaning is this; why are you
troubled about the ruin of the City, as if it should suddenly be as Jeremy
that false Prophet has said; the City is so far from ruining, that you see
long since it has been increased, the old houses stand, new have been added,
and Jeremie is proved a liar, therefore fear not, no such evil shall come
upon us. Nebuchadnezzar destroyed not the houses heretofore, and can he do it
now? but this vulgar translation suits not with the Text.

The Tigurine translation is, non est in propinquo contritio, aedificemus
igitur domus: and so Vatablus, only igitur he leaves out. Contrition,
destruction is not near, let us therefore build houses, this interpretation we
condemn not. Montanus goes that way, The Sept. have it (...).
and adds contritio in the margent. Nonne neviter aedificatae sunt domus, are
not houses lately, or newly built.

The Heb. is, (...) it is not near to build houses, here is an infinitive put
for an imperative; to build, for let us build, or let houses be built.

It is not near: what is not near? the desolation threatened, that they said was
not near. Jer. had told them of the Lords wrath, and that a sore captivity was
at hand, and because God had forbade him to marry and beget children, because
they should be destroyed, as you have it, Jer. 16.2, 3. Thou shall not take
thee a wife, neither shall thou have sons or daughters in this place. For
thus says the Lord concerning the sons, and concerning the daughters that
are born in this place, and concerning their mothers that bare them, and
concerning their fathers that begat them in this land, they shall dye of
grievous deaths, they shall not be lamented, neither shall they be buried, but
they shall be as dung upon the face of the earth, and they shall be consumed by
the sword, and by famine, and their carcasses shall be meat for the fowls of
heaven, and for the beasts of the earth. These sad tidings had Jeremy made
known as being given not only for himself, but others, and hereupon he writ to
the captives in Babylon, that they should build houses, plant gardens, Non
prope est construantur domus. Castal. Procul absunt qua minantur, vates. Idem.
take wives to themselves, and sons that they might increase, and not
diminish, as they were like to do at Jerusalem, Jer. 29.5, 6. Because of these
things the people were full of fears, refused to build and plant: hereupon
these Princes of the people counseled things contrary to God and the Prophet,
and said, it is not near; what Jeremie threatens, or any other Prophet those
things they speak of are far off, according to that in Ezekiel. 12.22. The days
are prolonged, and every vision fails. And v. 27. He prophecieth of the
times that are afar off, therefore fall a building, plant, multiply, and
increase, there is no such danger as you dream of.

Some carries i^ thus; houses are not to be built in nearness to the City, and
so make it military counsel, as if these Princes would not have any Suburbs,
or neighboring villages, which might advantage the enemy, if he should come
and take them, and so shut up the City; therefore they conceive these words
import thus much, houses are not to be built near; that is, they are to be
pulled down, and the rubbish removed.

This City is the cauldron, and we be the flesh.
These words have their difficulty in them: If you take the last sense of the
former words, then you may understand these thus; we are threatened to be
boiled in the siege of this City by the Chaldeans, as flesh is boiled in a
cauldron; but we will take a course to prevent that; we will pull down all the
houses without the walls of the City, and near hand, so that the enemy shall
not come near us, and then we shall see what truth is in it, that this City is
the cauldron, and we the flesh. Had they such an opportunity to sit down in
the houses, they would besiege us straightly, press us with famine, be as a
fire to this City, and consume us to nothing.

Others think these words spoken scoffingly against Jeremiah, who Chap. 1.13.
had said, I see a seething pot, it is the same word is here (...) and here it is
(...) the cauldron, the seething pot: Jeremie had prophesied that the enemy
should come from the North, and besiege them in the City, that they should be
as flesh in a cauldron, boiled with the Chaldean fire till they were consumed;
this they mock at; This City is the cauldron, and we are the flesh, says that
false and lying Prophet; for you see we are as before, we ne^d not fear
Chaldeans.

A cauldron, 1. is made of strong materials, as brass, or the like.

2. It will endure the fire many years before it be consumed.

3. It conteins the flesh put into it, and that is not to be taken out till it
be thoroughly boiled.

Hence upon these grounds they scoffed at Jeremie: If the City be the cauldron,
it is a strong City, and has brazen walls, it will endure the fire; let the
Chaldeans come as thou say, if we be a cauldron, their fire will not melt
us: and though they do boil us, yet we shall not be taken out of this
cauldron to be eaten before we are thoroughly boiled, till old age and death it
self take us out of it. Thus did these Princes profane that Prophecy, and
bred security in the hearts of the people, and fed them with hopes of liberty
and long life. Or thus you may take it, if this City be the cauldron, and we
the flesh, we will rather be boiled in it, then be destroyed by the sword; we
will rather dye in the fire, be boiled to death, then fall into the hands of our
enemies; we will rather dye here, then yield our selves into their hands, be
slain out of the City, or be carried into Babylon, but we fear no such thing:
Thus these Princes eluded the Prophetical threats, hardened the people in their
ill way, and ripened them for destruction.

Our Prophet was acted in these visions by the Spirit; Obser. 1.
sometimes it entered into him, sometime it fell upon him, and sometime it
lifted him up, Chap. 2.2. Chap. 3.24. The spirit entered into me. Chap.
1.3.8.1. The hand of the Lord (that is, the Spirit) came upon me, fell upon me:
and Chap. 3.12. The spirit took me up: and here, the spirit lift me up. The
Spirit had much to do with our Prophet, and so with all the Prophets, they
were acted by the Spirit in all their visions and prophesies, they were lift up
above themselves, and out of themselves, when they were to have cognizance of
Divine things.

2. The Spirit is God, it knows men and their ways, it discoverd them unto the
Prophet. Here the Spirit took notice of these men, what devises they had in
their heads, what counsel they gave, and acquainted the Prophet with them: so
before in the 8. Chap. the Spirit showed him the Image of Jealousy, the 70.
men that were offering Incens^ to the Idols, the women that wept for Tammuz,
the 25. men that worshipped the Sun, and put the branch to their nose: as
it is said of the Sun, Psalm. 19.6. there is nothing hid from the heat thereof.
So much more of the Spirit, there is nothing hid from his knowledge, 1 Cor.
2.10. The spirit searches all things; all in heaven, and all in earth, all
things in the closets, in the heart, Psalm. 139.7. Whither shall I go from thy
Spirit. David could not hide himself from the sight and presence of Gods
spirit, neither can we. Let us look well therefore unto our ways, the spirit
may make them known to the Prophets and servants of God.

3. That men chief in dignity and place are for the most part corrupt: Here
were the 25. who bare the sway in the City, and had great power, all
confederate in wickedness, Isa. 1.10. he calls their Rulers rulers of Sodom,
because of their extreme wickedness, and he excepts none, they were generally
such: so Neh. 13.11. I contended with the rulers, and said, why is the house of
God forsaken? They kept away the portions of the Levites, and therefore they
left the house of God: so verse. 17. The Nobles of Judah they profaned the
Sabbath day, and brought wrath upon Israel. 2 Chronicles. 24.17, 28. The Princes of
Judah were all idolatrous, and led Joash into idolatrous practices, (but they
were quickly after all slain for it, v. 23.) John 7.48. Have any of the Rulers
believed in him: They were so wicked even all of them, that they could make
their boast; have any of them believed in him? No, no, they are not for Christ
and his ways, Jer. 5.5. I will get, me unto the great men, and will speak unto
them, for they have known the way of the Lord, and the judgment of their God;
but these have altogether broken the yoke, and burst the bonds. The Prophet
thought the great ones, who had great obligations upon them to honor God, who
knew what pertein'd to worship and justice, that they would hearken to him; but
they cast off all respect, subjection, and obedience to the law of God; they
followed their own wills, lusts, humors, they regarded neither equity nor
honesty, they were far worse then the poorer sort whom the Prophet had tried
also. Luke mentions but one Judge, and he was an unjust one: Are not too many
of the great ones among us corrupt, loose, and enemies to Christ and his
Kingdom?

4. It Is matter of mourning when those are set over others to be punishers of
the wicked, countenancers of the godly, examples of piety and virtue, and
should seek the good of the public, prove clean otherwise, and are actors
and patrons of wickedness; the Spirit here is affected with it, and affects
the Prophet. Son of man, these are the men that do so, these pervert,
obstruct justice, these encourage evil doers, these sad the hearts of the
godly, these hinder good designs, these are the men that seek themselves,
that cry, give, give, and love to have it so, these be the men that pretend the
good of the estate and people, but are the ruin of both. This was matter of
grief to heaven and earth, Isa. 1.10. when the Prophet had termed them rulers
of Sodom, he complains, verse. 23. saying, Thy Princes O Jerusalem are
rebellious, and companions of thieves, every one loves gifts, and follows
after rewards, they judge not the fatherless, neither does the cause of the
widow come unto them. They sought themselves, not the good of particulars, or
the public, and this troubled the Prophet, and not only him, but the Lord
also; for it follows in the next verse. Therefore says the Lord, the Lord of
hasts, the mighty one of Israel, Ah, I will ease me of mine adversaries, and
avenge me of mine enemies. God had been wearied and grieved with them a long
time, and though they were many, and mighty, yet he was the Lord of Hosts etc.
This argument did affect God much, and he was often upon it, Isa. 3.12. As for
my people, children are their oppressors, and women rule over them. O my
people, they which lead thee, cause thee to err, and destroy the way of thy
path, they destroyed Justice and Religion.

5. There will never be wanting in any place men to devise mis^^^^^^; In
Jerusalem there were men whose hearts, heads, and tongues were at work. Dan.
6.7. All the Presidents of the Kingd. Governors, Princes, Counselors,
Captains, devised a plot against Daniel.
In the 8. Chap. he tells you of the 70. Ancients, and of the 25. who had all
devised, and were practicing mischief. In Shushan was not wanting a Haman to
devise mischief against the Jews, Est. 8.3. Pharaoh and his Courtiers devised
mischief against the Jews, Exodus 1. There were those devised to take away
David's life, Psalm. 31.13. They imagined a mischievous devise, Psalm. 21.11. No
City, no Kingdom was ever free from men of deceitful, wicked, and mischievous
devices, and no time ever abounded more with such men, and such devices, then
our times: and if I should say no place more then this Kingdom, I should not
much fail. Who can reckon up the mischievous devices have been against the
Estates, Laws, Liberties, Religion and Consciences of the people of this
Kingdom. Ship money was a cunning devise to dry up their estates: Prerogative
was cried up to bring the laws and liberties of the Subject down. Innovations
and new Cannons were Prelaticall devices to rid you of your Religion and
Consciences, to make way for Popery. What wicked devices have been against the
Parliament, against this City, against this Kingdom; what ever has been
devised for the good of all, has met with Anti-crosse devices. There be those
devise as strongly and speedily to ruin us, as any do to relieve us. The
device against Ireland was a bloody and mischievous device, and bloody devices
are in men's heads against us: but here is the comfort, Job. 5.12. God
disappointeth the devices of the crafty, so that their hands cannot perform
their enterprise. They devise to undo all, but they cannot, Mic. 2.1. Woe to
them that devise iniquity. God has threatened, and though they cannot
accomplish their devices, yet he will accomplish his threats, Prove. 12.2. A man
of wicked devices will be condemn. Many of wicked devices have been amongst us,
and has not the Lord condemned them?

6. Men in place being evil, they make others evil; they do not only devise
mischief, but communicate mischief, they give and obtrude ill counsel upon
others: These that were in place, especially Jaazaniah and Pelatiah the
Princes, they gave out ill counsel to the people: They and such men do the
greatest hurt, their power, honor, estates, examples, are prevalent with the
people, and when they counsel corruptly, their counsel takes and infect a
multitude quickly. Jeroboam tells the people it was too much for them to go up
to Jerusalem, that was a long journey, would be very chargeable, and might
prove dangerous, therefore he had taken a better course for them, he had made
Calves, set them up for gods at Dan and Bethel, and now they should need to
go no further for to worship; this counsel took. Balack being advised by
Balaam, counsels the Moabitish women to entice the Israelites to folly, which
took; and they drew them both to whoredom and idolatry, Numb. 25.12. with
Chap. 31.16. Ill counsel from great ones does great mischief, Nah. 1.11.
There is one come out of thee that imagines evil against the Lord, a wicked
Counselor: It Is spoken of Nineveh concerning Senacherib: We have many come
out of us that are wicked Counselors, and prevail with the people to do what
they counsel. Did not Prelates, Judges, Nobles, Princes, lately give ill
counsels, and were not the people too forward to hearken. All counsels that
seem good are not always safe, men should therefore examine others counsels,
whethey they be such as agree with the word of God, are really for the good of
Church or State, before they approve or entertain them.

Take heed what counsels you take from great ones that are corrupt; this has
endangered Cities, Churches, whole Kingdoms. Take counsel of the great God,
who dasheth all wicked counsels, and establishes his own, Psalm. 33.10, 11. He
brings the counsels of men to naught, but the counsel of God endures for ever.

7. That great ones are greatly secure, they put the evil day far from them,
It is not near. They are lavish to entertain thoughts that may disquiet their
hearts, or shake their foundations. Honors, pleasures, ^ecular affairs take
them up so, that they fear not changes, they consider not the evil day, they
are as quiet as men that are in Covenant one with another. Isa. 28, 14, 15.
Those ruled the people, they said, We have made a covenant with death, and
with hell are we at agreement. When the overflowing scourge shall pass
through, it shall not come unto us. The great ones were Covenanters, such as
ruled the City; but with whom did they covenant, with Death and Hell, and now
feared not any threatenings of them by the Prophets. Although the Prophets
threatened Death, Hell to them, it was as nothing, they feared not. Some think
they being Idolatrous, sacrificed to Pluto, fatum Atropos, those gods they
conceived had power over Death and Hell, and so had them their friends, and
lived without fear, Amos 6.3. He tells you of some put far away the evil
day; but who were they? Men of place and power, they were such as caused the
seat of violence to come near, that lay upon beds of Ivory, that stretched
themselves upon their couches, and did eat the lambs out of the flocks, and
Calves out of the midst of the stall; they were dauncers, drinkers, and such as
anointed themselves wi^h the chiefest ointments. These are men settled on their
lees, as Zeph. speaks, Chap. 1.12. They were like wine in vessels, not emptied
from vessel to vessel, but settled in their sinful security: and not only
great ones are secure, but Zach. 1.11. The Angel told the man among the myrtle
trees, that all the earth sat still and was at rest. Security is an
epidemicall disease.

8. See the impiety and profaneness of these men:

1. They oppose God, and give contrary counsel to what he had given by
Jeremie, that they should not build houses in that place, but in Babylon, Jer.
29.5, 6. and that because of the great judgment was coming upon them; but they
say it is not near, let us build houses, there is no danger: or if the enemy
should come, we had need build and strengthen our selves; thus they counsel
contrary to the Prophet, and to God.

2. Their profaneness, they scoff at the word of God: This City is the
cauldron, we are the flesh. Jeremie had told them that God would bring the
Chaldeans upon them, and boil them in that City like flesh in a Cauldron: This
they scoff at, strengthening their malice and profaneness from abuse of the
word of God. This made Jer. say, I am in derision daily, every one mocketh me,
and the word of the Lord was made a reproach unto me, and a derision daily,
Jer. 20.7, 8.
There is such corruption in the heart of man, that it turns the best things
of all into bitterness. Isa. 28.14, 15. Hear the word of the Lord ye
scornful men. The Hebrew is, (...) viri derisionis, they mocked and scoffed
at what was prophesied; what ever the Prophet threatened, they derided it,
therefore verse. 22. Be not mockers, lest your bands be made strong, lest you
have double fetters, double judgments, 2 Chronicles. 36.16. They mocked the
messengers of God, and despised his words, all his threatenings. And Peter, 2
Pet. 3.3, 4. tells us, there shall come scoffers, walking after their own lusts,
saying, where is the promise of his coming. Those under the law scoffed at the
threatenings; these under the times of the Gospel scoff at the promises. Those
of Christ's coming, of the resurrection, last judgment, the end of all, and
life eternal, such as these walk after their own lusts, they bring a City
into a snare, Prove. 29.8. The Sept. translates the word scornful, Psalm. 1.1.
(...) pestes, (...)
because such men are pestilent men, the very plagues of Church and State,
contemners of God and men. Jude said it long since, that there should be
mockers in the last time, and we have found it true; there be as profane,
bitter scoffers amongst us, as ever were; even the truths of God are scorned
and scofft at.

9. No devices, counsels, attempts of men can null or frustrate the purposes of
God: They devise mischief, give ill counsel, scoff at the truths of God, put
the people upon contrary designs, yet all this would not do, desolation was
near, the Chaldeans came, they were besieged in that City, boiled in it as
flesh in a Cauldron, and Gods counsels, truths, threats took place,
notwithstanding all their counsels and endeavors to the contrary. Balaam was
hired by Balack to cross Gods design in cursing of his people, he attempted
to do it, but God overpowred him, he could not do or speak ought to their
prejudice, Numb. 23.38. therefore he professed, Chap. 23.23. Surely there is no
enchantment against Jacob, neither is there any divination against Israel:
according to this time it shall be said of Jacob and of Israel, what has God
wrought. Man would have wrought mischief, but could not; what has God wrought?
he has wrought, and none could hinder; therefore Isa. 14.27. its said, the
Lord of Hosts has purposed, and who shall disannul it; not Balack or Balaam,
not Jaaz^niah or Pelatiah, not the 25. Rulers in Jerusalem: his hand is
^tretched out, and who shall turn it back? It Is not in the power of Princes, no
not the Prince of darkness, to let his work, to alter his counsels, what God
has determined, shall so come to pass as he has determined, v. 24. Surely as
I have thought, so shall it come to pass, and as I have purposed, it shall
stand, and all his pleasure shall be done, Isa. 46.10. so that there is no
wisdom, nor understanding, nor counsel against the Lord, Prove. 21.30.

VERSE. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
Therefore prophecy against them, prophecy, O Son of man.

And the Spirit of the Lord fell upon me, and said unto me, Speak, Thus says
the Lord: Thus have ye said, O house of Israel: for I know the things that come
into your mind, every one of them.

Ye have multiplied your slain in this City, and ye have filled the streets
thereof with your slain.

Therefore thus says the Lord God, Your slain, whom ye have laid in the mids
of it; they are the flesh, and this City is the cauldron: but I will bring you
forth out of the midst of it.

Ye have feared the sword, and I will bring a sword upon you says the Lord God.

And I will bring you out of the midst thereof, and deliver you into the hands
of strangers, and will execute judgments among you.

Ye shall fall by the sword, I will judge you in the border of Israel, and ye
shall know that I am the Lord.

This City shall not be your cauldron, neither shall ye be the flesh in the
midst thereof, but I will judge you in the border of Israel.

And ye shall know that I am the Lord, for ye have not walked, in my statutes,
neither executed my judgments, but have done after the manners of the heathen
that are round about you.


IN these verses is contained the denunciation of judgment against these
devisers of mischief, and wicked Counselors. The parts are these.

1. A command, Prophecy against them, verse. 4. 2. A discovery of their
thoughts and counsels, v. 5. 3. Demonstration of their wickedness, v. 6. Those
hearkened not to their counsels, they slew. 4. The death of these Counselors,
and place where it should be, not in Jerusalem, but in the borders of Israel,
v. 8, 9, 10, 11. 5. The end of God in it, v. 11, and 12. 6. The ground of G ds
proceeding thus with them, v. 12. For ye have not walked, etc.
VERSE. 4.
Therefore prophecy against them, etc.


THe word prophecy is twice mentioned, to set out the intention of God which
was set against them, the certainty of the thing, and to prevent delay in the
Prophet, he must go and tell them of heavy and sad things: God was greatly
displeased with them, and therefore will have the Prophet without any delay to
make known his pleasure against them; he must speak freely and boldly, and
foretell them of their destruction.

Jeremies words; This City is the cauldron, and we be the flesh, and made
constructions of them to please themselves: Therefore says God, prophecy
against them. His spirit was stirred, and he stirs up the Prophet to declare
his wrath against such scoffers. Gods threats and judgments should make men
tremble, Job 41.10 Who is able to stand before me. At his presence the
mountains melt, Isa. 64.3. When he threatened, the great City Nineveh repented,
Jonah 3. and Devils tremble, Jam. 2.19. Mountains, Ninevites, Devils, melt,
repent, tremble, and yet Israelites scoff at the threats and judgments of
God; but the Lord will not endure it, the Prophet must declare dreadful things
against them.

Men that have scoffed at the truths and ways of God, have been lashed with
the judgments of God.

John Apowel scoffing at one for praying, Fox in Acts and Monument.
was presently surpised with fear, and the next day found mad, crying out
night and day, O the Devil, the Devil.

Another hearing a godly Minister preaching of that Text, Prove. 10.7. The
memory of the just is blessed, but the name of the wicked shall rot, scoffed at
the Minister, and said, he had made a rotten Sermon; presently after hurting
his tongue with a litttle wood which he held at his mouth, his tongue swelled,
rotted, and he dyed of it.

2. That servants of God having divine warrant, are forthwith to do their
office, although they be messengers of sad tidings. Prophecy, prophecy
against them; he has command from God, and he must not stick now, and say,
they are great men, the chief of the City, such as sought Jeremie's death,
and If I shall prophecy against them, they will use means to crush me; God by
doubling the word, takes him off from all such reasonings, from all delays,
and expected immediate performance of his commands. Let men fret at the
messages of Gods servants, they must respect God, and not man, they must give
out what the Lord has given in. If men be great, God is greater, we must be
faithful to him, who ever suffers by it.

VERSE. 5.
And the Spirit of the Lord fell upon me.


Resedit super me spiritus prophetiae a facie Domini says the Chald. Cum in me
Jehovae spiritus illapsus est, Cast. Cecidit super me, Tigur. Incidit in me.
Jun. Irruit in me. Vulg. Survint en moy French.
'T The Hebrew word (...) notes the falling of a thing from a high place, Jerome.
cum vi and impetu: and so here the Spirit coming from above, offered not
violence to the Prophet, but came upon him with might and power, and provoked
him to prophecy.

Thus have you said.
Whether the Spirit or Prophet repeated their words, is not evident, they are
not expressed; where the sense is evident from former expressions, the
Scripture is frequently silent, and repeats not the words. 2 Kings 5.4. Thus
and thus said the maid that is of the land of Israel. So 2 Samuel 17.15. Thus and
thus did Ahitophel counsel, says Hushai, and thus and thus did I counsel;
the sense was known by what was before, and therefore the words are not
repeated, the Scripture shuns the multiplying of words needlessly.

O house of Israel.
That is, the house of Judah, the whole being put for a part, and this is
frequent.

I know the things which come into your minds.
The Hebrew is, Ascensiones spiritus vestri. Calv. Quae subeunt animum vestrum
Jun. Quae ascendunt, Tig. Mentis vestrae cogitatus. Cast. Cogitationes spiritus
vestri. Pol. Les chooses qui montent. Fr. (...)
(...) which notes those things that rise up out of men's hearts, as weeds out
of the earth, or leaves upon trees, (...) is a leaf, quia sursum crescit, what
ever goes out and up from the heart or spirit of a man, that is understood by
Maaloth, Matthew. 15.19. ill thoughts go out from the heart, go up to the
tongue, to the eyes, Luke 24.38. Why do evil thoughts or reasoning arise in
your hearts.

Obser. 1. Whom the Lord sends about his work, he enables to do it; go
prophecy, prophecy, and presently the Spirit fell upon him, whereby he was
furnished with prophetical matter, and enabled to deliver it. When God sent
Moses, he furnished him for the great work he appointed him to; Moses pleaded
his in eloquence and slownesse of speech; but God said, Exodus 4.12. Go, and I
will be with thy mouth, and teach thee, etc.

2. To new acts or prophecy, new access of the Spirit is requisite; he had
received the spirit before diverse times, Chap. 1.3.2.2.3.14.22.24.8.1. And here
again before he prophesies, the Spirit falls upon him, which shows that to
spiritual work antecedent receptions of the spirit suffices not, there must
be new influxe of the spirit, for new acts of prophecy: Propheta est
supernaturalis quaed^m cognitio in divina revelatione fundata a quo praedictio
prophetica praecedit. If the Spirit therefore do not reveal new things unto
the Prophets, they could not prophecy; for prophecy is no habit which men
might stir up, and use at their pleasure. Prophets know not secret and future
things, but as the Spirit reveals them. Elisha knew not the death of the
Shunamites son, 2 Kings 4.27. The Lord has hid it from me, and has not told
me, Hermas in his book called pastor. c. 2. mentions a book of their prophecy,
and cites these words, prope est Dominus his quise ad eum converiunt sicut
scriptum est in Eldad and Medad qui vaticinati sunt in solitudine populi, Alap.
and Nathan knew not the mind of God about building the Temple, 2 Samuel 7.3.
There must be new acts of the Spirit revealing unto the Prophets when they give
out Prophetical things; but Numb. 11.26. The spirit rested upon Eldad and
Medad, and they prophesied in the Camp. Some think they continued constantly
prophesying, and ceased not, but that is an opinion only. The spirit resting
upon them, argues not that they did always prophecy, or had a habit of
prophesying, but that they were numbered amongst the Prophets, and at what times
it pleased the Spirit, had new revelations, which they declared, suitable to
that in Isa. 50.4. He wakeneth morning by morning, he wakeneth mine ear to
hear as the learned; the Prophet could not speak a word in season if God had
not wakened him, and spoke to him every morning.

3. Supernatural things commmanded are not in vain; God bid Ezekiel
prophecy, he was not able to do it; the Phlistims might more easily have
interpreted Sampsons riddle: Job might as well have answered Gods great
questions, in Chap. 38, 39, 40, 41. as our Prophet have prophesied; but God
commanded, and he caused the Spirit to fall upon him; as the Lord calls upon us
to repent, to believe, these be supernatural works, and men may as soo^e
remove mountains, pluck the Sun out of heaven, as do these; but God that
commands them, gives power and grace to do them, Phil. 1.29. 2 Timothy 2.25.

4. The Prophets had warrant to deal particularly, even with the greatest
sinners: Speak, thus have you said, how? thus, it is not near, let us build
houses, this City is the cauldron, and we be the flesh. The Prophet must go
and tell them what they have said, though they were the chiefest men of the
City. When great ones sin, they must be told of their sins in a special
manner. David he defiles his body with adultery, and the land with blood,
Nathan comes to him, and tells him a parable that was so general as David took
it not home to himself, thereupon the Prophet deals roundly with him, and
tells him, thou art the man, 2 Samuel 12.7. And verse. 9. Thou have killed Vriah
the Hittite with the sword of Ammon, and taken his wife, now therefore the
sword shall never depart from thy house. So Elijah spoke home to Ahab, and told
him that it was he and his Fathers house that troubled Israel, 1 King. 18.18.
because they had forsaken the commandments of the Lord, and followed Balaam.
Isaiah flattered not great nor small when he said, Chap. 1.10. Hear the word
of the Lord ye rulers of Sodom, and people of Gomorrah: And Jeremie must say
unto the King, and to the Queen, humble your selves, sit down, for your
principalities shall come down, even the crown of your glory, Jer. 13.18. John
told Herod it was not lawful for him to have his brothers wife, Mar. 6.18. and
Luke 3.19. It Is said he was (...) he showed him the greatness, fowlnesse, and
danger of his sin, and labored to convince him by strong arguments: so Paul
dealt with Peter, and John with Diotrophes, and there is great reason that
Ministers should tell men of their sins, Ezekiel. 3.18. If thou speak not to
warn the wicked from his wicked way, to save his life, the same wicked man
shall dye in his iniquity, but his blood will I require at thy hand.

5. That what ever risings, thoughts, workings, are in men's spirits, the Lord
knows them, and that exactly. I know the things come into your minds every one;
there is nothing in man hid from God; a thought is a small thing, yet thoughts
escape not the eye of God. Jer. 17.9, 10. The heart is deceitful above all
things, and desperately wicked, who can know it? Not a man's self, not Satan,
not Angels, who then? I the Lord search the heart, I try the reins. Man may
know it conjecturally, Prove. 20.5. He may by his art pump out much, man may
know it by revelation, 1 Samuel 9.19. So Samuel the Seer could tell Saul all that
was in his heart; but to know what is in the heart of man, immediately,
exactly, and certainly, can none but God, he only is (...) therefore the
Apostle prayed to him under that notion, Acts 1.24. Thou Lord, which know
the hearts of all men, show which of all these thou have chosen. There is no
juggling with God, his eye beholds all, and if there could be doubt of any thing
with him, he searches the heart, he tryes the reins; this is spoken to our
capacity, God needs no searching, no trying; for Psalm. 119.2. Thou
understandest my thoughts afar off: Not that God is at distance from us, or our
thoughts, but he understands them while they are far off from us, from our
knowledge, while they are potentiall, as Gardiners know what weeds such ground
will bring forth, when nothing appears, Deuteronomy. 31.21. I know their imagination
which they go about, even now, before I have brought them into the land which
I swear. God knew their thoughts before they came into Canaan, what they would
be there. And how can it be, but that God should know all our thoughts, seeing
he made the heart, and it is in his hand, Prove. 21.1. seeing we live, move, and
have our beings in God, Acts 17.28. seeing he is through us all, and in us all,
Ephesians. 4.6. Look well to your hearts, thoughts, risings, what ever comes into
your mind; let no secret sins, corruptions, lodge there, think not to
conceal any thing from the eye of God, Psalm. 90.8. Thou have set our
iniquities before thee: and not only them, but our secret sins in the light of
thy countenance. Thou look upon them fully, see, know them exactly,
therefore remember that, Eccl. 12.13, 14. Fear God, and keep his
commandments: and why? for God shall bring every work into judgment, with
every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil. There is no
shuffling with God, men in great place, or of great parts cannot elude or evade
him.

VERSE. 6.
Ye have multiplied your slain in this City, etc.


BEfore they had been profane, now their injustice appears. Some think the men
were not actually slain, but oppressed and cruelly dealt withal; violence and
oppression being counted in the Scripture sense, murder: but it is not probable
that our Prophet would use such expressions, as to multiply the slain, and fill
the streets with slain, if none were slain. Chap. 7.23. The land is full of
bloody crimes: And Chap. 9.9. The land is full of blood. And Ezekiel. 22.2. It Is
called the bloody City. So in the 24.6. and 9. verses, the Heb. is the City of
bloods. These great men who gave the ill counsel, it is likely that they crushed
those opposed them, and dealt with them as seditious, as rebellious, as enemies
to the City and State. Jeremie you know, they sought his life, petitioned the
King that he might be put to death, Jer. 38.4. And it is probable, that many
which would not conform to their idolatrous practices were cut off.

When the Lord is about to proceed in judgment against evil doers, he
declares the cause of his proceeding in such a way: Obser.
When God intended to destroy the world, he made known the cause thereof, Genesis
6.5, 6.11.12. When he was about to fire Sodom, he discovered to Abraham the
ground of i^, Genesis 18.20.

VERSE. 7.
The slain whom ye have laid in the midst of it, they are the flesh, and
this City is the cauldron.


HEre the Lord shows them who are the flesh in the cauldron: Not in that sense
they took it; for they thought themselves should be the flesh, live till old
age in the City: but the Lord tells them here that those they had slain
unjustly, whose carcasses lay in the streets, and consumed away, they were the
flesh boiled in the cauldron. Manasses had been bloody, and Zedekiah was
bloody, and the slain were the flesh, and so the City was a cauldron to them,
but not to the others, I will bring them forth of the midst of it.

God tells them they shall neither live nor dye in it, he would order things so,
that they should be carried out of Jerusalem: and for certainty of it the words
are repeated in the beginning of the 9. verse.

Judgments of God cannot be waved by men's wits or power, they jeered and made
a construction of flesh and cauldron suitable to their own minds, Obser.
and conceited they should dye in the City in peace; but the Lord tells them no,
he would bring them forth out of the midst of it.

VERSE. 8.
You have feared the Sword, and I will bring a Sword upon you, etc.


Jeremy had counseled them to yield themselves, Chap. 38.17. the King and
rest through fear would not hearken: They feared the sword, and therefore sent
to Egypt for help, Jer. 2.18. They feared the sword, but not the Babylonish
captivity, the Lord brought both upon them.

Babylon by breaking oath and covenant with him, Ezekiel. 17.15. and now what ever
they said, it is not near, yet they were full of fear; God saw what timorous
spirits they had. If the horror of their wicked acts did not seize upon them,
yet fear of wrath and judgment possessed them. Psalm. 14.5. speaking of
workers of iniquity, he says, There they were in a great fear, Heb. is, they
feared a fear; but where was it, in their consciences? When the light of nature
did convince them of their wickedness, there where the conviction was they
feared greatly. Prove. 28. The wicked fly when no man pursues. They fear, and
so fear, that they fly to secure themselves from imaginary dangers. Lev.
26.36. The sound of a shaken leaf shall chase them. And Job 15.21. Eliphaz
speaking of the wicked, says, A dreadful sound is in his ears: The Heb. is a
sound of fears; such was in Richard the 3d whose hand was ever upon his
dagger. The wicked are a restless sea, Isa. 57.20.

2. That which sinners fear, the Lord brings upon them: Saul feared the
devolution of the Kingdom to another, and it fell to David. The Jews feared
lest the Romans should come, and take away their place and Nation, John 11.48.
and they did do it. Prove. 10.24. The fear of the wicked it shall come upon
him, it is coming toward him every day, and will be upon him ere he dye.

After the flood the people feared scattering, and therefore said, Let us build
a tower, whose top may reach unto heaven, Genesis 11.4. and verse. 8. The Lord
scattered them abroad from thence upon the face of all the earth. Men that
fear evils usually take surer courses to prevent them, which justly brings the
thing feared upon them. Richard the third feared the Kingdom would not be
firm to him, his Nephews he murders for security, and this kindled fire in
the Kingdom, which quickly consumed him. The Prelates feared their standing; to
establish themselves, they remove from jus regium, to jus divinum; they frame a
new Oath, with an etc. in it, to swear all men to put to their shoulders for
support of their tottering Kingdom, but it is fallen, it is fallen.

VERSE. 9.
I will bring you out of the midst thereof.


OF these words before in the 7. verse.

And deliver you into the hands of strangers.
Not of the neighbor Nations; for had they come against them, because of
commerce, consultation, language, and some references to them, the Nobles and
great ones might have found favor; therefore God would put them into the hands
of strangers that understood not their language, that had no inducements to
show favor to them, that regarded neither great nor small: They had destroyed
their friends, now strangers should destroy them.

I will execute judgments among you. Of these words I spoke, Chap. 5. verse. 8.
The Lord can use any instruments to accomplish his judgments: strangers,
heathens, profane ones, Obser.
it matters not what the instruments be, if the holy God use them; his usage of
them is holy, and he orders all their thoughts, counsels, operations, to
accomplish his own ends.

VERSE. 10, 11.
I will judge you in the border of Israel.


THe same words are in the 11. verse. Where this was must be e^quired, it is
generally thought to be at Riblath, and the Scripture is for it, 2 K. 25.6.
some have thought it to be in Babylon, but without warrant, 2 Kings 23.33.
Riblah was in the land of Hamath, which lay on the North part of Canaan on the
East side: and Bonfrerius observes in his Onomasticon of Cities and places,
that Jerome thinks it to be Antiochia, Adrichomius, some City of Syria or
Judaea in the Tribe of Nepthali, and this the Scripture gives countenance unto,
Numb. 34.11, 12. Others think it to be a Province in Syria, afterward called
Epiphania, from Antiochus Epiphanes. This Riblah or Epiphania was at the border
of Israel, where Nebuchadnezzar was, whether Zedekiah was brought, and there
God judged him and the rest, 2 Kings 25.6. They took the King, and brought him
to the King of Babylon to Riblah, and gave judgment upon him. Heb. is, spoke
judgment; they expostulated with him and the rest about their treachery, in
breaking the oath, and revolting from the King of Babylon. And there judgment
was executed, Zedakiah sees his sons slain, his eyes are put out, all the
Nobles are put to death, Jer. 39.5, 6, 7.52.10.

Obser.
God punishes sinners in places, and by persons they think not of. These men
thought they should dye in Jerusalem, never fall into the hands of strangers;
but God carried them to Riblah, to the borders of the land, delivered them into
the hands of strangers, from whom they found no pity, no mercy: It Is some
comfort to men to dye in their own Country among their friends, Oterque
quaterque beati queis ante ora patru^ Trojae sub maenibus altis Contigit
oppetere.
that will take care of their dead corpse, see the same interred honorably after
death. Hence was it that Aeneas counted them happy who dyed before the walls of
Troy; when he was floating upon the Seas, and in danger of death among the
waves. Something is in it that the Prophet says, Jer. 22.10. Weep not for the
dead, neither bemoane him: but weep sore for him that goes away, for he shall
return no more, nor see his native Country. They must not weep for the dead,
but must weep, and that sorely for those lost their country; the Jews had
rather dye then lose their land, and be taken from Jerusalen, verse. 26. It Is
laid as a great judgment upon Jeconiah and his mother to be carried to another
land where they should dye.

VERSE. 12.
And ye shall know that I am the Lord, etc.


IN this verse is the end and ground of Gods judgments; you have the first
words of the verse often before, especially in Chap. 6. v. 7.10.13, 14. And those
words, ye have not walked in my statutes, neither executed my judgments, you
had opened, Chap. 5.6. One thing in this verse. must be spoke unto: It Is said,
Chap. 5.7. Neither have done according to the judgment of the Nations that are
round about you. And here it is, but have done after the manners of the heathen
that are round about you. The difficulty is not great in the 5. Chap. they were
not so righteous and just as the heathens were, and here they followed the
manners of the heathen; what corrupt manners they had, those the Jews took up,
their manners of worship and of life.

Ye shall know that I am the Lord. You have cast me off, taken in other gods,
worshipped the Sun, and forms of creeping things; but I will bring heavy
judgments upon you, carry you out of this City to the borders of Israel, slay
you with the sword: and when you are in the hands of your enemies, you shall
know experimentally that I am the Lord, that all other gods were false and
idol gods, that they were not able to save you in time of trouble, that you
have don exceeding ill to provoke me, who am Jehovah the true and only God,
who have all power in my hands, and will now make good my threats upon their
heads and carcasses, your consciences shall tell you, will you, ^ill you, that
I am righteous in my proceedings, and that themselves dye justly by my strokes.

2. God therefore punishes, because men do wickedly. I will judge you in the
border of Israel, and ye shall know that I am the Lord; for you have not walked
in my statutes, neither executed my judgments, etc. God has a special eye to
his own statutes and judgments; when they are kept and performed, he prospers,
but when they are violated, he judges, he destroys. Gods statutes and
judgments come from infinite wisdom and holiness, they are good, equal,
profitable: and for the sons of men that depend upon God every moment for
their lives and beings, to neglect the Lords statutes, to transgress them, and
do after their own wills, humors, fancies, or others, this is unspeakable
wrong to God, and he has, does, and will visit for such wrongs: If men would
not be broken with his judgments, let them not break his statutes; if they
would secure their lives, let them walk in his laws.

3. The Lords own people are prone to take up the manners and customs of
other Nations. Ye have done after the manner of the heathen: and not one
heathenish nation only, but of all round about you; they observed their manners
of life, and manners of worship, liked, fetched them in, and practiced the
same. 2 Chronicles. 13.9. They made them Priests after the manner of the nations of
other lands. Psalm. 106.35. They mingled with the heathen, and learned their
works and ways. 2 Kings 16.3. Ahaz caused his son to pass through the
fire, according to the abomination of the heathen: they would have a King to
judge them, like all the Nations, 1 Samuel 8.5.20.

Ezekiel. 20.32. We will be as the heathen, as the families of the Countries.
Such conformity had they with the heathen, that Moab and Seir could say, Ezekiel.
25.8. Behold, the house of Judah is like to all the heathen.

4. When Gods people take up the manners of heathens, and Nations hateful to
God, it provokes him greatly, and aggravates the evil much.

In this case, 1. They reject Gods statutes and ways, they laid them by, and
walked not in them; yet Deuteronomy. 4.8. No nation under heaven had statutes and
judgments so righteous as they. 2 Kings 17.15. They rejected his statutes, and
his commandments, his testimonies; they followed vanity, and went after the
heathen that were round about them. It was as if men should lay aside the
Bible, and take the Turkish Alcaron, or Popish masse-book.

2. There was a prohibition, that they should not do after the ways of the
heathens. Deuteronomy. 12.30. Take heed thou be not snared by following them, and that
thou enquire not after their gods, Jer. 10.2. Lerrn not the way of the heathen.
saying, how did these nations serve their gods? even so will I do, v. 31.
Thou shall not do so, etc. And 2 K. 17.15. The Lord had charged them that they
should not do like the heathen.

3. God punished the heathens for those practices they took up, see Levit.
18.24, 25, 26.28. Deuteronomy. 12.29, 30. he cast them out before their eyes, 2 K.
16.3.

VERSE. 13.
And it came to pass that when I prophesied that Pelatiah the son of Benaiah
dyed, then fell I down upon my face, and cried with a loud voice, and said, Ah
Lord God, will thou make a full end of the remnant of Israel.


THis verse presents unto us, 1. The death of Pelatiah. 2. The time of it, when
I prophesied. 3. The consequents of this judgment upon Pelatiah, which are, 1.
The Prophet's falling upon his face. 2. His exclamation; he cried with a loud,
etc. 3. What he cried out, Ah Lord God, etc.



Some doubts lie wrapped up in this verse, and must be cleared: our Prophet was
in body amongst the Captives in Babylon; in spirit he was in the Temple at the
Eastgate of the Lords house, verse. 1. of this Chap.

1. Q. How Ezekiel. says here, when I prophesied, Pelatiah dyed? when as he had
yet prophesied nothing, he was now in a vision, and v. 24, 25. after this he
was returned by the spirit into Chaldea, and then he spoke all the things the
Lord had showed him.

Ans. 1. Some think that by prophesying here is not meant actual prophesying,
as if our Prophet did prophecy, and give out what the Lord said; but the
hearing of prophecy, and that place is brought to justify it, 1 Cor. 11.5.
Every woman that prays or prophecyeth; that is say they which hears
prophecy, and so they will have our Prophet only to hear prophetical truths
which the Lord gave out, and that Pelatiah should dye; but this sense of the
words seems harsh, and the Text says he prophesied, he did not hear
prophecy, hear Pelatiah should dye; why at the hearing of these things should
he fall down upon his face, and cry out as he did?

2. The Lord had great indignation against these men gave ill counsel, and
bids Ez^kiel prophecy, verse. 4. and doubles the command, prophecy, prophecy
against them, and then the spirit fell upon him, v. 5. and bade him speak, thus
says the Lord, etc. therefore it might well be, that he prophesied (while he
was in the vision) visionally, and so had a visionall sight of Pelatiah's
death: and then after when he came to them in the captivity, he spoke to the
captivity all the things that the Lord had showed him, and there the real
death of Pelatiah was.

3. The Prophet wrote this story after he had prophesied in Babylon, and so
might insert these words here being upon the story of these 25. men; for it is
usual in Scripture to set that before which was done after.

Q. 2. But then a second doubt arises; if Ezekiel were in Babylon, and
prophesied there, how could this prophecy reach the men that were at Jerusalem
to them it belonged, and the Prophets voice could not extend to their ears?

Ans. 1. Be it granted that the Prophet was at a distance from them at
Jerusalem, yet the virtue of the prophecy, though not the words, might, and
did extend to Jerusalem. When Ezekiel fell really to prophecy against these
men, then Pelatiah dyed: When Isaiah prophesied against Babylon, Moab,
Damascus, Aethiopia, and Egypt, Isa. 13.15.17, 18, 19, 20. Chapters, he was
at a great distance from them, yet the prophesies were fulfilled upon them.

2. There was intercourse between those at Jerusalem, and those in Babylon,
Jer. 29.1.3. Zedekiah sent Elazah and Gemariah to Babylon, and Jeremiah sent
letters to them, to acquaint them with his prophecy concerning them, and by
those men or others, might Ezekiels prophecy be made known to them at
Jerusalem.

Q. 3. How knew Ezekiel that Pelatiah dyed at that time when he prophesied?

Answ. 1. This he might know by comparing the tidings of his death, by
messengers brought unto him, and certifying the time, day, and hour thereof,
comparing the same with the time of his prophesying; for Pelatiah being a
Prince of the people, great notice would be taken of his death, and the hour
of it fly abroad swiftly, and that to Babylon. Ezekiel. 33.21. When the City was
besieged, one got away, and brought tidings thereof to Ezekiel. much more easily
might they do it before.

2. The spirit of prophecy might certify our Prophet hereof, that when he did
prophecy, Pelatiah should dye at that time. Elijah could tell Ahaziah, that he
should never come off the bed he lay sick upon, 2 Kings 1.4. And Abijah could
tell Jeroboams wife that when her feet entered into the City, the child should
dye, 1 K. 14.12. and v. 17. when she came to the threshold of the door, the
child dyed.

Qu. 4. How comes it to pass that these 25. men, not being of the number of
marked ones, Chap. 9. escaped the sword of the six slaughter-men, when they
slew all unmarked ones in the Sanctuary, and in the City?

Answ. They were visionally slain, not really, till the siege and taking of
Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar, when also the other 24 perished, being carried
thence to the borders of Israel. And whereas some think Pelatiah here dyed only
visionally, they detract much from the words of the Prophet, who says he dyed;
you know he prophesied against them all, the 25. and they were all cut off
afterward: and if Pelatiah's death were visional, why saw he not visionally the
death of all the rest.

The truth is, Pelatiah was made an example, to show the reality and efficacy
of this prophecy; for when the Captives understood that the thing was so at
Jerusalem, as Ezekiel prophesied in Babylon, that Pelatiah a Prince was
stricken dead by the hand of the Lord, they began to change their thoughts of
them at Jerusalem, that they had done wisely to stay it out there, and that
themselves were improvident in coming into Babylon: but now they saw God was
going on with his judgments against them, and that safety was on their own
side.

Of falling upon the face, and crying out, ah Lord God, see Chapter 9.8. where
those expressions have been opened.

Will thou make a full end of the remnant of Israel.
Q. 5. What moved the Prophet to use these words; here was only the death of
one man, and that a wicked man; had he seen thousands cut off, smitten dead by
the hand of God, he might have feared all the remnant of Israel, he knew there
were many marked ones, commission given to spare them, and therefore why does
he conceive the Lord would make a full end of the remnant of Israel?

Answ. 1. Some think Pelatiah being the chief of the Princes, and bearing great
sway (for Zedekiah stood in awe of them, Jer. 38.5.) among the people, that our
Prophet speaks in their person, rather then his own, and thus it is carried.
Pelatiah has been our Councellor, has great interest in us, we confide more
in him then others, and now thou have cut him off who was our support: Ah Lord,
will thou make a full end of the remnant of Israel. That the Prophet should
speak in their person, I see nothing to induce it, it is not like so wicked a
people would make so gracious an use of this judgment, but rather encourage
themselves in Jaazaniah and the rest.

2. I conceive the words refer only to the Prophet, who seeing this stroke
of God upon Pelatiah, cried out so,

1. From his love to that people in general, they were Israelites, and love is
full of fears.

2. He remembered Chap. 9.5, 6. the commission given to the slaughtering Angels
to be without pity, to slay old and young, maids, women, children: and now
seeing the judgment begun upon Pelatiah, he knew not but that it might proceed
to the destruction of all, and he therefore says, ah Lord God, etc.

He had received in this vision much matter for prophecy, which was not yet
given out, and hereupon seeing Pelatiah smitten, he cried out so.

Q. 6. should not Ezekiel. have rejoiced in the death of Pelatiah? Ps. 58.10. The
righteous shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance: Did not he neglect a duty,
and so offend, seeing he wept and mourned?

A. We are to rejoice at the ruin of the wicked. Exodus 15. when Pharaoh and
his host were drowned in the red Sea, and Egypt howling for their loss, then
Moses and the Israelites sang unto the Lord; when Sisera was slain, Baruch and
Deborah sang to the Lord, Judge. 5. and Solomon lays it down for a maxim,
Prove. 11.10. When the wicked perish, (...) Cantus exultatio ovatio.
there is shouting and great joy. The Saints may rejoice at the deaths of
wicked ones, be they natural or violent.

1. As it sets out the glory of his justice: he has threatened sinners in his
word, and when he executes his threats upon them, gives them according to the
nature of their sin, then his justice is glorious.

2. As way hereby is made for the spreading of truth, inlargment of the
Gospel, and Kingdom of Christ.

3. As their death tends to the clearing of the godly: David was suspected, yea
accused by Nabal to be some run-agate, 1 Samuel 25.10. God smites Nabal with
death, v. 38. when David heard it he blesses God for it that he had pleaded
the cause of his reproach from the hand of Nabal, and returned his wickedness
upon his head, v. 39.

4. As by their death the godly gain liberty: so when Haman was hanged, and his
10. sons, and other enemies of the Jews put to death, they feasted and
rejoiced, Est. 9.19. They were freed from their vexations, oppressions,
cruelties, plots.

5. As there is a stop made to wickedness, Prove. 21.11. When the scorner is
punished, the simple is made wise. Sin cease in the scorner, being cut off,
and others cease their wickedness, and grow wise by their stroke. Now
Pelatiah's ill counsel, example, power, and what ever he had to promote
iniquity withal, ceased. So then we may rejoice upon those grounds, but not
out of any private respect or revengefull apprehension.

But there is also matter of grief and mourning: God delights not in the death
of a sinner, neither should any godly man. As therefore Pelatiah was a wicked
man, dyed in his sins, was suddenly cut off, ran a hazard of his eternal
condition, so it was matter of mourning: Our Prophet therefore might rej^yce
upon the grounds first mentioned, and mourn upon these last named; but as I
hinted in the former q^estion, he looked beyond this one man to the state of
Israel.

Pelatiah a Prince of the people gave ill counsel in the City, scoffed at the
Prophecy of Jeremie, this City the cauldron, and we are the flesh, and here
God smites him. The dreadfulnesse of the judgment is seen in four things.

1. In that he smites his life, not his estate, not his liberty, not his near
friends, not any limb, but his life; he smote him in that was dearest of all,
his life; with that was most feared of all, death, the King of fears.

2. It was sudden: When judgments are sudden, they note severity, Deuteronomy. 7.4.
when Gods wrath is kindled, and kindled very hot against idolatry, who
expresses the heat and severity of it this way, he will destroy thee suddenly.
And Pro 6.14, 15. A wicked man devises mischife, sows discord, therefore
shall his calamity come suddenly: (...)
suddenly shall he be broken without remedy. Sudden judgments are unthought
of, such men are unprepared for; here are two words to express suddenly, pithom
and pethah quae rem maxim improvisam and subitam denotant: and therefore Isa.
29.5. God tells Jerusalem that her judgment should be at an instant, suddenly,
yea as sudden as thunder and lightning, v. 6. And Chap. 30.12, Scoffers,
despisers of Gods word, shall have momentanous judgments.
13. Because they despised the word of God, he tells them their judgment
should be as a swelling in a high wall, whose breaking comes suddenly, at an
instant. Magnum est subito opprimi, when judgments are graduall, they are
admonitorious, and there is hope; but when they are so sudden, all hope is cut
off, and r^medie prevented.

3. Immediate from Gods hand, it was the immediate hand of God upon him. What
ever is immediate from God, mercy or judgment, has the more comfort or
terror in it. In hell is immediate wrath from God, and therefore it is more
dreadful: so when fire and brimstone came upon Sodom and Gomorrah, this made
it so terrible, that it was immediately from the Lord, Genesis 19.24. When
judgments come immediately from God, they come with a greater weight of wrath
upon them then others.

4. It Is exemplary, a great man, a Prince of the people. Great men have great
sins, and great judgments: some men are not only hanged or beheaded, but
they are also quartered, their heads and quarters are set up on the gates of
Cities, and made spectacles to all that pass by, so here Pelatiah is made a
spectacle of divine vengeance.

Solomon told us long since, that judgments are prepared for scorners, Prove.
19.29. and stripes for the back of fools. (...)
The word for stripes imports graves percussiones quibus res quassatur,
contunditur, such stripes as shiver and break a thing. Ahitophel caused Absalom
to go in to his Fathers Concubines, he gave him ill counsel against David, 1 Samuel 16.17. Chap. and you know what a sad and dreadful judgment befell him.
The Captain^s with their fifties scoffed at Elijah, when they said, thou man of
God; 2 Kings 1.
thou say thou art a man of God, and the foolish people think so of thee;
but we know thou art a deceiver, and the King has sent for thee, come down or
we will fetch thee down: but before they could fetch him down, he fetches down
fire from heaven which consumed these scoff^rs to ashes. The children that
mocked the Prophet, 42. 2 Kings 2.
of them were torn in pieces by two she bears. Lucian falling off from
Christianity, grew a scoffer, and said, se nihil habere ex christianismo quam
cum antea Lucius vocatus est nunc Lucianus vocaretur, but Suidas tells us he was
eaten up of dogs. Julian would take away the Christians wealth, and say that he
took this, ut centuplum juxta servatoris sui doctrinam reciperent, but the Lord
struck him from heaven, and he dyed blaspheming. The story of Nightinghale is
known, which Mr. Fox relates, how abusing that Scripture, he that says he has
no sin is a liar, and the truth is not in him, he fell out of the Pulpit and
brake his neck. Another making mouths at a godly Minister preaching, had his
mouth drawn greatly awry, and so dyed. One present in this congregation was an
eyewitness of a woman scoffing at another for purity, and walking holily, had
her tongue stricken immediately with the palsy, and dyed thereof within two
days. Take heed of jeering and scoffing, the penitent Thief was admitted into
Paradise, when the scoffing one was sent to hell.

2. Princely and high conditions are quickly laid in the dust: Pelatiah a
Prince of the people, in great honor, all things about him as heart could
wish, likely to have continued long here, is brought in, a dead corpse; there is
no certainty in any condition, Acts 12. Dan. 5. Exodus 14.
how suddenly was Herod eaten of worms, Nebuchadnezzar driven from his Palace,
and Pharaoh drowned in the bottom of the sea.

1 These. 5.3. When they shall say peace and safety, then sudden destruction,
etc. And Christ said, ye know not what hour the Lord will come, watch: So we
know not what hour death will come, therefore let us watch.

The Papists call upon St. Christopher to keep them from sudden death; let us
call upon Christ to prepare us for, and preserve us in death.

3. God sometimes meets with wicked men when his Ordinances are dispensing.
When I prophesied, then Pelatiah dyed; it was at the time of prophecy; when
the word is preached, other Ordinances administered, then does God smite
sinners, sometimes present at the Ordinance, and sometimes absent, as Pelatiah
was. Ezekiel. 37.7. As I prophesied there was a noise, and behold a shaking, and
the bones came together. This was done as he prophesied, there was great virtue
and efficacy in his words: so here, when he prophesied, a noise was heard, and
behold, a shaking: Pelatiah shakes, and shakes to pieces, the power of Ezekiels
prophecy in Babylon, slayes Pelatiah at Jerusalem. There is a converting power
in the Word which converts when men are present; but there is a wounding and
confounding power in it also when men are absent and present. When the Apostles
preached, sometimes the holy Ghost fell upon men, Acts 10.44. and sometimes
heavy judgments. Elimas the sorcerer is smitten blind; Ananias and Saphira are
stricken dead, if not in the time of the Ordinance, yet immediately thereupon.
Jeroboam thrusts out his hand to take hold of the Prophet which prophesied
against the Altar at Bethel, and his hand was dried up, 1 K. 13. When Paul was
preaching, Eurichus sleeps, falls down and is taken up dead, Acts 20.9. at
that time he fell down when the ordinance was dispensing: and certainly when
the servants of God do preach and prophecy against sinners present or absent,
sometimes God smites them. Hos. 6.5. I have hewed them by the Prophets; the
word was an axe in their mouths, and every time they prophesied judgment, they
hewed the state and particular persons. 1 Kings 19.17. They escape the sword of
Haz^el and Jehu, shall Elisha slay; how? by his prophesying and preaching. This
God does to put honor upon his word, that so men may fear, respect his
Ordinances, and take heed how they hear.

4. Not only judgments themselves are to be observed, but the circumstances of
them also: When I prophesied, then Pelatia dyed; he notes the time in a
special manner. Circumstances of time, place, and person do add much weight
to the judgments of God, and truth of a story: here you have all, the time when
Ezekiel prophesied; the place, the door of the Eastern gate of the Temple at
Jerusalem, v. 1. the name, Pelatiah. These add strength to the judgments and
prophecy. Circumstances commend mercies, and aggravate judgments; to be
smitten when the Prophet was prophesying against him, sets out the judgment
with life and terror. Circumstances help to serve the thing into the heart,
and to fasten it upon the memory; the time of things is much mentioned in the
word, be it of sins, Jer. 11.15. When thou do evil, then thou rejoycest; or
of mercies, when Manasseh was brought back to Jerusalem, then Manasseh knew
that the Lord was God, 2 Chronicles. 33.13. or of judgments, Judge. 5.8. They chose
new gods, then was war in the gates. Numb. 11.33. While the flesh was between
their teeth, ere it was chewed, the wrath of the Lord was kindled against the
people, and he smote them with a great plague. So Dan. 4.30. While the word was
in the Kings mouth, the voice was heard, thy Kingdom is departed from thee:
And Dan. 2.5. Whiles Belshazzar tasted wine in the bowls of the Temple, in the
same hour came forth fingers that writ letters of death upon the wall. And of
Vzziah it is said, then he was wroth, and whiles he was so, the leprosy even
rose up in his forehead, 2 Chronicles. 26.19. The Prophets observed the times of
Gods giving out the threatenings, and the times of execution.

5. Holy and good men fear when the judgments of God fall heavily and
suddenly upon wicked men. Psalm. 52.6. When Gods hand should fall upon Doeg,
says David, the righteous shall see and fear; what shall they see to make
them fear? the glory and power of God in executing justice, in cutting off
delinquents Psalm. 9.16. The Lord is known by the judgments he executes,
known to be most powerful, glorious, dreadful; he is present in them, and the
godly have eyes to see much of him. When Angels appeared, Gideon a man of
valor and others feared; much more when God appears in thunder and lightning,
in sudden and grievous judgments there is cause of fear. When Vzzah was
smitten with a sudden stroke, David was afraid of the Lord, 2 Samuel 6.9. this
might occasion that in the 119. Ps. 120. My flesh trembles for fear of thee,
and I am afraid of thy judgments. Gods judgments are now abroad, and not
only wicked men but good also are cut down suddenly: Let us fear, and not only
that, but do as the Prophet and other holy men did at such a time, Isa. 26.8,
9. Let us wait for God, let the desire of our souls be to his name, let us
desire him in the night, seek him early with our spirits, for now is the time
that the inhabitants of the world should learn righteousness.

6. Sudden or great judgments do put the Saints and servants of God upon
humble, earnest, and argumentative prayer; humble, Then fell I down upon my
face, earnest, and cried with a loud voice, argumentative, Ah Lord God, will thou make a full end of the remnant of Israel. Judgments looked upon by the
Saints, are of an humbling nature, prompt them with arguments to wrestle with
God, and that earnestly, Josh. 7.5, 6, 7, 8, 9.

7. When God begins judgments with some are wicked among them, the godly look
upon it as an inlet to public misery; will thou make a full end of the
remnant of Israel? Joshuah when the men fell before A^, and Israel fled, looked
not only at the loss of those men fell, but as the hazard of all, Josh. 7.7.
Have thou brought this people over Jordan, to deliver us into the hand of the
Amorites to destroy us? So when Gods wrath brake in a little upon the people in
Moses days, he feared lest the sea of Gods wrath should come in at once upon
them, therefore he stood in the briars, Psalm. 106.23. to turn away his wrath
lest he should destroy them. When a cloud rises, droppeth a little, they fear
a great storm, a deluge, and therefore look at the public, they know what
God has said, when I begin I will make an end.

VESS. 14, 15
Again the word of the Lord came unto me, saying:

Son of man, thy brethren, even thy brethren, the men of thy kindred, and all
the house of Israel wholly are they, unto whom the inhabitants of Jerusalem
have said, Get ye far from the Lord, unto us is this land given in possession.


THese words are an answer to the Prophets deprecation of judgment; he had
pleaded with God to spare the residue of Israel; the Lord tells him that the
inhabitants of Jerusalem looked upon them as none of the Lords people, upon the
Land, City, Temple, Ordinances as theirs only; they thought the captives had
nothing to do with God, but were an abject people like the Babylonians and
Heathens, cut off from God, the holy Land, and holy things; now says God, see
whom thou have interceded for? are these fit to be spared? will thou have those
that hate thee and the rest of the captives to lie at peace in Jerusalem? The
Lord sets them out before the Prophet what kind of persons they were, and
leaves it upon his thoughts to consider of them, and gives not in the complete
answer till after in verse. 21.

Or thus, the Prophet feared lest God would now destroy all, and so his Church
perish altogether; but God here intimates to him that the residue of Israel lay
not in the 25. mentioned before, nor in them that were in Jerusalem, but rather
in those who were gone into captivity, thy brethren, even thy brethren, the men
of thy kindred, etc. He calls his thoughts to them, and would rather have him
look at them, the seed of the Church, the persons to whom the promises
belonged, of whom should come the Messiah, then the others.

Thy brethren.
The word brethren has diverse acceptions in Scripture,

1. It notes the common nature of man, as in Genesis 29.4. says Jacob, Whence are
ye my brethren.

2. Those are born of the same parents, one or both, Genesis 37.11.23. Mat. 20.24.

3. Such as are of kindred by consanguinity or affinity, so Christ's kinsmen
were called his brethren, 1 Cor. 9.5.

4. Those agree together, and are partners in any business, at Simeon and Levi
were brethen in iniquity, in murdering the Shechemites, Genesis 49.5.

5. Those are godly true believers, that do the will of God, Mat. 12.49. Heb.
2.11. 1 Timothy 4.6. 1 These, 5.27.

6. Them that are of the same calling, Numb. 18.2. Ezr. 6.20. 2 Cor. 8.23.

Lastly, Those are of the same Country and Nation, Romans 9.2. Paul could wish
himself accursed for his brethren who were Israelites of the Jewish nation. In
what sense to take brethren is doubtful, because the verse speaks afterward
of the men of his kindred, and all the house of Israel, so that hereby two
acceptions of the word seem to be excluded, and the 1.2d and 4th are not
intended. We may take brethren here for those of the same calling, French is,
lez hommes de ton parentage Cast. Tuae consanguinitatis homines. Pisc.
Consanguinei tui. Vulg Propinqui tui. Jun. and tree necessarij tui. The heb. is,
viri redemptionis, tui. Most. (...)
such as were Priests and Prophets, few the Levites; but because these were
few, we may take in also the kindred of the Prophet, for the words are not thy
brethren, and the men of thy kindred, as making a difference between these;
but thus are the words, thy brethren, even thy brethren, the men of thy kindred.

Men of thy kindred.
Heb. is, the men of thy redemption. The law of redemption was, that if a man
were waxen poor, and had sold his house, land, or any person, some kinsman was
to redeem it, as you may see, Levit. 25.25. and usually the nearest K^nsman was
to do it: and the words, if any of his kin come to redeem it, in the Hebr. are
uba goalo bakkarob elas and venerit redemptor ejus ille qui propinquus ad eum,
he that is near to him, it lay upon him was nearest of blood to redeem house,
land, or persons, and also to revenge the blood of persons if slain, Numb.
35.12. and therefore is rendered here by some viri vindiciarum tuarum, the men
of thy avengements. Both these do set out near kinsmen, and therefore it is
likely here are meant some special kindred of the Prophets.

All the house of Israel.
All that were in Babylon carried away with Jech^niah, it is spoken
synechdochically, Israel for Judah.

Are they.
These words are not in the Original; but here are many nominative cases
absolute, without any verb to refer to, or depend upon: Thy brethren, even
thy brethren, the men of thy kindred and all the house of Israel wholly: This
is usual in the holy writ, Psalm. 11.4. The Lord in his holy Temple, the Lords
throne in heaven. So Ephesians. 3.1. For this cause I Paul a prisoner of Christ for
you Gentiles. It Is so in many places, which may be to make us heed the more
what we read.

Unto whom the inhabitants of Jerusalem have said, get ye far from the Lord,
etc.
In this part of the verse is laid down the unjust proceedings of the men at
Jerusalem against those in Babylon, and it appears in these things; 1 They
judge them not the Lords people, and so deny them communion with God and his woe
ship, and therefore say, Get ye far from the Lord. 2. They arrogate Gods
Temple, and the worship of it to themselves, which is employed. 3. They
challenge the land and all in it to be theirs: To us is this land given in
possession. 4. They spoke those words with disdain and scorn against the
captives, they said, get ye far from the Lord, ye are none of our brethren,
none of the Church, ye are of Babylon, we are of Sion: ye were a foolish and
timorous company, void of counsel and spirit in leaving your own Country,
this City, and Temple.


Get ye far from the Lord.
They deemed God was no where but in the Temple: And Chap. 8.6. their
abominations had caused God to go far from his Sanctuary; it is probable
that from this phrase the Heathens took up those passages of thir^ (...) procul
este prophani, Schotti adagia sacra, p. 19. Lavat.
(...), gressus removete prophani: So those expressions, ite in malam crucem,
(...), the Jews at Jerusalem thought the Jews in Babylon to be cut off from
their body they had unworthily left them, and were not now worthy to have any
interest in their God or land.

Ezekiel showed some weakness in saying, will thou make a full end of the
residue of Israel? When God in his hearing had appointed the mourners to be
marked, and had answered him this question before, Chap. 9. yet God bears with
his weakness, and speaks to him in a loving manner, and says, Son of man,
and he upbraids him not for any forgetfulness of what was done, for any
jealousy he had of Gods failing in making good his promise. He says not, what
troublest thou me any more? thou have had an aswer, be gone, be silent? No, the
Lord knows our weakness, Psalm. 103.13, 14. As a father pittieth his children,
so does the Lord them that fear him; For he knows our frame, because we
have weaknesses, therefore does God pity, he does not punish, but pity the
weakness of his. Deuteronomy. 1.31. In the wilderness the Lord thy God did hear
thee as a man does bear his son, in all the way that ye went. Sometimes the
father carries the child in his arms, sets it upon his knee, and dandles it;
the crying, peevishness, half services, cost, trouble in its education, he
bears with all: and so whatever is burdensome in Gods children, he suffers it,
Acts 13.18.40. he suffered their manners, (...) some think it put for (...) as
a Nurse bears her child in her womb, in her arms, feeds it with her
breasts; so God suffered them. Isa. 63.9. He bare them, and carried them all
the days of old, and does so still. The Lord Christ bears our infirmities,
and puts up many a hard thing from us: Peter's denial, Paul and Barnabas
contention, Thomas his unbelief; and not only the infirmities of one or two,
but of all Saints, Heb. 4.15. He is touched, and touched to the quick with the
feeling of our infirmities.

2. Those have the name and show of a Church are rigid, cruel, against those
are the true Church: they of Jerusalem say to the others, get you far from the
Lord; They were in captivity, suffered hard and sore things there, yet these
add afflictions to their affliction, they tell them they are none of Gods
people, have nothing to do with his worship; and so cut them off from all
hope, Isa. 10.6. They were an hypocritical Nation, and they persecute,
excommunicate those were faithful and obedient to the will of God; for those
Jews were in Babylon at the command of God, and the counsel of Jeremiah,
yielded themselves to Nebuchadnezzar, and were carried away; hereupon they at
Jerusalem reject them, and thrust them from God and his worship. False
worshippers ever hate the true. The Samaritans and those worshipped the Calves,
hated the Jews that differed in their worship from them. 1 These. 2.14, 15. Ye
brethren became followers of the Churches of God, which in Judaea are in Christ
Jesus; for ye also have suffered like things of your own country men, even as
they have of the Jews, who both killed the Lord Jesus and their own Prophet,
and have persecuted us, forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles, v. 16. Thus
the Papists and others deal with us, because they have the name of Church and
some corrupt Ordinances, can plead succession of their Priests from Peter,
therefore they reproach us who are justly gone from them, with the terms of
Heretics, Schismatics, Synagogue of Satan, the malignant Church; that we have
torn Christ's coat, ren^ our selves from his dody; that we have shaken the
Church, and troubled the whole world: Thus with their virulent tongues do they
asperse us; thus Ishmael dealt with Isaac, Gal. 4.29. Long ago the worse
persecuted the better, thus is it now.

3. Men of rigid and bitter spirits are puffed up and conceited of their ways
and privileges; see it here, they separate the other far from God, bid them
get them far off, which amounts to this, you have nothing to do with God or
his ways; God is not with you, he is with us, his O^dinances are for us; you
are false, erroneous, but we are orthodox, sound, and the possession and
privileges of the Temple are ours; they justified and preferred themselves
above, and before those were in Babylon, and boasted closely of their own worth
and advantages; Their malice blinded them, and m^d^ them boast foolishly. Paul
had a persecuting spirit at first, and how conceited was he of his own ways,
Acts 26.9, 10, 11. I verily thought with my self that I ought to do many
things contray to the name of Jesus of Nazareth, and therefore he complained of
the Saints, got power from Authority to puni^h them, Insinuated all arguments
to make them odious.
to imprison them, to put them to death, therefore he compelled them to
blaspheme, and persecuted them to strange Cities, and fulfilled that which
Christ had said, John 16.2. They shall put you out of the Synagogues; yea the
time comes, that whosoever kills you will think he does God service. They,
the Scribes and Pharisees, they would not suffer the Christians to meet in
their Synagogues, and their Teachers to preach unto them; but stirred up those
had power in their hand to persecute and put them to death. The Scribes and
Pharisees were opinionated of their own ways, and could not endure others
better then themselves. Luke 18.11, 12. says the Pharisee, I am not as other
men are. True, for he was more better conceited of his own righteousness, and
further from mercy then the Publican.

4. Men in false and corrupt ways are glad they are rid of those are
conscientious, bound up by divine truths, and obedient to the will of God.
Ezekiel, Daniel, and others knew, that if they had staid in Jerusalem, and not
yielded themselves to Nebuchadnezzar, they had dyed for it; they were
acquainted with Jeremies prophecy and counsel, which doubtless he had
delivered in Jehoiachin's days, as well as in Zedechiah's, Chap. 21.9.38.2.
That if they yielded themselves to the King of Babylon, they should live, which
they durst not disobey: and therefore it is said, 2 Kings 24.12. that Jehoiakim
King of Judah went out to the King of Babylon, (...).
which act of his Josephus magnifies, saying, he was so good and just, that he
would not see the City to perish for his sake; that the City and Citizens might
be the safer, he hearkened to Jeremies counsel. Now these men that were left at
Jerusalem were glad they were gone, even Ezekiel and his brethren that were of
his judgment, and d^ffer'd from them, and Jeremie they were weary of, and
those thought as he thought, Jer. 38.4. So that men in false ways, are
desirous, and glad to be rid of those conform not to themselves. Isa. 66.5.
Your brethren that hated you, that cast you out for my names sake, said, let
the Lord be glorified. Those were the godly, opposed the false ways of the
rest, and labored to reduce them to the truth, therefore they hated them, and
cast them out as they pretended, for the Lords name sake, they said they had
the true way and worship, that the others were erroneous, factious, proud,
censorious, troublers of Church and State, and therefore in reference to Gods
name they cast them out, excommunicated them, the word is, (...) elongantes
vos, get ye far off out of our coasts and quarters; get ye into Babylon, or
to the 10. Tribes, we may not, we cannot, we will not bear you: and how did
they rejoice in it, let God be glorified. It Is no fault of ours, thank your
selves: you are so tenacious of your opinions, so differing from us, and so
burdensome to us, that we shall do God and the Church good service to cast
you out; God shall have glory, and we shall have ease; we shall go on quietly
in our way. So the Jews and Pharisees cast out the blind man, when once he
came to see more then themselves, John 9.34. and made an order to cast any man
out that should confess Christ, and so differ from them in judgment or
practice, verse. 22. This is the nature of falsehood; whereas truth is so far
from drawing men from God, that it invites them to come to God: Truth and true
godliness is full of love, which bears, hops, and endures all things, 1
Cor. 13.7. and therefore the servants of God are described, 2 Timothy 2.24, 25. To
be gentle to all men, patient, in meekness instructing those that oppose,
(...), if at any time God, etc. They will not drive men from God, from truth,
but bear and forbear, that if it be possible they may draw men to the truth.
How was Ezekiel affected with their condition, how did he intercede for them?

5. The Lord considers and takes notice of the words and ways of those which
have ill will to his people, though far off from them: There were some
faithful ones in Babylon, and they at Jerusalem spoke hardly of them, dealt
unkindly with them; they said, get ye far off from the Lord, ye are neither
our brethren, nor the Lords children: Ye have no right to this land, nor
interest in us. This the Lord laid to heart, and took notice of* and acq^aints
the Prophet with it; there is nothing thought, said, or done in the world
against any of the Lords, but he has cognizance of it, and as seems good to
him, discovers the same, any bitter passages toward his he observes. Obad. v.
11. God tells Edom there of her dealing with his people; when strangers carried
away my people captive, thou stoodst on the other side, and wast as one of the
enemies; but thou should not have looked on, rejoiced, and spoken proudly in
the day of their distress; thou should not have laid hands on their
substance, nor have cut off those that escaped: verse. 15. As thou have done, it
shall be done to thee, thy reward shall return upon thine own head. They spoke
proudly, and did cruelly against their brethren, but God observed it, and
rewarded it. Psalm. 50.20. Thou sit and speak against thy brother, thou
slanderest thy own mothers son: but I will reprove thee. So in Jer. 48.30. I
know his wrath says the Lord, but it shall not be so, his lies shall not so
effect it. Moab was proud and wrathful against the people of God, threatened
them, plotted against them, and thought by lies and crafty carriages of things
to ruin them, the Lord regarded it, and said, his lies shall not so effect it;
the word for lies is (...) and rendered bars in the margent: Nugae ejus Mont.
Lies were their refuge, their strength, the bars they trusted to, and leaned
on; but lies should not effect it, God would break those bars, and frustrate
their lies. Zeph. 28.9. I have heard the reproach of Moab, and the revilings of
the children of Ammon, whereby they have reproached my people, and magnified
themselves against their border. Therefore as I live says the Lord of hosts,
the God of Israel, surely Moab shall be as Sodom, and the children of Ammon as
Gomorrah, even the breeding of Nettles and Salt pits, and a perpetual
desolation; Let men speak and plot against the servants of God, in due time
Christ will come with 10000. of his Saints to convince men of all their hard
speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against h m and his.

6. Men deeply guilty, are deeply secure, they were Idolatrous in the highest
degree, so oppressive that they filled the Land with bloody crimes and cries,
they were profane and scoffed at the Prophets, and their Prophesies; they had
seen a sudden hand of God upon Pelatiah, and yet they were secure and promised
safety to themselves, the Land is ours, its given us in possession, we shall
quietly enjoy it, we fear no Captivity, loss of Country, Temple, or City.
Their King was under disgrace, he had violated the oath, perjured himself, and
shortly after, Mothers did eat their Children, and men in Scarlet embraced the
dunghill; all was laid wast, and yet they feared not. Sometimes when their
consciences were awakened, and guilt stirred, they did fear, but genarally
they were secure, and dreamed of liberty and long life. The Egyptians feared
not till the waters came upon them and drowned them: God plucked away the ten
Tribes for their sins, and sent them into Captivity, yet Jer. 3.8.
Treacherous Judah feared not, but went on in her ways of wickedness, and when
the Sword was at the do^r^, they looked still for peace, Jer. 8.15, 16. Some
creatures sleep most in Winter, and many are drowsy against rainy weather,
wicked men are sleepy when storms are coming.

7. Those go out from the Brethren upon just grounds, and meet with unjust
censures for it, God will justify and vindicate. These captives in Babylon
went forth from Jerusalem, which only was the place of Gods worship, where only
he had a people and that upon Jeremiahs counsel and exhortation they went
forth to save the City and their lives, for this they are censured deeply of
the Inhabitants of Jerusalem; but the Lord pleads for them, and says to the
Prophet, Thy Brethren, thy Brethren, are the men spoken against: this
patheticall repetition of the word brethren, notes Gods indignation against
their censure they gave of them, and his calling of them, the Prophets
Brethren, argues his clearing of the Prophet, and them, in what they had done.
And the next ve se cleares it further, they did nothing but what God would have
done; and therefore ownes as his own act, I have cast them far off among the
Heathen, etc. If Gods people do withdraw from others upon good grounds, what
ever men object against them, yet they shall have approbation in Heaven, and in
their own hearts: These were justified for going out of Sion into Babylon;
surely then God will not condemn men for coming out of Babylon into Sion.
When we left Rome and Romish trash, we had good warrant for it; and so Luther
who took the first step thence: For indulgencies troubled Luther, and when he
Preached against them, the Romish Priests, d d alto fastu disdain his
Preaching, he heard the way of truth blasphemed, saw men were forced to new
Articles of Faith, and himself was compelled to submit to S^tanicall Doctrine;
these were just causes to induce Luther to leave the Romish Babylon: And
therefore he was unjustly excommunicated by Pope Leo, in whose Bull this is
made the cause, Mort. Grand impost. p. 335.
because he denied the Church to have power to create new Articles of faith:
But the Lord has justified his separation from them, and ours since him; their
Idolatrous Mass, their corrupt Doctrines, denying of the Cup to the people,
etc. are just grounds for us and others to leave them; for if Rome be a Church,
We have not left the word of God, the Apostles of Christ, or Churches they
instituted; but we are gone, ab hypocritarum contagione, Alsted.
its not only subject to errors as other Churches are, but more subject to
erring then any other Church Christian, and the most Schismatic of all
Christian Churches, and the only Church against which there is a Prophecy in
the Gospel, of falling from the Faith, which three last things that learned
man Morton shows, and he has a section (its the 7. of his 15. Ch.) to show
what may be judged necessary causes of separation from any particular Churches,
as obstinacy of error in Teachers, affected ignorance, obduration of people.
Idolatry in Gods worship, tyranny and persecution against the true and sincere
professors; to which I conceive this may further be added, that if a Church be
so defiled that the Members of it cannot partake of the Ordinances without
sin, having used all means for redress, they may justly depart, so it be in
a peaceable manner, and God will justify them.

8. Where much may be pretended for truth of Churchship, there may be no
Church. Same mak^ notes of the true Church.

1. Succession, There can be no true succession without true Doctrine.
Stapleton.
those at Jerusalem in Ezekiels days Priests and people succeeded Aron, Eli,
and other Priests and Levites, that were faithful, but at this time, they
were, both Priests, and people become fearfully Idolatrous, Frustra allegatur
successio personarum ubi non est successio formae.

2. Carnal seed: They were of kin to Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, and other
godly ones in Babylon; they were Abraham's, The Saracens are from Hagar and
Abraham, though for honor they chose to be called from Sarah, yet these are not
the true Church.
David's seed, yet this made them not a true Church, therefore Jeremiah calls
Judah a harlot, Chap. 3.8.

3. Multitudes, here were a greater multitude at J^rusalem then in Babylon, but
what were they? A multitude of Idolators, oppressors, scoffers, persecutors,
and such materials are fitter to make a Tower of Babel, then a Temple in Sion:
Multitudo vesparum non apum.

4. They dwell at Jerusalem, in Judea the holy City, the holy Land, but they
had defiled both with their abominations, and neither of those added any
holiness to them: Men at Jerusalem, and of Jerusalem were worse then those in
Babylon: I^s not Jerusal^m, or the local bounds of Judea can make these the
true Church.

5. Prosperity, outward pomp, greatness, glory, these men at Jerusalem had
what the World and creatures could afford them, plenty, honor, liberty, Unity
among them. Unity in idolatry oppression.
and they in Babylon were poor Captives, despised, villified, scorned ones; the
glory of the Church is internal, not external: and what glory had the
mourners in Jerusalem.

6. The Temple; and worship of it had these men at Jerusalem, the Captives had
no Temple, no sacrifices, no prosperity, no holy Land, or City, no multitudes,
no succession, yet they were the Church of God, and not those, for God is wro^h
with them of Jerusalem, for thinking themselves the Church, when as they were
none, and un-Churching the other, when as they were the true Church, and are
called by God, the house of Israel; and it further appears that those of
Jerusalem were not the true Church, because they were destinated to
destruction, and as sore judgments as ever people were, Chap. 5.9, 10. and six
slaughter-men designed to slay them utterly, Chap. 9. The truth of Churchship
is to be fetched from other things: Its Caetus fidelium, says our Article,
such as profess Christ and his Gospel, and practice answerably, such as are
orderly united and observe Divine order in the things of God, The word may be
truly Preached to those are no Church, and the seals administered to those are
a false Church as at this time Circumcision and the Passover: Ordinances are
food and maintenance of the Church rather then marks of it.
Ephesians. 4.12. the Apostles and other Officers in the Church were given (...),
for the joining together of the Saints, and putting them as members of the body
in their right places, Vt omnia apt inter se cohaereant, Col. 2.5, 6.

9. Its Gods mind and will, that those are strong, highly favored of God,
should look at those under, beneath them as Brethren; there were many in
Babylon questionless, who were mean in knowledge, low in naturals, weak in
faith, tainted with some errors and corruptions of Jerusalem, if not of
Babylon; yet says God, Thy Brethren, thy Brethren: Where there is any thing of
God or Christ, though many and great infirmities accompany and cloud the same,
we should look upon them as Brethren. When Christ saw a little moral good in
the young man, he looked upon him, and loved him, Mark 10.21. and shall we see
any spiritual good in any, and not love them and use them as Brethren. Look
only at the good and graces are in one another, and not at the weaknesses: You
can eye a little Gold in much earth, and why not a little grace, Gal. 6.2.
Bear ye one another burdens, and so fulfill the Law of Christ.

We must answer for stumbling at the infirmities of the godly, and also for
neglect of their graces; if their corruptions do alienate, their graces should
allure, its more honorable and Christian, to love them for bearing Christ's
Image, then for being of our judgment.

VERSE. 16.
Therefore say, Thus says the Lord God: although I have cast them far off
among the Heathen, and although I have scattered them amongst the Countries,
yet will I be to them as a little Sanctuary in the Countries where they shall
come.


AT this Verse begins comfort for the Captives, they were cast out, rejected,
and insulted over by their Brethren, filled with sad thoughts of their
condition: but here Heaven opens and light breaks out in sweet promises, and
they are these, 1. A promise of mercy to them in Babylon, verse. 16. 2. Of
returning thence, from Babylon to Syon. v. 17. 3. Of purifying them from their
pollutions in the Land of Canaan, verse. 18. 4. Of regeneration or conversion,
verse. 19, 20. 5. A threat to those whose hearts should cleave to their
detestable things, which is comfortable to the godly.


For the 16. Verse, the sum is this, They at Jerusalem look upon you in Babylon
as a forlorn and forsaken people, without God and his worship; they exclude
you from all fellowship and communion with them, yea from the Land of Canaan,
and condemn your act of leaving them as illegitimate, but go Ezekiel, and
tell them that it was my doings to remove and scatter you, and that howsoever
they look upon this act of mine, as a certain token of my vengeance upon you,
and tending to your utter destruction, yet let them know that they are
mistaken, and that I am a father of mercies, and will be a Sanctuary unto you
in Babylon, and have deserted them at Jerusalem, that the glory is departed
thence and come to you: Go declare this for their terror, and the comfort of
you Captives.

The words in the Verse are most of them plain and easy, only those must be
opened, I will be a little Sanctuary; for there is some diffi^ulty about them,
being variously interpreted. Sanctuary, (...) The word whence Mikdas comes, is
sometimes used in Scripture for cleansing and sanctifying; as 2 Samuel 11.4. She
was purified from her uncleanness, (...) Hence some render the word here, in
sanctificationem; thus, I will be to you for a little Sanctification; I will
purge and cleanse them; this Captivity shall be Ignis expurgatorius unto them,
seventy years they shall be in the fire, and after that they shall come forth,
as a Refiners Vessel, well purified from its dross, be restored to their
Land, have a new Temple and pure worship: So the vulgar has it, in
sanctificationem modicam, Jerome also takes it in this sense. In Babylon I will
sanctify them, divorce them from their Idols, turn them from their Idolatry,
that they may worship me purely; and it is observed, they never fell to
Idolatry more, after their return from the Babylonish Captivity.

In this sense it affords us this note, the Lord does sanctify and purge his
People, by sharp and long afflictions, they had greatly defiled themselves
with the sins of the Nations, and especially with Idolatry, and now he threw
them into the Furnace of affliction, to melt and separate the dross and tin
from them, some conceive that in Is 1.25. Referrs to this Babylonish captivity.
A Lapi^.
I will turn my hand upon thee and purely purge away thy dross and take away
all thy tin. Senacheribs coming did only scare them, Nebuchadnezzars
carrying them away and keeping them so many years in Babylon was the means
through Gods blessing to Sanctify them: Gods hottest and fiery trials are to
purge. Dan 11.35. God purges the Iniquity of Jacob by afflict on. Is 27.9. And
it is all the fruit he gives in it, to take away his sin, not to take away his
limbs or life but his sin: when the Seraphin touched Isaiah's lips with a
burning coal, it was terrible to him; but then he said, Thy iniquity is taken
away, thy sin is purged. Others take the word as here its rendered Sanctuary
and so is frequently used in the Scripture. as Jer. 17.12. Lament. 2.7. Ezekiel.
9.6. The Septuagint read it (...), in Sanctuarium, so Kerker, not in
sanctificationem; and Suidas interprets (...), Templum: And so Vatab renders
it. Mickdas, and Montan. sanctuarium, so Junius, Pisc. and Polan. Castalio has
it thus, Ero eis fanum, I will be to them a Temple, a Sanctuary, and this sense
fits the condition of the Captives: For,

1. The Inhabitants of Jerusalem reproached them for going into Babylon; and
looked on them as having nothing to do with the Temple, God, or his worship,
get you far from the Lord: against this evil, God comforts them, and says, I
will be a Sanctuary unto you, what ever your Brethren think or say.

2. The Captives wept to think of their condition, Ps 137.1. By the Rivers of
Babylon there we sat down yea we wept when we remembered Sion. When they
called to mind what a glorious Temple they had, what solemn assemblies there,
what precious Ordinances, and comforts they found therein; and now saw
themselv^ destitute of all, they wept. For their consolation says God, I will
be a Sanctuary unto you; and what ever benefit you found by the Saints at
Jerusalem, you shall find in me.

1. The Sanctuary was a place of refuge and defense, quasi sancta tueri a place
to defend holy things, for such things were laid up in Sanctuaries, the Greeks
call it (...), from (...), a particle privative, and (...), to spoil, rob, take
away, for a Sanctuary was deemed a priviledg'd place, from whence, no thing, or
person might be taken away without sacrilege; upon this ground Joab fled to
the Tabernacle of the Lord, 1 K. 2.28. and took hold of the horns of the
Altar. Moses had his Cities of refuge, and in reference to these, many Princes
appointed Sanctuaries to be priviledg'd places that those fled to them might be
secure; and this Land heretofore abounded with such places. Churches,
Churchyards, and other places were priveledg'd, so that if fellons or Traitors
did fly to them, they were sheltred for 40. Days; in which time, they were to
confess their fault, and to submit to banishment; taking an oath of
abjuration: and during those forty days, no man might take them thence,
without danger of excomunication, or irregularity; in this time any might feed
them. After the forty days, if their Wives fed them, or gave them any
sustenance, it was felony. Exposition of terms of Law Stamf.
This law was made by K. Edward the confessor, grounded upon, the Law of mercy
and reverence he bare to holy places, God would be a S^nctuary to him in this
sense, Isa. 8.14. Sanctify the Lord of hosts himself, let him be your fear
and your dread. A d he shall be for a Sanctuary, that is, for a defense unto
you. Jer 42.11. Be not afraid of the K. of Babylon of whom ye are afraid, be
not afraid of him says the Lord for I am with you to save you and to deliver
you from his hand: here God was a Sanctuary unto them. The three Children, when
the fiery furnace was heat so hot and cast into it, found God a Sanctuary unto
them.

Isa. 6.1. His train filled the Temple.
2. In it they had Gods special presence, hence Sion where the Temple stood was
called the habition and rest of God, Ps. 132.13.14. Hence Gods goings and ways
are said to be in the Sanctuary, Ps. 77.13.68.24. And David professes he had
seen God in the Sanctuary, Ps. 63.2. God would be a Sanctuary to them in this
sense, they should have his special presence; he had left the Temple at
Jerusalem, the glory was gone; and now he was with them in Babylon: Ezekiel had
the Heavens opened to him by the River Cheb^r, saw visions of God, God did
manifest himself in a special manner to him, and to Daniel even in Babylon.
God had no Church elsewhere, and now he was with his people there, and calls
them his flock four times in one v. Ezekiel. 34.8. and twelve times his flock in
the whole Chapter.

3. Acceptance in the Temple and sanctuary; their persons and prayers were
accepted there. Hence was it that they freequented the Temple so much for
prayer, Acts, 3.1. Luke, 18.10. And that David intimates Ps. 20.3. that the
Offerings and Sacrifices in the Temple were accepted, He heard my voice out of
his Temple, Ps. 18.6. So Jer. 6.20. When they had corrupted the worship of God
he tells them there; burnt Offerings were not acceptable, nor their Sacrifices
sweet, before they were; and the Prophecy is, Isa, 60.7. That they shall come
with acceptance to Gods Altar. Where his Altar was settled there was the
acceptance, this they had likewise in Babylon. When Daniel made his prayer to
God for himself, and his People Chap. 9. Gabriel comes and tells him, he was
greatly beloved of God, a man of desires. So when Mordecai and Esther fasted,
their persons and prayers were regarded, accepted in Babylon.

4. Encouragement and help, Ps. 20 2. Help came from the Sanctuary and
strength from Sion, Strength and beauty are in his Sanctuary Ps. 96.6. There
they had council to direct them, Ordinances to Sanctify them, and promises to
comfort them. These they should not want in Babylon, God would be to them such
a Sanctuary as should afford them help. Therefore he stirred up the Spirit of
Jeremiah to write to the captives and to counsel them what to do. Jer 29.5
6.7. Build you houses and dwell in them, plant Gardens and eat the fruit of
them take Wives beget Sons and Daughters, and take wives for your Sonn^, and
give your Daughters to Husbands that they may bear Sons and Daughters, that
ye may be increased there, and not diminished. And seek the peace of the City
whether I have caused you to be carried away Captives, and pray unto the Lord
for it, for in the peace thereof shall ye have peace. And God gave them
prophets in Babylon, Though they had no material Temple to worship God in, yet
God would sanctify them and give them grace to worship him, metu interno.
Ezekiel, and Daniel, by whom he counseld them from time to time; some
Ordinances they had; what they wanted, God made up himself, being a special
Sanctuary unto them: he also made Babylon an ordinance to cleanse them, and for
promises they had many, diverse in this Chapt. and others as the 34. the 36.
Which is full of sweet, gracious, and comforting promises.

A little Sanctuary.
(...) Some take this word Adverbially, and render it Paulisper, So Polanus,
Junius, and Castal. God would be a Sanctuary to them a little time; and so to
point out the shortness of the time they should be in Babylon, and thereby to
comfort them against their Captivity. 70 Years was not long, and all that time
they should have God a Sanctuary.

Others take the word adjectively, Sanctuarium parvum, or modicum; so Montanus,
Pisc. the Vulgar, and the French. Why his expression is laid down a little
Sanctuary, we must inquire.

1. In opposition to that they had at Jerusalem; that was very beautiful,
rich, and glorious, set in Ivorie, Ezekiel. 7.^0. eyed of all; resorted unto by
all the Jews; and famous throughout the Earth. God would be a Temple to them:
but not such a material, conspicuous Temple. You think upon that great
glorious Temple are troubled for it, I will be a little Temple to you.

2. Little, in regard of the paucitie that were there; you are but a fe^, and a
little Temple will suffice you, Vatab. has it Templum pauc^rum, Here they have
no great Congregations, but Exiguae domunculae supersunt in quibus congregatis
adero. Aecolamp.
and Calvi^, Sanctuarium paucitatis, many fell to the ways of the Heathens;
being mingled with them, they learned their ways, and served their gods; few
were godly.

3. In regard of the hidden virtue, power, and goodness conveyed unto them,
which Babilonish eyes saw not; they thougth their God had wholly forsaken them,
d d nothing for them: but he was an invisible, spiritual, wonderful, and
strange Sanctuary unto them, all which, was little to that they had in their
own Land, there they had mercy more openly, and more plentifully.

Will be
(...) Et fui, I have been a little Sanctuary, and will be, Ps. 69.11. I
became a Proverb to them, the word is Vaaebi, I have been; its future, yet
rendered in the preter tense; and so much it shows here, that God had been,
and would be a Sanctuary to his people in Babylon.

get ye far from the Lord, unto us is this Land given in possession;
therefore say, thus says the Lord, etc. because they spoke so bitter,
therefore God speaks so comfortably; because they rejected them, denied them to
have to do with God, or the land; therefore God receives them, tells them he
will be a Sanctuary unto them. When others beat the Child the Parents Bowels
yerne, especially if unjustly, and show the more ki^d^esse. When Rabshakeh
rayld against Hezekiah, Gods People, and blasphemed, from thence did the Lord
take occasion to signify by Isaiah to Hezekiah and the rest, things very
comfortable, 2 Kings 19.6. Thus says the Lord, Be not afraid of the words
which thou have heard, with which the servants of the King of Assyria have
blasphemed me: Behold, I will send a blast upon him, and he shall hear a
rumor, and return to his own Land, and I will cause him to fall by the Sword
in his own Land. God took a rise from the enemies blasphemies, and rough
proceedings against his people, to give in promises of mercy to his, and of
destruction to them; when the enemy had dealt barbarously with Rachell, slain
and captived her Children, and she refused to be comforted, because they were
not; hereupon the Lord steps in, and says, Refrain thy voice from weeping,
and thine eyes from tears, for thy works shall be rewarded, and they shall
come again from the Land of the enemy, because they have destroyed thy
Children, therefore will I give thee Children, because they are scattered
abroad, therefore they shall return. When the Pharisees had cast out the blind
man, Jesus sought him out, found him, and told him who he wa^, John 9.35. and
Isa. 66.5. When their Brethren that hated them, cast them out, then was the
gracious promise given in; he shall appear to your joy, and they shall be
ashamed: Ill manners occasion good Laws; and rough dealings, have drawn forth
sweet promises.

2. Afflictions, be they of what nature soever, are the acts of God, they were
deprived of their Country, all their comforts there, they were in a sad
Captivity, mingled among the Heathen, but who did this? Was it their own act?
The Babylonians or any others? No, the Lord takes it upon himself: I have cast
them a far off, I have scattered them; it was his counsel, power, and
providence did it, who ever were the instruments: The Scripture denies
afflictions to be from beneath, they spring not out of the dust, Job 5.6.
the root of them is not in the earth, but in Heaven; it therefore attributes
all of them to God. Mich. 1.12. Evil came down from the Lord unto the Gate of
Jerusalem: Its evil indefinitely, what ever evil came nigh that City, is came
from the Lord, he created it, he sent it, and not only what was without the
City, but all in the City, Amos 3.6. Shall there be evil in a City and the
Lord has not done it? Its an interrogation, and vehemently affirms that all
is the work of God: Men take not notice of the hand of God in affliction, and
therefore the Lord is often brought in and presented as the true and only Author
of them, the instruments are eyed by us, and we are vexed at them, and greatly
perplex our selves, that creatures of the same rank and condition we are in,
should harm us and afflict us, but did we see the Lord in all, it would qu et
and still our spirits; whatever the agents were, God would have us to take
notice of this, Isa. 45.6, 7. That they may know from the rising of the Sun,
and from the West, that there is none besides me, I am the Lord, and there is
none else: I form the light, and create darkness: I make peace, and create
evil, I the Lord do all these things: Man does none of them.

3. God is mindful of his threats, and faithful in performing of them: He had
long before in the days of Moses told them, that if they sinned against him,
they should be plucked off the Land they possessed, and be scattered awong the
Heathen, Dan. 28.63.64. Levit. 26.33. and see it here performed, I have cast
them out, I have scattered them among the Countries. God is not forgetful of
what he has threatened against sinners, he has his times to fulfill his
threats, though some thousand years after. There is a Prophetical threat in
Hag. 2.22. which is probable that the Lord is now thinking of, and fulfilling,
I will overthrow the throne of Kingdoms, and I will destroy the strength of
the Kingdoms of the Heathen, I will overthrow the Charriots, and those that
ride in them, the Horses, and their riders shall come down every one by the
Sword of his Brother. Some interpret this place of Zerubbabel literally, and
some shaking of Heaven and Earth was then, some great changes were made, but
the most interpret it of Zerubbabel mystical, of Christ, and his Kingdom; so
D^odate takes it. God for the advance of his Church, under the Gospel, will
overthrow the throne of Kingdoms, all power and greatness that is against the
Kingdom of his Son; and how shall it be done by Wars? mostly by civil
Wars, Every one by the Sword of his Brother: God in his wise providence shall
stir up Kingdoms and Kings one against another, and they shall break
themselves and each other in pieces, that his truth and faithfulness may be
seen.

4. Afflictions are not always arguments of Divine hatred, God had cast them a
far off, and scattered them among the Countries; this the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem took to be an argument of Gods hatred, that he had forsaken them,
that now they were none of his people, they conceived such great judgments
upon them, could not stand with Gods love, but the Lords thoughts differ from
man's, he looked upon them as his people as the true Church, as dearer to him
then they at Jerusalem, as those he would be a Sanctuary unto: If great
afflictions were arguments of the Lords hatred and wrath, then Noah, Job, and
Daniel, were hated of God, they had exceeding great affl ction. Noah saw a
World drowned, Job had all plucked from him, his Friends and Wife against him,
yea God also in appearance; Daniel was a Captive, cast into the Lions Den, yet
how dear were these to the Lord: Noah, God accepted his Sacrifice, Gen 8.21.
Blessed him; Chap. 9.1. made a Covenant with him, verse. 8, 9, So Job, how does
God justify him, Chap. 42.7. You have not spoken of me the thing that is right
as my servant Job has: Job was Gods servant, spoke what was right of God, Job
must pray for his three Friends, him God will accept, God gave Job twice as
much as he had before; and Daniel was a man greatly beloved, Dan. 9.23. Christ
was Vir dolorum, yet the man in whom Gods soul delighted, Isa. 42.1.
Afflictions are arguments of l^ve, Prove. 3 12. Whom the Lord loves he
corrects, even as a Father the Son in whom he delights: God loves not
affliction, but he loves his Children, and his bowels cause him to correct; it
were cruelty, not love in a Father, that would suffer his Child to dye for want
of a little Physic; if Physic will do a Child good, a loving Parent will be
at any cost that way: Take heed how you censure those that suffer; affl^ctions
are not always wounds of an enemy, but arguments o^ love, especially when they
break the stubbornness and pride of our hearts, purge out our pollutions,
cause us to seek the face of God, quicken our endeavors after more holiness,
cause us to mind the things of E^ernity more, make the Word and Christ more
sweet and precious to the soul, really and seriously.

5. What ever others think or say of Gods people, whithersoever they are
driven, whatsoever they loose or suffer, God will be a little Sanctuary unto
them, these men were hardly thought of, yea rejected and condemned of those at
Jerusalem, carried Captive into Babylon, they had lost all Countrey-comforts,
City-priviledges, Temple-Ordinances, Estates, and Liberties; they had hard
bondage when they were yet now in this case God was a Sanctuary unto them, he
preserved them, vouchsafed them his presence, accepted their persons and
prayers, gave them counsel, sanctified and comforted them, he was a special
Sanctuary unto them, and in stead of all Ordinances. Take Sanctua^y for the
Land of Canaan as some think its taken, Exodus 15.17. God would be a Land of
Canaan to them, or take it for Sanctification, as some do here, and in Psalm.
114.2. God would be their Sanctification; or take it for Heaven, as it is Psalm.
102.19. God would be a Heaven unto them: However the Jews in Babylon appeared
in the World, either to them in Sion or Babylon, they were glorious in the eye
of God, and he calls them his glory, and would be a Sanctuary unto them. This
should afford comfort unto those are deprived of Ordinances, Estates,
Liberties, Friends, Countries, and suffer very hard and sharp things, if they
be godly, God will be a Sanctuary unto them. Our Brethren that were driven out
into other parts of the World, has not God been a Sanctuary unto them? and
has he not always been a Sanctuary unto us, This was the Lecture presently
after Hazebie fight.
and a stone of stumbling unto others, and for a rock of offense? if God has
been a Sanctuary to defend us, to afford us his presence, to accept of our
persons and prayers, to send us help, counsel, comfort, deliverance, let us
sanctify this God himself in our heart, make him our dread and fear, and he
will still be a Sanctuary unto us, Psalm. 134 2. Lift up your hands in the
Sanctuary, and bless the Lord.

6. There is no place can hinder God from taking care of, and showing kindness
unto his people; they were in Babylon, a profane, polluted Land, they were
scattered up and down in the Countries thereof, and yet God was a Sanctuary
unto them, and said, he would be so in the Countries where they should come;
when they were in Egypt, God was a Sanctuary to them there, and now in
Babylon: Acts 10.34, 35. God is no respecter of persons or places, but in every
Nation, he that fears him and works righteousness is accepted with him:
Gods people fear him, and work righteousness where ever they are cast, if
into strange Nations, as these Jews; if into the dungeon, as Jeremiah; into
the bottom of the Sea as Jonah; if into the fiery Furnace, as the three
Children; Lions den, as Daniel, God is a Sanctuary to them, let a man be godly,
and he shall have not only protection, but praise of God, Romans 2.29.

VERSE. 17.
Therefore say, Thus says the Lord GOD, I will even gather you from the
People, and assemble you out of the countries where ye have been scattered, and
I will give you the Land of Israel.


THey at Jerusalem had vindicated the Land to themselves, To us is this Land
given, and so cut off the Captives from hope of having any part in that Land:
This was questionless a great affliction to their spirits; and therefore the
Lord bids the Prophet tell them that (as he would be a Sanctuary to them in
Babylon) so he would gather them out of Babylon; bring them back to Canaan and
give them that Land in possession, which the others unjustly challenged to
themselves. In the former verse he spoke to them at Jerusalem, in this he
speaks to the Captives.

I will even gather you.
Cast. Convocabo, the Septuagint (...), Ie vous recueillerai de peuple. Fr.
I will receive or undertake to bring them out of the Nations, the Hebrew word
(...) Congregabo vos, from (...) Which is properly spoken, de redispersa, To
gather that is dispersed, men or other things; and these being dispersed among
the Nations God says he will congregate them, (...)
The Jews prayer was in the time of their dispersion, Congrega nos de populis
quo dispersisti nos, we are now no body, we have no face of a State or Church,
gather us into a body, make us a common wealth, a Church again, This is the
thing God has promised them.

Assemble you out of etc.
The Hebrew is (...) I will add you out of those countries, and here its spoken
of those were scattered; which I observe because Buxtorf. showing the
difference between Kabats, and Asaph, says, Asaph is, De re non dispersa, and
so does Leigh out of him, in his Critica sa^ra: but both Kabats, and Asaph
here, refer to the Jews, who where scattered amongst the Babylonians; and the
Vulgar render it ad unabo, I will unite you and make you one body.

I will give you the Land of Israel.
The Land of Israel is not often mentioned, save in this Prophecy, only nine
times before it, and not after it at all in the old Testament; and but twice in
the new, Mat. 2.20.21. In Ezekiel its mentioned 20 times: In wrath, when it
refers to those were yet in it, in mercy, when it refers to those were
Captives, or enemies insulting at the ruin of it, as you may see, Ezekiel.
12.19.36.6.25.3.6.

Why its said the Land of Jsrael, rather then the Land of Judah, when as it was
called the Land of Judah before it was called the Land of Israel (for we read in
Moses days it was called the Land of Judah, Deuteronomy, 34.2. and the Land of Israel
first in Samuells days 1 Samuel, 13.19.) is inquireable. The Land of Judah is a
restrictive Term, and includes only what belonged to the Tribe of Judah of
which you may read, Josh. 15.1.2.3.4. But the Land of Israel is a comprehensive
term, containing all the Tribes which came out of the loins of Israel; so
that hereby he gives them to understand, that they should not enjoy a piece of
the holy Land again; but the whole, all that the twelve Tribes had.

The Land of Israel was a choice Land; A Land that flowed with Milk and Honey.
Deuteronomy 26.15. A Land of Corn, and Wine, bread, and Vineyards. Isa. 36.17. A Land
of Brooks, Fountains, Springs, Vines, Figtrees, Pomgranets, Oil and Honey, a
Land of plenty, wherein they should want nothing. Deuteronomy. 8.7 8.9. A Land given
of God. Deuteronomy 4.1. The desire and glory of all Lands. Ezekiel. 20.6. Because it was
the Land of Immanuel Isa. 8.8. Gods holy habitation. Exodus 15.13. The type of
Heaven, and therefore called the Land of the living. Psalm. 27.13. This Land of
Israel God puts them in mind of, the loss of which, as it begat deep sighing
in their Souls, so the hope of repossessing it revived them not a little. God
had given them this Land once before; through their sin they had lost it, but
now God would give i^ them again, and double engage them by a second deed of
gift. This people were now Captives, and their sins had often Captived them,
after they had Kings. Of their first Captivity you may read, 2 Kings 15.29.
which was by Tiglath Pelezer: A second by Salmanazzar, 2 K. 17.6. A third by
Senacherib, 2 Kings 18.13. A fourth by the Captains of the Host of the King of
Assyria, who carried Manasses into Babylon, 2 Chronicles. 33.11. A fifth by Pharaoh
Nechob, 2 Kings 23.33, 34. A sixth and seventh, by Nebuchadnezzar, 2 Chronicles.
36.5, 6. 2 Kings 24.11, 10, 12. 2 Kings 25.7. Thus was this people often brought
low, carried into other Lands from that good land of Israel, as its called, Deuteronomy.
4.21. And you shall hardly find that any of the preceding Captivities had a
promise of returning them again before this, but here God graciously tells
them, he would gather them out of the Countries and bring them back to
Jerusalem.

1. Quest. By whom did the Lord gather them? bring them to this Land again?

Answ. By three men especially, whose names are very observeable, Ezra,
Nehemiah, and Zerubbabel; Ezra signifies a helper, and he was a special
helper of them, under God, out of Babylon, Ezra 7.6. Nehemiah is the
consolation of the Lord, and he brought Divine consolation unto them, Nehem.
2.18. and was as a God amongst them in conveying and comforting them many
ways, as you may observe in the Book bears his name. Zerubbabel is, as Jerome
will have it (...) Iste princep^ in Babylon^, and he that could bring this
people out of such a Country and condition they were in, had need to be a
mighty Prince, and so was he; therefore Zach. 4.7. no mountainous strength of
Devils or wicked men could stand before him: Others interpret it, one repugnant
to confusion; and so he was, he led the people orderly out of that confused
place and condition they were in, even unto the holy Land, and Divine order
they had formerly enjoyed there; and thus Ventilator babel, (...) Ventilavit.
the fanner of confusion, or (...) Fluxus Babylonis, he brake down the bank of
Captivity, and made way for the stream to flow from Babylon to Sion.

2. Quest. The promise here being made to the Captives in Babylon that were
brought thither with Jechoniah, whether had they any benefit of it that were
now at Jerusalem, and afterward carried Captive with Zedekiah into Babylon?

Answ. Some think none of the Captives with Zedekiah returned, or had any
benefit of this promise; and the reason I find given, is, because few returned,
but there may more be said for it.

1. The promise was not made to them at Jerusalem, but to the Captives in
Babylon at that time.

2. We find many excepted from entering into the Land of Israel after the
Captivity, Ezekiel. 13.9. the false Prophets are excluded the Land of Israel; and
Ezekiel. 20.38. The Rebels God says, shall not enter into the Land of Israel; and
who were the Rebels, but those refused to go with Jechoniah, who stayed at
Jerusalem, and sinned greatly against God, and therefore are often called the
Rebellious house, the Rebellious Nation, Chap. 2. God says, he would plead
with them as he did with their Fathers in the Wilderness when they came out of
Egypt, and there they dyed, only two of them entered into Canaan.

3. That Chapter in Jeremiah of the good and bad Figs, speaks to this
business; its the 24. of Jeremiah; where the good Figs are interpreted of
Jeconiah and his Captives; God says, he will acknowledge them, set his eyes
upon them for good, bring them again to the Land, and plant them in it, etc.
verse. 5, 6, 7. The evil Figs are interpreted of Zedekiah and his Captives, and
them God will deliver into all the Kingdom of the Earth for hurt, to be a
reproach, a proverb, a taunt, and a curse in all places.

Others conceive, that some of Zedekiahs Captives returned to the Land of
Israel, and the grounds given are these: First, in the 9. Chap. some were
marked that were godly, and these being preserved and carried away, its not
probable they should be shut out from interest in that gracious promise, I will
gather you, and give you the Land of Israel: whoever were denied the Land, not
the godly.

2. Cyrus Decree was not restrictive, but any Jew might return, 2 Chronicles.
36.23. Who is there among you of all the Lords people, the Lord his God be with
him, and let him go up: Cyrus gave liberty to any, or all to go.

3. I shall add one thing, and it is that in Jer. 31.8. A great company shall
return thither, above 40000. As you may read, Neh. 7.66.67. And it is probable
that some of them were of those that Nebuchadnezzar brought with Zedekiah into
Babylon.

Quest. 3. Whether the gathering and deliverance of the Church out of Babylon,
be Typical, and a resemblance of the spiritual gathering and deliverance of
the Church in time of the Gospel: whether they referr to Christ or no?

Answ. Those great deliverances out of Egypt and Babylon, had something in
them representative of the Churches deliverance by Christ. Pharaoh, and
Nebuchadnezzar point out Satan, that held the Gentiles; and Antichrist, that
held the Christians in bondage, till Christ, as Moses and Zerubbab^l did
deliver them. Their coming out of Egypt referrs to the time of Christ and the
Gospel, if you compare Hos. 11.1. with Mat. 2.15. And for the Babylonish
deliverance referring to Christ, consider, Ezekiel. 34.12.13.14. Where the Lord
speaks of gathering and bringing his People from the Countries where they have
been scattered, to the Mountains of Israel, and then in the 23. and 24. ver. I
will set up one Shepherd over them, and he shall feed them, even my Servant
David, he shall feed them and he their Shepherd; I the Lord will be their God,
and my Servant David a Prince among them. This one shepherd, this David, this
Prince, was Christ, As is generally agreed upon by interpreters, and Job.
10.11. Christ tells them he is The good Shepherd, Namely, that one and only
Shepherd spoken of in Ezekiel. That of Rachel weeping for her Children, when
they went into Captivity, Jer. 31.15. referd to the time of the Gospel and had
its fulfilling then. Mat. 2.17.18. and why their coming out, should not also
have reference to deliverances under the Gospel by Christ, I see not. Some
interpret those words of Isa. 19.1.2. Maldon. Tollet.
The spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because the Lord has anointed me, to
preach good tidings unto the meek, he has sent me to bind up the broken
hearted, to proclaim liberty to the Captives etc. to be meant literally, of
the Babylonish Captivity: And you know how the Lord Christ. Luke 4.21. says,
This day is this Scripture fullfilled in your ears.

Daniel was, among waters, and Fishes, as Jonah was; let them be where, or in
what condition soever, he sees them, observes, considers them, Proverbs. 15.3.
The eyes of the Lord are in every place; not of some one Country, as Judea,
Egypt, Babylon, but in every place of the World, 2 Chronicles. 16.9. His eyes run
to and fro, throughout the whole earth, to show himself strong in the behalf
of his: Gods eying of his is not a bare intuition, but in order to their
assistance; to do them good, to put out strength from them.

2. In low and miserable conditions, God sends in hope and help; they were now
stripped naked of all their comforts, amidst Barbarians, in a servile, sinking
condition, saw no likelihood of bettering their condition, being under the hand
of a potent and severe Adversary; yet now hope and help comes in: I will
gather you, you that are Captives, desolate, more low and miserable then ever
you were, even you will I gather; thus God lets in comfort to them in their
comfortless estate, and its Gods way to do so. When the Israelites cried in
Egypt by reason of their bondage; when they were sorely afflicted, says the
Text, God heard them, remembered them, looked upon them, and had respect unto
them, Exodus, 2.24, 25. And in the next Chapter, he appears to Moses, tells him,
he had seen their affliction, knew their sorrows, and was come to deliver them,
verse. 7, 8. When people are outwardly or inwardly low, its Gods method
frequently, if not constantly, to afford relief, Psalm. 116.6. I was brought
low and he helped me; He was low in Saul's days, low in Absoloms, but the Lord
helped him. When power is gone from a people, and none to be found, in public
or private to help a people, then are they in an afflicted, miserable
condition, yet then God affords help, Deuteronomy. 32.56. So Nehem. 9.27. In the time
of their trouble when they cried unto thee, thou heardest them from Heaven, and
according to thy manifold mercies, thou gave them Saviors. When the Jews
were brought low by Haman, and at the borders of death all of them, God
appeared in Esther, Abasuerus, turned the storm upon Haman himself, and
helped the Jews in that strait.

3. Things which are hard and seem impossible to flesh and blood, are easy
unto God: How difficult was it to the judgment of those Captives, to conceive
a return; they were far from Jerusalem, the journeys long and dangerous; they
at Jerusalem had rejected them, they were under a mighty Tyrant, the terror of
Nations; they were scattered in several places, employed to servile work, for
the profit, pleasure, of the Chaldeans; as digging in their Mines, plowing of
their Fields, dressing of their Vines; if they should stir to get away, the
King had command of 127. Provinces, and could presently raise Forces to fetch
them back, or cut them off, etc. These and such like thoughts, made it seem
difficult, if not impossible to them, that they should ever return again to
Jerusalem; but the Lord would gather them; it was an easy act to him, no more
then a Shepherd gathering of his Flock into the fold, he whistles or sends out
his Dog, and presently they all run into his Fold; so when God spoke the
word, moved the heart of Cyrus, he made a Proclamation for the Jews to go up
to Jerusalem, and presently it was done: In Ezekiel. 37.11. You may read the Jews
apprehensions of their conditions; they say, Our bones are dried, our hope is
lost, we are cut off, for our parts: They thought themselves like dead and dry
bones that lie in the bowels, or on the face of the earth, without hope of
life, or ever returning into their own Land; but by the Parable of the dry
bones, which at a word of Prophecy were inl^ve^ed, raised, and made a great
Army, God showed what he could easily do, in things seeming to man impossible;
and he applies it to them, Verse. 12. Behold, O my people, I will open your
graves, and cause you to come up out of your graves, and bring you into the
Land of Israel: They conceived it as impossible for them to repossesse their
Country, as for a dead man to live; bu^ it was easy with God. There is
nothing too hard for God, he could bring a great Nation out of Sarahs dead
womb, Genesis 18.14. and Jer. 32.27. God tells them that he is the Lord, the God
of all flesh; and then asks them this Question, Is there any thing to hard for
me? Did I not bring you out of Aegipt? Laed you through the red Sea, through
the Wilderness, set you in the pleasant Land, and can I not bring you back
into it, though scattered up and down in Babylon? Verse. 37. Behold I will
gather you out of all Countries, whither I have driven you in mine anger, and
will bring you to this place, and cause you to dwell safely. Luke 18.27. Things
unpossible with m^n, are possible with God.

4. Lands and Countries are the Lords to dispose of to whom he pleases, I will
give you the Land of Israel, the Earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof,
the World and they that dwell therein, Psalm. 24.1. And he disposes the
Kingdoms thereof, Psalm. 115.16. The Earth has he given to the Sons of men:
There is not a Son of man which has any spot of Earth, or Kingdom in the
World, but the Lord gave it him; he rules in the Kingdoms of men; he takes
them away, and gives them to whom he will, Dan. 4.31, 32. He is God of all the
Kingdoms of the Earth, Isa. 37.16. And Cyrus acknowledged that God had given
them all to him, Ezra 1.2. Being the Lords, he may justly dispose of them as
seems good to himself. This Land of Israel was possessed by Canaan the Son of
Cham, and called the Land of Canaan; but his Posterity for their wickedness,
were spued out of it, Levit. 18.25. and then God gave it to the seed of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, whose name was changed to Israel, and thence his
Posterity called Israelites, and so this the Land of Israel; but they through
their Idolatry and oppression, forfeited this Land, and now God had given it
into the hands of Nebuchadnezzar, after they had possessed it 850. years. Sin
thrusts people out of their Country, and robs them of their rights and
privileges, Isa. 13.22. And had not God given them this Land again, they had
had little or no right to it. God gave it to Abraham when the Canaanites had
it, and he gives it to the Israelites when the Chaldeans had it.

5. The afflictions of the Church though great and grevious, yet have their
period; now Israel was in Babylon, their Country, City, Temple, Ordinances,
Public worship, were gone. They were amid'st Idolaters, profane, blasphemous
persons, in a polluted place, which was very sad; yet this condition should
have an end, God would gather them out from Babylon, into the holy and pleasant
Land, where they should enjoy choice mercies again. God will not always
chide, The Greek is, (...).
neither keep his anger for ever. Psalm. 103.9. Here at the beginning of their
Captivity, Gods heart was relenting, and he laid in this gracious promise, to
refresh them. Man when he is offended, is not only angry, but bares grudges in
his heart, seeks revenge, and the ruin of them have wronged him, as Haman,
Mordecai, and the Jews: but it is not so with God, he may be angry for 70
years, but that is not always, for ever. Isa. 54.7.8. It was but a moment, a
small moment, and the wrath was but alittle, as he calls it there; because God
was a Sanctuary unto them, all the time and made them gracious promises at the
beginning. So then you may answer, the question made, Jer. 35. Will he reserve
his anger for ever? Will he keep it to the end? No, God is gracious, and will
not always be wrath.

VERSE. 18.
And they shall come thither, and they shall take away all the detestable
things thereof, and all the abominations thereof from thence.


GOd does not only promise them, that they shall return to their own Land,
but also tells them, what they shall do there, Take away the detestable
things, and abominations thereof.

Detestable things.
The Septuagint renders it, and so the word for abomination, (...). Aecol^mp.
spurcitias. Tig. and Lavat. contaminationes. Cast. scelera. Fr. Toutes ses
in^ametes; all things make infamous, Vulgar, Omnes offensiones: Calvin, Omnia
idola: And Idols are detestable things, as I showed when I opened the 5. Chap.
11. One thing I shall add, and that is, Shikku^ziru, here rendered detestable,
by our Translators, is the same word in Dan. 9.27.12.11. where i^s translated
Abominations: And Matthew. 24.15. (...), Which some interpret of the Roman
Soldiers, profaning the Temple with blood, and brutish actions: Others of
Antichrist, sitting in the Temple, and worshipped as God; and others of Idols,
brought in, and set up there.

Abominations.
Flagitia; Castal. This word was largely opened in the 5. Chap. 9. Verse.
Notorious sins of all kinds, are called in the Scripture sense, Abominations;
things to be abhorred: So Romans 2.22. (...), Thou that abhorrest Idols. Idols
and Idolatries are abominable, 1 Pet. 4.3.

Obser. 1.
What the Lord promises that shall be performed; he had said in the former Verse.
I will give them the Land of Israel: And here he says, They shall come
thither: What obstructions soever may be in the way, what power soever oppose,
yet the Lord having promised it, he would make it good: God is gracious in
promising, faithful in keeping promise, and powerful in performing his
promises: You may see it made good, Ezra 1.2, 3. God stirred up the spirit of
Cyrus to make a Proclamation, for the Jews to go to their own Land, and then
he stirred up the spirits of the people to go, Verse. 5. their spirits were
down, they were heartlesse and hopeless many of them, but God raised their
spirits to go up to Jerusalem; the word is (...) Evigilavit suscitavit, they
were asleep, and God dealt with them, as we with sleepy men; they had their
objections, but God took them all away, and raised their spirits above all
difficulties, and caused them to hasten to their Country, and the work he had
for them: God has promised a new Jerusalem, that he will dwell with men, and
be their God, wipe away all tears from their eyes, that there shall be no more
death, sorrow, crying, pain, Revel. 21.2, 3, 4. That the Nations of those are
saved shall walk in the light of that City, that Kings shall bring the glory
and honor of the Nations into it; that only those which are written in the
Lambs Book shall enter; this will be a glorious time, God has promised it, he
is faithful, and able to perform it.

2. When judgments and mercies are sanctified to a people, they will produce
answerable effects; they had had sore judgments in Babylon, for Seventy
years, and when they were brought out of that furnace into this pleasant Land,
which was a great deliverance; when they were come thither, what should they
do? Take away the detestable things, the abominations therein. The fruit of
that affliction, and the deliverance out of it, evidenced that their judgments
and mercies were sanctified.

1. They repented of their Idolatry and sinful practices, which had laid the
Land wast; which is supposed in the words. They would never have taken away the
detestable things, had not their hearts been broken for them.

2. They reform, when they come into the Land, they take away the detestable
things; they are bitter against their master-sin, and serve it as it served
them; their detestable things had taken them away out of the Land, Jer. 44.22.
and they fall upon the detestable things presently, and take them away, and
what else they apprehended offended God; not only Idols did they take away,
but reformed also the marriage of strange Wives, Ezra 10. in point of Usury,
Nehem. 5. and profaning of the Sabbath, Nehem. 13.

3. They show themselves sincere in it, they spare none but take away all
detestable things: all abominations, Josh, 24.14. It Is syncerity to put away
false Gods, and especially all of them.

4. They endeavored, to worship God purely, without any corruptions or
mixtures of their own. They put away all detestable things, all abominations,
they labored to have only what was Divine, and so what was pleasing to God.
They would not come to God with any impieties, but in pure worship, as Jacob,
Genesis 35.2. When he was to go up to Bethel, he took all their strange Gods,
their earerings, and what might be occasion of sinning that way, and buried
them under the Oak out of sight, and cleansed himself and Family, and would
serve God, not with any mungrell, but with pure worship; so was it here: when
its thus, its an argument, judgments, and deliverances are sanctified, that
mercies are well bestowed, and well enjoyed; when corrections and mercies
stir us up to repent, reform, to deal syncerely with God, and to worship
him purely; its evident they came from Gods love, and are sanctified unto us.

VERSE. 19.
And I will give them one heart, and I will put a new spirit within you: and I
will take the stony heart out of their flesh, and will give them an heart of
flesh.


IN the former Verses you heard opened sundry sweet promises of God, made to
his people, he would be a Sanctuary to them in Babylon, bring them thence to
Sion, purify them from the pollutions in their own Land, all which were
gracious; but here he exceeds all given in before; those promises concerned
their outward conditions chiefly, but these their inward and spiritual estate
only: Some make this Verse to contain the Covenant of grace which God made
with his people Israel, whom he had chosen, above any people in the World, but
they forsook him, fell to Idolatry, and were now justly Captived for their
sin, suffered much among their enemies; and here God enters into a gracious
Covenant with them, and promises great things unto them. In the words consider,
1. The party promising, I, I, I, 2. The things promised 1. One heart. 2. A new
spirit. 3. Taking away the stony heart. 4. Heart of flesh.
3. The persons to whom, them, 4. The manner of conveying these, and it is
expressed by Giving, putting, taking.


One heart.
The Septuagint is (...), another heart: They mistaking the H^brew (...) for
(...) take the word (...) for (...) and so f^ll into that error, which is not
great; for one heart was another heart then that they had: The Hebrew is (...)
one heart.

Heart: By it here we may understand, 1. The judgment or understa^d ng; so its
taken, Ephesians. 4.18. heart, and understanding are the same there. 2. For the
will and affections; so Prove. 23.26. Matthew. 22.37. 3. For the conscience; so
its taken, 1 John 3.20.


One. Is taken in the word, 1. For likeness, 1 Samuel 6.4. One Plague was on
them all. That is, a like plague.

2. For samenesse, 2 Cor. 11.2. I have espoused you, Rev. 21.21. Every Gate was
of one pearl: that is, of the same pearl.
to one husband Heb, 10.14. By one Offering, he has perfected for ever them
that are Sanctified. One is put for the same in both places.

3. For that is united and makes one, Genesis 11.6. Behold the People is one. They
were united t^gether as one man, in the Building of Babel. We may understand
all here, that God would unite them together as one man, give them likeness,
and samenesse of heart.

Some think, by one heart is meant, the mutual consent to hasten to Jerusalem
to build the Temple. As they were one people of one language and Spirit in
building Babel: so these should be one People, of one mind, and language, in
rebuilding Jerusalem. But if it should, be confind to this sense, it were no
spiritual mercy, and here God is promising spiritual mercies. Th^s sense may
be included, but there is something beyond it: We will enquire what heart was
antecedently in this People, which will give us light, for the better
understanding of this oneness of heart.

1. They had a backsliding, apostatiz^ng heart in them, 1 K 18.37. Elijah
prays that their hearts may be turned back again. Jer. 5.23. This People has
a revolting and Rebellious heart, Ezekiel. 2.3. They are called A rebellious Nation,
and Ezekiel. 6.9 God says he was Broken with their whorish heart, which departed
from him: They went out from God to Idols, and to false ways of worship: They
walked after the imaginations of their hearts, after other Gods, to serrve and
worship them. Jer 13.10.

2. They had a slippery unfaithful heart, Psalm. 78.8. Their spirit was not
steadfast with God, they were off, and on, no certainty in them, but full of
changes. Hence they are said to gad much about, to change their way. Jer. 2.36.
and in Isa. 24.5. To change the Ordinances, and in, Ezekiel. 5.6. To change Gods
judgments into wickedness, more then the Nations.

3. They had a deceitful, hypocritical heart. Isa. 44.20. A deceived heart
has turned him aside; and Chapter, 10.6. God calls them an hypocritical
Nation, they pretended love and obedience to God, but Jer. 3.10. Judah served
God fainedly, in falsehood is the Hebrew: their hearts were deceitful, false:

4. They had, a divided, froward, bitter heart Hos. 10.2. Their heart is
divided. God had a piece of it, and the World a piece, Ezekiel 33.31. and their
Idols a piece, Ezekiel. 14.3. And it was contentious and froward, Isa. 57.17. He
went on frowardly, in the way of his heart. They had divided hearts, divided
tongues, and divided ways: Manasseh was against Ephraim, Ephraim against
Manasseh, and both against Judah.

Now this one heart here mentioned, is opposite to all these.

1. God would give them one heart, and that is, an heart should be for himself,
and not for Idols; an heart should not withdraw or turn back to any false
ways, but cleave to himself only: After they came out of Babylon, they never
could endure Idols more, God had separated their hearts from them, and
therefore upon their return, God promised they should take away all detestable
things, verse. 18.

2. An heart faithful and steadfast, that should hold fast the things of God,
and not be given to change. Hence Jer 32.39. God says, I will give them one
heart, and one way, that they, may fear me for ever: Their heart shall
besetled, fixed in my way and never look out and wander after other ways.

3. An honest sincere heart, free from hypocricy, guile, and lying, Zech. 8.3.
Jerusalem shall be called a City of truth. The inside and outside should be the
same; intentions, words, and actions, should be correspondent.

4. An united, loving, peacable heart, as they shall have one God, be firm to
his way, and sincere in that way: so they shall have sweet communion together;
strife, bitterness, Isa. 11.9. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy
mountain.
division, shall not be found amongst them, Isa. 60.18. Violence shall no more
be heard in the Land. There should be much unity, much love, and mutual
agreement between them, they should have but one heart.

Vnum est ens indivisum in se: Vnius quidditas, Scaliger, Exercit. 65. Number. 2.
Suarez in Metaph.
est essendi indivisibilitas, Others say, that is one which is, Indivisum a se,
And divisum ab omni alio. Such an heart they should have, an heart undivided in
it self, and divided from all things heterogeneall, and of a dividing nature;
as God he is one simply, absolutely, individed in himself, and mostly divided
from every thing differing from himself. Gal. 3.20. God is one, and one is
opposed to many; so that they shall have one heart not many hearts.

This oneness of heart may be considered.

1. As respecting themselves: and so first, as it includes the judgment and
affections, they shall not dissent and cross one the other, but when truth is
in the understanding, the affections shall close with it; often time there is
much truth in the heads of men, but no love to truth in their hearts, 2 These.
2.10. They received not the love of the truth; the truth was revealed, made
love to their souls, appeared very lovely and beautifully, but they had no
love to it, John 3.19. Light is come into the World, and men loved darkness
rather then light: their affections closed with their own lusts and errors: but
it should be otherwise here, they should have a heart toward truth, not
divided from truth.

2. As it comprehends the will and conscience, they shall not be one against
another; sometimes conscience dictates and tells men they must do or not do
such things; and their wills carry them a wrong way, Romans 1.32. their hearts
told them that they did such things as are there mentioned, were worthy of
death, yet their wills carried them to do those things, and to delight in
them: So in the 18 Verse. they held the truth in unrighteousness, their
consciences told them it was truth, and to be obeyed, but their wills were
against obeying that truth; so that here was not one heart in them. Here the
promise is Will and Conscience shall be one.

3. As it looks at the intention and practice; many men have one heart within,
and another without, fair pretenses, but foul intentions; their actions and
hearts laid together, would confute one another: Herod pretends to worship
Christ, but intends to murder him; but these should have one heart within and
without, the same they should be inwardly and outwardly, as Nathanael, no guile
was in his spirit, in his lips, in his actions, but the same heart was in all.
Col. 3.23. Whatsoever ye do, do it heartily.

2. As respecting God: They should look at God, as the only and adequate
object of their heart, they should be content with him alone; they should not
ask counsel, confide in, fetch comfort from, or worship any other, he only
had made Covenant with that people, Cor integrum in veritate solid adunatum
Deo^ and toti corpori Ecclesiae.
and they should own him only for their God. Moses told them long before,
that the Lord their God was one Lord, Deuteronomy. 6.4. And Samuel told them they must
serve him only, 1 Samuel 7.3. And this could not be, unless their heart was
one: David who was an one-hearted man, said, Psalm. 62.5. My soul wait thou
only upon the Lord.

2. One heart in regard of his worship, that should be pure, immixt, and one,
Zach. 14.9. In that day shall there be one Lord, and his name one: by Name,
Interpreters understand Worship, and that shall be one, and answerable shall be
their hearts, Jer. 32.39.

3. In respect of others: First the judgment shall be one, they shall agree
together in fundamentals, and substantial points of faith, though there be
differences in circumstantials, inferences, consequences, and points of
inferior alloy, Phil. 4.2. they should (...), think the same things, be of the
same mind.

2. Their affections toward one another, Acts 4.32. The multitude of them
believed, were of one heart and of one soul: By these words, One heart and one
soul, Beza understands, Summa tum in doctrina tum in voluntatibus consensio;
and he ^ells us, that in an old Copy he had, there were these words more added,
(...), there was no d^ff^rence, or controversy amongst them, they were united
in judgment and affections, they had common faith, and common affections; they
believed the Gospel, and loved Christ's truth, and one another dearly.

3. In their converse and practice together, they should be one hearted, Acts
2.46. they continued daily wi^h one accord in the Temple, and breaking bread
from house to house, In rebus omnibus agendis. Ferus.
did eat their meat with gladness, and singleness of heart, (...), Budaeus
interprets of men, sine livore, their hearts were without envy, or other
evils; they were single. In this sense chiefly, I conceive this one
heartedness is to be taken, the union and harmony of their judgments,
affections, and practices in spiritual things.

Quest. When was this performed?

Ans. Some think at their return from Babylon, they were one-hearted, and
united in their judgments, affections, and practices, and some phrases in
Scripture import it. Ezra. 1.5. Then rose up the chief of the Fathers of Judah
and Benjamin, and the Priests, and the Levites, with all them whose spirit God
had raised to go up, to build the House of the LORD, in Jerusalem. They had
the same mind and affection to that good work, to build the House of the
Lord, and Chap. 2.2 They came every one to his City. Chap 3.11. All the people
shouted with a great shout when they praised the Lord, because the Foundation
of the House of the Lord was laid. And Chapter 6.16. The children of Israel, the
Priests and the Levites and the rest of the children of the Captivity kept the
Dedication of the House of God with joy: These and such like passage^, give
occasion to think that there was a fullfilling of this truth at that time:
Others conclude it made good in the Apostles days, when the Beleivers were so
united as you read of Acts. 2.42.44.46. Chap. 4.32. The Beleivers, yea the
multitude of them, were of one heart and one Soul: Some are of judgment that
its not yet accomplished, because there were great divisions, and contentions,
among the Churches, in the Apostles times, The Stick of Joseph, and the Stick
of Judah are not yet united, they were never yet since the division, made one
Kingdom, Verse. 17, 18, 19, 21.
and therefore refer it to the calling of the Jews, when the two prophetical
Mystical sticks mentioned, Ezekiel. 37.19.21.22.23. are united and made one
Nation, and have David their King, ruling over them; then shall there be this
one heartedness amongst them. If we should put it upon the times wherein those
great and glorious things spoken of, Isa. 60. shall be given into the Church,
we shall not much mistake: there God says, I will make thine Officers peace,
and thine exactors righteousness, violence shall no more be heard in thy Land,
the Lord shall be unto them an everlasting light, and thy God, thy glory; thy
people also shall be all righteous: Which time I suppose may fall in with the
New Jerusalem, Deuteronomy. 21. in which should be no leanness, death, sorrow,
crying, or pain; all things in it should be new, having the glory of God,
Verse. 4, 5.

Quest. 2. Whether this union, this one heartedness, be attaineable in this
life? Some judge it impossible, that there should be one heartedness in
judgment, affections, and practice, because of the difference of
constitutions, natural abilities, corruptions, and temptations of men, and
unequal dispensations of grace; and therefore refer it to our condition
after this life?

Ans. We must distinguish this one heartednes, its either incomplete, and
inchoative, which is to be had in this life, or complete and consummative,
which is a piece of our happiness in Heaven; the Angels and Saints above enjoy
the same perfectly; we who are here beneath, have it only in part. Though
there be differences in the lesser things of Religion, yet we agree in the
weighty things thereof, and are one hearted in them, and were there no
possibility of being so, and being more and more so, the Lord would not here
have promised it, nor the Apostle exhorted to it, 1 Pet. 3.8. Be you all of one
mind, (...), idem sentientes and consentientes: (...), are they qui, (...),
which think the same things, yea, (...), comprehends as Gerard observes upon
the place, Consensionem in fidei veritate and vitae sanctitate: Paul, 1 Cor.
1.10. prays, (...), and to be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and
in the same judgment, let there be no deficiency, no redundancy, but a sweet
coherency, as in the members of the body: So Phil. 2.2. Be ye like minded,
having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind: He would not only have
them, (...), but (...), not only (...), but (...), in sundry other places the
Apostle exhorts unto it, 2 Cor. 13.11. Romans 12.16. Chap, 15.5. And the Text
says Acts 4.32. That the Believers were of one heart and one soul; they were
so united, that the Heathens were affected with their union, and said
ordinarily of the Christians, Tertul. in Apol.
Vide ut se diligant, ut alter pro altero mori sunt parati: There were many
bodies, not many souls, nor many hearts amongst them.

There have been great differences and contentions amongst the Worthies of God,
Paul with Peter, and Barnabas; Basil, with Eusebius; Chrysostom, with
Epiphanius; and Jerome with Ruffinus: But their differences have been rather in
judgment, then affection; Incolumi amicitia.
and differences there may be without breach of friendship: Paul differed in
judgment from the Jews, and other men, yet he became all things, to all, he
was wonderful loving to all; or if the difference came to their wills, and
affections; yet it provoked to love, rather then abated love, (...), pro salute
animarum, Heb. 10, 24. Neither did they differ in the great things of Religion;
and had they, yet there might have been harmony in their affections and
practice. The Thomists and Scotists, the Dominicans, and Jesuits, have their
controversies, and differences; so the Churches of Spain, and Italy, have a
great Controversy with those of France, about the infallible judgment in
matters of Faith: The Italians and Spaniards affirm the Pope is that judge;
the French deny it, and look upon him as liable to error, with other men; and
subject to Schism, Heresy, and Deposure, by a general Council, and yet they
hold together, in brotherly love and communion.

etc. Pliny says, L. 11.37.
the Partridges of Paphlagonia have d^uble hearts; and men have double, and
treble hearts, Psalm. 12.2. With a double heart do they speak: Hebrew it, with
an heart and an heart, they had diversity of hearts: When the heart is
separated from God, it falls upon the Creatures, and multiplies according to
the objects it affects; so that no man in his natural condition, taken in a
moral consideration, can have one heart, but many hearts, his heart is
divided, and as he has no agreement with God, so no^e with man, or himself.

2. Oneness of heart is a great blessing, its the fruit of the Covenant of
grace, its the first blessing here mentioned, its joined with other great
blessings: I will show you the good of it in some particulars.

1. One heartedness in Christians rej^yceth the spirit of Christ, which is a
spirit of love, peace, union, and is grieved with what is opposite to them,
therefore Ephesians. 4.30, 31. says the Apostle, Grieve not the spirit of God: And
how should that be p^evented? Let all bitterness and wrath, and anger,
clamor, and evil speaking, be put away from you, with all malice: Where these
be, there are divisions, and the spirit is grieved; where these are not, there
is one heartedness, and that rejoices the spirit: Spiritus res delicata,
where tender hearts are, little breaches offend them, Isa. 63.18. They
rebelled, and vexed his holy spirit.

2. It greatly sweetens and contents the heart of man, when the will,
affections, judgment, and conscience, are friendly and united the right way,
When another heart ^s as his own, Jonathan David, had one soul.
its heaven in the soul, Romans 14.17. The Kingdom of Heaven is righteousness,
peace, and joy: And Luke 17.21. The Kingdom of God is within you: When the
heart is divided, then appear storms and troubles in the soul. When
Christians are at variance, divided and not united in their judgments,
affections, and practice, they have not that heavenly sweetness in them which
otherwise they would have, James 3, 16. Where envy and strife is, there is
confusion, (...), unquietness, unheavenlinesse.

3. It makes the Communion one with another delightful, acceptable, Psalm.
133.1. Behold how good and how pleasant it is for Brethren to dwell together in
unity: Where there is union of hearts, there is sweet communion; when the union
is strongest, the communion is sweetest, as in the sacred Trinity: Acts 4.32.
The Believers were of one heart, and of one soul: And Chap. 2.42. They
continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine, and fellowship, and breaking of
bread, and prayers. Communion of those are one hearted, is a Box of precious
and sweet ointment without Flies.

4. It prevents all the evil comes by divisions, and contentions, which are
great and many; I will name some few.

1. Much time is lost, where contentions are, in janglings, brawlings and
bitter expressions; we have woeful experience of it, in these days, both in
men's preaching, printing, reading, conversing, and disputings. Time is
precious, and the Apostle bids us redeem the time, Ephesians. 5.16. Where one
heartedness is, there is prevention of this great loss, Acts 2.46.47. The
Christians there Continued daily with one accord in the Temple praising God.

2. Where divisions are, there is seeking the disgrace, damage, if not the
ruin of one another; there is plotting and practicing to root out each other.
Scribes, Pharisees, high Priests, did not only disgrace Christ, and damage him
several ways, but were restless till they had his blood. Gal. 5.15. Where
strife is there is biteing, and devouring one another. But one-heartednesse
prevents all these things, it never disgraceth, damnifieth or destroys any, 1
Cor. 13. Its full of love, and is kind, not envying, it does not unseemly, it
thinks no evil, but bears all things.

3. They weaken much, and hinder the doing of much good; therefore its the
policy of Satan and his instruments, to make divisions in Kingdoms, Armies,
Counsels, Cities, families, that so the good intended may not be
accomplished. When hearts and heads are divided, hands are weakened, and the
good can never be done in a contentious way, which may be done in a peaceable
and loving way. When men are divided, their counsels, their motions, are often
destructive one to another. When a great River is divided into many Channels,
her waters cannot carry such great vessels as before, nor be so serviceable.
Where union is, there is strength; this made Antisthenes say, Fratrum inter se
concordiam quovis mur^ firmius esse munimentum. Agesilaus being asked why
Lacedemon had no walls, answered, pointing at the Ctizens who were unanimous
and one hearted, Hi sunt Spartae maenia, intimating, that the agreement of
Citizens is the greatest strength to a City. And In Apoptheg. regum. Vulg.
Prove. 18.19. Reads it thus, Frater qui ad juvatur a fraire quasi civitas firma.
Plut: tells of old Scylurus who had 80 Sons, and he on his death bed gave
them a bundle of Arrows, and bad them break them etc. If you agree you will be
invincible, and do great things: if not, you will be weak and do nothing;
Therefore Solomon Ecles. 4.9. says, Two are better then one, there is more
strength; and twenty are better then two, when they agree: Gen 11.6. The
People is one, and nothing will be restrained from them, which they have
imagined to do; being united, they were so strong to carry on that great work
of building Babel, that none could hinder them, but God himself.

4. Divisions greive the weak, and harden the wicked, as you may observe, Romans
14. But where one-heartednesse is, there is no greiving of the one, nor
hardening of the other, that were a strange spirit, which should be offended at
union, peace, and love of brethren. Psalm. 133.2. The unity of Brethren, is like
precious Ointment, which is pleasing to the weak, and softening to the hard
heart, hence, Prove. 25.15. A soft tongue breaks the bones.

5. One heartedness, invites others unto that way where it is found, Its a
pleasant and comely thing, to see Brethren dwell in unity. Men are affected
with it, there is much beauty and mirth, in the harmony of hearts. The sweet
peace and union was amongst the Christians in the primitive times, allured many
to them; love unites and draws strongly. An Indian passing by the house of a
Christian, where they were brawling and contending, said Habbomach dwells
there, that was Satan, and wou^d not turn in: but where love, union, and peace
is, there God dwells, 1 John 4.16. God is love, and dwells where love is. And
that society which has God in it has the strongest argument to draw others to
it, Zach. 8.23. Ten shall take hold of the skirt of a Jew saying, we will go
with you, for we have heard that God is with you.

6. It improves grace, and makes Christians thrive much, whereas jarrs,
divisions, vain disputes, and wranglings, prejudice the luster and growth of
grace, if not the life; its observed by some, that the power of godliness is
greatly abated in many places, They give heed rather to questions, then godly
difying, 1 Timothy 1.4.
and among many Christians in these divided times we live in; these waters of
Marah have imbittered their spirits, and quenched the graces of the spirit; so
that the wholesome words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Doctrine which is
according to godliness, are not so minded as formerly. In Winter the Trees put
not forth, neither do the fruits of the Earth grow in stormy weather: In times
of War things are greatly defaced, but when Winter's gone, Sun shines, then
do all things flourish, and in days of peace things prosper. Where one
heartedness is, this unity we speak of, there does grace thrive among
Christians. Where envyings, grudges, jealousies, strifes, oppositions, and
rising, of spirits are among Christians, they are as Northern and Eastern
winds to the Corn and fruits, they cause them to dwindle away, or to prove
little and lanke: 1 Cor. 8.1. If love edifieth, and builds up Christians,
divisions pull down: when men are divided they seldom speak the truth in love,
and then it does little good; Acts 9.31.
when its spoken in love, then Christians grow, and grow up into Christ, in all
things, Ephesians. 4.15.

7. It furthers their Prayers; when men are all of one heart, there is much
sweetness and strength in their prayers, Acts 4.24. They lift up their voice
to God with one accord: all their hearts were as one heart, and Verse. 31. When
they had prayed, the place was shaken, and they were all filled with the holy
spirit: Here was a sweet and efficacious prayer, all their hearts were in the
prayer, and all were filled with the holy spirit, Mat. 5.23, 24. If thou bring
thy gift to the Altar, and there remembrest that thy brother has ought against
thee: leave thy gift, go, and first be reconciled to thy brother, and then
come and offer thy gift. Whilst divisions are amongst brethren, a prohibition
lies against our sacrificing, but when there is peace and unity, then Heaven is
open for acceptance of our prayers, 1 Cor. 7.5. Paul knew what an enemy
Contention was to Divine duties; and therefore would not have married parties
refrain the use of the marriage bed, without consent of each other; if it were
upon will and humor, it would not further, but hinder their prayers: So in 1
Pet. 3.7. Husbands must dwell as men of knowledge with their Wives, honor
them, though the weaker Vessels, look at them as coheires of the grace of life;
and why? that their prayers be not hindered; if there be dissentions, their
prayers will suffer; but if there be love, oneness of heart, their prayers
will be more spiritual, fervent, and prevalent.

8. Its an honor to the Lord Christ, that Christians do agree; they are
members of his body, and its a disparagement to the head to have the members
fall out, rend and tear one another; this makes Strangers speak, and think
evil of the way of Christ; hereby he is dishonored, but when there is one
heart among his Disciples, when they love one another, and are peaceable, its a
glory to Christ, John 13.35. By this shall all men know that ye are my
Disciples, if ye love one another. Christ would be known in the World, and
have his Disciples known from all others; and How? By love. Chrysostom
observes, he says not by Miracles and Wonders, men shall know you to be my
Disciples; no, they are laid by, but by love: That is a glorious grace, it
shows forth Christ, and who are his; it is not greatness of power, but
greatness of love, which declares who are the Disciples of Christ, and which
honor Christ, 1 John 3.10.

9. Sympathy with each other; if there be one heartedn^sse among men, what is
the burden and comfort of the one, is the burden and comfort of the rest, as in
marriage, the sorrows, are divided, and joys doubled which fall out to persons
in that condition, and the reason is, because they are one flesh, and have
quasi anima^ vna^; So where there is onenes of heart, there is a choice
simpathy, the blows, wounds, losses, greifes, infirmities of one, are the blows
etc. of all the rest, when Peter, and John, had been imprisoned, brought before
the council, threatened, they went to their one company and told them how they
had been used, and they were affected with their sufferings, and fell to prayer
with them, Acts. 4.23, 24. How sensible were the rich Christians of the poorers
burdens, pitying and releiving them, verse. 32. And when Peter was in Prison,
the Church sympathized, Acts 12: But where this is wanting, I mean samenesse
or likeness of spirit, there will be a rejoicing at their sufferings, wrongs,
and mournings or envying at their good: they are divided from others, too often
glory in the infirmities of others, and if Gods hand be upon them or theirs,
they say, its a just judgment of God upon them for their judgments, opinions,
and so add affliction, to the afflicted.

10. What evidence of being in the covenant of grace, if their be not union of
the heart within it self, union of it to God, and others? what satisfaction
can a man have of his being in Covenant with God. Here this one heartedness is
prefixed as the first thing we should look at; and so in Jerem. 32.39. I will
give them one heart and one way. Men that want this one heartedness, cannot
but suspect themselves, be jealous of their condi^ion; if it be not in some
measure in us, inchoatively and te^ding to increase, we are not the Lords, 1
John 3.18, 19.

11. Makes willing to do one for another; how forward was Jonathan to speak
and do, etc. Am^ntibus facile fit omne difficile; and the ground of it is, Cor
est ubi amat non ubi animat.

Helps to unite our hearts, or uniting Directions.
1. Consider many things are darkely laid down in the Scriptures, and the
scope of God and Christ therein, is not to cause contention, difference, and
censuring: but to unite us more strongly in those things are clear, and to
cause a forbearance of one another in things are dark and doubtful: Phil.
3.15, 16. If in any thing you be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this
unto you: Nevertheless whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the
same rule, and let us mind the same thing. Says Paul, I confide not in my
own works or righteousness, but look at Christ alone; I labor to win Christ,
and be found in him; I press after him and none but him, and mind nothing
else at a means of Salvation; if any be otherwise minded through ignorance, or
weakness of Faith (as many were, who affected Mosaicall Rites and Ceremonies)
God shall reveal even this unto you; he will make known the truth unto you;
nevertheless, though there be differences, let us forbear one another
therein, and whereto we have attained, let us walk harmoniously and peaceably
together, minding the same things. (...), notes the outward practice; (...),
the consent of minds and judgments.
What is clear held out unto us in the Gospel, let us consent in, and walk
answerably; in what is dark, doubtful, let us forbear each other, and stay
till God reveal more. If we cannot unite in all, let us unite in what is
clear. Things fundamental, and absolutely necessary, are clearlyest laid
down in the Word; they are expressly commanded, or held forth in Scripture,
whether they be matters of Faith or practice, they are not things drawn out by
remote consequences, and strength of men's parts, but imm^diatly from, or in,
the Word, and in these most may, or do agree, not being many in number; so
far as we have attained in these, let us walk; and as King James says, in
other things, place may be given to Christian liberty; and let us take heed how
we charge men to hold fundamental errors, when Fundamentalls are few, Romans
10.9. 1 John 4 2. and men's errors are Extrafundamentalls.

2. Divine providence has ordered it so, that there should be d fference and
inequality in the naturalls, and spiritualls, of Christians, that so they may
have a greater tendencie and fitness for union, as in a ship, or house, all
pieces of timber must not be of the same length, height, and breadth; but
differing; that so they may fit their several places, and conduce to make up a
more goodly fabric: so among men, some have great natural, and spiritual
abilities, some lower degrees of both, some lesser then they; and this is the
will and wisdom of divine providence, so to dispense, and dispose, that all
may fitly fall in together, and make the more glorious structures for Heaven,
John tells you Ephesians 2.13. of Fathers, young men, and little children, who
d^ffered in their naturalls and spiritualls, yet lived lovingly and peaceably
together, and made up a Church for Christ. If we quarrel because there be
differences of judgment amongst us, we cross the intent of divine providence,
and quarrel with that, which has so dispensed his gifts and grace, Strong
have need of the weak, rich of the poor, Ephesians. 4.16. Every joint supplyeth
something.
and given them out unequally. When we see one man white, another black, one
tall, another low; shall we quarrel because both are not white, both of one
equal height; one has sore eyes, another sound, the veil is fully drawn off
ones heart, half way off another; and this is the Lords doing, it is that we
may the better join together.

3. Seek the good one of another, and that indifferently, selvishnesse and
partiality undo and divide; they have private ends, ways, means, and move
upon sinister respects: whereas if we had more selfe-denying, impartial, and
public spirits to mind the welfare of others, we should quickly attain to
some good degree of this oneness of heart, 1 Cor. 10.24. Let no man seek his
own, but every man another wealth: Its not a flat prohibition from seeking a
man's own good, Romans 15.2. Let every one of us please his neighbor for his
good.
but he should rather seek the good of others, then of himself; as Paul did,
Verse. 33. I seek not mine own profit, but the profit of many: If this were in
practice, it would let in our hearts and spirits into the bosoms of others,
and make us one hearted with them, Phil. 2.20. Paul speaking of Timothy, who
sought the good of the Philippians, says, I have no man like minded; the word
is (...), which some render, Pari animo praeditum; some, Tam unanimem; but the
word notes, Eum qui aequalis sit animi; so that Timothy and the Philippians
were aequ^nimes; his heart, his soul was in theirs, and equal, yea one with
theirs; and what then? Who will naturally care for their estate; the workings
of his soul for their good, were like the workings of a Father toward his
Children natural, which are most strong, constant, and delightful; when men's
hearts are equal too, one with the hearts of others, they act naturally for
their benefit, but when men seek the hurt of others, black their names, greaten
their infirmities, catch advantages against them, they are unnatural, (...),
and (...), men of other, and bitter spirits.

4. Lay aside the wisdom of the flesh, and exalt the wisdom of the spirit;
fleshly wisdom makes and maintains divisions, Romans 8.7. (...). Its enmity
against God, and all the ways of God, it subjects not to them, neither can do
it, but opposes continually. And as it hinders union with God and his ways, so
it does with the Children of God, it keeps them from one heartedness, it makes
breaches, and maintains them made; it was such wisdom separated Paul and
Barnabas, and kept them, being separated, at a distance. The flesh y mind
puffes up, and so the heart cannot lie even with another; Col. 2.18.
but spiritual wisdom is of another nature, Prove. 12, 18. The tongue of the
wise is health, others tongues are like the peircings of a Sword, they wound:
but the spiritual wise they heal wounds, make up breaches, they pacify
wrath, even the wrath of great ones, Prove. 16.14. Men think themselves wise in
these days, but what is the wisdom of most, is it not such James speaks of?
Earthly, sensual, devilish, because its joined with Bitterness, envying,
strife, see James, 3.14.15. And then he tells you the nature of spiritual
Wisdom, verse. 17. That is from abov^, first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and
easy to be entreated, full of mercy, and good fruits, without partiality, and
hypocricy. There is nothing in it but what tends to oneness of heart, its
Pure, there is no mixture of fleshly wisdom in it, its Peaceable, ave^se from
contention, studious of peace, Gentle, and easy to be entreated, not harsh and
self willed, but pl^able to that is good, Full of mercy and good fruits, Its
ready to help and do for others in their necessities, Without partiallity,
(...). without wrangling, judgeing, Without hypocrisy, its real in what it
does.

5. Humility, where that is it draws the heart of God to it, Isa. 57.15. God
dwells with the humble spirit, and surely it will gain the hearts of men to it
Prove. 29.23. A man's pride will bring him low, Mat. 18.4. The humblest man is
the greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven.
it will make God and man against him, But honor shall uphold the humble in
spirit, both God and man will support, speak well of, do good to and close
with him: its pride only, chiefly that makes contentions, Prove. 13, 10. Men's
lusts lift them up, divide themselves, and cause divisions among'st others,
therefore James, 4.1. From whence come Wars and fightings amongst you, Come
they not hence, even of your lusts, that war in your members? Proud men have
many lusts and much war* and when they agree not with themselves, how can they
agree with others? we should therefore purify our hearts from such lusts,
Verse. 8.10.
and humble our selves in the sight of the Lord, and then our hearts would
close better. Its men's proud lusts that dissolve union, that make War, and
breed confusion, blind men's eyes, and engage them in errors: but the humble
man that has had his heart broken, and has let them out, he is readyest to
unite with others, he stands not upon his will, his credit, he has low
thoughts of himself, and high of others: Hence Paul bids the Collossians, put
on bamblenesse of mind Chap. 3.12. and 1 Pet. 5.5. Peter bids them Be clothed
with humility, that is the most becoming garment and least offensive of any.
The man walks with that garment on will not wrong any man in thought, word, or
deed; he judges not others, but himself; he bears the burden and infirmities
of men, and so gains upon and gets interest in the hearts of others.

6. Consider we are brethren, called and pres'd unto peace and mu^uall agreement
in the Gospel. Moses thought the name brethren, sufficient to reconcile the
t^o struggling Hebrews, Acts 7.26. Sirs ye are Brethren, what your hearts, heads,
and hands divided? think how near you are, and how dear you should be one to
another. The word brethren should draw our hearts together, and make us
desirous of peace. 1 Timothy 6.1.2. Servants must not despise their Masters, but
count them worthy of all Honor, because they are brethren. And we should not
desp^se and contend one with another, because we are brethren, endued with
divine nature, and brethren of Christ. Heb. 2.12. The Prince of peace, Isa 9.6.
Partakers of the Gospel of peace, Ephesians. 6.15. And are called of God to peace,
1 Cor. 7.15. Col. 3.1^.
And its peace that we are pressed unto, Romans 14.19. Let us follow after the
things that make for peace, (...), 2 Timothy 2.2^. (...), Heb. 12.14. (...), We
should p^rsue peace with all men, but especially with those are our brethren in
Christ; they make up the body of Christ, in which the spirit of Christ lives,
therefore Ephesians. 4.3. Paul cou^sells them, to K^^pe the unity of the Spirit in
the bond of peace, the Spirit has united men to Christ, and its peace, is the
bond which keep^s the Spirit ^mo^g them: When the Corinthians brake the bond of
pea^e saying, I am of Paul etc. the Apostle told them, they we^e carnal not
spiritual. Chap. 3.1. There should be no strife among Brethren, but this, Viz.
Who should be most loving and peaceable.

Preservatives of One heartedness:
1. Look much at the gifts, graces, and excellencies be in others, not their
weaknesses and imperfections, let the b^ight side of the cloud be in your eyes,
not the black side, and this will k^epe your hearts united, Peter eyed the like
precious faith which was in the Christians, with his and other Apostles, 2 Pet.
1.1. And John takes special notice of the graces were in the Fathers, young
men, little children, in the elect Lady, and Gaius, and that kept his heart
united to them: when men's persons, parts, or graces, are slighted, it breaks
the bond of peace, divides hearts and spirits. The Apostle bids us honor all
men, 1 Pet. 2.17. Esteem them if their be any worth in them, take notice of
it, and honor them answerablie, if there be great sins and weaknesses in them,
are they greater then thine own, If they be or be not, greive for them, be not
angry with them.

2. Lay aside all provoking, dividing names, terms and speeches. Those names
of Petrians, Paulians, Johanites, in the primitive times did hurt; which
Epiphanius observing would not give way that there should be (...), any name
added to the Christian name. Those names of Lutheran, Swinglian, Calvinist,
bred divisions among the Protestants; and surely discriminating names have made
divided hearts among us, so reproaching and bitter words have kindled a fire
which might be put out, if all men had such spirits as Calvin had, who professed
if Luther should call him Devil, yet would he have a reveren'd esteem of him,
and acknowledge him a worthy Servant of the Lords; If we would have our hearts
kept in a firm union, we must use soft tongues, and gentle words, Prove.
15.1.12.25.

3. Ever make the best construction of men's words and actions; that will
preserve peace and oneness of heart; when other interpretations are put upon
the words and actions of men, then were intended, this sowes the seed often times
of bitter contentions, and great evils, John 2.19.20. with Mat. 26.61. Christ
speaks there of the Temple of his Body, the Jews interpret it of the Temple
that was 46. Years a building, and bring it in against Christ, as matter
worthy of death. If we shall force the words, or acts of others, and fetch
senses, intentions, out of them, which the Authors aim^d not at, we shall never
maintain peace with any.

4. Get much love and exercise it; that makes hearts one, and preserves them
being one, 1 Samuel 18.1. Jonathan loved David at his own Soul, so verse. 3.
David loved Jonathan as his own soul; they two had as it were one heart and
one soul, If there were love among us, it would cover a multitude of sins, and
not discover one, it would make up breaches past, Ephesians. 4.2. Forbear one
another in love.
and prevent breaches for the future. The very nature of love consists in
union, Amans est in amato, He that loves lives in the loved, the heart of the
loved is his habitation: and love is very forward to do any kindness for
those it relates to. That Chapter 1 Cor. 13. had need be new studied in these
divided times. What ever the knowledge of faith be, if we have not love, the
text says We are nothing. He says not, we are little, but plainly we are
nothing. Many among us are very bitter, uncharitable, and go among men for some
things, and some bodies, but in the judgment of God they are nothing; if you
have little love, you are little ones, if great love, great ones, if no love,
nothing: Its love that Christ specially looked at, and called for, in Peter,
Peter love thou me more then these etc. Christ measures men by their love;
and no marvel, love is the ful^fi^ling of the law, Gal. 5.14. And if we
serve one another by love and fulfill the law where can the breach be made,
how can the offense come in? love behaves not it self unseemely, seeks not
her own, is not easily provoked, thinks no evil; this grace binds a man to
his good behavior; and will keep peace with all men: hence is it that whereas
once we are bid Above all things to take the shield of faith, we are twice bid
above all things to put on love, 1 Pet. 4.8. and Col. 3.14. Which is the bond
of perfectness, That is both in regard of man and G d, l^ve knits the members
of Christ together, and so perfects his body, it unites us to God, and so
causes the perfecting of Divine love in us, 1 Job. 4.12. If we love one
another God dwells in us and his love is perfected in us. v. 17.

5. Be willing to le^rne one of another, that will indeare our hear^s each to
other, and keep them in oneness: The Scribes and Pharisees thought they knew
the Law, better then Christ, they would not learn of him, and so never
heartily closed with him, but were peremptory in their own opinions, and
tenacious of traditions, and by this means were enemies to truth, and those
were one-hearted in the truth, Col. 3.16. They were to teach and admonish one
another, yea they must say to Archippus, take heed to the Mynisterie which thou
have received of the Lord, that thou fulfill it: Their willingness to learn
one of another, preserved them in order; and those that do teach, should
willingly and meekely instruct, those that do oppose, if God peradventure will
give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth, 2 Timothy 2.24.25. For the
promise is, Isa. 29.24. That those have erred in spirit shall come to
understanding, and they that murmured shall learn doctrine.

6. See Gods presence and nearness to us; that is a means to preserve us in an
one hearted condition, when the Master is present the servants are quiet, and
keep so, James, 5.9. Grudge not one against another brethren, least ye be
condemned, and what should prevent this, and keep them in brotherly love,
Behold the judge stands before the door, he is ready to come in, to examine
you thoroughly, what the differences are, what the words, acts, thoughts are; he
is in you all, through you all, observes every rising of the spirit, all
workings there; and above you all; and will reckon with you.

Inducements to One-heartednesse, are these:
1. That great Apostle Paul says to the Ephesians. Chap. 4.3, 4, 5, 6. Endeavor
to keep the unity of the spirit: And why? There is one body, one spirit, one
hope, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all: Here be
seven ones, and every one a strong argument to move to unity and
one-heartednesse: One body orderly united; they were one body, Propter externam
visibilem, and ordinalem conjunctionem, quam in Ecclesia sua habebant tanquam
membra in corpore. Estius: One spirit, which inliven^, inlightens, strengthens,
sanctifies, comforts; and this spirit is not contrary to it self, but one and
the same, a spirit of love and peace; one hope among you of immortality, glory,
and eternal excellencies: one Lord Christ who rules over you, whose servants
you are; one Faith, one Christ, that you believe in, one rule that you walk
by: one Baptism, you are all baptized in the Name of the Father, Son, and
holy Ghost, one God and Father, there is but one God whom ye serve, and he is
the Father, you are his Children in his Family; will you fall out? if you were
of diverse Families, had diverse Fathers, diverse Gods, that might be excusable.

2. Christ has taken our nature upon him, and as to unite Man and God
together, so to unite Man and Man together in himself: Hence Gal. 3.28. Ye
are all one in Christ Jesus: and Romans 8.17. Joynt-heires with Christ: and
Ephesians. 2.6. Said to sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus: This
should move us to live and love, as those have such high privileges by Christ;
and its observed, Christ being united to us, bears with more in us, then we
can with one another; when we are in that condition as we can endure one
another no longer, I mean dead, and must be buried out of the sight of the
living, Christ then is united to our corrupt bodies; when Lazarus lay stinking
in the grave, Christ loved him.

3. If you love them be of your own opinion only, and love you, what do you
more then others, then Pharisees, then Publicans, Matthew. 5.46. If you love them
which love you, what reward have ye? do not even Publicans, the worst of men,
the same? and if you salute your Brethren only, what do you more then others?
Publicans do it, all sorts will do that, and know, if you be one with men,
and love them because they are of your opinion, it is the opinion, and not the
men you love; if of another opinion, then you cannot close with them and love
them, but Christ would have you do more then others, more then Publicans, he
would have you Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them
that hate you, and pray for them that despitefully use you and persecute you:
Why can you not love men have the same graces with you, as well as the same
opionions with you?

4. Its the fulfilling of a Prophecy, Isa. 11, 6, 7, 8, 9. By Wolf, Leopard,
Lion, Bear^, and Aspe, are meant, Frenzy, Choleric, Strong, Rigid, and
Hurtful men; by Lamb, Kid, Calfe, Cow, and Ox, the weak, meek, laborious,
and useful; and these should dwell together, eat together, and lie down
together; their natures should be so altered by the Gospel and spirit of
Christ, that the fiercest should be as meek as a Lamb, and live in peace with
the rest of the Believers, they should come to the state of innocence, in which
no creature should have preyed upon another, but all have lived harmoniously
and sweetly together; so should it be under Christ, Verse. 9. They shall not
hurt nor destroy in all my holy Mountain, there shall be no hurting nor
destroying in the whole Church. The Jews because they see not this fulfilled
among us Christians, take offense, and say, that therefore Christ is not yet
come; that our Christ was not the true Christ; for yet the Lion tears, the
Wolf devoures, etc. A sad thing to cause Jews to deny Christ, and to
blaspheme, because we are like Lions, Bears, Wolves to one another. Let us
remember the Prophecy in Z^ph. 3.9.

5. Consider what oneness of spirit is amongst the enemies of God.

1. Devils; Seven Devils dwelt together peaceably in Mary Magdalen, Mark
16.9. a Legion in another, Luke 8.30. The man was unquiet, but the Devils were
very quiet in him; though hundreds yet there was no dissension: The Devils
Kingdom is an undivided Kingdom, Matthew. 12.26. and all the Devils in the
World drive on the same design unanimously, they all seek to hinder the
conversion, comfort, and salvation of sinners, they all labor to draw men to
perdition.

2. Wicked men, Mahumetans are of one heart in their Mahumetanisme: Papists,
what a multitude of Orders and differences among them, and yet all are
onehearted in popery and superstition, Revel. 13.3, All the World wondered after
the Beast, and worshipped the Dragon and the Beast: Herod, Pilate, the
Gentiles, and people of Israel, were gathered together against Christ, Acts
4.27. And when they built Babel the people were one, Genesis 11.6. Read Psalm. 83.
from the 3. to the 9. shall wicked men and Devils be one hearted, one spirited,
in sinful practices, in false ways, and shall not those be godly?

6. Where oneness is not, there will be divisions and offenses, as amongst the
Corinthians, they were the most divided Church we read of, and their offenses
did most abound: and how sad it is to offend any belong to Christ, hear Christ
himself telling you, Matthew. 18.6. Who so shall offend one of these little
ones, which believes in me, it were better for him that a Millstone were hanged
about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the Sea: So heinous a
thing is it in the eye of God, that a man were better dye any death then offend
the godly, the meanest of the godly, what then if he offend the greatest and
most of the godly; it were better a great Millstone were hanged about his neck,
and he, etc. (...), such a stone as Asses and Horses drew, a great Millstone.

7. The Lord Christ may own them at last day, for sheep, whom you look upon
and carry your selves toward like goats, and those he may judge sound sheep,
you have judged infected: and what shame will that be to these, have so fowly
mistaken; the Pharisees thought themselves skillful in the law, and judged the
people cursed that followed Christ closest, Job. 7.49. but those People were
dear to Christ. When the blind man saw, and saw more then the Pharisees, they
cast him out, but Christ received him, Joh. 9. So, many that now are cast out,
as factious, seditious, erroneous, schismatic, ere long Christ will own;
and then how will they blush have reproached them, persecuted them, judged them
unworthy of any liberty or being amongst them: God takes the foolish to
confound the wise, the weak to confound the mighty, the base, despised, and
things which are not, to bring to naught things which are: 1 Cor. 1.27.28.

8. Where unity is amongst the Saints, there the presence of the Lord Christ
is, Matthew. 18.20. Where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am
I in the midst of them, Where there is most unity there God delights most to
be: Jerusalem was as a City compact together, Psalm. 122.3. had Gods presence in
a special manner, and it represented the Church under the Gospel, which when
its fitly framed together then its an habitation for God, Ephesians. 2, 21.22. The
Curtains of the Tabernacle where God was present must be coupled together,
Exodus 26.3. The hearts of men must be knit together, if they would have God
and Christ among them. The Jews affi me, that where two sit together (that is
agreed having one heart) and speak of the law, divinitas habitat inter ipsos.

I shall end this point, with that of Paul. Phil. 2.1.2. If there be therefore
any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the
spirit, if any bowels and mercies, fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like
minded, having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind.

I will give them one heart, they cannot make their hearts one, but I can, its
a work not to be accomplished by force of man, but by the free grace of God:
Jer. 32.38.39. They shall be my people and I will be their God, and I will give
them one heart, and one way: When God, is God in covenant with a People, then
will he freely give and work this oneheartednesse, he does not force it, but
freely work it. Men attempt by compulsory acts, to make men differing in
principles and practices, to be one hearted, and to go one way, but such
attempts seldom take any good effect; men's judgments and consciences will not
be forced. Bodinus in his fourth Book of his Commonwealth, says judiciously;
If a Prince persuaded of the truth of his Religion, would draw his Subjects
thereunto, being divided into Sects and Factions, he must not therein use force
(for the minds of men, the more they are forced, the more froward and stubborn
they are, and the greater punishments that shall be inflicted upon them, the
less good is to be done; the nature of man being commonly such, as may of it
self be led to like of any thing, but never be enforced so to do) but without
fainting to profess his Religion, devoutly serving the Almighty God, whereby
he shall turn the wills and minds of his Subjects unto the imitation and
admiration of himself. Theodosius the Elder, who found all the Provinces of
his Empire at the beginning of his Reign, full of Arrians, whose strength and
power was so grown and increased under three or four Arrian Emperors their
favorers, as that their Doctrine was not only by eight Counsels confirmed,
held at Tire, Sardis, Syrme, Milan, Seleucia, Nice, Tarsis, Ariminum, (where
six hundred Bishops were of their opinion, and but three of name, which held
the contrary) but that they jpunished also others their adversaries, of opinion
contrary to themselves, with confiscations, proscriptions, and other most
grievous punishments, yet would not this good Emperor, either force, or punish
the Arrians, though he deadly hated them, but granted unto both the Arrians,
and other the Catholics, their Churches, and suffered them in every Town to
have two Bishops, of either Religion one, and though at the importunate suit of
the Catholic Bishops, he commanded certain Edicts to be published against the
Arrians, yet he was contented to have the same held in suspense, and not to be
put in execution, as his Letters to Ambrose declare, Trade Arrianis Basilicam,
mei namque sunt omnia juris. Theodorick King of the Goths, though favoring the
Arrians, would not yet enforce the consciences of his Subjects, nor have them
tormented for their Religion, lest under the pretense of impiety, he should
have seemed to have taken the spoil of their goods; to bend their minds, which
could by no threats or commands be constained to bend; for thus he writes unto
the Senate of Rome, Religionem imperare non possumus quia nemo cogitur ut
credat invitus: He says also, No man is to be forced, the private exercise of
his Religion is to be yielded, if it cannot be publicly professed without
Sedition, otherwise men will become Atheists, and so having lost the fear of
God, and trod under foot Laws and Magistrates, will practice all impieties and
villainies. Mr. Forbes being sent for to the King of Sweden, when he was
victorious, and asked by him what Government he should set over Lutherans,
Calvinists, Papists, whom he had Conquered; his answer was, You have Conquered
their bodies with ease, but you will find it a hard work to conquer men's
judgments and consciences. What ill effects the forcing of men's spirits
brought forth, you may read in that learned and judicious Treatise of Sir Simon
D' Ewes, entitled, The Primitive practice for preserving Truth.

You know who said it, in things of the mind, we look for no compulsion, bu^
that of light, and reason.

He is not a loving Father, but rather a step-Father, who will compel his
Children to eat of that meat is against their stomachs, when there are variety
of dishes to feed upon, which are suitable to them. Wise Physicians persuade,
do not force their Patients to take Physic: Its good to cure errors be in
men's minds, The conscience is not obstinate, which uses means to know truth.
If God hide it from, it lives under the power of conscience, and is not
turbule^t.
and to save their souls, but in Gods way, James 5.19. by conversion, not by
compulsion, by the power of the Word, not the edge of the Sword, this makes
Hypocrites, that Saints.

These things I speak, not to make way for licentiousness, that what ever
opinions me^ hold, think, say, or practice, they may be free: but merely, that
consciences truly tender, may not be forced. Its one thing to restrain men's
practices which are Idolatrous, blasphemous, against pure worship, the power of
god inesse, and peace of the State; another to force men to that their
judgment and consciences are against. I pleaded not ever for a Toleration of
all, neither do, but only that those whose lives are holy, peaceable, and
differ in judgment from others in some things, may not be forced to conform
or depart.

Ezekiel. 11.19. I will put a new Spirit within you.
The word Spirit notes sometimes, the Soul, Acts 7.59. says Stephen, Lord
Jesus receive my Spirit, 2 Cor. 7.1. Let us cleanse our selves from all
filthiness of flesh and spirit. Sometimes for the heart and affections, 1 K.
21.5. Why is thy Spirit so sad, said Jezabel to Ahab; that is, why is thy heart
so heavy, Acts. 17.16. Paul, his Spirit was stird within him, when he saw their
Idolatry, his affections moved him to speak and dispute with them. Sometimes,
for the faculties of the soul, Viz. Understanding, will, and conscience, 1
These. 5.23. I pray God your whole Spirit and Soul, and body be preserved
blameless. By whole spirit, the understanding, will and conscience, may be
meant: Pro. 18.14. A wounded Spirit, who can bear, that is, a wounded
conscience; Sometimes, for the gifts and graces of the spirit, Gal. 3.2.
Received ye the Spirit by the works of the Law, or by the hearing of faith.

New.
Is in Scripture sometime, that which is totally new for matter, Deuteronomy. 20.5 A
new H^use, Judges 15.13. New ways, 1 Samuel 6.7. A new cart, 1 K. 11.29. A new
Garment. Sometimes, for that is renewed, 2 Chronicles. 20.5. Jehoshaphat stood
before the new Court, that is judged to be the Priests Court renewed in its
building, or use, after some public profanation; so its called a new Shipp or
Garment, that are altered and changed. Sometime, for that is excellent, and
admirable, Mar. 1.27. What new Doctrine is this? its admirable and excellent
doctrine, so the New Name, Rev 2.17. Chap. 3.12. That is, an excellent and
admirable name. Sometimes, for that is diverse from what it was before,
especially in regard of q^alities, Mar. 16.17. They shall speak with new
tongues, which Acts. 2.4. are called other tongues, tongues which had other
gifts and graces in them

By new Spirit here is not meant a new Soul, or faculties, for substance or the
inward form of it, but the same soul altered in the frame, renewed in the
qualities thereof: it has other excellent qualities in it, which it had not
before; even the gifts and graces of the spirit; hence its called the new
birth, or birth of the spirit, John. 3.6. The new man, Ephesians. 4.24. The new
creature, Gal. 6.15. Not only faith and love mentioned, Gal. 5.6. But all
divine qualities man is capable of, are included in this new spirit.

1. The understanding is enlightened, with divine light which it had not before,
Acts 26.18. To open the eyes and to turn them from darkness to light. The
Gentiles were blind before God gave them this new spirit, which brought new
lights unto their minds, Ephesians. 4.18. Having the understanding darkened, being
alienated from the life of God through the ignorance that is in them, because
of the blindness of their hearts: but when they had put on the new man, verse.
24. in the next Chap. verse. 8. Paul says of them Ye were sometimes darkness
but now are light in the Lord, the Lord by his spirit had brought in marvailous
light into their understandings, and scattered their darknesses; this Paul
calls Gods shining into the heart, 2 Cor. 4.6. John, Christ's giving an
understanding 1 John 5.20. and Luke, an opening of the understanding, Luke
24.45. all which phrases, as they suppose oldnesse of dark^esse, so a renewing
of the understanding with newness of light, and this light is the light of
life, John 8.12. brought into the soul by the spirit of wisdom and
revelation, Ephesians. 1.17, 18.

2. This new spirit has influence into the will, and alters that which in it
self is corrupt, and carries the soul the wrong way, John 1.13. Will of the
flesh is put for the whole corruption of nature.
Ephesians 2.3. Fulfilling the desires of the flesh, (...), The wills of the
flesh: Paul acknowledges nothing to be in the wills of men naturally, but
fleshly corruption, and whatsoever that put them upon, that they did, and with
delight, fulfilling the wills of the flesh, but when this new spirit comes, it
alters the will, breaks the principle of stubbornness in it, purges the
pollution and corruption out of it, and makes it pliable unto the will of God,
Ezekiel. 36.27. I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
Statutes: Gods spirit will so alter our spirits, so transform and renew them,
that they shall be inclined to, and carried on, in the obeying of Divine
Statutes: Before, they went on in the ways of sin, with strength, constancy,
and delight; now they move with new strength, constancy and delight, in that
which is good; this new spirit bows the will to the Law of righteousness; so
that it obeys and commands well.

3. The affections are renewed, Ezekiel. 36.26. A new heart also will I give you:
That is, your affections which are now corrupt and inordinate, shall be changed
and regulated; they shall of sinful, be made holy; of earthly, be made
heavenly; of unrighteous, become righteous; Ephesians. 5.9. The fruit of the spirit
is in all goodness, righteousness, and truth: When the spirit of Christ comes
and makes our spirits new, there is truth for the understanding, goodness for
the will, and righteousness for the affections; and Gal. 5.22, 23. the fruits
of the spirit refer most to the affections, as Love, joy, long-suffering,
gentleness, meekness, temperance: Now the old affections, and lusts of the
flesh are crucified, Gal. 5.24. and the new affections are set on things above,
Col. 3.2.

4. The conscience is renewed; before, its defiled, and acts according to that
false or dim light, is in the understanding; but when this new spirit comes
in, the conscience is awakened, purged, and acts upon Divine grounds, Heb.
10.22. Having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience: the holy Ghost,
like water which washes away the filth of the body, cleanses the conscience
from the blindness, impurity, and deadness which are in it; so that it being
endued with new qualities becomes a pure, 2 Timothy 1.3. and good conscience, 1 Timothy 1.5. and acts new, not in a natural, but sanct^fied manner.

5. The memory is renewed and made able to retain good things before like a
Streiner, it lets the Milk go, and kept the hairs and draffe; like a
Boulter, it let the fine flower go, and keeps the bran, but having a new
quality in it, its retentive of good, 1 Cor. 15.2. Ye are saved by the Gospel
if you keep in mem^^y what I have Preached; they had memories in^bled to do
it: many a poor soul that is converted, when it comes to practice, remember
truths better then those of able memories.

These renewing and refining qualities make up the new man, and here are called
a new spirit.

Spirit.

1. Because they are from the spirit, that is the author of them, John 3.6.
That which is borne of the spirit, is spirit: It has the qualities and graces
of the spirit, the spirit begets its own likeness in the soul, as a Father
does in the body.

2. In opposition to the flesh, these new qualities are contrary to those of
corrupt nature, which the Scripture calls Flesh, and therefore fitly called
Spirit, Gal. 5.17. The flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against
the flesh.

3. For that they make us spiritual, they have such operations in us, and
honors us with such a denomination, 1 Cor. 2.15. He that is spiritual judges
all things.

4. Because they are chiefly seated in the most spiritual part of a man, the
soul and faculties of it are the subject thereof.

New.

1. In opposition to the old corruptions were in man before, which the
Scripture calls the Old man, Ephesians. 5.22. Put off the old man, which is corrupt:
And Verse. 23. Be renewed in the spirit of the mind, and put on that new man
which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness: Here its
called the new man (which is the same with the new spirit) in oppoisition to
the old man.

2, For that it comes a new way into man, had not Adam sinned, we should not
have needed such Ordinances as now we have, to work this new spirit in us; its
not by generation but regeneration, its not from nature, art, afflictions,
Ordinances, but the spirit in Ordinances.

3. Because its wrought anew in us; no man has ought of this new spirit in him
naturally, but an old and contrary spirit, Romans 8.7. The wisdom of the flesh
is enmity to God: This is totally new wrought, and therefore is called a
Creation, Ephesians. 4.24.

4. From the effect, it makes us new, 2 Cor. 5.17. If any man be in Christ, he
is a new creature, 1 Pet 2.2. These endued with this new spirit are called newborn babes.

5. Because its ever vigorous, fresh and lively, not decaying, so I find the
words new interpreted by a late Divine, and applied to the new man, and he
thinks the new Heavens, and the new Earth spoken of, Mr. Balls in his Covenant
of grace, p. 195.
Isa. 65.17.66.22. Rev. 21.1. (Whatsoever is meant by them) that the title new
seems to import the admirable excellency and continuance thereof, never to
alter or decay; but to remain before the Lord.

Quest. Whether was this promise fullfilled among the Jews, or in times of the
Gospel.

Answ. Many of the Fathers refer the fullfilling of it unto the times of the
Gospel; but it being primarily made unto the Jews, we have just cause to
think that it was in part fullfilled amongst them, after their return from
Babylon; so gracious a promise being given out by God, made known by Ezekiel,
its not likely they would neglect, having bin so soarly afflicted in Babylon;
but would improve, and press the Lord for the accompl^shment of it, and
without dispute, many of them had this new spirit, for after they came again
to Jerusalem, they had such a hatred of Idols, and love to truth, that they
stood out to death for the law, and religion of their God, as it recorded in
the Maccabee.

Quest. 2. Whither is this new Spirit given, or wrought all at once.

Answ. This new spirit, consists in those new qualities which are put into man,
and the several qualities are wrought in at once, but they are wrought up by
degrees, A man has all graces at once in semine, radice, habitu, and this
grace is called The Law in the mind, Romans 7.22, the Law written in the heart,
Hebr. 8.10. The Divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. Christ formed in us. Gal. 4.19. The
inward man, Romans 7.23. Seed. 1 John 3, 9. Now this seed, this inward man, this
Christ, this Divine nature, are growing, this law receives addition, 2 Pet.
3.18. Grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
2 Cor. 4.16. The inward man is renewed day by day, There is an addition of more
strength, more degrees are added to those new qualities, the inward man grows
stronger and better: So Chap. 3.18. We are changed into the same image, from
glory to glory: When men are changed, and this new spirit is put into them, it
is glory; and there is a Progress in this glory, they go from one degree of
glory to another.

knowledge, righteousness, Romans 8 8. They that are in the flesh cannot please
God.
and true holiness, Col. 3.10. Ephesians. 4.24. Its that makes a man good, and
acceptable to God, it was the holy Ghost and Faith, made Barnabas a good man
Acts 11.24. Till a man have some new qualities in him, this new spirit, he is
flesh, displeasing unto God, Joh. 3.6. That which is borne of the flesh is
flesh, and that which is borne of the spirit is spirit, and so acceptable to
God, then the tree is good, and the fruit good also, Matthew, 7.17.18, Its that
sets us at liberty, this new spirit is not a spirit of bondage, but of liberty,
2 Cor. 3.17. not of fear, but love, power, and of a sound mind, 2 Timothy 1.7.
It Is that weakens and wastes sin in us 2 Cor. 5.17. If any man be in Christ he
is a new Creature, old things are past away. Old customs, practices,
principles, corruptions, they are decaying, the old leaven is purging out: It Is
an argument of Gods love in the Covenant of grace toward a sinner, and
evidence that thou art in that Covenant, its the promise of the new Covenant,
to give this new spirit: It Is that makes us honorable and glorious, When we
have this new spirit we are partakers of the divine nature, and borne of God; 1
John. 3.9. And that is honorable, v. 1. and glorious, 2 Cor. 3.18. It Is a
choice comfort to the man that has it, more then thousands of silver and gold,
more then a world to him, no such comfort to him as this, its life, Luke,
16.24. This my Son was dead, and is alive again. The dead prodigal when he
had this new spirit had a new life, and this was a sweet, a great comfort to
him, to his Father, to others; It Is that gives you title to the Kingdom of
Heaven, John, 3.5. Verily verily I say unto you except a man be borne of water
etc.

How does this new spirit act and discover it self in that man where it is?

Answ. 1. It begets a noble ingenuity in the Soul, to maintain the condition
it puts into, it will shun whatever is contrary to it, or offensive to the
Lord who gave it, 1 John, 3.18, Whosoever is borne of God sins not, but keeps
himself, and that wick-one touches him not, he has a noblenes of Spirit and
keeps himself from sin and Satan; the things they propound are too low for him,
too base. Joseph said, How can I do this great wickedness and sin against God?
Genesis 39.9. Nehemiah 6. chap. 11. Should such a man as I flee. So says the man
endued with this new Spirit, should such a man as I sin? God has made me
spiritual, and I will not imbase my self to carnal things. 1 Pet. 1.14. Not
fashioning your self according to the former lusts.

2. A strong impression made upon the soul, so that it cannot but follow after
Christ; before, the heart could not but look downwards, pursue the Creature,
but now it does the contrary, Acts, 26.18. To open their eyes and to turn them
from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God: when the turn is
once made, they cannot but mind the light, and follow after God, and Christ,
when Elijah threw his mantle upon Elishah, he had such an impresse made upon
his spirit, that he must leave all, and follow him. The Needle is unquiet till
it come to the Northern point: so a soul t^ll it come to Christ when it is
anointed with these new qualities etc.

3. Sees every thing with a new eye, there is divine light, the light of life
in the soul, John, 8.12. And the life of God, Ephesians. 4.18. Before they are
alienated from it, but now having this new spirit, they partake of it and not
only live the life of God but look upon things as God does, they see sin
exceeding sinful, Rom, 7.13. Grace to be free, glorious, exceeding rich, and
abundant, Ephesians. 1.6. Chap. 2.7.8, 1 Timothy 1.14, They beheld Christ in another
manner then ever before, 2 Cor. 5.16, Henceforth know we no man after the
flesh, yea though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth
know we him no more. Since we have had an eye to see spiritually, and the eye
renewed to see more spiritually into the death of Christ, what satisfaction,
peace, life, grace, Salvation, glory, it has wrought, and brought, we know no
m^n after the flesh, for their present honor, external exc^llencies, no not
Christ: We look not upon him as poor, mean, afflicted, contemptible; but we
see and judge spiritually, we look at what is divine in him, in others, in
all; So for God himself, Jer. 31.34. When he should put his Law in their
inward parts, then they should all know him, that is, in another manner then
ever; they should see not only what an infinite excellency he was in
himself, but what a father of mercies, and God of Consolations he was in
Christ.

4. It makes a spiritual War in the soul; this new spirit sets upon the old
man the old spirit, and maintains a mighty War against the same, bringing
under and captivating the flesh, with its lusts, members, wisdom and strong
holds: There was a natural War in the man before, between sin and the
conscience; but this is a spiritual War: and it is known thus.

1. The whole frame of the soul is against sin, not the conscience alone, the
understanding, will, affections, conscience, a drunken man may speak against
drunkenness, and yet the frame of his heart be toward it? a coveteous man,
may condemn coveteousnesse, yet the frame of his spirit may be to it. Col.
1.21. Enemies in your minds by wicked works, a man being without this new
spirit is an enemy to God, Christ, truth in his mind by wicked works, the
frame of his mind is against them, but being endued with this new spirit, he
is reconciled to God, and so an enemy in his m^nd to wicked works, so for his
will, Romans 7.19. The evil which I would no^ that I do^. His will was against
evil, So for his affection verse. 15: What I hate that I do. So for conscience
while its natural all it restraines a man and makes him say, I dare not do
it, but when sanctified, it causes a man to fight against sin, and to say, I
cannot do it, Gal. 5.17. Ye cannot do the things that ye would: The new
nature is universally through a man, and where it is, it opposes. When Lot was
in Sodom, he was vexed with all the sinful ways of the Sodomites, and when
this new spirit is in a man, its vexed with all the ways of the flesh.

2. This new spirit wars against sin as sin, the unsanctified conscience never
does so, therefore is carried against sin upon consideration, its a great sin,
it brings damage, etc. Darius, when Daniel was in the Lions den, his
conscience troubled him, but if the sins be lesser, as omission of duties,
vain thoughts, lusts, Dan. 6.48.
those motus primo primi, they are dispensed with, but this new spirit is
against every sin, be it little or great, it knows its a breach of the Law,
against the holy God, defiles, cost the blood of Christ.

3. By the weapons are used, this new spirit where it is, uses spiritual
arguments against sin, as Gods love, Gods dishonor, Christ's death, sense of
pardon, the sealings and comforts of the spirit; Communion with God and Christ,
love of holiness, the nature of grace, and scope of the Gospel; see Col. 3.4,
5. 1 John 3.3. Tit. 2.11, 12.
2 Cor. 7.1. But an unregenerate heart, a natural conscience, uses arguments
fetched from the curses of the Law, terrors of death, fear of Hell, and
damnation, shame of men, loss of friends, estate, the sovereignty of God over
them.

4. By the continuance of this war, an hypocrite that has only a natural
conscience, may go on skirmishing against sin a long time, but not for ever, an
illighten'd, unsanct^fied conscience will either grow weary, or be bribed, or
extenuate sin, or grow hard, feared, and commit sin without reluctance; but a
man possessed with this new spirit, will hold out the war to the end of his
life, he grows not faint, he will not be bribed with ought, or all, the World,
flesh, and Satan have, to make a truce with sin, sin is sin to him, and shall
not be lessened, he will fight it out, and dye in the fight, rather then yield,
Romans 7.24. O wretched man, says Paul, who shall deliver me, etc. 2 Timothy 4.6,
7. I am ready to be offered, I have fought a good fight.

5. By the event; the man without this new spirit by all his combating against
sin, gets it more restrained, and so more quiet, but not mortified: but where
this new spirit is, there sin is wounded, crucified, Gal. 5.24. They that are
Christ's have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts thereof.

5. It works and acts in a new manner, Romans 7.6. Paul speaks of serving them
in the newness of the spirit, not in the oldnesse of the letter; when you were
under the Law, that showed you your duty, provoked corruption, gave you no
power to subdue the one, or do the other, and all the service then was after
the old man, with much earthlinesse, difficulty, dullness, untowardly,
inconstantly, and no better then dead work^, but now you are under the Gospel,
the spirit has begotten a new life in you, beautified you with new qualities
and principles, laid in new strength, therefore now serve the Lord in newness
of the spirit: and that is,

1. In a spiritual manner; the Apostle speaks of a spiritual understanding,
Col. 1.9. of a spiritual house, an holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual
sacrifice, 1 Pet. 2.5. They being spiritualized, served the Lord in a
spiritual manner; they had more spiritual conceptions of God and his worship,
and put out more spiritual acts.

2. More readily; when this new spirit is in a man, he is like a Ship which
has all its Tacklings and sails up, and is ready to sail immediately, such a
man is prepared to every good work, 2 Timothy 2.21. Romans 1.15. Paul was ready to
Preach the Gospel, and ready to be bound and suffer, Acts 21.13. And the
Corinthians had a ready mind, 2 Cor. 8.19. Where this spirit is, there the
Wheels are oiled.

3. More delightfully, Romans 7.22. I delight in the Law of God, after the inward
man. Christ's yoke is easy, his commands are not grievous: The ways his
wisdom prescribes are ways of pleasantness. Prove. 3.17. And Paul counted
all the pains he took, hard things he suffered, but a recreation. Phil. 3.8.
That I may win Christ. He had as much pleasure, and delight in them, as men
have in any games.

4. More beautifully; before they bungled, but now they act more comelily, they
pray and sing with the spirit, and with understanding, 1 Cor. 14, 15. Romans
12.8. he gives with simplicity, rules with diligence, shows mercy with
cheerfulness, and Cant. 7.1. How beautiful are thy feet with those, O Princes
daughter; the ways of the Church are beautiful, actions comely.

5. More evenly and constantly, 2 Pet. 1.4. this new spirit is called the
Divine nature, both because its from God our Father, because all the Children
have it, because it cannot be altered, and also because it acts like nature,
constantly, strongly, the eye is not weary with seeing, nor the ear with
hearing.

6. It propounds new ends to it self, Viz. Gods glory: before, a man's self
was his center and end, this new spirit came out from God, and works for God
and to God, now it sees the nature of Divine grace; beholds glory in that
grace, and answers Gods end, it does act to the praise of the glory of his
grace.

7. Makes cheerful and thankful, Col. 3.10. after had spoken of the new man,
Verse. 16. He tells them of singing with grace in their hearts to the Lord, 2
Cor. 5.17. When old things are gone, and all new, etc. as in a House, when all
is renewed in it, beautifully trimmed, etc. it cheares.

You have mention of a new song six times in the Psalms,
33.3.40.3.96.1.98.1.149.1.144.9: Once in Isa, 42.10. Twice in the Rev.
5.9.14.3. Sung with new fervencie, as new things use to affect most, sung with
the motions of the new spirit of grace, which minds more the new benefits by
Christ, and the new Covenant, then those by Creation.

The Twenty four Elders sang this new song, Revel. 5.9. 144000 redeemed from
the Earth learned it, it was a song of the new mercies given in Redemption,
Justification, Sanctification.

A new song, that is, an excellent song, with singular cheerfullnesse, made
upon the giving in of some new mercy.

Non vulgar sed eximium, Bez.
New, because the singers were new, they had a new spirit, a spirit of grace and
glory in them. 2. Matter of it was new, Christ's incarnation, passion, doctrine,
miracles ordinances, promises, Church, Kingdoms, but especially the opening
the Book and redemption by his blood.

Obser. 2. This new spirit is the work of God, and not of man, the Lord alone
is the Author and cause of it, man's will contributes nothing to it. I will put
a new spirit within you You oppose, resist, but I will overcome all that
opposition and resistance, and plant new qualities, put a new spirit within
you. I will work powerfully, efficaciously, so that the work shall proceed.
The Arminians hold that the operation of God in the conversion of a sinner, or
putting in this new spirit, is Moralis suasio not Realis efficientia. That he
does not work immediately upon the mind and will, causing us to believe, to
come to Christ, to live holily; but only propounds truths, which is sufficient
that the understanding and affections are renewed, with such power of God and
his grace as cannot be withstood; But the will is quickened, Resistibili modo,
that however it is sometimes renewed in the affectionate part of it, yet it
continues unrenewed in the willing and nilling part thereof; Secundum modum
libertatis, That the grace of God does nothing, but accompany the will
consenting that all things supposed on Gods part needful to the co-working
this new spirit, and regenerating the heart, yet a man may go without it, and
still be as he was; That this new spirit and work of conversion, depends not
upon any necessary causation or infallible event, from the intention or
operation of God; but merely upon the will of man, and so is wholly contingent,
and uncertain; all which are erroneous.

The Papists also hold that there is free will in man before he has this new
spirit: which does concur and cooperate with God in the putting in this new
spirit as an efficient cause thererof: and they pronounce him Anathema, Sess.
6. de Justif. Can. 4.
in the council of Trent that says the will is merely passive in this work.
Our divines hold it, and not only they, but the Lord himself, John. 15.5.
Without me you can do nothing, therefore al is from Christ.
and if it be his judgment how impious is that Cannon which puts an Anathema
upon the Lord. We cannot make our spirits new nor any part of them, Deus est
causa totius entis, of this new spirit of every quality in it, and every
degree of every quality; Phil, 2.13. It is God which works in you, both to
will and to do of his good pleasure. The will to have this new spirit is not
from man's will, but from the grace of God, and that grace when it is working
and entering into the will, though the will of it self oppose it and rejects
it, yet because of the mighty power of God in the work and strong intention of
God to effect such a work, it cannot impede the introduction and forming of
this new spirit; its called the circumcision of the heart, and is attributed to
God, Deuteronomy. 30.6. Its not in the power of man to circumcise his own heart; God
only does it, and that he acts powerfully in this work of a new spirit, see
Ezekiel. 36.27. I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
Statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments and do them: Though Satan the God
of this World have got possession of a man, fortified himself in the strong
holds be in man, yet the Lord will bring in his spirit, throw out Satan, throw
down his holds, and cause a man by the power of his spirit and grace, to walk
in contrary ways to what he did. Man in Scripture is said to be dead, and dead
men neither desire, nor work their own resurrection, John 5.25. The dead
shall bear the voice of the Son of God: It must be a mighty and powerful
voice which reaches to a dead soul, and fetches it out of that condition;
and when God speaks and works efficaciously to that purpose, the soul can no
more withstand it then Lazarus could the call and power of Christ; therefore
says Christ, John 6.37. All that the Father gives me, shall come to me: They
shall not prevent it by the liberty of their wills, the event is infallible,
the causation necessary; otherwise Gods election should be frustrate; for if
man by his free will could keep out this new spirit, and null all the
operations of God, about the working of it, what should become of his Elect?
his giving of men to Christ would be to no purpose.

Quest. Whereas they say, Propound suitable objects and men will take them; as
propound honey to a Be, Grass or a green Bough to a Sheep, and they will
receive them: so let man have fit objects propounded to his understanding and
will, and he will then close with them, and this is all is done in the work of
grace.

Ans. 1. See how derogatory this is to the Lord, that no more is given to his
spirit in working then is given to Satan; he propounds objects suitable to the
Sons of Men, and if the spirit propound Divine objects, so does Satan, Genesis
3.5. Ye shall be as Gods, knowing good and evil: If the Devils objects be
received or refused at the pleasure of man's will, so shall the spirits.

2. What suitableness is there between our carnal heart, and the spiritual
high things of God, 1 Cor. 2.14. The natural man receives not the things of
the spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him, men must be made
spiritual before they can discern or close with spiritual things. Honey is
the proper food of a Be, and grass of a Sheep, but spiritual things are not
the proper food of a Carnal heart. New wine is not for old Bottles.

3. If suitable objects would do it, Christ propounded as suitable truths as
ever any did, yet the Jews were not taken with them, John. 6.44. not any man,
be he never so rational, have he never such rational objects propounded, that
will hear, or can come.

Quest. Is it not in man's power to do ought toward the working this new
spirit in himself, it seems otherwise, for the Lord says, Ezekiel, 18, 31. Make
you a new heart and a new spirit.

Answ. 1. Such phrases in Scripture import not liberty, and power in man to do
such things, but show his duty, and misery that he cannot do them: Man having
fallen should set himself in the condition God placed him first in, he should
cast away his si^s, regaine that Image of God he has lost, yet all his
endeavors will not reach it; A man may with as much facility make a new
sun, a new Heaven, a new Earth, a new World, as a new heart and new spirit
within himself; David knew it, and therefore prayed, Psalm. 51. Create in me a
clean heart etc.

2. Neither is this command of God in vain, for the Lord gives what he
commands, Make you a new heart and a new spirit. says God, here is his command,
and in the Verse we are on, its said, I will put a new spirit within you, so
that, when a thing is commanded us to do, which we cannot do, we are to look
at the Lord to do it, who has therefore made gracious promises to his for
that purpose: man is commanded to fear God, Ecles. 12.13. Isa. 8.13. 1 Pet.
2.17. and God has promised to put his fear in his Peoples hearts, Jer, 32.40.
I will put my fear in their hearts and they shall not depart from me, Hose,
3.5. They shall fear the Lord and his goodness. Prove. 4.5.7. We are bid to
Get wisdom and understanding, Isa. 1.17. Learn to do well, And the promise
is, Isa. 54.13. All thy Children shall be taught of God. 2 Pet. 3.18. We are
commanded to Grow in grace, but we can no more make grace to grow in our
hearts, then the Gardener can make the tree to grow in the Orchard; Therefore
the promise is Psalm, 92.12.13.14.15. The righteous shall flourish like the
Palm Tree: he shall grow like a Cedar in Lebanon; Those be planted in the
House of the Lord, shall flourish in the Courts of our God. They shall still
bring forth fruit in old age, they shall be fat and flourishing, to show that
the Lord is upright. Col. 3.5. Mortify your members which are upon the Earth,
that is the command, and Micha, 7.19. He will subdue our iniquities.

3. Make you a new heart, that is, declare you have a new heart wrought in you:
Says Junius, God makes the new heart (...), man does it (...), by
manifestation.

I will take the stony heart out of their flesh.
(...) Cor lapidis: The word heart has been opened formerly, and by it we
comprehend, and mean the understanding, will, affections, and conscience.

Stony.
Or stone heart, or stoninesse of heart: Its a metaphorical expression, taken
from the nature of a Stone; and notes out the spiritual stoninesse and
hardness is in the heart.

Aug.
1, A Stone is senseless and stirs not, Exodus 15.16. They shall be still as a
stone: Such is a stony heart; its Cor fine sensu, as in Nabal, Pro. 23.35. They
have stricken me, and I was not sick, they have beaten me, and I felt it not.
1 Samuel 25.37. His heart dyed within him, and he became as a stone, senseless.

A stone feels no weight, lay the heaviest burden upon it, smite the hardest
strokes, its not sensible of any; let a stony heart have a world of sin, and
guilt in it, lying upon it, yet no feeling of it, Ephesians. 4.19. Who being past
feeling, have given themselves over unto lasciviousness, to work all
uncleanness with greediness: They had lost all sense of evil in sin, and
w^nt on without any check, let men swear, lie, deceive, whore, etc. they feel
no evil in it, let them be upon the Pikes, like the young man in the seventh
of the Proverbs, going as an Ox to the slaughter, as a Bird to the snare: they
know not that it is for their lives: tell such of danger, they are not sensible.

The Jews had stony hearts, and see how senseless they were, Matthew. 13.15.
This people is waxed gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their
eyes have they closed, lest at any time they should see with, etc. This is five
times more mentioned in the New Testament, Mark 4.12. Luke 8.10. John 12.40.
Acts 28.26. Rom 11.8. fetched all from Isa. 6.9.

Hence those expressions, The unjust knows no shame, Zeph. 3.5. they cannot
blush, Jer. 6.15. They are impudent Children, Ezekiel. 2.4. Their brow brass,
Isa. 48.4.

2. Its hard and yields not: strike a stone often, it yields not to the stroke:
In Job 41.24. speaking of the Leviathan, he says, His heart is as firm as a
stone, yea as hard as a piece of the nether, etc. Brass Arrows, Darts, and
Spears, are as stubble and straw to him, they will not enter: So is it with a
stony heart, nothing enters, Zech. 7.11. They refused to hearken, and pulled
away the shoulder, and stopped their ear that they should not hear; yea, they
made their hearts as an Adamant stone; and that is Lapis indomabilis, it will
not yield at all. No reproves, threatenings, afflictions, judgments, did
prevail with their stony hearts; therefore, Isa. 1.5. says God, Why should
you be stricken any more, ye will revolt more and more: Cor lapideum, est cor
indocile, immorigerum; an unteachable, an intractable heart; no prayers, no
tears, no truths, no arguments, no mercies, no judgments, will conquer it;
its inexorable, Isa. 26.10. Let favor be showed to the wicked, yet will he not
learn righteousness.

Hence two things:

1. Tenacity of opinions, principles, and conclusions, though never so false
and corrupt, Jer. 8.5. They hold fast deceit, Chap. 4.14. O Jerusalem, how long
shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee: They thought their worship was
right, that God was pleased with their inventions and additions, that the Lord
would not depart from the Temple, etc.

2. Obstinacy in their ways, continuance in their old practices, Jer. 17.23,
They obeyed not, neither inclined their ear, but made their neck stiff, that
they might not hear nor receive instruction, Chapter 5.3. They have made their
faces harder then a rock, they refused to return, Judges 2.19. They ceased not
from their own doings, nor from their stubborn way

3. It resists, Lam. 3.16. He has broken my teeth with gravel stones: While a
m^n thinks to break the stones with his teeth, they co^q^er by their
hardness, and break the teeth. Adamants and other stones repel the force of
the stroke, and often break the instrument which strikes them; so do stony and
hard hearts, Matthew. 23.37. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem* thou that killest the
Prophets, and flonest them that are sent unto thee: how often would I, etc.
When Christ Preached unto them, they yielded not to his Doctrine, but resisted,
and sought the ruin of his person, Luke 4.28, 29. All th y in the Synagogue
when they heard these things, were filled with wrath, and rose up, and thrust
him out of the City, and led him unto the brow of the Hill, that they might
cast him down headlong: Here was the stonynesse of their hearts made evident
fully, they would not receive Christ, but kill him; such hearts make men
possessed with them.

1. Contradict^ry to the truth, their tongues are busy, Romans 10.21. The Jews
are called a disobedient and gainsaying people, they contradicted the Prophets,
2 Chronicles. 36.16. They mocked the M^ssengers of God: So Jer. 44.16. As for the
word which thou have spoken unto us in the name of the Lord, we will not
hearken unto thee: but we will certainly do whatever, etc.

2. Contentious, Romans 2.8. Unto them that are contentious, and obey not the
truth: Hard hearts yield not to the truth, but contend against the truth: the
Pharisees and others, did not only cavil at Christ's Doctrine, but plotted,
acted, and contended against it and him. John 11.47, 48. The chief Priests and
Pharisees gathered a Council, and said, What do we if we let him thus alone,
all men will believe on him, etc. Verse. 53. From that day they took counsel
together to put him to death. God told Jeremiah, that the Jews should fight
against him, Jer. 1.19. and Chap. 26.8.9. You shall find it made good when he
had Prophesied against their carnal confidence in the Temple, they were
gathered together against him, lay hands upon him, and threaten him with death.

4. A stone has a strong tendency downwarde, Exodus 15.5. They sank into the
bottom as a stone: stons hasten downward to the bottom, and they move not
upwards at all; if by force you throw a stone upwards, it falls down again
with swiftness; such is the nature of a stony heart, it moves not God or
Christ-ward, but sin and Hell-ward, that is the proper motion of it, being
weighty, and cannot but move downward, Prove. 7.27. speaking of the Adultresse,
whose heart is hardened in wickedness; he says, Her house is the way to Hell,
going down to the chambers of death. Ephesians. 4.19. Being past feeling, Prove.
2.18.
they work all uncleanness with greediness: There is a strong inclination
to, and greediness of, committing sin; and every sin is a step to Hell, Prove.
2.18. Her house inclines unto death, and her paths into the dead. Ezekiel. 3.7.
Its said; All the house of Israel are impudent, and hard hearted: And Ezekiel.
6.9. Their heart is said to be whorish, and why whorish? because it leads to
death and Hell, as the whorish woman's house does: A stony heart is an earthly
heart, and so an enemy to the Cross of Christ, Phil. 3.18, 19. That is, That
is, to all of Christ, it looks not upwards.

Obj. Its said, a stony heart is not yeildable, teachable, receives not
impression of any thing; did not the stony ground receive the Word, Matthew,
13.20. If so, how is it true which has been affirmed?

Answ. 1. Its said by Matthew, The seed fell upon stony places, Chap. 13.5. and
upon a rock, Luke 8.6. it fell not into the stones, or into the rock: but some
fell not only on the good ground, as Luke has it, but into the good ground,
as Matthew relates it, Chap. 13.8.

2. There is a double reception of the word. First, a superficial, and
secondly, a solid reception of the word, which the place holds ou^; for that
seed which fell into stony p^aces, lacked moisture, says Luke, had no
deepness^; no root says Matthew: It affected the natural fleshinesse of the
heart, but the spiritual hardness in it, suffered it not to root, to enter,
abide: the novelty, and rationalnesse of the word caused them to rejoice, but
the spiritualnesse of it was opposed by their stony hearts: Secondly, the solid
reception is, when there is a deep impression made upon the heart, a through
entrance into it, so that it roots, abides, and brings forth fruit, James 1.21.
He calls it, The ingrafted Word; now it cannot be ingrafted into a stony stock,
there is no life, no tenderness in such a stock, it may be propounded to such
a heart, it cannot enter, unite, and grow.

Out of their flesh.
Flesh is sometimes put for corruption, or corrupt nature. Romans 7.18. In my
flesh dwells no good thing, so its not taken here: sometimes for the body of
man Psalm. 38, 3. There is no soundness in my flesh, that is, in my body:
sometimes for the whole man, Romans 3.20. By the Law shall no flesh be justified
in his sight, and so in Luke, 3.6. All flesh shall see the Salvation of God,
and thus its taken here, out of their flesh, its out of them, out of the whole
man.

Ezekiel. 3.7. All the House of Israel are hard hearted young and old.

There is a natural hardness of the heart, and a contracted, Original sin,
Neh. 9.16. They dealt proudly, and hardened their necks. Heb. 3.13. Lest any of
you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin.
which is common to all, and comee with all, makes the heart hard, and actual
sins make the heart stony, very hard; every sin contracts more stonynes; and
where sin abounds, there stonynesse abounds: hence the Scripture speaks of
hearts like Adamants, Zech. 7.12. They have made their hearts as an Adamant, by
their sins, they have brought their hearts to such a high degree of stoninesse.
Isa. 48.4. I knew that thou art obstinate and thy neck an Iron sinew, and thy
brow brass; Which sets out the great hardness they had contracted by their
sin: is their any thing harder then stone, Iron and brass? unto these are
their hardened hearts, necks, and brows compared.

The spiritual hardness spreads it self into the understanding Romans 11.7.
(...), the rest were blinded, blindness respects the mind, the understanding,
and its such a blinding as hardens (...), Est callosa durities, a brawnie
hardness, their ignorance and unbeleife blinded and hardened them; In the night
we have the hardest frosts etc.

Hebrews, 5.11. The Apostle tells the Hebrews, they were dull of hearing,
they had been long taught, yet scarcely understood the principles of Religion,
Luke, 24.25. O fools and slow of heart to believe.

2. Into the will and affection, says Christ, you will not come to me that you
may have life, John. 5.40. There was a stone, stubbornenesse, and obstinacy in
their wills; Did not Christ Preach powerfully spiritually, did he not command,
threaten, promise, present strong arguments, tender the greatest mercies bear
with the greatest patience, weep over Jerusalem with the most patheticall and
sacred tears, saying most compassionately, O Jerusalem Jerusalem, yet Jerusalem
would not. Do not the Ministers of Christ now beseech you in his stead, to
leave your sinful courses, and to come in, yet, etc?

3. Into the conscience; Paul tells you of consciences seared with a hot Iron,
1 Timothy 4.2. When any part of the body is seared with a hot Iron, it grows hard
and feels nothing; such were the consciences of men then, and are now; they
are so brawny and stony, that tell them of danger, judgments, death, Hell,
eternal damnation, that their sins are great, grievous, subjecting them every
moment to all the vengeance of an infinite Deity, they are not troubled at it,
tell them that all the curses in Gods Book due to sinners will come upon them,
their hearts fail them not, their consciences are still, etc.

Now this stoninesse of heart is a great evil, its unthankful what mercies
soever it has given in, insensible of all spiritual good, its unyeildable to
any Ordinance, it resists the truth, Cor lapid eum adversus Deum, omnino
inflexibile est, Aug.
and spirit of truth, Acts 7.51. Ye stiff necked and uncircumcised in heart
and ears, ye do always resist the holy Ghost, as your Fathers did, so do
ye: Its contradicting, and contending against the Lord his ways, its tending
swiftly to destruction; for its impenitent, it neither will nor can repent.

of the Bladder, but not out of the heart: We may all say, Who shall roll away
this stone, as they said, Mark 16.3. and the answer must be, Not an Angel, not
any Creature, but only the Lord: God tells them that They should take away all
the detestable things out of the Land; but he would take away the stone out of
their heart, and the stony heart out of them.

Its the work of free grace; nothing is in a stony heart to move God to take
it away, but enough to move God to destroy it, and him that has it; its merely
good will puts him on to do it.

Its the work of omnipotent power to do it; some read it, auferam, some
removebo, some extrabam, I will draw out of you: intimating, there must be a
mighty power to do it: when you would remove a great stone, you bring a strong
Teame, and tacklings to draw it out of its place, so here.

Its a great mercy to have this stone removed; the stone in the heart is a
great plague, yea greater then all the plagues of Egypt, Pharoahs hard heart
was worse then all them; the removal therefore of it is a greater mercy then
the removal of all those judgments.

Its an heart incapable of reproof; that profits not by the means of grace
whatsoever, that is not kindly affected with the greatest mercies or
judgments, its an heart that hates holiness, and the power of godliness, an
heart that pleases it self in the ways of wickedness, its an heart the
Devil lives in, and works his will by.

Quest. Whither does God remove the stone totaly out of the hearts of his
People at first conversion or while they are in this life.

Answ. God does this work gradually, its not all done at once, the Apostles
were converted, yet all hardness was not out of their hearts, Mar. 6.52.8.17.
Stones are dug out of the Quarres by degrees, and Rocks hewne in pieces in
time; So is it here, God breaks and seperates the stoninesse of the heart,
some one day, some another day, and its doing all a man's life; As a man
subject to the stone, and gravel, voids some one day, some another, and is not
perfectly cured till death; so in this spiritual stonynesse. Neither let any
say then, the heart is stony still, and in the same condition it was before.
Not so; for though there be some stonynesse in it, yet is it not stony: There
is softness introduced and the denomination is from that. I will give them a
heart of flesh.

Quest. If there be stonynesse in the hearts of these be in Covenant with God,
how shall I know the difference between the stonynesse in the godly, and that
in the wicked?

Answ. 1. The stonynesse of the wicked grows greater and greater, every day
they are more stony, L^pi^ obs^^matus. 2 Chronicles. 28.22.
they grow worse and worse, 2 Timothy 3.13. But the stonynesse in the godly grows
esse and less, they use all means to abate it, in the one its incurable, in
the other its curing.

2. That in the Saints is rather accidental, then essential, an external
crustinesse, rather then an intrinsecall hardness; its an ycecinesse not a
true stonynes, water may become ice, but not stone: it will thawe and melt
again, it freezes and thawes often, not so with a stone, or iron, they have
intrinsecall, essential hardness.

3. The godly feel the stone in their hearts, complain and cry out of it, as
a grievous evil, but the wicked feel it not, in them it reigns, is in full
power and strength, Ephesians. 4.19. They are past feeling.

4. The stonynesse in the godly, is rather a stonynesse against sin, then a
stonynesse of sin; he is facile to good, but obstinate to evil, Gen, 39, 9.
How can I do this great evil and sin against God, Psalm. 119.115. Depart from
me ye evil doers, for I will keep the Commandments of my God: He had strong
temptations to sin from the wicked, but he would not be drawn by them; but its
otherwise with the wicked, they are obstinate to good, and prone to evil, They
work sin with greediness, Ephesians. 4.19. and cease not from their stubborn
way, Judges 2.19. So the Samaritans who were fallen to false worship, said, In
the stoutnesse and pride of their hearts the Bricks are fallen down, but we
will build with hewn stone, Isa. 9.9, 10. and Mal. 3.13. their words were
stout against God: and Saul a wicked King, its said, Counsel of God, Luke 7.13,
He rejected the word of the Lord, 1 Samuel 15.23. The builders who had stony
hearts, rejected Christ the corner stone, Mat. 21.42. Lawyers rejected the
counsel of God, Luke 7.30.

(...) Cor Carnis.
And will give them an heart of flesh.
We have opened the word Heart before, at the beginning of the Verse, and
showed, it comprehended understanding, will, affections, and conscience.

Flesh.
Here its set in opposition to stony, and differs from the word Flesh mentioned
immediately before, there flesh employed substance, their persons, here it
implies a quality, tenderness, softness; flesh is in it self a tender thing,
sin hardens it, and makes it stony, but God would take out the stonynesse,
hardness thereof, and make it tender, soft.

There is a double tenderness spoken of in Scripture:

1. A natural tenderness, 2 Chronicles. 13.7. When Rehoboam was young and tender
hearted, and could not withstand them: he was not hardened in wickedness, but
being young, had a natural tenderness, which made him facile and yeeldable to
the onsets of others; but this is not the tenderness we are to speak of.

2. A spiritual tenderness, Ephesians. 4.32. Be ye kind one to another: tender
hearted (...), full of tender bowels: A Mother has natural tenderness and
bowels to her Child, have you answerable, spiritual bowels, such as are in
the Lord, who is said to be (...), Full of pity and tenderness, James 5.11.
and this is the tenderness here meant.

This spiritual tenderness is a gracious disposition of the heart, wrought by
the spirit, easily admitting, or receiving what ever spirituals are propounded
unto it.

Its a gracious disposition, not natural, nor moral, neither Parents nor
education convey ought unto it; grace is a tender thing, and makes tender, Luke
1.78. its called tender mercy of God, and that makes a tender heart; a gracious
disposition in it like it self.

Wrought by the spirit; its not the Law works it, that may break the heart
into pieces, as a Hammer does a stone, but not melt it and make it tender; its
the Gospel and fire of the spirit in it which produces that effect: not the
Plow, but rain which softens the ground: David says, Psalm. 65.10. Thou make
it soft with showers: The Galatians received the spirit, The Corinthians hearts
were not Tables of stone but fleshy Tables, the spirit had made them such, and
written the Gospel in them. 2 Cor. 3.3.
not by the Preaching of the Law, but by the Preaching of Faith, Gal. 3.2. and
that spirit made their hearts tender. When Job was in his great afflictions,
they softened not his heart, but he says, God made soft his heart, Job 23.16.
that was by his spirit.

Easily admitting or receiving; this is the formal, intrinsicall nature of
this tenderness, that its like Wax taking in impressions, the stony heart
yields not, but resists; this resists not but yields, like Gideons Fleece, it
drunk in the dew as fast as it fell, Judges 6. Like the soft earth which
drinks in the rain, not like the Rocks and Mountains, which shoot it off,
Heb. 6.7. Hence says Moses, Deuteronomy 33.3. speaking of Saints, who have tender
hearts, and sit at Gods feet, Every one shall receive of thy words: And Paul
speaking of a natural man, 1 Cor. 2.14. he says, The natural man receives
not the things of the spirit: his heart is stony, not tender, and so without a
capacity of receiving what ever spiritual things are propounded; its ready to
say as Samuel, Speak, for thy servant hears, 1 Samuel 3.10. Let God or any
from God offer any spiritual things unto a tender heart, its ready to receive
them, Acts 9.6. says Saul, Lord what will thou have me to do? propound what
thou please unto me.

Discoveries of this tenderness.
1. Its affected with, and mournes for, that hardness remains in it, that it
is not more tender and wrought upon by the mercies, Ordinances, judgments of
God. David was sensible of his hardness and deadness, and therefore cries often
to God for quickening, Psalm. 119.154. Quicken me according to thy word. 156.
Quicken me according to thy judgments. 159. Quicken me according to thy loving
kindness.

2. It feels the least sins and rysings of corruption; as some bodies are so
tender that they discern any distempers stir in them presently, others are
hardy and discern little, till it come to some dangerous disease: Its not so
here, a heart spiritually tender is sensible of the least sin, David's heart
smote him for cutting off, etc.
the least moat in the eye, crumme in the windpipe, are troublesome to them,
and so the rising of corruption, the very being of sin in the heart is
troublesome to a tender heart, Paul saw and felt the Law in his members warring
against, etc.

3. It hearkens and yields to reproves; Salt will not enter into a stone but
into flesh, seasons it, and makes it savory: Reproves are Salt, they enter
into fleshy and tender hearts, Prove. 17.10. A reproof enters more into a
wise man, then an hundred stripes into a fool: Vatablus has it, Descendit in
cordatum increpatio, his heart is tender, and a reproof presently makes
impression, the door opens and it goes in, whereas the heart of a fool will
not be beat open with many stripes; Nec credit, nec cedit, but the tender
hearted, wise, and godly, believe, and yield; David, Psalm. 141.5. Let the
righteous smite me, it shall be a kindness, and let him reprove me, it shall
be an excellent oil: Reproves soften tender hearts, harden stony ones,
Proverbs 29.1.

4. It has a lively sense of Gods dishonor, and the Saints wrong.

1. Of Gods dishonor, Psalm. 119.136. Rivers of water run down mine eyes,
because they keep not thy Law: When David saw Gods worship corrupted, heard
his name blasphemed, beheld his Law openly violated, his tender heart bled
with^n him, melted into tears, and wept abundantly, that the infinite, holy,
glorious, great God should be so dishonored by sinful dust and ashes: And
Psalm. 69.9. The reproaches of them that reproached thee, are fallen upon me:
David reproved men that reproached God by their lips and lives, and they
reproached him for it: Lots righteous soul was vexed at the filthy, etc. 2
Pet. 2.7.

2. The Saints wrong, and Churches suffering, 2 Cor. 11.29. Who is offended,
and I burn not? When any member of the Church suffered, Paul was afflicted,
grieved, as a man burnt with fire, and the more tender the flesh is, the
greater is the pain; and so in the heart, the tenderer that is, the greater
sense and pain has it of others sufferings, especially the Churches, read the
79. and 80. Psalms, and you shall see how greatly Asaph was afflicted for the
miseries of the Church, the Saints suffered much without, and he suffered much
within; they were broken in their states and comforts, and he was broken in his
heart and spirit: so Jer. 9.1. O that my head were waters, and mine eyes a
fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for the slain of the
daughter of my people, Acts 12.5. When Peter, etc. As Christ was tender of the
Sain s, when persecuted by Saul, Acts 9. So every member of Christ
participating of his tenderness, feels in his degree the injuries done to the
rest.

5. It trembles at the word of God, Isa. 66.2. Contrition of spirit, and
trembling at the word do go together, there is such Majesty, authority,
holiness, severitie, and glory, in the word, that a tender heart trembles at
it, 2 Chronicles. 34.27. Josiahs heart was tender, he trembled and humbled himself
before the Lord, when the Law was read before him: And those in Ezra trembled
at the words of the God of Israel; Chap. 9.4.

6. Its obedient unto the call and will of God, its Cor ^equax and morem gerens
domino, let the Lord call, it says, here I am, what will thou have me to do,
whether shall I go I am ready for it; Abraham had a tender heart, and when God
called for his Isaac and bad him go and offer him upon mount Moriah, Gen, 22.
he had a tractable heart, he yielded presently, to the Lord, without any
dispute or delay, a tender heart is an obedientiall heart; J siah was tender
he^rted, and he did the will of God most thoroughly of any of the Kings of
Judah: none of them did reform so as he did, 2 Chronicles, 35.18. David was a man
of a tender spirit, and he fullfil^'d all the wills of God; Acts 13.22.

7. Its tender toward o he^s; a tender heart has a tender tongue, and a
tender hand; the man has such an heart speaks evil of none, does harm to
none; such an one is merciful to his Beast, much more to men, he pities those
are in a perishing way, and would pull them out of the fire; ahe Law of
kindness is in his lips, and actions of love are in his hands: Jobs heart was
soft, Job 23.16. and you may find what his words and actions were, Chap. 29,
11, 12, 13, 15, 16. When the ear heard me, then it blessed me; he spoke such
comfortable words to them, gave them such good counsel, that they blessed him
for it, and his actions were delivering the poor and fatherless, helping the
blind and lame, and making the Widows heart to rejoice. Tenderness of heart
breeds tenderness toward others: Its said of Esau, he was red all over, like
a hairy Garment, Genesis 25.25. he was red and rough, bloody and bitter, it were
well there were no Sons of Esau in our days, men bloody and bitter, seeking the
ruin of plain hearted Jacobs. If others by their rough speeches, and
dealings, do show the hardness of their hearts; let us by the softness of
our tongues, and bounty of our hands, show the tenderness of our heart^,
Ephesians. 4.32. Be kind one to another, tender hearted, forgiving one another,
even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you.

8. It enterteines and reteines the motions, and truths of Gods spirit; a
tender heart will not suffer the spirit to knock long at the door, Bereans
received tke word with all readiness, of mind. Acts 17.11.
and then go away grieved, but it opens quickly, and receives the message:
When the spirit came to Peter, Acts 10.19, 20. and bade him go to Cornelius,
and Preach Christ unto him, he went immediately: When the Gospel was Preached
to the Thessalonians, in demonstration of the spirit, its said, They received
it with joy of the holy Ghost: That joy of the holy Ghost, may as well refer
to the holy Ghost it self, who rejoiced at their speedy receiving the word and
spirit in it, as to the Thessalonians, who had joy wrought in them by receiving
of the word, 2 Cor. 3.3. the Corinthians had fleshy hearts, and they are called
the Epistle of Christ, and why? because the spirit had writ the Gospel in them
with ease, Moses had much ado to write the Law in the Tables of stone, but the
spirit did it easily in the fleshy Tables of their hearts, those truths are
written in the heart, are held so fast, that men will rather loose their lives,
then loose them.

Obser. 1.
A Tender heart is a choice and great mercy; where this is the understanding is
apprehensive of Divine things; the Lord Christ who was without sin, and so
nothing but tenderness was quick of understanding, Isa. 11.3. and the more
free from sin our hearts are, the quicker our understandings will be, Mat.
13.15. Where there is a gross and hard heart, there is an un-understanding
heart, an unperceiving heart, Mark 8.17. On the contrary where a tender heart
is, there is the clearest understand^ng.

The will is pliable to the truth of the Gospel, Romans 6.1^. Ye have obeyed
from the heart, that form of Doctrine which was delivered you, and into which
ye were delivered.

The conscience is awake and will not endure the guilt of any sin to lie upon
it; Peter had sinned but he goes out and weeps bitterly.

The affections are lively and stir much toward God, David had a tender heart,
and how strongly did his affections stir after God, Psalm. 42.1.2. As the heart
pants after the water brooks, so pants my soul after thee O God, my soul
thirsts for God, for the living God, when shall I come and appear before
God, Psa. 63.8. My soul follows hard after thee: and the zeal of thy house
etc.

Its that the Lord intends to write his whole will in, Jer. 31.33. I will put my
Law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, first he will make
them soft, and then write in the Law and Gospel.

It receives discipline, correction, Jer. 5 3. Thou have stricken them, but
they have refused to receive correction, they have made their faces harder,
etc. An hard heart does not receive correction, but a tender one does

2. It is the gift of God, he gives this tender heart unto us: we can harden
our hearts through sining, but we cannot soften them, being once hardened, by
any means we use: Tenderness of heart is a special grace, so i^ oneness of
heart, newness of spirit, and all these are from God, who is styled, The God
of all grace, 1 Pet. 5.10. There is not any grace but what is from God, he is
the author of it: In this case of an heart of flesh, he puts his hand into the
heart and pulls out the stone, and puts in tenderness. He that can turn
stones into children, Mat. 3.9. is he that turns stony hearts into flesh and
this he does freely, there is no motive of his will, Phil. 2.13. His working is
of his good pleasure, James 1.18. Of his own will begat he us. Not the
pleasure of man, or his will, appears in this work, God consults not with man
about it, but does the work himself, I will take away the stone, etc. It is
exclusive, and shuts out all: Isa. 44.3. I will pour floods upon dry ground.
hence those sweet promises, Isa. 41.18. I will open Rivers in high places, and
Fountains in the mid'dst of the Valeys; I will make the Wild^rnesse a poole of
water, and the dry Land springs of water, I will plant in the windernesse the
Cedar, the shittah trees the mertle and the oil tree, I will set in the desert
the fur tree, the pine and the box tree together, that they may see, know,
consider, understand together, that the hand of the Lord has done this: and
the holy one of Israel has created it.

God softens the heart by dropping his word upon it, Deuteronomy. 32.2. My doctrine
shall drop at the rain, etc. By the blood of Christ, by revealing his free
grace, etc.

VERSE. 20.
That they may walk in my statutes, and keep mine Ordinances, and do them:
and they shall be my people, and I will be their God. etc.


HEre is the end of Gods grace and goodness toward them, with an asserting of
such to be his: and his promise to be their God.

Obser.
God multiplies mercies, when he is in a way of mercy; when he is giving out
promises, he gives not one, or two, but many. Jer. 31.33.34. There is an heap
of promises, so in Ezekiel. 36.25.26.27.28.29. There be eight or nine promises
together. Hos. 14.4.5.6.7. Promise after promise is given out. Isa. 60. Is full
of sweet promises, one after another. This is a sweet Subject to meditate upon,
but I come to open the words.

That they may walk:
Walking here is metaphorical, taken from the motion of the body; moving by
steps from place to place; and is applied to the conversation and life of man,
in a spiritual sense, and imports progress in the way of God, Psalm. 119.1.

In my statutes. (...)

The Hebrew word Chukkim, notes rites pertaining to the Ceremonial Law, called
also (...), and not only ^o, but Chukkim includes the whole Ceremonial Law;
the Seaventie do sometimes translate it (...), Commandment, which Mitzuoth
properly signifies, containing the Morrall Law, or Ten Commandments; and not
(...), but Deuteronomy. 4.40. They render Mitzuoth by (...), and Chukkim by (...).
Ephesians. 2.15. Paul calls Chukkim, (...), The Law of Commandments in Ordinances.

Mine Ordinances. (...)

Mishphatim, (...), Judgments, these some refer to the outwa^d policy of
Israel, their civil estate, but statutes and Ordinances are used
promiscuously: And here by them I conceive is meant, the whose Law of God
revealed.

This walking in his statutes is set out in holy writ, by such expressions as
these, Viz. Walking after the Lord. Deuteronomy. 13.4. Walking before God. 1 Kings
9.4. Walking in the light of the Lord. Isa. 2.5. Walking in the truth, John,
Epist. 3. Verse. 4. Walking in the name of the Lord, Micah. 4.5. Walking
according to rule. Gal. 6.16. And Walking with God, Genesis 6.9.

Keep mine Ordinances.
Keeping imports, 1. Remembering, Luke, 2.51. Mary kept all these sayings in her
heart.

2. Holding fast, 2 Timothy 1.14. The good thing committed to thee keep, that is,
hold fast; here we must take in both remembering and holding fast, but in order
to doing; men may know, remember, and hold fast the mind of God, but not do
the same. Deuteronomy. 5.1. Hear O Israel the statutes and Judgments which I speak
in your ears this day, and keep and do them; the Hebrew is, keep to do
them.

Do them:
Doing implies, 1. The performing and practice of them. Psalm. 15.5. Facere ^st
exact custodire and decenter quicquam operari.
He that does these things shall never be moved.

2. Fullfilling of things required, 1 Kings 5.8. Says Hiram to Solomon, I will
do all thy desire, that is, fulfill thy desire; both may be understood here,
not simply to do, but to do exactly.

Obser. 1.
The end of Gods giving us temporal and spiritual mercies, is, that we should
be obedient unto him. He gathered them out of Babylon, planted them in Canaan,
gives them oneness of heart, newness of spirit, etc. And why? that they might
walk in his statutes, and keep his Ordinances. God hireth us with mercies to
do his will, Psalm. 105.43.44.45. He brought forth his People with joy, and his
chosen with gladness, and gave them the Lands of the Heathen, and they
inheritied the labor of the People that they might observe his statutes and
keep his Law. 2 Samuel 12.7.8.9. David was obliged by Gods bounty to obedience,
why did God so much for his Vineyard, Isa. 5.2. but that it might bring forth
Grapes, the end of all mercies and means offorded us, were to make it
fruitful in obedience. All in Gods works, in his word, are so many inducements
to obedience: God has given us the Earth and fulness of it, and the end is
to provoke us thereby to walk in his statutes. He has given us his good word,
choice O^dinances, Heavenly Counsels, precious promises, profitable commands,
holy examples, and his end in all these is to quicken us up to obedience. Its
the end of Election, 1 Pet. 1.2. Its the end of Redemption, Luke 1.74.75. Its
the end of our new Creation, Ephesians. 2.10. Paul beseeches the Romans By the
mercies of God, to present their Bodies a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable
unto God. Our mercies should prevail with us, we are Planted in a good Land,
we have the dewes of Heaven, and fatness of the Earth: God has done great
things amongst us, and for us, we have had wonderful Deliverances, and shall
not we be encouraged thereby to walk in the statutes of our God? Deuteronomy. 11.7.8.
Your eyes have seen all the great Acts of the Lord which he did, therefore
shall you keep all the Commandments which I command you this day. Let the
great things we have seen and heard put us upon obeying the Lord, and so
obeying him that our obedience may be.

1. General, God requires, you should walk in all his ways. Deuteronomy. 10.12. 2.
Hearty, yea with the whole heart, Deuteronomy. 26.16. 3. Constant, Deuteronomy. 4.9. Gal.
6.9. 4. Willing, cheerful, Phil. 2.14. Deuteronomy. 28.47. 5. With strength and
courage, Josh. 23.6.
If we do not walk in the statutes of the Lord, and keep his commands, we
know not God, 1. John 2.3.4. We do not love God. 1 John 5.3, Nor Christ, Joh.
14.15. Our prayers will be unfruitful, and succeslesse, 1 John 3.22.

2. Note that walking in Gods statutes, keeping his Ordinances, and doing his
will, do evidence the work of grace in the heart, and what the man is. God
would give them oneness of heart, newness and tenderness of spirit, that
they might walk, keep, do, etc. If then they did so, this declared what was
within, Luke 1.6. Zachary and Elizabeth were both righteous before God;
walking in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord, blameless; their
w^lking witnessed their righteousness, see 1 John 3.10. 2 Chap. 29. Luke 6.44.
What ever the fruit is, such is the Tree; Figgs do not grow upon thorns, nor
Grapes upon brambles, where you find Grapes it is a Vine, and not only does
God and Christ know them, but Mat. 7.16. you shall know them by their Fruits,
not by their leaves, but their fruits; not some few actions, but by a daily
observat^^n of them; sometimes delay and times always attention is required to
discern them, 2 Timothy 3.5. Having a form of godliness, etc. this may be
discerned, for verse. 9. Their folly shall be manifest to all men. James 2.18.
Works ^re the glass, picture, Child of faith, Adam begat a Son after his
Image, and faith begets Children after its own Image, Abraham's offering of his
Son dec^a^ed his faith. Heb. 11.17. Works justify faith, and faith justifies
the man. Some doubt whether works will prove grace, whether sanctification will
evidence justification: But John tells us there is a witness of Water as well
as of blood, and of the spirit, 1 John 5.8. if the Law written in Books may be
known, and the sense of it evidenced by Commentaries, surely the Law written
in the heart, may be known and evidenced by works.

3. Grace in the heart will appear in the life, if there be a new spirit, a
tender heart, there will be walking in the Statutes* A new spirit cannot be
imprisoned within, but it will break out into action; when the seed is sown
in good ground, it will not lie long under ground, but spring forth, Mark
4.20. Grace is light, and that will manifest it self, verse. 21.22. God has
determined, that hidden things shall be manifested; grace cannot always be
hid, 1 Pet. 2.9. Such virtue will out. 1 These. 1.5.6.7. The Coritnhians were
the Epistle of Paul written in his heart, read and known of all men. The
Romans faith was spoken of throughout the World; Romans 1.8. That was in all the
Churches of the World. So their obedience, Chap. 16.19. There be diverse things
cannot be hidden, as the light, fire, life, the wind, a spring; and of this
nature is grace, which is all those, its light, and fire, John was a burning
and shining light: Its life, Luke 15.24 Its the wind of the spirit, Cant. 4.16.
Joh. 3.8. Its a Spring, Joh. 7.38. A good Tree cannot bring forth evil fruit,
and it cannot but bring forth good fruit, Acts 4.20. We cannot but speak the
things we have heard and seen, Paul when converted presently said, Lord what
will thou have me to do? He would not be idle, but doing the will of the Lord
Christ.

4. It is not from man's strength but Gods grace, that any walk in his
statutes, keep his Ordinances and do them; I will take away the stony heart,
give them an heart of flesh, and put a new spirit within them, that they may
walk, keep, and do: Man is a feeble, impotent Creature, he cannot think a
good thought, make an hair white or black, and how then can he walk in the
Statutes of the Lord? Satan is powerful and politic, he makes strong
assaults, and such, as that if God did not assist by his grace, we should fall
every moment; hence those expressions of David, Ps. 119.5.35.36. Moses and the
Covenant of works, called for obedience, contributed no strength, but God in
Christ gives strength, to do what is called for, Ezekiel. 36.27. I will put my
spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes and ye shall keep my
judgments and do them. Heb. 13.20.21.

5. Gods statutes and Ordinances are to be the Saints way to walk in, and rule
to walk by; statutes, Ordinances are called ways, paths, Jer. 6.16. Young men
must cleanse their ways according to the word, Psalm. 119.9. David would have
his steps ordered by the word, verse. 133. The word is the way to walk in, and
a rule to walk by, we must try all spirits and doctrines by it, Isa. 8.20. 1
These. 5.21. 1 John 4.5. Acts. 17.11. All things we believe, Acts. 26.27. Ephesians.
2.20. John 20.31. Gal. 1.8. All things we practice. 2 Timothy 3.15.17. Eccles.
12.13. Mat. 28.20. What God and Christ command must we observe not what others.
Isa. 8.11. Walk not in the ways of this People, not in the light of our own
fire. Isa. 50.11. Not after customs of men. Acts, 21.21.

6. Those God renews by grace, gives newnes and tenderness of spirit unto, he
looks they should make progress in his ways, keep in mind his Ordinances,
and do them exactly, fulfill them, Deuteronomy. 6.17. You shall diligently keep the
Commadements of the Lord, and his Testimonies and statutes, Psalm. 119.4. Thou
have commanded to keep thy precepts diligently. The Hebrew is Valde, greatly,
the Septuagint, vehemently, (...)
and the Vulgar, Nimis, too much, which Expressions show, that we should
endeavor to the utmost to keep them, God expected they should keep the Sabbath
exactly, Isa. 58.13. And so the rest of his commands.

They shall be my People, and I will be their God.
These words have two things in them.

1. Gods asserting them to be his people. 2. A gracious promise to be their
God.
You have these words often mentioned in the Book of God, once in Levit. 26.12.
Seven times in Jeremiah, Chap. 7.23. 11.4:24.7:30.22:31.1.33:32.38: Four
times in our Prophet Ezekiel, Cha. 36.28: 37.23.27. And here in this Verse. Once
in Zachary, Chap. 8.8. Twice in the new Testament, 2 Cor. 6.16. and Revel.
21.3. In all they are 15 times set down, which intimates to us that there is
great weight in them, that they are of great consideration and use.

(...)
They shall be my people.
Hebrew is, they shall be to me, in Populum, for a People. And so I will be to
them Lel^him in Deum, for a God. I will show you.

1. What is employed in these words, They shall be my people. 2. Wha^ in the
other, I will be their G^d,
They shall be my people.

1. They shall acknow edge me to be their God, they shall not own any other
God. There is difference between knowing and acknowledging; you may know such
an one to be a child, but not acknowledge him to be your child, you may know
such Towns, Countries, Kingdoms, but not acknowledge them yours. This phrase,
My people, imports acknowledging God to be theirs, Psalm. 48.14. This God that
dwells at Jerusalem that breaks the Ships of Tarshish, this God is our God for
ever and ever, Psalm. 77.13. Who is so great a God as our God. Here is
acknowledgement of God, not only to be great, but to be their God. Isa. 25.9.
This is our God, and we have waited for him, Exodus 29.45.46. I will be their
God, and they shall know that I am the Lord their God. That is, they shall
acknowledge me to be so, its called vouching God to be their God, Deuteronomy. 26.17.

2. They shall worship me only, Exodus 5.8. Let us go and Sacrifice to our
God, not to other Gods; when a people is Gods people, they are possessed with
apprehensions of his glory, greatness, authority, over them, and infinite
worthiness to be honored, adored admired and magnified by them; and will say
as its, Psalm 95.6. Oh come let us worship etc. And as its, Hos. 14.8. What have
we to do any more with Idols: they would not meddle with the worship of the
Nations, their own inventions but they would worship God, and him only, Joel.
2.27. 1 Samuel 12.24. Psalm. 147.1. Rev. 19.1.

3. They shall trust and rely upon me, and not any other Gods, or arms of
flesh, Hos. 14.3. Ashur shall not save us, we will not ride upon Horses,
neither will we say any more to the work of our hands, you are our Gods, for
in thee the Fatherless find mercy. Zeph. 3, 12. Psalm. 9.10.

4. They shall be a People unto me; when God takes a people to be his, they are
holy unto him, Deuteronomy. 7.6. Thou art an holy people unto the Lord thy God, God
separated them from the World and other Nations, to be holy unto himself,
therefore it follows, The Lord thy God has chosen thee to be a special people
unto himself, Levit. 19.2. Hence they were called an holy Nation, Exodus 19.6.

5. They shall hearken unto my voice and do my will and yield obedience unto
me, Jer. 7.23. Obey my voice and I will be your God and ye shall be my people,
Josh. 24.18. We will serve the Lord for he is our God. Deuteronomy. 6.17. Psalm.
50.7.81.8.13

6. They shall love me and lay out their strength for me, Deuteronomy. 6.5. Thou shall
love the Lord thy God with all thy heart and with all thy soul, and with all
thy might. Mar. 12.30. is added With all thy mind, If God be ours he must have
all; Psa. 68.28.

7. They shall stand for my glory, and make my name honorable, Isa. 43.21.
This people have I formed for my self; they shall show forth my praise.

I will be their God.
These are gracious words, and they do import much.

1. The free grace of God in pardoning their sins, Jer. 31.33.34. When he
speaks of being their God, he tells them he will forgive their Iniquity, and
will remember their sin no more, Psalm. 85.2. Thou have forgiven the iniquity of
thy people, thou have covered all their sin. The word Forgiven, signifies, to
lift up, and take away, sin is a great burden, when God becomes a God in mercy
to a People, then he takes off that great Burden, he lif^ it up, carries it
quite away, and its hid out of sight, and remembrance, Hos. 14.4.

2. The presence of God amongst them, Levit. 26.11.12. The Jews were Gods
people and he says, I will set my Tabernacle amongst you, and will walk among
you, and be your God, and ^ou shall be my People. The Tabernacle and walking,
were arguments of his presence, and evidenced him to be their God; God is
essentially present every where, but especially present with his People, Rev.
21.3. No Creature, no Angel, no representation of God, but God himself shall
be with them; as a Father with his Children, as a Husband with his Wife, God
will not only be with them, but in them, 2 Cor. 6.16. He will indwell in them
and walk in them. (...).


3. The peculiar and special care of God over them, Deuteronomy. 32.10.11.12. The
Lord was as tender to them, as any Creature could be to her young; the Eagle is
very careful of her young, carrying them not in her Tallons, but on her wings;
So God deals by his People, he preventeth harms that might befall them, Psalm.
68.7. He went forth before his People, and did march in the front of them
through the Wilderness, Psalm. 77.20. Isa. 26.20. God does provide for, and
protect his People, Deuteronomy. 33.27, Psalm. 125.2. Isa. 4.5. Upon all the glory
shall be a defense.

4. Deliverance, if in streights, dangers, misery, Exodus 3.10. I have seen the
oppression, come now therefore and I will send thee unto Pharaoh that thou
may bring forth my People out of Egypt. Ezekiel. 37.12. Behold O my People, I
will open your graves, and cause you to come up out of your graves: Where God
is a God to any, he is a delivering God, he is affected with their condition
and sufferings, Exodus 3.7. Isa. 63.9. 1 Samuel 9.16. Isa. 3.15.

5. Singular comfort, Rev. 21.3.4. They shall be his people and God himself
shall be with them, be their God, and he shall wipe away all tears from their
eyes, and there shall be no more death, nor sorrow, nor crying, nor pain, Isa.
40.1.49.13.30.26.51.3. He does encourage and hearten them. Isa. 41.10.

6. Speaking and pleading for them, Isa. 51.22. Thus says the Lord, the Lord
and thy God that pleads the cause of his people. Their cause is many times
like to suffer, men are unwise, unfaithful, manage it strangely, but God will
plead the cause of his people, and he will not do it faintly, as if he cared
not whether his people should have the day or no; but to purpose will he do
it, Jer. 50.34. Their redeemer is strong, the Lord of hosts is his name, he
shall thoroughly plead their cause that he may gain lest unto the Land, and
disquiet the inhabitants of Babylon. Mica. 7.9. Joel 3.2.

7. Exalting and honoring of them, Deuteronomy. 26.18.19. The Lord has avouched thee
to be his peculiar people, and what then? To make thee high above Nations, in
praise, in name, in honor. God makes his people renewed, Isa. 28.5. He is a
Crown of glory unto them, Isa. 60.11. Thy God thy glory, Jer. 2.11. Isa. 43.4.

8. Teaching and instructing of them, Isa. 28, 26. his God does instruct him to
discretion, Isa. 51.4. Hearken unto me my people and give ear unto me my
Nation, for a Law shall proceed from me and I will m^ke my judgment to rest
for a light of the people, Deuteronomy. 4.36. Isa. 48.17.

9. Delight in them, Isa. 65.19. I will joy in my people, no friends can
rejoice more in one another, no bridegroom more in his bride, then God in his
people, them he calls his strength, and his glory, Psalm. 78.61. Yea a Crown of
glory, Isa. 62.3. Thou shall be a Crown of glory in the hand of the Lord, and
a royal diadem in the hand of thy God. No King can delight more in a Crown
then the Lord does in his people, which are his Crown, Gods people are near
unto him, Psalm. 148.14. They are his jewels, Mal. 3.17. His Portion, Deuteronomy.
32.9. His Heritage. Joel. 2.17. His peculiar Treasure, Exodus 19.5. The Hebrew
Word Segullah, notes an exquisite treasure, a thing very desirable, singular
and peculiar, Eccles. 2.8. The peculiar treasure of Kings; Aquila has it
substance; Vatablus a treasure entirely beloved: Gods people are his choice
treasure, dearly bloved. Things we delight in, we often think upon, and speak
of, and you may find this expression often, Viz. His treasure or peculiar people,
its in Deuteronomy. 7.6. special people, its the same word; so in Deuteronomy. 14.2.26.18.
Psalm. 135.4. Titus 2.14. 1 Pet. 2.9.

10. Blessing and communicating choice and satisfying mercies, where a People
are his he will Crown and load them with variety of blessings. Psalm. 3 8. Thy
blessing is upon thy People, thy people are distingu shed from all others, and
thy blessings are distinct from all others: Gods blessings note a plentiful
bestowing of all good things as appears, Genesis 24.35. Ephesians. 1.3. Among his
people are all his springs, the lower and upper ones. He blessed them with
choice mercies, with his secrets, Psalm. 25.14. With his name, Dan. 9.19. Isa.
63.19. The Shulamite was so called from Solomon, Cant. 6.12. When God takes a
people to himself, that people is married unto him, and it has his name, the
Church is called Christ, 1 Cor. 12.12. With his holiness, Hebr. 12.10. With the
divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. With grace and glory, Psalm. 84.11. Yea with
satisfying mercies. Psalm. 65.4.36.8. He will satisfy them with goodness, Jer.
31.14. With himself, Genesis 15.1.

Obser. 1.
God prepares a people for himself, and then marries that people unto himself;
he gives them oneness, newness, tenderness of heart, and spirit, and then
they shall be his people, and he will be their God, Ezekiel. 16.6.8. When thou
wast in thy blood I said unto thee live, I spread my skirt over thee and
covered thy nakedness, and thou becamest mine, when Abraham was come out of
his Country, had left his idolatrous ways, walked uprightly before God, then
he hears I am thy God and the God of thy seed, Genesis 17.7. This is the way of
Christ, Ephesians. 5.26.27. He is sanctifiing and cleansing of his Church that he
may present it to himself a glorious Church without spot.

2. Its great happiness to have God to be our God; many think happiness to
lie in other things, but in nothing else, only in this it consists, Psalm.
33.12. Blessed is the nation whose God is the Lord and the people wbom he has
chosen, for his own inheritance. They are the blessed people, Psalm. 144.15. It
is not thousands of Cattle, full barns, laughter in the streets, peace and
plenty, which make a people happy, the happiness of a people is, in having God
to be theirs. Great parts, honors, friends, estates, do not happifie a man;
but happy is he that has the God of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in the
Lord his God. Psalm. 146.5. When God is the God of a people he will do great
things for them, 2 Samuel 7.23. He will show them the power of his works, Psalm.
111.6. He will not leave his people, 1 Samuel 12.22. When Heaven and Earth shake
the Lord will be the hope of his people, Joel 3.16. The Hebrew is, (...)
the place of repair or harbor.

3. It is free grace and favor that God does take any people to be his, and
becomes a God unto; people choose not God, he says They shall be my people and
I will be their God. We are vile in our natures, wicked in our works, no
loveliness or profitablenesse is in us, or by u^, Ezekiel. 16.5.6. When thy
person was loathed and thou wast polluted in thy blood I said unto thee live.
There is nothing in a Nation that sets his heart a work to do a people good,
it was not their greatness moved him, Deuteronomy. 7.7. They were the fewest of all
people, nor their goodness, for what was their father Abraham, Josh. 24.2.3.
Terah, Abraham, and Nachor, were idolaters, they served other Gods, says the
text, and I took your Father Abraham, so when God took his seed in Egypt,
they were idolatrous, Ezekiel. 20.5.6.7. There is no righteousness in people to
moove God, neither can any sin in them hinder God from putting forth acts of
his free grace, D^u. 32.10. Speaking of Israel, he found him in a desert Land,
and in the wast howling Wilderness, to which some allusion may be, Cant. 8.5.
God found out and took this people in a wicked lost, distressed, condition,
and brought them out by his power and made them his people by his grace, 1 Samuel
12.22. It pleased the Lord to make them his people.

4. God does not equally dispense his grace and favor; some are his people and
he is their God, others are not; many Nations were left, when the Jews were
taken, yea all other Nations, Amos 3.2. You only have I known of all the
Families of the Earth. The Lords favor fell upon the Jews and not others.
Some infer from Genesis 22.18. In thy seed shall all Nations of the Earth be
blessed* that God loves all equally, at that time he did not, the words are a
promise of what should be, not of what was, neither is it so now: for if he
l^ves all alike, why does he deny the means of grace to many Nation? why does
he not bless and make the same effectu^l, equally to al where they are. Besides
such an opinion over ^^ow Election, Gods dominion over the Creatures, and his
freedom in dispensation of grace and mercy, John 10.26. Acts 13.48.

5. Those are the Lords have a strong ground to plead with God in prayer for
any mercy. Where is relation and intrest, there is encouragement to ask, if
God be ours and we his, surely we may plead with him for great things in our
prayers. The people of God did so of old, Jer. 14.9. Psalm. 80.4. Isa. 64.9.
Deuteronomy. 9.26. 2 Chronicles. 20.12. Chap. 14.11.

VERSE. 21.
But as for them whose heart walks after the heart of their dteestable
things, and their abominations, I will recompense their way upon their own
heads, says the Lord GOD.


THis Verse is a threatening to those should persist in their evil ways, yet a
comfort to the godly, that the Lord would judge them and ease them of them.

Detestable things and abominations.
These words have been opened in the 18. verse. and Chap. 5.11.7.20.

Quorum cor ambulat ad cor.
Heart of their detestable things.
Hebrew is, their heart going to the heart of their detestable things; Aprez le
desire de leur infametes, Idols have an interpretative desire to be worshipped.
Heart is sometimes put for the midst of a thing, Exodus 15.8. The heart of the
Sea. Which is called, Ezekiel. 27.4. The midst of the Sea. So their heart was in the
midst of their Idols, or amongst their Idols, what was delightful in them,
that was as the heart of the Idol, and their hearts were carried thereunto. Or
thus you may take the words, they conceived some deity to be in their Idols,
and they labourd to please and do those things delighted the heart of that
deity.

Those rites, ceremonies, ways, whereby they worshipped their Idols, may be
called the heart of their detestable things. It was a law among the Heathens,
that every God should be worshipped as he thought good, and the way prescribed
by him, of worshipping, was, as the heart and life of the Idol and the
Idolatry.

I will recompense their way upon thtir own heads.
Of these words see what has been said, Chap. 9.10. Chap. 7.3.4.8.

That when the Lord makes gracious promises to a people, Obser. 1.
they do not refer to, and fetch in all. This Observation rises from the two
former Verses, and this, laid together, God promises to give them, oneness,
newness, tenderness of heart, he promises that he will be their God, and
they shall be his people. These promises were absolute, yet made good unto some
of the Captives, not unto all, But as for them whose heart walks after etc.
They should not come within the compass of them. Many promises of the Lord are
delivered indefinitely, without restriction, and absolutely, without condition;
and yet are made good only to some, even those are given of the father unto
Christ, many of these after the Captivity never had these promises made good
unto them; yet God was faithful in that some had the fruit and comfort of them.

2. Tares, Hypocrites, and naughty ones will be in the Church always; some had
new spirits, tender hearts, and walked in Gods Statutes, others had old spirits,
hard hearts, and walked after detestable things; some threw away all abominable
things and others there hearts went after them: They coming out of Babylon,
and laying the foundation of a new Church, it was probable that none but choice
ones should have been of it, or in it; but their were Usurers,
Sabbath Breakers, and such had mingled themselves with strange Wives, Nehem. 5.
and 13. Cham was in the A^ke, Judas among the Apostles, the Church abounded
with Hypocrites in Christ's days, Matthew. 13.30. there will be Tares among the
Wheat to the end of the World.

3. Afflictions, great, and long, do not sanctify; they were to be in
Captivity, and that seventy years; yet after their return, the hearts of many
would be carried to their detestable things. Its granted, that after they came
out of Babylon, they never fell to Idolatry; that is, the body of them did not,
but doubtless some particulars did, their hearts went to the heart of their
detestable things; when they saw some of the old Idols* or relics of them,
they were affected with them: Affl ctions of themselves purge not out
corruption, nor take the heart off from evil things.

4. Men's hearts are in false ways and worship, they take pleasure in
superstitious and idolatrous practices. Things invented by men, and brought
into the worship of God, are pleasing to humane senses, to carnal reason, men's
corruptions, and so take their hearts; when the Calfe was made, Exodus 32.19.
they were greatly affected with it, and danced about it. 1 Pet. 4.3.
Lasciviousness, lust, Wine, revelling, banqueting, and Idolatries, are joined
together: False worship and false ways of worship, are set out by such
expressions as show their hearts were taken therewith, Numb. 15.39. Isa. 57.5.
Chap. 66.3. Acts 17.16. 2 Kings 21.21. Psalm. 97.7. Ezekiel. 16.17, 18, 19, 20.

5. That is an object of hatred to the godly, is an object of delight unto the
wicked; in the 18. Verse, when the godly should come to the Land again, they
would take away all the detestable things, but the wicked, their hearts would
go after them: The hearts, of the one sort were for them, of the other were
against them.

6. God takes notice which way the heart looks, how it stands affected, As for
them whose heart walks after, etc. Ezekiel. 20.16. Chap. 33.31. in the 14 Chap.
3, 4, 7. thrice God observes, They had set up Idols in their hearts. The heart
is the principal thing in man, that God calls for, Prove. 23.26. and therefore
he looks after it, Revel. 2.23. All the Churches shall know that I am he which
searches the reins and the heart.

7. Things men are much taken with, are detestable in the sight of God; they
affected detestable things, Luke 16.15. That is highly esteemed amongst men is
abomination with God: When men bring into his worship things of their own he
accounts it iniquity, Exodus 20.5. and the Authors thereof haters of him.

8. Superstitious and Idolatrous persons shall not go unpunished, I will
recompense their ways upon their heads; when they had made a calfe, quickly
after 3000 were slain for it, and though Moses mediated for them, yet God
tells Moses that in the day he visits he will visit their sin upon them, Exodus
32.35. And verse the last, The Lord plauged the people because they made the
calfe which Aaron made. God is jealous and cannot endure his glory should be
given to another.

9. When ever God punishes, or whom ever he punishes, he is just in his
punishment, I will recompense their way upon their own head: They shall have
the fruit of their own labors, and its certain, thus says the Lord, you
think your selves safe, if vou can avoid my stroke, that your false gods shall
secure you, but it shall not be, I will recompense your ways upon your heads:
God may punish men sometimes less then they deserve, but never more; he is
just, and returns their own doing upon them, Psalm. 7.16.

VERSE. 22.
Then did the Cherubims lift up their wings, and the wheels besides them: and
the glory of the God of Israel was over them above.


HEre begins the fifth part of the Chapter, which is a further description of
the Lords leaving the City.

The Cherubims wheels and glory were at the East gate of the Temple, Chap.
10.19. where you have the very words of this Verse. Cherubims note out Angels,
and superior causes; Wheels, inferior things, with the motions of them; and
by the glory of the God of Israel, is meant either the glorious Lord himself,
or some visible sign of his glorious presence.

Obser.
All things are under the God of Israel, he has the eminence, he is above,
wheels and Angels are under him at his dispose, if he give out the word, the
Cherubims move, lift up their wings, and order the wheels.

VERSE. 23.
And the glory of the Lord went up from the midst of the City, and stood on the
mountain, which is on the East side of the City.


HE^e you have Gods departure from the City. To leave the Temple was grievous;
had he staid at the gates of it, or in the City it self, any where within the
walls, it had been mercy: but he leaves the East gate, (which he calls the midst
of the City) and goes forth unto the mountain, which showed, God would now
expose the City to the fury and spoil of the Babylonians.

The glory of the Lord.
Of this see before Chap. 10.4.18.19. Chap. 9.3. Chap. 8.4. Chap. 3.23.

And stood upon the mountain.
There were many mountains about Jerusalem, Psalm. 125.2. It was compassed about
with them, the mountain which the glory went to and stood upon, was mount
Olivet, or mount Olives, Zach. 14.4. This mountain was before Jerusalem, on the
East, and the glory of the Lord stood before at the East gate whence it
removed, and went up this mountain; for it was high and had ascents 2 Samuel
15.30.

The standing of the glory upon this mountain may be either to see the ruin
and destruction of the City, and so to weep over it, as Christ did upon or
near the same mount; Luke 19. or Secondly, to upbraid them for their
wickedness there, because they did abominable things in that mount, whence it
was called the mount of corruption, 2 K. 23.13. or,

Thirdly, to make it typical to represent the ^scending of Christ to Heaven,
which was from that place, Acts 1.12.

These things being granted, yet I conceive there was somewhat else in it. The
glory of God had made several stands before, which they had not much minded,
now it goes from the Temple and City, to an high conspicuous mountain, that
they might take notice of Gods departure, repent of their sins, and use all
possible means for recalling, recovering, and keeping the glory with them, and
Zach. 14.4. The promise is of returning and standing upon the same mount.

God is unwilling to forsake that people he has vouchsafed his presence,
Obser. 1.
and communicated his favor unto; no people in the World had God so nigh them
as this people, Deuteronomy. 4.7. Here God goes out of the City but not quite away,
nor quite out of sight, he steps to the mountain over against the City. Before,
he had removed to the side of the Temple, then from within the Temple to the
threshould, after that to the East gate, and from thence ^o mount Oliv ^; and
God pauzed at every stand, whether he should go any further. The Lord is loath
to leave h^s people, they put him upon it. Ezekiel. 8.6. See thou the great
abominations that they commit here that I should go far off from my
Sanctuary, they forced God out of all, whe^as seeing him upon the leaving them,
they should have purg d the Sanctuary from all Idols and false worship, and
have importuned the Lord to stay among them, when a friend is l^aving his
friends, what entreaties what tears many times are used to stay him, Acts
21.12.13. Jer. 14.7.8.9.

2. God is not tied so to any place, or people, bu^ when they grow wicked and
defile his worship, he may leave them, and the place where he has recorded his
name. Mount Sion God h^d chosen above all places to dwell there. Psalm. 132.14.
This is my rest for ever, here will I dwell for I have desired it. For ever is
a long tim^, in Scripture sense, and God had dwelt a long time with them, but
now the time was come of his departure, now the holy Temple, holy City, holy
people, were all prophanenes, unto him, they had corrupted his worship,
polluted themselves, and therefore he would leave them. The Jews thought
because they had the Temple and God amongst them, that therefore they were well
and happy, though their worship were mixed and their lives wicked; but they were
deceived. No particular visible Church has assurance of Gods abiding longer
with it, then it keeps his worship pure, walks holily and humbly with him;
when any corrupt his glory, his worship, then the glorious Lord and the glory
of the Lord does leave them.

3. When God leaves a people, then protection of Angels and comfort of
Ceeatures leave them also, the Cherubims and wheels together with the glory
left them, and went to the mountain. When the King goes the Court removes, and
the Servants follow, when God is gone, we are left naked, lie open to all
temptations and miseries; we have no God to counsel, comfort, protect, or
save, and what a case is such a people in? Jer. 6.8. Be thou instructed O
Jerusalem, least my soul depart from thee, and what then? Least I make thee
desolate, a Land not inhabited.

VERSE. 24.
Afterward the spirit took me up, and brought me in vision by the Spirit of
God into Chaldea, to them of the Captivity: so the vision that I had seen, went
up from me.


HEre is the conclusion of this glorious Vision our Prophet had seen. The
spirit had carried him not in body, but in spirit unto Jerusalem, Chap. 8.3.
And showed him how things were there, what God was purposed to do, and now
having seen and heard glorious and terrible things, the Vision went up to
Heaven, he saw it no more.

The spirit an show us things at a great distance, Obser. 1.
as if we were present, the spirit caused Ezekiel to see things at Jerusalem,
when his body was in Chaldaea. Our senses cannot discern far, but the spirit
knows all things, in all places, and can sati^fie us with the knowledge of
them, give us spiritual and prophetical eyes; Paul says, 2 Cor. 12.2.3. That
he was caught up to the third Heaven, but whether in the body or out of the
body, he knows not, and being there he heard unspeakable words. The spirit
took him up, caused him to hear such things, so did the spirit here take up
our Prophet, and caused him to see such things.

2. This Vision was real, divine, no imaginary fained thing, not from his
brain but from the spirit it self, In raptu abstrahitur anima a sensibus and
phantasmatibus.
therefore it is said to put all out of doubt, The spirit took him up and
brought him in Vision, and the Vision I had seen went up, which shows it was
no humane thing but divine.

3. The servants of God have glorious sights here sometimes, but they soon
expire and come to an end, So the Vision which I had seen went up from me. He
had seen the glory of God, the Cherubims and wheels, and the man clothed with
linen, Viz. Christ, but here was no continuance of this glorious sight. Jacob
sees a ladder reaching up to Heaven, Angels ascending and descending, and the
Lord at the top of the ladder, but this was only for a night and then it
ceased, Genesis 28.12.13.16. Moses saw the Lord in the burning bush, Exodus 3.23.
But the fight lasted not, Isaiah saw the Lord sitting upon a Throne, Isa. 6.1.
Peter, James, and John, saw the transfiguration of Christ. Math. 17. And all
the Apostles Saw his glory, as the glory of the only begotten: but the Vision
went up from them.

VERSE. 25.
Then I spoke to them of the Captivity, all the things that the Lord had showed
me.


HEre you have what the Prophet did after the Vision, he had been in an ecstasy
some time, and now being brought to his ordinary and pristine condition, he
relates to the Captives what he had seen and heard. Many of those in the
Captivity, and probably some of those Elders which sat in the Prophets house,
Chap. 8.1. thought them happy which were at Jerusalem, condemned their own act
in coming to Babylon, judged their counsels foolish and weak, which they had
about their coming thi^her, and blamed Jeremiah for exhor^ing them ther^unto;
hereupon Ezekiel being returned, as he thought, from Jerusalem to Chaldaea,
speaks unto them what he had received concerning the destruction of the Temple,
City, Land, and the m^series of the inhabitants, and thereby convinces them,
that they were in a far better condition then those they ha^ left behind.

All the things.
Things in Hebrew is words, now words are not shown but heard, how then does
he say? Which he had showed me: they were not mere words but words Ves^ita
externo symbol^. He had many types, Viz. Of a s^^dge, of a raz^r, and hair, of
a chain, of six men wi^h sl^ughter weapons in their hands: of a cauldron, which
were visible words.

Obser. 1.
When men have been in the hand and power of the spirit, acted thereby, then are
they si^ to speak unto the people. Then I spoke unto them. When Moses had been
in the mount, then was h^ fit to speak to those at the foot of the mount, when
the spirit had irradiated the minds of men with divine light and truths, then
are they meetest ^o communicate to others. The Apostles being filled with the
spirit spoke freely, boldly, Acts 4.13.20.

2. Gods Prophets and Messengers must speak unto those they are intended for,
Ezekiel had his vision, and all the types in it, for the Jews, those of the
Captivity, not the Babylonians. God had a care of the Captivity, that they
might be instructed concerning his mind, and be undeceived in their
apprehensions about the things of Jerusalem, Then I spoke unto the Captivity.

3 They must declare what they have h^ard and seen, not what is their own;
what is man's is uncertain, unsatisfying, unsanctifying, but that which i^ ^h^
Lords is infallible, will satisfy and sanctify; Christ told the Apostles, the
spirit should take of his and show unto them. John 16.14. and Math. 28.20. They
must teach the people to observe what he commanded them, 1 Cor. 11.23. Paul
received what he delivered, thus did Ezekiel he spoke what the Lord showed unto
him.

4. They must be faithful, speak all the things which are showed unto them,
thus did our Prophet, he delivered unto them, all the Lord had shown unto him,
what ever he had seen or heard that he faithfully gives out. There mu^t be no
adding to the things of God, no detracting from them, no changing any of them,
but what is the Lords, that must be dispensed. Christ who was sent of the
father, says, All things that I have heard of my Father, I have made known
unto you. Joh. 15.15. and Paul kep^ back nothing, but delivered all the
counsel of God unto them, Acts 20.20.27.

CHAP. XII.
VERSE. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
The word of the Lord also came unto me saying.

Son of man, thou dwell in the midst of a rebellious house, which have eyes
to see, and see not: They have ears to hear, and hear not: for they are a
rebellious house.

Therefore thou son of man, prepare thee stuff for remooving, and remoove by
day in their sight, and thou shall remoove from thy place to anothr place in
their sight, it may be they will consider, though they be a rebellious house.

Then shall thou bring forth thy fluffe by day in their sight, as stuff for
remooving; and thou shall go forth at Even in their sight, as they that go
forth into captivity.

Dig thou through the wall in their sight, and carry out thereby.

In their sight shall thou bear it upon thy shoulders, and carry it forth in
the twylight: thou shall cover thy face; that thou see not the ground: for I
have set thee for a sign unto the house of Israel.

And I did so as I was commanded: I brought forth my stuff by day, as stuff for
captivity, and in the Even I dug through the wall with mine hand, I brought
it forth in the twy light, and I bare it upon my shoulder in their sight.


EZEKIEL having been in a vision at Jerusalem seen and hazard many remarkable
things, which he declared to them of the captivity: here the word of the Lord
came afresh unto him, and he is put upon doing those things which might
convince Zedekiah and others, of the sad judgments coming upon them.

In the Chapter be three things in general observeable. 1. A Prophecy of
Zedekiahs carrying into captivity, with the Citizens of Jerusalem, to the 17.
verse.

2. The miserable condition of the people preceding and following the captivity
of the King and people; from verse. 17. to 21.

3. A confutation of those who mokct at the judgments of God threatened by the
Prophet, from the 21. to the end.

In the first part you have, 1. A type set out in the six first verses.

2. The application of the type, from thence to the 17.

Its a question to whom these words of the Lord do refer, Thou dwell in the
midst of a rebellious house, etc.

Our prophet was in Babylon, and before the captives there, he was to remoove
in their sight, and this was not to give them hopes of any speedy return out
of Babylon; but to quiet their disturbed minds, for these typical actions of
the Prophet in carrying out his stuff and digging through the wall, etc. have
a double aspect, one toward them at Jerusalem, to evidence to them that their
captivity was at hand, another toward these already in captivity, which was
to comfort them, in leting them see what heavy judgments they had escaped,
being safe there in Babylon, though burdened with some difficulties.

The scope is to show the certainty of their suffering and destruction at
Jerusalem, and their advantage who were come to Babylon, and freed from the
judgments were coming upon the other.

Thou dwell in the midst of a rebellious house.
Hebrew is a house of rebellion: a Family, Nation, people, who are rebellious,
imbittering, exasperating.

Which have eyes to see, and see not: Ears to hear, and hear not.
Some take the sight for the understanding, the ear for the will, for these
two senses are the servants of those faculties, and as the eye and ear are
delighted with light and sweetness, so the understanding and will: but these
men were spiritually bli^d, and deaf, they neither heard nor saw as they might
have done. They might have seen Gods goodness to them, in bringing them from
Jerusalem, in causing them to hearken to Jeremiahs counsel: in planting them
in Babylon, in procuring more f^vour from the Babylonians, then the condition
of captives did require: they might have understood by the P^ophets visions,
and words spoken to them, what the Chaldaeans should speed ly do to them in
Canaan, what bloody and fie^y judgments they were bringing upon the City,
Temple, people and whole Land.

They did not see inwardly, they considered not what God did, said, nor what
they were to do.

Obser. 1.
Wicked men neither see not hear the things of God, neither meecies nor
judgments are rightly discerned by them: they saw not the mercy they had in a
strange Land, nor the judgments they escaped in their own Land. Mercies and
judgments have much of God in them, they speak, and speak aloud, but wicked
men neither see God, nor hear his voice in his works, they are blind and
deaf. When men see, hear, and do not profit by their seeing or hearing, then
they neither see nor hear in Scripture sense: the more signs, threatenings,
judgments, the harder hearted they grow, the blinder and deafer they are.

We had need pray unto the Lord to open our eyes that we may see what
judgments, what mercies, we have had, that he would bore ou^ ears that we may
here his voice and repent of our wickedness.

2. The cause of sinners not seeing, and not hearing is in themselves. For they
are a rebellious house. Their rebellion was the cause, they neither saw nor
heard, they did contrary to what God required and so blinded their own eyes,
hardened their own hearts; Isa. 26.10.11. Let favor be showed to the wicked,
yet will he not learn righteousness, when the Lords hand is lifted up yet
will he not see. I fear this is the case of many amongst us, God has given
men senses to observe his works, and ways, but they either do not, or will
not observe them, they have eyes to see mercies, and judgments but they
consider them not, they have ears to hear the voice of his Rod and word, but
they hear not: their eyes, ears, and hearts are taken up and exercised about
other things, which is a dreadful evil.

Prepare the stuff for removing.
Hebrew is instruments, what instruments? such were seen in Mat. 10.10. A
^crip, a coat, shoes, a staff, some add a girdle, but whether these were the
instruments Ezekiel was to prepare, I make some doubt, this might suffice for
his own travalling, but he was to remove his household stuff verse. 5.6. He was
to carry it out through the hole of the wall, and bear it upon his shoulder.

This he was to do for trial of their spirits; they had not been affected
with his prophesying, and therefore now a visible sign is added, and what
then? It may be they will consider: when they should see the prophet removing
from place to place, digg through the wall, go out in the night, cover his
face etc. these things were likely to affect them: actions are more observeable
then words, they make deeper impressions. If some chief man in a City, should
pack up all his stuff, break through the walls of the City in the night,
carry all he had away, what strange effects would it cause, in the hear s of
men.

The Lord is very patient toward a sinful and rebellious people: Obser. 1.
he tries variety of ways to do them good, visions, prophesies, signs, they
had before; here again the prophet must do strange things to see if they will
be apprehensive of danger: repent and prevent judgments, this is the way of God
with sinners, he waits, is bountiful, and would with his goodness and long
suffering draw sinners to repentance. Let others be like God, a Minister should
be patient, not strive, be gentle toward all men, not bitter, nor cursing, in
meekness instructing, etc.

2. Prophets must venture, though the success of their endeavors be
uncertain, go, prepare stuff for removing, remove, and from place to place,
It may be they will consider: Prophets and others should look at Gods will, not
success. Divine pleasure is warrant sufficient for any to act; let the issue
be what it will, Ministers, Magistrates, Parents, must do their duty; it may
be good will come of it, It may be they will consider, its not a word of
doubting, but of hope and encouragement.

Thou shall bring forth thy stuffeby Day in their sight:
The reason of this was, that so all might see, Princes, Nobles, and People,
and be inexcusable if they did not take warning.

Go forth at even:
This was to show the stealing away of the King, Nobles, and men of war by
night, as it is 2 Kings 25.4. The City was broken up, and all the men of war
fled by night, by the way of the Gate, between two walls which is by the Kings
Garden, and the King went the way toward the plain, Jer. 39.4. They fled and
went out of the City by night, even Zedekiah with the rest..

Dig through the wall, etc.
To show what great streights they should be in, all gates should be beset, all
known passages stopped, and they necessitated to break through the wall, and
verse. 7. Ezekiel says, he did it with his own hand, I dig'd through the wall
with my hand: In eminent danger any shift will men make, pull stones out of
walls etc.

Thou shall bear it upon thy shoulders.
To show that the People and Princes should carry away their precious things
upon their shoulders.

Thou shall cover thy face, that thou see not the ground.
Covering of the face was in use among the Jews and others.

1. In case of disappointment, and shame, they did it, Jer. 14.3. Their Nobles
have sent their little ones to the waters, they came to the pits and found no
water, they returned with the vessels empty, they were ashamed, confounded,
and covered their heads.

2. In case of sorrow and mourning, 2 Samuel 19.4. When Absalom was slain David
covered his face, and cried O Absalm my Son, so in the 15 Chap. 30. David and
the people had their heads covered, and wept when they went up Mount Olivet.

3. In case of guilt and punishment for it, Esther 7.8. When Haman was accused
by Esther, and to suffer for his villainous plot, against the Jews, they
covered his face, as not worthy to see the sun or earth; here the Prophets
covering was typical, and was to show not only what a dark moonelesse night
Zedekiah should choose to fly in, but what a dark condition he should be in
when his eyes should be put out, therefore those words, That thou see not the
ground, are added, intimating that though he were carried into Babylon yet he
should not see that Land.

For I have set thee for a sign to the house of Israel.
And in the 11 ver. I am the sign. The word in Hebrew is (...) Portentum, from
(...) which signifies something beautiful, specious, drawing to admiration:
here its put for a strange or wonderful thing, That might be pleasing to the
eye, but sad in effect and heavy to the heart.
and is the same with Oath and is rendered a sign, in this place, and others;
as in 2 Chronicles. 32, 24. Isa. 8.18. I and the Children thou have given me are for
signs and wonders; There are both the words, and point out the same thing, and
that is, Signum or portentum quo futurus rerum eventus design^tur as Isa.
20.3.4. His going naked and barefoot, was a sign and wonder upon Egypt, and
Ae hiopia, and our Prophets digging the wall, carrying out his stuff, and
covering of his face made him a sign to the house of Israel; they would not
believe that they should go into cap ivi^y but this was a lively sign to
convince them of it.

The Lord carries on his desi^ne in the World, often times, Obser.
by foolish, weak, and ridiculous means, the Prophet must dig through the wall,
carry out his stuff upon his shoulder, remove from place to place, and cover
his face, that he see not the ground; these things seemed childish and foolish
unto the Jews, they thought him a silly or mad man, so Chap. 4. He must take a
Tile, picture Jerusalem upon it, he must build a sort, cast a Mount, set a
camp and battering Rams against it, he must also set an Iron pan for a wall
between him and the City, lie upon his left side, and then upon his right side,
drink water by measure, and b^ke his bread in dunge etc. All which, seemed
poor, ridiculous things in the eyes of the people, but there was weight in
them.

And I did as I was commanded, I brought forth my stuff by day, as stuff for
captivity etc.
In this Verse is the obedience of the prophet, to the type commanded, and in
the two next, preparation to the application of the type.

Obser.
From the sixth Verse its man's duty readily to obey the Lord in whatsoever he
commands, be they things of such nature as to seem ridiculous, unworthy a man;
such as will expose him to scorn, disgrace etc. yet he is bound to do them.
Our Prophet did as he was commanded, he stuck not at the doing those things
would make him a sign and fable in all Israel.

VERSE. 8, 9.
And in the morning came the word of the Lord unto me saying.

Son of man, has not the house of Israel, the rebellious house, said unto
thee, What do thou?


GOD had appointed the Prophet to do those typical things in their sight, and
now he comes to inquire what the people did or said upon his so doing; and such
was the blindness and stupidity of this people, that they did not so much as
inquire of the Prophet what these typical passages meant. The words in the 9.
Verse are an interrogation, and import a negative, not an affirmative, thus,
Has not the rebellious house said unto thee what do^st thou? No, I know it
has not, they dreamt rather of their own return out of Captivity, then
thought of their Brethrens coming into captivity who were at Jerusalem: they
rather derided the Prophet for those strange acts, then consulted what they
meant.

The Lord looks after his Messengers and messages, Obser.
sent by them, and will have an account what entertainment they have. The Lord
commanded Ez kiel to go and do such things; which he did, and here he comes
and inquires what was the effect of those typical actions, whether the people
apprehended his meaning in them, or made inquiry after them, have they come to
thee, have they said, What do thou? God minds the Servants he imployes,
there words and actions shall not be in vain. He makes speedy inquiry here
after all, In the morning came the word of the Lord unto me saying. Son of
man has not the house of Israel said unto thee, etc. If they understood them
not, it was their duty to come to the Prophet for resolution, and his duty to
resolve them.

VERSE. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
Say thou unto them; Thus says the Lord God. This burden concerns the Prince
in Jerusalem, and all the house of Israel that are among them.

Say, I am your sign: as I have done, so shall it be done unto them: they
shall remoove and go into captivity.

And the Prince that is among them, shall bear upon his shoulder in the
twylight and shall go forth: they shall dig through the wall, to carry out
thereby: he shall cover his face, that he see not the ground with his eyes.

My net also will I spread upon him, and he shall be taken in my snare, and I
will bring him to Babylon to the Land of the Chaldaeans, yet shall he not see
it, though he shall die there.

And I will scatter toward every wind all that are about him to help him, and
all his bands, and I will draw out the Sword after them.


IN these Verses you have the application of the type to the Prince, and all
the house of Israel, which is in general laid down in the 10. Verse: then,
the common calamity of both in the 11. Verse They shall go into captivity.
Then, a more special application of it, to the King in the 12. and 13. Verses,
where his bearing stuff upon his shoulder, his flight, digging through the
wall, and covering his face, are set down; together with his apprehension,
excaecation, deportation into Babylon, and death there.

This burden.
H^mmassa from Nasa, to lift up, a word so rich in signification and efficacy,
Vt vix centum aliarum linguarum verbis explicentur ejus divitiae; Pradus.
it may be rendered, this burdensome doctrine, or prophecy, which these types
do speak; by burden is meant, the typical sign of captivity, which was a
burden to the Prophet to act, to open unto them, a burden to them to hear, and
especially to bear: grievous prophesies are called burdens in scripture, Nabum
1.1. Hab. 1.1. so Isa. 15.1.17.1.19.1.

The Prince.
It was Zedekiah a wicked and timorous King, the Hebrew is Hannasi from Nasi to
lift up, either because he is lift up above the people, or should populi onera
levare, ease and lighten the greivances of the people as they in Exodus 18.22.
But if they grow tyrannical, and impose heavy burdens upon the people, the
Lord has a burden for them; as here Zedekiah must dig through the wall, carry
forth on his shoulder, fly etc. This you may see fullfill'd, Jer.
52.7.8.9.10.11. Where you have his flight mentioned, the Chaldaeans persuit and
apprehension of him, his carrying to Riblath, where his eyes were put out, and
after to Babylon where he dyed.

Say I am the sign etc.
This relates to the few in Babylon, they conceived there should no judgemtnt
befall Jerusalem, nor the men there; by this typical work of the Prophet, the
Lord shows them their error, that it should not be well with them at
Jerusalem, its true they condemn you for remooving into Babylon, and justify
themselves, that they are the only people, righteous and acceptable unto me,
and therefore are safe in Jerusalem; but you shall see, and they shall know,
how vain and foolish their thoughts and reasonings are, as I have dealt with
you, so will I do by them, they shall be made C^ptives very speedily, and meet
with sorer judgments then you did.

My net alsa will I spread upon him, and he shall be taken in my snare.
These words you have again in the 17. Chap. 20. Verse The Chaldaeans here are
likned unto Fisher men who usually dwell by the water sides, now Babylon was
among the waters, Euphrates, and Tygris running by it or through it, hence Jer.
51.13, O thou that dwell upon many waters. Therefore fitly are they compared
to Fishermen, and the Army was the net; a net spreads abroad, compasses, and
catches; by this net was Zedekiah, the Princes, City, and all precious things
therein, taken.

In my snare.
Lam. 3.13. He has spread a net for my feet.
Snares are for the Land, and its thought to be a hunters snare, such as is set
for wild Beasts, which being hunted and chased hard, are driven into snares,
and so taken; they are set secretly, catch suddenly, hold certainly. The hebrew
word Meizudab, as Junius observes, signifies also a strong hold, and in this
sense it may represent to us Riblath, whether Zedekiah was carried, where he
received judgment, and had his eyes put out, or that hold he was put unto in
Babylon.

Obser. 1.
The great mercy and goodness of God, who takes occasion from their sin to
afford them this mercy, the exposition of this type; they were stupid, and
minded not the Prophet and his actions, or if they did, they derided him as a
foolish or madd man, to do such things: hence the Lord is pleased to take an
advantage to acquaint them with it, have they not asked thee what do thou?
Say thou unto them, thus says the Lord, this burden concerns the Prince, etc.
Hos. 2.13.14. Isa. 57.17.18. Genesis 8.21. In those places God takes occasion from
man's sin to show mercy. So in Joh. 20.25.27. From Thomas his unbeleife, etc.
Takes an opportunity to come and show his wounds, etc.

2. To secure and confident sinners, God will render judgment most certainly
and impartially, Say to them as I have done, so shall it be done unto you. What
ever their thoughts are at Jerusalem, or yours here, their condition shall be
like yours; have you been afflicted with War, Famine, Plague, have you lost
the Temple, City, your Country and estates, are you brought into an Heathenish
Land; so shall it be with them.

3. The Lord has burdens for Princes: if they be wicked, there be burdensome
Prophecies against them, and burdensome judgments for them, Zedekiah did evil
in the sight of the Lord, 2 K. 24.19. And you may see what burdens he had.

1. A burden of fear, he durst stay no longer, and Jer. 38.19. I am afraid of
the Jews fallen unto the Chaldaeans least they deliver me into their hand.

2. A burden of shame, he covers his face, he will see none, nor be seen of
any; he leaves Jerusalem in a shameful manner, carrying some burden upon his
shoulder, as if he were some vulgar man, he is disguised as being ashamed of a
Princely title.

3. A burden of flight, he is put to it, to fly for his life.

4. A burden of darkness, in the evening or night he steals away.

5. A burden of difficulties, he must dig through a wall, go in by-ways.

6. A burden of sad judgments.

1. He is taken by the enemies. 2. His Sons are slain before his face. 3.
His eyes are put out. 4. He is led into captivity. 5. He is imprisoned till his
death.
And why all these burdens? Because he had a burden of guilt in his conscience
which was worse then all the rest; and that burden brings the burdens of
judgment, for so its called, 2 K. 9.25. When Jehu shot an arrow into the heart
of Joram a wicked King, he says, The Lord laid this burden upon him. Such a
burden laid the Lord upon Jezabel for her whoredoms and witchcrafts, she is
thrown out at a window, her blood sprinkled upon the wall, trod underfoot by
horses, and eaten up all by dogs, except her skull, feet, and palms of her
hands.

4. Sinful Princes cannot escape the judgments of God, he has nets and
snares to surprise them, to hold them; Zedekiah thought by flight to get away,
but the Lord spread out his net upon him, and took him in his snare: the
Chaldaeans Army was Gods net and snare to catch sinners, Habbak. 1.13. God
makes men, yea takes them as the Fishes of the sea, and verse. 15. They catch
them in their net; meaning the Chaldaeans, which troubled the Prophet that such
wicked men should catch and spoil the Jews; but the Lord knows how to make
use of the worst men to execute his judgments. So the Goths and Vandalls of
old, Turks now, to scourge the Christian World, etc. What base spirits has
God set on work to correct us. etc. If God will catch men, he has nets, if he
will hunt them, he has snares.

5. The Lord makes sinners helps helpless. Zedekiah had some Nobles,
Councellers, friends, about him, a life or person-guard, bands of Soldiers,
but I will scatter all that are about him to help him, and all his bands; God
would put him into a helpless condition, they should none of them be able to
relieve him. Men are apt in times of trouble, to look unto some helps, and
hopes, but they are vain things, soon blasted, scattered. Take heed of making
flesh your arm, of creature confidences. Wicked men expect help from things
beneath, from those about them but they are frequently disappointed and so
perplexed: take David's counsel. Psalm. 146.3. Put not your trust in Princes nor
in the son of man in whom their is no help, verse. 5. Happy is he has the God
of Jacob for his help.

VERSE. 15.16.
And they shall know that I am the Lord, when I shall scatter them among the
Nations, and disperse them in the Countries.

But I will leave a few men of them from the Sword, from the Famine, and from
the Pestilence, that they may declare all their abominations among the Heathen
whither they come, and they shall know that I am the Lord.


IN these two Verses you have two great ends of Gods judgments; the first is,
that the wicked may be convinced from what they have felt and seen, that it was
the Word of the Lord which they despised; that he spoke by Jeremiah, and
Ezekiel, that they were his threatenings, and now made good by him, and this is
in the 15. Verse. The second is confession of their sin, and Gods
righteousness in their judgments, and this is in the 16. Verse.

Scatter, and Disperse; men are no more before God, then a little dust before
the wind, or chafe in a Fan; the Original word for disperse, is (...)
Ventilavero, Jer. 15.7. God said he would Fan them with a Fan; and Isa.
40.15. God counts the Nations as the small dust of the Balance; and Isa. 41.2.
Gave them as dust to the Sword.

2. Judgments produce those effects which mercies do not; they had great
means and mercies at Jerusalem, in the Land, City, Temple, but under those they
did not know, not confess their sins, and give glory to his Name; but when
they were deprived of their mercies under sad and sharp judgments they should
do so, Isa. 26.9. When thy judgem^nts are in the Earth, the Inhabitants of the
World will learn righteousness: Verse. 16. In trouble have they visited thee.

3. The Lord in the midst of his judgments shows some mercy, I will leave a
few men: Hebrew is men of number, that may quickly be numbered: Though many were
destroyed by the Sword, Famine, Pestilence; yet some would the Lord leave.

VERSE. 17.18.19.20.
Moreover the Word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

Son of man, eat thy bread with quaking, and drink thy water with
trembling, and with carfulness.

And say unto the people of the Land, Thus says the Lord God, of the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and of the Land of Israel: They shall eat their
bread with carfulness, and drink their water with astonishment, that her
Land may be desolate from all that is therein, because of the violence of them
that dwell therein.

And the Cities that are inhabited, shall be laid wast, and the Land shall be
desolate, and ye shall know that I am the Lord.


THese words contain the second general part of the Chapter, Viz. The sad
condition of the people, both before, and after the Captivity of the King.
Having spoken of the Captivity of the King, now he comes to the beseidging of
the City.
In the 18. Verse, a new Type is commanded; in the 19. Verse its applied; and
there you have the end of its application, which is desolation, and vastation,
and the procreant cause of both; Viz. the violence which was amongst them; and
in the 20. the end of Gods putting them into such an afflictive condition, that
they may know him to be the Lord.

Eat thy bread with quaking.
Chald. In tree more. Sept. In dolor.
Fear and perplexity of spirit makes men tremble, and takes away the sweetness
of any comfort present: The Hebrew is (...) In commotione: Cum tremore
corporis, such quaking as the earth quakes with, or like unto Corn and Leaves,
so should the Prophet tremble, quake, in eating, looking this way and that way,
as one affrighted.

Drink thy water with trembling, etc.
(...) The Septuagint, (...), with torment, affliction; the Vulgar is, in
festinatione, in haste, as they did eat the Passover. This eating and
drinking with quaking and trembling, was to set out, either the great fear
should be upon them, when the Babylonish Army should beseige them, so that they
should not enjoy the comfort of those creatures, without great trouble, or the
great Famine which should be in the Earth, which should cause great fear and
trembling, least they should want, and dye for hunger and thirst, least others
should snatch out of their hands, or pull out of their mouths that little they
had, and so they were full of care in their eating and drinking.

Say unto the People of the Land.
That is, those Jews who were in the Land of Chaldea, he must tell the
Captives what should befall the Jews at Jerusalem, and in the Land of Israel.

They shall eat their bread with carefullnesse.
(...) It notes care, grief, fear, which commonly attend one the other, the
Septuagint (...), with want before they rendered this word (...), want is a
great affliction.

And drink their water with astonishment.
(...) from (...) Stupescere admirari, The Septuagint has it (...), Cum
interitu, desparing of deliverance and life; Chalde, Cum stupore; the French,
En desolation.

That her land may be desolate.
Judaea was the choycest of Lands, a paradise to other Countries, it abounded
with milk, honey, corn, oil, wine, cattle, silver, gold and other precious
things, but now it was to be laid wast; now it should be stripped of its
inhabitants, of its plenty and treasure, the Hebrew is a plenitudine sua.

Because of the violence of them that dwell therein.
(...) Notes injury, Tyranny, spoil. The Septuagint renders it (...), because
of the wickedness of them, etc.

The Lord puts his servants often upon troublesome service, Obser. 1.
and sad actions; for the conviction and benefit of others, here Ezekiel must
eat his bread with quakeing, and drink his drink with trembling; he must dig
through the wall, and bear his stuff upon his shoulder, go out at even, cover
his face, remove his stuff, which were burdensome actions; and Chap. 4. He
must lie upon his left side, three hundred and ninety days; and then upon his
left side forty days; he must eat bread baked with Cowes dung: and Chap. 5. He
must shave his head and his beard, make himself bald and unsightly. So Hosea
he must marry a Wife of whoredoms, Chap. 1.2. and Jer. 27.2. He must make
yokes and bonds, and put upon his neck: These things were to signify what God
would do unto the Nations, bring them into subjection to Nebuchadnezzar.

2. Its Divine pleasure, that when typical and dark things are given out to
the Prophets, that they should make them known to the People; Ez^kiel must
tell the people what was in it, that he eat his bread and drank his drink in
such a manner. So for his digging, and removing, he must tell them what Mystery
was wrapped up in it. Say unto them, this burden concerns the Prince; verse. 10.
and here, verse. 19. Say to the people, etc. Its the duty of those are teachers
in the Church, to open things are mysterious, what they mean and signify.

3. God can mingle sorrows with our comforts, and make our choice comforts,
comfortless comforts, they shall eat their bread with carefullnesse, and
drink their drink with astonishment; God wou^d bring an enemy to the gates of
Jerusalem, and put them to such streights, that they should neither eat nor
drink with any comfort: fear, carefullnesse, and astonishment, would be
gravel in there bread, and gall in their drink. Adams comforts in Paradise
were soon dampt, Psalm. 127.2. To eat the bread of sorrows.
Genesis 3.17. In sorrow shall thou eat; bread of sorrows was his bread, and is
his Childrens bread to this day, only some times God puts in more sorrow then
at others, there is bread of affliction, 1 K. 22.27. Bread of mourners Hos.
9.4. Here God would put in much sorrow, affl ction, and mourning; quakeing,
trembling, care, and astonishment should possess them, their plenty should be
turned into scarcity: for wine they should have water, and very little of that
too; for the finest of the wheat flower, they should have bran, and not their
bellies full of that.

4. Its sin, the sin of Injustice, oppression, which cause God to lay wast a
plentiful land, that her land may be desolate from all that is therein,
because of the violence of them that dwell therein: Its observed that the Jews
were, and still are, a covetous people. It was their covetousness put them
upon unjust acts of oppression and violence, and God upon just judgments of
Famine and desolation Psalm. 107.34. He turns a fruitful land into barrennes
for the wickedness of them that dwell therein. Man's wickedness moves the Lord
to lay plentiful and pleasant lands wast, yet its made their act, Zech. 7.14.
They laid the pleasant land wast, they were the procreant cause, they begat
sin, sin begat judgment, and judgment begat desolation.

VERSE. 21.22.23.24.25.26, 27, 28.
And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying.

Son of man, what is that proverb that ye have in the land of Israel, saying
the days are prolonged, and every vision fails.

Tell them therefore* thus says the Lord God, I will make this proverb to
cease; and they shall no more use it as a proverb in Israel: but say unto them.
The days are at hand, and the effect of every vision.

For there shall be no more any vain vision, nor flattering divination, within
the house of Israel.

For I am the Lord: I will speak, and the word that I shall speak, shall come
to pass: it shall be no more prolonged: for in your days, O rebellious house,
will I say the word, and will perform it, says the Lord GOD.

Again the word of the Lord came unto me, saying.

Son of man, behold they of the house of Israel say; the vision that he sees
is for many days to come, and he prophecyeth of the times that are far off.

Therefore say unto them. Thus says the Lord GOD. There shall none of my words
be prolonged any more, but the word which I have spoken shall be done says the
Lord God.


IN these verses you have the third part of the Chapter, a confutation of those
made an ill construction of the Prophets Prophesie^. One kind of men gave no
credence at all to what was Prophesied but derided the Prophets saying: when
were you in Heaven or who told you the mind of God; you are deceivers if any
such thing had been, as you speak of, it had taken place ere this, but nothing
is done, therefore we will not believe you. Another kind of men were persuaded
the Prophets spoke truth, but it was at a great distance, long ere it was to
take place; and therefore grew secure. Hence the Lord commands the Prophet to
let them know that his words should certainly and shortly come to pass. In the
words consider.

1. A complaint of a Proverb, What is that Proverb which you have in the Land
of Israel, Verse. 22. 2. The mention of the Proverb, The days are, etc. V.
22.28. 3. The confutation of it, Verse. 23. I will make this Proverb to cease,
and they shall no more use it as a Proverb in Israel, etc. 4. A confirmation
of that confutation.
1. From the Lords proceeding with the false Prophets, and their vain visions,
and flattering Divinations, They should cease, Verse. 24. And,

2. From the promise of making good his word, and that speedily, Verse. 25.28.

What is that Proverb which you have in the Land of Israel.
I shall open the Word Proverb unto you, (...) which is from (...) signifying
to bear Rule, to Reign, to Excel, and so a Proverb is some notable speech,
which excels others, and bears rule amongst men. New Wine is not for old
Bottles. Do men gather Grapes of Thorns. Little Leaven leavens the whole
lump. Mashal signifies (...), a Lordly, authentic sentence; as the Proverbs
of Solomon, and such as these, Viz. the Axe laid to the root of the tree: Where
the treasure is, Sermo ad exhortationem aptus cujus per universum vitae
curriculum utilitas dimanet. Mich. Apostol. Hesych. in Lexic. (...). Basilius.
the heart will be also. No man can serve two masters, etc. Or its from the
same root signifying to speak Similies, or Parables, Adagie^, or witty
sayings. Hence the Septuagint renders it (...), What is the Parable which you
have in the Land. The Gospel express^s a Proverb by the word (...), John
16.25. 2 Pet. 2.22. And the Learned think (...), to be (...). And Scaliger, L.
3. Poet: censet (...) dici (...), because its a sentence goes up and down by
the way, its common amongst men: or thus it may rather be so called, because
its praeter viam, besides the common way of speaking; having something
mysterious, dark, and difficult in it. The Graecians say its (...), a speech
useful for this life, (...), because cast amongst the people for their use.
(...) Plut. in Camillo. Paraemia est oration obscura quae per aliam d^scuram
significatur, Suidas, in Collect.
having much good, and moderate darkness in it: They say also its (...), a
speech vaild; light in a dark Lantern. Some Proverbs are obscure, and
signify somewhat else, then the words seem to express, As the Dog is turned
unto his own vomit again; and the Sow that was washed to her wallowing in the
mire, 2 Pet. 2.22. So that in Ezekiel. 18.2. The Fathers have eaten sour Grapes,
and the Childrens teeth are set on edge.

Some are more plain and easy, as 1 Samuel 24.13. Wickedness proceeds from the
wicked; So that among us, truth begets hatred, flattery, friends: Some were
wicked and false, and such had this people among them, that in Ezekiel. 18.2. The
Fathers, etc. And that in this place are wicked Proverbs.

The days are prolonged, and every vision fails.
Herein lies the evil of this Proverb: When the Prophets at the command of
God prophesied sad things, threatened destruction to Jerusalem, Captivity to the
people, etc. They not willing to hear of such things, All those Visions they
say, they have had touching the Chaldaeans coming and laying us wast they are
dreams, fancies, they have no weight, no worth, no truth in them.
put off all by this Proverb thus, If that the Prophets prophecy be true, its
not for our days, but the days of those are long after, for the next, the
second, or third Generation after, as the days are prolonged say they: or if
they be false, as its likely, what need we fear, or care, every vision
fails, they come to nothing, they are words, wind; and thus wickedly they
put off Prophetical threats, and deluded their own souls; they laid not to
heart their sins, they used not any means to divert Divine wrath, or to
secure their own souls; and that because sinfully they prolonged or disanul'd
the Prophesies.

That men very wicked are very secure, they look for peace, liberty and long
life, Obser. 1.
even when they have greatly provoked the wrath of God against them, what if we
have find by violence, in the land, by corruptions, and false worship, in the
Church; and the Prophets have thundered against us with threatening judgments,
yet The days are prolonged, we shall have peace, walk at liberty, and fill up
the number of our days so in Chap. 11.3. It is not near desolation is
threatened by the Prophets from Chaldea, but is not near; let us build houses
for our delight and dwell in them secur^ly, and take a course with Jeremiah,
and those of his st^eine, which think to trouble us, Jer. 7.9.10. They did
Steal, murder, commit adultery, swear falsely, burn Incense to Baal; yet came
and stood in the house of God and said, We are delivered to d^e all these
abominations; the meaning is, though we have done such things, and have been
greviously threatened for them, by the Prophets, yet we are delivered from their
threats, and are well, safe, without fear or danger and shall go on in our old
ways; when Gods threatenings are deser'd, out of mercy, that men may consider,
repent, and prevent them, they think they will never come, and so grow more
secure and more sinful. Eccl 8.11. Because sentence against an evil work is
not executed speedily, therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set in
them to do evil they go on more freely, with more delight, this makes the Lord
often to mind sinners of the days of his wrath. Amos 4.1.2. Hear this word, ye
Kine of Bashan that are in the Mountain of Samariah, which oppress the poor,
which crush the needy, which say to their Masters bring and let us drink. They
were secure, and like Kine, goared, trod under the poorer sort, and what must
they hear? this, The Lord God has sworn by his holiness, that lo the days
shall come upon you, that he will take you away with hooks and your posterity
with fish-hookes. so Zeph. 1.14. The great day of the Lord is near, it is
near and hastes greatly.

2. Such is the corruption of man, that being, opposed it swells higher and
vents it self often times blasphemously; the Prophets reproved them for their
sins, threatened the soarest judgments for them, and how did they entertain
those threatenings, Because men feel not Gods hand, they think his threatenings
wind.
their hearts boyld against the Prophets, and their Messages: and they uttered
it with their tongues, every vision fails, there is no truth in the Prophets,
nor in their visions, they are liars, and their visions, lies. This was not
only contumelious to the Prophets, but blasphemous against the Majesty of
God, and the truth of his word: men that live under the word if their
corruptions and lusts be not weakened and mortifyed, they are ripened,
strengthened, and grow to an insufferable height; Jer. 17.15. They say unto me
where is the Word of the Lord? let it come now: Thou tellest us of the word of
the Lord, but its thine own dream, if it be the Lords, let it come now and we
will believe it; but if not, its thine and thou art a deceiver to tell us so. 2
Pet. 3.3.4. In the last days shall be scoffers, walking after their own
lusts, saying, where is the promise of his coming.

3. That sinful words are of a spreading nature; they said, The days are
prolonged, and every vision fails: this wicked speech was become a Proverb,
it passed through the mouths of all sorts, young, old, great, small, learned,
ignorant, it was in the City and Country, a Proverb in the Land of Israel.
The words of the Prophet stuck not by them, they mocked at him, and made jests
at what he said, Ez k 33.31. With their mouth they show much love: in the
Hebrew it is, they make jests, they made sport with the Prophet and his
threatenings; but this blasphemous Proverb they took up, and conveyed from one
to another all the Land over, and made use of, to disparage what ever he said.
So that in Matthew. 28.13. when it was known that Christ was risen, money was
given to the Soldiers to say, His Disciples came by night and stole him away,
while we slept: This saying went abroad, and is commonly reported among the
Jews unto this day, Verse. 15.

4. God takes notice of the ungodly speeches which are in men's mouths; they
said, The days are prolonged, etc. God heard and observed what they said, Isa.
59.3. Your lips have spoken lies, your tongue has muttered perverseness: Many
think a lie nothing, and secret m^ttering against others nothing, but God
observes every lie is told, all whispering and muttering against others, Jer
33.24. Considerest thou not what this people have spoken; if thou do not, I
do: They have said, The two Families which the Lord has chosen, he has even
cast them off. Jer. 44.25. God regards what men and their Wives say; yea, what
every one sait^, and will come ere long in judgment to convince sinners of the
hard speeches spoken against him, Jude 15. and to call men to an account for
every idle word which they have spoken, Matthew. 12.36. therefore let no corrupt
communication proceed out of your mouth, but that which is good, to the use of
edifying, that it may minister grace unto the hearers, and comfort to the
speakers.

5. The Lord has an admiring indignation at the wickedness of his people:
What is that Proverb which you have in the Land of Israel? This Interrogation
implies admiration, and indignation. Admiration, that a people brought up in
his house, which had had the Law and Prophets from the beginning, so many
hundred years, should be so stupid, wicked, profane, blasphemous, as to
think, say, Divine threatenings were in vain, the Prophets liars, and their
Prophesies lies: Indignation, what Proverb is this which you have taken up?
What? a Proverb which strikes at me, which makes me a false and lying God,
which overthrowes all Religion? O detestable and vile Proverb? What shall all
that I say by my Prophets, fail and come to nothing, vanish into the air?

Tell them therefore thus says the Lord God, I will make this Proverb to
cease, etc.
This Verse is a confutation of their sinful Proverb, which the Lord tells
them should cease, and that the days they thought prolonged were at hand.

They shall no more use it as a Proverb in Israel.
Celebre dictum scita quadam novitate insigne, Erasm.
(...) Which is, they shall no more Proverb it, not with this Proverb, others
they might use, acute and wise sentences concerning man's life and manners, etc.
of which nature, Proverbs are, God would not abridge them of, but this was a
destructive Proverb.

The days are at hand.
Hebrew, have drawn near; that is, at hand, or draws near, which is either
presently to be done, or not far off, the time was not far now from
Jerusalems beseidging, Zedekiahs taking, and the ruin of all, Gods net was
made, and his snare ready for them.

The effect of every Vision.
Hebrew is (...) the French, La parole, the word or thing of every Vision, res
omnis visionis, so Piscator; whatsoever the vision did present to the Prophet,
and he to the People, that should be.

The thoughts and words of the wicked are differing and contrary to the
thoughts and words of God, Obser. 1.
they thought of peace God of war, they thought of liberty, God of captivity,
they of long life, God of cutting them off, they said the days of judgment
were prolonged a far off, God says, they are at hand, they said, every vision
fails, God said, every vision should take effect, they thought and said, this
proverb should continue, but God thought and said, it should cease and be used
no more. 1 These. 5.3. Men cry peace, safety, and God cries destruction.

2. When sinners are exceeding wicked, and have provoked God greivously, as
they did here by this blasphemous proverb, yet even then God shows mercy:
they had provokt him into the field, etc. God might immediately have slain
them, but he forbears them still, admonishes them of judgment near at hand;
go say to them the days are at hand, and the effect of every vision. God
tryes them yet longer and labors to awaken them with consideration of the
neernes of danger.

3. Length of time does not frust^^te and null the threatenings of God against
sinners; Jeremiah had Prophesied above thirty years, had threatened sad
judgments, and because they came not to pass in so long time, they conceived
they would come to nothing, but what ever be the distance of time between a
threatening goeing forth and the execution of it, yet it shall not fall to the
ground, but have its time of fullfilling, if repentance intervene not.

For there shall be no more any vain vision, etc.
Here begins the confirmation of the confutation, false Prophets which had
vain visions told them it should not be as Jeremiah had Prophesied: Jerusalem
should not be destroyed, they should not go into captivity, but dwell safely
there, and enjoy that good land, but what says God? There shall be no more any
vain vision; the Hebrew runs thus, (...) Non erit ultra omnis visio vana;
There shall not be any more all vision of vanity. Some refer these words to the
true Prophets and their vision, but they are put hard to it, how to make it
out, how some of their visions have been vain, for that is employed when its
said, There shall not be any more, all or any vain vision, as when God says,
I will smite you no more, it argues, God has smitten. But thus I conceive it
may be taken, if it refer to the true Prophets, there shall not be any more all
vision of vanity, that is, hitherto you have looked upon all the vision of
Jeremiah as a vision of vanity; but it shall be so no more; you shall have
visions that shall be real, and quickly take place: but I incline to those
judge the words meant of the false Prophets, who had filled the people with
vain visions, but they should be no more, God would make good the visions he
had given touching the King and people, Temple, City, and Land, and this would
put an end to all the vain visions of the false Prophets.

Nor flattering divination.
(...) Divinatio blandientis, Miksam is from (...) futura praedicere, to
foretell things to come, to Divine good or evil, its taken both ways; and
when in the evil sense, it comprehends what ever is done by Witchery, Sorcery,
Astrology, or the ^ike, 1 Samuel 28.8. Saul comes to the Witch, and says, (...)
Divina quaeso mihi in Pythone, I pray thee Divine unto me by the Familiar
Spirit: So 2 Kings 17.17. they used Divinations, (...) They Divined Divinations
that were wicked ones: Hence (...) is put for a Soothsayer, Joshua 13.22.
Balaam the Son of Beor, (...) illum magum, and Numb. 23.23. Balaam says,
(...) Surely there is no Enchantment against Jacob, nor any Divination against
Israel. No Soothsaying, Charming, Prognostication, had power against Israel:
the false Prophets being addicted to Magic, Astrology, and such wicked Arts,
told them that what ever was Prophesied by the other Prophets of the King of
Babylons coming and taking Jerusalem, yet all should be well, which they
gathered from the Stars and Planets.

Divinations were sometimes from the entrails of Beasts or Birds; as Ezekiel.
21.21. The King of Babylon stood at the parting of the way, at the head of the
two ways, to use Divination, he consulted with Images, he looked in the liver.

Lavater thinks their Divinations were Astrologicall, Acts 13.6. They found a
certain Sorcerer, a false Prophet, a Jew, whose name was Bar. Jesus.
and that they had taken up the practice of Heathens, who looked at, and
consulted much with the Stars, Isa. 47.13. Let now the Astrologer, the
Stargazers, the monthly Prognosticators, stand up and save thee from these
things that shall come upon thee: these things were spoken of Babylon, who made
use of such Artists but in vain, and it was the use of the Jews to do so
likewise, 2 Kings 17.16, 17. They worshipped. all the Host of Heaven, and used
Divinations, and Enchantments: To these the people hearkened; therefore, Jer.
29.8. Let not their Prophets and Diviners which are in the midst of you,
deceive you.

Hence I might take a hint to speak against that part of Astrology as
unlawful, yea damnable, which is judicial and Prognosticative. From the
Conjunction of Planets, the benign and oblique Aspects of them, men gather and
foretell things to come; yea, some think that all material contingent
accidents which concern man, are written in the face of Heaven; and that God
sets the Stars in Heaven to signify such things: If Deodate go too far in
his Annotations that way, our Learned Divines in their Annotations on the
place, Genesis 1.14.
correct that error, and give no allowance to judicial Astrology, they say
the place gives no warrant to the presumption of Prognosticators or judiciary
Astrologers, to foretell the fortunes of men, These men as Nazianzen says, are
like a man that seeing the Palace, or Throne of a Prince, take upon them
thereby ^o tell what the thoughts and Counsels of the Prince are.
or fates of civil estates, by the Stars; or to make any Prediction of any
other supernatural events from the face of the Heavens, or the impression of
the Planets, or from the temperature, figure, color, or posture of the
Celestial bodies, for such Arts of Divination are condemned by the Word of God,
Deuteronomy. 18.10. There shall not be found among you, any one that uses
Divinations, or an Observer of times; such men are good, such are bad; for
Verse. 12. Those that do those things are abomination unto the Lord. Listen not
therefore to their lying observations; it matters not what the Conjunctions and
Aspects of Planets and Stars are; reason and Religion will qualify them.
Sapiens, yea Sanctus dominabitur astris, if holy men have shut and opened
Heaven with their prayers, if they have cast out Devils, they may stop the
influence of Stars. Stars are made for man, not man for Stars, if the Lord
be with us let Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, etc. Be against us: one of note says of
the Astrologers, and time observers; either they tell you of things adverse or
prosperous, if prosperous and deceive you, you are miserable by expecting, if
adverse things, and false, you are miserable by fearing: if they tell you true
things, and not good, you are presently miserable before they come; if they
foretell good things to come, your expectation will weary your hope, and your
hope will defloure yea devour the future fruit of your joy, Phavorin. lib. 14.
Nullo igitur pacto utendum est hujusmodi hominibus res futuras praesagientibus.

Flattering.
(...) Blandientis, nor divination of a flatterer, the Hebrew word originally
signifies, smooth, plain, even, and properly refers to things concern the
touching, as any thin plate, butter, oil, and metaphorically is transferd to
the speech, and instruments of it, not ng out the sweetness, smoothness, and
flattery thereof. Psalm. 5.9. They flatter with their tongue, Hebrew is the
same, and may be rendered, they smooth with their tongue, and make smooth their
tongue, that is, they give flattering and deceitful words, so the Apostle has
it, Romans 3.13. With their tongues they have used deceit; so Psalm, 55.21. The
words of his mouth were smoother then butter, but war was in his heart; that
is, his words were flattering and deceitful, the singular number is put here
for the plural, flatterer, for flatterers, they promised the people a happy
condition of things, and fed them with smooth words; the Septuagint has it
(...) those things which seem gracious, which are acceptable and make way for
favor; which please: the Vulgar reads it, Neque divinatio ambigua, no more
doubtful divination, such as the Oracles were, which might be taken diverse,
yea contrary ways.

False Prophets have pretenses and cunning ways to prevayle with the people,
Obser. 1.
the Verse points out the practice of such, and what is that, they had visions
and divinations, and when they came to the people and told them of these, they
were taken therewith. Jer 14.14. They prophesied lies in the Lords name, they
said he sent them, he commanded them, and so by these pretenses made way for
their lies. 1 K. 22.24. Zedekiah smites Micaiah on the cheek, and says, which
way went the spirit of the Lord from me unto thee. He pretended he had the
spirit, spoke by it, and so gained upon those heard him, Mat. 7.15. Beware of
false Prophets which come unto you in sheeps clothing, they seem harmless,
their countenance, words, and carriage do plead for them, and usher in their
false opinions, no false teachers but have some pretenses to ingratiate
themselves with the people, Ephesians. 4.14. Paul speaks of the condition of the
people how they were carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men and cunning craftynesse, whereby they lie in weight to deceive: by
mutual opinions and subtle sophismes, they cog'd with, and cheated the
people, as cunning gamesters at dice lie in wait to cheat young novices.

2. That their visions and divinations are false, and flattering.

1. False, they are called here visions of vanity, there is no truth in them, no
trust to be given unto them: the false Prophets had their names from the
falsehoods which they presnted to the people: sometimes they are said to
Prophecy lies, false visions, and divinations, a thing of naught, the deceit of
their heart. Jer. 14.14.15. Sometimes they are said to make vain, and speak a
vision of their own heart. Jeremiah 23.16. To cause Dreams to be dreamed:
Jeremiah 29.8. They are called Foolish Prophets, that follow their own spirit,
that have seen nothing, Ezekiel. 13.3. That have seen vanity, and lying
divination. verse. 6. Which is as nothing. There were many such Prophets amongst
them, and this is the way that Antichrist works, now in times of the Gospel
2 These. 2.9.10. His coming is after the working of Satan with all power and
signs, and lying wonders and withal deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness.
When Satan comes into a man, i^s with efficacy, and there he works stranegly,
and deceitfully; so Antichrist, when he comes into the Church or State, its
with efficacy, he pretends that all Ecclesiastical power is his, he sits in
the Temple as God, and exalts himself, above all is called God, even above the
civil powers, therefore in the 9. Verse is said to come with all power. Of his
signs and lying wonders, you may see. Rev. 13.3.13.15. and with all
deceivablenesse, of unrighteousness; that is, with all the Art and cunning to
deceive, which an unrighteous heart, spirit, state, and policy, can afford.

2. Flattering, Jer. 28.2.3.4. Hananiah a false Prophet flatters them and feeds
them with vain hopes, saying, Thus says the Lord of Hosts, I have broken the
yoke of the King of Babylon; within two full years will I bring again into
this place all the Vessels of the Lords House, and Jeconiah the Son of
Jehoiakim King of Judah, with all the Captives of Judah that went into Babylon.
Here were pleasing words, which lulled them in security. When Ahab had a mind
to go up to Ramoth Gilead and fight, what said the Prophets to him, 1 Kings
22.12. Go up to Ramoth Gilead and prosper, for the Lord shall deliver it into
the Kings hand: And when Micaiah a true Prophet was called to speak, they would
have corrupted him, say the Messengers, The words of the Prophets declare good
unto the King with one mouth: let thy word I pray thee be like unto the word of
one of them, and speak that which is good: Foolish people think those words
good which flatter and please them; but such words undo them, Ezekiel. 13.10.
Because they have seduced my people, saying peace, and there was no peace, and
one built up a wall, and others dawbed it with untempered mortar: The true
Prophets threw down Jerusalem by their Prophesies, but the false built up a
wall, prophesied safety, deliverance, and others agreed with them, but this was
flattery and their destruction, Pro. 26.28. A flattering mouth works ruin:
This Paul knew, and therefore justifies himself, that at no time he used
flattering words, 1 These. 2.5. If he should have pleased men he should not have
been the servant of Christ.

3. Vain visions and flattering divinations of false Prophets do cause people
to be secure and fearelesse of Divine threats; Obser.
they regarded not what Jeremiah prophesied against Jerusalem, so long as
Hananiah and such men prophesied the contrary, Ahab feared not scattering and
falling at Ramoth Gilead, whilst the false Prophets said, Go and prosper: Man's
nature is apter to be secure then to fear, because pleasing things are sooner
taken in, then such as are averse to them.

4. God has his time to confute and confound visions of vanity, and
divinations of flattery, There shall be no more any vain visions, etc. When the
Lord made good his word, brought Nebuchadnezzar to the walls of Jerusalem, gave
it up into his hands, then were all the lying Prophets confuted, and confounded
with shame; events discover vi^^ons, and distinguish Prophets, Jer. 28.9. The
Prophet which prophecyeth of peace, when the word of the Prophet shall come to
pass, then shall the Prophet be known, that the Lord has truly sent him. If
it proved true what was Prophesied, then was it a vision of God, if not, a
vision of vanity, and this was the way for them to try the Prophets by. Deuteronomy.
18.21.22. The question is there, how shall we know whether a Prophet speak of
himself or from God? the Answer is, Look to the event, if the thing he speaks
come not to pass, its not of God, its a lie: shame and confusion to the
Prophet; when Ahab was wounded and fell at Ramoth Gilead, then the false
Prophets were confuted, and Zedekiah confounded, running into an inner Chamber
to hide himself. 2 K. 22.25. Hence the Lord is said to frustrate the tokens of
liars, to make Diviners mad, to turn wise men backward, and to make their
knowledge foolish, Isa. 44, 25.

For I am the Lord I will speak, and the word that I shall speak, shall come
to pass, etc.
In this and the last verse, the Lord promises to make good his word, and that
without delay, is should not be prolonged as they imagined, but quickly take
effect, and accomplish those ends it was intended for: I will confound the
false Prophets and justify the true; they speak and it never comes to pass, I
will speak by my Prophets, and it shall come.

In the words of this Verse you have,

1. A reason which first looks back to what was said in the 24 Verse. Vain
vision and flattering divination shall cease, why? I am the Lord: and power is
in my hand, to discover vain and flattering Prophets, to confound them and
their visions. 2. Forward to what God should say, I will speak it shall come
to pass, it shall not be prolonged, and why? I am the Lord Jehovah, and will
give being to my word.

2. A general promise, of speaking what he pleases, and making it good. I
will speak and it shall come to pass; There shall not be any delay.

3. A special application of it to the house of Israel, and their time, In the
days O ye rebellious house, will I say and perform.

Quest. Whither do the sins of people cause judgments threatened, to come
sooner then the time appointed, because its said here it shall be no more
prolonged; as if he should say, I thought yet to have prolonged, deferred my
judgments, but they shall come speedily.

Answ. As men's repentance may prevent judgments threatened, so their sins may
hasten them, Jer. 48.16. The Calamity of Moab is near to come, and his
affliction hastes fast. Moabs sins hastened Moabs affl^ctions. When men sin
with a high hand after judgments given out, those sins add wings to judgment.
M^l. 3.5. I will be a swift witness, says God, against Sorcerers, Adulterers,
false Swearers, those oppress the hireling, Widow, Fatherless, and turn
aside the stranger form his right. He will come flying to judgment against
them, 2 Pet. 2.1. S nners are said, to bring upon themselves swift destruction,
destruction makes have to them; when men shall scoff at divine threats and
jest at judgments, this provokes God to hasten them. Isa. 5.19. Let him make
speed, and hasten his work that we may see it: They were so far from
fearing, and believing the threats of God, that they made a mock at them: Hence
says the Lord, Jer. 1.12. I will hasten my word to perform it, I will take
the first opportunity to make it good. God will shorten the day of affliction
for the Elects sake, and hasten the days of judgment for the wickeds sake.

The thoughts and hopes of wicked men about the threatenings of judgment are
foolish and vain, Obser. 1.
they think and hope, that either they will not come at all, or if they do,
it will be a long time after; It shall be no more prolonged, you conceit,
because the time is long, that there is no such thing, or that it will not be
in your days; but you are deceived, such threats are groundless, and hopes
are vain, Jer. 5.12. They have belyed the Lord, it is not he (that speaks by
these Prophets) neither shall evil come upon us, neither shall we see sword
nor famine, and the Prophets shall become wind, and the word is not in them:
they are deceived, not we, they look for a black and sad day, which will not
come, and we look for good days, good things; therefore the Prophet
impersonating them, says, Chap. 8.15. We looked for peace, but no good came,
and for a time of health, and behold trouble; they would not believe that ever
an Adversary should have entered within the gates of Jerusalem, Lamin. 4.12.

2. That what ever word the Lord speaks, he will make it good, I will speak
and it shall come to pass; what ever God has spoken by the Prophets, or
Apostles; yea what ever is spoken warrantably from the Word, by any faithful
Minister of his, he will accomplish the same: he does not possess hit Servants
with vain Visions, or flattering Divinations; what ever he utters by them, is
Divine and infallible; he is Jehovah, a God of power and faithfulness,
sufficient every way to fulfill his promises, and perform his threatenings.
Some take these words, I am the Lord, to be an Asseveration, or an Oath, and
the fense to lie thus, As sure as I am God, Jehovah, that have Being of my
self, and give being to all others, so sure will I give Being to my promises
and threatenings, so that not only Heaven and Earth must pass away, before any
tittle of any truth of the Lords shall fall to the ground, but even God
himself must cease to be, before his Word shall be without effect, Isa. 44.24.
I am the Lord that makes all things: That I am, does frustrate and confound
Liars, Diviners, Wizards, and all Impostors, as its Verse. 25. that confirms
the word of his Servant, and performs the Counsel of his Messengers, Verse.
26. What word soever Isaiah gave out, the Lord confirmed and performed it: He
gave out the word touching Cyrus, that he should be a Shepherd to Gods people,
that he should further the Jews return out of Babylon, and building of the
Temple; and this was above two hundred years before his birth, as Deodate
says in his Notes upon the place, and about two hundred, as our late
Annotations have it: But if we reckon by Scripture account, you will find it
not so much; for this Prophecy of Cyrus was delivered by Isaiah, after
Hezekiahs sickness, Chap. 38. in which fifteen years were added to his
days, and from thence it was but an hundred twenty five years and fix months
to Zedekiahs carrying into Captivity, which was eleven years after the
Captivity began, for Chronologers do reckon the beginning of the Captivity
from the time of Jehoiachins carrying away, and the Scripture countenances it,
Ezekiel. 1.2. So then, reckon the Captivity from Jehoiachin, seventy years, and
there are but an hundred and fourteen before, and these make one hundred eighty
four, and this person prophesied of so long before, did God in due time give to
the World, and stir up to be helpefull to his people, Ezra 1.1, 2, 3. and so
made good to both what Isaiah said here, and Jer. 29.10. Gods word must take
place, who ever gains or looses by it, Isa. 55.12. The word that goes out of
my mouth, it shall not return unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which
I please, and it shall prosper in the thing whereunto I sent it. Zech. 1.6. My
words and my Statutes which I commanded my servants the Prophets, did they not
take hold of your Fathers? God appointed them to do so, and they did
accordingly; Gods words overtooke them, thinking to escape. Daniel bears
witness to this truth. Chap. 9.12. He has confirmed his words which he spoke
against us.

5. The corrupt heads and hearts of men are subtle and prone to ^l^d^ and put
off those truths are presented unto them by the Servants of God; the Lord sent
his Prophets unto them early and late; they being faithful, laid open the
judgments of God, ^^ld them of their danger, invited them to repentance,
mourned for the slight entertainment they found, etc. And what then? they
either mocked at them, as it is in 2 Chronicles. 36.16. or charged them with
falsehoods and lies, Jer. 5.12, 13. or resolved not to hearken to them, Jer.
44.26. or put it off, as not concerning them at all, or if it did, not for a
long time; for those were after them, not the present Generation, Ver. 27. of
this Chapter, The Vision is for many days, and he Prophesies of the times
are afar of: Thus were they witty and wicked against themselves, to turn
aside the stroke of Gods word, which having been entertained, might have done
their souls good; this was the practice in Christ's, and the Apostles times,
one thing or other still was pretended to wave the Doctrine of Christ, as the
meannesse of his person, Matthew. 13.55, 56. John 7.27: his breaking of the
Sabbath, John 5.16.9.10.16. this man is not of God, etc. They said he
blasphemed, Matthew. 9.3. that he deceived the people, John 7.12. made himself a
King and spoke against Caesar, John 19.12. they pretended his Doctrine to be
new, Acts 17.19. to be hard and severe, John 6 60. to be against Moses, Acts
6.11. that it was Heretical, Acts 24.14. that he spoke too particularly to
them, Luke 11.45. that the Rul^rs and great ones, received it not, John 7.48.
Have any of the Rulers, etc. That his Doctrine, and the followers of it, made
great stirs where ever it came, caused Sects and Schisms, Acts 19.23.28.22.

CHAP. XIII.
VERSE. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
And the word of the Lord came unto me saying,

Son of man, prophecy against the Prophets of Israel, that prophecy, and say
thou unto them that prophecy out of their own hearts, hear ye the word of
the Lord.

Thus says the Lord God, woe unto the foolish Prophets, that follow their own
spirit, and have seen nothing.

O Israel, thy Prophets are like the foxes in the deserts.

Ye have not gone up into the gaps, neither made up the hedge for the house of
Israel, to stand in the battle in the day of the LORD.

They have seen vanity, and lying divination, saying, the Lord says, and the
Lord has not sent them: and they have made others to hope, that they would
confirm the word.

Have ye not seen a vain vision, and have ye not spoken a lying divination:
whereas ye say, The LORD says it, albeit I have not spoken?


THE former Chapter concerned the King, and the people; this concerns only
the false Prophets, and Prophetesses, who taking upon them that Office, were
led by their own spirits, and deceived the people with vain visions, and
lying divinations, to accomplish their own ends; against these does the Lord
set our Prophet Ezekiel on work to prophecy severely.

In the Chapter you have two general parts.

1. A Prophecy against false Prophets, in the first 16. Verses. 2. A Prophecy
against Women Prophets from the 17. Verse. to the end.
In the first part you have the judgments and sins of the false prophets
declared and laid down.

1. The judgments threatened against them, which are in the 2. 3. 8. 9. 11. 13.
14. 15. 16.

2. The sins causing those judgments threatened, and they are expressed in the,
2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 16. Gods threatenings and their sins, are
promiscuously delivered by our Prophet, and we shall handle them as they lie.

The 1. verse. 2. and 17. Do show the Author of this Prophecy; and that was
the Lord, who bade Ezekiel Prophecy, and set his face against them. Our
Prophet had Divine warrant for what he said, and wisely prefixes it, when he
was to deal with false Prophets, who had neither word nor warrant from God for
what they said or did; true Prophets have their Commission and Instruction from
God.

In the 2. Verse you have, 1. The appellation, Son of man. 2. A a command, and
that is two fold. 1. Is to Ezekiel, Prophecy. 2. Is to the false Prophets,
Here ye the word, etc.
3. The kind of Prophecy, and that is comminatory, Prophecy against the
Prophets of Israel. 4. The sin that moves God to set the Prophet against them,
and that is, They Prophecy out of their own heart.


Against the Prophets of Israel.
Whether the Prophet in Babylon or in Zion you may demand, for there were
false Prophets in Babylon, who were the Prophets of Israel, because they
Prophesied to the captive Jews. Jer. 29.8.9. And there were false Prophets at
Jerusalem. Jer. 27.14. And they were the Prophets of Israel also. We may
understand this Prophecy of the false Prophets in both places.

That Prophecy out of their own hearts.
Hebrew, them that are Prophets out of their own hearts; Vulgar;
Prophetantibus de cord suo. Cast. Qui commenta sua vatici nantur. To Prophecy
out of theie ownr hearts, is,

1. To Prophecy upon their own m^ere motion, they are Prophets because
themselves will be Prophets, and they Prophecy because they will Prophecy:
they have no call to this Office, but their wills, they thrust themselves upon
it.

2. The things they Prophecy not their own, what their fancies, lusts,
affections, carnal reason, suggest unto them; those things they deliver, their
Prophesies came by the will of man. 2 Pet. 1.21. For the Prophecy in old time
came not by the will of man. The true Prophets did not prophecy out of their
own hearts, after their own wills, but they spoke as they were moov'd by the
holy spirit, what that brought in they gave out. Divine truths were presented
to them, and those they commended to the people: but false Prophets had nothing
of, or from the spirit: they had all out of their own hearts; yet pretended
they were inspired and had the spirit. 1. Kings. 22.24. Which way went the
spirit of the Lord from me unto thee. Zedekiah and all the rest of the false
Prophets thought they had the spirit of the Lord, but it was the spirit of
Satan a lying spirit they had, verse. 22. I will go forth and be a lying
spirit, in the mouth of all his Prophets.

Quest. If they speak out of their own hearts why are they called Prophets; they
are Prophets that speak from God and not themselves.

Answ. The word Prophet is taken largely, for any one that foretells things
true or false, and is common to good and bad, the Scripture speaks according to
the use of words. Titus 1.12. One of themselves even a Prophet of their own.
That was Epivunides a Poet; for poets were commonly called Prophets, and so the
Scripture gives the name to any foretelling things, Baals Prophets, 1 K. 18.19.
And the Prophets of the graves, in the 2 Pet. 2.1. There were false Prophets
among the people.

Thus says the Lord God, Woe unto the foolish Prophets, etc.
Here the Prophet proceeds in denouncing judgment, and describing those false
Prophets.

1. The judgment denounced is in this word Woe, French, Malediction sur les
fol Prophets.
a little word, but very comprehensive, all evils are contained in it, they
promise all happiness to the people, but woe to themselves, woe to their
bodies, woe to their souls, woe to their names, woe to them here, woe to them
hereafter; the dreadful judgments mentioned in the Revelations, are called
Woes, Chap. 9.12. One woe is past, and behold there come two more hereafter.

2. The description of the Prophets; they are foolish, and this foolishness of
theirs, is evidenced two ways.

1. They follow their own spirits. 2. They have seen nothing.
Foolish.
(...) from (...) which signifies Vilis, stultus, caducus, (...) Signifies one,
Qui caret cerebro and sapore, Kirker.
so Montanus renders the word Prophetis caducis, woe to the Prophets that fail
in their prophesies, and fall by them; the Vulgar is, Prophetia insipientibus.
Castal: insanis. These Prophets were subtle and crafty, abounding with carnal
and worldly prudence, but in the things of God they were blind and foolish:
they called light darkness, and darkness light; they were lifted up with their
pretended Visions and Divinations, they despised and insulted over the true
Prophets, they boasted themselves to be the men of Gods Counsel, and labored
to be had in admiration of all; they foresaw no danger, but spoke pleasing
things to the people, prophesying safety and good days, and this was their
foolishness: There was no Divine wisdom or truth in them.

That follow their own Spirit.
These words are answerable to those in the second Verse. That prophecy out of
their own heart: The Hebrew is, Qui ambulant post spiritum suum: Their own
spirits led them, not the spirit of God. In the first Chapter it is said, The
spirit was in the wheels, and they went whither the spirit led them, Verse. 20.
But these Prophets had not the spirit in them, neither went after it but after
their own spirit, what ever their own spirits dictated to them, that they
embraced, magnified, and gave out to the people.

Have seen nothing.
The true Prophets had visions of God, Divine Revelation, their understandings
were in an extraordinary manner irradiated by the spirit of God, and they saw,
that it understood the mind of God: Hence Prophets were called Seers, Amos
7.12. O thou Seer, flee away, 2 Kings 17.13. God testified against them, by all
the Seers, they foresaw judgments to come, and other things which God revealed
unto them, Numbers 12.6. If there be a Prophet amongst you, I will make my
self known unto him in a vision. But these false Prophets had seen nothing;
they had no vision, no discovery of Gods mind unto them any way.

Ezekiels days there were false Prophets, which deluded the people, which
opposed the true Prophets, with much insolency, which caused great stir
contentions, and divisions amongst the captives in Babylon, and people at
Jerusalem; see for both these the 28. and 29. Chapters of Jer. where Hanan
opposes Jeremiah and Jeremiah writes Letters into Babylon to quiet them there.
In Ahabs days you may find false Prophets and their number very great. 1 K.
18.19. The Prophets of Baal were 450. And the Prophets of the groves 400. They
exceeded the number of the true Prophets eight to one, for they were but 100.
Hid by Obadiah in caves. verse. 4. And these false prophets drew many of the
people from the worship of the true God: Others they staggered and made to halt
between two opinions, and so caused great division, opposition, and persecution
in Israel. There have always been and ever will be false teachers and Prophets
among the people of God. In the Gospel you read of false Christ's. Mark.
13.22. False Apostles. 2 Cor. 11.13. False Teachers, 2 Pet. 2.1. And of many
false Prophets that should arise, Mat. 24.11. The Churches in the Apostles
days were much troubled with those vented corrupt opinions and caused great
contentions: the Church of Galatia had those among them who preached another
Gospel, and justification by the law, and so troubled them, that the Apostles
wished them cut off, Chap. 5.12. There were Lying Apostles, in the Church of
Ephesus, the Doctrine of Balaam, and the Nicolaitans in the Church of Pergamus,
etc. Such men with their opinions, errors, and consequences of them God
suffers, to clear up truth, to make it more precious, to try the godly, to
discover hypocrites, to show his power and wisdom, that can work good out of
evil, and preserve his, in the midst of contentions.

2. See here who are true Prophets, and who are false, The word of the Lord
came to Ezekiel, it came not to them; the true Prophets saw visions, the false
saw nothing, they were moved by the spirit of God, these by their own spirits;
out of their own hearts came what they delivered, out of Heaven what the other
delivered; God spoke by the true Prophets, 1 Kin. 22.22.
Satan by the false; he is a lying spirit in the mouth of all the false
Prophets. Either Satan's or their own they speak, Jer. 23.16. They speak a
vision of their own heart, and not out of the mouth of the Lord, verse. 26.
They are Prophets of the deceit of their own hearts, 28. They tell dreams.
They feed the people with chafe, and not wheat, and make them to err and
forget the name of God; but the true Prophets ever spoke what they received
from the Lord: therefore Micaiah told some desiring him to speak somewhat of
his own, 1 Kin. 22.14.
that as the Lord lived he would speak nothing but what the Lord should say
unto him: Christ, John 7.16.18. My Doctrine is not mine, but his that s^nt me,
he that speaks of himself seeks his own glory, but he that seeks his
glory that sent him the same is true, etc.

3. That what comes from man, however esteemed or magnifyed by men, is
worthless in Gods account; they prophesied out of their own hearts, followed
their own spirits, which they set a price upon, but this the Lord blames,
condemner, he calls foolish, mentions their own hearts and spirits in
opposi^ion to the revelations and inspirations of his spirit, which only are
of weight and worth: therefore what ever Prophets or Ministers do bring of
their own, its Perversum figmentum. Its the Office of the spirit of truth to
give out truth, he leads into all truth, he takes of Christ's and shows unto
those are Christ's Prophets, Apostles, and Ministers, John 16.13.14. If men
Preach or Prophecy any thing is not from the spirit, but from themselves its
not acceptable unto God, neither should be entertained by us. Hence you shall
find, that what men have brought of their own is called lies, Jer. 27.10.
Dreams, Jer. 23.32. Untempered Mortar, Ezekiel. 22.28 A thing of naught. Jer.
14.14. Deceit. Chap. 23.26. Perverse things, Acts 20.30. Commandments of men,
Mark. 7.7. Wisdom of this World. 1 Cor. 2.6. (...), Fained speeches. 2 Pet.
2.3.
Another Jesus, another spirit, another Gospel. 2 Cor. 11.4. What is man's, is
opposite to God and Christ; therefore Paul says expressly 2 Cor. 4.5. We
preach not our selves but Christ Jesus the Lord; only what we have from him by
his spirit, that we preach unto you. Paul was a man of great parts, a great
Scholar, and yet durst not vent any thing of his own.

4. The folly and madness of false Prophets, who pretend they have all from
God, yet follow their own spirits. Those words Have seen nothing, import, that
they pretended they had seen something, that they told the people they had
visions from God; its frequent in Scripture to hear of their visions, Isa.
28.7. They err in vision, Jer. 14.14. They speak a false vision. 23.6. They
speak a vision of their own heart, Zach. 13.4. They shall be ashamed every
one of his vision. and verse. 7. of this Chapter, it was a vain vision and a
lying divination which they had, but the pretense was they had all from God;
the Lord says it, albeit he spoke not. Thus they mad^ him Author of all their
lying, va^ne, and false prophesies, which was extreme madness, and folly in
them. Herein was a dreadful hand of God upon them because they were malicious
against the true Prophets, and received not the truth with the love of it, God
left them to blindness, hardness, to believe lies, so that they thought that
to be from God, which was from their own spirits; or from Satan the spirit of
errors.

5. That wicked Prophets are in a dreadful condition, woe is their portion,
Woe to the foolish Prophets; Such meat and drink he sent by Jeremiah to
Hananiah, Chap. 28.16. to Shemaiah, Chap, 29 32.
they are men set out for judgment, under malediction, appointed to
condemnation and utter destruction. Jer. 23.15. God tells such Prophets that he
will feed them with wormwood, and make them drink the water of Gall. God will
deal bitterly with them. Jer. 14.15. By Sword and famine shall those Prophets
be consumed. Rev. 20.10. The Devil, the beast, and the false Prophets are in
the same lake of fire and brimstone, tormented continually and eternally: By
the Prophet some understand the Pope, some his Clergy. We may take in all false
Prophets and Teachers, who bring upon themselves swift destruction, 2 Pet. 2.1.
They should be thrust through by their own friends when they prophesied, Zech.
13.3.

Oh Israel, thy Prophets are like the Foxes in the Deserts.
The words hold forth, 1. A patheticall exclamation, Oh Israel. 2. A
description of these Prophets, They are like Foxes, and that we must make out
unto you.


The Land of Israel abounded with Foxes, Judges 15.4. Sampson caught three
hundred at once, Nehem. 4.3. The enemies told the Jews that if a Fox went up
the Wall they built, he would break it down, Cant. 2.15. take the Foxes,
which shows their Land had store of them. Now the Prophets of Ezekiels days,
are likened to Foxes.

1. A Fox is a sublill, crafty creature; the Serpent and the Fox exceed
therein: The Foxes craft is known in deceiving and catching Fish, Poultry,
Lambs, and Foul; Vulpes multa, echinus unum, novit prover:
when he is hungry he will lie as dead, and so the fowls coming to prey upon
him as a dead Carcass, he snaps them, and preys upon them; for Hares he
counterfeits a sporting with them, till at last, Plerumque septem aditus
praparare solet ut possit fallere venetorem. Francius.
he cease upon them, he has many Dens to fly unto, and some of them have
many entrances, that he may more easily deceive the Hunters, Luke 9.58. The
Foxes have holes: False Prophets are subtle to deceive the people, they say
they are sent of the Lord, have seen Visions, and make use of his Name, Jer.
14.14. Zech. 13.3. Sometimes they did wear rough garments to deceive, Zech.
13.4. The true Prophets had such garments, Isa. 20.2. Sackcloath and hairy
Vestments, and the false Prophets would imitate them, that they might without
jealousy the better deceive the people: Sometimes they came in sheep
clothing, Mat. 7.15. and spoke fair, smooth, pleasing words, they are full of
insinuvations, windings, turnings, Rhetoric, language, to gain upon people;
they are deep and pollitick to carry on designs to promote their own ends,
they can conform to men, and transform themselves into variety of shapes, 2
Cor. 11.13. False Apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves into
the Apostles of Christ, and by this means, they had advantage to do what they
aimed at. How Foxish was the old Prophet when he set upon the young Prophet,
Boniface the eighth. Intravit ut vulpes regnavit ut Leo, mortuus ut Canis.
1 Kings 13.18. saying, I am a Prophet also as thou art, and an Angel spoke
unto me by the Word of the Lord, saying, Bring him back with thee unto thine
house, that he may eat bread, and drink water, but he lied unto him, and so
prevailed. False Prophets and Teachers, have cunning carriage, cunning
arguments and speech, to beguile others with, 2 Pet. 1.16. We have not followed
cunningly devised fables: there were such as did. Arrius was one of these
Foxes, who counterfeited that he was of the same mind with the Orthodox, and
that he might be received into Communion of the Church again, he subscribed
the Nicene Creed, and decrees, sicut subscripsi, ita quoque credo: I believe as
I have subscribed. Now he had in his bosom his own wicked confession, which
he had writ at home, and subscribed with his own name. The Popish Priests and
Jesuits, what Foxes have they been in Churches and States to advance the
Catholic cause: In the Eastern parts they show once a year their Converts,
in white, with Palms in their hands, which is a great policy to draw others
to their way. Coniz^n has laid down subtle ways to cheat a State of its
Religion. The Prelates had consulted with the Fox when they made the etc. Oath,
to support their tottering Kingdom: It were to be wished that there were less
of the Fox now among the Prophets, and more of the Lamb.

2. The Fox is cruel and malicious, Animalium hist sacra. per Francium.
Omnis ipsius calliditas tendit ad perniciem reliquorum animalium, when he get^
amongst the poultry; the learned observe, Non comedit de gallinis nisi prius
omnes jugulaverit, false teachers and Prophets are Foxes in their cruelty and
malitiousnesse, Zedekiah smites Micaiah on the cheek, 1 K. 22.24. He dealt
injuriously and rigidly with him; Jer. 26.8.
Shemaiah he stirred up authority against Jeremiah the true Prophet whom he
would have put in the stocks, and Prison, Mic. 3.5. They bite with their teeth,
and cry peace. Ezekiel. 34.4. With force and with cruelty have ye ruled them, 21
they thrust with side and shoulder, and with their horns.
Jer. 29.24.26. And this would not suffice, they proceed to blood, Ezekiel. 22.25.
There is a conspiracy of her Prophets in the midst thereof, not only like
Foxes but even like Lions ravening the prey. They have devoured souls, the
Prophets laid their heads together to suck the blood of innocents: Lam. 4.13.
It was the Prophets and the Priests which shed the blood of the just in the
midst of Jerusalem; they were not to meddle in matters of blood but they
incensed authority to do it, they preached against them, told those had the
power in their hand, that they should do God good service in sacrificing such
persons. So great has been the malice of wicked Prophets, and Priests ever
against the Saints, that they have never rested till they have gotten their
blood shed. The Pope and his Priests filled Christendom with blood. It was the
Prelates, and priests in Queen Mary's days that brought so many to the fire,
and caused that Queen to imbrue her hands in innocent blood.

3. The Fox is greedy of prey, he is Animal gulosum; night and day Praedis
inhiat nec potest saturari, So false Prophets they are greedy enough. Mic. 3.5.
he that puts not into their mouth they even prepare war against him, if they
were not fed with the finest and fattest there was no peace no safety, Verse
11. The Priests teach for hire, and the Prophets Prophecy for money. It was
not the good of souls that they sought, they made Merchandise of them, but
gain was in their eyes, Ezekiel. 22.25. They have taken the treasure and precious
things, those they would be sure to lay hands on. Isa. 56.11. They are greedy
dogs, which can never have enough, and they are Shepherds that cannot
understand, they all look to their own way, every one for his gain, from his
quarter, the words for Greedy in the H^brew, are (...) Strong of soul,
appetite, stomach, they presently concoct, digest, whatever they take in:
Souls, Ezekiel 22 25. Widows houses, Matthew. 23.14. Its known what great revenues
the Popish Priests, and Prophets have had in the Kingdoms, under the Popish
jurisdiction: in King John's days, his Revenues were sixty thousand Marks, and
theirs seventy thousand.

Balaam was a false Prophet, and he loved the wages of unrighteousness, he
would have cursed the people of God for reward, if God himself had not
withheld, Numb. 22.

A Cardinal coming to Rome, and seeing nothing but offering of moneys at the
Election of a Pope, said, Ad hunc modum fiunt Pontifices Romani.

4. Foxes are timorous creatures, and when danger comes, they run to their
holes, When storms come, they run to covert.
and shift for themselves; so are false Prophets and Teachers, 1 Kings 22.25.
when trouble came, Zedekiah fled into his holes, he went from Chamber to
Chamber, to hide himself: John 10.12. He that is an hireling, and not the
Shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, sees the Wolf coming, leaves the
sheep and flees: By Wolf you may understand persecution, danger, when these
approach and look sternely upon the man, he flees, nequitia semper est
timida.

5. The Fox runs up and down from place to place, doing mischief night and
day, Cantic. 2.15. Take us the Foxes, the lrttle Foxes that spoil the Vines.
They ran from Vineyard to Vineyard, they spoiled the Grapes and Vines
themselves; so false Prophets and Teachers are like them in this, they went up
and down in Israel, they were at Samaria, at Jerusalem, Jer. 23.13, 14. in
Babylon, Jer. 29.25 In Paul's days there were such who went up and down from
house to house and subverted whole houses, teaching things which they ought
not, for filthy lucres sake, Tit. 1.11. and Christ tells us of such who
compass Sea and Land to make one Proselite; are not Jesuits and Priests sent
into most parts of the World to make Proselites, and to spoil the tender Vines
and Grapes where they are.

6. The Fox keeps his nature, what ever you do to him, or do with him; you
may chain him up, but you cannot change him, its questioned whether he can be
tamed, if he get loose, he is the same again that ever he was, so false
Prophets.

In the Deserts.
Bacharaboth, in the ruptures and breaches of the Hedges, through which the
Foxes and other beasts entered into the Vineyards, some think there is nothing
peculiar in these words, its ordinary to say, the beasts of the field, the
birds of Heaven, and so the Foxes of the Desert; but Desert notes places
neglected, without any fence, in those places the Foxes abounded, were most
hungry and ravening.

Its a sad judgment to a people, Obser. 1.
when the Prophets degenerate, and become Foxes: Foxes you know are a cumber, a
plague to the Country where they live, and so are false Prophets where ever
they come, they caused the people to err, and destroyed the way of their
paths, Isa. 9.12. They perverted and gainsayed what the true Prophets gave in:
they flattered the people, and concealed their sins and judgments due to them,
Lamen. 2.14. Thy Prophets have seen vain and foolish things for thee, and
they have not discovered thine iniquities, to turn away thy Captivity; but
have seen for thee false burdens, and causes of banishment, Jer. 50.6. Their
Shephea^ds have caused them to go astray: and sobrough: destruction upon them,
Isa. 9.16. The Leaders of this people; that is, Prophets and Priests cause them
to err; and what then? They that are led of them are destroyed, Jer. 12.10.
Many Pastors have destroyed my Vineyard, they have trodden my portion under
foot. Foxes destroy Lambs, poultry, Vines, but those destroy souls. Bernard
sets down many qualities of false Prophets and Teachers; In vita Malachiae.
they love to hear rule, Fastum and quaestum aestimant pietatem, they think
them selves happy, if they may enlarge their borders, they build stately
Houses, love full Tables, exact of the poor, look strangely, or bigg upon the
inferior sort, and honor great ones, they either teach not, or teach for
their bellies; such Prophets are a burden, if not destruction to those they are
among: and when the prophets are Foxes, the Princes are Lions, and Judges
Wolves, Zeph. 3.3, 4.

2. Its matter of grief and complaint to Heaven it self; when the Prophets
are subtle, coveteous, cruel. O Israel! thy Prophets are like unto Foxes. God
laid it to heart to see such Prophets amongst them, as sought themselves; and
preyed upon the people. Isa. 3.12. O my people they which lead thee, or call
thee blessed, cause thee to err and destroy the Way of thy paths. Their
leaders, the Priests, Prophets, Princes, did that which affected Heaven, and
provoked the Lord to cry out. O my people.

Ye have not gone up into the Gapps, etc.
Here the Lord proceeds in accusing these Prophets; and this accusation
respects.

1. Their duty. 2. The end of their duty.
1. They are accused, first, not to do their duty, and that is set down in
two metaphorical expressions.

1. They went not up into the Gapps. 2. They made not up the hedge.
2. Not to have minded the end of their duty, which was, that the people might
stand in battle in the day of the Lord.

Into the Gapps.
(...) In fracturas. intercisiones. Aun bresches, in French. Cast. in ruinas.
Its judged by diverse of the Learned, that this metaphor is taken from a
Seidge, where the Seidgers labor to make breaches in the Fortifications and
walls of the place or City beseidged, and its their duty within who have the
command, and power, to make up those breaches, and stand for the defense of the
people and place where they are; but the Prophets did not this, when judgment
came in upon the people, they stood not in the breaches to divert them; had he
spoken before of military men I should have rested in this sense of the word,
but having spoken of false Prophets, and here by an Apostrophe turning to them,
we may consider a metaphorical war; God was out with them against them.
Ezekiel. 5.8. He was the Enemy bringing judgments upon them; the people, the
City, Religion and their Laws the walls, their sins, the gapps, which set in
wrath upon them.

These Prophets did not oppose the sins of the people, convince them of their
idolatry, oppression, security, hypocrisy, profaneness, etc. But either
sinned with them, or winkt at their sins; and so went not up into the Gapp to
keep out the severe judgments of God from crouding in upon them, they should
have called the people to repentance, declared the judgments of God to have been
at hand, interceded mightily with the Lord for them; and if possible have
prevented judgment, but these things they did not: Ezekiel. 34.4. The diseased
have ye not strengthened, neither have you healed that which was sick, neither
have you bound up that which was broken, nor brought again that which was
driven away, nor sought up that which was lost: When the people made a Calfe
and worshipped it, there was a great gap made in the Law, in the true worship
of God, and now wrath was coming out, and God would have destroyed them, had
not Moses stood in the breach, to turn away his wrath, Psalm. 106.23. Gaps
therefore are the breaches which sins make.

Nor made up the hedges.
Hebrew is, Non sepivistis sepem, ye have not hedged a hedge; Vulgar, Non
apposuistis murum, ye have not set up a wall against all incursions: This is a
metaphor taken from Gardens, Orchards, Vineyards, and Enclosures, which having
hedges made about them, are secure from Swine and beasts breaking into them;
these Prophets in stead of making hedges for their defense, they made gaps for
their enemy. The hedge about a Church and State, is Divine protection, sound
Doctrine, pure worship, holiness of life, and execution of Justice; and when
there is a violation of either of these, the hedge is broken down, and the way
to make up the hedge again, is by fasting, prayer, and hearty repentance;
these Prophets minded neither sound Doctrine, pure worship, holiness of life,
nor called upon authority for execution of Justice; there was a general
violation of all things in the Church and State, and they laid it not to heart,
they neither fasted, prayed, nor repented, but increased the violations, trod
down the hedge more, and made the gaps wider. Ezekiel. 22.30. I sought for a man
among them that should mak^ up the hedge and stand in the gappe before me for
the Land, that I should not destroy it, but I found none.

To stand in the Battle in the day of the Lord.
Their care should have been for the peoples good, that when the day of the
Lords fury and judgments came he should war against his people, they might
have been able to stand. By Battle, understand not only the Seidge they
endured by the Babylonians, but all ^fflictions and miseries which befell them,
and had the Prophets been faithful to them, the day of the Lords wrath would
have been their day of repentance, and so they might have stood and not fallen.

Obser. 1.
That peoples sins make way for judgments to come in upon them, they break
down the wall and the hedge, they make gaps and breaches, they unfortifie a
City, unhedge the Vineyard, and unarme a State. Exodus 32.25. When the people
had sinned, Moses saw that they were naked, a City now without walls, an Army
without Arms, they lay open to the winds and storms of Divine wrath. 2 Chronicles.
28.19. Ahaz made Judah naked, and how he transgressed sore against the Lord, by
his sinful courses, he brake down the hedges and walls of protection, and so
made them a naked people. Gods people have their hedges and fences about them,
Job 1.10. Have thou not made an hedge about him and his house, Isa. 5.2. His
Vineyard was fenced and walled, Verse. 5. and if they were careful to fly sin,
their hedges would be without gaps, their walls without holes, but when they
sin, they make gaps and holes, and the greater their sins, the greater
breaches still are made in them: When David fined in numbering the people, 2 Samuel 24.
what a wide gap made he for the pestilence to come in and destroy seventy
thousand. When Vzzah made a breach in Gods Law by his sin, he made a gap for
Judgment to come in upon himself: Sin is a breach, Isa. 30.13. and ever makes
way for judgments to enter, Psalm. 89.31, 32. If they break my Statutes, and
keep not my Commandments, then will I visit their transgression with a rod,
and their iniquity with stripes: When they break Gods Laws, he will break them
with his rods, Mich. 7.13. The Land shall be desolate, because of them that
dwell therein, for the fruit of their doings: by their sinful actions, they
break the bounds, and by my just judgments I will make them desolate, Hos.
12.1. Ephraim daily increases lies and desolation: How desolation? By his
lies, his lying pretenses, and practices, he makes breaches for desolation to
come in: Isa. 42.24. Who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the Robbers?
Did not the Lord, he against whom we have sinned? For they would not walk in
his ways, neither were they obedient to his Laws.

2. Its the duty of the Prophets and servants of the Lord when gapps and
breaches are made, to go up into them, and make them up; they are to stand
between the people and Gods judgments; when the people had find greatly, and
made way for soar judgments to come in upon them, Exodus 32. Moses ascends into
the gapp, and makes up the breach, he sets upon God by prayer and uses strong
arguments to d^vert his wrath, he besought the Lord his God and said, Lord, Why
does thy wrath wax hot against thy people, which thou have brought forth out
of the Land of Egypt, with great power and with a mighty hand, wherefore
should the Egyptians speak and say, for mischeife did he bring them out, to
slay them in the Mountains; and to consume them from the face of the Earth?
Turn from thy fierce wrath, and repent of this evil against thy people.
Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, thy servants to whom thou swearest by
thine own self, and said unto them, I will multiply your seed as the
stars of Heaven and all this land that I have spoken of, will I give unto your
seed, and they shall inherit it for ever. And the Lord repented of the evil
which he thought to do unto his people. Here was a true Prophet that stood in
the breach and turned away wrath: It was the practice of the good Priests and
Prophets to do so. Numb. 16. When the people murmured, made a breach for the
plague to come in upon them, Aaron took his Censer, fire from the Altar, put
in Incense, hasted into the Congregation and made an atonement for the people,
and stood between the dead and the living, and stayed the plague. see, Deuteronomy.
9.24.25.26. When Ezekiel saw the Slaughter-men sent out to slay young and old,
without pity, he steps into the gapp and says, Ah Lord God will thou destroy
all the residue of Israel, Ezekiel. 9.8.
in thy pouring out thy fury upon Jerusalem. Jeremiah was so frequent in the
gap, deprecating judgments, interceding for mercy, that the Lord forbids him
to pray for that people, Chap. 14, 11. and Chap. 7.16. Pray not thou for this
people, neither lift up cry nor prayer for them, neither make intercession to
me. He usd to pray, to cry, to intercede, 1 Samuel 7.9, 10.
and keep off wrath from them. Samuel, when Israel had find and the
Philistines were coming upon them; he gets up into the gap, offers Sacrifice,
and cries to the Lord, and he heard him, discomfits the Philistines, and
delivers the Israelites. This is that God looks for, when people have find,
that some man of God or other should thrust into the breach, and prevent wrath.
Ezekiel. 22.29.30. The people of the Land have used oppression, exercised Robbery,
vexed the poor and needy, yea they have oppressed the stranger wrongfully. Here
was the hedge broken down, and breadth enough for judgments to come in upon
them, and what then? I sought for a man among them that should make up the
hedge and stand in the gapp before me, for the Land, that I should not destroy
it, but I found none. These false Prophets trod down the hedge more and more,
made the gapps wider, increased and hastened the judgments of God upon them.

3. The Lord has days of Battle with his people appointed, what times he
comes forth to punish them with his judgments, those are his days of
Battle. God has decreed times to deal with the sons of men for their
iniquities, and if they persist in sinning, the Lord will take his days of
warring against them. You read in, 2 Samuel 11.1. That Kings had a time to go
forth to battle, it was at the return of the year, when it was spring or
summer, then they went out to war against their Enemies not in the winter; but
all times are alike to God, to go out to war with his enemies, he can bring
judgments upon sinners in winter, spring, summer; yea he has his peculiar
times and days appointed to meet with wicked ones; this day of the Lord in
Scripture is called a day of darkness. Joel 2.2. A day of evil. Jer. 17.17.
A day of Calamity. Je^. 46.21. A day of Indignation. Ezekiel, 22.24. A day of
Visitation. Isa. 10.3. A day of fierce anger. Lament. 1, 12. A day of ruin.
Ezekiel. 27.27. A day of great slaughter. Isa. 30.25. A day of grief, and
desparate sorrow. Isa. 17.11. A day of vengeance. Isa. 61.2. A day of Battle.
Zech. 14.2. What time soever God enters into a controversy with the sons of
men, walks contrary to them, avenges the quarrel of his Covenant, executes any
judgments upon them; it is the day of the Lord, hence the day of judgment is
called the day of Christ. Phil. 1.10. 2 These. 2.2. Because then he shall
execute wrath upon sinners.

4. Those the Lord finds in their sins in the day of Battle, they cannot stand
before him, they fall by the strength of his judgments. When Vzzah sinned, God
made a breach upon him in the day of Battle, and smote him dead. 2 Samuel 6.6.7.
When he smote Egypt, he made it desolate; the fulness of it could not stand
before him. Ezekiel. 32.15. Israel is no more to God, then a reed shaken in the
waters. 1 K. 14.15. one stroke of his will cut it down. Ephraim is no more
then a tree to the axe. If God smite, the root dries up, and no more fruit
grows thereon. Hosa 9.16. If God smite habitations, be they never so costly,
stately, great, of what materials soever, they quickly fall, Amos 3.15. When
God reckons with Kings and Qu^enes, they cannot stand in judgment; Jehoram God
smites with sickness till his bowels fall out, 2 Chronicles. 21.18, 19. Vzziah
sins, and is smitten with leprosy; Jezebel and Athaliah cut off by just
judgment of his, 2 Kings 9. and 11. Chap. he cuts off the spirits of Princes,
and is terrible to the Kings of the Earth, Psalm. 76.12. Great Armies cannot
stand in the day of the Lords anger, 2 Chronicles. 13. Jeroboam had an Army of eight
hundred thousand, and Verse. 15. God smote him and all Israel, so that there
fell down slain of Israel five hundred thousand chosen men, Verse. 17. David
asks the question, Psalm. 147.17. Who can stand before his cold? If God can
intend the cold, so that men cannot endure it, he can intend the heat also, so
that there is no abiding of it; his wrath is hot, fierce, a consuming fire; Ez
9.15.
this made Ezra cry out, Behold we are before thee in our trespasses, but we
cannot stand before thee, because of this, Chi, is rendered here, for; but under
correction, it may be rendered, but, as in Genesis 45.8. It was not you sent me
hither, Chi haelohim, but God: When the Lord had smote fifty thousand and
seventy men of Bethshemesh, for their irreverent meddling with the Arc, what
said the rest? Who is able to stand before this holy Lord God? No man in his
sin can do it, Nahum. 1.5, 6. The Mountains quake at him, the Hills melt,
the earth is burnt at his presence, yea the World and all that dwell therein:
Who can stand before his indignation? and who can abide in the fierceness of
his anger? His fury is powered out like fire, and the rocks are thrown down by
him. Let sinners be never so great, stout, when God comes in battle, he will
overcome, and therefore says Ezekiel. 22.14. Can thine heart endure, or can thine
hands be strong in the days that I shall deal with thee? Jerusalem thought
so, but she found it otherwise.

5. The Prophets failing in their duty, is one great cause of the peoples
falling in the day of the Lords Battles: they went not up into the gaps, they
made not up the hedge for the house of Israel, that they might stand, etc.
therefore they fell; the Prophets here are employed to be builders, and
husbandmen; builders to make a wall about the people, who are the City of God,
husbandmen to make hedges and fences about them, being the Garden, Orchard, and
Vineyard of God: Now when they neglect to do these, they expose them to spoil
and ruin, and provoke God to destroy all. Samuel knew this, and therefore, 1 Samuel 12.23. God forbid that I should sin against the Lord in ceasing to pray
for you: Had he fayl'd in his duty, sin would have increased wrath, broken out,
and all have been overthrown; you have an observable place in Jer. 23.22. Had
the Prophets stood in my counsel, and had caused my people to hear my words,
then they should have turned them from their evil way and from the evil of
their doings: which had it been done, they had prevented the Battle, and the
peoples falling therein.

They have seen vanity and lying divinations saying, etc.
Here is a further manifestation of the Iniquity of these Prophets.

1. You have the nature of their visions discovered, they were vanity and lies.
2. Their lying pretense for what they saw, and said; the Lord says, and the
Lord has not sent them. 3. The fruit and effect of their Prophecy, they made
the pople to hope that they would confirm what they said; they gave it out
that God had revealed it unto them, that they should not go into captivity,
that those in Babylon should return to Jerusalem within few years, and by
this means they begat vain hopes in the hearts of the people with their vain
visions.
What these Prophets had was out of their own hearts, and from their own
spirits; not from God, for nothing from him is vain or lying, but because it
was from themselves it was vanity and lying divination.

Lying Divinations.
Hebrew, divinations of a lie, that had no truth in them.

The Lord has not sent them.
True Prophets had two things.

1. The Gift of Prophecy. 2. A call to exercise that gift, both these were
wanting in these Prophets, and therefore the Lord sent them not.
That they would confirm the word.
Hebrew is, Ad excitandum, or firmandum verbum. They opposed the true Prophets,
told the people God was merciful, and would never bring such a long judgment
upon them; that ere long they should see who spoke truth, and so the people
were brought to a hope and persuasion that their word should be accomplished
and this they waited for. The Septuagint reads it (...), they began to stir up
revive the word, many times the peoples hearts were fainting, misgiving them
that it might prove otherwise then they said, hereupon they stirred up their
words, bid them not doubt, but be confident they had all from God, and were
sent of him.

Obser. 1.
The impudency and arrogance of false Prophets and Teachers; they said they had
visions and had none, Verse. 3. They saw nothing. They pretended they had
visions, and divinations from God real and true, and they saw nothing, but
vanity and lying divination, they said the Lord says. And he said not so, that
the Lord sent them, and he sent them not, but ran of themselves: they engaged
the name and faith of God in their lying Prophesies, and would have had them to
be thought as good Scripture, as what any of the true Prophets delivered, they
condemned the true Prophets for liars, and justified themselves; false teachers
are very arrogant, and self justifying, Zedekiah said to Micaiah, which way
went the spirit from me to thee; have not I the spirit, do not I understand
the mind of God as well as thee, or any of thy rank? 1 K. 22.24. Are not
Jesuits and many other of this streine? they pretend Miracles, Scriptures,
Counsels, Fathers, for their traditions, new Articles, Faith, seven
Sacraments, etc. When there is hardly any such thing; and do not many among us
rest Scripture, and force it into other senses, to weaken truth, maintain
error, and to obtrude their own terms upon others.

2. People are easily misled, seduced by false Prophets, when they come with
pretense of divine Revelations, and mission, and say the Lord says, they
lissen, they hope, especially when they shall bring things suitable to their
nature, and desires, as here, they persuaded them that Jeremiah had prophesied
falsely, in telling them they should be carried into Babylon, be 70. years
there. No no, we have truer visions then he, the Lord will never forsake you
who are his people, he will never leave Jerusalem, your Brethren shall return
to you, you shall never go to them; and this the people hoped would be. Prove.
14.15. The simple believes every word. Aquill. has it, (...), Delinitus,
palpatus, a man smoothed up, flattered, believes every thing, Jer. 5.31, The
Prophets prophecy falsely, and the Priests bare rule by their means, and my
people love to have it so: they affect the lies and flatteries of these false
Prophets, and what will they do in the end thereof: Let Paul's advice be
acceptable to you, 1 These. 5.21. Prove all things, and hold fast that which is
good; believe neither one Prophet nor other, but prove what they say, and what
is truth, good, hold that fast.

VERSE. 8, 9.
Therefore thus says the Lord God, Because ye have spoken vanity, and seen
lies: therefore behold, I am against you, says the Lord GOD.

And my hand shall be upon the Prophets that see vanity, and Divine lies: they
shall not be in the assembly of my people, neither shall they be written in the
writing of the house of Israel, neither shall they enter into the Land of
Israel, and ye shall know that I am the Lord GOD.


IN these words are several judgments laid down against the false Prophets.

1. General. 2. Particular.
The General are two: 1. God is against them: Behold I am against you. 2. His
hand shall be upon them.


2. Particular ones are three: 1. Exclusion from Gods people, They shall not be
in the assembly of my people. 2. Exclusion from having their names written
amongst the Israelites, Neither shall they be written in the writing of the
house of Israel. 3. Exclusion from return from Captivity, Neither shall they
enter into the Land of Israel.


2. The reason of all, because they spoke vanity, and divined lies, Therefore
because ye have spoken vanity, etc.

3. The authority and certainty of all, Thus says the Lord GOD.

4. The event, Ye shall know that I am the Lord.

Spoken vanity.
Hebrew is, Propter loqui vos vanum, for that ye speak a vain thing: These
Prophets pretending they had visions, and divinations spoke them to the people;
and what were they? Vanity and lies, there was no truth or reality in ought
they delivered: The word (...) notes vanity of words, and falsehood, Psalm.
144.8. Deuteronomy. 5.20. Thou shall not bear false witness, Hebrew is, witness of
vanity, Zech. 10.2. The Idols have spoken vanity, the Diviners have seen a
lie, and have told false dreams: Vanity, lies, and dreams, are joined
together here: These Idol Prophets spoke vanity, saw lies, told dreams. Peter
says, The false Prophets spoke great swelling words of vanity, 2 Pet. 2.18.

I am against you.
Hebrew is, Ecce ego ad vos, its an Aposiopesis, something is conceald which
may easily be apprehended, as I come to you, to punish you, or I come against
you, Chaldae is Missurus sum iram meam adversum vos, this phrase you have
again, Ezekiel. 21.3. Behold I am against thee: and in the 26.3. And its used when
the Lord is greatly offended, and destruction of persons and things near at
hand. Rev. 2.5. Repent and do thy first works else will I come unto thee
quickly and remoove thy Candlestick. Its of sad importance when the Lord says
I come to you, or am against you. They thought it was but a few men opposed who
were weak inconsiderable things, but the great and glorious God tells them
that he is against them.

My hand shall be upon the Prophets, etc.
Hand notes Gods power and stroke, he being against them himself, he would put
forth his power and smite them with some judgment or other. The Septuagint
reads it, Pagnine has it, Erit percussio mea super prophetas.
(...), I will stretch out my hand too, or upon the Prophets. And the Chaldee,
for my hands have, Plaga mea, my stroke, thus hand is taken. Psalm. 21.8. Thine
hand shall find out all thine enemies, thy right hand shall find out those
that hate thee. 9. Thou shall make them as a fiery Oven, in the time of thine
anger. 1 Samuel 5.7. His hand is soar upon us, Chap. 6.3. It shall be known why
his hand is not remooved from you. God had smitten them with the Emrods, and
that they call the hand of God; the phrase here implies that God will in some
special manner punish these Prophets.

They shall not be in the assembly of my people.
Hebrew is, (...) which Montanus interprets, in Secreto, Va^ablus, in arcano,
the Septuagint (...), In the instructing of my people, they shall not Prophecy
or preach unto them; their liberty and power of speaking shall be taken from
them. French, Its ne serout plus au conseil de mon peuple. They shall be no
more of the counsel of my people: Castalio, ut in meorum concilio non sint.
Junius, In consilio populi mei: one is with C. the other with S. That with C.
Notes the company of Gods people; Pisc.
the other with S. Notes the counsels of that company: some have it, Iucaetu
populi mei, in the company of my people. This differ^nce of interpreting the
word, arises from the several significations of the Hebrew word (...) which
signifies a secret council, and the company of those who consult or counsel.
If we take it here for secret, they shall not be in the secret of my people,
and so besides those mentioned, the Chalde Paraphrast says, Non erunt in
seoreto: then the sense is they shall not know those secrets, nor partake of
that good which I reserve for to make known and communicate to my people.
Oecolam.
The Targum has it thus. In occultis bonis quae reposita sunt populo non
habebuntur. They shall not be accounted among those secret, good things which
are laid up for my people. Prophets were great mercies for people, and God gave
them out upon occasion, but these should not be numbered amongst them, they
should be detected and have their reward.

This secret of Gods people is some choice knowledge of God and his will,
beyond what is vulgarly known by men of the World, Psalm. 25.14. The secret of
the Lord is with them that fear him, Prove. 3.32. His secret is with the
righteous: Micaiah knew the secret of the Lord, touching Ahab, which neither
Zedekiah nor any other of the false Prophets knew, 1 King. 2.4.
Mic. 3.7. The Lord reveals his secret unto his servants the Prophets, not to
those are false and against him.

If we take is for assembly, as the word is sometimes used in holy Writ, as
Jer. 6.11. I will power out my fury upon the assemblies of young men. Hence
Sodalitium.
(...) Super congregationem juvenum; then we must inquire what assemblies are
meant. There were two kind of Assemblies among the Jews.

First, An Assembly of Elders, Psalm. 107.32. I will praise him in the Assembly
of Elders: these were the Magistrates and Senators that had authority, and bare
rule over the people, it might be the Seventy, or Sanedrim, bemoshab Zekenim,
in cathedra seniorum.

Secondly, An Assembly of Saints, Psalm. 89.7. God is greatly to be feared in
the Assembly of Saints: the Jews were a holy people, and when there were
public Congregations of them, they were an Assembly of Saints: To this Pradus
applies that in Psalm. 1 5. the ungodly shall not stand in judgment.
You may understand it of both Assemblies, that these false Prophets should
neither come amongst the Senators, to sit in Council, there to consult about
any matters of State or Church; nor amongst the Saints, they should have no
communion with Gods people, and this sense I like best, for tbe Prophets came
to Ecclesiastic meetings, as appears, 2 Kings 23.2. The Prophets were present
when Josiah read the Book of the Covenant, Jerem. 26.7. the Priests and
Prophets heard Jeremiah in the House of the Lord.

Neither shall they be written in the writing of the house of Israel.
What this writing of the house of Israel was, search must be made: Septuagint,
(...), In the Scripture of the house of Israel, they shall not be written; by
Scripture some understand, the Canonical Books of Moses and the Prophets, and
will have the sense to be, that the prophesies of these false prophets should
not be written in, or among those Books; but surely it was never in the
thoughts of any true prophet, that the lies and vanities of false prophets
should be joined to sacred Writ: What has the Chafe to do with the Wheat? We
must look out some other meaning of these words. When it pleased the Lord to
bring his people out of Egypt, he commanded them to be numbered, Numb. 1.2, 3.
The names and number of all from twenty years old and upwards were to be
taken, and when they were numbered they were to give every man a ransom for his
soul unto the Lord, Exodus 30.12. In like manner, when they came out of Babylon
they were numbered, as appears, Ezra 2. and 8. Chap. Nehem. 7. Where you have
the number set down, Verse. 66.67. the whole Congregation together was forty
two thousand three hundred and threescore, besides men and Maid servants seven
thousand three hundred thirty seven, and two hundred forty five Singing Men and
Women. The Catalogues in which the names of these were writ, are judged to be
the writings of the house of Israel; by these the Tribes were known, preserved
distinct, and those were not found in the writing, were displaced, Nehem 7.64.
These sought their Register among those that were reckoned by Genealogy, but it
was not found therefore were they as polluted, put from the Priesthood Isa.
4.3. Every one that is written among the living in Jerusalem, shall be called
holy: He speaks of great calamity, a destruction which should be upon the
Jews, and few should escape, but he that was left, and written among the
living, etc. All those who came to Jerusalem from the Captivity, and were
Citizens thereof, were written in some Book, Catalogue, or Register, which was
the writing of the house of Israel, and was called also the Book of life, or
of the living: For upon the death of a man, his name was razed out of this
Book, or if he did any thing unworthy the name and right of a Citizen; and
then he was counted as a dead man. The sense of these words you may hence then
take up thus, Viz. These false Prophets shall be reckoned amongst the dead, not
the living; they shall not be written in the writing of the house of Israel,
when they come back to Jerusalem, they shall be like trees pulled up and never
planted again; they shall be cut off and destroyed by some soar judgment. In
this sense some take those words of Moses, Exodus 32.32. Blot me out of thy
book which thou have written, take away my life; thou are now wroth with thy
people, about to slay them, Lord forgive them, spare them, else destroy me, and
blot my name out of the Book thou have written, as our practice is.

This sense I condemn not, but something more some Interpreters find in the
words; this Writing of the house of Israel they interpret the Book of life, in
which the names of all true Israelites were written, Phil. 4.3. Whose names are
in the Book of life, Dan. 12 1. Every one that should be found written in the
Book: Luke 10.20. there is mention of names written in Heaven, Revel. 13.8.
Its called the Lambs Book of life; so Revel. 21.27. Contrary to this is writing
their names in the earth, Jer. 17.13. Those depart from the Lord, shall be
written in the earth. The meaning then of the words must be of this nature,
these false Prophets think themselves to be my servants, that their names are
in my Book; they say, the Lord has sent them, that they have my spirit, do
declare my will, and honor me much among my people, and you think them also
happy men, that their names are written in Heaven, that if any be saved they
shall: but they neither are, nor shall be ever written in any Book, accounted
among my faithful ones, they are Hypocrites, shall be discovered, and
discarded for ever. In Psalm. 69.28. you have such an expression, Let them be
blotted out of the Book of the living, and not be written in the Book of the
righteous: There were many who appeared to others to be written in the Book of
life, but the Prophet prays rhat the Lord would make it evident some way or
other, that they were not there: Here the Scripture speaks Ad sensum and
opinionem hominum non ad veritatem rei, God blots men out of the Book of life,
when he declares by some dealings of his with them, that they are not accepted
of him; here Gods hand should be upon them, they should not be among his
people, have communion with them or him in any Ordinance of his, and this was
evidence they were not in his Book, in that they should not come into the Land
of Canaan, that they should not be written in the writing of the house of
Israel.

Neither shall they enter into the Land of Israel.
This is the third particular judgment: The Land of Israel has many Eulogies
in Scripture, The Jews were as dead men when they were in Babylon. Ezekiel.
37.10.12.
its called The Land of the living, Psalm. 27.13. David had fainted, but that he
hoped to see the goodness of the Lord in the Land of the living: People that
lived in other Lands, were dead men, they had deaf, dumb, dead gods, and
deadly worship: but the Jews had the living God their God, and lively worship,
Acts 7.38. (...), A Land of uprightness, Psalm. 143.10. Where were the best
Laws that ever Nation had; A Land of delight, for so the Hebrew is, Dan.
11.41. (...) a Land which was the glory of all Lands, Ezekiel. 20.6. The Land of
Immanuel, Isa. 8.8. Where Immanuel was promised, borne, lived, preached,
wrought his miracles, and showed his glory; into this Land must not they come:
they prophesied, that within a few years all should return into this Land;
but Ezekiel from the Lord tells them, that after seventy years they shall not
return into their Country, nor enter into Heaven, whereof this was a type:
Captivity was a little death, and to be in a Land of dead ones, was another
death, and never to enjoy the Land of the living, nor the living God, this was
the sting of death. It was lawful for strangers to come into the L^nd of
Israel, 2 Chro. 2.17. there were an hundred fifty three thousand six hundred,
at once in the Land, and yet these Prophets might not come in.

The Lord is against evil Prophets, Obser. 1.
and that is a dreadful thing: There are several things which makes God to be
against them.

1. They abuse his Name and Authority, saying, The Lord sent them, Verse. 6. If
any man should abuse the Name of a Prince, of Parliament, and say, they sent
them to speak or do any thing, and they did not, what injury were this unto
them, how would they take it, much more is it a wrong to the Lord, who is
greater then they.

2. Their Prophesies are lies, vanity, the thoughts of their own heads, and
conceptions of their own hearts, Verse. 2, 3, 7. and so contrary to the truths
of God.

3. They prejudice the design of God by the true Prophets. By them the Lord
made known his displeasure against the ways of sinners, convinced them of the
evil of their doings, and drew them to repentance, Jer. 25.3, 4, 5. the
Prophets said, Turn from the evil of your doings, and dwell in the Land, but
the false Prophets discredited them, disparaged their prophesies, and cried
peace.

4, They deceived the people with their falsehoods, filled them with vain
hopes, Ver. 6. and so strengthened in them their evil ways, and encouraged
them to their own destruction.

5. They grieved the spirits of the godly, they made their hearts ache, as the
false prophetesses did, Verse. 22. They made the hearts of the righteous sad.

6. They were evil themselves, Jer. 23.11. Both Prophet and Priest are
profane; yea, in my house have I found their wickedness says the Lord: they
corrupted the worship of GOD with their inventions, God had cause enough to
be against them; it is very sad, yea dreadful to have God against one; I that
know the secrets of all hearts, I that am holy and hate all sin, I that keep an
exact account of all their ways, I that am infinitely just, and must punish
all wicked ones, I that am infinitely powerful, and can destroy with an
everlasting destruction, I even I, am against you, Romans 8.31. If God be for us,
who can be against us? When God is for a man, all is safe, who ever attempts to
hurt. David had many against him, Psalm. 118.10. All Nations compassed me about,
12. They compassed me about like Bees; they swarmed about him, and had their
stings ready, thrust out to sting him to death, but he had God with him, for
him; and therefore says, Verse. 14. The Lord is my strength and song, and is
become my salvation; but had God been against David, one of those Bees would
have been his death: who ever the Lord is against, has many enemies and few
friends, all in Heaven, all in Earth are against that man.

2, Those Prophets or people the Lord is against, he puts forth his power to
punish, Behold I am against you, and my hand shall be upon you, Jer. 28.15, 16,
17. God was against that false Prophet Hananiah, and his hand was quickly upon
him, Hear says Jeremiah unto him, the Lord has not sent thee, but thou
make this people trust in a lie, therefore thus says the Lord, Behold I will
cast thee from off the face of the Earth: this year thou shall dye, because
thou have taught rebellion against the Lord: So Hananiah the Prophet dyed the
same year: God was against Ahab, and spoke against him, 2 Chronicles. 18.22, and
the next tidings you hear of him, is his death by the hand of the Lord, Verse.
33.34. So Levit. 20.3. I will set my face against that man and will cut him
off: If Gods face be against a man, he will put forth his hand to destroy that
man from before his face; and Chap. 26.17. I will set my face against you, and
ye shall be slain before their enemies: Ananias and Saphira had God against
them for their wilful lying, and presently his hand was upon them, Acts 5.
Gods judgments are called his hand, 1 Pet. 5, 6. his mighty hand, and if that
fall upon any, it will break them to pieces.

3. The fruits of Gods displeasure are very grievous: First, they are shut out
from the assemblies of Gods people, they shall have no communion with the
Saints, those are dear to God: All David's delight was in them, Psalm. 16.3. and
when he was a little put by coming at the Assemblies of Gods people, how did
it trouble and afflict him, Psalm. 42.1, 2, 3, 4. As the Heart pants after the
water bra^kes, so pants my soul after thee O God. My soul thirsts for
God, for the living God, when shall I come and appear before God. My tears
have been my meat day and night; while they continually say unto me, Where is
thy God? When I remember these things, I p^wre out my soul in me, for I had
gone with the multitude, I went with them to the house of God: So in the 84.
Psalm, how did he long for communion with God and his people in the Sanctuary,
his soul longed and fainted for the Courts of the Lord, his heart and flesh
cried out for the living God, Verse. 2. he counted a day in the Lords Courts,
better then a thousand, he had rather be a door keeper there, then a favorite
in Saul's house; David knew there was much good to be had in the assemblies of
Gods people, and therefore he prized them so, and was impatient of absence from
them: In the assemblies men have communion with God, there his glory is seen,
Psalm. 29.9. In his Temple does every one speak of his glory, Psalm. 68.24. They
have seen thy goings O God in the Sanctuary: There his wisdom, his power,
his mercy, his truth, his glory, are evidenced, the treasures of his grace
opened and dispensed, spiritual life begotten and maintained, drooping souls
are comforted, raised, ravished, there we admire, adore, magnify, and glorify
God, there we hear of our duty toward God and man, there we have fellowship
with the Saints, interest in their affections, gifts, graces, counsels,
comforts, admonitions, exhortations, and prayers; in the Assemblies of Gods
people, you have the presence of God, of Christ, the spirit and the Angels, 1
Cor. 11.10. and what a soar judgment is it, to be shut out from these
assemblies: bless God for your liberties, be thankful for all the good you
have in the Assemblies, and walk so, that you may honor truth, and the God of
Assemblies.

4. Many that in their own and the Worlds esteem, go for true Prophets,
Saints, will be in Gods time, discovered to be Liars, Hypocrites, false:
themselves think, and others also, that they are written in the writing of the
house of Israel, in the Book of life, but their names were never there. The
Jews said they were Abraham's seed, God their Father, but they were found
false, they were of their Father the Devil.

VERSE. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
Because, even because they have seduced my people, saying, Peace, and there
was no peace: and one built up a wall, and lo, others dawbed it with
untempered mortar.

Say unto them that dawb it with untempered mortar, that it shall fall; there
shall be an overflowing shower, and ye, O great Hailstones shall fall, and a
stormy wind shall rent it.

Lo when the wall is fallen, shall it not be said unto you; Where is the
daubing wherewith ye have daubed it?

Therefore thus says the Lord God, I will even rent it with a stormy wind in
my fury: and there shall be an overflowing shower in mine anger, and great
Hailestones in my fury to consume it.

So will I break down the wall that ye have daubed with untempered mortar,
and bring it down to the ground, so that the foundation thereof shall be
discovered, and it shall fall, and ye shall be consumed in the midst thereof:
and ye shall know that I am the Lord.

Thus will I accomplish my wrath upon the Wall, and upon them that have daubed
it with untempered mortar, and will say unto you, The Wall is no more, nor they
that daubed it:

To wit, the Prophets of Israel, which prophecy concerning Jerusalem, and
which see visions of peace for her, and there is no peace, says the Lord God.


THE words before you present to us two things:

1. The sin of the false Prophets, Viz. Seduction, They have seduced my
people; and the manner how, by saying peace; by building and daubing a Wall
with untempered mortar, Verse. 10.

2. Gods proceedings with them, and their Wall, he will send a storm,
overthrow their Wall, shame and confound them: in the following Verses.

Because, even because.
Hebrew is, For that, even for that, the words are doubled, and so emphaticall;
the like you have in Levit. 26.43. Because, even because they despised my
judgments.

Seduced.
Hebrew is (...) in hiphil errare fecerunt, have caused to err; Vulgar is
deceperint, have deceived; French, Qu' ils out deceu mon peuple: but causing to
err, sets out the sense of the word more fully, 2 Chronicles. 33.9. Manasseh made
Judah, and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem to err: the false Prophets seduced
him, and he seduced them; seduction is when men are led aside from the right
way, and upon false suggestions are carried into a wrong way, believe lies, and
practice answerably, Amos 2.4. Their lies caused them to err after the which
their Fathers have walked.

Saying Peace.
(...) from (...) Integer, perfectus, because it preserves things, Psalm. 37.11.
The meek shall delight themselves in the abundance of peace.
places, persons entire; whereas War wastes and consumes all: Peace among the
Hebrews notes freedom from War, tumults, a quiet condition of life, and all
kind of outward happiness; therefore the Jews when they wish happiness to a
man, they wish him peace. These Prophets told them in Babylon that they should
have liberty and quick return, and their hearts desire in the Land of Judea,
they told those there, that they should not need to fear Nebuchadnezzar or any
forces of his, they should live in safety, be fat and flourishing, wanting
nothing.

One built up a Wall.
The word for one, is (...) and iste, or ipse, Junius, hic, he, or this man:
Jerome will have this be, or one, to be meant of God, who by his Law and
Prophets built them a Wall, but had God built the Wall, he would not have
spoken against it, as here he does: Some understand the people, but there is no
sufficient ground for that: The Lord here is reproving the false Prophets for
seducing the people, not the people for seducing the Prophets, its unlikely
therefore that the people should build a wall. By one, or he, we conceive is
meant some chief one amongst the false Prophets. Zedekiah was a chief one
among Ahabs false Prophets, such was Hananiah, Jer. 28. and Shemaiah, Jer.
29.31. whom our Prophet may intend, for this Shemaiah was in Babylon, he
prophesied false things, sent Letters to all the people at Jerusalem, and
caused them to trust in a lie, or one may be taken indefinitely.

Built a Wall,
This is a metaphorical expression borrowed from builders, (...) A wall of no
worth, weak and shaken with every blast, such an one as a Fox might break
down, as they said, Neh. 4.3.
who make walls about their houses, to secure and strengthen them from danger:
Jerusalem had a wall about it, which was a great defense unto it. This wall was
some false prophecy or doctrine given out unto the people which caused them to
be secure, Jeremiah had prophesied of the coming of Nebuchadnezzar, the
destruction of the Temple and City, seventy years Captivity, that so he might
awaken this people, bring them to repentance, and prevent such judgments; but
some one or other of the false Prophets prophesied the contrary, Jer. 29.8, 9.
they had some in Babylon who built a wall there, telling them that they should
shortly return again to Jerusalem, and quieted the spirits of those in
Captivity; they had some at Jerusalem who built a wall there, and caused them
to trust in vain things: Verse. 21. There was Ahab the Son of Kolaiah, and
Zedekiah the Son of Maaseiah, which prophesied a lie unto them in the name of
the Lord: Either Nebuchadnezzar will not come, or if he do, you will have
help from Egypt. Their false and lying prophesies wherein the people trusted
was the wall they built; the prophecy of peace was the foundation of this
wall, and the arguments they used, the Brick to build it up. So that hereupon
the people feared not any danger, humbled not themselves for their sins, but
became secure and confident that all should be well, which made Jeremiah say,
Chap. 6.14. They have healed the hurt of the daughter of my people slightly,
saying peace, peace: Jeremiah had threatened judgments to them for their sins,
wounded them by his Prophesies, but they healed the wounds by crying Peace,
peace.

And lo others daubed it.
Other Prophets with their fair words, and false pretenses, justified what the
former had said; when some chief false Prophet had prophesied of peace, the
rest who were inferior, would second him. The word for daubed, is (...) from
(...) to cover, plaster over, or anoint, and so the Septuagint reads it,
(...), and they anoint it: French, Les autres la maconnoyent, Mason, or
Plaster it. Gast. trullissant, they trowel'd it: these false Prophets were
like Masons and Carpenters, who build deceitfully, and use their Art and utmost
skill to make such work seem goodly and beautiful.

With untempered Mortar.
Hebrew is (...) which Montanus renders insulso, with that which is unsavory:
Piscator, Polanus, Junius, inepto, with that is foolish; the Vulgar, luto absq,
paleis, with Mortar which has no Straw, Chafe, H^ire, or binding thing mixed
with it: You know there must be something mingled with Loame, or Lyme, which
men use in buildings, if they will build to purpose; but these built with
untempered Mortar; and this Mortar was their flattering, false, weak reasons
and pretenses they used to keep the people in security withal, Ezekiel. 22.28.
Her Prophets have daubed them with untempered Mortar, seeing vanity, and
divining lies unto them, saying, Thus says the Lord God, when the Lord has
not spoken: There was no truth, and so no strength in what they said, all was
their own; and so Lutum sine firmitate.

The word (...) may be rendered Casuro, with that which is about to fall, from
(...) and the Greek in Kirker is (...), and in the 11 Verse. its said (...) and
it shall fall.

An overflowing shower.
(...) Great showers will try Buildings, specially walis that are of untempered
Mortar; this overflowing shower was the Chaldean Army, Isa. 59.19. The enemy
shall come in like a flood, Isa. 8.7, 8. The Lord brings upon them the waters
of the River, strong and many, even the King of Assyria and all his glory, he
shall overflow and go over, he shall reach unto the neck: Jer 47.2. Behold
waters rise up out of the North, and shall be an overflowing flood, and shall
overflow the Land, and all that is therein, the City and them that dwell
therein.

Great Hailestones.
Hebrew is, (...) Stones of the Hail, this word Elgabis is only mentioned in
this Prophet, and but thrice in this Verse. 13. and Chap. 26.22. and its great
hail, the Septuagint is (...), Stones to throw against a rock: Vulgar, Lapides
per grandes, and these may note out the chief men in the Army; or the whole
Army who should be as stones of great halle, to shake this mud wall of theirs.

The word is a compound word of (...) potens, and (...) Crystallus, Job 28.18.
no mention shall be made of Coral, or of Pearls; the word in Hebrew for
Pearls is (...) which Shindler interprets a Crystal, and Montanus, Vnio: Now
because hailestones are like unto Crystal and Pearl, therefore the word is
here used, and El added to it, to show what strong hailestones God would send.

A stormy wind shall rent it.
Hebrew is (...) Ventus turbinum, these words you have in the first Chap. 4.
rendered a whirlewinde, where they were opened unto you; such an expression you
have in Isa. 25.4. The blast of the terrible ones, is as a storm against the
wall: By these metaphorical words he sets out the wrath of God by the Chaldean
Army, which should be as tempestuous rain, hail, and wind, and the Scripture
is frequent in this metaphor when it would make known to us the indignation of
the Lord; as you may observe, Isa. 21.1.29.6. Jerem. 23.19. Chap. 30.19. Isa.
17.13.

The Foundations thereof shall be revealed.
There shall not a stone be left upon a stone of this building; the Foundation
of this wall built up and dawbed with untempered mortar shall be discovered, God
would detect the falsehood of their Prophesies, the vanity of all their
arguments, wlies, and ways, they used to seduce, and secure this people, what
ever they promised of help from Egypt, whatever they prophesied of the
Chladaeans not coming, what ever they said of the peoples safety, of Gods
mercy and favor and good will toward them; what ever they pretended of being
sent from God, of speaking his words, of having his spirit, etc. God would
discover all their imposturings and lay them open to the World, so that nothing
shall be left them but disgrace.

Some make the Temple and City to be the Foundation, because they had the holy
City, and holy place where God had recorded his Name; therefore they cried
peace, peace, flattered the people into a good condition, and surrounded them
with a wall of security: therefore God would destroy both and discover their
Foundation.

They shall be consumed in the midst thereof.
You promise great matters to others, that they shall within few years return
from Babylon, come and dwell safely in Jerusalem; but there is no safety in
Jerusalem for your selves, you shall be consumed in it, that are so confident
of the safety of it; when a wall falls and foundations are discovered, likely
some do suffer by it, and so should these false Prophets here.

Quest. In Jer. 4.10. You have these words uttered by the Prophet Ah Lord God
surely thou have greatly deceived this people and Jerusalem saying, Ye shall
have peace, whereas the Sword reaches unto the soul. If God promised them
peace and deceived them, does he not herein resemble the false Prophets, and so
lessen their sin.

Answ. 1. God did not promise them peace, but threatened severe judgments
against them, by ^aiah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel, as you may see Isa. 29.3.4.5.6.
Jer. 9.9.10.11. Ezekiel. 5.8.9.10.

2. Some make the Prophets here to speak in the name of the people and to
personate them; they thought the peace which was promised them by the false
Prophets was from God; and therefore finding the contrary, do charge God, as
wicked men in their distresses are wont to do.

3, The words may be taken by way of Interrogation thus, Have thou in deceiving
deceived this people, have thou promised them peace and brought the Sword upon
them? Is this thy manner of proceeding with thy people, surely it cannot be,
thou art faithful and can not deny thy self. 2 Timothy 2 13. and Numb. 23.19.
God is not a man that he should lie, neither the son of man that he should
repent, has he said and shall he not do it? or has he spoken and shall he
not make it good?

4. If God promised them peace, it was af er their return from captivity, not
at the present; and so Jer. 3.17.18. You shall find it, At that time they
shall call Jerusalem the Throne of the Lord, and all the Nations shall be
gathered unto it, to the name of the Lord to Jerusalem, neither shall they
walk any more after the imagination of their evil heart. In those days the
house of Judah shall walk with the house of Israel, and they shall come
together out of the land of the North, etc.

5. The Prophet might thus speak and say, God had deceived them, because he
suffered the false Prophets to propound their dreams, lies, divinations,
visions, and things of their own hearts, and spirits unto the people, whereby
they were greatly deceived: a man that suffers a thing to be done in ordinary
speech, is said to be the Author of it, if a Physician will not give Physic to
cure a sick man, if he dye of his sickness, its Vulgarly said he is the cause of
his death. If the owner will not preserve a ruinous house from falling, when
its fallen he is said to be the Author of its fall: so here God is said to
deceive them, because he hindered not those false Prophets from deceiving them.
God saw how averse they were to truth, how they slighted and mocked his
Prophets, 2 Chronicles. 36.16. And despised his words, therefore in just judgment
he gave them up to believe lies, falsehoods, and deceivable things.

Obser. 1.
That false Prophets and teachers seduce the people, feeding them with vain
hops, They cried peace peace, al things shall be prosperous, comfortable, we
shall have no wars in our gates, no Famine or plague in our Cities, they gave
out laeta vaticinia and so beguild the unstable and credulous people, and sweld
them with vast hopes. They hoped to see their brethren return from Babylon, to
buy and sell, to marry and build, to grow great, and see many good days; the
false Prophets filled Ahab with great hopes of victory at Ramoth Gilead, go up
and prosper said they, for the Lord shall deliver it into the Kings hand 1
Kings 22.12. These Prophets begat, and maintained hopes, in the hearts of the
people, they made them trust in the Temple, and corrupt worship was in it,
therefore Jer. 7.4. Jeremiah sent to command them, not to trust in lying words,
Saying the Temple of the Lord, etc. What ever wickedness they committed, yet
if they appeared in the Temple, and stood before the Lord, they said they were
delivered, no threatenings of Jeremiah or others should take hold of them. They
made them trust in their strong holds and look to the hills and mountains
about them; therefore Jer. 3.23. He tells them, that in vain they hoped for
Salvation from the hills, and from the multitude of Mountains. They thought
because Jerusalem was so well fortifyed with high hills and great Mountains,
that it could not be taken. Jer. 21.13. Who shall come down against us? Or who
shall enter into our habitations. So Jer. 29.31 Shemaiah caused them to trust
in a lie.
and Chap. 49.4. Jerusalem said, who shall come unto me? Hananiah a false
Prophet told the people that within the space of two full years
Nebuchadnezzars yoke should be broken from off the neck of all Nations. Jer.
28.11. and verse. 15. Jeremiah says, He made the people trust in a lie.

2. Its a clear argument of a blind and false teacher to speak things
answerable to the humors and corruptions of men, this people could not endure
Jeremiah prophesying truth, threatening judgment against them, for their sins,
see Jer. 38 2.3.4 5. They desired to hear of pleasing things; it was good
tidings to them, to hear that Nebuchadnezzar should not come against them, nor
make them tributary unto him; therefore the Prophets prophesied it, Jer. 27.14.
They told them they should not serve the King of Babylon, it was pleasing to
them to hear of bringing back again the Vessels of the Temple; and Verse. 16.
These Prophets prophesied, saying, Behold the Vessels of the Lords house shall
now shortly be brought again from Babylon: wherein could they have humored
these people more; you have a notable place in the 23. of Jer. 16.17. The
Prophets that prophecy unto you make you vain, they speak a vision of their
own heart, and not out of the mouth of the Lord: Now that comes not from Gods
holy mouth, but man's carnal heart, will be pleasing to other carnal hearts;
and least you may think I deceive you, observe the next Verse, They say still
unto them that despise me, the Lord has said, ye shall have peace, and they
say unto every one that walks after the imagination of his own heart, No
evil shall come upon you. What is more pleasing to man, then to have his own
mind, do his own will, Isa. 3.12. They which lead thee are they which call
thee blessed.
walk after the imaginations of his own heart; and what softer words more
suitable to him can be said, then no evil shall come upon him: false Prophets
speak Verba lactis, Milkie, Oily words, such as please men, and battle their
humors, and so have a great advantage with men, who love to be humor'd; but
true Prophets speak Verba veritatis, which have salt and fire in them, and so
cross, fret, provoke men's lusts, and stir up their hatred against them, and
as the other with their lies and flatteries find favor with men, so these for
their truths with God, who loves truth: Paul durst not Preach to please men,
but Christ, Gal. 1.10. John would not please Herod.

3. The Prophesies and Doctrines of false Teachers, seem unto them, and those
cleave to them, to have much strength, they built up a wall; walls are things
of strength, be they Earth, Timber, or Stone Walls; they prophesied peace, that
Nebuchadnezzar should not come against them, or depart if he came without
prejudice to them; they said that the Vessels and people should speedily
return from Babylon, etc. These Doctrines of thei^s were as walls unto them of
strength and defense: Solomon tells us, that A rich man's riches are a high wall
in his own conceit, Prove. 18.11. and so the opinions and tenets of false
Teachers, are a high wall in their own conceits, they think the people are
strengthened and secured by them. There are scarcely any opinions abroad, be
they never so erroneous, heretical, blasphemous, tending to licentiousness,
but the Authors of them judge them to have strength in them, and look upon
them as walls to advantage the people, and those are deceived by them, think
the like of them.

4. That false Prophets and Teachers do concur and mutually endeavor to
countenance and strengthen each others Doctrines and Tenets; one built up a
Wall, and lo others daubed it, the true Prophets often prophesied the same
things, and so strengthened the hands each of other, and so did the false
Prophets, they improved their art and parts to strengthen one another, they
brought their Visions, Divinations, Dreams, Lies, and whatever they had, to
plaster and daube up this wall; they told them of Gods mercy, Covenant,
Promise, to dwell at Jerusalem for ever, how greatly God was delighted with
that place, that they were a holy people, had the Law, Ordinances, Sacrifices,
which none else in the World had, that God had no Church but them, and
therefore unlikely that ever he would destroy them, that his heart was toward
them; thus they agreed all in falsehood, and strengthened themselves, and the
people in wickedness: So all the false Prophets concurred in deceiving Ahab,
Zedekiah the chief makes horns, and says, With these shall thou push the
Syrians till they be consumed.

5. Whatever Prophets give out of their own unto the people, its weak,
unsollid, and unserviceable; these Prophets prophesied of their own heads, out
of their own spirits, they had nothing from God, and what was all, but
untempered Mortar, a thing unsavory and foolish? did any of their Visions,
Divinations, or Prophesies, strengthen the hearts or hands of this people? were
they not altogether seduced by them? they filled them with vain hopes,
flattered them in their sinful ways, prophesied of peace and plenty, and so
healed the hurt of Gods people slightly; they skinned it over with fair words,
but did not search it to the bottom, Jer. 8.11.
and lance it with sound and wholesome truths; they brought of their own, not
of the Lords, and therefore it was unserviceable, they brought lies, Jer.
27.10. False dreams, Jer. 23.32. The deceit of their own hearts. Verse. 26.
False Visions, D^vinations, and things of naught, Chap. 14.14. Can lies,
dreams, deceits, false, and things of naught, strengthen or build up. The
truths and Doctrines of God are sollid, savory, strengthening, lutum paleatum,
well tempered Mortar; they are tempered with the glory, wisdom, mercy, and
love of God, with the blood of Christ, with the power of the spirit, and they
will build up a Wall, be strength unto us, Zecharie 1.13. his words are good
and comfortable, Mic. 2.7. they do good, Psalm. 91.4. His truth is a Shield and
Buckler: its sure and will not deceive, 2 Pet. 1.19. The Doctrines of the
Apostles confirmed the Brethren and the Churches: Acts 14.22:15.32. The
Doctrines and Opinions of men are windy deceitful things, and hinder growth
and strength, Ephesians. 4.14. but the truths of God cause growth in all things, and
so strengthen, making us firm as Walls: What men bring of their own, 2 Pet.
2.3.
are (...), fained words, untempered Mortar; but what they have from God, are
wholesome words and Doctrines, according to godliness, 1 Timothy 6.3.

6. Seducing of people by false, flattering, unsound Doctrines does greatly
provoke God, Because, even because they have seduced my people, saying, Peace,
and one built, etc. Prophets work is to make known truth, and to bring men out
of their by and base ways into the way of truth; but if they turn men out of
that way into the ways of error, they work, but their work is not pleasing
unto God, it exasperates his spirit against them, and no marvel they undo
souls, which are precious things, James 5.20. He converts a sinner from the
error of his way, saves a soul from death, and hides a multitude of sins that
would appear by his going on in an erroneous way: if on the contrary, a man
seduce a man from the truth, and lead him into ways of errors, he destroys a
soul, discovers and multiplies sin; and so did these false Prophets, and so
do all false Teachers. Peter tells you of false Teachers, 2 Epist. 2.1. who
bring in damnable heresies, and draw away many thereby; and is that all? No,
they bring upon themselves swift destruction, they so provoke God by their
corrupt and damn^ble Doctrines, that he intends and hastens their destruction;
and let the seduced look to it least destruction be their portion, Isa. 9.16.
The Leaders of this people cause them to err, and they that are led of them
are destroyed.

7. Whatsoever works men work, God will try them; if the Prophets build Walls,
daube with untempered Mortar, Preach visions of their own heads, etc. God will
prove their walls what strength is in them, examine their Mortar, whether
tempered or no, whether ought of God be in it, or all be humane. Verse. 11.
There shall be an overflowing shower, great hailestones, and a stormy wind:
When men build, the wind and weather tryes their buildings: the Prophets here
go under the notion of builders, and they had made their building, and God
would try it, Nebuchadnezzar with all his Forces should come like an
overflowing shower, great strong hailestones, a stormy wind, and if their wall
could stand then, and their mortar endure, it would be evident that they were
wise builders, had made a firm wall, 1 Cor 3.13. Every man's work shall be
made manifest, and the fire shall try every man's work of what sort it is; the
work here is interpreted of Doctrines and Opinions, taught and held, they shall
be tried by fire, either of affliction or of the spirit, the Word of God.

8. God has variety of ways and means to try men's works, he has showers,
hailestones, winds.

9. Its impossible for false Prophets to avoid the judgments of God, they and
their work must suffer; see what is said in the 15. and 16. Verses. I will
accomplish my wrath upon the wall and upon them that have dawbed it; to wit,
the Prophets of Israel: Gods judgments against them are sudden, irressistible,
and unavoidable, they are likned to showers, hailestones, and stormy winds,
which come suddenly, assault strongly, and cannot be avoided: and God says in
the 13 Verse. He will rend their wall, and work in anger and fury; if he will
rend, who can preserve, if he will tear in pieces who shall deliver, Psalm.
50.22.

10. What ever Doctrines, Opinions, Tenets, false Teachers and Prophets do
deliver, to scatter among the people, shall come to naught, They built a wall,
dawbed it with untempered mortar, but Verse. 11. Say unto them it shall fall:
God had determined the ruin of this wall, of all the false prophesies they had
delivered; the Doctrines of men are w ndy, unstable, and vanishing things: Acts
5.36, 37, 38. Gamaliel tells of one Theudas who boasted that he was somebody, a
Prophet, and vented his own opinions amongst them, and drew four hundred men
after him, and this false Prophet with his prophesies and followers, were
scattered, ruined, and brought to naught, after him Judas of Galilee drew away
much people with his persuasions and pretenses, and he perished, and those
obeyed him were dispersed, and then presents to the Council where he was
speaking, the Apostles and their Doctrine, saying, Refrain from these men, and
let them alone, for if this couns^ll or this work be of men, it will come to
naught; you have seen the end of Theudas and Judas, of their Counsels,
Opinions, and works, they being from men are fallen with the men, but if they
had been of God, they would have stood; as he speaks of the Apostles Doctrine,
if it be of God ye cannot overthrow it: Men may venture, build upon Divine
truths, they have a Divine arm to support them, but humane Opinions,
Doctrines, if we confide in, we shall greatly be deceived, they and we shall
fall together: B^by on you know was supported by false Docteines, falls worship,
falls Government, falls Miracles, and lying wonders, as you may observe in the
Revel. and Chap. 18.2. you hear, Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen; and
Rev. 19.20 The Beast was taken, and with him the false Prophets; that is, the
Pope and his Clergy; they desired and endeavored the standing of their
Kingdom, but being upon a false foundation it fell. Psa. 112.10. The desire of
the wicked shall perish; not only their desires, but Doctrines, Prophesies,
endeavors, shall perish.

11. False Prophets and Teachers shall be discovered, and they and their
worship exposed to laughter and scorn: When the wall is fallen, shall it not
be said unto you, Where is the dawbing wherewith ye have dawbed it; you have
made a goodly Wall, such an one as could not endure a shower, ye are
Imposters, have deceived us and others, thus should they be detected and
derided. There were many false Prophets in Ahabs days, they were great with
Jezabel and Ahab, and made use of their power to cut off the true Prophets; but
Elijah calls them forth to a Sacrifice, some eight hundred and fifty of them,
where they were discovered to be Liars, Seducers, and laughed to scorn before
all the people: 1 Kings 18.
those Prophets bade Ahab go up to Ramoth-Gilead and prosper, how ashamed were
they when Ahab was slain, and the Soldiers returned with loss of their King
and the day; what cause had these Prophets to blush, when God brought
Nebuchadnezzar to beseidge the City, when the walls were broken down, and they
discovered to be false Prophets, and their foundation with which they upheld
the hope of this people to be lies, flatteries, and false Divinations.

VERSE. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.
Likewise thou Son of man, set thy face against the daughters of thy people,
which Prophecy out of their own heart, and prophecy thou against them.

And say, Thus says the Lord God, Woe to the Women that sow Pillows to all
armeholes, and make Kerchiefs upon the head of every Stature to hunt souls.
will ye hunt the souls of my people, and will ye save the souls alive that
come unto you?

And will ye pollute me among my people, for handf^ls of Barley, and for
pieces of bread, to slay the souls that should not dye, and to save the souls
alive, that should not live, by your lying to my people that hear your lies.

Wherefore thus says the Lord God, Behold, I am against your pillowes,
wherewith ye there hunt the souls to make them fly, and I will tear them
from your arms, and will let the souls go, even the souls that ye hunt to
make them fly.

Your Kercheifs also will I tear, and deliver my people out of your hand and
they shall be no more in your hand to be hunted, and ye shall know that I am
the Lord.

Because with lies ye have made the heart of the righteous sad, whom I have
not made sad, and strengthened the hands of the wicked, that he should not
return from his wicked way, by promising him life.

Therefore ye shall see no more vanity, nor Divine divinations, for I will
deliver my people out of your hand, and ye shall know that I am the Lord.


WE are now come to the second part of the Chapter, which is a Prophecy
against Women Prophetesses; and here as before you have their judgments, and
the sins laid down causing those judgments.

The judgments are in the 17, 18, 20, 21. and 23. Verses, the sins moving God
to be against them, and to proceed so with them, are in the 17, 18, 19, 22. and
23. Verses, the judgments and sins are intermingled in the several Verses.

In Israel had been some true Prophetesses, as Deborah and Huldab; now there
were many fal^e Prophetess s, and the Prophet is commanded to turn his speech
against them.

Set thy face against.
Once before you had this phrase, Chap. 4.3. where the Prophet was to set his
face against Jerusalem, here it is against the Women; be thou an adversary unto
them, and prophecy against them. Enemies when they are to encounter each
other, they set their faces one against another, and so here, when the Prophet
should denounce judgment against them for their lying prophesies, he was as an
adversary to them; and to set the face in Scripture sense, against any one, is
Adversum eum venturas calamitates praedicere, to proclaim War against them:
The Hebrew is, thy Faces, speak boldly, freely and be severe against them in
thy prophesying.

The daughters of thy people.
Some would understand by these Women, men Prophets, who were weak and
womanish, without courage, constancy, and prudence; but we have no cause to
take the words in that sense: Our Prophet had spoken of men Prophets before,
and now is directed of God to another distinct subject, and that is the women
Prophets, who are called Daughters of his people, this cannot belong unto the
men, De falsis Prophetissis haec interpretari par est, non de effoeminatis
viris.

Which Prophecy out of their own heart.
As the false Prophets did, Verse. 2. that is, of their own accord, and their
own imaginations: There were Women of old, who did prophecy, without blame it
was lawful for them, Miriam was a Prophetess, Exodus 15.20. and went before
the people, Micah 6.4. so Huldab, 2 Kings 22.14. Anna also was a Prophetess,
Luke 2.36. and the promise of the spirit of prophecy was to Women as well as
men, Acts 2.17. I will power out my spirit upon all flesh, and their Sons and
their Daughters shall prophecy: And Phillip the Evangelist had four Daughters
did prophecy, Acts 21.8, 9. and doubtless the Church and people of God
received much good by their Prophesying; but these were false Prophetesses
which did deceive the people, and came not behind the false Prophets in doing
mischief: Its probable they exceeded men; for, Women by reason of the
tenderness of their nature, sweetness of their voices, respect amongst men,
have the advantage to insinuate their opinions, and persuade more powerfully,
especially when they have a repute for holiness, and are esteemed
prophetical, as these were.

Prophecy thou against them.
They arrogated to themselves the call and authority of God, when there was no
such thing; and for Women to pretend this that they might deceive the people,
was grievous; therefore Ezekiel is commanded to prophecy against them.

One thing here especially is observable, that the Lord calls the people not
his, but the Prophets, Set thy face against the Daughters of thy people; when
some heinous thing was committed dishonorable to God, reproachful to the
people, and the Lord would object it against them, then the Lord would not own
them for his people that did such things, that they might be convinced of the
greatness of the evil they had done, which made them unworthy to be the
people or children of the Lord any longer, Exodus 32.7, 8. When the people
corrupted themselves in making a Calfe and worshipping it, then God calls them
Moses people, Get thee down, for thy people, etc. Hence that in Deuteronomy. 32.5.
They have corrupted themselves, their spot is not the spot of his Children.

Woe to the Women that sow Pillowes, etc.
Here is a general Judgment denounced against those Women; Woe which includes
evils of all sorts, and special sins set down: 1. Sowing of pillowes to all
armeholes. 2. Making Kerchiefes upon the head of every Stature, which are
typical actions, and then the end of these, hunting of souls.


Sowing of pillowes.
(...) Septuagint is (...), sowing things for the head; this is an obscure
phrase, Pillows are soft things, filled with Feathers for the head to repose
upon, some thereby understand an easy and pleasurable life; others think
these Prophetic Women were Sorceresses, and did use these Pillowes and
Kerchiefes in their enchantments, they appointed those consulted with them to
have these on them or about them, and hereby they were made fit to receive
their Oracles or Prophesies, as those went to the Oracle in the Den of
Tryphonius, they had strange Vestures, and Rites, they were clad with a linen
Coat, that was girt to them with a Fillet, or hairelace, and they had Slippers
tied to their feet, peculiar to that place; these things were to procure the
greater reverence to their Religion, Oracles, and Prophesies.

The word is from (...) to cover, hide, and the Nounes derived thence signify
Operimentum, velamen, praetextum, quicquid obtenditur, ut aliquid abscondas vel
dissimules; Hence Pradus interprets the word here, Chesathoth, rete, quod
obtendunt aucupes ad capiendas aviculas.

We must take the words in a metaphorical sense; a man that lies upon the hard
ground, among stones or thorns, will sleep little, and very uneasily,
unquietly; but a man that has soft pillowes to lie upon, he sleeps much, with
great ease and quiet, he has nothing to trouble or interrupt his sleep; when
men are full of feare^, cares, distractions, they sleep among stones and
thorns: These Prophetesses by their Prophesies took away those fears, cares,
and distractions, were caused in the hearts of the people by the true Prophets,
who told them of Nebuchadnezzars coming, and threatened the ruin of City and
Temple, and their going into Captivity; they flattered them, and fed them with
fair words, they promised them peace, safety, liberty, etc. and so put
Pillowes under their heads and armeholes, and strengthened them in their
security.

Make Kerchiefes upon the head, etc,
(...) Vailes wherewith Women did cover their faces; hereby is meant the
flatteries and false Prophesies whereby they veiled and covered up the people
in security, that they might sleep securely in utramvis aurem, and not be
troubled with any apprehensions of danger; though they sinned grievously, they
persuaded them, the Lord was not angry with them, and they fitted their words
and prophesies to the condition of every one; they had that fitted the humors
of the ancient, of the middle age, of youth, they through their craft and lying
Prophesies applied themselves to the head of every stature; and so pleased all,
and lulled them in a general security. Junius thinks these Kerchiefes were,
Triumphales pilei, made up into the form of crowns of Hats, and set upon the
heads of the Statues, thereby presaging they should have not only safety from,
but victory over their enemies, which they learned from the practice of
Egyptians and Babylonians; and to this purpose is Deodate, who expounds Vailes
of the mourning and calamity of others; now if the Jews had been conquerors of
the Babylonians, the Babylonians had had cause of covering their faces and
mourning for their loss.

To hunt souls.
(...) Ad venandum, which the Septuagint render this (...), to pervert souls;
the French, Pour attrapper les persons: Cast: Ad aucupandas animas: Vulgar,
Ad capiendas animas; those that hunt, set their nets, and then drive what is
hunted into their Nets, and so make a prey of it, the like do these, the
Prophets they seduce souls; that is, Men and Women, with a false hope of peace
and good days, and so the evil day comes upon them unthought of, and they are
made a prey.

Will you hunt the souls of my people?
By this Interrogation the Lord manifests his displeasure, they thought it was
free for them to deceive the people with their Pillowes and Kercheifes, with
their flattering words, false promises, and to make gain of them, but the Lord
would not let things pass, so will you hunt their souls, spoil and prey upon
them, you shall be hunted your selves, and taken in your lying Prophefies.

Will you save the souls alive of them that come unto you.
The Hebrew (...) Animat vobis vivificebitis, will you make alive souls unto
you; these words may refer either to the false Prophetesses, or to others; if
to the false Prophetesses, the sense is this, will you delude my people with
vain hopes, with promises of life and happy days, that you may get from them
meat and drink, that so you may quicken and keep alive your own souls; what
will you destroy your souls with your errors, to feed your own with bread;
and so Piscator reads the words, Do you hunt the souls of my people, Vt
animat vobis vivas conservetis; if to others, the sense is thus, you hunt the
souls of the people, you ensnare them with your lies, divinations, and fained
visions, and will ye save them alive that come to you and believe what you
say? No, while you persuade them they shall live, you take away their life from
them; the very taking of them with your falsehoods is their death, you serve
them as hunters their game, when its taken they kill it.

And will ye pollute me among my people, etc.
This Verse contains several sins also of these wicked Prophetesses.

1. Their pollution of Gods Name. 2. Their covetousness, Handfuls of Barley,
and pieces, etc. 3. Their cruelty, Slaying of Souls. 4. Their partiality, they
slew those should have lived, and spared those should have dyed.
Then the manner how all these were done, By their lies.

Will ye pollute me, etc.
They pretended they were sent and authorized of God to prophecy, that they
had the spirit of God, and were true Prophetesses, that what ever they
delivered should come to pass, they crossed the true Prophets, they
strengthened the people in their finfull practices, they made Prophecy
contemptible, and so profaned the Name of the Lord, caused many to fall to
Atheism and Apostasy. This God would not bear at their hands, therefore
says, Will ye.

For handfuls of Barley and pieces of Bread.
This is a kind of proverbiall speech, setting out the meannesse of that work
which is so cheap; Prophecy with them was at a vile and low price, if any
brought never so mean a reward, as a little Barley in his hand, or a crust of
bread with him to these deluding Prophetesses, presently they had a pleasing
answer; had these Women set their lying Prophesies at the highest rate, it had
not been warrantable to have profaned Gods glorious Name for great rewards,
but for such petty gain to expose his Name to scorn, was extremely wicked:
Cato upbraided Marcus Coelius, as Gellius has it, Quod frusto panis conduci
possit ut taceat vel loquatur.

To stay the souls that should not dye, etc.
By souls you must understand Persons, for souls are not to be slain, Matthew.
10.28. They prophesied against the godly that they should dye, and so deprived
them of their peace, comfort, and apprehensions they had of Gods favor, filled
them with fears, griefs, and sad th ughts, if they harkened to Jeremiah, and
submitted to Nebuchadnez^ar: Or thus, they stirred up the people against them
were godly; and would not adhere to them, believing their Prophesies, and
provoke the Magistrates to restrain them, yea to cut them off, and so slew
them before their time; they should have lived longer by the course of nature,
had not these blood thirsty Prophetesses hastened their death.

To save the souls alive should not live.
They promised life, peace, happiness, to those they should have threatened
War, misery, death, Zedekiah and many with him, had broken the bath made with
Nebuchadnezzar to be tributaries to him, and so deserved death upon that
ground, others oppressed, filled the Land with bloody-crimes, were notoriously
Idolatrous and not worthy to live, yet these were justified, pleaded for, and
protected against the power of any would have had Justice executed.

Its not against the judgment of some learned ones to understand death and
life here, of eternal death and life; these Women teachers threatened the
righteous with eternal death, shut Heaven upon them, and opened Hell wide
enough upon them, and what lay in them, slew their souls; and for the others
they promised Heaven and all joys of it to them, and so saved them alive they
should not.

That its an old practice of Satan to trouble the Church, as with false
Prophets, Obser. 1.
so with false Prophetesses; God raised up Women Prophets to honor that Sex,
and to help his people, and the Devil rayses up Women to spread lies, to
deceive and damnifie the people, and to gain by that Sex the more to his
Kingdom: Satan imitates God, if he will have he or she Prophets, the like
will he have. In the Church of Thyatyra was a Jezabel which called her self a
Prophetess to teach and seduce the servants of Christ, to commit fornication,
and to eat things sacrificed to Idols, Revel. 2.20. Jezabel disturbed Israel,
opposed and sought the death of the true Prophets, maintained Idolatry, so did
this other Jezabel, etc. Nehem. 6.14. There is mention of one Noadiah a
Prophetess, she with other false Prophets prophesied against the building of
the Temple, encouraged Sanballat, Tobias, and others to hinder it, labored to
possess Nehemiah and the builders with fear. Such there have been in former
days, and such will be Women that take upon them to teach and deceive unwary
people, such were Prisca and Maximilla the companions of Montanus the Heretic,
such are the Jesuitesses.

2. Its the Character of false Teachers of what kind soever, Women or Men, to
flatter, sooth, insinuate, and speak pleasing things; the false Prophets cried
peace, etc. these false Prophetesses sow pillowes to all armeholes, etc. yea
their scope is to please all sorts, they observe the humors of men, and so
apply themselves to please answerably, Isa. 30.10. this was the disposition of
the people, Prophecy not unto us right things, speak unto us smooth things,
prophecy deceit. 2 Timothy 4.3 People would have Teachers after their own lusts.

3. False Prophesies; flattering, and erroneous Doctrines are the Snares and
Nets with which false Teachers do hunt souls.

Prove. 6.26. An Adultresse hunts for the precious life, and these for the
precious souls.

Ephesians. 4.14. They lie in wait to deceive.

Revel. 20.8. Its the Devils work to deceive the Nations in the four quarters
of the Earth.

4. What ever false Teachers promise they cannot perform, Will you save alive
the souls come unto you; will you keep off War, Plague, Famine, when
Nebuchadnezzar shall come about the walls, etc.

5. False Teachers profane Gods Name, and he takes it very ill at their hands,
Will ye pollute me among my people; to make God the Author of their dreame^,
lies, etc. to pretend they are sent of him, and cause his people to c^nce^ve he
deludes them, and tells them contraries, one thing by Jeremiah, other things by
them, and that for such poor things as Barley.

6. Covetousness, baseness of spirit, makes merchandise o Gods Name, truth,
and the souls of persons.

Mic. 3.5. He that puts not into their mouths, the Prophets he means, they
even prepare War against him; Judas sold Christ, etc. a Woman to prostitute her
chasti^y for hand^us of Barley is base, much more to serve souls so, 2 Pet.
2.3 With fained words they make merchandise of you.

7. That they kill whom God would not have killed, and spare those whom God
would not have spared, they curse whom God blesses, and bless whom God curses.

In the 20, 21, 23. Verses, he sets down Gods proceeding with these false
Prophetesses, he will be against them, tear their Pillowes and Ketchleses,
deliver his out of their hands, and destroy them and their divinations.

To make them flee.
(...) Piscator has it, In floribus hortis, they were wont to sacrifice in
Gardens, Isa. 1.29: 65.3: 66.17. these Prophetesses with their flatteries, drew
in young Maids, to Prophefie smooth and pleasing things, and they drew in the
men, and so great lewdness and filthiness was amongst them, and they were
charmed with their divinations: We may take it thus, they hunted them, they
used seducing ways by their Prophefies, promises, and flatteries, to make them
flee from the truth, Those expound the words of their souls fleeing out of
their bodies, or of fleeing into Babylon certainly mistake.
and true Prophets, to take them off from Jeremiah and Ezekiel, and so should
be like birds that fly from bough to bough, or beasts that run from place to
place, and abide no where.

I will let the souls go, even the souls that you hunt.
The meaning is, I will free them from the delusion of their false Prophefies,
they shall go Captive into Babylon, and be no longer in their hands.

With lies ye have made the hearts of the righteous sad.
The Hebrew is Conterere, to wear, to make contrite; Septuagint (...), ye
have perverted the heart of the righteous: There were some among them who
hearkened to the true Prophets, and it was in their hearts to yield to the
Chaldeans, as Jeremiah counseled; but when they heard the false Prophets and
Prophetesses encouraging the people not to fear Nebuchadnezzar, but promised
safety to them that should stay in the City; they were troubled, sadded, and
knew not what to do, and by this means also they strengthened the hands of
the wicked, who gave heed to their lying Prophefies, and slighted what ever
Jeremiah said.

You shall see no more vanity, nor Divine divinations.
There was no weight, no truth, in what they said, who ever received their
Prophefies were deceived, the time was approaching which would discover the
vanity of their visions, and cut them off from seeing any more, for they should
perish.

The Lord is against false Prophetesses, and will destroy their Prophefies,
Ceremonies, they use, and them too, Behold I am against your Pillowes, I will
tear them from your arms, and the Kerchiefes from your heads, and ye shall
see no more vanity nor Divine divinations. God will not let such persons and
practices go unpunished, as intrude into the Prophetical Office, abuse his
Name, Authority, Truth, and People.

2. Women teachers and Men teachers also are very subtle to seduce the people,
they had their Pillowes and Kerchiefes, their flatteries, pleasing Prophefies
and promises to keep them In security, to hunt them into the Gardens, to commit
spiritual and corporal whoredom: Calvin judges that they pretended, altas
speculationes, some transcendent matters, thereby to arise the expectations of
of the people, who were weary of Jeremiahs Prophefie, being of a lower strain
then Isaiahs, and some others, and were tainted with curiosity and itching
ears. They were not content with wholesome and plain Doctrine, but would be
wise beyond sobriety, and God suffered subtle and false Teachers to hunt and
snare them. Sometimes fowls are snared in flying, where no danger is suspected,
and these were deluded by those speculations were given out by false
Prophetesses: How were the Popish spirits taken with the tenet of Dionysius
touching the heavenly Hierarchy; so with the Jesuits Dalilab, de media
scientia: and at this day are not multitudes taken with speculations and
novelties, do they not despise wholesome Doctrine, and lysten to erroneous
Teachers both Men and Women.

3. Gods people may be taken with some errors of the times, and of false
Teachers, I will deliver my people out of their hand, and they shallbe no more
in their hand; they were then in their hands, they had hunted them into their
nets, and caught them with their inticeing Prophesies and brought them over to
be of their mind. Jezabel did seduce the servants of Christ, Rev. 2.20. you
know Peter and Barnabas were drawn into an error, Gal. 2.12, 13, 14. and
Christ has told you, Matthew. 24.11. That many false Prophets shall rise, and
deceive many: They rise from the Earth, or out of the bottomless Pit, and do
much hurt with their smoaky Doctrines, they darken the Heavens, so that the
Saints mistake their way. There were those constreined the Galatians to be
Circumcised, Chap. 6.12. and Acts 20.30. Of their own selves shall men arise,
speaking perverse things to draw away Disciples after them. The old lying
Prophet deceived and drew the young Prophet into a snare, cost him his life, a
Lion devoured him, 1 Kings 13. I fear there are young Prophets drawn away
into dangerous errors, and many others about this City, whom I hope God will
keep from the roaring Lion, and deliver in due time from the error of their
ways. Let the counsel of Solomon to his Son, Prove, 19.27. be welcome to
you, Cease to hear the instruction that causes to err from the words of
knowledge: and hearken to Peter, 2 Epist. 3.17, 18. Seeing you know these
things before, beware least ye also being led away with the error of the
wicked, fall from your own steadfastness, but grow in grace, and in the
knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

4. The Doctrines of false Teachers do prejudice both the godly and the
wicked, they sadden the hearts of those should not be sadded, and they
strengthen the hands of the wicked which should be weakened: When false
Teachers give out their lies, corrupt truths, and opinions, they weaken the
authority of the true Prophets Doctrine, they fill the godly with fears,
scruples, grief and discouragement. What sadding Doctrines are among the
Papists, from their false Teachers, as that of Auricular Confession, all sins
must be confessed to a Priest; justification by works, Satisfaction,
Purgatory, Transubstantiation, that of the death of Infants before Baptism,
falling away from grace, keeping of the Law, Traditions, etc. These with
others, are Doctrines which wound the hearts of the godly, and much perplex
them; and are there not as sadding and heart perplexing Doctrines among us?
Viz. Denial of the Sacred Trinity, Christ's Divine nature, authority of the
holy Scripture, that God is the author, creator, and inventor of all sin, that
it it the same spirit is in the godly and the wicked, that there is no
Election, but an universal Redemption, that God sees no sin in his, that the
Law is of no use to Believers, that Christ himself may sin as well as a Child
of God, that all days are alike, the Lords day having no pre-eminence, that
Women may Preach, that there is no power or rule in the Church, but all in the
Civil Magistrate; as these opinions sadden the hearts of the godly, so they
strengthen the hands of those are wicked, they go on in their ways, and never
think of returning to the Lord: False Teachers which speak pleasing things,
undo the souls of sinners; they promise life when they should threaten death,
open to them their danger, show them the evil of their ways, and use the
strongest arguments they can to awaken and reduce them, Jer. 23.22. Had they
caused my people to hear my words, then they should have turned them from
their evil way, and from the evil of their doings.

5. God has his times to deliver his people from the flattery, tyranny, and
policy of false Teachers, I will deliver them out of their hand; there was a
day when the people were delivered from the tyranny and flattery of Ahabs false
Prophets, 1 Kings 18. and Rev. 19.20. the Beast with the false Prophet, etc.
were thrown into the Luke.

A Table containing the principal things in the precedent Expositions.
A
Account, The faithful may boldly give up their account. 275. 276 Action,
Grace will break out into action, 456. actions more observable then words. 477
Affliction, it makes men mind God, 16 before affliction men slight, under it
regard, the Word of God, 25. 137. 138 by them the Lord sanctifies, 378. are the
acts of God, 383. no arguments of divine hatred, 384. have their period, 395 of
themselves do not sa^ctifie. 466 Angels have a care of communities, 207 are at
Gods command, 208. 212. 325 in what sense called men, 209. the bodies they
assume, not substantial. ibid Angels against us, when God against us, 211.
they have their Commission from Christ, 217. ready to do the will of God, 282.
have power over the wheels, 285. God uses their ministry, 286. desirous to
know the things of God, 291. applaud the judgments of God, 294. have no hands,
297. liken'd to fire, ibid. watch to serve Christ, 298. honor Christ
exceedingly, ibid. furnished with ability for employments, 300. do not things
rashly, ibid. Anger in God, the degrees of it, 196. described, ibid. God has
times of being surious, ibid. when that time is, 197. Gods fury dreadful, 199.
it hastens judgments, 206. a general destruction in the day of Gods wrath,
250. God not always angry, 395. has an admiring indignation at his peoples
sins. 496 Assemblies, the sense of the word, 531. two kinds of assemblies
amongst the Jews, 532. much good in the assemblies of Saints. 538 Astrology,
judicial astrology unlawful. 499 Atheism, the cause of man's going from God,
167. set out more fully, 266
B
Banishment or Captivity, is a civil death. 11, 12 Blood, bloody crimes what,
104. land full of blood, 264. what it notes, ibid. Brethren, a word of diverse
acceptions in Scripture. 366 Burden, what meant by it, 482. burden of sin
brings burden of judgment, 485 Burials of Princes and Prophets with costly
things. 7
C
Captivity, Isreal's captivity, 389. Jeconias captives and Zedekiahs, whither of
them returned. 390 Casual, motions here below not casual. 310 Chain notes
four things, 102, 103. what sins bring chains. 105 Chaldeans liken'd to
Fishermen, and why. 483, 484. worst of heathen. 107 Cherubims what, 278. 467.
why differenced by the Prophet, 279. Coals of fire between the Cherubims what,
284. attend upon Christ, 290. why God said to dwell between the Cherubims,
292. the sound of their wings what it imports, 294. by the fire they took what
meant, 297. their hands and wings what they import, 300. their motions
uniforme, 307. the several resemblances of their faces, 315, 316. a doubt
cleared, 317. Cherubims subservient to God. 325 Children, how it can stand with
Gods justice to destroy little ones. 245 Christ, the Angel of the Covenant, 214
the three Offices of Christ, ibid. Christ variously represented, 215. commander
in chief, 217. mediates for his people, ibid, has care of them, 217, 218.
Christ the marker of Saints, 234. has power to save and to destroy, ibid.
Christ a faithful executioner of Gods will, 275. secures those his Father
affects. 276 Church shall never fail, 12. Churches have their periods, 33. God
manifests his presence in the Church by some notable sign. 223 it never
totally failed, 231. Churches and States degenerating, go on to a height of
wickedness, 271. no visible Church but may fall, 323. those have the name of a
Church rigid against the true Church, 369 there may be no true church where
Church-ship is pretended, 375. the notes some make of it, ibid. the truth of
Churchship whence fetched, 376. tares will be in the Church. 465 Circumstances
of things to be observed, 363 Cities, what ruins them, 8. City full of
perverseness, what, 260. City a Cauldron and how, 334, 335. None can destroy it
unless God give command. 287 Cloud, God often appeared in a cloud, 290
Comforts, God can make comforts terrors, 286. God speaks comfortably, when men
speak bitterly, 382. when they are comfortless, 392. Comforts leave when God
leaves, 470. God can mix sorrows with comforts. 490 Command, commands of God
to be readily obeyed, 254. 480. supernatural things commanded are not in
vain, 346 Conscience, cannot be compelled, 423, 424 Conversation of the
wicked, vexation to the godly, 237, 238. men of heavenly conversations are
fittest to know Christ, 148. Counsels, truth is not tied to them, 124
Counsel, in counsel from great ones does great mischief, 339. dreadful
judgments upon evil Councillors. 360. showed in four things, ibid.
Covetousness, its greedy of gain, though a curse be in it, 59. folly of it.
80 Countries, The Lord the disposer of them. 394, 395 Creatures help little,
78, 79. glory, pomp, cease. 110 Creatures all at Gods command, 313 314. his
spirit in all, 321. not to eye second causes. 320 Crying, in man, and in God,
how meant, 202, 203. reasons of Gods crying, 202, 203 Custom, Gods people
prone to take up heathenish customs, 354. provoke God greatly. 354, 355
D
Days of trouble. 45 Death, some comfort to die in a man's own Country. 352,
353 Decree, no devices can frustrate Gods purpose. 341 Degenerate, Those do
so, go on to an height of sinning. 271 Delay, delays make God angry. 156
Desert, what it notes. 519 Desertion, a forerunner of judgments, 224. God
unwilling to leave a people, 226. 323. 469. When God leaves, comforts leave,
323. 470. Men are to take notice of Gods departure, 324 God may leave a people.
469 Design, those are upon great designs should begin with God. 218, 219
Device, devising mischief what it means, 332. men never wanting to devise
mischief, 337, 338. no devices can null Gods counsel. 341 D^blath. 29
Difficult, things difficult easy to God. 393 Displeasure of God very grievous,
537, 538 Divination. 498, 499 Division is Abaddon, Apollyon, 225. the evils of
division, 407, 408. prejudices the growth of grace, 409. a disparagement to
Christ, 410. glories at others sufferings. 411 Doing, they do not what they
know, shall not know what to do, 126. what it implies, 454. it evidences the
man. 455 Dove, a fearful and mourning creature. 68
E
Ears, ears to hear and hear not, how meant, 475. wicked men hear not
judgments. 476 Earth, the Lord has forsaken the earth, the phrase in this
Prophet only, and but twice. 266 Eating and drinking with trembling, what it
sets forth. 488 Enemy, It Is dreadful to have God against one, 536. whom God is
against, his hand is upon, 537. the fruits of it very grievous. 537, 538
Error, loves darkness, 167. when God visits for error, he opens a door for
truth. 211 Estates abused, bring the wrath of God upon them, 112. how to
prevent it, ibid. Example, Princes not to be patterns in point of Religion,
176. Ringleaders to sin, ringleaders in punishment, 251, 252 Excellency, Good
men not able to bear divine excellencies. 282 Eyes instruments of evil, 15.
of great evil, 21. The eye is for two things, 238. Eye not sparing what, 244.
273. Eye of the Lord upon his people, 392. Eyes to see and see not, how meant,
475. wicked men see not Gods judgments, 476. their not seeing is in hemselves,
ibid. Ezra, what that name signifies, 389
F
Face, of God what it signifies, 98. they are miserable from whom its turned,
99, 100. covering of the face when used, 478, 479. to set the face against any
one, in Scripture sense what. 554 Faith, the eye of the soul. 153 Falling on
the face, what. 256 Fear, what sinners fear the Lord brings upon them, 250,
251. Fear makes men tremble. 488 Feebleness, threefold. 70 Fire, Christ
likend to it. 142 Firmament, why so called. 278 Flattering, originally is
smoothing, 500. undoes men, 502. causes security. 503 Flesh, what it is put
for. 442 Free Will, Two Questions about freewill resolved. 436, 437
G
Gate, Magistrates were wont to sit at the gate to hear causes. 330 Gathering,
what it means. 387 Gilgal observable things of it. 191 Glory, glory of God
what is understood by it, 222. 467. his glory went to the threshold, and why,
223. the signs of Gods presence are the glory of God, 224 Divine glory usually
hidden in cloudy darkness, 291. the glory of the Lord who, 292. the way Christ
goes glorious, 293. glory of God standing upon the mountain how meant? and to
what end, 468, 469. sight of Gods glory, a great privilege. 153 God shows
mercy sometimes when severe judgments are deserved, 18. if God be wrath, all
preparations are in vain, 63. God a God of glory, 152, 153. sees what ever are
the thoughts, 167. there is power in his commands, 210, 211. his presence with
his Church, 223, 224. Signs of his presence, 224, 225. God has a care of his
when judgments destroy others, 232, 237. how this appears, 233. slow to
execute judgment, 282. looks after the ways of men, 285. why styled the God
of Israel, 325. God knows men and their ways, 336. overpowers all, 341.
knows the heart, 347. is mindful of his threats, 384. assists us by his
grace, 456. I will be their God; it imports much, 459. to 462. God is above
all, God against one, vid. enemy. 468 Godly but a few, 232. God owns them in
the worst times, 235. the lives and comforts of the godly dear to God. 51
conscious of their unworthiness, 260. God sollicitous for them, 275. revives
them, ibid. secures them, 276. is with them in every place and condition, 392
393. the godly comply not, but sigh for the wickedness of the times, 236, 237.
their sighing what, and how great, 237, 238. why they sigh, 238. God takes
notice of their wrongs. 372 Grace is free in respect of persons, place, and
time, 17. Grace wrought up by degrees, 419. Grace in the heart will appear in
the life, 456. where God gives grace, be looks for progress, 457. it is
freegrace that chooses a people, 463. God does not equally dispense his grace,
ibid. Guilt, when guilt is, there is fear, 350 and security. 373
H
Haggalgal, of that word. 313 Hand, stretching out the hand to and upon a
people differ, 30. God smites sinning hands, 131. hand of God what it notes.
531 Happiness, wherein it consists. 462 Head, recompensing their ways upon
their own head, what. 272 Hearing the same things again no damage. 320 Heart,
such as that is, such will the senses be, 22. Ill thoughts go out thence, 245.
its several acceptions, 399. oneness of heart what opposite unto, 400, 401.
men's hearts of themselves are divided, 406. Stoninesse of heart, what, 438. and
what it notes, 438. to 441. a stony heart may receive the Word, and how, 441,
442. the heart naturally is stony, ibid. this stoninesse spreads, 442, 443.
stoninesse a great evil, 443. its the Lord takes away the stony heart, 443,
444. not totally, 444. the stoninesse in the godly and the wicked differenced,
445. fleshly heart, what it implies, 446. a double tenderness, ibid. a
description of it, ibid. discoveries of tenderness, 447. to 450 tenderness of
heart a choice mercy, 450, 451. it is the gift of God, 451. heart, for what it is
sometimes put, 464. the heart of the godly and wicked contrary, 466. God
observes how the heart stands affected, ibid. a corrupt heart swells being
opposed, 494. is prone to elude truths. 507 Heathens, how they honored their
Gods, 178 Hebruismes. 32 Hedge, what the bedge of Church and State is. 522
Help, God can make helps helpless. 486 High places: when they might sacrifice
there, when not. 4 Holy, men must be lift up and above themselves to
participate of divine things. 148 Honor, they that honor God, God will honor
them, 235, 236. to honor God how, 236. honor quickly laid in the dust. 362
Hope, God often destroys sinners hopes, 59, 60 Humility, the humblest is the
greatest, 414 House, meeting in houses ancient and warrantable, 138. honored
by God, 139
I
Jaazaniah, what that name signifies, 163 Jarash, signifies contraries. 108
Idols are stinking defiling things, 6 Idolatry got in is not easily got out, 8
it provokes God greatly, and lays all wast, ibid. its called whoredom, and
wherein that lies, 14. Idolatry, a God provoking sin, 150. a grievous sin, and
wherein it lies, 164. a wrong to God, 151. causes God to depart, 152. Idolaters
act closely, 163. not so closely but some espiall, ibid. Idolatry infatuates
wise men, 165. the cunning of idolators, ibid. are expensive, ibid. forget all
modesty, 170. spreads to both sexes, 172. makes shameless, ibid. Idols were
wept for, how much more for God wronged, 172. Idols besot, 173 Idolatry
loathsome, 178. God sets a special mark upon idolators, 194. who are such, 195.
Idolatrous worship stinking, 195. brings destruction, ibid. no symbolizing with
Idolators, 219, 220 Idolators shall not go unpunished, 467 Jehovi, when used.
257 Jeremy why he purchased Hannameela land. 56, 57 Jews, under the Law saved
as we under the Gospel. 216 Images of the Sun, 5. Image of jealousy, what it
was, why so called, how seated, 147. Images pull down Gods worship. 149
Incense, made of sweet and costly things, 163. a token of worship, ibid.
Infirmities, God pitties infirmities, 368, 369. so should men. 376 Ingratitude
makes God appeal to man, 166 Injustice, abomination to God, 182. a crying
sin, ibid. Israel, put for Judah, 345. Israelit es why so called, 152. the
God of Israel a glorious God, ibid. why styled the God of Israel, ibid. and
325. why the house of Israel, 263. the land of Israel, why not the land of
Judah, 388. a choice land, ibid. their several captivities, 389. by whom
gathered, ibid. the land of Israel has many Eulogies in Scripture. 355 Jubilee,
what they did that year. 56 Judgments of God sudden, 36. they are his
messengers, 38. just. ibid. and 132. they linger not, 43. walk where God
pleases, 44. by degrees he comes to severitie of them, 121. general when sin
is so, 131. Judgments, God makes them known before he executes them, 205. and
why, 206. none come but at the Lords appointment, ibid. a time when God hastens
judgments, 206, 207. no escaping Gods judgments, 212. when judgments are
abroad Christ intercedes, 216. The Lord proceeds to judgment judicially, 230.
judgment begins at Gods own house, and why, 247 253. God in executing them
manifests mercy, 248. a time when judgment delays not, 248. judgments an
extensive at sinners sins, 254. God intense upon judgments, ibid. they puzzle
Prophets, 261, 262. Gods punishments exceed not men's sins, 270. judgments are
in the hand of Christ, 287. at his dispose, 296. He proceeds considerately,
296, 297. declares the cause of his proceeding to judgment, 394. no waving of
judgments, ibid. God can use any instruments to accomplish them, 351. the
ground, scope, and end of judgments, 353. sudden notes severity, 360.
immediately from the Lord terrible, 360, 361. judgments falling whilst
ordinances are administering, 362. the godly fear when wicked fall, 364. put
the Saints upon prayer, ibid. the beginning of judgments an inlet to misery,
364. judgments sanctified, 397. how evidenced, 397, 398. God just in his
judgments, 467. not discerned by wicked men, 476. the cause in themselves,
ibid. judgments produce those effects mercies do not, 487. God shows mercies
amidst judgments, 487. 497. wicked men's thoughts about judgments vain, 505
K
Kingdoms have an end, 33. their ruin is in themselves. 52, 53 Knowledge,
those will not know God in a way of mercy, shall know him in a way of
judgment. 133
L
Law to perish from the Priest, what. 119 Left, I was lest, what it means. 256
Light given and taken away at pleasure, 125 Lord God, what they denote. 257
Love, where love it God dwells, 225. it unites, 417. once commanded to take the
shield of faith, twice to put on love, ibid. Lies, termed bars. 372
M
Man, who the man was clothed with linen, 283. men unspirited against evil,
64 men chief in place usually corrupt, 336 men of rigid spirits, 370 corrupt
men are glad to be rid of the conscientious. 370, 371 Mark, set a mark, of that
phrase see 227, 228. Christ's marking of his, what it intimates, 228, 229. who
it is, is the marker of Saints, 234. God distinguishes between the precious and
the vile, 236. 246. the mark of Christ, and of the beast different, 234. the
deliverance of the marked ones a type, etc. 246 Means, God carries on his work
by weak means. 479, 480 Meetings private ones lawful, 138 God has honored
them. 139 Mercy of God is free in regard of persons, places, times, 17. mercy
is often showed when there is cause of sharp judgments, 18. abuse of mercies
defiles them, 82. choicest mercies apt to be abused, 92. abuse causes loss of
them, 95. mercy acts before justice, 248. mercies sanctified produce answerable
effects, 397. God when in a way of mercy, multiplies mercies, 452. mercies
oblige to obedience. 454 Ministers, what they should be, what not, 247. must
deprecate judgments coming, 260, 261. the Lord acquaints them with his
proceedings, 266. why he does this, ibid. Ministers must do their office, 344.
God enables them to the work, 345. must tell men of their sins, 346, 347. must
speak to those they are intended for, 473. must declare what they have heard,
ibid. must be faithful, ibid. not look at the success, 477. must open things
mysterious, 490. must stand in the gap, 520, 521. termed builders, husbandmen.
526 Mischief, what it notes, 117. one follows upon another. 120 Mountains of
Israel, 2. speaking to them. 3 Mourn, Gods people should mourn for sin and
judgments that come by them, 29. There be-times for great ones to mourn, 128,
129. why the godly mourn, 238. to 240. for what England should mourn, 240. to
242
N
Necessity, it makes men seek what was neglected before. 115 Nehemiah, what
that name signifies, 399 New, how taken in Scripture. 425 Number, of the number
Seaventie. 162
O
Obedient, an obedientiall spirit suitable to Christ's commands, 156. all
creatures at Gods command, 212. 313. Christ himself, 213. 288. the end of
mercy is obedience, 454. obedience how qualified, 455. an evidence of the work
of grace, ibid. it is from God, 456. it is man's duty. 480 One, how the word may be
taken, 399. one heart, how meant, from 399. to 401. its description, ibid.
oneness of heart diversely considered, from 401. to 403. when this oneness was
amongst the Jews, 403, 404. one heartedness whether attainable in this life,
404. men's hearts of themselves not one, 406. oneness a great blessing, ibid.
the good of it particularized: the evil of its contrary specified, 407.
oneness invites others, 408. improves grace, 409. furthers prayers, ibid. an
honor to Christ, 410. sympathizes with each other, ibid. an evidence of grace,
411. makes willing to do for another, ibid. Helps to this oneness, or unity,
411. to 416. preservatives of it, 416. to 418. Inducements to it, 418. to 422.
Oneheartednesse the gift of God. 422 Oppression, a spreading sin, 191. what
the Hebrew for it signifies, 192 State oppression and Church corruption got
together, 193. Causes God to deal in fury, 198. oppression in Scripture sense
is murder, 348. lays a Land desolate. 490 Ordinances are the ornaments and
glory of a people, 89, 90. Men may have them, without God in them, 158. Keep
mine Ordinances, of that phrase, and what it imports. 453
P
Pains must be great to find out great evils. 164 Parents sins ruin
children. 251 Patience, The Lord will not always bear with sinners, 204. his
patience exceeding great. 271. 477 Peace, what it notes, 540. wicked men are
peaceless, 114. it may be sought too late. 115 Pelatiah, of the name, 330. his
death, and Questions resolved concerning him. 355. 360 People, They shall be my
people, what the words, implie, 458, 459. God marries a people to himself,
462. great happiness to have God ours, ibid. it is free grace any are his, 463.
those are Gods, have encouragement to asks 464. People easily misted, 528, 529
Pithom and Pethah, what they express. 360 Pity, arguments of pity, 249, 250.
God deals gently with his. 268, 269 Place, God often smites sinners in the place
where they sinned. 253 Pomp, 108. not to be confided in. 110 Prayer, forced is
faithless, 199. Prayer for others, 261. Sins may be such as God will not
hear prayer, 267, 268 and why. 268, 269 Preparations, endeavors not seconded
by God come to naught. 63 Presence, its a great evil when God takes away the
signs of his presence, 123 Pride precedes destruction, 51, 52. the cause of
man's going from God. 167 Princes, are chief Rulers, 330. are to ease burdens,
483. else God has burdens for them, 484. cannot escape judgments. 485, 486
Privilege, no privilege exempts a sinning people from judgment. 37. 61
Privileges no plea. 288 Promises of God shall be performed, 396 505. only to
some. 465 Prophets, they are prayed, sued to in streights, 122. 137. if not
heard when men are at ease, they shall miss of help from them in trouble, ibid.
Prophets privy to what God does, 288. acted by the Spirit, 335, 336. prophecy
why twice mentioned, 343. for new acts of prophecy now influx of Spirit, 345,
346. Prophets were to deal particularly with sinners, 346, 347. Of Ezekiels
prophesying, some doubts cleared, 355. to 360. God looks what entertainment
they have, 401. God puts them often upon troublesome service, 489. Prophets were
to make known dark things, 490. False Prophets have cunning ways to prevail,
501. their visions false and flattering, 501, 502. make men secure, 503. events
distinguish Prophets, 503. Prophesying of their own hearts, what it is, 510.
false Prophets, why called Prophets, ibid. judgment denounced against them,
511. false Prophets described, 511, 512. false Prophets in the Churh no new
thing, 512, 513. who are true Prophets, who false, 513. what comes from false
Prophets is worthless, 514. the folly of false Prophets, ibid. we is their
portion, 515. liken'd to Foxes from 515. to 519. a sad judgment when Prophets
become Foxes, 519. its a grief to heaven, 520. Prophets are to stand in the
gap, 523, 524. failing in their duty makes people fall, 526, true Prophets had
two things, 527. the impudency of false Prophets, 528. they seduce people, 528,
529. the Lord is against them. 535. several things that make the Lord against
them, 536. Prophets true in men's esteem, may be false in Gods, 538. false
Prophets liken'd to Masons and Carpenters, 452. A doubt Cleared out of Jer.
4.10.544. to 546. false Prophets seed people with vain hopes, 346. to please
men an argument of false teachers, 546, 547. their Proph^^^es seem to have much
strength, 547. false Prophets strengthen each other, 548. Prophets what is
their own is weak, 548, 549. their work is to make known truth, 549, 550. God
will try their works, 550. by variety of ways, ibid. false Prophets cannot
avoid judgments, ibid. what they deliver shall come to naught, 551. and
themselves discovered, 551, 552. women of old prophesied, 554, 555. Satan
troubled the Church us with false prophets, so with false prophetesses, 560
those are false that flatter, 561. false Prophesies are snares, ibid. false
Prophets cannot perform what they promise, ibid. they profane Gods Name, ibid.
make merchandise of truth, ibid. they curse whom God blesses, 562. Gods
proceeding against them, ibid. Women and men Teachers are subtle to seduce,
563. Gods people may be taken with their errors, 563 564. their doctrines
prejudice both the godly and wicked, 564. God has his times to deliver his
people from them. 565 Providence, acts in all things, 303. dubiously, 306. much
glory, and beauty in the works of providence. 310 Proverb, the word opened.
492, 493 Purpose, intentions to please God, often prove provocations. 183
Punishment, God punishes in the things men sin, 75. God punishes because
men do wickedly, 354. God Just in his punishing. 467
R
Rebellion, rebellious house, what, 475 Regeneration, see New Spirit. Religion
to be fetched from Christ and the Apostles, 176. not to be forced. 422. to 424
Remembering of God, what is in it 12, 13. to be put in mind of the some things
an advantage. 320 Repentance, true penitents are affected with, and loath
themselves for their sins, 22. Scripture-expressions concerning repentance,
22, 23. notes of true repentance. 23, 24 Repetitions are not in vain, 32. they
awaken. 43 Robbing. 99 Rod. 48, 49 Ruin of things in themselves, 52, 53 the
nearer d^struction, the more all things are out of order. 155 Rulers for the
most p^rt wicked, 366. its matter of mourning, 337. being evil make others
evil, 338, 339. secure, ibid.
S
Sackcloath. 73 Saints are C^rists treasure, 233. God their Sanctuary, 385.
shows them kindness in all places, 386. seeming Saints will be discovered.
538 Salvation, Few saved. 231 Samenes, how a thing like, may be called the
same. 317 Sanctum Sanctorum, 174. Sanctuary, 247. 378. the holiness of a place
averts not Gods wrath, 253. Sanctuary a place of refuge, 379. Gods presence
there, 380. acceptance there, ib^d. help from thence, 381. why called a little
Sanctuary. 381 Sapphire, whence derived, and what it notes. 279 Scoffing,
provokes God greatly, 343. examples of sc^ffers, 343, 344. 361. their
judgments momentaneous, 360 Scripture, sh^ns multiplying of words, 345. vid.
Word. Season, Things done in season are acceptable to God. 299 Secret of God is
amongst his people, 532 Secure, Great ones greatly secure, 339. Security an
epidemicall disease, brings judgment impartially. 484 Seduction, what? 540.
seducing of the people provokes God. 549 Segullah, what it notes. 641 Self, a
great let to divine things, 148. self-seeking matter of mourning, 337.
selveishness undoes. 413 Separation, what justifi able. 373, 374 Shame what,
73. ^^es two things. 74 Sig^e^, G^d manifests his pleasure by signs, 291 when
^isits with judgments gives signs, 293. set thee for a sign, what sign fies.
479 Sin, the evil in i^, 24. it weakens, 60. its the life of the wicked, 61
Sinners smitten in what they off^nd with, 131 there are degrees of sins, 158.
sin discovered by degrees, 159 Crl^sh sin in the conc^ption, 175 sin to be
measured not by man but Gods account, 179 sin no light matter, ibid.
delightsom, 190. sinning under mercies manifested, aggravates, 191. sins cause
God to deal in fury, 198. how to prevent it, ibid. sin makes God and the
creature our enemy, 211. drives away God, and lets in wrath, ibid. sins of
others to be mourned for, 238, 239. sins may provoke to utter destruction, 249.
what those sins are, 249, 250. open sins involve our selves and others, 250,
251. sin and judgment, 270. sins of Gods people fetch the greatest severity*
273. God deals equally with sinners, 274. He punishes them in places, and by
persons they think not of, 352. God from sin takes occasion to show mercy,
484. sinners of little account with God, 487. whether do sins hasten
judgment, 504, 505. sins make way for judgment. 522 Snare, what it signifies.
484 Sorrow, expressions of it, by smiting, st^mping, saying, alas, 28. its the
fruit of sin, 69. godly sorrow how known. 69 70 Soul put for appetite. 77
Spirit, new supplies needful, 140. its called the hand of the Lord, and why,
145. the agent by which Christ works, 147. makes known the sins of men, 149.
helps in studying, etc. ibid. directs inferior motions, 308. 320. is God, 336.
the Spirit of the Lord fell upon me, what it notes, 344 Spirit variously taken,
424. new Spirit how meant, 425. new qualities included in this new Spirit, 425
to 427. new qualities why called a new Spirit, 427, 428. the promise of a new
Spirit when fulfilled, 428. whether wrought at once, 429. this new Spirit is a
great mercy, ibid. how it acts where it is, 430. to 433. acts in a new manner,
and how that is, 433, 434. new Spirit the work of God, 435, 436. whether man's
spirit can close with objects propounded to it, 436. whether it is in man's
power to work this Spirit in himself, 437. Spirit shows things at a distance,
471. men acted by the Spirit are fit to speak to the people. 472 Standi^g,
what it impo^ts, 216. standing in the gap, what it means, 520, 521. standing
in battle, what. 522 Statutes of God the Saints way. 457 Streights, in them
men will seek to those they hated. 122 Strength humane not to be confided in,
71 Sudden judgments severe. 360. Superstition, men love to have of their own
in worship, 9. that is so, steals away the heart, 20. provokes God, 150.
Crosses set in high ways to promote superstition, 149. men engaged therein
grow worse. 164. superstition stirs up God to fury, 198. is pleasing. 466
Sympathize, the godly sympatize with the miseries of others, 259, 260. how to
be so affected. 260
T
Tammuz. 168, 169 Temple was Gods and the Jews ornament, 86. the beauty of it,
87. true majesty and excellency of it, 88. the mystery of the gates and doors
about it, 146. the building of Temples East and West, whence it sprung, 187.
Christ the Lord of the Temple, 291. there his glory appears, ibid. and 293
when Christ leaves the Temple, nothing but judgment remains. 293 Things how
taken in the Hebrew. 472 Thoughts of men are different from Gods. 497 Threat's,
a time of fulfilling them, 505 length of time does not null them. 497 Throne,
what it is, 280. the various acceptions, ibid. the Lord has kingly power, and
a double throne, 280. his throne the chief of thrones, 281. his throne
glorious, himself much more, ibid. Time, God looks not upon it at we do, 34.
in corrupt times great persons profane, 175. even in reforming times, ibid. in
the worst times God has some faithful, 230. God has times to punish, 524,
525. whom God finds then in sin they cannot stand, 525, 526 Traditions of
Fathers no warrant for worship. 176 Trouble, Christ specially cares for his in
times of trouble. 217 Trumpets, of what use. 63 Truth, its not confind to any
sort of men, 124. time noted when truths are given out, 137. Truth loves the
light. 167
V
Valor, wherein true valor lies. 72 Violence, 104. a spreading sin, 191. a
crying sin, 192. a leprosy, ibid. a wasting sin. 490 Vision, a vision in
Babylon not so clear as a vision in Sion, 279. God has his time to make
known visions, 314. the vision of the Prophet real, 471. visions soon
expire, ibid. every vision fails, that Proverb opened, 493. events discover
visions. 503 Unbelief, the cause of man's going from God. 167 Unity, spoken of
at large from 399. to 424. vid. oneness. Unthankfulnes causes upbraidings, 93
W
Wait, those wait on God loose not by it. 140 Walking in Gods statutes, what
it imports. 453 Ways what, 35. Ways and works of all, known unto God. 132
Weak, to be looked upon by the strong, 376 Wealth the fuel of sin, 77, 78.
it wounds in the day of wrath. 79 Wheels, what meant by them, 283. 467. going
in between the wheels, what it notes, 283, 284. standing beside the wheels,
what, 295. wheels what they note, 303. des^ribed, explained, 303, 304. wheels
^like in all places, 306. a coherence in their motions, 307 constant in their
motions, 308, 309. move not of themselves, 320. nor disorderly, or
unseasonably, ibid. Wicked men wise to promote superstition, 149. consent in
wickedness^, 165. in streights will cry to God, 199. devise mischief, 337.
consider not the evil day, 339. 373. 476. oppose God, 340. scoff at the Word,
340, 341. Saints may rejoice at the ruin of the wicked, and in what respects,
359. wicked men very secure, 493. entertain not threatenings, 494. mock at
truths. 507 Word of God not in vain, 26. its ill to sli^ht is in prosperity,
122. prized in time of affliction, 137. has diverse effects, 362, 363. the Word
the r^ale to walk by, 457. the Word of the Lord shall stand. 505, 506 Words,
sinful words of a spreading nature, 495. God takes notion of ungodly speeches,
ibid. words of the wicked contrary to Gods. 497 Work, Gods work done by secret
means, 300, 301. those do it should hide their hands, 302. man not able to
judge of Gods works, 306. works prove grace, 456. God will try all men's works.
550 World, worldly things little to be valued, 58. all things therein have
dependencie, 305. a methodicall disposing of things in the world, ibid. whether
all things alike in all parts of the world, 305. in what sense alike, 305, 306
Worship, nothing in it pleases God but his own, 10. that is of man's in worship
steals away the heart, 20. God must appoint it, 90. unspirituall pleases not,
111. worshipping of God is gainful, 140. the mind must be intent to discern
aright of worship, 155. superstitious worship affects the eye, ibid. th^se have
a call to it may safely examine worship, ibid. where pure worship is, there is
Gods presence, 157. corruptions in worship cause the Lord to depart, 158. 469.
mischief of it, ibid. men may have forms, and God gone, ibid. false worship a
work of darkness, 166. men leaving true worship, f^ll upon any, 171. false
worship and filthiness usually go together, 171, 172. Jews worshipped toward
the West, and why, 147. Sun-worship, ibid. whence it sprung, 174. 176. Eastern
worship why pleaded for, 177. corruption in worship not to be countenanced,
219. God discountenances it, 220. 466. false worshippers hate the true, 369.
glad to be rid of them, 370, 371. false worship pleases. 466 Worst, God uses
to holy ends. 109 Wrath, appreh^nsions of divine wrath dispirits men, 65. Gods
wrath is graduall. 121
Z
Zedekiah his burdens. 485 Zerubbabel, what that names signifies, 389.
A Table of the Scriptures opened or illustrated in the foregoing Work: The
first number directs to the Chapter, the second to the Verse, the third to the
Page.
Genesis. Chapter. Verse. Page. 4. 7. 212 13. 10. 154 22. 18. 463 45. 20. 244
Exodus. 12. 22. 233 13. 21, 22. 223 26. 3. 422 28. 2. 152 29. 45, 46. 458 32.
3. 165 32. 32. 534 40. 34. 290 Leviticus. 20. 3. 537 26. 11, 12. 460 26. 28.
197 Numbers. 7. 2. 330 23. 23. 341 23. 24. 178 1. 31. 368 6. 5. 459 7. 6. 459
9. 8. 190 29. 29, 113. 152 31. 21. 348 32. 42. 206 Joshua. 9. 14. 219 Judges.
9. 15. 287 1 Samuel. 2. 18. 214 6. 3. 531 12. 23. 526 15. 3. 250 ^^. 23. 179 1
Kings. 1. 18. 231 8. 10, 11. 124 16. 31. 179 19. 11, 12. 158 19. 17. 363 22.
12. 546 2 Kings. 2. 3. 273 23. 5. 5 11. ibid. 2 Chronicles. 24. 19, 20. 176 33.
9. 540 36. 16. 546 Ezra. 9. 15. 526 10. 9. 142 Nehemiah. 9. 1. 73 13. 11. 336
13. 17. 155 Job. 5. 12. 338 10. 1. 16 11. 5, 6. 270 15. 19. 190 15. 21. 350 15.
20. 24. 65 31. 26. 174 Psalm. 3. 8. 462 5. 9. 500 9. 7. 230 9. 16. 364 11. 4.
281 14. 5. 350 21. 11. 338 22. 3. 153 24. 7, 9, 10. 152 27. 13. 535 28. 4. 270
29. 9. 224 32. 6. 299 33. 12. 462 52. 7. 78 55. 21. 501 66. 12. 273 69. 9. 448
76. 1. 279 77. 13. 458 78. 8. 400 78. 38. 121 83. 5. 165 89. 7. 532 89. 31, 32.
523 91. 4. 549 103. 13, 14. 368 103. 20. 213, 298 206. 7. 191 106. 19. 190 106.
19. 195 107. 32. 532 112. 10. 551 115. 16. 394 118. 12. 536 119. 2. 347 119. 4.
457 119. 60. 157 119. 115. 445 119. 136. 238 132. 14. 469 133. 1. 407 133. 2.
408 142. 4. 119 147. 17. 526 147. 18. 314 Proverbs. 1. 31. 39 5. 22. ibid. 10.
6. 273 10. 23. 179 10. 24. 350 11. 4. 80 11. 10. 359 12. 2. 338 13. 10. 414 14.
3. 51 14. 9. 179 14. 15. 529 15. 3. 392 18. 11. 548 23. 4, 5. 79 25. 11. 299
29. 23. 414 Ecclesiastes. 3. 11. 298 8. 11. 494 Canticles. 2. 15. 518 Isaiah.
1. 14. 203 1. 23. 337 1. 25. 378 3. 12. 520 4. 3. 533 5. 7. 182 5. 19. 207 5.
19. 505 6. 8. 299 6. 9, 10. 224 8. 8. 254 8. 14. 380 11. 9. 420 14. 27. 341 25.
4. 543 26. 10. 191 26. 10, 11. 476 28. 14, 15. 339 29. 1. 36 29. 15. 167 30.
22. 194 33. 7. 71 42. 14. 204 47. 13. 499 48. 4. 442 43. 13. 60 49. 18. 154 50.
4. 346 51. 22. 460 53. 5. 216 57. 4. 190 57. 5. 194 59. 3. 495 59. 12. 39 62.
3. 461 66. 5. 371 Jeremiah. 1. 12. 505 3. 23. 546 5. 1. 232 5. 5. 336 5. 12.
505 5. 27, 28. 78 5. 31. 529 6. 6. 182 6. 14. 542 6. 7, 8. 324 7. 4. 546 7. 9,
10. 494 7. 16. 199 9. 1, 2. 237, 259 9. 16. 519 11. 11. 212 14. 7, 8. 9. 261
15. 1. 269 16. 2, 3. 333 17. 9, 10. 347 17. 15. 495 17. 17. 65 23. 11. 536 23.
15. 515 23. 16, 17. 547 23. 26. 513 2^. 21. 541 31. 19. 28 31. 33. 451 31. 34.
431 36. 23, 24. 155 48. 30. 372 50. 38. 194 51. 52. 230 Lamentations. 3. 16.
440 3. 39. 39 4. 19. 207 4. 13. 517 Ezekiel. 14. 17. 206 16. 5, 6. 463 20. 16.
194 20. 28. 191 22. 25. 517 22. 26. 191 22. 28. 542 22. 29, 30. 524 22. 30. 232
24. 13, 14. 197 34. 23, 24. 391 36. 26. 426 36. 27. 436 37. 7. 362 37. 11. 393
Hosea. 2. 10. 159 6. 5. 363 9. 10. 173 9. 15. 190 12. 1. 523 12. 11. 190 13. 9.
39 14. 8. 23 Amos. 2. 13. 204 2. 14. 119 3. 6. 383 4. 1, 2. 494 4. 4. 190 3. 2.
273 Obadiah. 15. 274. 372 Micah. 1. 12. 383 3. 5. 561 6. 9. 204 7. 13. 523
Nahum. 1. 5, 6. 526. 9. 42 Zephaniah. 1. 2. 340 1. 8. 130 1. 9. 191 3. 4. 191
Haggai. 2. 9. 293 2. 22. 284 Zichary. 1. 6. 506 7. 11. 349 7. 12. 442 14. 6.
306 14. 9. 402 Malachy. 3. 17. 251 Matthew. 5. 23, 24. 409 5. 46. 419 6. 25. 77
7. 15. 501. 516 8. 3. 301 8. 19. 299 12. 18. 296 18. 6. 421 18. 20. 421 22. 5.
190 23. 29, 30, 31. 194 24. 11. 564 Mark. 4. 39. 218 10. 21. 376 14. 53. 124
64. ibid. Luke. 1. 6. 455 3. 19. 347 6. 44. 455 13. 7. 250 16. 24. 430 18 11,
12. 370 24. 45. 426 Jo^n. 1. 14. 153 3. 19. 401 3. 20. 167 5. 25. 436 6. 37.
436 7. 24. 155 10. 12. 518 13. 35. 410 14. 31. 275 16. 2. 183. 370 Acts. 4. 24.
409 4. 32. 403. 405 5. 36, 37, 38. 551 9. 6. 220 10. 34, 35. 386 13. 18. 369
14. 22. 549 17. 6. 404 20. 9. 363 26. 18. 425 Romans. 1. 18. and 32. 402 5. 12.
212 7. 6. 433 8. 7. 414 8. 31. 536 9. 4, 5. 288 11. 7. 442 1 Corinthians. 1.
10. 405 1. 26. 176 2. 10. 336 3. 13. 550 3. 21. 311 2 Corinthians. 4. 16. 429
5. 16. 431 5. 17. 429 6. 17. 220 11. 29. 448 12. 2, 3. 471 Galatians. 5. 19,
20. 166 Ephesians. 2. 3. 426 4. 3, 4, 5, 6. 418 4. 19. 438. 441 4. 32. 446 5.
9. 426 5. 23. 428 Philippians. 2. 2. 405 3. 1. 320 3. 15, 16. 411 Cul^ssians.
1. 16. 203 1. 21. 431 3. 14. 417 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. 529 2 Thessalonians.
2. 9, 10. 502 1 Timothy. 2. 8. 187 2 Timothy. 2. 1. 141 2. 24, 25. 372
Hebrews. 4. 15. 369 9. 14. 65 10. 22. 427 12. 14. 415 James. 3. 17. 414 4. 1.
414 5. 9. 418 5. 20. 549 1 Peter. 1. 12. 291 2. 17. 416 3. 7. 410 3. 8. 404 5.
5. 415 2 Peter. 2. 1. 550 3. 3, 4. 340 2. 21. 510 Revelations. 2. 5. 530 3. 12.
234 4. 8. 316 5. 9. 324 7. 2, 3. 217. 218 9. 4. 218 13. 3 420 14. 4. 14 14. 9,
10. 234 18. 6. 133 19. 4. 217 19. 20. 551 20. 10. 515

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 3. in marg. read (...) p. 5. l. 27. r. v. 11. 6. 30. your idols. 7. in
marg. pollure. 13. 18. (...). 17. 9. after there, only a comma. 23. 24.
Petronius. 20. in marg. its, and dele comma. 32. (...) 45. 20. Mehumah. 49. in
marg. (...) 50. in marg. (...). 53. 19. idolatry. 65. 1. Lavater. 68. In marg
(...). 74. marg. inducit. 85. marg. (...) 96. 34. oblations. 108. marg. (...)
123. 21. dele and. 124. 12. out of the way. 124. 34. 64. 125. 2. Ariminum. 125.
3. rebaptization. 125. 7. ubi tres sunt, make the comma there. 125. 11. 7ly God
gives. 133. 28. dele comma. 143 36. against. 155. 5. hereupon. 169. in marg.
(...). 191. 16. Ezekiel 20.28. ib. 28. oppression. 206. marg. (...) 209. 13.
praesentiam. 214. marg. byssum. ib. marg. Christus. ib. marg. (...) 215. 4.
dele (...). 223. 2. (...). 228. 10. Tivvah. 229. marg. (...) gravius sonat
quam. et Ana graviorem notat gemitum quam Ana. 237. 20. lasciviousness. 244.
marg. (...) 253. 8. dele any. 263. 10. Jerusalem. 264. marg. (...) 270. 10.
preceded. 279. marg. Rueus. 282. 16. in some copies, after glory of, add God.
18. dele God. 287. 32. violence. 289. 6. accomplishment. 308. 13. (...) 347.
28. (...). 353. 33. your. 364. 33. at. 368. 28. answer. 369. 37. body. 380. 11.
habitation. 388. 2. (...) 392. 25. for them. 394. 13. lead. 395. marg. (...).
396. 9. shikkutseha. 403. 11. (...). 414. 25. (...). 415. 19. two. 416. 15.
there. 417. 16. amato. 423. 4. Smyrna. 428. 20. word. 430. 14. wicked. 438. 19
(...) 455 32. time, et add comma. 458. 11. implied. 461. 13. renowned. 489.
26. right side. 492. 21. (...) et 35. (...) 493. 3. (...). 501. 35. presented.
502. 10. strangely. 505. 13. after prolonged a full point. et 16. thoughts.
510. 4. their own. 512. 14. that is. 516. 13. insinuations. 526 35. after wrath
dele comma. 529. 4. (...). 537. 22. your. 543. 13. (...) 544. 11. wiles. 557.
27. (...). 558. 16. destroy their. 562. 8. horti.


