The Lord Mayor of Londons Letter to the King at York, June, 22.
In behalf of the Aldermen Sheriffs, the Masters and Wardens of each several
Company in Answer to His Majesty's Letter.
The Parliaments Resolution, concerning the Kings most excellent Majesty, and
the Lords and Commons which have absented themselves from the said Houses, and
are now at York attending on his Majesty.
Like wise the Grounds and Reasons why they are enforced to take Arms, With the
several Reasons to prove that every man is bound to uphold the Parliament
against all Opposers whatsoever.
Ordered by the Lords and Commons that this be printed and published.

Ic. Bro. Cler. par. Hen. Elsing Cler. parl.




AS no greater fidility can be presented to me, then a Loyal Obedience to your
Majesty's Command, so no greater unhappiness can befall me, then in conceiving
my solicitous endeavors to imbecill and invailid, and not able to incline to
myaffections; for my condiscentious mind is so dubiously balanced, depending
on a double Authority, that it is an unexpressible difficulty to my thoughts,
how to weigh my resolution with an unquestionable action. If I should not obey
Your Majesty's command in an equitable cause, I might meritoriously be
suspended from that place of Honor conferred on me, undeserving to be your
Majesty's Subject, muchlesse Your Personable Servant, and liable to Your
Majesty's displeasure and indignation; yet if I should obey Your Majesty's
command without consent of Parliament, I should be nevertheless liable to the
censure of Parliament, so that in various and several commands a conformity of
Obedience is very difficult. Whereas Your Majesty has received true
information of great sums of Money endeavored to be borrowed of Your City of
London, by directions proceeding from both Houses of Parliament, with
additionall persuasions to your good subjects for the raising of Horse and
furnishing your Parliament with necessary Moneys, (I Your Majesty's faithful
Subject) do conceive, and dare asseverate, that it is intended upon no other
pretense then for the Honor and defense of Your Majesty, together with both
Houses of Parliament, and for the universal security of Your Kingdoms. And
since Your Majesty's manifold Protestations taken in the presence of Almighty
God, and by Your several Oaths taken by the Faith of a Prince, are ample
testimonies of Your Majesty's just desires for the public peace, and
sufficient manifestations, of your real intentions, not to levy war against
your Parliament, I cannot entertain such a sinister conceit in my thoughts,
that your Majesty will violate those several Oaths by raising any Forces,
which consequently would ruinate the prosperity of your Majesty's Kingdom by
a Civil Discord

And I am so confident on the other side, that whatsoever moneys shall be
collected, or forces levied by your Parliament, they will not derogate any
thing from your Majesty's Prerogative, but to the preservation of the public
peace, and the advancement both of your Maiisties Honor, and your Kingdoms
happiness.

So that whatsover Money, Plate, Horse, Arms shall be contributed die your
Majesty's willing and Leyall, subjects of the City of London, being disposed by
the prudent dispensation of your Parliament, chiesly to maintain the
Protestant Religion, your Maiestis Authority, and person in Royal Dignity the
free course of Justice, the Laws of the Land, the peace of the Kingdom, and
Privilege of Parliament, and partly to the necessary use of Ireland; as also
the payment of the Scottish subjects.

I hope your Majesty will take it as an acceptable service at their hands, and
not look upon it as the raising forces against your Majesty, or to be done
either in malice, or contempt of your, or of your Authority.

Thus I, and the several Companies having herein punctually, observed the
direction of both Houses of Parliament, nothing contradictory to Your Majesty's
Commands, We hope Your Majesty shall have no cause to proceed against the
several Companies, in obeying the Trust reposed in them both by Your Maiestys
Authority, and by both Houses of Parliament: or against any particular persons,
either as Contemners or opposers of Your Majesty's Commands and Authoritys, or
Her Law of the Land; doing nothing, but what Your Parliament wisdom, Truth,
and Equity have prescribed unto them, as well for the intended safety of your
Maiestees person, as the security of the Kingdom.

And that Your Majesty shall hereby have no just occasion to be compelled to
question the Charter of this Your City, which as Your Majesty is yet willing
to believe, so You may be confident both in a high and low degree will continue
Loyal to Your Majesty's sacred Person, and Authority.

These ample testimonies of my Loyalty (SIR) I hope will give Your Majesty a
satisfactorie contentation, since Your Majesty's Commands are iusty presormed,
and obeyed by

Your Majesty's faithful humble and Loyal Subject and Servant. E. G
The Reason why the Subject is bound to obey the Command of the Parliament,
Voted,

Both houses of Parliament has took into their serious consideration the
Occasion and Reason why the Members of the said Houses should absent themselves
upon their summoning in Whereupon they has drawn up a Charge against them, and
are resolved that they shall pay 100. l a man, and to be examined by the
Committee before the next fitting.



Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, that this be printed and
published.


